=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Layli  Phillips~ The Womanist Reader.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 498
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:36.682467
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
THE
WOMANIST
READER
5WBKDOIWLWOHSGI 


--- PAGE 3 ---
RT54118_Prelims.indd   iiRT54118_Prelims.indd   ii 8/11/06   9:17:55 PM8/11/06   9:17:55 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
THE
WOMANIST
READER
EDITED BY LAYLI PHILLIPS
Routledge is an imprint of the 
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
New York   London
57BWLWOHSGI 


--- PAGE 5 ---
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
270 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10016
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
2 Park Square
Milton Park, Abingdon
Oxon OX14 4RN
© 2006 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Routledge is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-415-95411-8 (Softcover) 0-415-95410-X (Hardcover)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-415-95411-2 (Softcover) 978-0-415-95410-5 (Hardcover)
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, 
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
Trademark Notice:  Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Womanist reader / edited by Layli Phillips.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-415-95410-X (hardback : alk. paper) -- ISBN 0-415-95411-8 (pbk. : alk. 
paper) 1.  Womanism. 2.  Women, Black. 3.  African American women. 4.  Minority 
women. 5.  Feminism.  I. Phillips, Layli, 1965- II. Title.
HQ1197.W66  2006
305.48’896073--dc22 2006007443
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the Routledge Web site at
http://www.routledge-ny.com
57B'LVFOSGI 


--- PAGE 6 ---
Permissions
We, the editor and the publisher, are grateful for permission to reprint the 
 following copyrighted material. Please note that, in some cases, the current copy-
right holder is diff erent from the original publisher.
Alice Walker, “Coming Apart” © 1979 (used by permission from Bantam).
Alice Walker, “Gift s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson” © 1981 (used 
by permission from Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).
Alice Walker, “Womanist” © 1983 (used by permission from Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich).
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi, “Womanism: Th e Dynamics of the Contem-
porary Black Female Novel in English” © 1985 (used by permission from Th e 
University of Chicago Press).
Clenora Hudson-Weems, “Cultural and Agenda Confl icts in Academia: Criti-
c al  I s s u e s  in  Afri c an a  W o m e n ’ s  S tu di e s ”  ©  1 9 8 9  ( u s e d  b y  p e rm i s s i o n  fr o m  
Bedford Press).
Clenora Hudson-Weems, “Africana Womanism” © 1993 (used by permission 
from Bedford Press).
Patricia Hill Collins, “What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black Feminism, and 
Beyond” © 1996 (used by permission from Th e Black Scholar ).
Michael Awkward, “A Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist Criticism” © 1998 
(used by permission from Th e University of Chicago Press).
RT54118_Prelims.indd   vRT54118_Prelims.indd   v 8/11/06   9:17:55 PM8/11/06   9:17:55 PM


--- PAGE 7 ---
Layli Phillips & Barbara McCaskill, “Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women and 
the Bringing of the Everyday into Academe, or, Why We Started Th e  Womanist” 
© 1995 (used by permission from Th e University of Chicago Press).
Gary L. Lemons, “To Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’: Making Womanist Space 
for Black Men” © 1997 (used by permission from Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited).
Delores S. Williams, “Womanist Th  eology: Black Women’s Voices” © 1987 
(used by permission from Delores S. Williams).
Cheryl J. Sanders, Katie G. Cannon, Emilie M. Townes, M. Shawn Copeland, 
bell hooks, and Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, “Christian Ethics and Th  eology in 
Womanist Perspective” © 1989 (used by permission of the authors and Th e 
Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion).
Sherley Anne Williams, “Some Implications of Womanist Th eory” © 1986 (used 
by permission from Th e Johns Hopkins University Press).
W enyingXu, “ A W omanist Production of T ruths: Th e Use of Myths in Amy 
Tan” © 1995 (used by permission of the author).
Elsa Barkley Brown, “Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the 
Independent Order of St. Luke” © 1989 (used by permission from Th e Univer-
sity of Chicago Press).
Mark A. Reid, “Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): Womanist Film” 
© 1991 (used by permission from African American Review ).
Geneva Smitherman, “A Womanist Looks at the Million Man March” © 1996 
(used by permission of the author and Th ird World Press).
Janice D. Hamlet, “ Assessing Womanist Th ought: Th e Rhetoric of Susan L. 
Taylor” © 2000 (used by permission from Taylor and Francis).
Ruth Trinidad Galván, “Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas: Womanist Pedagogies 
of the Everyday, the Mundane, and the Ordinary” © 2001 (used by permission 
from Taylor & Francis).
Vanessa Sheared, “Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruction – A Womanist 
Perspective” © 1994 (used by permission of Jossey-Bass).
T a m a r a  B e a u b o e u f - L a f o n t a n t ,  “ A  W o m a n i s t  E x p e r i e n c e  o f  C a r i n g :  U n d e r -
standing the Pedagogy of Exemplary Black Women Teachers” © 2002 (used 
by permission from Springer Science + Media BV).
RT54118_Prelims.indd   viRT54118_Prelims.indd   vi 8/11/06   9:17:56 PM8/11/06   9:17:56 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
Iris Carlton-LaNey, “Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African American Reformer 
of Consciousness, 1908-1940” © 1997 (used by permission from the National 
Association of Social Workers).
JoAnne Banks-Wallace, “Womanist Ways of Knowing: Th eoretical Consider-
ations for Research with African American Women” © 2000 (used by permis-
sion from Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins).
Wenshu Lee, “Kuaering Queer Th eory: My Autocritography and a Race-Con-
scious, Womanist, Transnational Turn” © 2003 (used by permission from 
Haworth Press, Inc.).
Epifania Akosua Amoo-Adare, “Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Posi-
tionality and the Spatio-temporal Construction of Black Family Life” © 2004 
(used by permission from Ediciones Almar).
Helen (charles), “Th e Language of Womanism: Rethinking Diff erence” © 1997 
(used by permission from Taylor & Francis).
Inderpal Grewal & Caren Kaplan, “Warrior Marks: Global Womanism’s 
Neo-colonial Discourse in a Multicultural Context” © 2001 (used by permis-
sion from Taylor & Francis).
RT54118_Prelims.indd   viiRT54118_Prelims.indd   vii 8/11/06   9:17:56 PM8/11/06   9:17:56 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
RT54118_Prelims.indd   viiiRT54118_Prelims.indd   viii 8/11/06   9:17:57 PM8/11/06   9:17:57 PM


--- PAGE 10 ---
Dedication
For the “Five Grand Mothers” …
Phyllis,
who was born into slavery and emancipated at age twelve and whom I 
know only through a fi rst name and half a torn photograph, seen once.
Laura Glass,
the cigar-smoking supporter of the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association and neighborhood root doctor, aft er whom I am named.
Jannie Glass Worthy Murphy,
who worked three jobs to put two daughters through Spelman College 
and turned down her own admission so they could go—a pious church 
organist whose only two books were the Bible and Carter G. Woodson’s 
Th e Negro in Our History.  She was my biggest cheerleader and also 
the most stylish and classy woman I ever knew.
Mary N. Worthy and Louise Worthy Geer,
respectively, Mom and Aunt, family philosopher and family historian, 
artist and teacher, mothers of fi ve and seven, civil rights activists, 
iconoclasts, and free thinkers, through whom I came to know the power 
of conversation at the kitchen table.
And for Dad …
Duane D. Dumbleton
(1939-2006),
who was born a white farm boy in Wisconsin, only to become the kind of 
man no one yet imagines possible.
“I don’t know about you, but I am universalese.”
RT54118_Prelims.indd   ixRT54118_Prelims.indd   ix 8/11/06   9:17:57 PM8/11/06   9:17:57 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
RT54118_Prelims.indd   xRT54118_Prelims.indd   x 8/11/06   9:17:57 PM8/11/06   9:17:57 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
xi
Contents
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction xix
Womanism: On Its Own
LAYLI PHILLIPS
Part I Birthplaces, Birthmothers: Womanist Origins
1 Alice Walker’s Womanism 3
Coming Apart (1979) 3
ALICE W ALKER
Gifts of Power: The Writings of Rebecca 
Jackson (1981) 12
ALICE W ALKER
Womanist (1983)  19
ALICE W ALKER
2 Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism 21
Womanism: The Dynamics of the Contemporary 
Black Female Novel in English (1985) 21
CHIKWENYE OKONJO OGUNYEMI
3 Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism 37
Cultural and Agenda Conflicts in Academia: 
Critical Issues for Africana Women’s Studies (1989) 37
CLENORA HUDSON-WEEMS
Africana Womanism (1993) 44
CLENORA HUDSON-WEEMS
Part II  Womanist Kinfolk: Sisters, Brothers, Daughters, 
and Sons on Womanism
4 Sisters and Brothers: Black Feminists on Womanism 57
RT54118_TOC.indd   xiRT54118_TOC.indd   xi 8/11/06   1:59:37 PM8/11/06   1:59:37 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii • Contents
What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black Feminism, 
and Beyond (1996) 57
PATRICIA HILL COLLINS
A Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist 
Criticism (1998) 69
MICHAEL AWKWARD
5 Daughters and Sons: Th  e Birth of Womanist Identity 85
Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women and the 
Bringing of the Everyday into Academe, 
or Why We Started The Womanist  (1995) 85
LAYLI PHILLIPS AND BARBARA McCASKILL
To Be Black, Male, and “Feminist”: Making 
Womanist Space for Black Men (1997) 96
GARY L. LEMONS
Part III  Womanist Th eory and Praxis: Womanism in the 
Disciplines
6 Th  eology 117
Womanist Theology: Black Women’s Voices (1986) 117
DELORES S. WILLIAMS
Roundtable Discussion: Christian Ethics and 
Theology in Womanist Perspective (1989) 126
CHERYL J. SANDERS, KATIE G. CANNON, EMILIE 
M. TOWNES, M. SHAWN COPELAND, bell hooks, 
AND CHERYL TOWNSEND GILKES
7 Literature and Literary Criticism 159
Some Implications of Womanist Theory (1986) 159
SHERLEY ANNE WILLIAMS
A Womanist Production of Truths: The Use 
of Myths in Amy Tan (1995) 165
WENYING XU
8 History 173
Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker 
and the Independent Order of Saint Luke (1989) 173
ELSA BARKLEY BROWN
RT54118_TOC.indd   xiiRT54118_TOC.indd   xii 8/11/06   1:59:38 PM8/11/06   1:59:38 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
Contents • xiii
9 Th  eater and Film Studies 193
Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): 
Womanist Film (1991) 193
MARK A. REID
10 Communication and Media Studies 207
A Womanist Looks at the Million Man 
March (1996) 207
GENEVA SMITHERMAN
Assessing Womanist Thought: The Rhetoric 
of Susan L. Taylor (2000) 213
JANICE D. HAMLET
11 Psychology 233
Womanist Archetypal Psychology: A Model 
of Counseling for Black Women and Couples 
Based on Yoruba Mythology (2006/1995) 233
KIM MARIE VAZ
12 Anthropology 247
Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas : Womanist 
Pedagogies of the Everyday, the Mundane 
and the Ordinary (2001) 247
RUTH TRINIDAD GALVÁN
13 Education 269
Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruction—
A Womanist Perspective (1994) 269
VANESSA SHEARED
A Womanist Experience of Caring: 
Understanding the Pedagogy of Exemplary 
Black Women Teachers (2002) 280
TAMARA BEAUBOEUF-LAFONTANT
14 Social Work 297
Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African American 
Reformer of Womanist Consciousness, 
1908–1940 (1997)  297
IRIS CARLTON-LaNEY
RT54118_TOC.indd   xiiiRT54118_TOC.indd   xiii 8/11/06   1:59:38 PM8/11/06   1:59:38 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv • Contents
15 Nursing Science 313
Womanist Ways of Knowing: Theoretical 
Considerations for Research with 
African American Women (2000) 313
JoANNE BANKS-WALLACE
16 Sexuality Studies 327
Kuaering  Queer Theory: My Autocritography 
and a Race-Conscious, Womanist, 
Transnational Turn (2003)  327
WENSHU LEE
17 Architecture/Urban Studies 347
Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Positionality 
and the Spatio-temporal Construction 
of Black Family Life (2004) 347
EPIFANIA AKOSUA AMOO-ADARE
Part IV Critiquing the Womanist Idea
18  Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? 361
The Language of Womanism: Rethinking 
Difference (1997) 361
HELEN (charles)
Warrior Marks : Global Womanism’s Neo-colonial 
Discourse in a Multicultural Context (2001) 379
INDERPAL GREWAL AND CAREN KAPLAN
Part V Womanist Resources
19 Selections from the First Quarter Century 405
A Womanist Bibliography 
(Including Internet Resources) 405
LAYLI PHILLIPS
Name Index 415
Subject Index 421
RT54118_TOC.indd   xivRT54118_TOC.indd   xiv 8/11/06   1:59:38 PM8/11/06   1:59:38 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
xv
Acknowledgments
Th is project has been my dream for the past ten years, and the roots of its coming 
into being go back even further. Th ere are many people whom I need to thank for 
its realization, and I do so with the utmost sincerity. For starters, at Routledge, 
I want to thank Michael Bickerstaff  for having the vision to see the necessity 
and timeliness of this anthology and David McBride for having the enthusi-
asm to see its production through to the end. I also want to thank Stephanie 
Drew for being a fantastic “nuts and bolts” person. I thank Colin Reublinger for 
giving me a crash course on the publishing business, brainstorming with me, and 
then going the extra mile on the marketing end. Th ank you Nicole Hirshman for 
your painstaking disk editing and Arlene Belzer for your amazing proofreading—
this volume is all the more polished for it. Gratitude to Denise Gupta for the last 
minute save on the index and Suzanne Lassandro for the tie-breaking votes on all 
those unanswered questions. Th ank you to Brendan O’Neill, Sarah Blackmon, 
and especially Susan Horwitz for their production magic—we now hold their 
work in our hands. Th ank you to Pearl Chang for the graphic design that trans-
formed my sister’s cherished artwork into a book cover. And to all the unsung, 
behind-the-scenes people at Routledge/Taylor & Francis and affi  liated entities 
without whose labor and attention this text would never have seen the light of 
day, I express my deepest gratitude now.
My entrée into women’s studies came through the door of Black feminism 
and womanism in the early 1980s, when I was a student at Spelman College. 
Th ree people there were profoundly instrumental in my development as a 
womanist, Black feminist, and postmodern “race woman,” namely, Beverly 
Guy-Sheft all, Barbara Carter, and a dynamic instructor of African art whose 
name, unfortunately, I can no longer recall. Beverly, who continues to be an 
esteemed mentor and inspiration to this day, taught with Barbara Carter the 
fi rst course I took on race, class, and gender. Barbara took a personal interest 
in my education by encouraging me to apply for a Ford Foundation graduate 
fellowship at the end of my senior year, when I, toddler in arms and pregnant 
for the second time, might have given up. Th is fellowship ultimately funded 
p o r t i o n s  o f  m y  g r a d u a t e  e d u c a t i o n .  Th e instructor of African art modeled 
radical pedagogy and forever changed my approach to learning and teaching 
when she spent the fi rst half of our class exposing us to the “forbidden knowl-
edge” of Africology and insisting that we could not understand African art 
without it. To these three women, I am indebted to your imprint, and I deem 
you spiritual mothers.
RT54118_C000.indd   xvRT54118_C000.indd   xv 8/6/06   2:23:04 PM8/6/06   2:23:04 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi • Acknowledgments
Th ree more spiritual mothers must also be recognized. To Barbara Smith, 
Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology  was a watershed in my life and an 
epiphany of major proportions, and I am honored that I can now call you 
both friend and elder. Y our picture sits on my desk for daily inspiration. T o 
Faye V. Harrison, you are my model for engaged, liberationist, Black feminist, 
womanist, citizen-of-humanity, spiritualized scholar-activism, and your love, 
sweetness, and support have sustained me and lit the way for me more times 
than you know (a shout-out also to William Conwill). To Chela Sandoval, you 
are my model for taking it from the streets and making the academy pay atten-
tion. You are the queen of translation across languages, thought communities, 
and spiritual dimensions—thank you for giving me the language for things I 
have always known and for talking back to “them big boyz (and girlz).”
I must also give thanks to the “big three” of womanism: Alice Walker, 
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi, and Clenora Hudson-Weems. Th ank you for 
laying the foundation and speaking in three diff  erent voices that harmonize 
and coordinate so well.
Numerous colleagues have provided tangible and intangible assistance 
to this project over the years, and I want to recognize them by name. From 
my University of Georgia days, I thank R. Baxter Miller, Barbara McCaskill, 
Kendra Freeman, Kecia Th omas, and Pat Del Rey. Th anks also to Lynn Szwaja 
at the Rockefeller Foundation and to everyone associated with the Womanist 
Studies Consortium (1995–2002), Th e Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric 
Feminist Researchers  (1994–95), and Womanist Th eory and Research  (1995–
2002), especially Gerris Farris, Beth McIver, and Emilie Townes. I thank 
Dionne P. Stephens, Derrick Alridge, and Lee D. Baker (who wins the prize 
for being on the team longest) for being my crew. I send thanks out to Linda 
Bell, Susan Talburt, Charlene Ball, Julie Kubala, Charles Jones, Makungu 
Akinyele, Akinyela Umoja, Carol Marsh-Lockett, Sarah Cook, and Rod Watts 
at Georgia State University. Th anks to Dean Lauren Adamson, who arranged 
for my research leave during fall 2004, when the writing for this book began 
in earnest. Other academic friends in the area include Kim Wallace-Stephens 
and Vanessa Jackson (a shout-out to our old Black feminist reading circle), 
M. Bahati Kuumba, Dianne Stewart, Isa Williams, Beth Hackett, and Jude 
Preissle and Mark Toomey. My national network of people who must be 
recognized and thanked heartily includes Susan Glisson, Carolyn Fluehr-
Lobban, Jean Rahier and Mariama Jaiteh, Pat Washington, Laurie Fuller 
and Erica Meiners, Yi-Chun Tricia Lin, Mattie Richardson, Marlon Bailey, 
J af ar i  S i n c l ai r  All e n ,  L i s a  C.  M o o r e ,  an d  J ill  N e l s o n .  S u s an  L.  T a y l o r ,  y o u r  
columns have been manna. Laura Amazzone, thanks for the connecting 
work. Th anks also to Pat Hill Collins and Bonnie Th  ornton Dill for being 
trailblazers and giving the much-needed nods. Special shout-outs to Asa G. 
Hilliard III and Robert V. Guthrie (you just departed, but it feels like you’re 
still here), elders who need no introduction; your personal words of wisdom 
RT54118_C000.indd   xviRT54118_C000.indd   xvi 8/6/06   2:23:05 PM8/6/06   2:23:05 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---
Acknowledgments • xvii
and encouragement, in addition to your world-changing work, have made a 
diff erence in my life. 
Students have been important to my life and to the development of this 
project from the beginning. I must thank the students of my womanism classes 
of summer 2003 and spring 2005 and every section of Black feminist thought 
and African American lesbian and gay activism that I have ever taught. For 
particular research assistance, I thank Melinda Mills, Angel Charmain Dupree 
Paschall, Kerri Reddick-Morgan, BeAnka Nyela/Kym Tate, Max Green, and 
Stacey Singer. For good conversations in which we all developed our ideas, I 
thank Charles Stephens, Martha Turner, Shomari Olugbala, Xiumei Pu, Shani 
Settles, Donna Troka, and Derrick Lanois. For being my connection to Uganda 
and more, I thank Andrew Ellias State and also Alicia Decker. GSU BlackOUT, 
your support has been invaluable all along, but special thanks to Samietra 
Lisenbee for picking up the womanist torch and also to Leah Trotter, Brandy 
“Calamity” Collier, Marla Stewart, Aza Zuma Sauti/Janelle Allen, Sanjo Kali, 
Antoine Norwood, and Kyndra Frasier on general principle. Some students go 
that extra mile, and for that I must thank Taliba Sikudhani Olugbala/Jonelle 
Shields, Andy Lowry, and Yolo Akili Ifakunle/Micheal Robinson.
Friends and family form the bedrock of our daily lives and emotional 
 survival. For being there, I must thank Lyz Jaeger (“oldest and bestest”), Debra 
Roberts, Carla Th ompson, Susan Gill and Giordana Diaz, Sujata and Kalindi 
Winfi eld, and Cara Averhart Reese. My children, Th ad and Aliyah, are among 
my reasons for living. Th ank you to the Richman and Phillips clans for being 
“part of that village. ” Love to my brothers and sisters—Mary Bahiyyih (“the 
librarian” and “the artist”—a shout-out on the cover art), Xandra, Rama, 
and Ben—and also to my father’ s Wisconsin-rooted people and my mother’ s 
Georgia-rooted people. Nancy Cavins, you have earned a special place in my 
heart. A shout-out goes to my book group, “Book and Circumstance: Responses, 
Revelations, Resolutions”—Gary Longstreet, LaMiiko Moore, Gerald Phillips, 
Tyees Douglas, Coy McCall, Julie Jones, Gregory Turner, Alisa Dawson, Miss 
Culver, and Kendall Clayborne—because it is so nice to talk about books with 
people outside school! And speaking of books, big thanks to Mutota at Oasis and 
everybody at Charis for the constant support, both tangible and intangible.
I saved the best for last. I must thank all those who have transitioned and 
generously provide me with inspiration and help from the “other side”—“we 
are all interconnected.” You know who you are, and I will continue to honor 
you. Special respect is owed to Ignacio Martin-Baro, Kenneth and Mamie Clark, 
Audre Lorde, Gloria Anzaldúa, Joseph Antenor-Firmin, Malcolm, Martin, Fela, 
Jean-Michel, and el Che. I thank the Creator for instilling me with mission, my 
Higher Self for taking up the charge, and Life itself for providing signposts. 
Finally, there is not enough I can say or do to thank my visionary counterpart, 
Baruti KMT, “beloved Abiona,” with whom I travel time and space and walk 
the path.
RT54118_C000.indd   xviiRT54118_C000.indd   xvii 8/6/06   2:23:05 PM8/6/06   2:23:05 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
RT54118_C000.indd   xviiiRT54118_C000.indd   xviii 8/6/06   2:23:05 PM8/6/06   2:23:05 PM


--- PAGE 20 ---
xix
Introduction
Womanism: On Its Own
LAYLI PHILLIPS
Since 1983, when Alice Walker’s In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist 
Prose introduced the womanist idea to the general public, feminists of all colors, 
as well as women of color and others who question or reject feminism, have 
been debating the uniqueness and viability of womanism as a freestanding 
concept. Because the defi nition of “womanist” off ered by Walker was poetic in 
nature, it became, on the one hand, immediately attractive to and resonant for 
many people who were searching for an alternative to “feminist” as an identity 
or praxis and, on the other hand, theoretically slippery and frustrating to 
scholars and activists accustomed to working within a decidedly feminist 
frame. By the end of the 1990s, two things had happened. First, within women’s 
studies per se, these debates had reached a point of exhaustion, prematurely 
stifl ing any serious discussion of womanism as a signifi  cant discourse within 
academic feminism or critical theory. Second, outside women’s studies, as 
w ell  as  in  m argin alized  co rn e rs  o f  th e  fi eld, the employment of womanism 
as a theoretical frame had proliferated, by then constituting a venerable and 
persistent underground movement indicating the ongoing productivity and 
relevance of the perspective outside the academic mainstream and even 
beyond the academy itself. Today, in 2006, we can look back on how the 
twentieth anniversary of the publication of In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens 
was unceremoniously bypassed and observe a major void, namely, the absence 
of any systematic treatment of the womanist idea and, notably, the absence of 
any defi nitive compendium of womanist scholarship documenting what has 
now been more than a quarter century of womanist scholarly and creative 
work.
I say “quarter century” because what few people note is that Alice Walker’s 
fi rst use of the term womanist occurred in 1979 when her short story “Coming 
Apart” was published in Laura Lederer’s anthology Take Back the Night .
1 In 
this story about a Black husband and wife arguing over the eff  ect of the hus-
band’s consumption of pornography on their marriage, there is a line where 
Walker writes, “Th e wife has never considered herself a feminist—though she 
is, of course, a ‘womanist.’ A ‘womanist’ is a feminist, only more common.” 
Th is act of joining the terms “woman” and “common” at the border of “femi-
nist/not feminist” situated a particular mode of women’s resistance activity 
RT54118_C000.indd   xixRT54118_C000.indd   xix 8/6/06   2:23:06 PM8/6/06   2:23:06 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
xx • Introduction
squarely within the realm of the “everyday,” thereby defying both academic 
and ideological claims on the defi nition, labeling, and elaboration of women’s 
resistance activity under the exclusive and limited label “f e m i n i s t.” In two 
simple yet pregnant sentences, Walker had opened up a new way of talking 
about the relationship between women, social change, the struggle against 
oppression, and the quest for full humanity. In two successively more widely 
circulated publications, namely, her 1981 book review essay, “Gift  s of Power: 
Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson” and her 1983 book In Search of Our Mothers’ 
Gardens, she further elaborated the defi  nition of “womanist” in ways both 
explicit and cryptic. From 1983 on, womanism and Alice Walker were inextri-
cably linked in both the popular and the academic imaginations.
Yet there is more to the story. Th e notion and terminology of womanism 
must be traced to at least two additional progenitors, namely, Chikwenye 
Okonjo Ogunyemi, who in 1985 published her article “Womanism: Th  e 
Dynamics of the Contemporary Black Female Novel in English,” and Clenora 
Hudson-Weems, whose 1993 book Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves 
resulted from a series of papers presented in the 1980s, including her 1989 
article “Cultural and Agenda Confl  icts in Academia: Critical Issues for 
Africana Women’s Studies.” Each of these authors developed the womanist idea 
and related terminology independently. Over time, Ogunyemi’s perspective 
came to be known as African womanism, while Hudson-Weems’s perspective 
identifi ed itself as Africana womanism. Each distinct in its own right, Walker’s 
womanism, Ogunyemi’s African womanism, and Hudson-Weems’s Africana 
womanism formed the collective basis for an interpolated fi  eld of theory and 
praxis used by a host of people to follow. Signifi  cantly, none of these authors 
created something new; rather, each named something that had been in 
existence for some time, functioning below the academic and activist radar 
and outside dominant histories of consciousness. What is signifi  cant is that 
the time had come to name, and ultimately elaborate, this thing.
Womanism: What It Is
Th at being said, what is womanism? Womanism is a social change perspective 
rooted in Black women’s and other women of color’s everyday experiences 
and everyday methods of problem solving in everyday spaces, extended to the 
problem of ending all forms of oppression for all people, restoring the balance 
between people and the environment/nature, and reconciling human life with 
the spiritual dimension. I take the perspective that womanism is not femi-
nism. Its relationships to feminism (including Black feminism) are important, 
but its relationships to other critical theories and social-justice movements are 
equally important, despite being less frequently discussed or acknowledged. 
Unlike feminism, and despite its name, womanism does not emphasize or 
privilege gender or sexism; rather, it elevates all sites and forms of oppres-
sion, whether they are based on social-address categories like gender, race, 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxRT54118_C000.indd   xx 8/6/06   2:23:06 PM8/6/06   2:23:06 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
Introduction • xxi
or class, to a level of equal concern and action. Womanism’s link to gender is 
the fact that the historically produced race/class/gender matrix that is Black 
womanhood
2 serves as the origin point for a speaking position that freely and 
autonomously addresses any topic or problem. Because Black women experi-
ence sexism, and womanism is concerned with sexism, feminism is confl uent 
with the expression of womanism, but feminism and womanism cannot be 
confl ated, nor can it be said that womanism is a “version” of feminism.
Since being named, womanism has spawned both passionate affi   liation 
and vigorous debate. Beginning in the mid-1980s, scholars in theology, 
literature, and history began to employ womanist terminology and explore 
the implications of womanism in their disciplines. Within a decade, scholars 
in fi elds as diverse as fi  lm and theater studies, psychology, education, 
anthropology, communication studies, social work, and nursing, in addition 
to women’s studies and Africana studies, had enlarged this corpus. By the time 
womanism could claim a quarter century of existence, womanist scholarship 
could also be found in sexuality studies, public health, and architecture. 
Womanism has been visible in popular culture since the mid-1980s, appearing 
in magazines, newspapers, and other media and permeating the worlds of popular 
music, especially hip-hop, as well as the arts. Neither has womanism been limited 
to Black American contexts. Explorations of the womanist idea can be found 
in African, Australian (Aboriginal), Canadian, Caribbean/West Indian, Chinese/
Taiwanese, European, Latino/Latina American, Native American Indian, and 
Southeast Asian/Indian cultural contexts, scholarly and otherwise. Internet 
searches of the World Wide Web readily locate thousands of womanist-related 
citations from around the world.
What is interesting is that, since the beginning, the womanist frame has been 
applied more frequently than it has been written about. Th at is, more people 
have employed womanism than have described it. What this refl  ects is the 
tendency of womanism to be approached and expressed intuitively rather than 
analytically. While some might view this as problematic, there are good reasons 
for it—reasons that only affi  rm the distinctiveness and incommensurability of 
womanism vis-à-vis other perspectives with which it might be confused or 
confl ated. On the plus side, this state of aff airs has preserved the open-ended, 
polyvalent, polyvocal, dialogic, noncentralized, and improvisational character 
of womanism, allowing it to resist canonization, academic appropriation, and 
ideological subsumption. By maintaining its autonomy outside established 
intellectual and political structures, womanism has preserved its accessibility 
to a broad spectrum of people from diverse walks of life and retained its ability 
to fl ourish “beneath the radar.” On the minus side, however, this state of aff airs 
has allowed the apparent absorption of womanism into various taxonomic 
schemes within which it is not intelligible and lessened the visibility of 
womanism in some contexts. Th e fi eld of women’s studies, where womanism 
has experienced an interesting rise and fall, is a case in point.
RT54118_C000.indd   xxiRT54118_C000.indd   xxi 8/6/06   2:23:06 PM8/6/06   2:23:06 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
xxii • Introduction
Th e ascent of womanist scholarship and usage of womanist terminology 
in the popular sphere precipitated ongoing attempts to defi  ne womanism 
in relation to feminism as well as to debate the merits of womanism versus 
feminism. Several points have been at issue: Is womanism “its own thing” or 
simply another “version” of feminism? Is womanism the same thing as Black 
feminism? Who can claim womanism or be womanist? Is womanism activist 
o r  s im p l y  an  i d e n ti ty ?  Does  w o m anis m  d etra ct  fr o m  f e minis m ?  I s  w o m an -
ism an alternative to feminism for women who reject feminism? Is womanism 
soft  on sexism and an apology for patriarchy? Is womanism prolesbian or, 
alternately, soft  on homophobia? Is womanism essentially academic or truly 
vernacular? Interestingly, within the fi  eld of women’s studies, where these 
questions have been most vigorously debated and are of greatest concern, ini-
tial excitement about womanism yielded to obscurity once the determination 
was made that womanism was simply a synonym for Black feminism, and a 
relatively superfl uous one at that. Th is view has been cemented by entries in 
“offi  cial” reference works—encyclopedias and dictionaries—that essentially 
stripped womanism of its defi  ning features and represented it as a largely 
unremarkable phenomenon.
For instance, the American Heritage Dictionary —which, in 1993, was the 
fi rst to include such a defi nition—defi nes “womanist” as “Having or express-
ing a belief in or respect for women and their talents and abilities beyond the 
boundaries of race and class.”
3 Th is dictionary defi nition includes the following 
quote from Alice Walker: “Womanist … tradition assumes, because of our 
experiences during slavery, that black women already are capable.” To me, this 
defi nition seems to be, at best, nonsensical and, at worst, an attempt to neu-
tralize the diff erence that womanism actually represents. What does “beyond 
the boundaries of race and class” mean? Clearly , womanism is an ethnically 
and culturally situated (although not bounded) perspective that does not seek 
to negate diff erence through transcending it. Rather, as I explain in greater 
detail later, womanism seeks to harmonize and coordinate diff  erence so that 
diff erence does not become irreconcilable and dissolve into violent destruc-
tion. Additionally, womanism does not “begin and end” with women, as the 
defi nition suggests. Invocation of Alice Walker’s quote affi   rming the capa-
bility of Black women implies that womanism is more or less a recuperation 
and celebration of women who have been “beat down” by the system. Yet, a 
careful reading of the extant womanist literature—even Alice Walker’s work 
alone—relays that womanism is a great deal more than this.
Th e encyclopedia entry on womanism found in The Reader’s Companion 
to U.S. Women’s History  is similarly problematic.
4 It begins, “ Womanist and 
womanism are culture-specifi c and poetic synonyms for Black feminist  and 
Black feminism” (p. 639), and it ends, “See also Feminism, Black” (p. 641). Th is 
entry, authored by Gloria Steinem and Diana L. Hayes, briefl  y acknowledges 
that some womanist theologians “prefer womanist to stand alone” and “do 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxii 8/6/06   2:23:06 PM8/6/06   2:23:06 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
Introduction • xxiii
not off er Black feminist or feminist of color  as synonyms” (p. 640), yet it fails 
to elaborate on this possibility. In addition, this entry, which relies heavily on 
Alice Walker’s womanism, makes no mention of other key progenitors such 
as Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi or Clenora Hudson-Weems. Even though 
it was published as late as 1998, the entry makes no mention of womanism’s 
global reach, even in areas like Africa and Europe, where its elaboration was 
highly signifi cant by that time; rather, it emphasizes a U.S. frame. While a 
strength of this encyclopedia entry is its nuanced and fairly elaborate treat-
ment of Walker’s poetic defi nition from In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens,  a 
reader might walk away from this reference thinking that Walker’s womanism 
is all there is. In addition, such a reader’s understanding of womanism might 
be limited to racialized gender concerns. Th e entry also suggests that men feel 
less comfortable with womanism than with feminism or profeminism, while a 
number of Black male authors, in particular, had by that time clearly expressed 
that they felt womanism off  ered a more inclusive context for men’s partici-
pation than feminism. I point out the shortcomings of Steinem and Hayes’s 
groundbreaking encyclopedia entry not to impugn the intent or expertise of 
its authors, but rather to make the point that prevailing conceptual schemes 
make it diffi  cult to understand womanism. Th e tendency to envelop it within 
existing conceptual schemes, especially feminism, has been strong, leading to 
the unfortunate and unintentional tendency to “not see” important aspects of 
womanism. Th us, womanism has typically been misrepresented or, at least, 
underarticulated within mainstream histories of consciousness. My goal here 
is to present womanism in a diff erent light—one that makes womanism visible 
on its own.
Carol Marsh-Lockett presents a better defi nition in Th e Oxford Companion 
to African American Literature , published in 1997.
5 Although this encyclope-
dia entry, like Steinem and Hayes’s, is limited by its singular and almost exclu-
sive focus on Walker’s womanist defi nition, Marsh-Lockett teases out nuances 
of womanist theory and praxis that extend beyond Walker’s 1983 verbiage and 
begins to allude to the full promise of womanism as a universal perspective 
authored by Black women. Most notably, Marsh-Lockett links womanism to 
a “global vision” tied to “attention to the African presence in the Americas” 
and the “universality of the Black race” (p. 785). A womanist is triply concerned 
with herself, other Black women, and the entire Black race, female and male—
but also all humanity, showing an ever-expanding and ultimately universal 
arc of political concern, empathy, and activism. As Marsh-Lockett points out, 
womanists are concerned with not only gender and race, but also “local and 
international culture in addition to national and global politics and economics” 
(p. 785). Th rough a discussion of intersectionality, Marsh-Lockett relates—but 
does not confl ate—womanism and Black feminism, demonstrating that, while 
there is a relationship between the two, they are not interchangeable. Accord-
ing to Marsh-Lockett, “womanism furnishes a system of analysis and a world 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxiiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxiii 8/6/06   2:23:06 PM8/6/06   2:23:06 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
xxiv • Introduction
view hitherto unavailable to African American women and other women 
of color” (p. 785). By linking womanism to the writings of authors like Zora 
Neale Hurston, Lorraine Hansberry, Alice Childress, and others, as well as to 
the Black women’s club movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, Marsh-Lockett demonstrates that womanism, while only recently 
provided nomenclature by Walker and others, nevertheless articulates a long 
and unique history of Black women’s thought and activism. Finally, Marsh-
Lockett demonstrates an awareness of the breadth of womanist thought across 
multiple disciplines and regions in her mention of womanist literary studies 
and theology as well as her citation of Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi. 
In sum, womanism ’ s representation within mainstream histories of con-
sciousness has been problematic. Either womanism has been confl  ated with 
feminism or Black feminism, or its full scope has been inadequately captured. 
Womanism manifests fi ve overarching characteristics: (1) it is antioppression-
ist, (2) it is vernacular, (3) it is nonideological, (4) it is communitarian, and (5) 
it is spiritualized. “Antioppressionist” supersedes and organizes all labels that 
reference specifi c forms of oppression, such as antisexist, antiracist, antihet-
erosexist, antihomophobic, antixenophobic, and the like,
6 extending the reach 
of womanism into zones of oppression that may not be related to labelable 
identities and for which there is not even yet language.
7 A womanist knows 
oppression when she (or he) sees it, and she (or he) is against it. 8 She lives her 
life in such a way as to fi  ght and dismantle oppression in whatever ways she 
can, individually or in organized formations with others. Th  e term “antiop-
pressionist” conveys that womanism is identifi ed with liberationist projects of 
all sorts and that womanism supports the liberation of all humankind from 
all forms of oppression. Indeed, womanism seeks to enable people to tran-
scend the relations of domination and oppression altogether.
“Vernacular” identifi es womanism with “the everyday”—everyday peo-
ple and everyday life. Th  e soul of womanism is grassroots, identifi  ed with 
the masses of humanity. Use of the term “masses of humanity ” does not in 
this case suggest a polarity between “the masses” and “the elites”; rather, it 
highlights the unifying reality that all people have “everyday” lives and that 
elite status is something that cloaks this reality more than supplants it. What 
links people, and thus provides a basis for the harmonization and coordina-
tion of diff erence, are common human concerns—food, shelter, relationships, 
communication, body and health, love, life, death, and contemplation of the 
transcendental, to name just a few examples. Like other critical theorists 
and social-justice activists, womanists view gross diff  erentials in power and 
resources as highly problematic because they contribute to dehumanization 
and interfere with individual and collective well-being. Where they diff er from 
many other critical theorists and social-justice activists is in the trust they 
place in nonelites to envision and accomplish social-justice ends, inside or 
outside formal structures like organizations or social movements. Womanists 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxivRT54118_C000.indd   xxiv 8/6/06   2:23:07 PM8/6/06   2:23:07 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction • xxv
just act in the course of everyday life, and the nature of these actions varies 
widely from person to person. Th is diversity is not problematized; rather, it 
is viewed favorably. Th e assumption of womanism is that “it all adds up” to 
positive social change in the end. “Start where you are” might be the woman-
ist credo, and “one step forward” is the standard for progress. As a womanist, 
there is no need to be “perfect”; personhood is enough to qualify.
“Nonideological” refers to the fact that womanism abhors rigid lines of 
demarcation and tends to function in a decentralized manner. Statements 
like “Y ou’re either in or you’re out” and “Y ou’re either with us or against us” 
do not compute for womanists. Womanism is not about creating lines of 
demarcation; rather, it is about building structures of inclusiveness and positive 
interrelationship from anywhere in its network. Ideology is rigid; it relies on 
internal logical consistency and some degree of central control that seeks the 
resolution of diff erence by means of homogenization. Ideological perspectives 
and, to a lesser extent, movements rely on processes that compel or seduce 
people to conform and do not deal eff  ectively with diff  erence or paradox. 
Diff erences and tension that cannot be elided or erased trouble ideologies, and 
unresolved paradoxes tend to cause ideologies to crumble and lose effi   cacy. 
Womanism is not a rule-based system, and it does not need to resolve internal 
disagreement to function eff ectively. It is a nondisciplinary system; there are 
no “lines in the sand.” Womanists rely on dialogue to establish and negotiate 
relationships; such relationships can accommodate disagreement, confl  ict, 
and anger simultaneously with agreement, affi  nity, and love. From an analytic 
perspective, womanism appears paradoxical and logically inconsistent, and 
from an analytic perspective, these are fair assessments—yet womanism’s 
criteria for self-evaluation are not analytic. Th  ey are holistic, aff  ective, and 
spiritual. From a political perspective, legitimation of paradox and logical 
inconsistency are methods of enabling the harmonization and coordination 
of diff erence in ways that are humanizing and respectful of the multitude of 
ways that people need to express themselves to live in rewarding and authentic 
ways and to answer to the dictates of their own spiritual evolution.
“Communitarian” refers to the fact that womanism views commonweal as 
the goal of social change. Commonweal is the state of collective well-being; 
it is the optimization of well-being for all members of a community. For 
womanists, community is conceptualized as a series of successively overlap-
ping tiers, beginning with Black women or women of color (the level of the 
self or identity), followed by the Black community and other communities 
of color (the level of “tribe” or “kin”), followed by all oppressed people (the 
level of similarly situated others), and ultimately encompassing all humanity 
(the universal level). Th us, contrary to the way in which it has been charac-
terized, womanism’s main concern is not Black women per se; rather, Black 
women are the place where this particular form of thinking about common-
weal originates. Black women’s vision then extends to encompass all humans, 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxvRT54118_C000.indd   xxv 8/6/06   2:23:07 PM8/6/06   2:23:07 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
xxvi • Introduction
but it does not stop there. Included in this conception of community is what 
Taliba Sikudhani Olugbala has called “livingkind” 9 ( all living things—from 
humans, to animals, to plants, to microorganisms) as well as the “inanimate” 
components of Earth, the universe(s) beyond Earth, the spiritual world(s) and 
transcendental realm(s) encompassing the universe(s), and, ultimately, all of 
creation. Commonweal is the principle that holds all these dimensions and 
aspects of creation together in an ideal state of dynamic balance and constant 
expressive unfoldment. Th e assumption is that commonweal does not exist at 
this time, and the purpose of social change activity from a womanist perspec-
ti v e  is  t o  b rin g  i t  abo u t.  Th us, womanism seeks to reconcile three relation-
ships: the relationship between people from diff erent groups, the relationship 
between people and the environment/nature, and the relationship between 
people and the spiritual/transcendental realms. Womanist methods are those 
that intervene between or seek to heal wounds and imbalances at any or all of 
these sites.
“Spiritualized ”  r e f e r s  t o  th e  f a c t  th a t  w o m an i s m  o p e n l y  a c kn o w l e d g e s  a  
spiritual/transcendental realm with which human life, livingkind, and the 
material world are all intertwined. For womanists, this realm is actual and 
palpable, and the relationship between it and humans is neither abstract nor 
insignifi cant to politics. AnaLouise Keating has used the term “spiritualized 
politics” to refer to social-justice activism and perspectives that are informed 
by spiritual beliefs and practices, rooted in the conviction that spiritual 
intercession and consideration of the transcendental or metaphysical 
dimension of life enhance and even undergird political action.
10 Perspectives 
that are more academic or ideological have typically avoided incorporation 
of spiritual/transcendental considerations. Womanism, on the other hand, 
is quite adamant about the reality and importance of the spiritual world, 
with less concern for the diversity of ways that it is conceptualized. Of all the 
characteristics that distinguish womanism from other critical, theoretical, or 
ideological perspectives, this one is perhaps the most unique and potentially 
controversial.
Womanist Methods of Social Transformation
Womanist methods of social transformation cohere around the activities of 
harmonizing and coordinating, balancing, and healing. Th ese methods work 
in and through relationship, reject violence and aggression but not assertive-
ness, and readily incorporate “everyday” activities. Th ese overlapping methods 
include, but are not limited to, dialogue, arbitration and mediation, spiritual 
activities, hospitality, mutual aid and self-help, and “mothering.” Physical heal-
ing and methods of reconciling body, mind, and spirit (including integral med-
icine and folk healing) are also recognized as methods of social transformation 
by womanists, based on the notion that physical and psychological well-being 
provide a necessary foundation for social justice and commonweal.
RT54118_C000.indd   xxviRT54118_C000.indd   xxvi 8/6/06   2:23:07 PM8/6/06   2:23:07 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
Introduction • xxvii
“Harmonizing and coordinating” involve fi guring out how to make dispa-
rate elements work together. It requires a type of cognitive mobility that Chela 
Sandoval refers to as “diff erential consciousness.”11 Diff erential consciousness 
permits movement among and between divergent logics (cultural, religious, 
ideological, etc.) and conceptual schemes (cosmologies, value systems, ethical 
codes, etc.), and its hallmark is a higher-order coordinating mechanism (“the 
diff erential”) that enables them to collectively make sense and work together. It 
requires the ability to make positive connections between elements that might 
have seemed unrelatable before; thus, it is associated with creativity, ingenu-
ity, improvisationality, and the proverbial “making a way out of no way.”
12 As 
Sandoval points out, the transcendental-emotive state of love creates a space 
within and a mechanism by which limiting rational-analytical logics can be 
dissolved to make diff erent, paradox-superseding logics possible and active. 
Th is love, similar to Audre Lorde’s “erotics,”
13 has a political expression that 
Sandoval calls “revolutionary love.”14
Dialogue is a means by which people express and establish both connec-
tion and individuality. Dialogue permits negotiation, reveals standpoint, real-
izes existential equality, and shapes social reality. Dialogue is the locale where 
both tension and connection can be present simultaneously; it is the site for 
both struggle and love. Th e “kitchen table” is a key metaphor for understand-
ing the womanist perspective on dialogue.
15 Th e kitchen table is an informal, 
woman-centered space where all are welcome and all can participate. Th  e 
table is an invitation to become part of a group amicably comprised of het -
erogeneous elements and unifi  ed by the pleasure and nourishment of food 
and drink. At the table, people can come and go, agree or disagree, take turns 
talking or speak all at once, and laugh, shout, complain, or counsel—even 
be present in silence. It is a space where the language is accessible and the 
ambience casual. At the kitchen table, people share the truths of their lives on 
equal footing and learn through face-to-face conversation. When the kitchen 
table metaphor is applied to political problem-solving situations, the relations 
of domination and subordination break down in favor of more egalitarian, 
interpersonal processes.
Arbitration and mediation involve helping warring parties to calm down 
and return to positive relationship. Th e arbiter or mediator is the person who 
serves as a bridge or connector by maintaining simultaneous positive relation-
ships with both parties at once and translating communications in ways that 
make fresh perspectives possible. In arbitration and mediation, there are no 
enemies—only parties to a disagreement. Th e goals of arbitration and media-
tion are fairness and reconciliation. Ogunyemi refers to womanist arbitration 
and mediation as “ siddon look ” tactics, literally “sit down and look” or “sit 
down and cogitate.”
16 She characterizes these tactics as “a belligerent form of 
pacifi sm,” which can easily be related to Walker’s womanist, who is “responsi-
ble, in charge, serious” and who “loves Struggle” and “loves the Folk.” 17 When 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxviiRT54118_C000.indd   xxvii 8/6/06   2:23:07 PM8/6/06   2:23:07 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
xxviii  • Introduction
tension, disagreement, or confl  ict arises, the goal in arbitration and media-
tion—unlike war—is not to vanquish, eliminate, or separate one or the other 
opposing party, but rather to facilitate both parties’ return to a state of happy, 
unhampered, and authentic life pursuit within the context of commonweal. 
What undergirds the mediation process and gives it moral legitimacy is the 
appeal to a common humanity, expressed as a family relation, answerable to 
transcendental, spiritual, or ethical imperatives. Arbitration and mediation, 
as womanist methods, do not, unlike prevalent confl  ict resolution models, 
aspire toward the creation of “unity” through the suppression or neutraliza-
tion of diff erence; rather, they aspire toward an organic and dynamic whole-
ness that functions whether the disagreement is resolved or remains. Actions 
that convey hospitality, care, or nurturance can help this process.
Spiritual activities involve communication between the material and 
spiritual realms, based on the assumption that these realms are actual, inter-
connected, and interpenetrating. Drawing from a diversity of traditions, 
womanists may use prayer, rituals, meditation, collective visualization, and a 
host of other means to draw spiritual energy toward social, political, and even 
physical problem solving and healing. Spiritual methods of social transforma-
tion, which may be exercised by individuals or groups, recognize not only the 
value of power based in the spiritual realm that can be applied toward human 
problems, but also the importance of maintaining a harmonious relationship 
between humans, the environment, and the spiritual realm.
Hospitality as method refers to taking good care of guests. Guests are those 
who, by one or more degrees of diff erence or separation, are not members of 
one’s house or intimate circle, but are welcomed into one’s house and treated 
in ways that respect their existential worth and integrity. By implication, hos-
pitality is a practice that facilitates a positive encounter between people who 
are strangers or “other” to one another, setting the stage for possible friend-
ship or collaboration. Hospitality is fundamental to the management of diff er-
ence on a global scale. Hospitality is a way of acknowledging dignity, off ering 
nurturance, promoting amity, and providing pleasure to foster positive intra- 
and intergroup relations. Hospitality preempts the tensions that may arise as 
a result of diff erence by providing a means of connection at the beginning of 
relation. Hospitality can also be used to mediate and reduce confl  ict through 
the heartening eff ects of care, pleasure, and festivity. Hospitality as a method 
of social transformation emerges out of womanist caretaking sensibilities as 
they manifest in ev ery da y life activities and refl ects traditions of caring for 
the friend or stranger that have long histories in many of the world’s cultures 
and religions.
Mutual aid and self-help are everyday “do-it-yourself” methods that involve 
coming together as a group at the grassroots level to solve a common problem. 
Mutual aid and self-help rely on the principles of strength in numbers, wisdom 
gained from life experience, self-education, and democratic knowledge 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxviiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxviii 8/6/06   2:23:08 PM8/6/06   2:23:08 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
Introduction • xxix
sharing. Examples of this womanist social change method can be found in 
washerwoman Callie House’s reparations movement activism during the 
late 1800s, the Black women’s club movement of the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries (with its motto of “Lift  ing as We Climb”), the eclectic social work 
leadership of early to mid-20th century icons Maggie Lena Walker, Elizabeth 
Ross Haynes, and Mamie Phipps Clark, the civil rights activism style of Ella 
Baker, the organization and activism of second wave feminist groups like the 
Th ird World Women’s Alliance (today the Women of Color Resource Center), 
Salsa Soul Sisters, the Combahee River Collective, and the National Black 
Women’s Health Project—examples are numerous and plentiful.
18 Even the 
Underground Railroad, spearheaded by Harriet Tubman, could be understood 
through this lens. Womanist mutual aid and self-help begins with the survival 
wisdom of women of color, but does not end there—ultimately it welcomes and 
embraces all who can benefi t from this body of knowledge without negating 
its source or denying the social conditions that created it. Mutual aid and self-
help demonstrate two important things: fi  rst, that an underestimated genius 
for problem solving circulates among institutionally dispossessed populations 
and, second, that such marginalized populations will not be forced to 
succumb beneath institutional neglect, whether benign or malign. Indeed, at 
times, mutual aid and self-help are the only means by which intellectually 
marginalized groups can implement superior methods of problem solving 
that are either rejected or not acknowledged by the mainstream.
Motherhood as a womanist method of social transformation has its roots 
in African cultural legacies. Motherhood, here, however, must be dissociated 
from its purely biological connotation and even from its strictly gendered 
connotation. In the African context, motherhood is a highly elaborated con-
struct encompassing a number of meanings not generally recognized in the 
Euroamerican context. As Ogunyemi explains, using examples from West 
African cultures, most germane here are the notions of spiritual mother 
(Osun or Chi/Ori), mother as oracle (Odu), childless mother (Mammywata), 
and community mother (Omunwa/Iyalode).
19 Essentially, motherhood is a set 
of behaviors based on caretaking, management, nurturance, education, spiri-
tual mediation, and dispute resolution. Anyone—whether female or male, old 
or young, with or without children, heterosexual or same-gender-loving—can 
engage in these behaviors and, therefore, mother. In so doing, every individ-
ual has the ability to contribute to the ultimate goals of womanism: societal 
healing, reconciliation of the relationship between people and nature, and the 
achievement and maintenance of commonweal.
Physical healing is integral to social change for a variety of reasons. Bodily 
well-being is the foundation for other forms of well-being; the lack of good 
nutrition, fi tness, and health make it hard for people to contribute their energy 
toward higher-level concerns. In the current social context, many forms of 
infi rmity are the result of oppressive conditions and processes. Arguably, 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxixRT54118_C000.indd   xxix 8/6/06   2:23:08 PM8/6/06   2:23:08 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
xxx • Introduction
suboptimal bodily health also relates to violence and hatred. Th  us, from a 
womanist perspective, the most basic forms of health and healing are related 
to rebalancing the world socially, environmentally, and spiritually. Woman-
ist methods of social change—from the simplest acts like cooking food and 
sharing it, to everyday acts of hospitality and nurturance, to more complex 
procedures of folk healing and integral medicine, even literacy and educa-
tion—all seek to enhance the wellness of the body and psyche as a foundation 
for the wellness of society. Womanists inherently recognize the principle of 
“as above, so below.” As such, bodily health is an indicator of and conduit 
for societal and environmental health. Due to its association with the every-
day and common “Folk,” womanism values both traditional, naturalistic, 
and spiritually based methods of healing as well as a variety of “scientifi  c” 
methods, as long they recognize the interconnectedness of body, mind, and 
spirit. In line with liberation psychology, womanists also recognize the role of 
societal structures in physical and psychological health: peace and justice are 
health-favoring conditions, while war and injustice are health-compromising 
conditions.
20 Part of healing/medicine is healing society.
In contrast to established ideological perspectives like feminism, ethnic 
n a t i o n a l i s m ,  M a r x i s m / s o c i a l i s m ,  a n d  s o  o n ,  w o m a n i s t  a c t i v i s m  d o e s  n o t  
focus on the confrontation of institutional structures so much as on the shap-
ing of thought processes and relationships. For womanists, entrenched social 
and environmental problems originate from a psychological and/or spiritual 
fi rst cause, only later manifesting in the material or institutional realms. Th us, 
to attack institutions or physical conditions is to attack the outer layer, rather 
than the inner layer, of the problem and run the risk of reproducing the same 
oppression with new actors. War, violence, poverty, environmental degrada-
tion, racism, sexism, classism, homophobia, heterosexism, xenophobia, able-
ism, ageism, inadequate health care, inadequate education, and the like all 
begin in the realm of beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors. Womanists value every-
day activism that involves confronting violence and oppression wherever and 
whenever they appear across the course of a day. Talking with and organizing 
those around one, sharing information that can conscientize, but not prosely-
tizing, and being a positive person to interact with are all womanist methods 
of social change—methods that more ideological perspectives might write off  
as unimportant, ineff  ective, or naive. In characteristic fashion, a womanist 
might respond by adapting the colloquial proverb as follows: “You can catch 
more fl ies with honey than vinegar—although a little vinegar does add spice 
now and then.” Methodological purity is not required; indeed, from a woman-
ist perspective, mixed methods, unhampered by ideology, work better.
Womanism and Postmodernity
Given its vernacular loyalties and grassroots sensibilities, it might not be obvious 
that womanism is uniquely well suited to social and environmental problem 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxRT54118_C000.indd   xxx 8/6/06   2:23:08 PM8/6/06   2:23:08 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
Introduction • xxxi
solving under conditions of postmodernity.21 Academic wisdom has it that this 
honor rests with poststructuralism, a philosophical approach that can claim 
particularly compelling explanations for how postmodern societies function 
(and dysfunction). A close reading of both womanist and poststructuralist 
texts, a full explication of which is beyond the scope of this chapter reveals that 
the two perspectives are remarkably similar in two respects: fi  rst, how they 
unpack complex oppressive processes and forms of violence, concentrating 
on the circulation of power; and second, how they promote equality and 
democracy while respecting diff erence and freedom.
22 Th ese perspectives diff er 
in three key ways, however: (1) their use of language—womanism is accessible, 
poststructural theory is not (and this fact has implications for the degree to 
which each is able to engage and mobilize various segments of humanity for 
change on a mass scale); (2) their perspectives on identity and community—
womanism favors holistic models, while poststructuralism has a particular 
affi  nity for perspectives that emphasize fragmentation and dislocation; and 
(3) spirituality—womanism is explicitly spiritual, poststructuralism is not 
(which, like accessibility of language, has implications for the degree to which 
each perspective can engage and mobilize various segments of humanity). In 
my opinion, womanism and poststructuralism are compatible and mutually 
enhancing, but poststructuralism would have more impact if its insights were 
more frequently delivered in plain language. Its failure to use plain language 
implicates it in processes that reinforce the very relations of domination it 
theoretically opposes, inside and outside the academy, allowing it to reinscribe 
white supremacy, patriarchy, class disparity, and a host of other oppressive 
systems.
23
Th e convergence of womanism and poststructuralism at a locale char-
acterized by new forms of community built around lines of affi   nity rather 
than identity and a radical respect for responsible freedom would represent 
the longed-for reconciliation of poor Black women, representing the histori-
cal and symbolic bottom of the global social hierarchy, and rich white men, 
who represent the top, under the current dehumanizing system, thus bringing 
people of all races, ethnicities, and genders into a new system of relations. 
Indeed, such a convergence might precipitate the collapse of the very oppres-
s i v e  b i n a r y  s y s t e m  t h a t  d r i v e s  t h e  r e l a t i o n s  o f  d o m i n a t i o n  a n d  o p p r e s s i o n  
altogether. As the Combahee River Collective wrote in 1977, “If Black women 
were free, it would mean that everyone else would have to be free since our 
freedom would necessitate the destruction of all the systems of oppression.”
24 
While such a reconciliation is almost unthinkable at this point in time, it will 
ultimately be the issue that determines the success or failure of social-justice 
activism in the twenty-fi rst century. Social forces that will force a resolution 
of this issue are rapidly gathering momentum. Part of why now is the time to 
clearly articulate the womanist idea is that womanism can contribute greatly 
to a successful reconciliation of parties opposed under the current system. 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxiRT54118_C000.indd   xxxi 8/6/06   2:23:08 PM8/6/06   2:23:08 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
xxxii  • Introduction
In its theory and praxis, womanism envisions and enacts a world freed from 
the oppressive and dehumanizing eff  ects of this binary. Without presenting 
womanism against the backdrop of postmodernity—a task that could scarcely 
have been accomplished twenty-fi ve years ago—it is nearly impossible to con-
vey womanism’s liberatory potential vis-à-vis other perspectives. Womanism 
is postmodernism at street level.
Womanism’s Relationship to Other Perspectives
H a v i n g  s t a t e d  t h a t  w o m a n i s m  i s  n o t  f e m i n i s m  a n d  t h a t  w o m a n i s m  a n d  
poststructuralism are compatible despite some important diff  erences, I now 
pursue a fuller discussion of the relationship between womanism and other 
perspectives with which is it oft  en compared or contrasted. To understand 
womanism’s relationship with other perspectives, a general framework for 
thinking about relationship must be articulated.
Th e Western academic emphasis on classifi  cation and taxonomy obscures 
the relationship between womanism and other perspectives, especially femi-
nism and Black feminism. Th ese relationships cannot be understood within 
the frame of taxonomic classifi  cation, which relies on lines of demarcation 
that separate and diff erentiate. Th e goal of any taxonomic system is to estab-
lish discrete and nonoverlapping categories. Taken a step further, taxonomic 
systems facilitate prediction and control as well as the formation of oppressive 
hierarchies. Th e goal of any familial system of organization is to establish con-
nections and overlaps while demonstrating distinctiveness and individuality 
through contrast from commonalities. While family models are not necessarily 
nonhierarchical from a conceptual standpoint, they diff  er from taxonomic 
models in three respects. First, their animating impulses of relationship, 
rather than prediction and control, are, ideally, love and care. Second, they 
manifest fundamental interconnectedness and interdependence among ele-
ments in the system. Th ird, the hierarchies they embody are, ideally, helpful 
rather than oppressive.
Taxonomic systems rely on “either/or” logic, while familial organization 
systems rest on “both/and” logic.
25 Even traditional feminist histories of 
consciousness are animated by the urge to demonstrate diff  erences between 
perspectives, and thus isolate and oppose groups of thinkers and actors whose 
best interests lie in working together—that is, harmonizing and coordinating 
all while permitting diff  erence and its infi  nite proliferations. Womanism 
is a harmonizing and coordinating project, not an isolating and separating 
project. It seeks to promote relations of interconnectedness and cooperation all 
while blurring, dissolving, and dismantling ideological lines of demarcation. 
Th us, womanism has not been and cannot be understood within traditional 
feminist histories of consciousness insofar as these systems rely on taxonomic 
systems of classifi cation. To understand womanism and its relation to other 
perspectives requires a family model.
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxxii 8/6/06   2:23:09 PM8/6/06   2:23:09 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
Introduction • xxxiii
For purposes of discussion, I separate womanism/feminism as identity 
and womanism/feminism as politics and discuss the implications of each 
separately. Th e relationship between womanist and feminist identities is read-
ily illuminated using a family metaphor. To a lesser extent, the relationship 
between womanist and feminist politics is also elucidated using this meta-
phor. But other metaphors, which I elaborate below, further clarify—and add 
a diff erent slant to—the relationship between womanist and feminist politics. 
While no metaphor can off er a complete accounting of the thing it analogizes, 
metaphors can be useful for pointing out new ways of thinking.
In terms of identity and, to a lesser extent, politics, feminism and 
womanism are cousins. Within a taxonomic system, feminism and womanism 
are opposed and, potentially, adversarial. Within a familial system, feminism 
and womanism are related and can be mutually supportive. Under this rubric, 
they recognize and respect their diff  erence from one another, yet they allow 
one another to fl  ourish. One problem plaguing the relationship between 
womanism and feminism heretofore has been the tendency of Euroamerican 
feminism to assimilate all diff  erence into itself and, in particular , to exhibit 
both racism and cultural imperialism rather unselfconsciously. While decades 
of internal work around these issues has fundamentally transformed feminism 
from the inside—a fact that not all womanist scholars acknowledge—one 
troubling component of feminism’s appropriative tendencies remains, namely, 
its constant attempts to recenter itself as the only progressive voice or vehicle 
for women concerned with social-justice issues. Th is tendency disallows and 
neutralizes alternative expressions of women’s social-justice work or thought, 
of which feminism is just one—a point well articulated by authors as diverse as 
Clenora Hudson-Weems, Catherine Obianuju Acholonu, Molara Ogundipe-
Leslie, Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz, and Allyson Goce Tintiangco
26—and is thus 
disciplinary in the Foucaultian sense. Th is tendency accounts for much of the 
tension between some womanists and feminism. To say that one is a womanist 
is not to say that one is a feminist, even if the two are not mutually exclusive; 
a person can be either, neither, or both.
For feminists to claim that womanists are being disloyal to feminism or 
undermining feminism by claiming womanism instead of feminism refl ects a 
lack of understanding about the relationship and diff  erence between the two 
entities as well as a lack of genuine appreciation for the proliferation of posi-
tionalities generated by all ideologies and critical perspectives as they evolve 
and diff erentiate. Such an accusation subtly implies that all women should be 
feminists because feminism is a superior social-justice perspective for women. 
Th e womanist perspective holds that, as long as the job of social justice gets 
done, it scarcely matters what label it falls under; the more perspectives con-
tributing, the better. Self-labeling is a psychologically and politically valuable 
process, yet all labels and identities are socially negotiated through dialogue. 
People may or may not agree about how to name a thing, but the process of 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxiiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxxiii 8/6/06   2:23:09 PM8/6/06   2:23:09 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
xxxiv • Introduction
negotiating the label is healthy and inevitable. For this reason, womanists view 
womanist identity as an article of avowal (one has to claim it). 27 Yet, woman-
ists exercise the right to describe someone or something else as exhibiting 
womanist tendencies if it appears that way to them, with the full understanding 
that someone else might have a diff erent opinion. Th us, use of the term wom-
anist retrospectively is not problematic for womanists.
Th is fact relates back to the fact that womanism is an interpolated perspec-
tive rather than an ideology. Th at is, womanism is not and never has been set 
in stone; codifi cation and canonization are processes that are antithetical to 
the spirit of womanism. Womanists function by constantly discerning and 
synthesizing the various expressions of womanism generated by dialogue 
(written, verbal, or visual) and inspiration (internal/spiritual creativity) in 
interaction with the knowledge produced by moving through the world in 
daily life. Womanism does not function by relating back to a set of rules 
or principles and evaluating whether one is in conformity. Rather, it func-
tions by constantly moving toward a horizon of healing and commonweal 
by whatever method seems best in the moment. Th  us, the responsibility for 
“right action” rests with the individual’s conscience and the guiding dialogue 
of the social and spiritual communities within which she embeds herself by 
affi  nity.
To continue with the family metaphor, Black feminism and womanism 
are sisters. Insofar as Black feminism can be distinguished from feminism, 
with its implied modifi  er “white,” the relationship between Black feminism 
and womanism is closer than that between womanism and feminism. Black 
feminism and womanism have common cultural and historical origins. 
While they “favor” each other, using the old country parlance to denote 
family resemblance, they are not, as some would argue, one and the same—
even if they sometimes seem like twins. Each must be respected for what it 
contributes uniquely to the struggle for liberation from oppression and to 
full humanization.
28, 29 Previous confusion about the nature and politics of 
womanism, not to mention inadequate models for understanding the relation 
between womanism and other perspectives, has made it appear at times that 
womanism is opposed or antithetical to Black feminism, but this is not the 
case. Womanism is opposed to the cultural appropriation and co-optation of 
Black feminism as well as to feminist deployments of racism and imperialism/
neocolonization, intentional or unintentional, but it is not opposed to the 
struggle against sexism and violence against women. Some womanists choose 
to frame Black women’s historical antisexist struggle within a Black cultural 
framework (“race women”) rather than a feminist framework in an eff  ort to 
reclaim the autonomy of Black political action by women, particularly Black 
women activists of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century;
30 
such a move serves antiracist rather than antifeminist ends. Womanism 
in its interpolated form embraces the creative and politically productive 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxivRT54118_C000.indd   xxxiv 8/6/06   2:23:09 PM8/6/06   2:23:09 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
Introduction • xxxv
tension between Black women who frame their work in terms of “Black” 
social movements (e.g., Black nationalism, Pan-Africanism, civil rights, etc.) 
and those who frame their work in terms of feminism (e.g., Black feminism, 
African feminism, third world feminism, postcolonial feminism, etc.), as well 
as those who don’t frame their work at all and just do it.
All metaphors have limits, and the limit of the family metaphor is its inability 
to show that there is a diff  e r e n c e  o f  typ e  o r  ki n d  b e t w e e n  w o m a n i s m  a n d  
feminism. Th us, comparing feminism and womanism is not like comparing 
apples and oranges, but rather like comparing apples and pie crust or apples 
and water. Pie crust (womanism) can work as well with apples (feminism) 
as it can with blueberries, cherries, or peaches (i.e., other social-justice 
concerns). Similarly, water (womanism) can just as easily give shape and form 
to apples ( feminism ) as it can to fi sh or glaciers or electricity (i.e., radically 
diff erent domains of human activity, from politics, to identity, to sexuality). 
Another metaphor that helps to show this complementary diff  erence of kind 
between womanism and feminism is musical: we can consider womanism 
a song and feminism one of many possible instruments on which it can be 
played. Womanism plays equally well on the violin, the djembe, the gamelan, 
the koto, or the didjeridu. Ultimately, however, the sound is richest coming 
from the full orchestra or, put in more global terms, intercultural musical 
a s s e m b l a g e — a n d  i t  i s  j u s t  s u c h  a n  a s s e m b l a g e  t h a t  w o m a n i s m  s e e k s  b y  
working through diff  erent instruments, feminism being only one of them. 
Without each instrument holding its own, the orchestra or assemblage is not 
possible, yet the song can exist independently of any given instrument. Here’s 
another metaphor: feminism is like a particular kind of magnifying lens that 
highlights certain womanist political concerns but not others. Other social-
justice–oriented critical perspectives could be employed to magnify in the 
same way. Womanism, then, as politics, is the entire “text” that stands to be 
so magnifi ed. Th e point is, prior to now, the relationship between womanism 
and feminism has been hard to articulate because all speech directed at this 
topic has been predicated on the notion that womanism and feminism are of 
the same type. My purpose with these analogies has been to demonstrate that, 
at least from one angle, they are not.
To summarize, feminism is that critical perspective and social movement 
that revolves around the eradication of sexism, the dismantling of patriar-
chy, and the elimination of violence against women. Black feminism is a Black 
expression of feminism animated by the womanist idea and conveyed through 
womanist frames. Stated diff erently, womanism is what’s left  when feminism 
is lift ed off  Black feminism; it is the sound and feel of Black feminism, the 
politics of Black feminism, and the soul of Black feminism. Th  at being said, 
however, womanism can infuse any critical perspective or social movement—
feminism is not the sole instrument through which it speaks. In the end, 
womanism is a social-change perspective that focuses on harmonizing and 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxvRT54118_C000.indd   xxxv 8/6/06   2:23:09 PM8/6/06   2:23:09 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
xxxvi  • Introduction
coordinating diff erence, ending all forms of oppression and dehumanization, 
and promoting well-being and commonweal for all people, regardless of iden-
tity, social address, or origins.
Who Can Be Womanist?
Given womanism’s origins with Black women and other women of color, many 
people wonder who can be womanist. Th ere is a consensus among the main 
progenitors of womanism, namely, Walker, Ogunyemi, and Hudson-Weems, 
that people other than Black women or women of color can be womanists; 
indeed, these authors all suggest that womanism is a perspective open to all 
humanity. Th e womanist idea is not owned by Black women and women of 
color, even if it was developed, launched, articulated, and elaborated primarily 
by Black women and other women of color. Men of color, particularly Black 
m e n ,  h a v e  p arti c i p a t e d  in  th e  w o m an i s t  e n t e rp r i s e  alm o s t  fr o m  th e  b e gin -
ning.
31 White women have questioned whether they, too, might be woman-
ists.32 To date, I have not seen this question posed by white men, but this fact 
does not preclude the possibility that White men could be womanists. Again, 
while such an event is hard to imagine at this time, its possibility must be 
acknowledged and even envisioned if womanism is to fulfi  ll its full potential 
as a social-change perspective and praxis.
Th at being said, womanism is not, at this time, a free-for-all. Th  e working 
policy is as follows: you’re a womanist if you say you’re a womanist, but others can 
contest you or ask you what womanism means for you. Womanism requires 
that one’s ethnic and cultural origins be acknowledged from the outset. 
Womanism detests race but loves ethnicity and culture, because the concept 
of race is rooted in the relations of domination and oppression, whereas 
ethnicity and culture are storehouses of human knowledge that contain 
such systemic and life-enhancing elements as ancestry, history, memory, 
geography, cosmology, epistemology, worldview, metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, 
logic, psychology, spirituality, traditions, rituals, art, literatures, architecture, 
food, medicine, science, and language. In other words, culture is rich, while 
race is impoverished; culture is life affi  rming, while race is dehumanizing.
33 
Far from being a frozen, essentialized entity, culture for the womanist is 
dynamic and constantly changing. At the same time that traditional cultures 
are being maintained and reinterpreted in contemporary forms, a hybrid 
global transculture is also forming. To be a womanist, one must identify one’s 
cultural roots and experience oneself as a cultural or ethnic being rather than 
a racial being, but one must also be able to see oneself and one’s people as part 
of a larger global body defi  ned by common h umanness. Such identifi  cation 
preserves valuable streams of diff erence for the benefi t of all humanity, while 
simultaneously detaching these streams of diff  erence from particular bodies 
or identities. From this ground, people can begin the process of struggling 
for commonweal at the successive levels of community as defi  ned by the 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxviRT54118_C000.indd   xxxvi 8/6/06   2:23:09 PM8/6/06   2:23:09 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
Introduction • xxxvii
womanist—from one’s own group, to all humanity, to livingkind, to Earth, to 
the universe, to all the realms of creation.
Th us, the short answer to the question “Who can be womanist?” is anybody 
and everybody, assuming they begin with the identifi cation of their individual 
standpoints and move toward the harmonization and coordination of every-
one’s standpoints. Ultimately, womanism allows everyone to move toward the 
same place along diff erent paths: that place is universal community; that path 
is whatever uniquenesses they have acquired by birth and all their successive 
travels through diff erent experiences since that time. While this perspective 
may be unsettlingly nonracial for those who view womanism as merely another 
name for Black feminism or a Black women-centered perspective, the reality is 
that one hallmark of womanism is Black women’s and other women of color’s 
expression, vision, and articulation of universal sentiments and aspirations.
Beyond Race, Gender, and Class: Womanism 
and Other Vectors of Diff erence
With all the focus on race, gender, class, culture, and nation, one question 
that may arise concerns womanism’s position on sexuality issues. Western 
feminism, gay and lesbian liberation movements, and queer theory have 
all identifi ed sexual orientation as a critical vector of social diff  erence, and 
homophobia and heterosexism as oppressive systems of tremendous magni-
tude. While Walker’s womanism clearly endorses same-sex love and relation-
ships, Ogunyemi’s African womanism takes a more polyvalent perspective, 
and Hudson-Weems’s Africana womanism rejects homosexuality outright, 
the process of interpolation that shapes womanist theory and praxis beyond 
its original progenitors allows room for diff erences of opinion about sexuality, 
all while rejecting systematic discrimination and oppression based on sexu-
ality on the basis of its dehumanizing consequences. At this time, womanist 
perspectives on sexuality are as diverse as sexuality itself, yet womanism still 
opposes oppression based on sexuality. While questions of sexuality are far 
from settled among womanists, productive dialogue is taking place.
My personal perspective is that womanism’s fundamental affi   rmation of 
human diversity and support of spiritually grounded self-expression within 
the context of commonweal supports the free expression of sexuality and 
rejects discrimination or oppression based on sexuality as well as the centering 
or privileging of one sexual group and its practices or norms over another. 
Th at is, my womanism is avowedly antihomophobic and antiheterosexist; 
beyond this, my womanism also rejects discrimination or oppression based 
on gender expression; transgender status; intersex status; bi-, omni-, pan-, or 
fl uid sexuality; monogamous versus polyamorous or open relationship forms; 
decisions about whether or not to bear children; and decisions about whether 
or not to disclose sexuality information about oneself. At the same time as 
I confi dently assert my views, I recognize that others may have diff  erent 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxviiRT54118_C000.indd   xxxvii 8/6/06   2:23:10 PM8/6/06   2:23:10 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
xxxviii  • Introduction
views and I retain my ability to remain in relation with people whose views 
are diff erent on whatever basis I may decide to do so. Because womanism is 
nonideological, it does not compel me to separate politically or socially from 
people whose views are diff erent from mine, although it does place on me the 
responsibility to pursue dialogue and diffi  cult conversations when my own or 
others’ humanity, safety, or well-being is at stake.
Beyond race, gender, class, ethnicity, culture, and sexuality, there are of 
course other issues, identities, and vectors of diff  erence to which womanism 
can and does speak. In focusing primarily on these issues, I hope that I have 
conveyed enough about the womanist perspective and how it works to allow 
others to extrapolate how womanism might address any issue not mentioned 
here. Th e point is, the universe of issues, identities, and vectors of diff  erence 
is infi nite, inexhaustible, and constantly proliferating. It is impossible to get a 
handle on and address all issues without taking the position that all oppres-
s i o n  i s  d e h u m a n i z i n g ,  t h a t  a l l  o p p r e s s i o n  i s  u n i fi ed by a common operat-
ing principle, namely, the relations of domination and oppression, and that 
this principle must be transcended, dismantled, and dissolved for any real, 
substantive change in the direction of justice and healing to take place. Th  e 
shortcoming of all previous perspectives is that they have defi  ned themselves 
according to a single issue, identity, or vector of diff erence, and only aft er rec-
ognizing the reality of intersectionality have they gradually added concern for 
others.
34 While the recognition of intersectionality improved these various 
single-issue based ideologies, it did not by itself allow these ideologies to tran-
scend their initial foundations and gain the ability to approach all oppressions 
with equal concern. Th ose who came closest to doing so were Black feminists 
and other feminists of color whose methods and perspectives were born out 
of generations of survival wisdom gained under conditions of near annihi-
lation and forged in the interstitial spaces between the multiple single-issue 
movements to which they could lay claim. While it may be controversial, I 
argue that womanism as I have described it herein is the spirit that animated 
the perspectives of this “eccentric cohort,”
35 conferring uniqueness on their 
particular and previously ill-labeled brand of race/class/gender/sexuality/
humanity activism. Furthermore, this same spirit animated the activism of 
“race women” and other outspoken Black women in the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries, as well as outspoken women of color from other back-
grounds during this same period. Th is connects with my much earlier point 
that womanism as a way of being in the world goes back much further than 
1979 when it was fi rst named. Th at is, the tradition is longer than the termi-
nology is old.
Why Black Women?
Lest it trouble some that Black women and other women of color are the origin 
point for a perspective with ramifi  cations for all members of humanity, let 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxviiiRT54118_C000.indd   xxxviii 8/6/06   2:23:10 PM8/6/06   2:23:10 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
Introduction • xxxix
me explain this connection further. Why Black women and other women of 
color? As I have already explained, Black women and other women of color 
have been at the bottom of every social hierarchy created by man, particu-
larly during the four centuries of the modern era, and multiply so, based on 
the interaction of race, class, and gender hierarchies and systems of identity. 
Black women and other women of color have come to understand what it 
means to live in the margins of multiple communities simultaneously and 
function, even thrive, in the “in-between,” interstitial spaces of other people’s 
structures. Th ey have developed the ability to think and reason using multiple 
perspectives simultaneously, moving in and out of diff  erent cognitive, ideo-
logical, cultural, emotional, social, or spiritual frames with relative ease—and 
the ability to harmonize and coordinate a variety of forms and methods of 
social movement to respond synthetically and with specifi  c i t y  t o  a n  e v e r -
changing variety of social problems and conditions.
Furthermore, Black women and other women of color maintain a relation-
ship with “the masses of the people of humanity , ” to borrow Angela Davis’ s 
phrase,
36 that most other academic and ideological perspectives have lost, 
abandoned, abdicated, or forgotten, despite their propeople rhetoric. Th  us, 
Black women are connected to—and generally live their daily lives as part of—
the primary site of today’s most entrenched social problems: the masses. Black 
women and other women of color rarely “forget who they are” or “forget where 
they came from,” no matter what spaces they circulate in; they can move back 
and forth with ease between disparate environments, separated by class, race, 
or other markers of social diff erence. Black women and other women of color 
fr eq u e n tl y  use  “ ev e ry da y  m eth ods ”  o f  social  ch an g e  th a t  m o r e  a ca d e mi c  o r  
ideological thinkers refuse to take seriously. Consciousness raising becomes a 
daily activity, achieved through ongoing streams of microactions.
Black women and other women of color are generally not afraid of or 
skeptical about spirituality. Th ey recognize the spiritual world, the transcen-
dental dimension of human life, spiritual forces (named or unnamed), and 
the importance of maintaining a positive and orderly relationship between 
humans and “the powers that be.” In this light, Black women and women of 
color are emblematic of the majority of humans, for whom a relationship with 
the spiritual world is actual, palpable, meaningful, and valued. Black women 
and other women of color also recognize the political implications of this spir-
itual relationship in ways that few more academically or ideologically inclined 
perspectives do.
Th e defi ning feature of the masses of humanity at this time is the condition 
of poverty. While academics and politicos euphemistically speak of “class,” 
the real issue is poverty—want, need, and the dehumanizing lack of resources 
required for survival and quality of life. Black women and other women of 
color have experienced racialized, gendered forms of economic deprivation 
at the same time as they have been responsible for the survival, care, and 
RT54118_C000.indd   xxxixRT54118_C000.indd   xxxix 8/6/06   2:23:10 PM8/6/06   2:23:10 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
xl • Introduction
nurturance of others under these conditions. As a result, they have evolved 
collective wisdom about how to get by on less, which, paradoxically, is what 
everyone in the world needs to know how to do to overcome environmental 
degradation and overtaxation as well as to achieve economic parity on a global 
scale. Th e real, hands-on knowledge as well as emotional sensibility to live 
with less will be required of all humans, particularly those who exist at the 
higher end of the economic spectrum, if the global human community is to 
get past the precipice of resource depletion based on rampant and unchecked 
consumerism, as well as all related social confl  icts. Th us, Black women and 
other women of color, based on historical legacies of economic deprivation 
combined with the previously noted genius of “making a way out of no way,” 
are poised to be leaders for the rest of humanity at a time when humanity is 
approaching a crisis point in its own survival. Part of this survival wisdom 
has derived from the maintenance of collectivist values, the teleological end 
of which is a form of commonweal that could harmonize and coordinate the 
world’s diverse and ever-changing groupings into a workable and peaceable 
community. Because individual distinctiveness within overall collectivity is 
valued, there is no tension or paradox between individual and community 
development.
Black women and other women of color have a history of resisting 
dehumanization—of “resist[ing] the conditions that thwart life,” to cite Katie 
Cannon
37—using D.I.Y. or “do it yourself” methods that require neither the 
validation nor the participation of institutional powers. What diff  erentiates 
womanism from other social-change perspectives is its indiff  erence toward 
traditional institutional structures of society. While most modernist social-
change camps orient toward one or more institutions of society, defi ning these 
insti tu tio ns as “the p roblem ” o r “the enem y , ” the w o manist activist man tra 
might be, “We can do it with or without you.” Historically, Black women and 
other women of color have not waited for “offi  cial” recognition or assistance 
to move forward when there was a pressing problem to solve.
38 While 
institutions can be problematic, what is more problematic are the thought 
processes, emotional structures, attitudes, and social practices that make such 
institutions, and indeed the relations of oppression and domination wherever 
they manifest, possible in the fi  rst place. Th ose who nurture human beings 
recognize, “Change the human being and you change society”; changing social 
institutions is only a partial or temporary solution because, in the absence of 
changed minds and changed practices, dismantled social institutions will only 
re-form in newly oppressive ways. Th is principle applies both to traditional 
s o c i a l  i n s t i t u t i o n s  a s  w e l l  a s  t o  “ p r o g r e s s i v e ”  s o c i a l - c h a n g e  o r g a n i z a t i o n s ,  
both of which Black women and other women of color have historically felt 
wary about.
One last point regarding why Black women and other women of color have 
so ingeniously produced the womanist idea. Contradiction is no problem 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlRT54118_C000.indd   xl 8/6/06   2:23:10 PM8/6/06   2:23:10 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---
Introduction • xli
for Black women and other women of color. People need not be perfect to be 
good. Th ere is no ideological “party line.” To reiterate, “womanist” is a term of 
avowal: once you claim it, it’s yours, and you decide what it means and how to 
enact it. Each person decides whether s/he is in or out, and that decision, while 
subject to dialogue, debate, and negotiation, is essentially personal. Further-
more, one can participate in “the struggle” and still “have a life.” As a result 
of historical experiences that have whisked them to the brink of psychological 
annihilation and back, Black women and other women of color recognize that 
self-nurturance is as important as taking care of others.
39 To require oneself 
and others to enact one’s politics perfectly at all times and under all condi-
tions is an unnecessary burden and may be counterproductive in the long run. 
Such extremism leads to burnout and alienation, and it defi  es the reality that 
change is a process. As I stated earlier, the fundamental social-change process 
is to “start where you are” and move one step forward. “Forward” is defi ned by 
that which moves toward full humanization and commonweal.
Womanism does not assume that only Black women or other women of 
color hold these perspectives or have had these experiences, yet it recognizes 
that historical conditions have produced a unique set of circumstances for 
Black women in particular and women of color in general. Th  is unique set 
of circumstances, created by the convergence of racism, sexism, and poverty, 
has yielded certain forms of consciousness and repertoires of skills that any 
and all occupying such a position ostensibly would have developed. Th  e fact 
that Black women and other women of color are doing this is controversial 
only because of the way in which and the degree to which Black women and 
other women of color have been maligned and dismissed historically, particu-
larly as thinkers. It is hard for people occupying positions of greater social 
power and privilege to take women of color and their perspectives seriously, 
to believe that their knowledge and social technologies could actually contain 
answers to long-standing, deeply entrenched, and increasingly threatening 
social problems, particularly when Black women and other women of color 
have so frequently been viewed as the very essence of “the problem.” But that 
is exactly what womanism is doing. Under the radar and beyond surveillance, 
everyday Black women and other women of color have devised theories and 
methods for human problem solving that are now taking shape as this thing 
labeled womanism.
Th e purpose of this anthology is, without undermining the very dynamic 
and fl uid nature of womanism, to highlight and showcase womanism “on its 
own” and to reveal its very infrastructure through direct exposure of the sites 
where it has been developed by thinkers who resonate with and endorse it. 
To read this book is to view a constructive process in process and to engage 
a ground-level perspective with far-reaching implications for the well-being 
of planet Earth and all its inhabitants. Th  at no single author has articulated 
this reality, yet all authors collectively point toward it, is the reason for this 
RT54118_C000.indd   xliRT54118_C000.indd   xli 8/6/06   2:23:11 PM8/6/06   2:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---
xlii • Introduction
compilation. Having said that, I now turn to a discussion of the articles that 
comprise this volume.
Organization of Th is Volume
Th is book is organized into fi  ve sections. Th e fi  rst section, “Birthplaces, 
Birthmothers: Womanist Origins” highlights the work of Alice Walker, 
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi, and Clenora Hudson-Weems to drive home 
the point that womanism is a multiply authored perspective. It is not my intent 
in this section to suggest that Walker, Ogunyemi, and/or Hudson-Weems 
“founded” womanism, because I hold fi rmly to the idea, as do these authors, 
that the womanist idea is much older that its naming within the last quarter 
century suggests. Yet these authors played a vital role in the articulation and 
elaboration of the womanist idea, thus setting the stage for the manifestation 
of this interpolated perspective that we now refer to as womanism. A further 
purpose of this section on origins is to highlight the fact that womanism has 
existed and emerged in diverse locales—in the case of Walker, in the United 
States and outside the academy, in the creative world; in the case of Ogunyemi, 
in Africa and, to the extent that traditional African religions and African-
derived religions have proliferated outside Africa, in the global African diaspora 
as well; in the case of Hudson-Weems, in the realms of Africana studies and 
Black nationalism, evoking the Pan-African arena. While all of these authors 
are connected to academia on some level, their takes on womanism clearly 
bridge the academic world with the world outside it, primarily because each 
brings herself, an everyday woman, into every environment she enters. Each 
of these womanist authors models this bridging activity and, importantly, 
each does so with a diff erent voice.
Obtaining an adequate grasp of Walker’s womanism requires the 
simultaneous consideration of her didactic short story “Coming Apart” (1979), 
in which she introduced and briefl  y defi ned “womanist,” as well as “Gift  s of 
Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson” (1981), in which she refl ected on the 
cultural and sexual autonomy of the womanist, and, fi  nally, her most famous 
piece, “Womanist” from In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose  
(1983). Taken together, these three writings demonstrate the growth of the 
womanist idea à la Walker and contain many important nuances that, in 
retrospect, enable us to distinguish womanism from other perspectives. 
Ogunyemi’s essay “Womanism: Th e Dynamics of the Contemporary Black 
Female Novel in English” (1985) is included here because it contains her fi  rst 
published use of the term “womanism,” although any reading of Ogunyemi’s 
womanism is incomplete without her later book Africa Wo/Man Palava: 
Th e Nigerian Novel by Women  (1996). Similarly, Hudson-Weems’s articles 
“Cultural and Agenda Confl  icts in Academia: Critical Issues for Africana 
Women’s Studies” (1989) and “Africana Womanism” (1993) are selected from 
her large corpus of writings because they refl  ect her fi rst published works on 
RT54118_C000.indd   xliiRT54118_C000.indd   xlii 8/6/06   2:23:11 PM8/6/06   2:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---
Introduction • xliii
womanism. A fuller understanding of Africana womanism can only be gained 
by reading Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves  i n  i t s  e n t i r e t y  ( t h e  
“A ft erword” is particularly interesting) and also examining her book Africana 
Womanist Literary Th eory  (2004), as well as her many published articles.
Th e second section of the book, “Womanist Kinfolk: Sisters, Brothers, 
Daughters, and Sons on Womanism,” explores the ways in which others have 
responded to womanism. Patricia Hill Collins’s essay “What’s in a Name? 
Womanism, Black Feminism, and Beyond” and Michael Awkward’s “A Black 
Man’s Place in Black Feminist Criticism” refl  ect Black feminist responses to 
womanism. Collins’s eff ort revolves around distinguishing womanism from 
Black feminism, without negating the relationship between the two, while 
Awkward’s article refl ects the tendency, particularly on the part of many Black 
m al e  a u th o rs,  t o  vi ew  B la ck  f e minis m  an d  w o m anis m  as  extr e m e l y  co nfl u-
ent. My own article with Barbara McCaskill, “Who’s Schooling Who? Black 
Women and the Bringing of the Everyday into Academe, or Why We Started 
Th e Womanist ” and Gary L. Lemons’s article “To Be Black, Male, and ‘Femi-
nist’: Making Womanist Space for Black Men” refl ect the birth of a womanist 
identity, that is, the emergence of “second-generation” womanist scholars who 
identifi ed with womanism as something distinct from (though not incompat-
ible with) Black feminism. In Lemons’s work, in particular, we begin to see 
recognition of womanism as a perspective with unique possibilities for anti-
sexist and antihomophobic Black men (and by association, other men of color) 
who wish to express and name Black male humanity, in contradistinction to 
Black masculinity per se.
Th e third and largest section, “Womanist Th  eory and Praxis: Womanism 
in the Disciplines,” samples womanist scholarship from diverse fi elds of study. 
Th is is the section in which womanism’s development “under the radar”—at 
a time when womanism was being largely ignored or downplayed by femi-
nists—becomes visible, its history eff ectively recovered.
One goal of this section is to demonstrate the disciplinary breadth and 
depth of womanism. Arts and humanities, social sciences, and professions 
are all represented, as is theology. A second goal is to highlight the cultural 
and geographical reach of womanism. African American, African, Chinese 
American, Taiwanese, and Mexican perspectives are all represented in this 
section. Were space unlimited, I would also have been able to represent 
womanist perspectives originating in Caribbean, Native American, East 
Indian, Australian (Aboriginal), and European cultural contexts. A third goal 
is to illustrate how womanism has been applied in more and less vernacular 
ways by academic writers, whose very identifi cation with vernacular themes, 
tropes, methods, or identities has challenged the structure of the academy 
and its unspoken rules of elitism and exclusivity. Articles published in top-
tier journals and books produced by prestigious publishers in the so-called 
mainstream sit side by side with articles published in more obscure journals 
RT54118_C000.indd   xliiiRT54118_C000.indd   xliii 8/6/06   2:23:11 PM8/6/06   2:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---
xliv • Introduction
and books of limited circulation from the so-called fringes—all of these 
animated and unifi ed by the womanist idea.
While it would have been desirable to include multiple articles for all of the 
disciplines in which womanist scholarship has taken expression, page limits 
precluded such a luxury. Th us, a premium was placed on articles that were 
either fi rst in their use of womanist terminology or particularly elaborative 
or demonstrative of the womanist idea. Th eology, because it was the fi  rst dis-
cipline to really latch on to the womanist idea and develop womanism as a 
unique and freestanding perspective, is presented fi  rst. Delores S. Williams’s 
oft -cited short article “Womanist Th eology: Black Women’s Voices” presents a 
template for womanist thinking—not just for theology but for other disciplines 
as  w e ll .  C h e ry l  J .  S an d e r s,  Ka ti e  G.  Cann o n ,  Emili e  M.  T o wn e s,  M.  S h a wn  
Copeland, bell hooks, and Cheryl Townsend Gilkes’s “Roundtable Discussion: 
Christian Ethics and Th eology in Womanist Perspective” models womanist 
dialogue, incorporating “kitchen table” method and achieving the harmo-
nization and coordination of diff  e r e n c e  a r o u n d  a  v a r i e ty  o f  i s s u e s  th a t  a r e  
debated within womanism, including diff  erences in spirituality, sexuality 
issues, and the relation between womanism and feminism.
Aft er theology, womanism proliferated most freely in the humanities, 
beginning with literary studies, history, and theater and fi  lm studies. Sherley 
Anne Williams’s “Some Implications on Womanist Th eory” and Elsa Barkley 
Brown’s “Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the Independent 
Order of Saint Luke” were landmark publications and are, to this day, widely 
cited. Mark A. Reid’ s “Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa( s ): W omanist 
Film” shows both the early appeal of womanism to men and the international, 
c r o s s - c u l t u r a l  s c o p e  o f  w o m a n i s t  t h e o r i z i n g .  W e n y i n g  X u ’ s  “ A  W o m a n i s t  
Production of Truths: Th e Use of Myths in Amy Tan” illustrates the appeal 
and applicability of womanism beyond Black and African contexts, in this 
case speaking to a Chinese cultural context.
In the decade following these developments, womanism took hold in 
the social sciences (communication and media studies, psychology, and 
anthropology) and professions (especially education, social work, nursing, 
and public health, but also architecture). Womanist language permeated 
quantitative psychology, particularly in the area of identity studies, as early 
as 1992, although its use was largely devoid of ethnic connotations. Th  us, 
the selection I have chosen for this volume is Kim Marie Vaz’s “Womanist 
Archetypal Psychology: A Model of Counseling for Black Women and Couples 
Based on Yoruba Mythology.” I chose this paper, originally presented as a 
conference paper in 1995 and published here for the fi  rst time, for several 
reasons. First, it shows how the iconography, philosophy, and spirituality 
of African cultures provide a more viable, alternative foundation for depth 
psychology than the usual, Western cultural myths; second, it demonstrates 
how women of African descent in the West maintain concrete connections 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlivRT54118_C000.indd   xliv 8/6/06   2:23:11 PM8/6/06   2:23:11 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---
Introduction • xlv
to African cultural legacies, applying them in everyday life; and third, it 
demonstrates how womanism as a discipline was developing as much around 
the edges of mainstream academia (in this case, the oral medium of conference 
presentation) as in traditional, “authorized” outlets. Ruth Trinidad Galván’s 
“Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas : Womanist Pedagogies of the Everyday, the 
Mundane and the Ordinary” serves double duty by illustrating womanism in 
a Latin American context and clearly demonstrating the vernacular genius of 
womanism. Geneva Smitherman’s “A Womanist Looks at the Million Man 
March” also serves a dual purpose by, fi rst, addressing the controversial topic 
of womanist support for men-only space and, second, illustrating how a 
womanist-identifi ed scholar, even aft er having achieved the highest pinnacle 
of achievement by traditional academic standards, can continue to affi   liate 
with, speak to, and write about vernacular concerns using vernacular methods 
without apology. Continuing to explore this theme of vernacularity, Janice 
D. Hamlet’s “ Assessing Womanist Th ought: Th e Rhetoric of Susan L. Taylor” 
takes a look at an icon of Black women’s popular spirituality and self-help, the 
long-time editor of Essence magazine and author of two inspirational books, 
In the Spirit  and Lessons in Living,  to demonstrate that her praxis, while 
unnamed, is highly consistent with the womanist idea.
Given the practical, hands-on, helping-oriented nature of womanism, it is 
not surprising that scholar-practitioners in applied fi elds began to explore the 
ramifi cations of womanist thought for their respective disciplines. An early 
example is Vanessa Sheared’s “Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruc-
tion—A Womanist Perspective,” a particularly important piece because her 
focus is on adult education—an oft -neglected area in the arena of educational 
discourse, yet an important site for healing the eff  ects of social inequality 
and seeking social justice. A later piece, Tamara Beauboeuf-Lafontant’s “A 
Womanist Experience of Caring: Understanding the Pedagogy of Exemplary 
Black Women Teachers,” shows how an expanded concept of mothering, akin 
to Ogunyemi’s community mother, helps defi  ne and explain the politically 
effi  cacious pedagogical methods of Black women teachers. In Iris Carlton-
LaNey’s “Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African American Reformer of Wom-
anist Consciousness, 1908–1940,” we can observe methodological parallels 
between other early twentieth-century womanist activists like Maggie Lena 
Walker (the subject of Elsa Barkley Brown’s contribution) and both Sheared’s 
and Beauboeuf-Lafontant’s late twentieth-century teachers. Th  e practices of 
African American nurses in clinical research settings, as they are documented 
in JoAnne Banks-Wallace’s “Womanist Ways of Knowing: Th eoretical Con-
siderations for Research with African American Women,” further extend this 
line of connection.
Sexuality studies is, at this point, ill-defi ned even as an interdiscipline—yet 
the importance of this emerging fi  eld for bridging women’s studies, cultural 
studies, ethnic studies, and other interdisciplines and representing the 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlvRT54118_C000.indd   xlv 8/6/06   2:23:12 PM8/6/06   2:23:12 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---
xlvi • Introduction
reformation of the disciplinary landscape of academia in general cannot be 
o v e r s t a t e d.  S e xu ali ty  s tu di e s  i s  a b l y  r e p r e s e n t e d  in  th i s  v o l um e  b y  W e n s h u  
Lee’s “Kuaering Queer Th eory: My Autocritography and a Race-Conscious, 
Womanist, Transnational Turn,” in which she laces together “all of the above” 
and challenges both the Western academy and Western languages of identity 
through the lens of her own Taiwanese lesbian existence. Perhaps better than 
any other article in this volume, Lee’s piece anticipates and foreshadows new 
frontiers of womanist emergence on the global horizon.
Finally, as something of an outlier in terms of disciplines, we have architect 
Epifania Akosua Amoo-Adare’s “Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Posi-
tionality and the Spatio-temporal Construction of Black Family Life,” which 
takes a critical look at how Western notions of nuclear family and women’s 
connection to private space are applied to urban architecture in Western 
Africa. Th e result is that rural West African women (in this case, Ghana-
ian) who move to urban centers must alter their patterns of social interaction 
( co mm un al ,  s p iri tual ,  p u b li c )  in  wa ys  th a t  aff ect their psychology and chip 
away at life-sustaining cultural practices. Th  e result is the diminishment of 
women’s power, infl u e n c e ,  fr e e d o m ,  an d ,  in  s o m e  c a s e s ,  h a p p in e s s .  Am o o -
Adare’s work implies that physical space itself, politically suff used in the form 
of architecture, serves to mediate the degree to which the values and practices 
of women of color permeate the larger society, whether local or global, thus 
contributing to social problem solving.
One thing that becomes apparent upon perusal of the many articles in the 
third section of this book is that womanists run the gamut in terms of their 
views on the degree to which womanism is equivalent to Black feminism. 
My perspective on this question is that, while womanism has been distinct 
from Black feminism all along, the articulation of this diff  erence has fallen 
behind the application of it in real-time terms. Th at is, people doing womanist 
work knew in their gut that they were doing something diff  erent when they 
called their work “womanist” instead of “(Black) feminist,” but the language 
or context within which to articulate this diff  erence-in-relation had not yet 
emerged. Part of the purpose of this chapter is to articulate and thus clarify 
that diff erence without resorting to an erroneous and destructive polarization 
of womanism and (Black) feminism—but also without denying the alienating 
rift  that has existed between women’s studies and Africana studies in the 
academy. It is important to allow womanism to be in both places at once 
and, in certain respects, to begin the process of reconciling and bridging 
the two disciplines. Here, womanism exhibits its method of arbitration and 
mediation between “warring” parties and does not shrink from its imperative 
to call out persistent and oft  en invisibilized racism in women’s studies and 
deeply entrenched sexism and homophobia in Africana studies. Womanism’s 
interpolated perspective makes such a bridging possible without allowing 
either side to elide responsibility for its real defi cits and their consequences.
RT54118_C000.indd   xlviRT54118_C000.indd   xlvi 8/6/06   2:23:12 PM8/6/06   2:23:12 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---
Introduction • xlvii
Th e fourth section, “Critiquing the Womanist Idea,” refl ects the reality that 
womanism has not always been met with open arms. Th e three most common 
critiques of womanism are that (1) it allows Black women to reject feminism, 
minimizing the gains that Black feminists have achieved for all Black women 
through struggle; (2) it undermines feminist struggle by creating confusing 
and diversionary new terminology with ambiguous politics and little con-
nection to activism; and (3) like white feminism, it is imperialist insofar as 
it privileges the views of U.S. Black women and pushes them globally onto 
womanists of other nations and cultures. Each of these perspectives obtains 
a hearing in this volume: bell hooks’s contribution to the womanist “Round 
Table” in the third section refl  ects the fi rst critique; Helen (charles)’s article 
“Th e Language of Womanism: Rethinking Diff  erence” voices the second 
critique; and Inderpal Grewal and Caren Kaplan’s “ Warrior Marks:  Global 
W omanism’ s Neo-colonial Discourse in a Multicultural Context” elaborates 
on the third critique.
As womanist theory and praxis become more clearly distinguished from 
that of feminism, some aspects of these critiques may be answered in a way that 
they were not during the fi rst quarter century of womanism. For now, let me 
digress briefl y to address each of these critiques. While all three authors make 
some compelling points, three common weaknesses impact their critiques. 
First, all three authors refer only to Walker’s womanism, without the advan-
t a g e  o f  a n  i n t e rp o l a t e d  v e r s i o n  o f  w o m a n i s m  th a t  d r a w s  f r o m  O gu n y e m i’ s  
and Hudson- W eems’ s contributions to the womanist idea as well as insights 
off ered by the many and diverse womanist thinkers and writers who pub-
lished subsequently. Th us, they rest their premises on an incomplete version 
of womanism. Second, each fails to distinguish womanism as something of a 
diff erent type than feminism, succumbing to the problem I identifi  ed earlier. 
Th at is, each author implies that womanism is a poor and problematic imita-
tion of feminism, not recognizing that womanism is neither an imitation of 
feminism nor a fl ight from it—it is something diff erent altogether. Th ird, each 
fails to acknowledge the positive (culturally grounded) sources of womanist 
thought, confi ning their discussion of womanism to those aspects of woman-
ism that revolve around rejecting racism among feminists and marginaliza-
tion within feminism. Th ese authors overidentify womanism with “race” and 
underidentify it with “ Africanity” (and/or other culturally situated sources 
of knowledge and politics). I fi  nd myself wondering whether these authors 
would have advanced similar arguments had they considered a broader, more 
complete version of womanism.
While it is beyond the scope of this introductory chapter to address the 
critiques of womanism in detail, it is important to include, acknowledge, and 
address them earnestly. Grewal and Kaplan’s article in particular reminds 
w o m a n i s t s  t o  b e  a s  v i g i l a n t  a s  a n y o n e  e l s e  t o  a v o i d  r e i n s c r i b i n g  t h e  v e r y  
oppressions it rejects. Helen (charles)’s article reminds womanists to exercise 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlviiRT54118_C000.indd   xlvii 8/6/06   2:23:12 PM8/6/06   2:23:12 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
xlviii • Introduction
the courage of their convictions by clarifying the new and important mean-
ings that ride on their valiantly defended neologism. bell hooks reminds 
womanists to remember and honor the great strides hard won at great risk 
by women calling themselves Black feminists and to not use womanism as 
an excuse to forget—or to reinvent the proverbial wheel. Other critiques of 
womanism, such as critiques of womanist perspectives on the relationship 
between women and men or womanist perspectives on sexuality, may be 
resolved in the process of interpolating womanism as well as the process of 
dialogue. Womanism, like other perspectives, feminism included, is dynamic 
and evolving at all times.
Finally, the fi  ft h section, “Womanist Resources,” includes an extensive 
womanist bibliography. With the rapid proliferation of womanism in schol-
arly and pop culture contexts (particularly on the World Wide Web), as well 
as the tendency of womanism to appear in marginalized areas, many worth-
while references did not make it onto this list. Nevertheless, it is hoped that 
this bibliography can serve as a point of departure for those wishing to fi  nd 
out more about womanism on its own as well as for those seeking to deepen 
their reading within specifi c disciplines or problem areas. Particular attention 
has been paid to references that might be helpful in a classroom or research 
context, especially when the goal is to expand the off erings available in a spe-
cifi c discipline.
For every article that I have included in this volume, I could have included 
several more. No historically oriented anthology can adequately represent the 
full fi eld of work that defi  nes a particular era (in this case, the fi  rst quarter 
century of womanism), yet it is the challenge of the anthologist to sample from 
th e  un i v e r s e  o f  a v ail a b l e  m a t e r i al  a s  f ai r l y  an d  r e p r e s e n t a ti v e l y  a s  p o s s i b l e .  
Because womanism is by defi nition constituted by the creative tension inherent 
in diverse perspectives seeking harmonization and coordination, it is diffi  cult 
to convey the richness of womanism as it exists when having to make deci-
sions about what to include and exclude. In this anthology, I have tried to 
preserve as much diversity as possible while, at the same time, showing how 
the womanist idea—as an interpolated phenomenon—has evolved over time. 
To make up for the fact that I could not republish every worthwhile article, 
I intend the bibliography as “suggestions for further reading.” Admittedly, 
these suggestions are colored by my own reading, which is not equally exten-
sive across all disciplines. Nevertheless, it is hoped that my suggestions will be 
of concrete use to teachers and others who are preparing discipline-specifi  c 
syllabi and the like.
P e r h a p s  a  l a t e r  e d i t i o n  o f  t h i s  v o l u m e  w i l l  b e  e x p a n d e d  t o  i n c l u d e  
some of the material that could not be included here. Yet, a retrospective 
approach cannot be all there is. Womanism is a vast and growing fi  eld of 
discourse, and this fact will surely lend itself to future anthologies focusing 
on contemporary womanist scholarship, womanism in the popular arena, 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlviiiRT54118_C000.indd   xlviii 8/6/06   2:23:12 PM8/6/06   2:23:12 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
Introduction • xlix
womanism in disciplines not represented here, and so on. Th  e prospect of 
these exciting developments—and, even more, the potential of womanism to 
inform real-world human problem solving and improve social conditions for 
the masses of humanity, leading to new solutions to old problems and new 
models for old situations—is what fuels and inspires womanist productivity. 
It is to the vision of redemption for a world in crisis aff  ecting all members of 
humanity that I, a Black woman, dedicate this work.
Notes
 1. Another version of this story was published in Ms. magazine under the title “A Fable.”
 2. As I am using it here, the term “Black womanhood ” references and encompasses a social 
location that is triply at the bottom of three intersecting social hierarchies, namely, race, 
gender, and class. Race is defi ned by the white–Black dichotomy; gender is defi ned by the 
male–female dichotomy; and class is defi  ned by the wealth–poverty dichotomy. In each 
case, the fi rst term names the superior or dominant pole of the dichotomy, and the second 
term names the inferior or subordinated pole of the dichotomy. By defi  nition, Black 
women and all women of color (who are not white) occupy the inferior/subordinated 
pole of the race/gender intersection. Historically, as a result of this double subordination, 
Black women and other women of color have been more likely than their counterparts 
to occupy impoverished conditions. Th  us, my use of the term Black womanhood  here 
encompasses both Black women and other women of color and implies that anyone, 
regardless of race or gender, who occupies similar subordinated conditions would develop 
a similar perspective and praxis to the one being described here.
 3. Th  is defi  nition is available online at http://www.answers.com/topic/womanism? 
method=5&linktext=womanist.
 4. Gloria Steinem and Diana L. Hayes, “Womanism,” in Th e Reader’s Companion to U.S. 
Women’s History, ed. Smith et al. (New York: Houghton Miffl  in, 1998), 639–41.
 5. Carol Marsh-Lockett, “Womanism,” in Th e Oxford Companion to African American Lit-
erature, ed. William L. Andrews, Frances Smith Foster, and Trudier Harris (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1997), 784–86.
 6. Th  ese “named” forms of oppression have the tendency to proliferate infi  nitely, making it 
diffi  cult to be as inclusive as one might wish to be, particularly when one is faced with the 
task of naming them all.
 7. A good example of nonlabelable oppressions or oppressions for which there is not yet language 
appears in Jeff  Schmidt’s book, Disciplined Minds: A Critical Look at Salaried Professionals 
and the Soul-battering System Th at Shapes Th eir Lives  (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 
2000). Chela Sandoval also discusses these in terms of the “democratization of vulnerability” 
in Methodology of the Oppressed (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2000).
 8. In this chapter, all genders are implied in most statements. To avoid wordy constructions, 
the pronouns she and her will be the default, although more inclusive constructions will 
occasionally be used. It is the perspective of this author that the pronouns she/her and 
he/him do not encompass all of the human genders that exist, thus the inadequacy of this 
system is acknowledged up front, with apology.
 9. Personal communication, July 2005.
 10. AnaLouise Keating, “Shift  ing Perspectives: Spiritual Activism, Social Transformation, 
and the Politics of Spirit,” in Entre Mundos/Among Worlds: New Perspectives on Gloria 
E. Anzaldúa,  ed. AnaLouise Keating (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), 241–54. See 
also “Self-Help, Indian Style? Paula Gunn Allen’s Grandmothers of the Light  and the Poli-
tics of Transformation,” in Cultural Sites of Critical Insight: Philosophy, Aesthetics, and 
Native and African American Women’s Writings,  ed. Angela L. Cotten and Christa Davis 
Acampora (Albany: SUNY Press, forthcoming). I fi  rst encountered Keating’s use of the 
term spiritualized politics  in a public lecture on womanism at the University of Georgia 
during spring 2000.
 11. Sandoval, Methodology of the Oppressed, 6.
 12. I am indebted to the Black women historians and sociologists who have enlarged on this 
theme of “making a way out of no way” by documenting and theorizing everyday Black 
RT54118_C000.indd   xlixRT54118_C000.indd   xlix 8/6/06   2:23:12 PM8/6/06   2:23:12 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
l • Introduction
women’s survival genius. Th ese historians and sociologists include but are not limited to 
Paula Giddings, Darlene Clark Hine, Deborah Gray White, Elsa Barkley Brown, Rosalyn 
Terborg-Penn, Jacqueline Rouse, Joyce Ladner, Elizabeth Higgenbotham, and Bonnie 
Th ornton Dill. Gerda Lerner’s work has also contributed greatly to this eff  ort.
 13. Audre Lorde, “Uses of the Erotic: Th  e Erotic as Power,” in her own Sister Outsider: Essays 
and Speeches  (Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 1984), 53–59.
 14. Sandoval, Methodology of the Oppressed,  142.
 15. Th  e thread of this metaphor can be followed through sources as diverse as the naming of 
Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press in the 1970s to Barbara and Beverly Smith’s “Across 
the Kitchen Table: A Sister-to-Sister Dialogue,” published in Th is Bridge Called My Back: 
Writings by Radical Women of Color  in 1981, to Olga Idriss Davis’s more recent scholar-
ship, “In the Kitchen: Transforming the Academy through Safe Spaces of Resistance,” 
Western Journal of Communication  63 (1999): 364–81.
 16. Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi, Africa Wo/Man Palava: Th e Nigerian Novel by Women  
(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1996), 26.
 17. Alice Walker, In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose  (San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1983), xi–xii.
 18. In addition to the related chapters in this volume, see Mary Frances Berry, My Name Is 
Black Is True: Callie House and the Struggle for Ex-slave Reparations  (New York: Knopf, 
2005); Layli Phillips, “Mamie Phipps Clark,” in Notable American Women: A Biographi-
cal Dictionary, Completing the Twentieth Century , ed. Susan Ware and Stacy Braukman, 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005); Susan M. Glisson, “ Neither Bedecked 
nor Bebosomed”: Lucy Randolph Mason, Ella Baker, and Women’s Leadership and Orga-
nizing in the Struggle for Freedom  (Williamsburg, VA: College of William and Mary, 2000 
[dissertation]); Kimberly Springer, Still Lift ing, Still Climbing: African American Women’s 
Contemporary Activism  (New York: NYU Press, 1999) and Living for the Revolution: Black 
Feminist Organizations, 1968-1980  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005). 
 19. Ogunyemi, Africa Wo/Man Palava,  21–61.
 20. For more on liberation psychology, see Ignacio Martin-Baro, Writings for a Liberation 
Psychology  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994), and Nicole Hollander, 
Love in a Time of Hate: Liberation Psychology in Latin America  (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 1997).
 21. Postmodern conditions include information glut/overload; the proliferation of new tech-
nologies, particularly in the telecommunications arena; the evolution of multi-, trans-, 
and supranational structures of governance and commerce; the mobility of capital and 
labor across national borders; increasing polarization of wealth and poverty and the 
global diminishmen t of the middle classes; increasing surveillance of every da y life; the 
eclipse of agricultural and manufacturing economies by service, information, and fi  nance 
economies; cultural and economic globalization; cultural hybridization and mestizaje, 
combined with global Westernization; moral indeterminism; the increasing impact of 
simulacra on psychological processes; and the increasing indeterminacy or complexity of 
identity.
 22. For an academic overview of poststructuralist theory as it relates to feminism, see Chris 
Weedon, Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Th  eory  (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 
1996). Michel Foucault’s works, Discipline and Punish: Th e Birth of the Prison  (New York: 
Vintage, 1995/1978) and Th e History of Sexuality: An Introduction  (New York: Vintage, 
1990/1978), also provide a reasonable entrée into this philosophical fi  eld. For a more 
accessible introduction to this general area of thought, see Donald D. Palmer, Structural-
ism and Poststructuralism for Beginners  (1998), James N. Powell and Joe Lee, Postmod-
ernism for Beginners  (1997), and Lydia Alix Fillingham and Moshe Susser, Foucault for 
Beginners  (1994), all part of the Writers and Readers Documentary Comic Books Series 
published in New York. Finally, womanism and postmodernism are brought together in 
Angeletta KM Gourdine, “Postmodern Ethnography and the Womanist Mission: Post-
colonial Sensibilities in Possessing the Secret of Joy, ” African American Review  30 (1996): 
237–44.
 23. I have nothing against such ornate language—indeed, I view it, like fancy cake decorat-
ing and fi ne art, among humankind’s most exquisite achievements—yet, in a world where 
educational inequalities are such that the vast majority of people can neither produce nor 
penetrate such language, its use feeds into systems of oppression, and the energies that 
RT54118_C000.indd   lRT54118_C000.indd   l 8/6/06   2:23:13 PM8/6/06   2:23:13 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---
Introduction • li
painstakingly craft   it could better be employed at this time to eradicate the very educa-
tional inequalities that prevent it from being accessible to all.
 24. Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement,” reprinted in Barbara Smith’s 
Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology  (New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color 
Press, 1983), 278. Th e Black Feminist Statement was originally self-published as a pam-
phlet in 1977.
 25. For a good discussion of either/or both/and logics, see Patricia Hill Collins, Black Femi-
nist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment,  2nd ed. (New 
York: Routledge, 2000).
 26. Clenora Hudson-Weems articulates this point in Africana Womanism: Reclaiming 
Ourselves (Troy, MI: Bedford Press, 1993); however, see also Catherine Obianuju 
Acholonu’s Motherism: Th e Afrocentric Alternative to Feminism  ( O w e r r i ,  N i g e r i a :  A f a  
Publications, 1995), and Molara Ogundipe-Leslie’s “Stiwanism: Feminism in an African 
Context,” in her own Re-Creating Ourselves: African Women and Critical Transformations  
(Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1994), 209–41, for perspectives on Black women’s 
critical thought and activism outside feminism. For similar perspectives among Hispanic 
women, see Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz, Elena Olazagasti-Segovia, Sandra Mangual-Rodriguez, 
Maria Antonietta Berriozabal, Daisy L. Machado, Lourdes Arguelles, and Raven-Anne 
Rivero, “Roundtable Discussion: Mujeristas:  Who We Are and What We Are About,” 
Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion  8 (1992): 105–25, and Isasi-Diaz’s En la Lucha/In 
the Struggle: A Hispanic Women’s Liberation Th eology  (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 
1993). Allyson Goce Tintiangco addresses a similar theme from a Pilipino perspective 
in her article “Pinayism,” Maganda Magazine  10 (1997), http://www.magandamagazine.
org/10/pinayism01.html.
 27. Emilie M. Townes, “Voices of the Spirit: Womanist Methodologies in the Th  eological 
Disciplines,” Th e Womanist  1 (1994): 2–3.
 28. Th  e list of Black feminist writers, scholars, activists, and artists whose work has altered 
the course of history in ways both big and small is longer than these pages can contain. 
In my own personal journey, I am particularly indebted to the following authors, whose 
work has revolutionized my consciousness and provided me with perpetual inspiration 
over the years: Barbara Smith, Alice Walker, Audre Lorde, Beverly Guy-Sheft  all, Patricia 
H i l l  C o l l i n s ,  P a t r i c i a  B e l l  S c o t t ,  T o n i  C a d e  B a m b a r a ,  M .  J a c q u i  A l e x a n d e r ,  A n g e l a  Y .  
Davis, Anna Julia Cooper, Filomena Chioma Steady, Faye V. Harrison, Rose M. Brewer, 
bell hooks, Pat Parker, Cheryl Clarke, June Jordan, Kimberly Wallace-Sanders, Kimberly 
Springer, M. Bahati Kuumba, Nah Dove, Cheryl Dunye, Lisa C. Moore, Makeda Silvera, 
Jill Nelson, Susan L. Taylor, Shirley Chisholm, Essex Hemphill, Marlon Riggs, and, of 
course, the Combahee River Collective, also Selena Sloan Butler, Mamie Phipps Clark, 
and Funmilayo Ransome-Kuti, whose lives of activism were their texts. It should be noted 
that some of these authors, activists, and artists also identify as womanists, and many of 
them have contributed to the development of my womanist consciousness. In addition, 
I have also been profoundly infl  uenced and deeply moved by Chicana feminists Gloria 
Anzaldúa and Chela Sandoval as well as third world/postcolonial feminist Chandra 
Talpade Mohanty. In addition to all of the above-named individuals, there are numerous 
other authors, artists, and activists whose works I am on the path to discovering, 
exploring, and sharing with others.
 29. My understanding of the concept of “full humanization” draws heavily from Paulo 
Freire’s in Pedagogy of the Oppressed  (New York: Continuum, 1999/1970).
 30. Clenora Hudson-Weems, Africana Womanism .
 31. For a few examples of Black men’s participation in womanism, see Mark A. Reid’s 
“Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): Womanist Film” (1991), Gary Lemons’s “To 
Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’: Making Womanist Space for Black Men” (1997) and 
“ ‘When and Where [We] Enter’: In Search of a Feminist Forefather—Reclaiming the 
Womanist Legacy of W.E.B. DuBois” (2001), Michael Awkward’s “A Black Man’s Place in 
Black Feminist Criticism” (1998), and Rufus Burrow Jr.’s “Enter Womanist Th eology and 
Ethics” (1998) and “Toward Womanist Th eology and Ethics” (1999). For a more recent 
take, see Mark Anthony Neal’s online essay, “My Black Male Feminist Heroes,” February 
26, 2003, http://www.popmatters.com/features/030226-blackfeminists.shtml. Some of 
these authors claim Frederick Douglass and W.E.B. DuBois as womanist forefathers. 
Tolagbe Ogunleye claims Martin Robison Delany as an early Africana womanist man in 
RT54118_C000.indd   liRT54118_C000.indd   li 8/6/06   2:23:13 PM8/6/06   2:23:13 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---
lii • Introduction
her article “Dr. Martin Robison Delany, 19th-Century Africana Womanist: Refl ections on 
His Avant-Garde Politics Concerning Gender, Colorism, and Nation Building” (1998).
 32. Th  is is a frequent query at conference sessions where womanism is the topic. However, 
for a published refl  ection on this topic, see Constance Fulmer , “ A Nineteenth-Century 
‘W omanist’ on Gender Issues: Edith J. Simcox in Her Autobiography of a Shirtmaker, ” 
Nineteenth Century Prose  26 (1999): 110–26.
 33. I am indebted to Faye V. Harrison’s “Introduction: Expanding the Discourse on ‘Race,’ ” 
American Anthropologist  100 (1998): 609–31, Asa Hilliard’s SBA: Th e Reawakening of the 
African Mind  (Gainesville, FL: Makare Publishing Company, 1998), and Cheikh Anta 
Diop’s Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic Anthropology  (Brooklyn, NY: Lawrence 
Hill, 1991) for perspectives on this matter.
 34. For more detail on in tersectionality , see Patricia Hill Collins’ s Black Feminist Th ought  
and Kimberle Crenshaw’s “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and 
Violence Against Women of Color,” in Applications of Feminist Legal Th eory to Women’s 
Lives: Sex, Violence, Work, and Reproduction,  ed. D. Kelly Weisberg (Philadelphia: Tem-
ple University Press, 1996).
 35. Sandoval, Methodology of the Oppressed,  42.
 36. Angela Y. Davis, women’s history month lecture, Agnes Scott College, March 2004.
 37. Katie G. Cannon, “Roundtable: Christian Ethics and Th  eology in Womanist Perspective,” 
Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion  5 (1989): 93.
 38. For an interesting case in point, see “Th  e New Amazons,” a story about the Womanist 
Party of India (WPI), published August 15, 2004, in Th e Telegraph  newspaper of Calcutta, 
India, http://www.telegraphindia.com/1040815/asp/look/story_3622999.asp#.
 39. Susan L. Taylor’s work, especially In the Spirit (San Francisco: Amistad, 1993), represents 
this perspective particularly well.
References
Acholonu, Catherine Obianuju. Motherism: Th e Afrocentric Alternative to Feminism . Owerri, 
Nigeria: Afa Publications, 1995.
Amoo-Adare, Epifania Akosua. “Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Positionality and the Spatio-
temporal Construction of Black Family Life.” In La Familia en Africa y la Diaspora Africana: 
Estudio Multidisciplinar/Family in Africa and the African Diaspora: A Multidisciplinary 
Approach, ed. Olga Barrios and Frances Smith Foster, 63–73. Salamanca, Spain: Ediciones 
Almar, 2004.
Awkward, Michael. “A Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist Criticism.” In Negotiating Diff erence: 
Race, Gender, and the Politics of Positionality . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Banks, JoAnne. “Womanist Ways of Knowing: Th  eoretical Considerations for Research with 
African American Women.” Advances in Nursing Science  22 (2000): 33–45.
Beauboeuf-Lafontant, Tamara. “A Womanist Experience of Caring: Understanding the Peda-
gogy of Exemplary Black Women Teachers.” Th e Urban Review  34 (2002): 71–86.
Berry, Mary Frances. My Name Is Black Is True: Callie House and the Struggle for Ex-slave Repara-
tions. New York: Knopf, 2005.
Brown, Elsa Barkley. “Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the Independent 
Order of Saint Luke.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society  14 (1989): 610–33.
Burrow Jr., Rufus. “Enter Womanist Th eology and Ethics.” Western Journal of Black Studies  22 
(1998): 19–29.
———. “ Towa rd Woma n i s t Th eology and Ethics.” J o u r n a l  o f  F e m i n i s t  S t u d i e s  i n  R e l i g i o n 15 
(1999): 77–95.
Cannon, Katie G. “Roundtable: Christian Ethics and Th eology in Womanist Perspective.” Jour-
nal of Feminist Studies in Religion  5 (1989): 93.
C a r l t o n - L a N e y ,  I r i s .  “ E l i z a b e t h  R o s s  H a y n e s :  A n  A f r i c a n  A m e r i c a n  R e f o r m e r  o f  W o m a n i s t  
Consciousness, 1908–1940.” Social Work 42 (1997): 573–83.
(charles), Helen. “Th e Language of Womanism: Re-thinking Diff  erence.” In British Black Femi-
nism: A Reader,  ed. Heidi Safi a Mirza, 278–97. London: Routledge, 1997.
Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of 
Empowerment. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2000.
——— . “What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black Feminism, and Beyond.” Th e Black Scholar  26 
(1996): 9–17.
RT54118_C000.indd   liiRT54118_C000.indd   lii 8/6/06   2:23:13 PM8/6/06   2:23:13 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---
Introduction • liii
Combahee River Collective. “A Black Feminist Statement.” In Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthol-
ogy, ed. Barbara Smith, 272–82. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 1983.
Crenshaw, Kimberle. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence 
against Women of Color.” In Applications of Feminist Legal Th eory to Women’s Lives: Sex, 
Violence, Work, and Reproduction,  ed. D. Kelly Weisberg. Philadelphia: Temple Univer-
sity Press, 1996.
Davis, Olga Idriss. “In the Kitchen: Transforming the Academy through Safe Spaces of Resis-
tance.” Western Journal of Communication  63 (1999): 364–81.
Diop, Cheikh Anta. Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic Anthropology . Brooklyn, NY: Law-
rence Hill, 1991.
Fillingham, Lydia Alix, and Moshe Susser. Foucault for Beginners . New York: Writers and Read-
ers, 1994.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: Th e Birth of the Prison . New York: Vintage, 1995/1978.
———. Th e History of Sexuality: An Introduction . New York: Vintage, 1990/1978.
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppressed . New York: Continuum, 1999/1970.
Fulmer, Constance. “A Nineteenth-Century ‘Womanist’ on Gender Issues: Edith J. Simcox in 
Her Autobiography of a Shirtmaker .” Nineteenth Century Prose  26 (1999): 110–26.
Galván, Ruth Trinidad. “Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas:  W o m a n i s t  P e d a g o g i e s  o f  t h e  
Everyday, the Mundane and the Ordinary.” Qualitative Studies in Education  15 (2001): 
603–21.
Glisson, Susan M. “ Neither Bedecked nor Bebosomed”: Lucy Randolph Mason, Ella Baker , and 
Women’s Leadership and Organizing in the Struggle for Freedom  [dissertation]. Williams-
burg, VA: College of William and Mary, 2000.
Gourdine, Angeletta KM. “Postmodern Ethnography and the Womanist Mission: Postcolonial 
Sensibilities in Possessing the Secret of Joy. ” African American Review  30 (1996): 237–44.
Grewal, Inderpal, and Caren Kaplan. “ Warrior Marks:  Global Womanism’s Neo-colonial Dis-
course in a Multicultural Context.” In Keyframes: Popular Cinema and Cultural Studies,  
ed. Matthew Tinkcom and Amy Villarejo. New York: Routledge, 52–71.
Hamlet, Janice D. “Assessing Womanist Th ought: Th e Rhetoric of Susan L. Taylor.” Communica-
tion Quarterly  48 (2000): 420–36.
Harrison, Faye V. “Introduction: Expanding the Discourse on ‘Race.’ ” American Anthropologist  
100 (1998): 609–31.
Hilliard III, Asa G. SBA: Th e Reawakening of the African Mind . Gainesville, FL: Makare Publish-
ing Company, 1998.
Hollander, Nicole. Love in a Time of Hate: Liberation Psychology in Latin America . New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997.
Hudson-Weems, Clenora. “Africana Womanism.” In Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Our-
selves, 17–32. Troy, MI: Bedford, 1993.
———. Africana Womanist Literary Th eory . Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2004.
———. Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves . Troy, MI: Bedford Press, 1993.
——— . “Cultural and Agenda Confl  icts in Academia: Critical Issues for Africana Women’s 
Studies.” Western Journal of Black Studies  13 (1989): 185–89.
Isasi-Diaz, Ada Maria. En la Lucha/In the Struggle: A Hispanic Women’s Liberation Th  eology . 
Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993.
Isasi-Diaz, Ada Maria, Elena Olazagasti-Segovia, Sandra Mangual-Rodriguez, Maria Antonietta 
Berriozabal, Daisy L. Machado, Lourdes Arguelles, and Raven-Anne Rivero. “Roundtable 
Discussion: Mujeristas:  Who We Are and What We Are About.” Journal of Feminist Stud-
ies in Religion  8 (1992): 105–25.
K e a tin g ,  An aLo ui s e .  “ S e lf - h e l p ,  I n di an  S ty l e ?  P a ul a  G un n  All e n ’ s  Grandmothers of the Light  
and the Politics of Transformation.” In Cultural Sites of Critical Insight: Philosophy, Aes-
thetics, and Native and African American Women’s Writings,  ed. Angela L. Cotten and 
Christa Davis Acampora. Albany: SUNY Press, forthcoming.
———. “ Sh i ft ing Perspectives: Spiritual Activism, Social Transformation, and the Politics of 
Spirit.” In Entre Mundos/Among Worlds: New Perspectives on Gloria E. Anzaldúa,  ed. 
AnaLouise Keating, 241–54. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Lee, Wenshu. “Kuaering Queer Th eory: My Autocritography and a Race-Conscious, Womanist, 
Transnational Turn.” Journal of Homosexuality  45 (2003): 147–70.
Lemons, Gary L. “To Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’: Making Womanist Space for Black Men.” 
International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy  17 (1997): 35–61.
RT54118_C000.indd   liiiRT54118_C000.indd   liii 8/6/06   2:23:14 PM8/6/06   2:23:14 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---
liv • Introduction
——— . “ ‘When and Where [We] Enter’: In Search of a Feminist Forefather—Reclaiming the 
Womanist Legacy of W .E.B. DuBois. ” In Traps: African American Men on Gender and 
Sexuality,  ed. Rudolph P. Byrd and Beverly Guy-Sheft  all, 71–89. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2001.
Lorde, Audre. “Uses of the Erotic: Th e Erotic as Power.” In Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches,  
53–59. Freedom, CA: Th e Crossing Press, 1984.
Marsh-Lockett, Carol. “Womanism.” In The Oxford Companion to African American Literature , 
ed. William L. Andrews, Frances Smith Foster, and Trudier Harris, 784–86. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Martin-Baro, Ignacio. Writings for a Liberation Psychology . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1994.
Nandgaonkar, Satish. “Th  e New Amazons.” Th e Telegraph,  A u g u s t  1 5 ,  2 0 0 4 , ,  h t t p : / / w w w .
telegraphindia.com/1040815/asp/look/story_3622999.asp#.
Neal, Mark Anthony. “My Black Male Feminist Heroes.” February 26, 2003, http://www.
popmatters.com/features/030226-blackfeminists.shtml.
Ogundipe-Leslie, Molara. “Stiwanism: Feminism in an African Context.” In Re-creating Our-
selves: African Women and Critical Transformations,  209–41. Trenton, NJ: Africa World 
Press, 1994.
Ogunleye, Tolagbe. “Dr. Martin Robison Delany, 19th-Century Africana Womanist: Refl  ections 
on His Avant-Garde Politics Concerning Gender, Colorism, and Nation Building.” 
Journal of Black Studies  28 (1998): 628–49.
Ogunyemi, Chikwenye Okonjo. Africa Wo/Man Palava: Th e Nigerian Novel by Women . Chicago: 
University of Chicago, 1996.
———. “Woma n i sm : Th e Dynamics of the Contemporary Black Female Novel in English.” Signs: 
Journal of Women in Culture and Society  11 (1985): 63–80.
Palmer, Donald D. Structuralism and Poststructuralism for Beginners . New York: Writers and 
Readers, 1998.
Phillips, Layli. “Mamie Phipps Clark.” In Notable American Women: A Biographical Dictionary, 
Completing the Twentieth Century , ed. Susan Ware and Stacey Braukman. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Phillips, Layli, and Barbara McCaskill. “Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women and the Bring-
ing of the Everyday into Academe, or Why We Started Th e Womanist .” Signs: Journal of 
Women in Culture and Society  20 (1995): 1007–18.
Powell, James N., and Joe Lee. Postmodernism for Beginners. New York: Writers and Readers, 1997.
Reid, Mark A. “Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): Womanist Film.” Black American 
Literature Forum  25 (1991): 375–88.
Sanders, Cheryl J., Katie G. Cannon, Emilie M. Townes, M. Shawn Copeland, bell hooks, and 
Cheryl Townsend Gilkes. “Roundtable Discussion: Christian Ethics and Th  eology in 
Womanist Perspective.” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion  5 (1989): 83–112.
Sandoval, Chela. Methodology of the Oppressed . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2000.
Schmidt, Jeff . Disciplined Minds: A Critical Look at Salaried Professionals and the Soul-battering 
System Th at Shapes Th eir Lives . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi  eld, 2000.
Sheared, Vanessa. “Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruction—A Womanist Model.” New 
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education  61 (1994): 27–37.
Smith, Barbara, and Beverly Smith. “Across the Kitchen Table: A Sister-to-Sister Dialogue.” In 
Th is Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color,  ed. Gloria Anzaldúa 
and Cherrie Moraga. Watertown, MA: Persephone Press, 1981.
Smitherman, Geneva. “A Womanist Looks at the Million Man March.” In Million Man March/
Day of Absence,  ed. Haki R. Madhubuti and Maulana Karenga, 104–107. Chicago: Th  ird 
World Press, 1996.
Springer, Kimberley. Living for the Revolution: Black Feminist Organizations, 1968–1980 . Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2005.
Springer, Kimberley. Still lifting, Still Climbing: African American Women’s Contemporary Activ-
ism. New York: NYU Press, 1999.
Steinem, Gloria, and Diana L. Hayes. “Womanism.” In Th e Reader’s Companion to U.S. Wom-
en’s History, ed. Barbara Smith, Gloria Steinem, Gwendolyn Mink, Marysa Navarro, and 
Wilma Mankiller, 639–41. New York: Houghton Miffl  in, 1998.
Taylor, Susan L. In the Spirit. San Francisco: Amistad, 1993.
———. Lessons in Living . New York: Anchor, 1998.
RT54118_C000.indd   livRT54118_C000.indd   liv 8/6/06   2:23:14 PM8/6/06   2:23:14 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---
Introduction • lv
Tintiangco, Allyson Goce. “Pinayism.” Maganda Magazine  10 (1997), 
http://www.magandamagazine.org/10/pinayism01.html.
Townes, Emilie M. “Voices of the Spirit: Womanist Methodologies in the Th  eological Disci-
plines.” Th e Womanist  1 (1994): 2–3.
Vaz, Kim Marie. “Womanist Archetypal Psychology: A Model of Counseling for Black Women 
and Couples Based on Yoruba Mythology” (this volume).
Walker, Alice. “Coming Apart.” In Take Back the Night,  ed. Laura Lederer, 84–93. New York: 
Bantam, 1979.
———. “Gi ft s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson.” In In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: 
Womanist Prose,  71–82. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983.
———. Womanist. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983.
——— . “Womanist.” In Womanist, xi–xii. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983.
Weedon, Chris. Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Th eory . Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.
Williams, Delores S. “Womanist Th  eology: Black Women’s Voices.” Christianity and Crisis,  
March 2, 1987, 66–70.
Williams, Sherley Anne. “Some Implications of Womanist Th eory.” Callaloo  9 (1986): 303–308.
Xu, Wenying. “A Womanist Production of Truths: Th e Use of Myths in Amy Tan.” Paintbrush  
22 (1995): 56–66.
RT54118_C000.indd   lvRT54118_C000.indd   lv 8/6/06   2:23:14 PM8/6/06   2:23:14 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---
RT54118_C000.indd   lviRT54118_C000.indd   lvi 8/6/06   2:23:14 PM8/6/06   2:23:14 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---
Part 1
Birthplaces, Birthmothers: 
Womanist Origins
RT54118_S001.indd   1RT54118_S001.indd   1 6/2/06   7:11:47 PM6/2/06   7:11:47 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
RT54118_S001.indd   2RT54118_S001.indd   2 6/2/06   7:11:48 PM6/2/06   7:11:48 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
3
1
Alice Walker’ s Womanism
Coming Apart (1979)
ALICE W ALKER
Th ese three paragraphs by Alice Walker tell why she wrote Coming Apart: 
“Many Black men see pornography as progressive because the white woman, 
formerly taboo, is, via pornography, made available to them. Not simply avail-
able, but in a position of vulnerability to all men. Th is availability and vulner-
ability diminishes the importance and power of color among men and permits 
a bonding with white men as men, which Black men, striving to be equal, not 
content with being diff erent, apparently desire.
“Many Black women also consider pornography progressive and are simply 
interested in equal time. But in a racist society, where Black women are on the 
bottom, there is no such thing as equal time or equal quality of exposure. It is 
not unheard of to encounter ‘erotica’ or pornography in which a Black woman 
and a white woman are both working in ‘a house of ill-repute,’ but the Black 
woman also doubles as the white woman’s maid.
1 Th e Black man who fi  nds 
himself ‘enjoying’ pornography of this sort faces a split in himself that allows a 
solidarity of gender but promotes a rejection of race. ‘Beulah, peel me a grape’ 
has done untold harm to us all.
“I have, as we all have, shared a part of my life—since the day I was born—
with men whose concept of woman is a degraded one. I have also experienced, 
like the woman in this piece, Forty-second Street; I felt demeaned by the sell-
ing of bodies, threatened by the violence, and furious that my daughter must 
grow up in a society in which the debasement of women is actually enjoyed.”
* * *
A middle-aged husband comes home aft  er a long day at the offi  ce. His wife 
greets him at the door with the news that dinner is ready. He is grateful. First, 
however, he must use the bathroom. In the bathroom, sitting on the com-
mode, he opens up the Jiveboy magazine he has brought home in his briefcase. 
Th ere are a couple of Jivemate poses that particularly arouse him. Studies the 
young women—blonde, perhaps (the national craze); with elastic waists and 
RT54118_C001.indd   3RT54118_C001.indd   3 7/8/06   8:40:53 PM7/8/06   8:40:53 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
4 • Th e Womanist Reader
inviting eyes—and strokes his penis. At the same time, his bowels stir with the 
desire to defecate. He is in the bathroom a luxurious ten minutes. He emerges 
spent, relaxed—hungry for dinner.
His wife, using the bathroom later, comes upon the slightly damp maga-
zine. She picks it up with mixed emotions. She is a brownskin woman with 
black hair and eyes. She looks at the white blondes and brunettes. Will he be 
thinking of them, she wonders, when he is making love to me?
“Why do you need these?” she asks.
“Th ey mean nothing,” he says.
“But they hurt me somehow,” she says.
“You are being a) silly, b) a prude, and c) ridiculous,” he says. “You know I 
love you.”
She cannot say to him: But they are not me, those women. She cannot say 
she is jealous of pictures on a page. Th  at she feels invisible. Rejected. Over-
looked. She says instead, to herself: He is right. I will grow up. Adjust. Swim 
with the tide.
He thinks he understands her, what she has been trying to say. It is Jiveboy, 
he thinks, the white women.
Next day he brings home Jivers, a Black magazine, fi lled with bronze and 
honey-colored women. He is in the bathroom another luxurious ten minutes.
She stands, holding the magazine: on the cover are the legs and shoes of a 
well-dressed Black man, carrying a briefcase and rolled Wall Street Journal in 
one hand. At his feet—she turns the magazine cover around and around to 
fi gure out how exactly the pose is accomplished—there is a woman, a brown-
skin woman like herself, twisted and contorted in such a way that her head is 
not even visible. Only her glistening body—her back and derriere—so that she 
looks like a human turd at the man’s feet.
He is on a business trip to New York. He has brought his wife along. He is 
eagerly sharing Forty-second Street with her, “Look!” he says, “how free every-
thing is! A far cry from Bolton!” (Th e small town they are from.) He is elated 
to see the blonde, spaced-out hookers, with their Black pimps, trooping down 
the street. Elated at the shortness of the Black hookers’ dresses, their long hair, 
inevitably false and blonde. She walks somehow behind him, so that he will 
encounter these wonders fi rst. He does not notice until he turns a  corner that 
she has stopped in front of a window that has caught her eye. While she is 
standing alone, looking, two separate pimps ask her what stable she is in or if 
in fact she is in one. Or simply “You workin’?”
He struts back and takes her elbow. Looks hard for the compliment implied 
in these questions, then shares it with his wife. “ You know you’re foxy?”
She is immovable. Her face suff  ering and wondering. “But look,” she 
says, pointing. Four large plastic dolls—one a skinny Farrah Fawcett (or so 
the doll looks to her) posed for anal inspection; one, an oriental, with her 
eyes, strangely, closed, but her mouth, a pouting red suction cup, open; an 
RT54118_C001.indd   4RT54118_C001.indd   4 7/8/06   8:40:54 PM7/8/06   8:40:54 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 5
enormous eskimo woman—with fur around her neck and ankles, and vagina; 
and a Black woman dressed entirely in a leopard skin, complete with tail. Th e 
dolls are all life-size, and the effi  ciency of their rubber genitals is explained in 
detail on a card visible through the plate glass.
For her this is the stuff  of nightmares because all the dolls are smiling. She 
will see them for the rest of her life. For him the sight is also shocking, but 
arouses a prurient curiosity. He will return, another time, alone. Meanwhile, 
he must prevent her from seeing such things, he resolves, whisking her briskly 
off  the street.
Later, in their hotel room, she watches TV as two Black women sing their 
latest hits: the fi rst woman, dressed in a gold dress (because her song is now 
“solid gold!”), is nonetheless wearing a chain around her ankle—the wife 
imagines she sees a chain—because the woman is singing: “Free me from my 
freedom, chain me to a tree!”
“What do you think of that?” she asks her husband.
“She’s a fool,” says he.
But when the second woman sings: “Ready, aim, fi  re, my name is desire,” 
with guns and rockets going off  all around her, he thinks the line “Shoot me 
with your love!” explains everything.
She is despondent.
She looks in a mirror at her plump brown and blackskin body, crinkly hair 
and black eyes and decides, foolishly, that she is not beautiful. And that she 
is not hip, either. Among her other problems is the fact that she does not like 
th e  w o r d  “ n i g g e r ”  u s e d  b y  an y o n e  a t  all ,  an d  i s  afr ai d  o f  m ari j u an a.  Th ese 
restraints, she feels, make her old, too much like her own mother, who loves 
sex (she has lately learned) but is highly religious and, for example, thinks 
cardplaying wicked and alcohol deadly. Her husband would not consider her 
mother sexy, she thinks. Since she herself is aging, this thought frightens her. 
But, surprisingly, while watching herself become her mother in the mirror, 
she discovers that she considers her mother—who carefully braids her average 
length, average grade, graying hair every night before going to bed; the braids 
her father still manages to fray during the night— very sexy.
At once she feels restored.
Resolves to fi ght.
“You’re the only Black woman in the world that worries about any of 
this stuff ,” he tells her, unaware of her resolve, and moody at her months of 
silent studiousness.
She says, “Here, Colored Person, read this essay by Audre Lorde.”
He hedges. She insists.
He comes to a line about Lorde “moving into sunlight against the body of a 
woman I love,” and bridles. “Wait a minute,” he says. “What kind of a name is 
‘Audre’ for a man? Th ey must have meant ‘An dré.’ ”
“It is the name of a woman,” she says. “Read the rest of that page.”
RT54118_C001.indd   5RT54118_C001.indd   5 7/8/06   8:40:54 PM7/8/06   8:40:54 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---
6 • Th e Womanist Reader
“No dyke can tell me anything,” he says, fl inging down the pages.
She has been calmly waiting for this. She brings in Jiveboy and Jivers. In 
both, there are women eating women they don’t even know. She takes up the 
essay and reads:
Th is brings me to the last consideration of the erotic. To share the power 
of each other’ s feelings is diff erent from using another’s feelings as we 
would use a Kleenex. And when we look the other way from our experi-
ence, erotic or otherwise, we use rather than share the feelings of those 
others who participate in the experience with us. And use without con-
sent of the used is abuse.
He looks at her with resentment, because she is reading this passage 
over again, silently, absorbedly, to herself, holding the pictures of the phony 
lesbians (a favorite, though unexamined, turn-on) absentmindedly on her lap. 
He realizes he can never have her again sexually, the way he has had her since 
their second year of marriage, as though her body belonged to someone else. 
He sees, down the road, the dissolution of the marriage, a constant search for 
more perfect bodies, or dumber wives. He feels oppressed by her incipient 
struggle, and feels somehow as if her struggle to change the pleasure he has 
enjoyed is a violation of his rights.
Now she is busy pasting Audre Lorde’s words on the cabinet over the 
kitchen sink.
When they make love she tries to look him in the eye, but he refuses to 
return her gaze.
For the fi rst time he acknowledges the awareness that the pleasure of com-
ing without her is bitter and lonely. He thinks of eating stolen candy alone, 
behind the barn. And yet, he thinks greedily, it is better than nothing, which 
he considers her struggle’s benefi t to him.
Th e next day she is reading another essay when he comes home from work. It 
is called “A Quiet Subversion,” and is by Luisah Teish. “Another dyke?” he asks.
“Another one of your sisters,” she replies, and begins to read aloud, even 
before he’s had dinner:
During the Black Power Movement, much cultural education was 
focused on the Black physique. One of the accomplishments of that 
period was the popularization of African hairstyles and the Natural. 
Along with (the Natural) came a new selfi  mage and way of relating. It 
suggested that Black people should relate to each other in respectful and 
supportive ways. Th en the movie industry put out Superfl y, and the Lord 
Jesus Look and the Konked head, and an accompanying attitude ran 
rampant in the Black community. … Films like Shaft  and Lady Sings the 
Blues portray Black “heroes” as cocaine-snorting, fast-life fools. In these 
movies a Black woman is always caught in a web of violence. …
RT54118_C001.indd   6RT54118_C001.indd   6 7/8/06   8:40:55 PM7/8/06   8:40:55 PM


--- PAGE 64 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 7
A popular Berkeley, California, theater featured a pornographic movie 
entitled Slaves of Love . Its advertisement portrayed two Black women, 
naked, in chains, and a white man standing over them with a whip! 
How such racist pornographic material escapes the eye of Black activists 
presents a problem. …
Typically, he doesn’t even hear the statement about the women. “What does 
the bitch know about the Black Power Movement?” he fumes. He is angry at 
his wife for knowing him so long and so well. She knows, for instance, that 
because of the Black Power Movement (and really because of the Civil Rights 
Movement before it) and not because he was at all active in it—he holds the 
bourgeois job he has. She remembers when his own hair was afro-ed. Now 
it is loosely curled. It occurs to him that, because she knows him as he was, 
he cannot make love to her as she is. Cannot, in fact, love her as she is. Th ere 
is a way in which, in some fi  rmly repressed corner of his mind, he considers 
his wife to be still Black, whereas he feels himself to have moved to some 
other plane.
(Th is insight, a glimmer of which occurs to him, frightens him so much 
th a t  h e  will  r e s i s t  i t  f o r  s e v e r al  y e ar s .  S h o ul d  h e  a c c e p t  i t  a t  o n c e ,  h o w e v e r  
unsettling, it would help him understand the illogic of his acceptance of por-
nography used against Black women: that he has detached himself from his 
own blackness in attempting to identify Black women only by their sex.)
Th e wife has never considered herself a feminist—though she is, of course, a 
“womanist.” A “womanist” is a feminist, only more common.
2 So she is sur prised 
when her husband attacks her as a “women’s liber,” a “white women’s lackey,” a 
“pawn” in the hands of Gloria Steinem, an incipient bra-burner! What possible 
connection could there be, he wants to know, between her and white women—
those overprivileged hags, now (he’s recently read in Newsweek) marching and 
preaching their puritanical horseshit up and down Times Square!
(He remembers only the freedom he felt there, not her long pause before 
the window of the plastic doll shop.) And if she is going to make a lot of new 
connections with dykes and whites, where will that leave him, the Black man, 
the most brutalized and oppressed human being on the face of the earth? (Is it 
because he can now ogle white women in freedom and she has no similar outlet 
of expression that he thinks of her as still Black and himself as something else?  
Th is thought underlines what he is actually saying, and his wife is unaware of 
it.) Didn’t she know it is over these very same white bodies he has been lynched 
in the past, and is lynched still, by the police and the U.S. prison system, dozens 
of times a year even now!?
Th e wife has cunningly saved Tracey A. Gardner’s essay for just this 
moment. Because Tracey A. Gardner has thought about it all, not just pres-
ently, but historically, and she is clear about all the abuse being done to herself 
as a Black person and as a woman, and she is bold and she is cold—she is 
RT54118_C001.indd   7RT54118_C001.indd   7 7/8/06   8:40:55 PM7/8/06   8:40:55 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---
8 • Th e Womanist Reader
furious. Th e wife, given more to depression and self-abnegation than to fury, 
basks in the fi re of Gardner’s high-spirited anger.
She begins to read:3
Because from my point of view, racism is everywhere, including the 
Women’s Movement, and the only time I really need to say something 
special about it is when I don’t see it—and the fi rst time that happens, 
I’ll tell you about it.
Th e h usband, surprised, thinks this very funny , not to say pertinent. He 
slaps his knee and sits up. He is dying to make some sort of positive dyke 
 comment, but nothing comes to mind.
American slavery relied on the denial of the humanity of Black folks, on 
the undermining of our sense of nationhood and family, on the strip-
ping away of the Black man’s role as protector and provider, and on the 
structuring of Black men and women into the American system of white 
male domination.
“In other words,” she says, “white men think they have to be on top. Other 
men have been known to savor life from other positions.”
Th e end of the Civil War brought the end of a certain “form” of slavery 
for Black folks. It also brought the end of any “job security” and the loss 
of the protection of their white enslaver. Blacks were now free game, and 
the terrorization and humiliation of Black people, especially Black men, 
began. Now the Black man could have his family and prove his worth, 
but he had no way to support or protect them, or himself.
As she reads, he feels ashamed and senses his wife’s wounded embarrassment, 
for him and for herself. For their history together. But doggedly, she continues 
to read:
Aft er the Civil War, “popular justice” (which meant there usually was no 
trial and no proof needed) began its reign in the form of the castration, 
burning at the stake, beheading, and lynching of Black men. As many as 
5,000 white people turned out to witness these events, as though going 
to a celebration. ( She pauses, sighs: beheading? ) Over 2,000 Black men 
w er e lyn ch ed in th e ten - y ear peri od fr o m 1 88 9– 1 8 99 . Th ere were also 
a number of Black women who were lynched. ( She reads this sentence 
quickly and forgets it.) Over 50 percent of the lynched Black males were 
charged with rape or attempted rape.
He cannot imagine a woman being lynched. He has never even considered 
the possibility. Perhaps this is why the image of a Black woman chained and 
bruised excites rather than horrifi es him? It is the fact that the lynching of her 
body has never stopped that forces the wife, for the time being, to blot out the 
RT54118_C001.indd   8RT54118_C001.indd   8 7/8/06   8:40:55 PM7/8/06   8:40:55 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 9
historical record. She is not prepared to connect her own husband with the 
continuation of that past.
She reads:
If a Black man had sex with a consenting white woman, it was rape. 
(Why am I always reading about, thinking about, worrying about, my 
man having sex with white women? she thinks, despairingly, underneath 
the reading .) If he insulted a white woman by looking at her, it was 
attempted rape.
“Yes,” he says softly, as if in support of her dogged reading, “I’ve read 
Ida B.—what’s her last name?”
4
By their lynching, the white man was showing that he hated the Black 
man carnally, biologically; he hated his color, his features, his geni-
tals. Th us he attacked the Black man’s body, and like a lover gone mad, 
maimed his fl  esh, violated him in the most intimate, pornographic 
fashion. …
I believe that this obscene, inhuman treatment of Black men by white 
men … has a direct correlation to white men’s increasingly obscene and 
inhuman treatment of women, particularly white women, in pornography 
and real life. White women, working toward their own strength and 
identity, their own sexuality and independence, have in a sense become 
“uppity niggers.” As the Black man threatens the white man’s masculinity 
and power, so now do women.
“Th at girl’s onto something,” says the husband, but thinks, for the fi rst time 
in his life, that when he is not thinking of fucking white women—fantasizing 
over Jiveboy or clucking at them on the street —he is very oft  en thinking of 
ways to degrade them. Th en he thinks that, given his history as a Black man 
in America, it is not surprising that he has himself confused fucking them 
with degrading them. But what does that say about how he sees himself? Th is 
thought smothers his inward applause for Gardner, and instead he casts a 
bewildered, disconcerted look at his wife. He knows that to make love to his 
wife as she really is, as who she really is—indeed, to make love to any other 
human being as they really are—will require a soul-rending look into himself, 
and the thought of this virtually straightens his hair.
His wife continues:
Some Black men, full of the white man’s perspective and values, see the 
white woman or Blond Goddess as part of the American winning image. 
Sometimes when he is with the Black woman, he is ashamed of how she 
has been treated, and how he has been powerless, and that they have 
always had to work together and protect each other. ( Yes, she thinks, we 
were always all we had, until now.)
RT54118_C001.indd   9RT54118_C001.indd   9 7/8/06   8:40:55 PM7/8/06   8:40:55 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---
10 • Th e Womanist Reader
(He thinks: We are all we have still, only now we can live without permitting 
ourselves to know this.)
Frantz Fanon said about white women, “By loving me she proves that I am 
worthy of white love. I am loved like a white man. I am a white man. I 
marry the culture, white beauty, white whiteness. When my restless hands 
caress those white breasts, they grasp white civilization and dignity and 
make them mine.” (She cannot believe he meant to write “white dignity.”)
She pauses, looks at her husband: “So how does a Black woman feel when 
her Black man leaves Playboy on the coff ee table?”
For the fi rst time he understands fully a line his wife read the day before: 
“Th e pornography industry’s exploitation of the Black woman’s body is quali-
tatively diff erent from that of the white woman,” because she is holding the 
cover of Jivers out to him and asking, “What does this woman look like?”
When he has refused to see—because to see it would reveal yet another area 
in which he is unable to protect or defend Black women—is that where white 
women are depicted in pornography as “objects,” Black women are depicted 
as animals. Where white women are at least depicted as human beings if not 
beings, Black women are depicted as shit.
He begins to feel sick. For he realizes that he has bought some if not all of 
the advertisements about women, Black and white. And further, inevitably, he 
has bought the advertisements about himself. In pornography the Black man 
is portrayed as being capable of fucking anything … even a piece of shit. He is 
defi ned solely by the size, readiness and unselectivity of his cock.
Still, he does not know how to make love without the fantasies fed to him 
b y  m o vi es  an d  mag azin es.  Th ose movies and magazines (whose characters’ 
pursuits are irrelevant or antithetical to his concerns) that have insinuated 
themselves between him and his wife, so that the totality of her body, her 
entire corporeal reality is alien to him. Even to clutch her in lust is to auto-
matically shut his eyes. Shut his eyes, and … he chuckles bitterly … dream of 
England. For years he has been fucking himself.
At fi rst, reading Lorde together, they reject celibacy. Th  en they discover 
they need time apart to clear their heads. To search out damage. To heal. In 
any case, she is unable to fake response—he is unwilling for her to do so. She 
goes away for a while. Left  alone, he soon falls hungrily on the magazines he 
had thrown out. Strokes himself raw over the beautiful women, spread like 
so much melon (he begins to see how stereotypes transmute) before him. But 
he cannot refuse what he knows—or what he knows his wife knows, walking 
along a beach in some Black country where all the women are bleached and 
straightened and the men never look at themselves; and are ugly, in any case, 
in their imitation of white men.
Long before she returns he is reading her books and thinking of her—and 
of her struggles alone and his fear of sharing them—and when she returns, it 
RT54118_C001.indd   10RT54118_C001.indd   10 7/8/06   8:40:56 PM7/8/06   8:40:56 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 11
is 60% her body that he moves against in the sun, her own Black skin affi  rmed 
in the brightness of his eyes.
Notes
 1. Ed. Note: Th  is is the situation in the movie version of Th e Story of O.
 2. “Womanist” encompasses “feminist” as it is defi  ned in Webster’s, but also means instinc-
tively pro-woman. It is not in the dictionary at all. Nonetheless, it has a strong root in 
Black women’s culture. It comes (to me) from the word “womanish,” a word our mothers 
used to describe, and attempt to inhibit, strong, outrageous or outspoken behavior when 
we were children: “You’re acting womanish!” A labeling that failed, for the most part 
to keep us from acting “womanish” whenever we could, that is to say, like our mothers 
themselves, and like other women we admired.
  An advantage of using “womanist” is that, because it is from my own culture, I needn’t 
preface it with the word “Black” (an awkward necessity and a problem I have with the 
word “feminist”), since Blackness is implicit in the term; just as for white women there 
is apparently no felt need to preface “feminist” with the word “white,” since the word 
“feminist” is accepted as coming out of white women’s culture.
 3. Th  e excerpts that follow are taken from an earlier, longer version of Tracey A. Gardner’s 
essay, “Racism in Pornography and the Women’s Movement.”
 4. Ida B. Wells, also known as Ida Wells Barnett, Black radical investigative reporter and 
publisher of the Memphis-based Free Speech . She wrote On Lynchings: A Red Record, 
Mob Rule in New Orleans: Southern Horrors  (New York: Arno Press, 1969; fi rst published 
1892), a brilliant analysis of lynching in America. Wells led the anti-lynching movement 
in this country.RT54118_C001.indd   11RT54118_C001.indd   11 7/8/06   8:40:56 PM7/8/06   8:40:56 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
12
Gifts of Power: The Writings of Rebecca Jackson (1981)
ALICE W ALKER
In the summer of 1830, when Rebecca Cox Jackson was thirty-fi  ve years old, 
she awoke in panic to the loud thunder and fl ashing lightning of a severe storm. 
For fi ve years thunderstorms had terrorized her, making her so sick she was 
forced to wait them out in bed. Th is time, even the sanctuary of her bed was 
not enough; she found herself cowering miserably at the top of the garret stairs 
of her house believing the next blast of thunder would knock her down them. 
In this condition she called earnestly to “the Lord” to forgive her all her sins, 
since she was about to die, and to have mercy in the next world on her poor 
sinner’s soul. Instead of dying, however, with the utterance of this prayer her 
inner storm ceased, the clouded sky inside her cleared, and her heart became 
“light” with the forgiveness, mercy, and love of God. Her fear of storms left  her 
permanently (she now believed the power of God’s spirit would come to her in 
storms); and she ran from window to window throwing open the blinds to let 
the lightning stream in upon her. It was, she said, like “glory” to her soul.
Th is was Rebecca Jackson’s fi  rst spiritual connection with the divine. She 
was to have many more.
Rebecca Cox was born in 1795 of free black parents in Philadelphia. Her 
mother died when she was thirteen, and she spent many years with a beloved 
grandmother, who also died while she was young. Th  ere is no record of her 
father. Her young adult life, indeed her life until she was nearly forty, was 
lived in the home of her older brother, Joseph Cox, an elder of the infl  uential 
Bethel African Methodist Episcopal church, one of the fi rst black churches in 
America, founded by Richard Allen. Her husband, Samuel Jackson, lived with 
her in her brother’s house and was also deeply involved in the church. Th  ey 
had no children of their own.
Aft er Jackson’s spiritual conversion—as she acknowledged it in later years—
she found she had been given spiritual “gift  s.” Th at she could tell the future 
through dreams, for example, and nothing was hidden from her “spirit eye.” 
Th is meant that while speaking to other people or simply observing them (and 
frequently not even this) she was able to discern their innermost thoughts as 
well as ways to deal with them. “God” (manifested as an inner voice) spoke to 
her, she felt, directly, and as long as she did not hesitate to obey Him she could 
count on His help over any obstacle.
Th ere were many obstacles.
For one thing, Jackson could neither read nor write, in a family and reli-
gious community that valued these skills perhaps above all others. As the 
RT54118_C001.indd   12RT54118_C001.indd   12 7/8/06   8:40:56 PM7/8/06   8:40:56 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 13
eldest girl, responsible for the care of younger siblings aft  er her mother died, 
as well as for her brother’s several small children, there was no opportunity to 
attend school. How she was even to speak intelligently about God, hindered as 
she was by ignorance of His written word, she could not fathom. She was also 
a married woman.
It was her brother to whom she turned for help in learning to read, but, 
tired from his own work and oft  en impatient with Jackson, he succeeded in 
making her feel even more backward and lost. He also attempted to censor or 
change what she dictated and wished him to write.
So I went to get my brother to write my letters and to read them. So he 
was awriting a letter in answer to one he had just read. I told him what 
to put in. Th en I asked him to read. He did. I said, “Th ee has put in more 
than I told thee. … I don’t want thee to word my letter. I only want thee 
to write it.” Th en he said, “Sister, thee is the hardest one I ever wrote for!” 
Th ese words, together with the manner that he wrote my letter, pierced 
my soul like a sword. … I could not keep from crying. And these words 
were spoken in my heart, “Be faithful, and the time shall come when 
you can write.” Th ese words were spoken in my heart as though a tender 
father spoke them. My tears were gone in a moment.
Incredibly, Jackson was taught to read and write by the spirit within her.
One day I was sitting fi nishing a dress in haste and in prayer. [Jackson 
earned her living as a dressmaker.] Th is word was spoken in my mind, 
“Who learned the fi rst man on earth?” “Why, God.” “He is unchange-
able, and if He learned the fi  rst man to read, He can learn you.” I laid 
down my dress, picked up my Bible, ran upstairs, opened it, and kneeled 
down with it pressed to my heart, prayed earnestly to Almighty God if it 
was consisting to His holy will, to learn me to read His holy word. And 
when I looked on the word, I began to read. And when I found I was 
reading, I was frightened—then I could not read another word. I closed 
my eyes again in prayer and then opened my eyes, began to read. So I 
done, until I read the whole chapter. I came down. “Samuel, I can read 
the Bible.” “Woman, you are agoing crazy!” “Praise the God of heaven 
and earth, I can read His holy word!” Down I sat and read through. … 
When my brother came to dinner I told him, “I can read the Bible! I have 
read a whole chapter!” “One thee has heard the children read, till thee 
has got it by heart.” What a wound that was to me, to think he would 
make so light of a gift  of God!
From this time on, Rebecca Jackson found she could write her own letters 
and “read the Bible anywhere.” Her scriptural interpretations, however, based 
solely on personal spiritual instruction, caused strife not only in her own family, 
but also in the entire religious community of which she was a part. She was a 
RT54118_C001.indd   13RT54118_C001.indd   13 7/8/06   8:40:57 PM7/8/06   8:40:57 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
14 • Th e Womanist Reader
woman, aft er all, when the church did not permit women as preachers, who, 
as soon as she received the holy message, moved immediately to spread it. Th e 
pastors and elders of the established churches (all male) accused her of “chop-
ping up the churches,” since she declined to join any, and of being a heretic, “a 
woman aleading the men.” Th ere were many threats against her and attempts 
made on her life.
For the most part, Jackson’s spiritual insights came from direct, frequently 
ecstatic, revelation in either a dreaming or a waking state. She was also literally 
instructed in matters both spiritual and temporal by a spirit who arrived almost 
daily to give her lessons. One of the most astonishing examples of this instruc-
tion (Jackson’s “teacher” was a “fatherly” white man dressed in Quaker attire) 
is the following entry from her journal, “View of the Natural Atmosphere”:
Monday evening, February 18, 1850, I was instructed concerning the 
atmosphere and its bounds. I saw its form—it is like the sea, which has 
her bounds. … It covered land and sea, so far above all moving things, 
and yet so far beneath the starry heavens. Its face is like the face of the sea, 
smooth and gentle when undisturbed by the wind. So is the atmosphere, 
when undisturbed by the power of the sun and moon. When agitated 
by these, it rages like the sea and sends forth its storms upon the earth. 
Nothing can live above it. A bird could no more live or fl y above its face, 
than a fi sh can live or swim out of water . I t is always calm and serene 
between its face and the starry heaven. Th e sight, to me, was beautiful.
Her dreams are fi  lled with symbols and her own activity. She can fl  y 
through the air like a bird (though higher than birds, and, interestingly, white 
women), walk through walls, visit other realms, and converse with angels. She 
can touch a hot stove while awake and not be burned, or totter with eyes closed 
on the very lip of a steep cellar stair and not fall. She preaches the word of God 
as it is revealed to her and discovers she has the power to pray sick people well 
and sinful people holy. All glory for these wonders she gives to God alone and 
repeatedly describes herself as “a little child” or “a worm of the dust.”
One of the biggest obstacles to Jackson’s new life in Christ (Jesus, she is 
told, is the second Adam, and essentially a female spirit; the fi  rst Adam was 
essentially male and fell from grace because he permitted lust to replace spirit 
and therefore obedience to God) was the expectation of her husband that as 
his wife she must fulfi ll her sexual obligations toward him. But her inner voice 
insisted that though she might live with her husband and serve him in every 
other way, she could not indulge in what she termed “the sin of the fall.” To 
do so would put her in the same category as Adam. Her husband was at fi  rst 
puzzled, then convinced of her holiness, then outraged anyhow. In his wilder 
moments, Jackson writes, he “sought my life, night and day.” But, because her 
inner voice was always “leading” her, she was able to keep ahead of him, to 
know what he was “agoing to do” before he knew it himself.
RT54118_C001.indd   14RT54118_C001.indd   14 7/8/06   8:40:57 PM7/8/06   8:40:57 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 15
A year aft er her conversion she left  her husband and her brother’s house. 
She became an itinerant minister who found “fellowship” (more accurately 
“sistership”) among other black women who organized “praying bands” that 
met in small groups in each other’s houses to pray, discuss the scripture and 
sing, and sustain each other in the arduous task of following the “true” voice 
within them. (Spiritual consciousness-raising groups, one might say.) It was at 
this time that Jackson formed a relationship with a younger woman, Rebecca 
Perot. Th ese two women lived together, ate together, traveled together, prayed 
together, and slept together until the end of Jackson’s life, some thirty-odd 
years aft er they met.
It was with Rebecca Perot that Jackson became a resident member of the 
community of Shakers at Watervliet, New York. Th e Shakers, a religious group 
that believed in nothing secular—least of all government and man-made laws 
(they would not fi ght in America’s wars; indeed, they did not recognize the 
country of America)—were ecstatics who shared the same spiritual views as 
Rebecca Jackson: they believed God was spirit (“As well ask how Jesus could be 
a man as how can Jesus be a woman. God is spirit”) and should be worshiped 
as one, preferably in silence unless the spirit itself directs otherwise. Th  ey 
believed in confession and repentance of sin as a prerequisite of inner peace. 
Th ey believed in physical and moral cleanliness, in plain dress, in meditation 
and silence, and in living separate from the world. But more important than 
any of these, from Rebecca Jackson’s point of view, they believed in celibacy; 
the only religious group she ever heard of that did.
During her time with the Shakers, Jackson knew much spiritual richness 
and love. For the fi rst time in her life she felt understood and warmly trea-
sured as one who revealed obvious gift s from God. As much as she had been 
despised in the A.M.E. churches for her stand on celibacy (in her view, an 
absolute necessity if one wanted to lead a spiritual life), she was embraced by 
the Shakers, who agreed with her that inasmuch as Jesus Christ was unmarried 
and celibate, this was the example he wished his people to follow.
 With the passing of time,  however,  disagreements surfaced,  primarily because 
Jackson felt compelled always to follow her own inner voice or “invisible lead” 
and could not follow the Shaker leaders unless instructed by her inner lead to 
do so. Shortly before the Civil War she was commanded by her inner voice to 
minister to her own people—ravaged by slavery and persecution—whose desti-
tution she felt the Shakers did not adequately address. But when she requested 
leave to follow the commandment,  the Shaker leadership would not give her 
its blessing to do so. She and Perot left  Watervliet anyway,  though Jackson was 
accused of apostasy,  of attempting to lead others “in her own gift .”
With time, the rift  was healed. Rebecca Jackson received instruction from 
her inner lead that she might accept orders and instruction from the Shaker 
elders and eldresses. Aft er this submission she was given a Shaker blessing to 
minister to black people in a black Shaker settlement, which she established 
RT54118_C001.indd   15RT54118_C001.indd   15 7/8/06   8:40:57 PM7/8/06   8:40:57 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---
16 • Th e Womanist Reader
in Philadelphia in the 1870s. With this blessing came the authority of being 
a recognized religious group, as well as a Shaker promise to render aid to 
the new settlement in time of trouble. Th ere is no record that Jackson either 
requested or received such aid.
A core group of sisters lived together in a single large house, supporting 
th e m s e l v e s  b y  da yw o r k ,  as  s e am s tr e s s e s  o r  l a un dr e s s e s  in  th e  c i ty  …  
[Shaker records tell us]. White Shakers, visiting from Watervliet and 
New Lebanon in 1872, described the residence of the family in slightly 
awestruck terms, as “almost palatial” with its modern plumbing, central 
heating, “a large drawing room, suffi  cient for twenty souls to sit down,” 
a carpeted meeting room with “marble” mantels … “very nice, almost 
extravagantly so.” Th eir description of the services that took place that 
evening … is also thoroughly admiring.
In 1878 eight black women, three black children, and three white women 
(one of them Jewish) lived in the Shaker commune, members of Rebecca Jackson 
and Rebecca Perot’s spiritual family.
Th e little band of Shaker sisters survived aft  er Rebecca Jackson’s death, in 
1871, at least until 1908, when the last reports of the group were recorded.
Gift s of Power is an extraordinary document. It tells us much about the 
spirituality of human beings, especially of the interior spiritual resources of 
our mothers, and, because of this, makes an invaluable contribution to what 
we know of ourselves. A simple review could not begin to do it justice, for 
it is a contribution of many facets, some readily comprehended, some not. 
What, for instance, are we to make of Rebecca Jackson’s obviously gnostic 
beliefs (that the “resurrection” occurs in life, not aft  er death; that the spirit 
of “Christ” is manifested through the “mind” in visions and dreams and 
not through the bureaucracy of the church) a hundred years before the Nag 
Hammadi “Gnostic Gospels, the Secret Teachings of Christ” was found? 
What are we to make of her discovery that she had not only a divine Father 
but also a divine Mother—which is consistent with pre-Western Indian and 
African religious belief? What are we to make of the reasons that suggest 
why so many black women (Rebecca Jackson only one of them)
1 abandoned 
the early black churches to fi  nd religious audiences of their own? (Th  e 
established churches insisted on “civilized” worship, everyone singing at the 
same time out of the same book; whereas the women wanted the passion 
and glory of spontaneous inspired worship and song, behavior the male 
leaders of the churches called “heathenish.” What the male leaders termed 
“progress” in the black church, i.e., subdued, calm, rather Presbyterian 
behavior, the women called “letting the devil into the church.”) What are 
we to make of Jackson’s ability to “manufacture” spiritually a “father” she 
had never had? And what are we to make of the remarkable general power 
of Rebecca Jackson herself—a woman whose inner spirit directed her to live 
RT54118_C001.indd   16RT54118_C001.indd   16 7/8/06   8:40:57 PM7/8/06   8:40:57 PM


--- PAGE 74 ---
Alice Walker’s Womanism • 17
her own life, creating it from scratch, leaving husband, home, family, and 
friends, to do so?
Jean McMahon Humez has done a magnifi  cent job in editing Gift s of 
Power. Th ere is only one point at which I stopped, while reading her splendid 
and thorough introduction, to question her obviously deep knowledge of her 
material. It is when she discusses the relationship between Rebecca Jackson 
and Rebecca Perot (known among the Shakers as “the two Rebeccas”). Unlike 
other black women who were spiritual leaders and were single and traveled 
alone, Rebecca, Humez writes, “aft er breaking with her husband and brother 
… lived and traveled throughout the rest of her life in close relationship with 
a single cherished, intimate woman friend who shared her religious ideas. 
Perhaps, had she been born in the modern age, she would have been an open 
lesbian” (my italics).
Th ough women ministers who worshiped and lived with other women 
were perceived by the male leaders of the early churches as “closeted lesbians,” 
because they followed their own inner voices rather than the “fathers” of the 
church, there is nothing in these writings that seems to make Jackson one. It 
would be wonderful if she were, of course. But it would be just as wonderful 
if she were not. One wonders why, since Jackson mentions more than once 
her “deadness” to sexuality or “lust,” Humez implies she was a lesbian? Th  e 
example she gives of “erotic” activity on Jackson’s part is a dream Jackson 
relates which involves Rebecca Perot’s long hair. In the dream another woman 
combs all her hair out, and Rebecca Jackson is upset because she had worked 
so hard on Perot’s hair and “had got it so long.”
Considering that our culture has always treasured long hair nearly as 
much as reading, and frequently as much, I submit that this does not qualify 
as an erotic dream. A more telling dream, in m y opinio n, is o ne related b y 
Rebecca Perot, in which she saw herself as queen and Rebecca Jackson as king 
of Africa.
What I am questioning is a nonblack scholar’s attempt to label something 
lesbian that the black woman in question has not. Even if Rebecca Jackson 
and Rebecca Perot were erotically bound, what was their own word for it? 
(What would be the name that must have been as black and positive as “bull-
dagger”—in more modern times—is black and negative?) Did they see it as a 
rejection of men? Did it (whatever they did alone together) infringe on their 
notion of celibacy? Was the “lesbianism” the simple fact that Jackson and 
Perot lived together? And would this mean that any two women who lived 
together are lesbians? Is the “lesbianism” the fact that Jackson and Perot lived 
with other women and founded a religious settlement comprised entirely 
of women (and their children)? If the “lesbianism” is any of these things, 
then the charge that the women were “closeted lesbians” was well founded. 
But the women did not accept this label when it was made, and I think we 
should at least wonder whether they would accept it now, particularly since 
RT54118_C001.indd   17RT54118_C001.indd   17 7/8/06   8:40:58 PM7/8/06   8:40:58 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---
18 • Th e Womanist Reader
the name they did accept, and embrace, which caused them so much suff ering 
and abuse, was celibate. Of course celibates, like lesbians, have a hard time 
proving they exist. My own guess is that, like Virginia W oolf, whom many 
claim as a lesbian but who described herself as a “eunuch,” the two Rebeccas 
became spiritual sisters partly because they cared little for sex, which Jackson 
repeatedly states.
Th e word “lesbian” may not, in any case, be suitable (or comfortable) for 
black women, who surely would have begun their woman-bonding earlier 
than Sappho’s residency on the Isle of Lesbos. Indeed, I can imagine black 
women who love women (sexually or not) hardly thinking of what Greeks 
w e r e  d o i n g ;  b u t ,  i n s t e a d ,  r e f e r r i n g  t o  t h e m s e l v e s  a s  “ w h o l e ”  w o m e n ,  f r o m  
“wholly” or “holy.” Or as “round” women—women who love other women, 
yes, but women who also have concern, in a culture that oppresses all black 
people (and this would go back very far), for their fathers, brothers, and sons, 
no matter how they feel about them as males. My own term for such women 
would be “womanist.” At any rate, the word they chose would have to be both 
spiritual and concrete and it would have to be organic, characteristic, not 
simply applied. A word that said more than that they choose women over men. 
More than that they choose to live separate from men. In fact, to be consistent 
with black cultural values (which, whatever their shortcomings, still have 
considerable worth) it would have to be a word that affi  rmed connectedness to 
the entire community and the world, rather than separation, regardless of who 
worked and slept with whom. All things considered, the main problem with 
Lesbos as a point of common reference for women who love women is not, as I 
had once thought, that it was inhabited by Greek women whose servants, like 
their culture, w ere probably stolen from Egypt, but that it is an island. Th  e 
symbolism of this, for a black person, is far from positive.
But this is a small complaint and perhaps an esoteric one. I simply feel that 
naming our own experience aft er our own fashion (as well as rejecting what-
ever does not seem to suit) is the least we can do—and in this society may well 
be our only tangible sign of personal freedom. It was her grasp of the impor-
tance of this that caused Rebecca Jackson to write down her spiritual “travels” 
that all might witness her individual path. Th  is, that makes her an original. 
Th is, that makes us thankful to receive her as a gift   of power in herself.
Note
 1. Others included Sojourner Truth, Amanda Berry Smith, and Jerena Lee.
RT54118_C001.indd   18RT54118_C001.indd   18 7/8/06   8:40:58 PM7/8/06   8:40:58 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---
19
Womanist (1983) 
ALICE W ALKER
Womanist
1. From womanish. (Opp. of “girlish,” i.e., frivolous, irresponsible, not 
serious.) A black feminist or feminist of color. From the black folk 
exp r ess i o n  o f  m o th ers  t o  f emal e  chil dr e n,  “Y o u  actin g  w o manish, ”  
i.e., like a woman. Usually referring to outrageous, audacious, cou-
rageous or willful behavior. Wanting to know more and in greater 
depth than is considered “good” for one. Interested in grown-up 
doings. Acting grown up. Being grown up. Interchangeable with 
another black folk expression: “You trying to be grown.” Responsible. 
In charge. Serious.
2. Also: A woman who loves other women, sexually and/or nonsexu-
ally. Appreciates and prefers women’s culture, women’s emotional 
fl exibility (values tears as natural counterbalance of laughter), and 
women’s strength. Sometimes loves individual men, sexually and/or 
nonsexually. Committed to survival and wholeness of entire people, 
male and female. Not a separatist, except periodically, for health. 
Traditionally universalist, as in: “Mama, why are we brown, pink, 
and yellow, and our cousins are white, beige, and black?” Ans.: “Well, 
you know the colored race is just like a fl  ower garden, with every 
color fl ower represented.” Traditionally capable, as in: “Mama, I’m 
walking to Canada and I’m taking you and a bunch of other slaves 
with me.” Reply: “It wouldn’t be the fi rst time.”
3. Loves music. Loves dance. Loves the moon. Loves the Spirit. Loves 
love and food and roundness. Loves struggle. Loves the Folk. Loves 
herself. Regardless.
4. Womanist is to feminist as purple to lavender.
RT54118_C001.indd   19RT54118_C001.indd   19 7/8/06   8:40:58 PM7/8/06   8:40:58 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---
RT54118_C001.indd   20RT54118_C001.indd   20 7/8/06   8:40:58 PM7/8/06   8:40:58 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---
21
2
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s 
African Womanism
Womanism: The Dynamics of the Contemporary 
Black Female Novel in English (1985)
CHIKWENYE OKONJO OGUNYEMI
We are not white. We are not Europeans. We are black like the Africans 
themselves. … We and the Africans will be working for a common goal: 
the uplift  of black people everywhere. [Alice Walker, Th e Color Purple ]
What does a black woman novelist go through as she comes in contact with 
white feminist writing and realizes that Shakespeare’s illustrious sisters belong 
to the second sex, a situation that has turned them into impotent eunuchs 
without rooms of their own in which to read and write their very own lit-
erature, so that they have become madwomen, now emerging from the attic, 
determined to fi ght for their rights by engaging in the acrimonious politics of 
sex? Does she precipitately enter the lists with them against Euro-American 
patriarchy and, in their victory, further jeopardize the chances of her race in 
the sharing of political, social, and economic power? Does she imitate their 
war eff ort and throw the gauntlet down to challenge black patriarchy? Does 
she light the sexual war some of the time and the racial war at other times? 
Does she remain indiff erent to the outer sex war and, maintaining a truce in 
the black sexual power tussle, fi ght only the race war?
Many black female novelists writing in English have understandably not 
allied themselves with radical white feminists; rather, they have explored the 
gamut of other positions and produced an exciting, fl  uid corpus that defi  es 
rigid categorization. More oft en than not, where a white woman writer may 
be a feminist, a black woman writer is likely to be a “womanist.” Th  at is, she 
will recognize that, along with her consciousness of sexual issues, she must 
incorporate racial, cultural, national, economic, and political considerations 
into her philosophy.
It is important to establish why many black women novelists are not femi-
nists in the way that their white counterparts are and what the diff  erences 
RT54118_C002.indd   21RT54118_C002.indd   21 7/8/06   6:34:35 PM7/8/06   6:34:35 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
22 • Th e Womanist Reader
are between them. African and Afro-American women writers share similar 
aesthetic attitudes in spite of factors that separate them. As a group, they are 
distinct from white feminists because of their race, because they have expe-
rienced the past and present subjugation of the black population along with 
present-day subtle (or not so subtle) control exercised over them by the alien, 
Western culture. Th ese extraliterary determinants have helped to make the 
black female novel in English what it is today and partly account for the con-
fl ict between white and black women over strategies and priorities in sexual 
politics. To illustrate the black womanist aesthetic, I will cite many novels by 
black women in both African and Afro-American literatures without going 
in t o  d e tail e d  an al y s i s  o f  th e m ;  m y  in t e n ti o n  i s  t o  e s ta b li s h  th a t  w o m ani s m  
is widespread and to pinpoint the factors that bind black female novelists 
together under this distinct praxis. On the African side I will refer to Bessie 
Head’s W h e n  R a i n  C l o u d s  G a t h e r ,  M a r u , and A Question of Power  (South 
Africa); Flora Nwapa’s Idu and One Is Enough (Nigeria); Ama Ata Aidoo’s Our 
Sister Killjoy  (Ghana); and Mariama Bâ’s So Long a Letter  (Senegal). On the 
Afro-American side my references turn primarily on Margaret Walker’s Jubi-
lee; Paule Marshall’s Th e Chosen Place, the Timeless People and Praisesong for 
the Widow; Toni Morrison’s Th e Bluest Eye  and Song of Solomon; and Alice 
Walker’s Th e Th ird Life of Grange Copeland  and Th e Color Purple .
* * *
Since the feminist novel is still evolving, the following descriptive statements 
are tentative and hypothetical but serve as a working base: the feminist novel 
is a form of protest literature directed to both men and women. Protesting 
against sexism and the patriarchal power structure, it is unapologetically 
propagandist or strident or both. It demands that its readers, whether the male 
oppressors or the female oppressed, be aware of ideological issues in order that 
it may change their attitudes about patriarchy. For a novel to be identifi  ed as 
feminist, therefore, it must not just deal with women and women’s issues but 
should also posit some aspects of a feminist ideology.
1 A reader can expect to 
fi nd in it some combination of the following themes: a critical perception of 
and reaction to patriarchy, oft en articulated through the struggle of a  victim 
or rebel who must face a patriarchal institution; sensitivity to the inequities of 
sexism allied with an acceptance of women and understanding of the choices 
open to them; a metamorphosis leading to female victory in a feminist Utopia, 
or a stasis, signifying the failure to eliminate sexism; a style spiced with the 
acrimony of feminist discourse. As with recipes, so with works of art; results 
are variable. Womanist novels, while they too may possess these characteristics 
to a greater or lesser degree, lay stress on other distinctive features to leave an 
impression markedly diff erent from that of feminist works. Th is divergence, 
I think, necessitates the separate classifi  cation I have given to black female 
novels.
RT54118_C002.indd   22RT54118_C002.indd   22 7/8/06   6:34:36 PM7/8/06   6:34:36 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 23
Consider Jane Eyre, a complex and far-reaching novel that Sandra Gilbert 
and Susan Gubar, in their scintillating analysis, identify as part of the feminist 
tradition.2 Th e feminist character of the novel is apparent in the portrait of Jane 
as a rebel against patriarchal institutions, represented by such domineering male 
fi gures as the Reverend Brocklehurst, Edward Rochester, and St. John Rivers. 
For the white feminist reader the novel’s ending is a positive one: Jane triumphs 
through achieving acknowledged equality with her husband, Rochester.
For the discerning black reader, however, Jane Eyre is not just a feminist 
novel, but a disarmingly realistic appraisal of white survival ethics. David 
Cecil in his Early Victorian Novelists  saw in the Heathcliff  –Edgar Linton 
clash in Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights an economic (and, I might add, a 
racial) dimension, an interpretation that can be extended to the Bertha-Roch-
ester relationship. Th e indomitable West Indian mulatto, Bertha Rochester, 
exploited for her sexual attractiveness and wealth, is locked up because the 
patriarchal Rochester says she is mad.
3 Rochester, as is typical of exploitative 
white masters, likes her wealth and her sexual possibilities but dislikes the tint 
of her skin, the color that, among other factors, made her vulnerable to him in 
the fi rst place. He casts her aside,
4 has aff airs, and attempts to marry a white 
woman as if the black one has metamorphosed into an invisible woman; for 
the “mad” Bertha, it is a catch-22 situation. She therefore fi  ghts for survival. 
She wreaks vengeance on the polygynously inclined Rochester and his female 
accomplice, “virtuous, plain Jane,” who should know better than to supplant 
another female to secure a husband. Bertha burns down Th ornfi eld, the white 
patriarchal edifi ce, to the chagrin of the white man and woman. To right the 
inequities of patriarchy, from the black viewpoint, the white woman must 
accept a more lowly situation in life, having as mate a man in reduced circum-
stances, with whom she is equal. So far, so good. However when Brontë allows 
Bertha, betrayed on all sides by white women—Adele’s mother; her guard, 
Grace Poole; and her rivals for Rochester’s love, especially Jane—to die as the 
patriarchy collapses, she creates a tragic vision of feminism for a black reader. 
Such an ending makes the novel ambivalent; or is it, perhaps, that the feminist 
utopia is for white women only? For black women who would be feminists 
the lesson is simple: in fi ghting the establishment, the black woman must not 
be so mad as to destroy herself with the patriarchy. Th  e fact that this lesson 
has been learned by many black women novelists partly explains their lack of 
enthusiasm for feminism’s implied endorsement of total white control. Hence 
their womanist stance.
Th e works of Nigeria’s Buchi Emecheta, who has been living in exile in 
England for almost twenty years and started to write aft er a marital fi asco, are 
something of an exception. Emecheta’s two autobiographical novels, In the 
Ditch (1972) and Second-Class Citizen (1974), are deeply grounded in the British 
and Irish feminism in which she was nurtured. Adah, Emecheta’s alter ego 
in these novels, is rebellious. Unlike Bertha Mason—a predecessor of Adah’s 
RT54118_C002.indd   23RT54118_C002.indd   23 7/8/06   6:34:37 PM7/8/06   6:34:37 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
24 • Th e Womanist Reader
insofar as they are both black women alone in a white society—she success-
fully fi ghts patriarchy, experienced as the British welfare slate ( In the Ditch). 
She also triumphs over her Nigerian husband, Francis ( Second-Class Citizen), 
bestial in his sexuality and economic irresponsibility, even though he is 
backed by a long Nigerian patriarchal tradition. In England, Adah transcends 
the female predicament by obtaining a divorce (which would be frowned on 
in Nigeria), and she also copes with the burden of caring for fi ve children in a 
hostile environment.
Following the tradition of feminists, Emecheta, in her later nonautobio-
graphical works whose titles suggest their feminist slant— Th e Bride Price  
(1976), Th e Slave Girl  (1977), Th e Joys of Motherhood  (1979), Double Yoke 
(1982)—tends to feminize the black male, making him weak, fl  abby, and 
unsuccessful. Th is  disq ui etin g  ten den cy  also  calls  in t o  q u esti o n  Em ech eta ’ s  
opinion about women. She presents the black male as the “other,” a ridiculous 
“ o b j e ct, ”  t o  b o rr o w  S im o n e  d e  B e a u v o ir ’ s  a p t  v o ca b ul ary .  H e  i s  d e s tin e d  t o  
b e  “ k i l l e d ”  b y  E m e c h e t a  b u t  i s  i n c o n g r u o u s l y  r e s u r r e c t e d ,  p e r h a p s  i n  t h e  
author’s last-minute bid to remain faithful to Nigerian patriarchal reality. Her 
heroines are mostly strong characters who struggle against patriarchy only 
to die in childbirth, heroine enslaved in marriage, or die insane, abandoned 
by the children they nurtured. Emecheta’s destruction of her heroines is a femi-
nist trait that can be partly attributed to narcissism on the part of the writer.
5 
Th e African feminist writer’s position is complicated by the fact that her work 
sometimes lacks authenticity, since the traditional African woman she uses as 
protagonist is, in reality, beset by problems of survival and so is hardly aware 
of her sexist predicament; the feminist desire to present her as rebellious can, 
in the context of this reality, be merely ludicrous.
If the feminist literary movement desires the illumination of female expe-
rience in order to alter the status quo for the benefi  t of women,
6 the African 
woman writer’s dilemma in a feminist context becomes immediately appar-
ent. Black women are disadvantaged in several ways: as blacks they, with their 
men, are victims of a white patriarchal culture; as women they are victimized 
by black men; and as black women they are also victimized on racial, sexual, 
and class grounds by white men. In order to cope, Emecheta largely ignores 
such  complexities and deals mainly with the black woman as victim of black 
patriarchy. Th is preoccupation is atypical of black women writers, though 
Emecheta’s indefatigable zeal for black feminism could become catching.
* * *
I n t e r v i e w e d  d u r i n g  t h e  f e m i n i s t  b o o k  f a i r  i n  L o n d o n  i n  J u n e  1 9 8 4 ,  t h e  
white South African journalist Beata Lipman was forthright about the state of 
women’s writing in South Africa. According to her, “Racism is a more urgent 
matter than sexism,”
7 a statement that can be extended to many Th ird World 
areas if we substitute hunger, poverty, or backwardness for “racism.” Much as 
RT54118_C002.indd   24RT54118_C002.indd   24 7/8/06   6:34:37 PM7/8/06   6:34:37 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 25
she downplays her power, the white woman has an authority that the black 
man or woman does not have. Moreover, while the white woman writer pro-
tests against sexism, the black woman writer must deal with it as one among 
many evils; she battles also with the dehumanization resulting from rac-
ism and poverty. What, aft  er all, is the value of sexual equality in a ghetto? 
Black women writers are not limited to issues defi ned by their femaleness but 
attempt to tackle questions raised by their humanity. Th us the womanist vision 
is racially conscious in its underscoring of the positive aspects of black life. Th e 
politics of the womanist is unique in its racial-sexual ramifi cations; it is more 
complex than white sexual politics, for it addresses more directly the ultimate 
question relating to power:
8 how do we share equitably the world’s wealth and 
concomitant power among the races and between the sexes?
White feminists consistently compare the situation of white women with 
that of “slaves,” “colonials,” the “black minority,” “serfs in a feudal system,” 
the “Dark Continent.”
9 Since these are demeaning positions to which black 
people have been assigned and which they still hold in many parts of the 
world, such comparisons alienate black readers because they underscore 
yet trivialize black subordination. Indeed, the white feminist stance arouses 
black suspicion that whites will further suppress blacks to make provision for 
a female victory in the white, sexual, political game. Th e black woman writer, 
therefore, whether in Africa or somewhere in the diaspora, tends to believe 
that white feminism is yet another ploy, perhaps unintentional, against her 
and hers. Th e common black heritage of subjugation by whites, both directly 
and by the introjection of white values and mores, has determined the nature 
of modern black life, which S.E. Ogude rightly recognizes as a living tradition of 
suff ering and humiliation.
10 To generate public awareness and understanding of 
this central fact through the writing of stories that are tellingly appropriate 
and instructive is the black woman writer’s fi  rst concern. She is thus not as 
primarily or exclusively interested in sexism as is the feminist.
Th e intelligent black woman writer, conscious of black impotence in the 
context of white patriarchal culture, empowers the black man. She believes 
in him; hence her books end in integrative images of the male and female 
worlds. Given this commitment, she can hardly become a strong ally of the 
white feminist until (perhaps) the political and economic fortunes of the black 
race improve. With the world power structure as it is, what would the relevance 
be of a black female character’s struggle to be equal to such a black man as, 
for example, on the Afro-American side, Richard Wright’s bestialized Bigger 
Th omas or Ralph Ellison’s eternally hibernating Invisible Man or James Bald-
win’s sterile Leo Proudhammer; or, on the African side, as Ngugi wa Th iong’o’s 
treacherous male or Wole Soyinka’s drift  ing interpreter or Chinua Achebe’s 
insecure Okonkwo? Just as Baldwin rejects integration into the burning house 
of the United States, the black woman instinctively recoils from mere equality 
because, as in Aidoo’s Our Sister Killjoy, she has to aim much higher than that 
RT54118_C002.indd   25RT54118_C002.indd   25 7/8/06   6:34:37 PM7/8/06   6:34:37 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---
26 • Th e Womanist Reader
and knit the world’s black family together to achieve black, not just female, 
transcendence.11
Aidoo might have been speaking for most black women writers when she 
diagnosed the African woman writer’s disease: “Life for the African woman 
writer is defi nitely ‘not crystal stair.’ It is a most peculiar predicament. But 
we also share all, or nearly all the problems of male African writers”—sharing 
 experience that white female writers do not have with their male counter-
parts.
12 For the African man or woman, there are the basic problems of  writing 
in a borrowed language and form; for most blacks the diffi   culties in getting 
published when there are so few black publishing houses remains a critical 
issue. Th en, too, many African novels are slight or lack the profundity found 
in many black American ones. Th e tradition of African art with its simplicity 
and ephemerality—as can be seen in African architecture as well as in oral 
and performed literatures—has been bequeathed to African women writers. 
Yet they have to produce novels in a milieu that hankers aft er the complex and 
the enduring. At the same time, who will read what they produce when a large 
p r o p o rti o n  o f  th e  h o m e  a u di e n ce  h a t es  r ea din g  o r  cann o t  r ea d — a  p r e di ca -
ment shared by black Americans?
Writing from a position of power, the white female writer does not face such 
diffi  culties. Instead she concentrates on patriarchy, analyzing it, attacking it, 
detecting its tentacles in the most unlikely places. Patriarchy, as it manifests 
itself in black ghettos of the world, is a domestic aff air without the wide rever-
berations it has in white patriarchy where the issue is real world power. Th e ulti-
mate diff erence between the feminist and the womanist is thus what each sees of 
patriarchy and what each thinks can be changed. Black sexism is a microcosmic 
replication of Euro-American racism, a concept Alice Walker recognizes. In Th e 
Color Purple,  Nettie writes that the Olinka in not educating girls are “like 
white people at home who don’t want colored people to learn.”
13 It follows that 
for  the black woman racism and sexism must be eradicated together.
Since the 1960s, when the idea of independence and nationalism blew 
through Africa and the diaspora, the white woman has intensifi ed her feminist 
drive for equality with white men, a position that complicates her response 
to racial issues and to black feminism. Many white feminist critics have con-
fi rmed black suspicion of duplicity by rarely dealing with black women’s writing, 
curtly dismissing it on the pretext of their ignorance of it.
14 Th is neglect has a 
positive side in that it has encouraged the emergence of black women critics. Th e 
confl ict between the white and black positions is concretized in black women’s 
antagonism toward their white counterparts’ sexual politics. It shows in the 
consistently unsympathetic portrayal of white female characters in novels by 
black women writers—a situation that signals the extent of the confl ict between 
while feminists and black womanists.
A revealing example of this hostility is Aidoo’s portrait of the German 
Marja, wife of Adolf (Hitler?) in Our Sister Killjoy . First Marja appears as a 
RT54118_C002.indd   26RT54118_C002.indd   26 7/8/06   6:34:37 PM7/8/06   6:34:37 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 27
tempter when she presents the black girl, Sissie, with numerous off ers of fruits 
in symbolic gestures that lead fi nally to a sexual advance. Sissie recoils at what 
she considers abominable, though her horror is mixed with Baldwinian ten-
derness, and rejects feminism while she moves toward womanism.15 Similarly, 
in A Question of Power Head demonstrates, through the portrait of Camilla, 
that the white woman yearns to control black men and women by humiliating 
them. She is stopped by an open confrontation.
Th e Afro-Americans have dealt with the white woman even more viciously 
than have African writers—understandably, since the racist situation is more 
exacerbating for them than for their average African counterpart. What 
could be more damaging than Margaret W alker’ s portrait in Jubilee of Big 
Missy as the hard matriarch or of her daughter, the lily-livered Miss Lillian, 
in the contrasting stereotype of the fragile, docile woman? Big Missy, for 
her diabolical treatment of her black slaves, fi  nally receives her just deserts 
when—with most of her family dead and Y ankee guns booming as if at the 
back of her plantation—she starts emitting fl  atus and becomes incontinent 
following a massive stroke. As if that were insuffi   cient, Walker fi nishes the 
white female by fi nally portraying Miss Lillian (who is also adept at emitting 
fl a tu s  a t  g a th e rin g s )  a s  in s an e  an d  h e l p l e s s ,  in  s h arp  c o n tr a s t  t o  th e  b l a c k  
Vyry, who thrives under hardships created by Big Missy and other white 
characters.
P a u l e  M a r s h a l l  i s  a s  d e v a s t a t i n g  a s  M a r g a r e t  W a l k e r  i n  h e r  p o r t r a i t  o f  
the white woman in Brown Girl, Brownstones  and even more trenchant in 
Th e Chosen Place, the Timeless People. In the latter, she makes an important 
historical point through her white character Harriet, whose wealth had its 
origins in the slave trade; like Margaret Walker, Marshall asserts that slav-
ery benefi ted white women as well as white men. Th e white woman’s dubious 
role in the racial context is further underscored by the behavior of a white 
woman, the English lover of the black woman, Merle. Th  e incident has the 
character of a historical parable. Determined to negate Merle’s attempts at 
connecting with her black African roots through marriage (worldwide unity 
of blacks), the white woman (Britain), in a symbolic, neocolonialist move, sets 
the African husband and the West Indian wife against each other, recklessly 
and treacherously destroying the budding relationship between black people 
in Africa and the diaspora; she has economic control, and her tactics are to 
divide and rule.
Neofeminism’s “socialist connection” smacks of the black fl  irtation with 
communism in the 1940s.
16 A black and white female alliance would have similar 
characteristics. Like the earlier fl  irtation, such connections would come to 
nothing much, since Euro-American economy with its present structure will 
not readily permit blacks or women to win. So black female writers express in 
their writing what Sheila Rowbotham has surmised about the world economic 
situation: “ A feminist movement which is confi ned to the specifi c oppression 
RT54118_C002.indd   27RT54118_C002.indd   27 7/8/06   6:34:37 PM7/8/06   6:34:37 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---
28 • Th e Womanist Reader
of women cannot, in isolation, end exploitation and imperialism.”17 If the ulti-
mate aim of radical feminism is a separatist, idyllic existence away from the 
 hullabaloo of the men’s world,18 the ultimate aim of womanism is the unity of 
blacks everywhere under the enlightened control of men and women. Each 
is fi nally separatist—the one sexually, the other racially—and their diff  erent 
goals create part of the disunity in the women’s movement.
Recognition of the impact of racism, neocolonialism, nationalism, economic 
instability, and psychological disorientation on black lives, when superimposed 
on the awareness of sexism that characterizes black women’s writing, makes 
concern about sexism merely one aspect of womanism. Black women writers 
distinguish womanism from feminism, just as their critical perception of black 
patriarchy and particular concern for black women distinguish the themes in 
their works from the acceptance of obnoxious male prejudices against women 
oft en found in writing by black men.
* * *
I arrived at the term “womanism” independently and was pleasantly sur-
prised to discover that my notion of its meaning overlaps with Alice Walker’s. 
She employs it to denote the metamorphosis that occurs in an adolescent girl, 
such as Ruth or Celie, when she comes to a sense of herself as a woman; involved 
is what Morrison, with her Pecola, refers to as “the little-girl-gone-to-woman” 
and Ntozake Shange represents through the maturing Indigo in Sassafrass, 
Cypress & Indigo. Th e young girl inherits womanism aft  er a traumatic event 
such as menarche or aft er an epiphany or as a result of the experience of rac-
ism, rape, death in the family, or sudden responsibility. Th rough coping with 
the experience she moves creatively beyond the self to that concern for the 
needs of others characteristic of adult womanists. While writing on Nwapa, 
Alison Perry made a comment on Walker’s extended usage of the word that 
tallies with my understanding of it. According to Perry, “If Flora Nwapa would 
accept a label at all, she would be more at home with Black American author 
Alice Walker’s term ‘womanist,’ meaning a woman who is ‘committed to the 
survival and wholeness of the entire people, male and female.’ ”
19
Black womanism is a philosophy that celebrates black roots, the ideals of 
black life, while giving a balanced presentation of black womandom. It con-
cerns itself as much with the black sexual power tussle as with the world power 
structure that subjugates blacks. Its ideal is for black unity where every black 
person has a modicum of power and so can be a “brother” or a “sister” or a 
“father” or a “mother” to the other. Th is philosophy has a mandalic core: its aim 
is the dynamism of wholeness and self-healing that one sees in the  positive, 
integrative endings of womanist novels.
Black American female writers share with black males the heritage of the 
blues, whose spiritual dynamics ensure equilibrium in a turbulent world—
perhaps because, as Stephen Henderson points out, there is a connection 
RT54118_C002.indd   28RT54118_C002.indd   28 7/8/06   6:34:38 PM7/8/06   6:34:38 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 29
between the blues and the capacity to experience hope. Th e blues have had a 
tremendous impact on the Afro-American womanist novel, and, in contrast 
to feminist novels, most Afro-American womanist novels, culture-oriented 
as they are, abound in hope.
20 Th e Afro-American female novelist sometimes 
even employs the mood and structure of the blues in her novels. As Hender-
son explains, “Th e blues … are a music and poetry of confrontation—with 
the self, with the family and loved ones, with the oppressive forces of society, 
with nature, and, on the heaviest level, with fate and the universe itself. And 
in the confrontation … a woman discovers her strengths, and if she is a Ma 
Rainey, she shares it with the community and in the process becomes immortal” 
(emphasis added).
21
More oft en than not, in fi ction we have many Ma Raineys—women with-
out men: examples include Janie Crawford (Zora Neale Hurston’s Th eir Eyes 
Were Watching God); Vyry (Margaret Walker’s Jubilee); Merle (Marshall’s Th e 
Chosen Place, the Timeless People ); Avey Johnson (Marshall’s Praisesong for 
the Widow); Sula and Nel (Morrison’s Sula); Pilate and Circe (Morrison’s Song 
of Solomon); Meridian (Alice Walker’s Meridian); Ruth (Alice Walker’s Th e 
Th ird Life of Grange Copeland ); Celie and Nettie (Alice Walker’s Th e Color 
Purple). Many such women can be found in the African female novel too: 
Elizabeth (Head’s A Question of Power ); Sissie (Aidoo’s Our Sister Killjoy ); 
Ramatoulaye (Bâ’s So Long a Letter); Idu (Nwapa’s Idu); and Amaka (Nwapa’s 
One Is Enough). In the contemporary literary scene, the Morrisons and Heads 
and Aidoos and Marshalls are themselves such matriarchs without men. 22 On 
one level the depiction of such women can be regarded as an antipatriarchal 
statement on the authors’ part. On another these exemplary fi  gures, like Ma 
Rainey, demonstrate concern for the family—not for the Western nuclear 
family (as viewed by feminists) but for the black extended family (as viewed 
by womanists) with its large numbers and geographical spread. From this 
perspective, Sula is a binding, spiritual force in Medallion; Merle in Bourne-
hills; Sissie amid black people.
Karen Gasten is therefore mistaken in concluding about Th e Th ird Life of 
Grange Copeland that “what is needed to bring about a healthy balance in sex-
ual relationships is a generation of Ruths.”
23 Th e book’s purpose is not so much 
the achievement of that feminist goal but the integration of the Ruths into the 
black world—a womanist objective. Th e black woman is not as powerless in 
the black world as the white woman is in the white world; the black woman, 
less protected than her white counterpart, has to grow independent. Th ese fac-
tors generate an affi  rmative spirit in the womanist novel that is packed full of 
female achievement.
24 Also, womanists explore past and present connections 
between black America and black Africa. Like amiable co-wives with invisible 
husbands, they work together for the good of their people. Charles Chesnutt’s 
Aun’ Peggy, the witch-herbalist in Th e Conjure Woman,  Hurston’s indomitable 
Janie Crawford, Ayi Kwei Armah’s and Ngugi’s formidable women—all serve 
RT54118_C002.indd   29RT54118_C002.indd   29 7/8/06   6:34:38 PM7/8/06   6:34:38 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---
30 • Th e Womanist Reader
as inspirational sources. Like the younger generation of black aestheticists, 
black female writers sidetrack the negative spirit of the protest tradition that 
some feminists still fi nd useful.
In spite of the blues, black women occasionally go mad. Unlike negatively 
presented white madwomen, the black madwoman in novels written by black 
women knows in her subconscious that she must survive because she has people 
without other resources depending on her; in a positive about-face she usually 
recovers through a superhuman eff ort, or somehow, aids others. Merle, carry-
ing her national burden of leading Bournehills up a road to progress, recoups 
her energy aft er her bouts of insanity and strengthens herself spiritually for 
the future political struggle by undertaking a pilgrimage to East Africa. In 
Th e Bluest Eye,  the peculiar Pecola goes mad on the surface but acquires an 
interior spiritual beauty symbolized by the bluest eye (an “I” that is very blue). 
In this mixed state she acts as the scapegoat so that “all who knew her—felt 
so wholesome aft er [they] cleaned [them]selves on her.”
25 Merle is comparable 
to Head’s Elizabeth, who—nudged on by self-will, her son, her neighbors, and 
the medicinal eff ect of herbal greenery—recovers her sanity to play her part 
in  an  a gri c ul tur al  c o mm un e .  B â’ s  J a c q u e lin e  r e c u p e r a t e s  fr o m  h e r  n e rv o u s  
breakdown as soon as she understands that her illness is psychosomatic, and 
she becomes reintegrated into society. Aft  er each mental upheaval there is 
thus a stasis in the womanist novel when the black woman’s communion with 
the rest of the society is established, a consonance that expresses the black way 
to authenticity and transcendence. Madness becomes a temporary aberration 
preceding spiritual growth, healing, and integration.
Th ese insights into character portrayal and thematic development have not 
come easily to the African writer. In an article unfortunately dated in some 
aspects, Maryse Conde observes that Nwapa and Aidoo “convey the impression 
that a gift ed woman simply has no place in African society.” In her analysis this 
is true “not only because [ the gift ed woman ] cannot fi nd a proper match but 
because the price she has to pay for her unusual gift s is so high that she would 
be better born without them, ” an idea that Juliet Okonkwo reiterates. Conde 
then concludes, “Here are two gift  ed women portraying gift  ed females like 
themselves, but ultimately destroying them. Th ese murders are the expression 
of a deeply-rooted confl ict.”
26 Perhaps. I suggest that this problem partly arises 
from the fact that early in their careers the African writers tend to model them-
selves on white feminists, thus putting themselves at variance with polygamy, 
which is generally accepted in rural Africa and is gaining ground in urban 
Nigeria.
27
Conde’s 1972 thesis has since been put into question by the appearance 
of Nwapa’s One Is Enough ( 1 9 8 1 )  a n d ,  m o s t  e s p e c i a l l y ,  b y  A i d o o ’ s  a s s e r -
tive Our Sister Killjoy (1977). In the latter, the strong-headed Sissie wants 
black men everywhere to undergo a psychological metamorphosis to assert 
their manhood in world politics, just as she has successfully represented 
RT54118_C002.indd   30RT54118_C002.indd   30 7/8/06   6:34:38 PM7/8/06   6:34:38 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 31
black womanhood in her role as roving ambassador in Europe. A black man 
with such mastery can then become equal to and united with her. Here, the 
Ghanaian Aidoo, an Akan by birth, discards her Western consciousness to 
embrace the Akan matrilineal culture and outlook. Akan women are generally 
acclaimed for their independence. Th  ere, as a proverb goes, the husband 
cooks and leaves the food to the woman to relish—though, I must hastily 
add, the woman’s brother dishes it out. So, in the denouement of the work, 
Aidoo envisages black solidarity between men and women in Africa and 
the diaspora.
Th e Senegalese novel So Long a Letter  by Bâ is grounded in a Fulani world 
where the foreign religion of Islam has, like Christianity, been ruthlessly 
imposed on Africans. As Bâ demonstrates, both religions bear partial respon-
sibility for the fact that many Africans have suff ered psychological and moral 
disorientation. She generates tension in the novel by exploring the matrilineal 
perspective of the Fulanis in opposition to the patriarchal tenets of Islam, 
which advocates polygyny. Her shortish novel takes the form of a long letter 
written by Ramatoulaye, the determined heroine, to a friend to tell her about 
the polygynous situation that has ruined her marriage because of her Western 
expectation of monogyny. Rather than collapsing, she remains undaunted, 
with little acrimony. Ramatoulaye will not break another woman’s heart by 
marrying that woman’s husband as a second wife, and she even sympathizes 
with the other woman who ruined her (Ramatoulaye’s) marriage. Men must 
be men, it seems, but women do not have to be like them. Having accepted 
men with their libidinous disposition, she can create a stable life around her 
numerous children, male and female, along with their spouses. Th  is is wom-
anism in action; the demands of Fulani culture rather than those of sexual 
politics predominate. Th ough she recognizes the inequities of patriarchy, she 
never really fi ghts for her “rights”—a position further expressed by the novel’s 
private, epistolary form. It must be pointed out that these two societies—the 
Akan and the Fulani—though preferable to the strictly patriarchal societies 
from a woman’s viewpoint, are matrilineal and not truly matriarchal. One 
can therefore postulate that matrilineal and polygynous societies in Africa are 
dynamic sources for the womanist novel.
Head’s W hen  Ra i n  Clo uds  Ga t her is  a  w o m anist  n o v e l  a chi ev ed  o n  dif -
ferent terms: widowhood involving the care of male and female children. 
In this idyllic novel, bad men are eliminated so that men and women can 
live together harmoniously. Similarly, ostracism and ethnicism rather than 
sexism cause the development of the strong woman in Head’s Maru. In the 
end, the untouchable Margaret Cadmore marries the chief and touches other 
people. Th e disintegrating forces of apartheid in conjunction with the neces-
sity to care for a black male child cause the toughening up and recovery of the 
insane heroine in Head’s A Question of Power . Elizabeth frees herself from 
racial, ethnic, and male bondage to emerge as an intrepid individual, able 
RT54118_C002.indd   31RT54118_C002.indd   31 7/8/06   6:34:39 PM7/8/06   6:34:39 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
32 • Th e Womanist Reader
to cope with bringing up her son and living harmoniously with others and 
with nature. I t is H ead’ s unique So uth African experience that makes it pos-
sible for her to detribalize the African womanist novel by exploring so many 
possibilities.
In the United States Alice Walker has been equally inventive. To make her 
point she uses the woman who is docile (but not helpless as her white coun-
terpart would be), hardworking, and pitted against a terrible fate; her hero-
ines suff er from poverty or racism allied with sexism, and sometimes from 
all three together. Walker is making the point that the black woman’s destiny, 
in general, radically diff ers from her white counterpart’s. About the latter de 
Beauvoir observes: “But woman is not called upon to build a better world: her 
domain is fi xed and she has only to keep up the never ending struggle against 
the evil principles that creep into it; in her war against dust, stains, mud, and 
dirt she is fi ghting sin, wrestling with Satan.”
28 In couching woman’s war in 
domestic and religious terms, de Beauvoir is playful and somewhat Puritanical; 
her account does not cover the experience of the black woman for whom Satan 
is not a metaphysical concept but a reality out there, beyond her home, where 
she must willy-nilly go to obtain the wherewithal for decent survival as well as 
for a “better world.” Ruth’s mother, Mem, does so in Th e Th ird Life of Grange 
Copeland; Meridian in Meridian; Celie and Nettie in Th e Color Purple.
* * *
Writing in the latter half of the twentieth century, the black womanist has 
been experimenting with old forms used by her predecessors, male and female. 
It is signifi cant that the African woman writer emerged with the advent of 
political independence. Handicapped by writing in a second language, she has 
sometimes tried to put herself on familiar ground by fusing the familiar oral 
tradition with the foreign written medium, while also playing the role tradi-
tionally reserved for woman: enlightening and entertaining the population 
left  in her care. Th e classics of the female Afro-American novel came aft  er the 
heyday of the protest tradition and took for granted the ideological backing of 
the black power movement. Consequently, female novelists in both continents 
prefer to tell of life as it is, sometimes of life as it is thought to be, and rarely 
of life as it ought to be.
W i t h  s o m e  p a r a l l e l s  t o  J a n e  A u s t e n ’ s  c l e v e r  e x p l o i t a t i o n  o f  t h e  g o t h i c  i n  
Northanger Abbey, Head manipulates the mystique of gothicism in her psy-
chological portrait of the mad Elizabeth in A Question of Power. As the private, 
fantastical “movies,” which represent the punishment cells, unreel in Elizabeth’s 
mind and vision, the reader is forced to act the voyeur, transported into an exotic, 
weird world where the unusual, the eccentric, the traumatic, the frightening, the 
mysterious become the norm. Elizabeth’s interior gothic world is wild, unjust, 
sexist, as her fi ght against the two reprehensible men—Dan and Sello—demon-
strates. Its power play replicates the outer racist and ethnocentric society whose 
RT54118_C002.indd   32RT54118_C002.indd   32 7/8/06   6:34:39 PM7/8/06   6:34:39 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 33
horrifi c power mongering leads Elizabeth to a nervous breakdown. Human 
tenderness and her willpower restore her to a supportable society.
Aidoo’s, Bâ’s, and Alice Walker’s return to the early epistolary form of the 
novel inherited from eighteenth-century women writers departs from twentieth-
century novelistic practice. 29 Th eir rediscovery of the epistle enables them to 
exploit its qualities of simplicity, relative intimacy, and candor. As a result, a 
novel in this form appears more open and more sincere than one written in 
the autobiographical mode—which tends to be defensively aggressive, narcis-
sistic, self-glorifying, as in the work of some feminists. Th e letter pretends to 
be authentic and, like oral narration, gives the impression that the storyteller 
is not lying. In Aidoo’s and Bâ’s novels, the correspondents are loving friends. 
Th is aura of authenticity has a didactic function, particularly for women read-
ers. Aidoo’s use of the form in Our Sister Killjoy seems a modifi cation of that 
employed in Baldwin’s Th e Fire Next Time:  she retains his clarity of vision and 
makes an objective assessment of the black global predicament. Her feminine 
nagging tone resembles Baldwin’s sermonizing mode, made acceptable by a 
tenderness extended to friend and foe alike. In its daring experimentation 
in form, Our Sister Killjoy  also resembles Jean Toomer’s Cane. Like Toomer, 
Aidoo mixes prose, the sketch, poetry, song, and the like to produce some-
thing living, fresh, and lyrical—an oral performance in book form.
Alice Walker’s Th e Color Purple  is also complex and variable in its structure. 
Th e fi rst addr essee in i ts ep istl es is a po w er - wiel ding God. Whi te, pa triar chal, 
he acts the role of the indiff erent voyeur. When God metamorphoses into “It,” 
neuter but not quite neutral, in the female imagination, life miraculously 
improves for womanhood. Also included in the book is the correspondence 
of two loving and trusting sisters. Like rural, sequestered women, some of their 
letters remain unopened, hidden in a trunk by an interfering male. Walker then 
brings the truth of their lives to the world, just as Shug, the enlightened black 
woman who brings the secluded, “private” Celie into the public world of artistic 
and economic fulfi llment. Celie and the letters resemble Emily Dickinson’s 
poems, sewn up and hidden in a wombed trunk, away from public hostility or 
public honor, but later delivered for many eyes to see.
Each letter in Th e Color Purple  represents a patch in the quilt that puts the 
whole of southern life with its sexism, racism, and poverty on display. One 
distinct pattern in the enormous quilt, painstakingly stitched together, shows 
the black woman’s development from slavery to some form of emancipation 
from both white and black patriarchy. Walker’s positivistic stance emerges as 
the expression of her yearning: a vision of a union of the male and the female, 
the black American and the African, brought about through women’s faith 
that is in turn sustained by (letter) writing.
Th e letter with its surface innocuousness is indeed subversive. As a literary 
form that pretends to be private while it is made public, it ensures an open 
inquiry into those matters that aff ect one’s material well-being, one’s spiritual 
RT54118_C002.indd   33RT54118_C002.indd   33 7/8/06   6:34:39 PM7/8/06   6:34:39 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
34 • Th e Womanist Reader
disposition, one’s destiny, and one’s relationship both to other people and to 
the environment. Letters in black female writing fi  nally ensure illumination 
of the black predicament that precedes black integrity.
It is notable that some black women writers intersperse their novels with 
songs, verse, reiterated phrases. Th ese seem to have the communal function of 
the call-and-response usually employed during African storytelling sessions. 
Th ey relieve the tedium of a long speech or a long stretch of narration and involve 
the audience in the spinning of the yarn. Th ey are eff ective during public read-
ings of novels. Th e writers sometimes use them to emphasize climactic points 
in the narration where the emotion is so intense that prose can no longer serve 
as a suitable vehicle; so Aidoo does in Our Sister Killjoy and Morrison in Song 
of Solomon. In Margaret Walker’s Jubilee as well as in Marshall’s Praisesong for 
the Widow the numerous songs, wise sayings, and dances link the principals 
with black tradition, black suff ering, black beliefs, and black religion. Ntozake 
Shange achieves a similar result by including weaving, culinary and medicinal 
recipes, and herbal lore in Sassafrass, Cypress & Indigo; she demonstrates their 
voodoo-like, “chemical” eff ects in the black lives involved.
* * *
Th e force that binds many black female novels in English together is, thus, 
womanism. As a woman with her own peculiar burden, knowing that she is 
deprived of her rights by sexist attitudes in the black domestic domain and by 
Euro-American patriarchy in the public sphere; as a member of a race that feels 
powerless and under siege, with little esteem in the world—the black female 
novelist cannot wholeheartedly join forces with white feminists to fi ght a bat-
tle against patriarchy that, given her understanding and experience, is absurd. 
So she is a womanist because of her racial and her sexual predicament.
Th e long-standing tradition of black American women writers has helped 
to defi ne the black American woman’s situation. Th e works of Pauline Hop-
kins, Mary Etta Spenser, Jean Fauset, Nella Larsen, Dorothy West, Ann Petry, 
and Zora Neale Hurston, among many others, have all helped to this end.
30 
( I t  will  b e  a  u s e ful  lin e  o f  r e s e ar c h  t o  fi nd out if these authors’ underlying 
philosophy is womanism too.) Th is long line of black foremothers—and also 
of forefathers—gives the Afro-American female writer an advantage over her 
African counterpart who was forefathered (in the written tradition) with a 
vengeance. Nevertheless, the black woman writer in Africa and in the United 
States has fi nally emerged as a spokeswoman for black women and the black 
race by moving away from black male chauvinism and the iconoclastic ten-
dencies of feminism to embrace the relative conservatism of womanism.
31 She 
consequently ensures larger horizons for herself and her people. Indeed, in 
helping to liberate the black race through her writing she is aiding the black 
woman who has been and still is concerned with the ethics of surviving rather 
than with the aesthetics of living. Womanism with its wholesome, its religious 
RT54118_C002.indd   34RT54118_C002.indd   34 7/8/06   6:34:40 PM7/8/06   6:34:40 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi’s African Womanism • 35
grounding in black togetherness, is her gospel of hope. Morrison expresses 
its nature when she says of black women, “Th ere is something inside us that 
makes us diff erent from other people. It is not like men and it is not like white 
women. We talked earlier about the relationship between my women and the 
men in their lives. When [the women] sing the blues it is one of those ‘some-
body is gone’ kind of thing but there is never any bitterness.”
32
Notes
 1. Ama Ata Aidoo dismisses the assumption that all material dealing with women is 
necessarily feminist: “I am not a feminist because I write about women. Are men writers 
m a l e  c h a u v i n i s t  p i g s  j u s t  b e c a u s e  t h e y  w r i t e  a b o u t  m e n ?  O r  i s  a  w r i t e r  a n  A f r i c a n  
nationalist just by writing about Africans? … Obviously not … no writer, female or male, 
is a feminist just by writing about women. Unless a particular writer commits his or 
her energies, actively, to exposing the sexist tragedy of women’s history; protesting the 
ongoing degradation of women; celebrating their physical and intellectual capabilities, 
and above all, unfolding a revolutionary vision of the role [of women],” he or she cannot 
be pronounced a feminist. “Unwelcome Pals and Decorative Slaves—or Glimpses of 
Women as Writers and Characters in Contemporary African Literature,” in Medium and 
Message: Proceedings of the International Conference on African Literature and the English 
Language (Calabar, Nigeria: University of Calabar, 1981), 1:17–37, esp. 33.
 2. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar, Th e Madwoman in the Attic: Th e Woman Writer and 
the Nineteenth-Century Imagination  (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale U niversity Press, 1 979 ) , 
pp. 338 ff .
 3. David Cecil, Early Victorian Novelists  (London: Constable & Son, 1935 ), cf. Jean Rhys, 
Wide Sargasso Sea (New Y ork: W . W . N orton & Co., 1 967 ) . In this fi ctional interpreta-
tion of Jane Eyre, Rhys presents Mrs. Rochester as a Creole. See also Elaine Showalter, A 
Literature of Th eir Own: British Women Novelists from Brontë to Lessing  (London: Virago 
Ltd., 1978), p. 124.
 4. Kate Millett ( Sexual Politics  [London: Sphere Books, 1972], p. 39) asserts that black men 
are more ready to stand by their white women than white men are prepared to protect 
their black women.
 5. Compare Myra Jehlen, “Archimedes and the Paradox of Feminist Criticism,” Signs: Jour-
nal of Women in Culture and Society  6, no. 4 (Summer 1981): 575–601, esp. 598.
 6. Cheri Register, “Literary Cristicism,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 6, 
no. 2 (Winter 1980): 268–82, esp. 269.
 7. “Th  e Feminist Book Fair,” West Africa  (June 18, 1984). p. 1263. Th e East African writer 
Grace Ogot considers other dimensions, such as “economic struggle” and the generation 
gap; see Oladele Taiwo, Female Novelists of Modern Africa  (London: Macmillan Publish-
ers, 1984), p. 162.
 8. Millett, pp. 38–39. She notes that socially the white female has a “higher status” than the 
black male who is in turn “higher” than the black female.
 9. Ibid., p. 33. Millett inherits some of her phraseology from Simone de Beauvoir ( Th e Second 
Sex, trans. H.M. Parshley [Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1972], p. 609); see also Barbara 
Charlesworth Gelpi, “A Common Language: Th e American Woman Poet,” in Shakespeare’s 
Sisters: Feminist Essays on Women Poets, ed. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1979), pp. 269–79, esp. p. 269; Elaine Showalter, “Feminist 
Criticism in the Wilderness,” in Writing and Sexual Diff erence,  ed. Elizabeth Abel (Brigh-
ton: Harvester Press, 1982), pp. 9–35, esp. p. 31. Recent feminist writing resembles 
Afro-American male literature from the Harlem Renaissance to the 1960s.
 10. S.E. Ogude, “Slavery and the African Imagination: A Critical Perspective,” World Litera-
ture Today 55, no. 1 (Winter 1981): 21–25, esp. 24.
 11. Amiri Baraka, “Afro-American Literature & Class Struggle,” Black American Literature 
Forum 14, no. 1 (Spring 1980): 5–14, esp. 12. Baraka treats the black female predicament 
from an economic, racial, and social viewpoint: “Th  ird World women in this country 
suff er a triple oppression, if they are working women, as workers under capitalism—class 
oppression, national oppression and oppression because of their sex.”
 12. Aidoo (n. 1 above), p. 32.
RT54118_C002.indd   35RT54118_C002.indd   35 7/8/06   6:34:40 PM7/8/06   6:34:40 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---
36 • Th e Womanist Reader
 13. Alice Walker, Th e Color Purple (New York: Washington Square Press, 1983), p. 145.
 14. Deborah E. McDowell, “New Directions for Black Feminist Criticism,” Black American 
Literature Forum 14, no. 4 (Winter 1980): 153–58, esp. 133.
 15. Black American writers operate in a more liberal atmosphere than their African counter-
parts and so tend to portray lesbian relationships more sympathetically: see, e.g., Walk-
er’s Th e Color Purple;  Ntozake Shange’s Sassafrass, Cypress & Indigo;  Paule Marshall’s 
Th e Chosen Place, the Timeless People and Praisesong for the Widow,  where lesbianism 
is depicted tangentially. An exception to the rule in African literature is Rebeka Njau, 
Ripples in the Pool  (London: Heinemann Books, 1975).
 16. Sheila Rowbotham, Women’s Consciousness,  Man’s World  (Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Books, 1973), p. ix.
 17. Ibid., pp. 123–24.
 18. Rosemary Radford Ruether, Sexism and God-Talk: Towards a Feminist Th eology  (London: 
SCM Press, 1983), pp. 229 ff .
 19. Alison Perry, “Meeting Flora Nwapa,” West Africa (June 18, 1984), p. 1262.
 20. See Annis Pratt, Archetypal Patterns in Women’s Fiction  (Sussex: Harvester Press, 1982), 
pp. 51 ff .
 21. Stephen E. Henderson, “Th  e Heavy Blues of Sterling Brown: A Study of Craft   and Tradi-
tion,” Black American Literature Forum 14, no. 1 (Spring 1980): 32–44, esp. 32.
 22. Elaine Showalter has noted the strange phenomenon that strong, successful female writ-
e r s  h a r d l y  e v e r  p o r t r a y  s u c c e s s f u l  f e m a l e  c h a r a c t e r s  (A Literature of Th eir Own  [n. 3 
above], pp. 244 ff  ). Th is is a feminist rather than a womanist practice, as the strong female 
characters cited above easily establish.
 23. Karen C. Gasten, “Women in the Lives of Grange Copeland,” CLA Journal 24, no. 3 
(March 1981): 276–86, esp. 286.
 24. See Barbara Christian, Black Women Novelists: Th e Development of a Tradition, 1892–1976 
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1980), p. 239.
 25. Toni Morrison, Th e Bluest Eye  (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1970), p. 163.
 26. Maryse Conde, “Th  ree Female Writers in Modern Africa: Flora Nwapa, Ama Ata Aidoo and 
Grace Ogot,” Présence africaine 82 (1972): 132–43, esp. 139, 143. Juliet Okonkwo, “Th e Tal-
ented Woman in African Literature,” Africa Quarterly 15, nos. 1, 2 (1975): 36–47, esp. 45.
 27. Compare Gilbert and Gubar, Th e Madwoman in the Attic  (n. 2 above), p. 78. If one modi-
fi es their observation about the relationship between the female writer and her mad or 
monstrous characters to suit Nwapa’s and Aidoo’s conceptual dilemma, one sees that the 
novelists project “their rebellious impulses” into their heroines but lack the courage to 
make them succeed, thereby demonstrating the authors’ “own self-division, then desire 
both to accept the strictures of patriarchal society and to reject them,” evidence of an 
early feminism mixed with an unconscious gravitation toward womanism.
 28. De Beauvoir (n. 9 above), pp. 470–71.
 29. According to Showalter ( A Literature of Th eir Own  [n. 3 above), p. 17), “Most eighteenth-
century epistolary novels were written by women.”
 30. Th  e fi rst Afro-American novel by a woman is Frances Harper’s Iola Leroy; or, Th e Shad-
ows Uplift ed
 (1892). Th e fi rst African novel by a woman is Flora Nwapa’s Efuru (1966). Th e 
Afro-American woman’s scribal tradition is, of course, over two hundred years old, dat-
ing back to Phillis Wheatley, though the oral tradition in Africa far predates Wheatley.
 31. Aidoo (n. 1 above), p. 33.
 32. Bettye J. Parker, “Complexity: Toni Morrison’s Women—an Interview Essay,” in Sturdy 
Black Bridges: Visions of Black Women in Literature,  ed. Roseann P. Bell, Bettye J. Parker, 
and Beverly Guy-Sheft all (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1979), pp. 251–57, esp. p. 255.
RT54118_C002.indd   36RT54118_C002.indd   36 7/8/06   6:34:40 PM7/8/06   6:34:40 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---
37
3
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s 
Africana Womanism
Cultural and Agenda Conflicts in Academia: Critical 
Issues for Africana Women’s Studies 1 (1989)
CLENORA HUDSON-WEEMS
Well, chillun, whar dar is so much racket, dar must be something out o’ 
kilter. I t’ink dat ‘twixt de niggers of de Souf an’ de women at de Norf 
all a-talkin’ bout rights, de white men will be in a fi  x pretty soon. … Dat 
man ober dar say dat women needs to be helped into carriages, and lift ed 
ober ditches, and to have de best place everywhere. Nobody eber helped 
me into carriages, or ober mud puddles, or give me any best place. And 
ain’t I a Woman? (Truth, 104)
During her lifetime as a staunch upholder of truth and justice, Sojourner 
Truth, born a slave in 1797 and freed under the 1827 New York State Eman-
cipation Act, oft en unexpectedly appeared at antislavery and women’s rights 
rallies. Her impromptu remarks oft en refuted antagonistic arguments against 
both her race and her sex, and in that order. Her frequently quoted speech 
above, which was both unsolicited and initially unwelcomed because of her 
color by the White audience at an 1852 Women’s Rights Convention in Akron, 
Ohio, is used here to demonstrate the critical position of the Africana woman 
within the context of the modern feminist movement.
Historically, Africana women have fought against sexual discrimination 
as well as race and class discrimination. Th ey have challenged Africana male 
chauvinism, but have stopped short of eliminating Africana men as allies in 
the struggle for liberation and family-hood. Historically, Africana women 
have wanted to be “liberated” to the community, family, and its responsibilities. 
Th e daily evacuation of males and females from the Africana community in 
a nine-to-fi ve society has wreaked havoc on the sense of security of Africana 
children. Th e distress of these Africana children and their need for comforting 
s e e m s  t o  h a v e  b e e n  i gn o r e d ,  o v e r l o o k e d  an d  v a s tl y  un d e rp l a y e d ,  s u g g e s tin g  
RT54118_C003.indd   37RT54118_C003.indd   37 7/5/06   1:14:45 PM7/5/06   1:14:45 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---
38 • Th e Womanist Reader
that these children do not need this kind of support. Th e result is generations 
of hurt and rejection. Even Africana women who happen to be on welfare and 
may be at home are condemned for not having a job and are, thus, oft  en not 
regarded as positive fi gures for these children, even though they at least off  er 
an adult presence. With polarized minds, Africanans have bought into this view, 
embracing all too frequently the stereotype of the Africana woman on welfare 
and society’s disapproval of them. Nevertheless, Africana women are seeking 
to reclaim security, stability, and nurturing of a family-based community.
According to Africana sociologist Vivian Gordon in Black Women, Femi-
nism and Black Liberation: Which Way?:
To address women’s issues, therefore, is not only to address the crucial 
needs of Black women, it is also to address the historic primacy of the 
African and African American community; that is, the primacy of its 
children and their preparation for the responsibilities and privileges of 
mature personhood. (viii)
Africana women have historically demonstrated that they are diametrically 
opposed to the concept of many White feminists who want independence and 
freedom from family responsibility. In the Statement of Purpose, which was 
issued by the National Organization of Women (NOW) in 1966 and which is 
still in eff ect today, “it is no longer either necessary or possible for women to 
devote the greater part of their lives to child rearing.”
2 Some women take this 
statement a step further and wish to be liberated not only from their families 
but from their obligation to men in particular. Th  is sentiment may appeal 
more to radical lesbian feminists or radical feminist separatists. Many White 
feminists deny traditional familyhood as an integral part of their personal 
and professional lives.
All too frequently, Sojourner’s resounding query, “And ain’t I a woman?” 
is extrapolated from the text in order to force a feminist identifi  cation of the 
speaker without any initial or even later reference to her fi rst obstacle, which is 
her race. As mentioned earlier, during Sojourner’s speech in 1852, Whites had 
not even deemed her as human, let alone deem her as a woman, which is pre-
cisely why she was mocked before they fi nally allowed her to speak. One may 
question what this has to do with the modern feminist movement. Th e fact is 
that these racist perceptions have not changed signifi cantly as to suggest that 
Africana women do not yet have to contend with the same problem of insidious 
racism, with almost equal intensity even though it is somewhat masked today.
In attempting to unearth the historical truths about the feminist move-
ment that divide the White feminist from Africana women, Africana literary 
theorist Hazel V. Carby asserts that:
In order to gain a public voice as orators or published writers, black 
women had to confront the dominant domestic ideologies and literary 
RT54118_C003.indd   38RT54118_C003.indd   38 7/5/06   1:14:47 PM7/5/06   1:14:47 PM


--- PAGE 96 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 39
conventions of womanhood which excluded them from the defi  nition 
“women.” (Carby, 6)
Moreover, many White feminists ironically have used Sojourner’s quotation to 
justify labeling this freedom fi ghter as a feminist or a “pre-feminist.” Oft en, they 
include their interpretation of the Africana experience when it is convenient—
Sojourner’s experience becomes a dramatization of female oppression. Ironically, 
Sojourner was not embracing the Women’s Rights movement; instead she was 
attacking that element of the Women’s Rights agenda that excluded her. Instead 
of establishing a feminist alignment, she was engaging in self-actualization, 
forcing White women in particular to recognize her and all Africana women 
as women, and as a defi nite and legitimate part of society in general. During 
the abolitionist movement White women learned from Africana women 
techniques on how to organize, hold public meetings, and conduct petition 
campaigns. As abolitionists, the White women fi rst learned to speak in public 
and began to develop a philosophy of their place in society and of their basic 
rights. Africana women, on the other hand, learned and practiced all these 
same things centuries ago in their ancestral home of Africa.
Procrusteans have mislabeled Africana women activists, like Sojourner 
Truth, and other prominent Africana women freedom fi  ghters, such as 
Harriet Tubman and Ida B. Wells, simply because they were women. Indeed, 
the primary concerns of these women were not of a feminist nature, but rather 
a commitment to the centrality of the African-American freedom struggle. 
Th eir primary concern was the life-threatening plight of all Africana people, 
both men and women, at the hands of a racist system. To cast them in a 
feminist mode, which de-emphasizes their major interest, is an abomination 
and an outright insult to their level of struggle.
Too many Blacks have taken the theoretical framework of “feminism” and 
h a v e  t r i e d  t o  m a k e  i t  fi t their particular circumstance. Rather than create 
their own paradigm and name and defi ne themselves, some Africana women, 
scholars in particular, have been persuaded by White feminists to adopt or to 
adapt to the White concept and terminology of feminism. Th e real benefi t of the 
amalgamation of Black feminism and White feminism goes to White feminists 
who can increase their power base by expanding their scope with the conve-
nient consensus that sexism is their commonality and primary concern. Th ey 
make a gender analysis of Africana-American life with the goal of equating 
racism with sexism. Politically and ideologically for Africana women, such an 
adoption is misguided and simplistic. Most Africanans do not share the same 
ideology as traditional White feminists. True, the two groups may share strate-
gies for ending sexual discrimination, but they are divided on how to change 
the entire political system to end racial discrimination and sexual exploitation. 
While the White feminist has not sacrifi  ced her major concern, sexism, the 
Black feminist has, in that she has yielded to her primary concern for racism, 
RT54118_C003.indd   39RT54118_C003.indd   39 7/5/06   1:14:48 PM7/5/06   1:14:48 PM


--- PAGE 97 ---
40 • Th e Womanist Reader
and is forced to see classism as secondary and tertiary issues. Th  e modifi  ed 
terminology, “Black Feminism,” is some Africana women’s futile attempt to fi t 
into the constructs of an established White female paradigm. At best, Black 
feminism may relate to sexual discrimination outside of the Africana com-
munity, but cannot claim to resolve the critical problems within it, which are 
infl uenced by racism and classism. White feminist, Bettina Aptheker, accurately 
analyzes the problem:
When we place women at the center of our thinking, we are going about 
the business of creating an historical and cultural matrix from which 
women may claim autonomy and independence over their own lives. 
For women of color , such autonomy cannot be achieved in conditions 
of racial oppression and cultural genocide. … In short, “feminist,” in 
the modern sense, means the empowerment of women. For women of 
color, such an equality, such an empowerment, cannot take place unless 
the communities in which they live can successfully establish their own 
racial and cultural integrity. (Aptheker, 13)
For many White women, Africana women exist for their purpose—a dra-
matization of oppression. As for their identity, they consider themselves the 
defi nitive woman and thus there is no need, for example, to name their studies 
“White” Women’s Studies. Moreover, while gender-specifi  c discrimination 
is the key issue for Women’s Studies, it unfortunately narrows the goals of 
Africana liberation and devalues the quality of Africana life. Gender-specifi  c 
neither identifi es nor defi nes the primary issue for Africana women or other 
non-White women. It is crucial that Africana women engage in self-naming 
and self-defi nition, lest they fall into the trap of refi  ning a critical ideology at 
the risk of surrendering the sense of identity.
Africana women might begin by naming and defi  ning their unique 
movement “Africana Womanism .”
3 Th e concept of Womanism can be traced 
back to Sojourner’s speech that began to develop and highlight Africana 
women’s unique experience into a paradigm for Africana women. In refi ning 
this terminology into a theoretical framework and methodology, “ Africana 
Womanism” identifi es the participation and the role of Africana women in 
the struggle, but does not suggest that female subjugation is the most critical 
issue they face in their struggle for parity. Like Black feminism, Africana 
Womanism a c kn o w l e d g e s  s o c i e t al  g e n d e r  p r o b l e m s  a s  c r i t i c al  i s s u e s  t o  b e  
resolved; however, it views feminism, the suggested alternative to these 
problems, as a sort of inverted White patriarchy, with the White feminist 
now in command and on top. Mainstream feminism is women’s co-opting 
themselves into mainstream patriarchal values. According to Gordon, 
“Th e Movement fails to state clearly that the system is wrong; what it does 
communicate is that White women want to be a part of the system. Th ey seek 
power, not change” (47).
RT54118_C003.indd   40RT54118_C003.indd   40 7/5/06   1:14:48 PM7/5/06   1:14:48 PM


--- PAGE 98 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 41
Th e Africana womanist, on the other hand, perceives herself as the com-
panion to the Africana man, and works diligently toward continuing their 
established union in the struggle against racial oppression. Within the Africana 
culture, there is an intrinsic, organic equality that has always been necessary for 
the survival of the Africana culture, in spite of the individual personal problems 
of female subjugation that penetrated the Africana family structure as a result 
of the White male cultural system. Th is issue must be addressed. However, the 
White male’s privilege is not the Africana men’s or women’s personal problem 
but rather a political problem of unchallenged gender chauvinism in the world. 
Critiquing Women’s Studies, Aptheker concludes that:
… women’s studies programs operate within a racist structure. Every 
department in every predominantly white institution is centered on the 
experience, history, politics, and culture of white men, usually of the elite. 
What is signifi cant, however, is that women’s studies, by its very reason for 
existence, implies a reordering of politics, a commitment to community, 
and an educational purpose, which is inherently subversive of its institu-
tional setting. … Insofar as women’s studies replicates a racial pattern in 
which white rule predominates, however, it violates its own principles of 
origin and purpose. More to the point: it makes impossible the creation of 
a feminist vision and politics. (13)
Africanans have critical and complex problems in their community, most 
of which stem from racial oppression. Th  e Africana woman acknowledges 
the problem of classism, a reproachable element in America’s capitalistic 
system. However, even there the plight of the middle-class Africana woman 
becomes intertwined with racism. Given that both the Africana womanist 
and the Black feminist address these critical issues and more, there must be 
something that makes the issues of the Africana womanist diff  erent, and that 
something is prioritizing on the part of the Africana woman. She realizes 
the critical need to prioritize the antagonistic forces as racism, classism and 
sexism, respectively. In the fi nal analysis, Africana Womanism is connected to 
the tradition of self-reliance and autonomy, working toward participation in 
Africana liberation.
Observe the importance of Africana identity in the case of Sojourner 
Truth, for example. Before one can properly address her much-quoted query, 
one must, as she did, fi rst consider her color, for it was because of color that 
Sojourner was initially hissed and jeered at for having the gall to address 
the confl ict between men and women and the rights of the latter. Before 
Sojourner could hope to address gender problems, she had to fi  rst overcome 
discrimination from her White audience. Clearly, gender was not her primary 
concern. By reiterating “And ain’t I a Woman,” Sojourner insisted that she, 
too, possessed all the traits of a woman, notwithstanding her race and class, 
that the dominant culture used to exclude her from that community. Th e key 
RT54118_C003.indd   41RT54118_C003.indd   41 7/5/06   1:14:48 PM7/5/06   1:14:48 PM


--- PAGE 99 ---
42 • Th e Womanist Reader
issue for the Africana woman, as well as for the Africana man, is racism, with 
classism intertwined therein.
While women of all ethnic orientations share the unfortunate commonality 
of female subjugation, it is naive, to say the least, to suggest that this kind of 
oppression should be the primary concern of all women, particularly women 
of color. When the Black feminist buys the White terminology, she also buys 
its agenda. Because Africana women share other forms of oppression that are 
not necessarily a part of the overall White women’s experiences, their varied 
kinds of victimization need to be prioritized. Instead of alienating the Africana 
male sector from the struggle today, Africanans must call for a renegotiation 
of Africanan male–female roles in society. In so doing, there must be a call to 
halt once and for all female subjugation, while continuing the critical struggle 
for the liberation of Africana people worldwide.
As previously stated, the notion of Africana women moving “from margin 
to center”
4 of the feminist movement, as proposed by bell hooks is ludicrous. 
For how can any woman hope to move from the peripheral to the center of a 
movement that, historically, has not included her on the agenda? Even during 
the resurgence of the Women’s Liberation Movement of the mid-1960s the 
critical concerns of the Africana woman were not part of the agenda. Be that 
as it may, hooks complains that contemporary Africana women do not join 
together for women’s rights because they do not see womanhood as an impor-
tant aspect of their identity. Further, she states that racist and sexist social-
ization have conditioned Africana women to devalue their femaleness and to 
regard race as their only relevant label of identity. In short, she surmises that 
Africana women have been asked to deny a part of themselves and they have. 
Clearly this position evokes some controversy, as it does not take into account 
the reasons for the Africana woman’s reluctance to embrace feminism.
Consider the experience of a woman who said that from so many feet away, 
her race was noticed; as she got into closer proximity, her class was detected; 
but that it was not until she got in the door that her sex was known. Does 
not that suggest the need for prioritizing? Th  e prioritizing of the kinds of 
relegation to which the Africana woman is subjected should be explored in a 
serious eff ort to recognize and to understand the existence of her total sense 
of oppression. What one really wants to do is appreciate the triple plight of 
Africana women. Society needs to deal with all aspects of the oppression of 
the Africana woman in order to better combat them. Race and class biases are 
the key issues for non-Whites and must be resolved even before gender issues 
if there is any hope for human survival. It is impossible to conceive of any 
human being succumbing to absolute regression without an outright struggle 
against it.
Sojourner Truth demonstrated early on in the Women’s Rights Movement 
that a commonality exists between the Africana men and women of the 
South and the women of the North in their struggle for freedom. Clearly, 
RT54118_C003.indd   42RT54118_C003.indd   42 7/5/06   1:14:49 PM7/5/06   1:14:49 PM


--- PAGE 100 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 43
the Africana woman had, neither then nor now, no exclusive claim on the 
struggle for equal rights apart from her male counterpart. Africana men and 
Africana women are and should be allies, struggling as they have since the 
days of slavery for equal social, economic, and political rights as fellow human 
beings in the world. Th ere is an inherent contradiction in the ideology of “Black 
Feminism” that should be reevaluated. A more compatible concept is “Africana 
Womanism.” Indeed, this issue must be properly addressed if Women’s Studies 
is to be truly respected and if a positive agenda for Africana Women’s Studies 
is to be truly realized.
Notes
 1. Th  is chapter is reprinted with permission from Th e Western Journal of Black Studies,  
which fi rst appeared in the Winter 1989 issue.
 2. NOW Statement of Purpose (Adopted at the organizing conference in Washington, DC, 
October 29, 1966).
 3. Th  e author introduced the “ Africana Womanism ” concept at the National Council for 
Black Studies Conference, March 1988.
 4. See bell hooks’ Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center.
RT54118_C003.indd   43RT54118_C003.indd   43 7/5/06   1:14:49 PM7/5/06   1:14:49 PM


--- PAGE 101 ---
44
Africana Womanism (1993)
CLENORA HUDSON-WEEMS
Black Feminism, African Feminism, Womanism …
Feminism. You know how we feel about that embarrassing Western 
philosophy? Th e destroyer of homes. Imported mainly from America to 
ruin nice African women. (Ama Ata Aidoo, 1986)
Central to the spirit of Africanans (Continental Africans and Africans in 
the diaspora) regarding feminism in the Africana community is the above 
quotation by internationally acclaimed African novelist and critic, Ama Ata 
Aidoo. One of today’s most controversial issues in both the academy and the 
broader community is the role of the Africana woman within the context of 
the modern feminist movement. Both men and women are debating this issue, 
particularly as it relates to Africana women in their eff  orts to remain authen-
tic in their existence, such as prioritizing their needs even if the needs are 
not of primary concern for the dominant culture. Th  e ever-present question 
remains the same: what is the relationship between an Africana woman and 
her family, her community, and her career in today’s society that emphasizes, 
in the midst of oppression, human suff ering, and death, the empowerment of 
women and individualism over human dignity and rights?
While many academics uncritically adopt feminism, the established theo-
retical concept based on the notion that gender is primary in women’s struggle 
in the patriarchal system, most Africana women in general do not identify 
with the concept in its entirety and thus cannot see themselves as feminists.
1 
Granted, the prioritizing of female empowerment and gender issues may be 
justifi able for those women who have not been plagued by powerlessness based 
on ethnic diff erences; however, that is certainly not the case for those who 
have—Africana women. For those Africana women who do adopt some form 
of feminism, they do so because of feminism’s theoretical and methodological 
legitimacy in the academy and their desire to be a legitimate part of the 
academic community. Moreover, they adopt feminism because of the absence 
of a suitable framework for their individual needs as Africana women. But 
while some have accepted the label, more and more Africana women today in 
the academy and in the community are reassessing the historical realities and 
the agenda for the modern feminist movement. Th  ese women are conclud-
ing that feminist terminology does not accurately refl  ect their reality or their 
struggle.
1 Hence, feminism, and more specifi  cally, Black feminism, which 
RT54118_C003.indd   44RT54118_C003.indd   44 7/5/06   1:14:49 PM7/5/06   1:14:49 PM


--- PAGE 102 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 45
relates to African-American women in particular, is extremely problematic as 
labels for the true Africana woman and invites much debate and controversy 
among today’s scholars and women in general.
It should be noted here that there is another form of feminism that is closely 
identifi ed with Africana women around the world. While African feminism 
is a bit less problematic for Africana women than is feminism in general, it 
is  m o r e  cl osel y  akin  t o  Africana womanism . According to African literary 
critic Rose Acholonu in a paper she presented in July 1992 at the International 
Conference on Africana women in Nigeria:
Th e negative hues of the American and European radical feminism have 
succeeded in alienating even the fair-minded Africans from the con-
cept. Th e sad result is that today [the] majority of Africans (including 
successful female writers), tend to disassociate themselves from it.
2
Hence, in spite of the accuracy of Filomina Chioma Steady in Th e Black Woman 
Cross-Culturally in her astute assessment of the struggle and reality of Africana 
women, the name itself, African feminism, is problematic, as it naturally sug-
gests an alignment with feminism, a concept that has been alien to the plight 
of Africana women from its inception. Th is is particularly the case in reference 
to racism and classism, which are prevailing obstacles in the lives of Africana 
people, a reality that the theorist herself recognizes. According to Steady:
Regardless of one’s position, the implications of the feminist movement 
for the black woman are complex. … Several factors set the black woman 
apart as having a diff erent order of priorities. She is oppressed not simply 
because of her sex but ostensibly because of her race and, for the major-
ity, essentially because of their class. Women belong to diff  erent socio-
economic groups and do not represent a universal category. Because the 
majority of black women are poor, there is likely to be some alienation 
from the middle-class aspect of the women’s movement which perceives 
feminism as an attack on men rather than on a system which thrives on 
inequality. (23–24)
In “African Feminism: A Worldwide Perspective,” from Women in Africa and 
the African Diaspora,  Steady asserts that
For the majority of black women poverty is a way of life. For the majority 
of black women also racism has been the most important obstacle in the 
acquisition of the basic needs for survival. Th rough the manipulation of 
racism the world economic institutions have produced a situation which 
negatively aff ects black people, particularly black women. … What we 
have, then, is not a simple issue of sex or class diff erences but a situation 
w h i c h ,  b e c a u s e  o f  th e  r a c i al  f a ct o r ,  i s  c a s t e lik e  in  c h ar a ct e r  o n  b o th  a  
national and global scale. (18–19)
RT54118_C003.indd   45RT54118_C003.indd   45 7/5/06   1:14:50 PM7/5/06   1:14:50 PM


--- PAGE 103 ---
46 • Th e Womanist Reader
It becomes apparent, then, that neither the terms Black feminism nor African 
feminism are suffi  cient to label women of such complex realities as Africana 
women, particularly as both terms, through their very names, align them-
selves with feminism.
Why not feminism for Africana women? To begin with, the true history of 
feminism, its origins and its participants, reveals its blatant racist background, 
thereby establishing its incompatibility with Africana women. Feminism, ear-
lier called the Woman’s Suff rage Movement, started when a group of liberal 
White women, whose concerns then were for the abolition of slavery and equal 
rights for all people regardless of race, class and sex, dominated the scene 
among women on the national level during the early to mid-nineteenth 
century. At the time of the Civil War, such leaders as Susan B. Anthony and 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton held the universalist philosophy on the natural rights 
of women to full citizenship, which included the right to vote. However, in 1870 
the Fift eenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States ratifi ed the 
voting rights of Africana men, leaving women, White women in particular, and 
their desire for the same rights, unaddressed. Middle-class White women were 
naturally disappointed, for they had assumed that their eff orts toward securing 
full citizenship for Africana people would ultimately benefi t them, too, in their 
desire for full citizenship as voting citizens. Th  e result was a racist reaction 
to the Amendment and Africanans in particular. Th us, from the 1880s on, an 
organized movement among White women shift ed the pendulum to a radically 
conservative posture on the part of White women in general.
In 1890 the National American Woman Suff rage Association (NAWSA) was 
founded by northern White women, but “southern women were also vigorously 
courted by that group” (Giddings, 81), epitomizing the growing race chauvin-
ism of the late nineteenth century. Th e organization, which brought together 
the National Woman Suff rage Association and the American Woman Suff rage 
Association, departed from Susan B. Anthony’s original women’s suff  rage 
posture. Th ey asserted that the vote for women should be utilized chiefl  y by 
middle-class White women, who could aid their husbands in preserving the 
virtues of the Republic from the threat of unqualifi  ed and biological inferiors 
(Africana men) who, with the power of the vote, could gain a political foothold 
in the American system. For example, staunch conservative suff  ragist leader 
Carrie Chapman Catt and other women of her persuasion insisted upon strong 
Anglo Saxon values and White supremacy. Th ey were interested in banding 
with White men to secure the vote for pure Whites, excluding not only Afri-
canans but White immigrants as well. Historians Peter Carrol and David Noble 
quoted Catt in Th e Free and the Unfree  as saying that “there is but one way to 
avert the danger. Cut off  the vote of the slums and give it to [White] women.” 
She continued that the middle class White men must recognize “the usefulness 
of woman suff rage as a counterbalance to the foreign vote, and as a means of 
legally preserving White supremacy in the South” (296). Th ese suff ragists felt 
RT54118_C003.indd   46RT54118_C003.indd   46 7/5/06   1:14:50 PM7/5/06   1:14:50 PM


--- PAGE 104 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 47
that because Africana people, Africana men in particular with their new status 
as  v o ters,  w er e  m em bers  o f  an  inf eri o r  race,  th ey  sh o ul d  n o t  be  gran ted  th e 
right to vote before them, which did not come until much later with the August 
1920 Nineteenth Amendment. Th us, while the disappointment of being left  out 
in the area of gaining full citizenship, i.e., voting rights, for White women was 
well founded, their hostility and racist antagonistic feelings toward Africanans 
in general cannot be dismissed lightly.
Feminism, a term conceptualized and adopted by White women, involves 
an agenda that was designed to meet the needs and demands of that particular 
group. For this reason, it is quite plausible for White women to identify with 
feminism and the feminist movement. Having said that, the fact remains that 
placing all women’s history under White women’s history, thereby giving the 
latter the defi nitive position, is problematic. In fact, it demonstrates the ulti-
mate of racist arrogance and domination, suggesting that authentic activity of 
women resides with White women. Hence, in this respect for White women, 
Africana women activists in America in particular, such as Sojourner Truth 
(militant abolition spokesperson and universal suff  ragist), Harriet Tubman 
(Underground Railroad conductor who spent her lifetime aiding Africana 
slaves, both males and females, in their escape to the North for freedom), and 
Ida B. Wells (anti-lynching crusader during the early twentieth century), were 
prefeminists, in spite of the fact that the activities of these Africana women 
did not focus necessarily on women’s issues. Considering activities of early 
Africana women such as those mentioned above and countless other unsung 
Africana heroines, what White feminists have done in reality was to take the 
lifestyle and techniques of Africana women activists and used them as models 
or blueprints for the framework of their theory, and then name, defi  ne, and 
legitimize it as the only real substantive movement for women. Hence, when 
they defi ne a feminist and feminist activity, they are, in fact, identifying with 
independent Africana women, women they both emulated and envied. Such 
women they have come in contact with from the beginning of American slav-
ery, all the way up to the modern Civil Rights Movement with such Africana 
women activists as Mamie Till Mobley, the mother of Emmett Louis Till,
3 and 
Rosa Parks, the mother of the Modern Civil Rights Movement—and the aft er-
math. Th erefore, when Africana women come along and embrace feminism, 
appending it to their identity as Black feminists or African feminists, they are 
in reality duplicating the duplicate.
Africana Womanism  is a term I coined and defi  ned in 1987 aft  er nearly 
two years of publicly debating the importance of self-naming for Africana 
women. Why the term “ Africana Womanism ”? Upon concluding that the 
term “Black Womanism” was not quite the terminology to include the total 
meaning desired for this concept, I decided that “ Africana Womanism, ” a 
natural evolution in naming, was the ideal terminology for two basic reasons. 
Th e fi rst part of the coinage, Africana,  identifi es the ethnicity of the woman 
RT54118_C003.indd   47RT54118_C003.indd   47 7/5/06   1:14:51 PM7/5/06   1:14:51 PM


--- PAGE 105 ---
48 • Th e Womanist Reader
being considered, and this reference to her ethnicity, establishing her cultural 
identity, relates directly to her ancestry and land base—Africa. Th  e second 
part of the term, Womanism, recalls Sojourner Truth’s powerful impromptu 
speech “And Ain’t I [a] Woman,” one in which she battles with the dominant 
alienating forces in her life as a struggling Africana woman, questioning the 
accepted idea of womanhood. Without question, she is the fl  ip side of the 
coin, the co-partner in the struggle for her people, one who, unlike the White 
woman, has received no special privileges in American society. But there is 
another crucial issue that accounts for the use of the term woman(ism). Th  e 
term “woman,” and by extension “womanism,” is far more appropriate than 
“female” (“feminism”) because of one major distinction—only a female of 
the human race can be a woman. “Female,” on the other hand, can refer 
to a member of the animal or plant kingdom as well as to a member of the 
human race. Furthermore, in electronic and mechanical terminology, there 
is a female counterbalance to the male correlative. Hence, terminology derived 
from the word “woman” is more suitable and more specifi  c when naming a 
group of the human race.
Th e Africana womanist is not to be confused with Alice Walker’s “womanist” 
as presented in her collection of essays entitled In Search of Our Mothers’ 
Gardens. According to Walker, a womanist is:
A black feminist or feminist of color … who loves other women, sexually 
and/or nonsexually. Appreciates and prefers women’s culture … [and who] 
sometimes loves individual men, sexually and/or nonsexually. Committed 
to survival and wholeness of entire people, male and female. … Womanist 
is to feminist as purple to lavender. (xi, xii)
Clearly the interest here is almost exclusively in the woman, her sexuality and 
her culture. Th e culminating defi  nition, “womanist is to feminist as purple to 
lavender,” fi rmly establishes the author’s concept of the affi   nity between the 
womanist and the feminist. Th ere is hardly any diff  erentiation, only a slight 
shade of diff erence in color. Th e Africana womanist, on the other hand, is 
signifi cantly diff erent from the mainstream feminist, particularly in her per-
spective on and approach to issues in society . Th is is to be expected, for obvi-
ously their historical realities and present stance in society are not the same. 
Africana women and White women come from diff  erent segments of society 
and, thus, feminism as an ideology is not equally applicable to both.
Neither an outgrowth nor an addendum to feminism, Africana Womanism 
is not Black feminism, African feminism, or Walker’s womanism that some 
Africana women have come to embrace. Africana Womanism is an ideology 
created and designed for all women of African descent. It is grounded in African 
culture, and therefore, it necessarily focuses on the unique experiences, struggles, 
needs, and desires of Africana women. It critically addresses the dynamics of 
the confl ict between the mainstream feminist, the Black feminist, the African 
RT54118_C003.indd   48RT54118_C003.indd   48 7/5/06   1:14:51 PM7/5/06   1:14:51 PM


--- PAGE 106 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 49
feminist, and the Africana womanist. Th e conclusion is that Africana Womanism 
and its agenda are unique and separate from both White feminism and 
Black feminism, and moreover, to the extent of naming in particular, Africana 
Womanism diff ers from African feminism.
Clearly there is a need for a separate and distinct identity for the Afri-
cana woman and her movement. Some White women acknowledge that the 
feminist movement was not designed with the Africana woman in mind. For 
example, White feminist Catherine Clinton asserts that “feminism primarily 
appealed to educated and middle-class White women, rather than Black and 
White working-class women” (“Women Break New Ground,” 63). Steady, in her 
article entitled “African Feminism: A Worldwide Perspective,” which appears 
in Women in Africa and the African Diaspora, admits that:
Various schools of thought, perspectives, and ideological proclivities 
have infl uenced the study of feminism. Few studies have dealt with the 
issue of racism, since the dominant voice of the feminist movement has 
been that of the white female. Th e issue of racism can become threat-
ening, for it identifi  es white feminists as possible participants in the 
oppression of blacks. (3)
Africana men and women do not accept the idea of Africana women as feminists. 
Th ere is a general consensus in the Africana community that the feminist move-
ment, by and large, is the White woman’s movement for two reasons. First, the 
Africana woman does not see the man as her primary enemy as does the White 
feminist, who is carrying out an age-old battle with her White male counterpart 
for subjugating her as his property. Africana men have never had the same 
institutionalized power to oppress Africana women as White men have had to 
oppress White women. According to Africana sociologist Clyde Franklin II:
Black men are relatively powerless in this country, and their attempts 
at domination, aggression, and the like, while sacrifi  cing humanity, are 
ludicrous. (112)
Joyce Ladner, another Africana sociologist, succinctly articulates the dynamics 
of the relationship between Africana men and women and does not view the 
former as the enemy of the latter in Tomorrow’s Tomorrow:
Black women do not perceive their enemy to be black men, but rather 
t h e  e n e m y  i s  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  o p p r e s s i v e  f o r c e s  i n  t h e  l a r g e r  s o c i e t y  
which subjugate black men, women and children. (277–78)
Since Africana women never have been considered the property of their 
male counterpart, Africana women and men dismiss the primacy of gen-
der issues in their reality, and thus dismiss the feminist movement as a 
viable framework for their chief concerns. Instead, they hold to the opinion 
that those Africana women who embrace the feminist movement are mere 
RT54118_C003.indd   49RT54118_C003.indd   49 7/5/06   1:14:51 PM7/5/06   1:14:51 PM


--- PAGE 107 ---
50 • Th e Womanist Reader
assimilationists or sellouts who, in the fi nal analysis, have no true commitment 
to their culture or their people, particularly as it relates to the historical and 
current collective struggle of Africana men and women.
Second, Africana women reject the feminist movement because of their 
apprehension and distrust of White organizations. In fact, White organized 
groups in general, such as the Communist Party and the National Organiza-
tion for Women (N.O.W.), have never been able to galvanize the majority of 
Africana people. On the whole, Africanans are grassroots people who depend 
on the support and confi dence of their communities and who, based on historical 
instances of betrayal, are necessarily suspicious of organizations founded, 
operated, and controlled by Whites. In general, unlike members of the domi-
nant culture, Africanans are not issue-oriented. Instead they focus on tangible 
things that can off er an amelioration of or exit from oppression, which are of 
u t m o s t  i m p o rt a n c e  f o r  s u rvi v al  i n  th e  A f r i c a n a  c o m m u n i ty .  Th ose Africana 
intellectuals who insist on identifying with organizations that off  er them 
neither leadership nor high visibility generally subordinate their Blackness to 
being accepted by White intellectuals. Unfortunately for those Africana intel-
lectuals, philosophy and scholarship surpass even self-identity, and they seem to 
be suffi  ciently appeased by merely belonging to a White group.
Having established that the major problem with the African feminist is 
that of naming, what is the major problem with the Black feminist? Briefl  y 
stated, the Black feminist is an Africana woman who has adopted the agenda 
of the feminist movement to some degree in that she, like the White feminist, 
perceives gender issues to be most critical in her quest for empowerment and 
selfh ood. On the outskirts of feminist activity, Black feminists possess neither 
power nor leadership in the movement. Black feminist bell hooks obviously 
realizes this, as she makes a call for Africana women to move “from margin to 
center” of the feminist movement in her book entitled Feminist Th eory: From 
Margin to Center. Receiving recognition as heralds of feminism by way of legit-
imating the movement through their identifi cation with it, Black feminists are 
frequently delegated by White feminists as the voice of Africana women. How-
ever, this peripheral promotion of Black feminists is only transient, as they 
could never reach the same level of importance as that of White feminists. It is 
quite obvious, for example, that bell hooks will never be elevated to the same 
status as either Betty Friedan or Gloria Steinem. At best, she and other Black 
feminists like her are given only temporary recognition as representatives and 
spokespersons for Africana people in general and Africana women in particu-
lar. Black feminists advance an agenda that is in direct contravention to that 
in the Africana community, thereby demonstrating a certain lack of African-
centered historical and contemporary perspective. Although White feminists 
contend that the movement is a panacea for the problems of Africana women, 
they have been unsuccessful in galvanizing the majority of Africana women 
as feminists. In fact, there is no existing group of White women controlling 
RT54118_C003.indd   50RT54118_C003.indd   50 7/5/06   1:14:52 PM7/5/06   1:14:52 PM


--- PAGE 108 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 51
the majority of Africana women to the extent of directing and dictating the 
latter’s thought and action.
While Africana women do, in fact, have some legitimate concerns regarding 
Africana men, these concerns must be addressed within the context of African 
culture. Problems must not be resolved using an alien framework, i.e., feminism, 
but must be resolved from within an endemic theoretical construct—Africana 
Womanism. It appears that many Africana women who become Black feminists 
(or who are inclined more in that direction) base their decisions upon either 
naiveté about the history and ramifi cations of feminism or on negative experi-
ences with Africana men. For example, because there are some Africana women 
who pride themselves on being economically independent—which was the way 
of life for Africana women long before the advent of feminism—and because one 
of the chief tenets of feminism in the larger society is that a woman is economi-
cally independent, many Africana women unthinkingly respond positively to 
the notion of being a feminist. To be sure, Africana women have always been, 
by necessity, independent and responsible co-workers and decision-makers. But 
while this naiveté can be easily corrected, negative personal experiences cannot 
be rectifi ed so readily.
True, one’s personal experiences are valid ways of determining one’s world 
view; however, the resulting generalization that many Black feminists share—
that all or most Africana men are less worthy than women—is based upon intel-
lectual laziness, which requires eff ortless rationalization. By the same analysis, 
it is easy for some people to believe that all White people or all people of any race 
or sex are a certain way, and it is diffi  cult for them to treat people as individuals. 
Th is is important because in reality, relationships are based upon  individual 
particularities rather than upon an overriding group characteristic. For exam-
ple, an Africana brother having a bad experience with an Africana woman 
might conclude that all Africana women are undesirable, thus castigating this 
entire group of people. A classic example of gross exaggeration based not on 
facts but on polemics or limited personal experiences, is Michele  Wallace’s book 
entitled Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman (1980). In this book, the 
author makes a serious attack on Africana men by categorizing them as super 
macho men who physically and mentally abuse Africana women. It is apparent 
that the author’s personal negative experiences with Africana men, which she 
relates throughout the book, infl uenced her ideology. Th e tragedy is that her 
book, which was encouraged in diff erent ways by the many feminists listed in 
the Acknowledgments, received such wide exposure that it consequently infl u-
enced the thoughts of an entire generation, thereby representing a watershed in 
the development of modern Black feminist thought.
If one considers the collective plight of Africana people globally, it becomes 
clear that we cannot aff ord the luxury, if you will, of being consumed by gender 
issues. A supreme paradigm of the need for Africana women to prioritize the 
struggle for human dignity and parity is presented by South African woman 
RT54118_C003.indd   51RT54118_C003.indd   51 7/5/06   1:14:52 PM7/5/06   1:14:52 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
52 • Th e Womanist Reader
activist Ruth Mompati. In her heart-rending stories of unimaginable racial 
atrocities heaped upon innocent children, as well as upon men and women, 
Mompati asserts the following:
Th e South African woman, faced with the above situation, fi  nds the 
order of her priorities in her struggle for human dignity and her rights 
as a woman dictated by the general political struggle of her people as a 
whole. Th e national liberation of the black South African is a prerequi-
site to her own liberation and emancipation as a woman and a worker. 
Th e process of struggle for national liberation has been accompanied 
by the politicizing of both men and women. Th is has kept the women’s 
s t r u g g l e  f r o m  d e g e n e r a t i n g  i n t o  a  s e x i s t  s t r u g g l e  t h a t  w o u l d  d i v o r c e  
women’s position in society from the political, social, and economic 
development of the society as a whole.
From the South African women who together with their men seek to 
liberate their country, come an appeal to friends and supporters to raise 
their voices on their behalf. (In Daphne Williams Ntiri’s  One [I]s Not a 
Woman, One Becomes, 112–13)
Overall, “human discrimination transcends sex discrimination … the costs of 
human suff ering are high when compared to a component, sex obstacle” (Ntiri, 6). 
Furthermore, according to Steady in Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally:
for the black woman in a racist society, racial factors, rather than sexual 
ones, operate more consistently in making her a target for discrimination 
and marginalization. Th is becomes apparent when the “family” is viewed 
as a unit of analysis. Regardless of diff erential access to resources by both 
men and women, white males and females, as members of family groups, 
share a proportionately higher quantity of the earth’s resources than do 
black males and females. Th ere is a great diff erence between discrimina-
tion by privilege and protection, and discrimination by deprivation and 
exclusion. (27–28)
Steady’s assessment here speaks directly to the source of discrimination that 
Africana women suff er at the hands of a racist system. Th ere is the oppression 
of the South African woman who must serve as maid and nurse to the White 
household with minimum wage earnings, the Caribbean woman in London 
who is the ignored secretary, and the Senegalese or African worker in France 
who is despised and unwanted. Th ere is the Nigerian subsistence farmer, such 
as the Ibo woman in Enugu and Nsukka, who farms every day for minimum 
wages, and the female Brazilian factory worker who is the lowest on the totem 
pole. Clearly, the problems of these women are not infl icted upon them solely 
because they are women. Th ey are victimized fi  rst and foremost because they 
RT54118_C003.indd   52RT54118_C003.indd   52 7/5/06   1:14:53 PM7/5/06   1:14:53 PM


--- PAGE 110 ---
Clenora Hudson-Weems’s Africana Womanism • 53
are Black; they are further victimized because they are women living in a 
male-dominated society.
Th e  p r o b l e m s  o f  A f r i c a n a  w o m e n ,  i n c l u d i n g  p h y s i c a l  b r u t a l i t y ,  s e x u a l  
harassment, and female subjugation in general perpetrated both within and 
outside the race, ultimately have to be solved on a collective basis within Afri-
cana comm unities. Africana people m ust eliminate racist infl uences in their 
lives fi rst, with the realization that they can neither aff ord nor tolerate any form 
of female subjugation. Along those same lines, Ntiri summarizes Mompati’s 
position that sexism “is basically a secondary problem which arises out of race, 
class and economic prejudices” (5).
Because one of the main tensions between Africana men and women in 
the United States involves employment and economic opportunity, African-
ans frequently fall into a short sighted-perception of things. For example, it is 
not a question of more jobs for Africana women versus more jobs for Africana 
men, a situation that too frequently promotes gender competition. Rather, it 
is a question of more jobs for Africanans in general. Th ese jobs are generated 
primarily by White people, and most Africanans depend on sources other 
than those supplied by Africana people. Th e real challenge for Africana men 
and women is how to create more economic opportunities within Africana 
communities. Many people talk about the need for enhanced Africana eco-
nomic empowerment. If our real goal in life is to be achieved—that is, the sur-
vival of our entire race as a primary concern for Africana women—it will have 
to come from Africana men and women working together. If Africana men 
and women are fi ghting within the community, they are ultimately defeating 
themselves on all fronts.
Perhaps because of all the indisputable problems and turmoil heaped upon 
the Africana community, much of which is racially grounded, Africanans fre-
quently fail to look closely at available options to determine if those options are, 
in fact, suffi  ciently workable. Rather than create other options for themselves, 
Africanans become confl uent with White privileged-class phenomenon, as in 
the case of feminism. On the other hand, when a group takes control over its 
struggle, tailoring it to meet its collective needs and demands, the group is 
almost always successful. When success in one’s goals is realized, it makes 
for a more peaceful reality for all concerned, and one is more inclined to a 
wholesome and amicable relationship with others, knowing that the concerns 
of the people are respected and met. As Africana Womanism —rather than 
feminism, Black feminism, African feminism, or womanism—is a conceiv-
able alternative for the Africana woman in her collective struggle with the 
entire community, it enhances future possibilities for the dignity of Africana 
people and the humanity of all. In short, the reclamation of Africana women 
via identifying our own collective struggle and acting upon it is a key step 
toward human harmony and survival.
RT54118_C003.indd   53RT54118_C003.indd   53 7/5/06   1:14:53 PM7/5/06   1:14:53 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
54 • Th e Womanist Reader
Notes
 1. For many reasons, many White women as well as African women have become disen-
chanted with feminism.
 2. Rose Acholonu presented a paper entitled “Love and the Feminist Utopia in the African 
Novel” at the International Conference on Women in Africa and the African Diaspora: 
Bridges Across Activism and the Academy at the University of Nigeria-Nsukka, July 1992.
 3. Emmett Louis “Bobo” Till was the 14-year-old Africana Chicago youth who was lynched 
in 1955 in Money, Mississippi for whistling at a 21-year-old White woman. For a detailed 
explanation of Till’s importance to the Modern Civil Rights Movement, read Clenora 
Hudson’s (Hudson-Weems’) 1988 doctoral dissertation entitled Emmett Till: Th e Impetus 
for the Modern Civil Rights Movement  and Emmett Till: Th e Sacrifi  cial Lamb of the Civil 
Rights Movement.
RT54118_C003.indd   54RT54118_C003.indd   54 7/5/06   1:14:54 PM7/5/06   1:14:54 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
Part 2
Womanist Kinfolk: Sisters, Brothers, 
Daughters, and Sons on Womanism
RT54118_S002.indd   55RT54118_S002.indd   55 6/2/06   7:13:36 PM6/2/06   7:13:36 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
RT54118_S002.indd   56RT54118_S002.indd   56 6/2/06   7:13:37 PM6/2/06   7:13:37 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
57
4
Sisters and Brothers: Black 
Feminists on Womanism
What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black 
Feminism, and Beyond (1996)
PATRICIA HILL COLLINS
Black women are at a decision point that in many ways mirrors that faced by 
African Americans as a collectivity. Building on the path breaking works by 
Toni Cade Bambara, Ntozake Shange, Angela Davis, Toni Morrison, June Jor-
dan, Alice Walker, Audre Lorde and other black women who “broke silence” 
in the 1970s, African American women in the 1980s and 1990s developed a 
“voice,” a self-defi ned, collective black women’s standpoint about black wom-
anhood (Collins 1990). Moreover, black women used this standpoint to “talk 
back” concerning black women’s representation in dominant discourses 
(hooks 1989). As a result of this struggle, African American women’s ideas 
and experiences have achieved a visibility unthinkable in the past.
But African American women now stand at a diff erent historical moment. 
Black women appear to have a voice, and with this new-found voice comes 
a new series of concerns. For example, we must be attentive to the seductive 
absorption of black women’s voices in classrooms of higher education where 
black women’s texts are still much more welcomed than black women our-
selves. Giving the illusion of change, this strategy of symbolic inclusion masks 
how the everyday institutional policies and arrangements that suppress and 
exclude African Americans as a collectivity remain virtually untouched (Carby 
1992; DuCille 1994). Similarly, capitalist market relations that transformed 
black women’s writing into a hot commodity threaten to strip their works of 
their critical edge. Initially, entering public space via books, movies, and print 
media proved invigorating. But in increasingly competitive global markets 
where anything that sells will be sold regardless of the consequences, black 
women’s “voices” now fl ood the market. Like other commodities exchanged in 
capitalist markets, surplus cheapens value, and the fad of today becomes the 
nostalgic memory of tomorrow.
RT54118_C004.indd   57RT54118_C004.indd   57 8/6/06   2:23:53 PM8/6/06   2:23:53 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
58 • Th e Womanist Reader
While a public voice initially proved dangerous, black women’s coming to 
voice ironically fostered the emergence of a new challenge. Th e new public safe 
space provided by black women’s success allowed longstanding diff  erences 
among black women structured along axes of sexuality, social class, nationality, 
religion, and region to emerge. At this point, whether African American women 
can fashion a singular “voice” about the black woman’s position remains less an 
issue than how black women’s voices collectively construct, affi  rm, and main-
tain a dynamic black women’s self-defi ned standpoint. Given the increasingly 
troublesome political context aff ecting black women as a group (Massey and 
Denton 1993; Squires 1994), such solidarity is essential. Th us, ensuring group 
unity while recognizing the tremendous heterogeneity that operates within the 
boundaries of the term “black women” comprises one fundamental challenge 
now confronting African American women.
Current debates about whether black women’s standpoint should be named 
“womanism” or “black feminism” refl ect this basic challenge of accommodating 
diversity among black women. In her acclaimed volume of essays, In Search of 
Our Mothers’ Gardens,  Alice W alker ( 1983 ) introduced four meanings of the 
term “womanist.” According to Walker’s fi  rst defi nition, a “womanist” was 
“a black feminist or feminist of color” (xi). Th us, on some basic level, Walker 
herself uses the two terms as being virtually interchangeable. Like Walker, 
many African American women see little diff  erence between the two since 
both support a common agenda of black women’s self-defi  nition and self-
determination. As Barbara Omolade points out, “black feminism is sometimes 
referred to as womanism because both are concerned with struggles against 
sexism and racism by black women who are themselves part of the black 
community’s eff orts to achieve equity and liberty” (Omolade 1994, xx).
But despite similar beliefs expressed by African American women who 
defi ne themselves as black feminists, as womanists, as both, or, in some cases, as 
neither, increasing attention seems devoted to delineating the diff erences, if any 
between groups naming themselves as “womanists” or “black feminists.” Th e 
name given to black women’s collective standpoint seems to matter, but why?
In this paper, I explore some of the theoretical implications of using the 
terms “womanism” and “black feminism” to name a black women’s standpoint. 
My purpose is not to classify either the works of black women or African 
American women themselves into one category or the other. Rather, I aim to 
examine how the eff  o r t  t o  c a t e g o r i z e  o b s c u r e s  m o r e  b a s i c  c h a l l e n g e s  t h a t  
confront African American women as a group.
Womanism
Alice Walker’s multiple defi nitions of the term “womanism” in In Search of Our 
Mothers’ Gardens, shed light on the issue of why many African American women 
prefer the term womanism to black feminism. Walker off ers two contradictory 
meanings of “womanism.” On the one hand, Walker clearly sees womanism 
RT54118_C004.indd   58RT54118_C004.indd   58 8/6/06   2:23:54 PM8/6/06   2:23:54 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 59
as  r oo ted  in  b lack  w o m en ’ s  co n cr ete  hist o ry  in  racial  an d  g en der  o p p r ess i o n. 
Taking the term from the Southern black folk expression of mothers to female 
children “you acting womanish,” Walker suggests that black women’s concrete 
history fosters a womanist worldview accessible primarily and perhaps exclu-
sively to black women. “Womanish” girls acted in outrageous, courageous, and 
willful ways, attributes that freed them from the conventions long limiting white 
women. Womanish girls wanted to know more and in greater depth than what 
was considered good for them. Th ey were responsible, in charge, and serious.
Despite her disclaimer that womanists are “traditionally universalist,” a 
philosophy invoked by her metaphor of the garden where room exists for all 
fl owers to bloom equally and diff erently, Walker simultaneously implies that 
black women are somehow superior to white women because of this black folk 
tradition. Defi ning womanish as the opposite of the “frivolous, irresponsible, 
not serious” girlish, Walker constructs black women’s experiences in opposi-
tion to those of white women. Th is meaning of womanism sees it as being dif-
ferent from and superior to feminism, a diff  erence allegedly stemming from 
black and white women’s diff erent histories with American racism. Walker’s 
much cited phrase, “Womanist is to feminist as purple to lavender” (1983, xii) 
clearly seems designed to set up this type of comparison—black women are 
“womanist” while white women remain merely “feminist.”
Th i s  u s a g e  s i t s  s q u a r e l y  i n  b l a c k  n a t i o n a l i s t  t r a d i t i o n s  p r e m i s e d  o n  t h e  
belief that blacks and whites cannot function as equals while inhabiting the 
same territory or participating in the same social institutions (Pinkney 1976; 
Van Deburg 1992). Since black nationalist philosophy posits that white people 
as a group have a vested interest in continuing a system of white supremacy, 
it typically sees little use for black integration or assimilation into a system 
predicated on black subjugation. Black nationalist approaches also support a 
black moral superiority over whites because of black suff ering.
Walker’s use of the term womanism promises black women who both 
operate within these black nationalist assumptions and who simultaneously 
see the need to address “feminist” issues within African American communi-
ties partial reconciliation of these two seemingly incompatible philosophies. 
Womanism off ers a distance from the “enemy,” in this case, whites generally 
and white women in particular, yet still raises the issue of gender. Due to its 
endorsement of racial separatism, this interpretation of womanism off  ers a 
v ocab ulary  f o r  ad dr ess in g  g en der  iss u es  wi thin  Afri can  Am eri can  co mm u -
nities without challenging the racially segregated terrain that characterizes 
American social institutions.
Th is use of womanism sidesteps an issue central to many white feminists, 
namely, fi nding ways to foster interracial cooperation among women. African 
American women embracing black nationalist philosophies typically express 
little interest in working with white women—in fact, white women are defi ned 
as part of the problem. Moreover, womanism appears to provide an avenue to 
RT54118_C004.indd   59RT54118_C004.indd   59 8/6/06   2:23:54 PM8/6/06   2:23:54 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
60 • Th e Womanist Reader
foster stronger relationships between black women and black men, another very 
important issue for African American women regardless of political perspec-
tive. Again, Walker’s defi nition provides guidance where she notes that wom-
anists are “committed to survival and wholeness of entire people, male and 
female” (xi). Many black women view feminism as a movement that at best, is 
exclusively for women and, at worst, dedicated to attacking or eliminating men. 
Sherley Williams takes this view when she notes that in contrast to feminism, 
“womanist inquiry … assumes that it can talk both eff ectively and productively 
about men” (1990, 70). Womanism seemingly supplies a way for black women to 
address gender oppression without attacking black men.
Walker also presents a visionary meaning for womanism. As part of her 
second defi nition, Walker has a black girl pose the question “Mama, why are 
we brown, pink, and yellow, and our cousins are white, beige, and black?” (xi). 
Th e response of “the colored race is just like a fl  ower garden, with every color 
fl ower represented,” both criticizes colorism within African American com-
munities and broadens the notion of humanity to make all people people of 
color. Reading this passage as a metaphor, womanism thus furnishes a vision 
where the women and men of diff erent colors coexist like fl owers in a garden 
yet retain their cultural distinctiveness and integrity.
Th is meaning of womanism seems rooted in another major political tradi-
tion within African American politics, namely, a pluralist version of black 
empowerment (Van Deburg 1992). Pluralism views society as being composed 
of various ethnic and interest groups, all of whom compete for goods and 
services. Equity lies in providing equal opportunities, rights, and respect to 
all groups. By retaining black cultural distinctiveness and integrity, plural-
ism off ers a modifi ed version of racial integration premised not on individual 
assimilation but on group integration. Clearly rejecting what they perceive 
as being the limited vision of feminism projected by North American white 
women, many black women theorists have been attracted to this joining of 
pluralism and racial integration in this interpretation of Walker’s “woman-
ism.” For example, black feminist theologian Katie Geneva Cannon’s (1988) 
work Black Womanist Ethics  invokes this sense of the visionary content of 
womanism. As an ethical system, womanism is always in the making—it is 
not a closed fi  xed system of ideas but one that continually evolves through its 
rejection of all forms of oppression and commitment to social justice.
Walker’s defi nition thus manages to invoke three important yet contradic-
tory philosophies that frame black social and political thought, namely, black 
nationalism via her claims of black women’s moral and epistemological superi-
ority via suff ering under racial and gender oppression, pluralism via the cultural 
integrity provided by the metaphor of the garden, and integration/assimilation 
via her claims that black women are “traditionally universalist” (Van Deburg 
1992). Just as black nationalism and racial integration coexist in uneasy partner-
ship, with pluralism occupying the contested terrain between the two, Walker’s 
RT54118_C004.indd   60RT54118_C004.indd   60 8/6/06   2:23:55 PM8/6/06   2:23:55 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 61
defi nitions of womanism demonstrate comparable contradictions. By both 
grounding womanism in the concrete experiences of African American women 
and generalizing about the potential for realizing a humanist vision of commu-
nity via the experiences of African American women, Walker depicts the poten-
tial for oppressed people to possess a moral vision and standpoint on society 
that grows from their situation of oppression. Th is standpoint also emerges as 
an incipient foundation for a more humanistic, just society. Overall, these uses 
of Walker’s term “womanism” creates conceptual space that refl ects bona fi de 
philosophical diff erences that exist among African American women.
1
One particularly signifi  cant feature of black women’s use of womanism 
concerns the part of Walker’s defi nition that remains neglected. A more trou-
blesome line for those self-defi ning as womanist precedes the oft en cited pas-
sage, “committed to survival and wholeness of entire people, male and female” 
(xi). Just before Walker off ers the admonition that womanists, by defi  nition, 
are committed to wholeness, she states that a womanist is also “a woman who 
loves other women, sexually and/or nonsexually” (xi). Th e relative silence of 
womanists on this dimension of womanism speaks to black women’s continued 
ambivalence in dealing with the links between race, gender and sexuality, in 
this case, the “taboo” sexuality of lesbianism. In her essay “Th  e Truth Th at 
Never Hurts: Black Lesbians in Fiction in the 1980s,” black feminist critic 
Barbara Smith (1990) points out that African American women have yet to 
come to terms with homophobia in African American communities. Smith 
applauds the growth of black women’s fi ction in the 1980s, but also observes 
that within black feminist intellectual production, black lesbians continue to 
be ignored. Despite the fact that some of the most prominent and powerful 
black women thinkers claimed by both womanists and black feminists were 
and are lesbians, this precept oft  en remains unacknowledged in the work of 
African American writers. In the same way that many people read the Bible, 
carefully selecting the parts that agree with their worldview and rejecting the 
rest, selective readings of Walker’s womanism produce comparable results.
Another signifi cant feature of black women’s multiple uses of womanism 
concerns the potential for a slippage between the real and the ideal. To me, 
there is a distinction between describing black women’s historical responses 
to racial and gender oppression as being womanist, and using womanism 
as a visionary term delineating an ethical or ideal vision of humanity for all 
people. Identifying the liberatory potential within black women’s communi-
ties that emerges from concrete, historical experiences remains quite diff erent 
from claiming that black women have already arrived at this ideal, “woman-
ist” endpoint. Refusing to distinguish carefully between these two meanings 
of womanism thus collapses the historically real and the future ideal into one 
privileged position for African American women in the present. Taking this 
position is reminiscent of the response of some black women to the admittedly 
narrow feminist agenda forwarded by white women in the early 1970s. Th ose 
RT54118_C004.indd   61RT54118_C004.indd   61 8/6/06   2:23:55 PM8/6/06   2:23:55 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
62 • Th e Womanist Reader
black women proclaimed that they were already “liberated” while in actuality, 
this was far from the truth.
Black Feminism
African American women who use the term black feminism also attach vary-
ing interpretations to this term. As black feminist theorist and activist Pearl 
Cleage defi nes it, feminism is “the belief that women are full human beings 
capable of participation and leadership in the full range of human activities—
intellectual, political, social, sexual, spiritual and economic” (1993, 28). In its 
broadest sense, feminism constitutes both an ideology and a global political 
movement that confronts sexism, a social relationship in which males as a 
group have authority over females as a group.
Globally, a feminist agenda encompasses several major areas. First and 
foremost, the economic status of women and issues associated with women’s 
global poverty, such as educational opportunities, industrial development, 
environmental racism, employment policies, prostitution, and inheritance 
laws concerning property, constitute a fundamental global women’s issue. 
Political rights for women, such as gaining the vote, rights of assembly, travel-
ing in public, offi  ceholding, the rights of political prisoners, and basic human 
rights violations against women such as rape and torture constitute a second 
area of concern. A third area of global concern consists of marital and family 
issues such as marriage and divorce laws, child custody policies, and domestic 
labor. Women’s health and survival issues, such as reproductive rights, preg-
n an cy ,  s e xu ali ty ,  an d  AI D S  c o n s ti tu t e  an o th e r  ar e a  o f  gl o b al  f e m in i s t  c o n -
cern. Th is broad global feminist agenda fi  nds varying expressions in diff erent 
regions of the world and among diverse populations.
Using the term “black feminism” positions African American women to 
examine how the particular constellation of issues aff  ecting black women in 
the United States are part of issues of women’s emancipation struggles globally 
(Davis 1989; James and Busia 1994). In the context of feminism as a global polit-
ical movement for women’s rights and emancipation, the patterns of feminist 
knowledge and politics that African American women encounter in the United 
States represent but a narrow segment refracted through the dichotomous 
racial politics of white supremacy in the United States. Because the media in the 
United States portrays feminism as a for-whites-only movement, and because 
many white women have accepted this view of American apartheid that leads to 
segregated institutions of all types, including feminist organizations, feminism 
is oft en  vi ew ed  b y  bo th  b lack [ s ]  an d  whi tes  as  th e  cul tural  p r o perty  o f  whi te 
women (Caraway 1991).
* * *
Despite their media erasure, many African American women have long 
struggled against this exclusionary feminism and have long participated in 
RT54118_C004.indd   62RT54118_C004.indd   62 8/6/06   2:23:55 PM8/6/06   2:23:55 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 63
what appear to be for-whites-only feminist activity. In some cases, some black 
women have long directly challenged the racism within feminist organizations 
controlled by white women. Sojourner Truth’s oft  en cited phrase “ain’t I a 
woman” typifi es this longstanding tradition (Joseph 1990). At other times, 
even though black women’s participation in feminist organizations remains 
largely invisible, for example, Pauli Murray’s lack of recognition as a founding 
member of NOW, black women participated in feminist organizations in posi-
tions of leadership. In still other cases, black women combine allegedly diver-
gent political agendas. For example, Pearl Cleage observes that black feminist 
politics and black nationalist politics need not be contradictory. She notes, “I 
don’t think you can be a true Black Nationalist, dedicated to the freedom of 
black people without being a feminist, black people being made up of both men 
and women, aft er all, and feminism being nothing more or less than a belief in 
the political, social and legal equality of women” (1994, 180).
Using the term “black feminism” disrupts the racism inherent in presenting 
feminism as a for-whites-only ideology and political movement. Inserting the 
adjective “black” challenges the assumed whiteness of feminism and disrupts 
the false universal of this term for both white and black women. Since many 
white women think that black women lack feminist consciousness, the term 
“black feminist” both highlights the contradictions underlying the assumed 
whiteness of feminism and serves to remind white women that they comprise 
neither the only nor the normative “feminists.” Th e term “black feminism” also 
makes many African American women uncomfortable because it challenges 
black women to confront their own views on sexism and women’s oppression. 
Because the majority of African American women encounter their own expe-
ri e n c e s  r e p a c ka g e d  in  r a c i s t  s c h o o l  c urri c ul a  an d  m e di a,  e v e n  th o u gh  th e y  
may support the very ideas on which feminism rests, large numbers of African 
American women reject the term “feminism” because of what they perceive 
as its association with whiteness. Many see feminism as operating exclusively 
within the terms white and American and perceive its opposite as being black 
and American. When given these two narrow and false choices, black women 
routinely choose “race” and let the lesser question of “gender” go. In this situ-
ation, those black women who identify with feminism must be recoded as 
being either non-black or less authentically black. Th e term “black feminist” 
also disrupts a longstanding and largely unquestioned reliance on black racial 
solidarity as a deep tap root in black political philosophies, especially black 
nationalist and cultural pluralist frameworks (Dyson 1993). Using family 
rhetoric that views black family, community, race and nation as a series of 
nested boxes, each gaining meaning from the other, certain rules apply to all 
levels of this “family” organization. Just as families have internal naturalized 
hierarchies that give, for example, older siblings authority over younger ones 
or males over females, groups defi  ning themselves as racial-families invoke 
similar rules (Collins forthcoming). Within African American communities, 
RT54118_C004.indd   63RT54118_C004.indd   63 8/6/06   2:23:56 PM8/6/06   2:23:56 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
64 • Th e Womanist Reader
one such rule is that black women will support black men, no matter what, 
an unwritten family rule that was manipulated quite successfully during the 
Clarence Th omas confi  rmation hearings. Even if Anita Hill was harassed by 
Clarence Th omas, many proclaimed in barber shops and beauty parlors, she 
should have kept her mouth shut and not “aired dirty laundry.” Even though 
Th omas recast the life of his own sister through the framework of an unwor-
thy welfare queen, in deference to rules of racial solidarity, black women 
should have kept our collective mouths shut. By counseling black women not 
to remain silent in the face of abuse, whoever does it, black feminism comes 
into confl ict with codes of silence such as these.
Several diffi  culties accompany the use of the term “black feminism.” One 
involves the problem of balancing the genuine concerns of black women 
against continual pressures to absorb and recast such interests within white 
feminist frameworks. For example, ensuring political rights and economic 
d e v e l o p m e n t  v i a  c o l l e c t i v e  a c t i o n  t o  c h a n g e  s o c i a l  i n s t i t u t i o n s  r e m a i n s  a  
strong focal point in the feminism of African American women and women 
of color. Yet the emphasis on themes such as personal identity, understanding 
“diff erence,” deconstructing women’s multiple selves, and the simplistic model 
of the political expressed through the slogan the “personal is political,” that 
currently permeate North American white women’s feminism in the academy 
can work to sap black feminism of its critical edge. Eff  orts of contemporary 
black women thinkers to explicate a long-standing black women’s intellectual 
tradition bearing the label “black feminism” can attract the attention of white 
women armed with a diff erent feminist agenda. Issues raised by black women 
not seen as explicitly “feminist” ones, primarily issues that aff ect only women, 
receive much less sanction. In a sense, the constant drumbeat of having to sup-
port white women in their eff orts to foster an anti-racist feminism that allows 
black women access to the global network of women’s activism diverts black 
women’ s energy away from addressing social issues facing African American 
communities. Because black feminism appears to be so well-received by white 
women, in the context of dichotomous racial politics of the United States, some 
black women quite rightfully suspect its motives.
Another challenge facing black feminism concerns the direct confl  ict 
between black feminism and selected elements of black religious traditions. 
For example, the visibility of white lesbians within North American feminism 
overall comes into direct confl  ict with many black women’s articles of faith 
that homosexuality is a sin. While individual African American women may 
be accepting of gays, lesbians and bisexuals as individuals, especially if such 
individuals are African American, black women as a collectivity have simulta-
neously distanced themselves from social movements perceived as requiring 
acceptance of homosexuality. As one young black woman queried, “why do I 
have to accept lesbianism in order to support black feminism?” Th  e associa-
tion of feminism with lesbianism remains a problematic one for black women. 
RT54118_C004.indd   64RT54118_C004.indd   64 8/6/06   2:23:56 PM8/6/06   2:23:56 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 65
Reducing black lesbians to their sexuality, one that chooses women over men, 
reconfi gures black lesbians as enemies of black men. Th is reduction not only 
constitutes a serious misreading of black lesbianism—black lesbians have 
fathers, brothers, and sons of their own and are embedded in a series of rela-
tionships as complex as their heterosexual brothers and sisters—it simultane-
ously diverts attention away from more important issues (Lorde 1984). Who 
ultimately benefi ts when the presence of black lesbians in any black social 
movement leads to its rejection by African Americans?
Th e theme of lesbianism and its association with feminism in the minds 
of many African Americans also overlaps with another concern of many 
African American women, namely their commitment to African American 
men. Another challenge confronting black feminism concerns its perceived 
separatism—many African Americans defi  ne black feminism as being 
exclusively for black women only and rejecting black men. In explaining her 
preference for “womanism,” Sherley Anne Williams notes, “one of the most 
disturbing aspects of current black feminist criticism (is) its separatism—its 
tendency to see not only a distinct black female culture but to see that culture as 
a separate cultural form having more in common with white female experience 
than with the facticity of Afro-American life” (1990, 70). Th is is a valid criticism 
of black feminism, one that, in my mind, must be addressed if the major ideas of 
black feminism expect to avoid the danger of becoming increasingly separated 
from African American women’s experiences and interests. But it also speaks 
to the larger issue of the continuing diffi  culty of positioning black feminism 
between black nationalism and North American white feminism. In eff  ect, 
black feminism must come to terms with a white feminist agenda incapable of 
seeing its own racism as well as a black nationalist one resistant to grappling 
with its own sexism (White 1990). Finding a place that accommodates these 
seemingly contradictory agendas remains elusive (Christian 1989).
Beyond Naming
African American women’s eff  orts to distinguish between womanism and 
black feminism illustrates how black women’s placement in hierarchical power 
relations fosters diff erent yet related allegiances to a black women’s self-defi ned 
standpoint. While the surface diff  erences distinguishing African American 
women who embrace womanism and black feminism appear to be minimal, 
black women’s varying locations in neighborhoods, schools, and labor mar-
kets generate comparably diverse views on the strategies black women feel 
will ultimately lead to black women’s self-determination. In a sense, while 
womanism’s affi  liation with black nationalism both taps an historic philoso-
phy and a set of social institutions organized around the centrality of racial 
solidarity for black survival, this position can work to isolate womanism from 
global women’s issues. At the same time, while black feminism’s connections 
to existing women’s struggles both domestically and globally fosters a clearer 
RT54118_C004.indd   65RT54118_C004.indd   65 8/6/06   2:23:56 PM8/6/06   2:23:56 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
66 • Th e Womanist Reader
political agenda regarding gender, its putative affi  liation with whiteness fos-
ters its rejection by the very constituency it aims to serve.
No term currently exists that adequately represents the substance of what 
diverse groups of black women alternately call “womanism” and “black femi-
ni s m . ”  P e r h a p s  th e  tim e  h as  c o m e  t o  g o  b e y o n d  n amin g  b y  a p p l yin g  m ain  
ideas contributed by both womanists and black feminists to the over-arching 
issue of analyzing the centrality of gender in shaping a range of relationships 
within African American communities. Such an examination might encom-
pass several dimensions.
First, it is important to keep in mind that the womanist/black feminist 
debate occurs primarily among relatively privileged black women. Wom-
anism and black feminism would both benefi  t by examining the increas-
ing mismatch between what privileged black women, especially those in 
the academy, identify as important themes and what the large numbers of 
African American women who stand outside of higher education might 
deem worthy of attention. While these African American women physically 
resemble one another and may even occupy the same space, their worlds 
remain decidedly diff  erent. One might ask how closely the thematic con-
tent of newly emerging black women’s voices in the academy speak for and 
speak to the masses of African American women still denied literacy. Black 
women academics explore intriguing issues of centers and margins and work 
to deconstruct black female identity while large numbers of black women 
remain trapped in neighborhoods organized around old centers of racial 
apartheid. Talk of centers and margins, even the process of coining to voice 
itself, that does not simultaneously address issues of power leaves masses of 
black women doing the dry cleaning, cooking the fast food, and dusting the 
computer of the sister who has just written the newest theoretical treatise on 
black women.
Second, shift ing the emphasis from black women’s oppression to how insti-
tutionalized racism operates in gender-specifi c ways should provide a clearer 
perspective on how gender oppression works in tandem with racial oppression 
for both black women and men. Th is shift   potentially opens up new political 
choices for African Americans as a group. Just as feminism does not automati-
cally reside in female bodies, sexism does not reside in male ones. It may be 
tim e  t o  s e p ar a t e  p o li ti cal  p hil o s o p hi e s  s u c h  as  b l a c k  n a ti o n ali s m ,  Afr o c e n -
trism, and feminism, from the socially constructed categories of individuals 
created by historical relations of racism and sexism. Black men cannot have 
black women’s experiences but they can support African American women by 
advocating anti-racist and anti-sexist philosophies in their intellectual and 
political work (see, e.g., Marable 1983; hooks and West 1991; and Awkward 
1995). Focusing on gender as a structure of power that works with race should 
provide the much needed space for dialogues among black women, among 
black men, and between black women and men.
RT54118_C004.indd   66RT54118_C004.indd   66 8/6/06   2:23:57 PM8/6/06   2:23:57 PM


--- PAGE 124 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 67
Th is approach promises to benefi  t the black community as a collectivity 
because it models sensitivity to the heterogeneity concerning not only gen-
der, but class, nationality, sexuality, and age currently operating within the 
term “black community.” Th us, the womanism/black feminism debate also 
provides an excellent opportunity to model a process of building community 
via heterogeneity and not sameness. For African American women, breathing 
life into Alice Walker’s seemingly contradictory meanings of “womanist” and 
“black feminist” means engaging in the diffi  cult task of working through the 
diverse ways that black women have been aff ected by interlocking systems of 
oppression. Some black women will have to grapple with how internalized 
oppression has aff ected them because they are poor while others must come to 
terms with the internalized privilege accompanying their middle- and upper-
class status. Other black women must grapple with the internalized privileges 
th a t  a c c ru e  t o  th e m  b e ca us e  th e y  e n g ag e  in  h e t e r o s e xual  b e h a vi o r s  o r  h o w  
American citizenship provides them rights denied to women elsewhere in the 
Diaspora. Working through the interconnected nature of multiple systems of 
oppression and potential ways that such intersectionality might foster resis-
tance becomes signifi cant in moving quite diverse African American women 
forward toward Walker’s visionary term “womanism.” A commitment to 
social justice and participatory democracy provide some fundamental ground 
rules for black women and men concerning how to relate across diff erences.
Finally, despite the promise of this approach, it is important to consider the 
limitations of womanism, black feminism, and all other putatively progressive 
philosophies. Whether labeled “womanism,” “black feminism,” or something 
else, African American women could not possibly possess a superior vision 
of what community would look like, how justice might feel, and the like. Th is 
presupposes that such a perspective is arrived at without confl ict, intellectual 
rigor, and political struggle. While black women’s particular location provides 
a distinctive angle of vision on oppression, this perspective comprises neither 
a privileged nor a complete standpoint. In this sense, grappling with the ideas 
of heterogeneity within black women’s communities and hammering out a 
self-defi ned, black women’s standpoint leads the way for other groups wishing 
to follow a similar path. As for black women, we can lead the way or we can 
follow behind. Th ings will continue to move on regardless of our choice.
Note
 1. For a detailed treatment of Alice Walker’s and other black feminist writers’ connection to 
black nationalist politics, see Dubey (1994).
References
Awkward, Michael. 1995. Negotiating Diff erence: Race, Gender, and the Politics of Positionality . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cannon, Katie G. 1988. Black Womanist Ethics . Atlanta: Scholars Press.
Caraway, Nancie. 1991. Segregated Sisterhood: Racism and the Politics of American Feminism . 
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
RT54118_C004.indd   67RT54118_C004.indd   67 8/6/06   2:23:57 PM8/6/06   2:23:57 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
68 • Th e Womanist Reader
Carby, Hazel. 1992. “Th e Multicultural Wars.” pp. 187–99 in Black Popular Culture,  edited by 
Michele Wallace and Gina Dent. Seattle: Bay Press.
Christian, Barbara. 1989. “But Who Do You Really Belong To—Black Studies or Women’s 
 Studies?” Women’s Studies 17, 1–2: 17–23.
Cleage, Pearl. 1993. Deals with the Devil and Other Reasons to Riot . New York: Ballantine Books.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics 
of Empowerment . New York: Routledge, Chapman and Hall.
——— .   forthcoming. “Intersections of Race, Class, Gender, and Nation: Some Implications for 
Black Family Studies.” Journal of Comparative Family Studies .
Davis, Angela. 1989. Women, Culture, and Politics . New York: Random House.
Dubey, Madhu. 1994. Black Women Novelists and the Nationalist Aesthetic. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.
DuCille, Ann. 1994. “Th  e Occult of True Black Womanhood: Critical Demeanor and Black 
Feminist Studies.” Signs 19(3): 591–629.
Dyson, Michael. 1993. Refl ecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
hooks, bell. 1989. Talking Back: Th inking Feminist, Th inking Black . Boston: South End Press.
——— , and Cornel West. 1991. Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life . Boston: South 
End Press.
James, Stanlie, and Abena Busia, eds. 1994. Th eorizing Black Feminisms . New York: Routledge.
Jordan, June. 1992. Technical Diffi  culties: African-American Notes on the State of the Union . New 
York: Pantheon Books.
Joseph, Gloria I. 1990. “Sojourner Truth: Archetypal Black Feminist.” pp. 35–47 in Wild Women in 
the Whirlwind, edited by Joanne Braxton and Andree Nicola McLaughlin. New Brunswick: 
Rutgers University Press.
Lorde, Audre. 1984. Sister Outsider . Trumansburg, NY: Th e Crossing Press.
Marable, Manning. 1983. “Grounding with My Sisters: Patriarchy and the Exploitation of Black 
Women.” pp. 69–104 in How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America . Boston: South 
End Press.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Mak-
ing of the Underclass . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Omolade, Barbara. 1994. Th e Rising Song of African American Women . New York: Routledge.
Pinkney, Alphonso. 1976. Red, Black, and Green: Black Nationalism in the United States . London: 
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Barbara. 1990. “Th e Truth Th at Never Hurts: Black Lesbians in Fiction in the 1980s.” pp. 
213–245 in Wild Women in the Whirlwind,  edited by Joanne Braxton and Andree Nicola 
McLaughlin. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Squires, Gregory D. 1994. Capital and Communities in Black and White: Th  e Intersections of 
Race, Class, and Uneven Development . Albany: SUNY Press.
Van Deburg, William L. 1992. New Day in Babylon: Th e Black Power Movement and American 
Culture, 1965–1975. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Walker, Alice. 1983. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
White, E. Frances. 1990. “Africa on My Mind: Gender, Counter Discourse and African-Ameri-
can Nationalism.” Journal of Women’s History  2, 1 (Spring): 73–97.
Williams, Sherley Anne. 1990. “Some Implications of Womanist Th  eory.” pp. 68–75 in Reading 
Black, Reading Feminist: A Critical Anthology,  edited by Henry Louis Gates. New York: 
Meridian.
RT54118_C004.indd   68RT54118_C004.indd   68 8/6/06   2:23:57 PM8/6/06   2:23:57 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
69
A Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist Criticism (1998)
MICHAEL AWKW ARD
Many essays by male and female scholars devoted to exploring the subject 
of male critics’ place in feminism generally agree about the uses and useful-
ness of the autobiographical male “I.” Such essays suggest that citing the male 
critical self refl ects a response to ( apparent) self-diff erence, an exploration of 
the disparities between the masculine’s antagonistic position in feminist dis-
course on the one hand and, on the other, the desire of the individual male 
critic to represent his diff  erence with and from the traditional androcentric 
perspectives of his gender and culture. Put another way, in male feminist acts, 
to identify the writing self as biologically male is to emphasize the desire not 
to be ideologically male; it is to explore the process of rejecting the phallocen-
tric perspectives by which men traditionally have justifi  ed the subjugation of 
women.
1
I n  w h a t  s t r i k e s  m e  a s  a  p a r t i c u l a r l y  s u g g e s t i v e  t h e o r e t i c a l  f o r m u l a t i o n ,  
Joseph Boone articulates his sense of the goals of such male feminist autobio-
graphical acts:
In exposing the latent multiplicity and diff  erence in the word “me(n),” 
we can perhaps open up a space within the discourse of feminism where 
a male feminist voice can have something to say beyond impossibilities 
and apologies and unresolved ire. Indeed, if the male feminist can dis-
cover a position from which to speak that neither elides the importance 
of feminism to his work nor ignores the specifi  city of his gender, his 
voice may also fi nd that it no longer exists as an abstraction … but that 
it in fact inhabits a body: its own sexual/ textual body.
2
Because of an awareness that androcentric perspectives are learned, are 
transmitted by means of specifi c sociocultural practices in such eff ective ways 
that they come to appear natural, male feminists such as Boone believe that, 
through an informed investigation of androcentric and feminist ideologies, 
individual men can work to resist the lure of the normatively masculine. 
Th at resistance for the aspiring male feminist requires, he says, exposing “the 
latent multiplicity and diff erence in the word ‘men,’ ” in other words, disrupt-
ing both ideologies’ unproblematized perceptions of monolithic and/or nor-
mative maleness (as villainous, antagonistic “other” for feminism, and, for 
androcentricism, powerful, domineering patriarch). At this early stage of male 
feminism’s development, to speak self-consciously—autobiographically—is to 
explore, implicity or explicitly, why and how the individual male experience 
RT54118_C004.indd   69RT54118_C004.indd   69 8/6/06   2:23:58 PM8/6/06   2:23:58 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
70 • Th e Womanist Reader
(the “me” in men) has diverged from, has created possibilities for a rejection 
of, the androcentric norm.
And while there is not yet agreement as to what constitutes an identifi  -
ably male feminist act of criticism or about the usefulness of such acts for the 
general advancement of the feminist project, at least one possible explanation 
for a male critic’ s self-referential discourse is that it is a response to palpable 
m i s t r u s t — e m a n a t i n g  f r o m  s o m e  f e m al e  p a rt i c i p a n t s  i n  f e m i n i s m  a n d  p e r -
haps from the writing male subject himself—about his motives. A skeptical 
strand of opinion with regard to male feminism is represented by Alice Jar-
dine’s “Men in Feminism: Odor di Uomo or Compagnons de Route?” Having 
determined that the most useful measure of an adequately feminist text is its 
“inscription of struggle —even of pain”—an inscription of a struggle against 
patriarchy which Jardine fi nds absent from most male feminist acts, perhaps 
because “the historical fact that is the oppression of women [is] … one of their 
favorite blind spots”—she admits to some confusion as to the motivations for 
males’ willing participation: “Why … would men want to be in feminism if it’s 
about struggle? What do men want to be in—in pain?”
3
In addition to seeking to cure its blindness where the history of female 
o p p r e s s i o n  i s  c o n c e rn e d,  a  m al e  f e mini s m  m us t  e xp l o r e  th e  m o ti v a ti o n s  f o r  
its participation in what we might call, in keeping with Jardine’s formulations, 
a discourse of (en)gendered pain. If one of the goals of male feminist self-
referentiality is to demonstrate to females that individual males can indeed 
serve as allies in eff orts to undermine androcentric power—and it seems that 
this is invariably the case—the necessary trust cannot be gained by insisting 
that motivation as such does not represent a crucial area that must be carefully 
negotiated. For example, I accept as accurate and, indeed, refl ective of my own 
situation Andrew Ross’s assertion that “there are those [men] for whom the 
facticity of feminism, for the most part, goes without saying … who are young 
enough for feminism to have been a primary component of their intellectual 
formation.”
4 However, i n d iscussions whose appa rent f u nc t ion is a foreg rou nd i ng 
of both obstacles to and possibilities of a male feminism, men’s relation(s) to 
the discourse can never go “without saying”; for the foreseeable future at least, 
this relation needs necessarily to be rigorously and judiciously theorized, and 
grounded explicitly in the experiential realm of the writing male subject.
But no matter how illuminating and exemplary one fi  nds self-referential 
inscriptions of a male feminist critical self, if current views of the impossibility 
of a consistently truthful autobiographical act are correct, there are diffi   cul-
ties implicit in any such attempt to situate or inscribe that male self. Because, 
as recent theorizing on the subject of autobiography has demonstrated, acts 
of discursive self-rendering unavoidably involve the creation of an idealized 
version of a unifi ed or unifi able self, we can be certain only of the fact that the 
autobiographical impulse yields but some of the truths of the male feminist 
critic’s experiences.
5 As is also the case for female participants, a male can 
RT54118_C004.indd   70RT54118_C004.indd   70 8/6/06   2:23:58 PM8/6/06   2:23:58 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 71
never possess or be able to tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth about 
his relationship to feminist discourse and praxis.
But while autobiographical criticism, like the genre of autobiography itself, 
is poised tenuously between the poles of closure and disclosure, between rep-
resentation and re-presentation, between a lived life and an invented one, I 
believe that even in the recoverable half-truths of my life are some of the mate-
rials that have shaped my perceptions, my beliefs, the self or selves that I bring 
to the interpretive act. In these half-truths is the source of my desire both to 
inscribe a black male feminism and to inscribe myself as a self-consciously 
racialized version of what Jardine considers a potentially oxymoronic entity—
“male feminist”—whose literal, it not ideological or performative “black-
ness” is indisputable, and whose adequacy vis-à-vis feminism others must 
determine. By examining discussions of the phenomenon of the male femi-
nist—that is to say, by reading male and female explorations of men’s places in 
feminist criticism—and exploring responses of others to my own professional 
and personal relationships to feminism, I will identify autobiographically and 
textually grounded sources for my belief that while gendered diff erence might 
be said to complicate the prospect of a non-phallocentric black male femi-
nism, it does not render such a project impossible.
At the outset, I acknowledge that mine is a necessary participation with 
regard to black feminist criticism in the half-invention, half-perception which, 
in  H o ust o n  Bak e r ’ s  co m pe llin g  f o rm ula ti o n ,  r ep r ese n ts  ev e ry  sch o lar ’ s  r e la -
tionship to cultural criticism.
6 S u c h  an  a c kn o w l e d gm e n t  i s  n o t  in t e n d e d  t o  
indicate that my male relationship to feminism is that of an illegitimate child, 
as it were. Rather, it is meant to suggest, like Elizabeth Weed’s insistence on 
“the impossibility” of both men’s and women’s “relationship to feminism,” my 
belief that while feminism represents a complex, sometimes self-contradictory 
“utopian vision” which no one can fully possess, a biological male can “develop 
political, theoretical [and, more generally, interpretive] strategies” which, 
though at most perhaps half-true to all that feminist ideologies are, neverthe-
less can assist in a movement toward actualizing the goals of feminism.
7
I have been forced to think in especially serious ways about my own rela-
tionship to feminist criticism since I completed the fi  rst draft s of Inspiring 
Infl uences, my study of Afro-American women novelists. 8 I have questioned 
neither the explanatory power of feminism nor the essential importance of 
developing models adequate to the analysis of black female-authored texts, 
as my book—in harmony, I believe, with the black feminist project concerned 
with recovering and uncovering an Afro-American female literary tradi-
tion—attempts to provide on a limited scale. Instead, I have been confronted 
with suspicion about my gendered suitability for the task of explicating Afro-
American women’s texts, suspicion which has been manifested in the form 
of both specifi c responses to my project and general inquiries within literary 
studies into the phenomenon of the male feminist.
RT54118_C004.indd   71RT54118_C004.indd   71 8/6/06   2:23:58 PM8/6/06   2:23:58 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
72 • Th e Womanist Reader
For example, a white female reader of the manuscript asserted—with 
undisguised surprise—that my work was “so feminist” and asked how I’d 
managed to off  er such ideologically informed readings. Another scholar, 
a black feminist literary critic, recorded with no discernible hesitation her 
unease with my “male readings” of the texts of Zora Neale Hurston, Toni 
Morrison, Gloria Naylor, and Alice Walker. I wondered about the possibility 
of my being simultaneously “so feminist” and not so feminist (i.e., so “male”), 
about the meanings of these terms both for these scholars and for the larger 
interpretive communities in which they participate. Consequently, in what 
was perhaps initially an act of psychic self-protection, I began to formulate 
questions for which I still have found no consistently satisfactory answers. 
Were the diff erences in the readers’ perceptions of the ideological adequacy of 
my study a function of their own views of feminist criticism, a product, in other 
words, of the diff erences not simply within me but within feminism itself ? And 
if the diff erences within feminism are so signifi  cant, could I possibly satisfy 
everybody with “legitimate” interests in the texts of Hurston et al. by means 
of my own appropriated versions of black feminist discourse, my unavoidably 
half-true myth of what that discourse is, means, and does? Should my myth 
of feminism and its mobilization in critical texts be considered naturally less 
analy tically compelling than that of a female scholar simply as a function of my 
biological maleness? And how could what I took to be a useful self-refl exivity 
avoid becoming a debilitating inquiry into a process that has come to seem 
for me, if not “natural,” as Cary Nelson views his relationship to feminism, at 
least necessary?
9
Co m pe ll ed,  an d,  t o  be  frank,  distur bed  b y  s u ch  q u esti o ns,  I  sear ch ed  f o r  
answers in others’ words, others’ work. I purchased a copy of Men in Feminism, 
a collection which examines the possibility of men’s participation as “com-
rades” (to use Toni Morrison’s term) in feminist criticism and theory. Grati-
fi ed by the appearance of such a volume, I became dismayed upon reading the 
editors’ introductory remarks, which noted their diffi  culty in “locating intel-
lectuals, who, having shown interest in the question, would off er, for instance, 
a gay or a black perspective on the problem.”
10 While a self-consciously “gay 
… perspective” does fi nd its way into the collection, the insights of nonwhite 
males and females are conspicuously absent.11
Even more troubling for me than the absence of black voices or, for that 
matter, of general inquiries into the eff ects of racial, cultural, and class diff  er-
ences on males’ relationship to feminism, was the sense shared by many con-
tributors of insurmountable obstacles to male feminism. In fact, the fi rst essay, 
Stephen Heath’s “Male Feminism,” begins by insisting that “men’s relation to 
feminism is an impossible one.”
12 For me, Heath’s formulations are insightful 
and provocative, if not always persuasive, as when he claims: “Th is is, I believe, 
the most any man can do today: to learn and so to try to write and talk or 
act in response to feminism, and so to try not in any way to be anti-feminist, 
RT54118_C004.indd   72RT54118_C004.indd   72 8/6/06   2:23:59 PM8/6/06   2:23:59 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 73
supportive of the old oppressive structures. Any more, any notion of writing 
a feminist book or being a feminist, is a myth, a male imaginary with the real-
ity of appropriation and domination right behind.”
13 Is male participation in 
feminism restricted to being either appropriative and domineering or not anti-
feminist? Must we necessarily agree with Heath and others who claim that men 
cannot be feminists? To put the matter diff erently, is gender really an adequate 
determinant of “class” position?
Despite the poststructuralist tenor of Heath’s work generally and of many of 
his perspectives here, his is an easily problematized essentialist claim—that, in 
eff ect, biology determines destiny and, therefore, one’s relationship to feminist 
ideology, that womanhood allows one to become feminist at the same time that 
manhood necessarily denies that status to men. And while Heath embraces 
its notions of history as a narrative of male “appropriation and domination” 
of gendered others, he appears resistant at this point in his discourse to evi-
dence of a powerful feminist institutional present and presence. I believe that 
we must acknowledge that feminism represents, at least in areas of the Ameri-
can academy, an incomparably productive, infl uential, and resilient ideology 
and institution that men, no matter how cunning, duplicitous, or culturally 
powerful, will neither control nor overthrow in the foreseeable future, one 
whose perspectives have proved and might continue to prove convincing even 
to biological males. In surveying the potential implications or the participation 
of biological men in feminism, we must therefore be honest about feminism’s 
current persuasiveness and indomitability, about its clarifying, transformative 
potential, and about the fact that the corruptive possibility of both the purpose-
fully treacherous and the only half-convinced male is, for today at least, slight 
indeed. Surely it is neither naive, presumptuous, nor premature to suggest that 
feminism as ideology and reading strategy has assumed a position of exegetical 
and institutional strength capable of withstanding even the most energetically 
masculinist acts of subversion.
Below I want to focus specifi cally on the question of a black male feminism. 
Rather than seeing it as an impossibility or as a subtle new manifestation of and 
attempt at androcentric domination, I want to show that certain instances of 
afrocentric feminism provide Afro-American men with an invaluable means 
of rewriting—of re-vis(ion)ing—our selves, our history and literary tradition, 
and our future.
Few would deny that black feminist literary criticism is an oppositional 
discourse constituted in large part as a response against black male partici-
pation in the subjugation of Afro-American women. From Barbara Smith’s 
castigation of black male critics for their “virulently sexist … treatment” of 
black women writers and her insistence that they are “hampered by an inability 
to com p rehend Black w omen ’ s experience in sexual as w ell as racial terms” 
to Michele Wallace’s characterization of the “black male Afro-Americanists 
who make pivotal use of Hurston’s work” as “a gang,” Afro-American men are 
RT54118_C004.indd   73RT54118_C004.indd   73 8/6/06   2:23:59 PM8/6/06   2:23:59 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
74 • Th e Womanist Reader
generally perceived as non-allied others of black feminist discourse. 14 And, as 
is evident in Wallace’s fi guration of male Hurston scholars as intraracial street 
warriors, they are viewed at times as always already damned and unredeem-
able, even when they appear to take black women’s writing seriously. We—
I—must accept the fact that black male investigations informed by feminist 
principles, including this one, may never be good enough or ideologically correct 
enough for some black women who are feminists.
Th is sense of an unredeemable black male critic/reader is in stark contrast 
to perspectives off ered in such texts as Sherley Anne Williams’s “Some Impli-
cations of Womanist Th eory.” In her essay, she embraces Alice Walker’s term 
“womanist”—which, according to Williams, connotes a commitment “to the 
survival and wholeness of an entire people, female and male, as well as a valo-
rization of women’s works in all their varieties and multitudes”—because she 
considers the black feminist project to be separatist in “its tendency to see not 
only a distinct black female culture but to see that culture as a separate cultural 
form” from “the facticity of Afro-American life.”
15
I believe that a black male feminism, whatever its connections to critical 
theory or its specifi c areas of concern, can profi t immensely from what female 
feminists have to say about male participation. For example, Valerie Smith’s 
suggestion in “Gender and Afro-Americanist Literary Th eory and Criticism” 
that “Black male critics and theorists might explore the nature of the contra-
dictions that arise when they undertake black feminist projects”
16 seems to 
me quite useful, as does Alice Jardine’s advice to male feminists. Speaking for 
white female feminists, Jardine addresses white males who consider them-
selves to be feminists: “We do not want you to mimic us, to become the same 
as us; we don’t want your pathos or your guilt: and we don’t even want your 
admiration (even if it’s nice to get it once in a while). What we want, I would 
even say what we need, is your work. We need you to get down to serious 
work. And like all serious work, that involves struggle and pain.”
17 Th e wom-
anist theoretical project that has been adopted by Williams, Smith, and others 
provides aspiring Afro-American male feminists with a useful model for the 
type of self-exploration that Smith and Jardine advocate. What Williams terms 
“womanist theory” is especially suggestive for Afro-American men because, 
while it calls for feminist discussions of black women’s texts and for critiques of 
black androcentricism, womanism foregrounds a general black psychic health 
as a primary objective. Williams argues that “what is needed is a thorough-
going examination of male images in the works of black male writers”; her 
womanism, then, aims at “ending the separatist tendency in Afro-American 
criticism,” at leading black femini sm away from “the same hole Th e Brother 
has dug for himself—narcissism, isolation, inarticulation, obscurity,” at the 
creation and/or continuation of black “community and dialogue.”
18
If a black man is to become a useful contributor to black feminism, he 
must, as Boone argues, “discover a position from which to speak that neither 
RT54118_C004.indd   74RT54118_C004.indd   74 8/6/06   2:23:59 PM8/6/06   2:23:59 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 75
elides the importance of feminism to his work nor ignores the specifi city of his 
gender.” However multiply split we perceive the subject to be, however deeply 
felt our sense of “maleness” and “femaleness” as social constructions, however 
heightened our sense of the historical consequences and current dangers of 
black androcentricism, a black male feminism cannot contribute to the con-
tinuation and expansion of the black feminist project by being so identifi  ed 
against or out of touch with itself as to fail to be both self-refl ective and at least 
minimally self-interested. A black male feminist self-refl  ectivity of the type I 
have in mind necessarily would include examination of both the benefi  ts and 
the dangers of a situatedness in feminist discourse. Th e self-interestedness of 
a black male feminist would be manifested in part by his concern with explor-
ing a man’s place. Clearly if convincing mimicry of female-authored concerns 
and interpretive strategies—speaking like a female feminist—is not in and of 
itself an appropriate goal for aspiring male participants, then a male feminism 
necessarily must explore males’ various situations in the contexts and texts of 
history and the present.
Perhaps the most diffi  cult task for a black male feminist is striking a work-
able balance between male self-inquiry/interest and an adequately feminist 
critique of patriarchy. T o this point, especially in response to the commercial 
and critical success of contemporary Afro-American women’s literature, scores 
of black men have proved unsuccessful in this regard. As black feminist critics 
such as Valerie Smith and Deborah McDowell have argued, the contemporary 
moment of black feminist literature has been greeted by many Afro-American 
males with hostility, self-interested misrepresentation, and a lack of honest 
intellectual introspection. In “Reading; Family Matters,” a useful discussion 
for black male feminism primarily as an exploration of what such a discourse 
ought not do and be, McDowell speaks of widely circulated androcentric male 
analyses of Afro-American feminist texts by writers such as Toni Morrison and 
Alice Walker:
Critics leading the debate [about the representation of black men in 
black women’s texts] have lumped all black women writers together and 
have focused on one tiny aspect of their immensely complex and diverse 
project—the image of black men—despite the fact that, if we can claim 
a center for these texts, it is located in the complexities of black female 
subjectivity and experience. In other words, though black women writers 
have made black women the subjects of their own family stories, these 
male readers/critics are attempting to usurp that place for themselves 
and place it at the center of critical inquiry.
19
Although I do not believe that “the image of black men” is as microscopic 
an element in Afro-American women’s texts as McDowell claims, I agree 
with her about the reprehensible nature of unabashed androcentricism found 
in formulations she cites by such writers as Robert Staples, Mel Watkins, and 
RT54118_C004.indd   75RT54118_C004.indd   75 8/6/06   2:24:00 PM8/6/06   2:24:00 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
76 • Th e Womanist Reader
Darryl Pinckney. Nevertheless, in relation to the potential development of 
a black male feminism, I am troubled by what appears to be a surprisingly 
exp li ci t  determina ti o n  t o  p r o tect  turf.  In  th eir  un willin gn ess  t o  gran t  tha t  
exploration of how Afro-American males are delineated by contemporary 
black female novelists is a legitimate concern that might produce illumi-
n a tin g  an al y s e s ,  M c D o w e ll’ s  f o rm ul a ti o n s  e c h o  in  un f o rtun a t e  w a y s  th o s e  
of antifeminist male critics, white and black, who consider feminism to be 
an unredeemably myopic and unyielding interpretive strategy incapable of 
off ering subtle readings of canonical, largely male-authored texts. Despite 
the circulation of reprehensibly masculinist responses to Afro-American 
women’s literature, black feminist literary critics do not best serve the dis-
courses that concern them by setting into motion homeostatic maneuvers 
intended to devalue all forms of inquiry except for those they hold to be 
most valuable (in this particular case, a female-authored scholarship that 
emphasizes Afro-American women’s writings of black female subjectivity). If 
the Afro-American women’s literary project is indeed “immensely complex and 
diverse,” as McDowell claims, bringing to bear other angles of vision, including 
antipatriarchal male ones, can assist in analyzing aspects of that complexity.
While the views of Staples and others are clearly problematic, those problems 
do not arise specifi cally from their eff orts to place males “at the center of criti-
cal inquiry” any more than feminism is implicitly fl awed because it insists, in 
some of its manifestations, on a gynocritical foregrounding of representations 
of women. Rather, these problems appear to result from the fact that the partic-
ular readers who produce these perspectives do not seem suffi  ciently to be, in 
Toril Moi’s titular phrase, “men against patriarchy.”
20 Certainly, in an age when 
both gender studies and Afro-American women’s literature have achieved a 
degree of legitimacy within the academy and outside of it, it is unreasonable for 
black women either to demand that black men not be concerned with the ways 
in which they are depicted by Afro-American women writers, or to see that 
concern as intrinsically troubling in feminist terms. If female feminist calls for 
a non-mimicking male feminism are indeed persuasive, then black men will 
have very little of substance to say about contemporary Afro-American women’s 
literature, especially if we are also to consider as transgressive any attention to 
fi gurations of black manhood. It seems to me that the most black females in 
feminism can insist upon in this regard is that examinations which focus on 
male characters treat the complexity of contemporary Afro-American women 
novelists’ delineations of black manhood with an antipatriarchal seriousness 
which the essays McDowell cites clearly lack.
From my perspective, what is potentially most valuable about the devel-
opment of black male feminism is not its capacity to reproduce black femi-
nism as practiced by black females who focus primarily on “the complexities 
of black female subjectivity and experience.”
21 Rather, its potential value lies 
in the possibility that, in being antipatriarchal and as self-inquiring about 
RT54118_C004.indd   76RT54118_C004.indd   76 8/6/06   2:24:00 PM8/6/06   2:24:00 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 77
their relationship(s) to feminism as Afro-American women have been, black 
men can expand the range and utilization of feminist inquiry and explore 
other fruitful applications for feminist perspectives, including such topics as 
obstacles to a black male feminist project itself and new fi gurations of “family 
matters” and black male sexuality.
For the purpose of theorizing about a black male feminism, perhaps the 
most provocative, enlightening, and inviting moment in feminist or in “wom-
anist” scholarship occurs in Hortense Spillers’s “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: 
An American Grammar Book.” Indeed, Spillers’s essay represents a fruitful 
starting point for new, potentially nonpatriarchal fi  gurations of family and 
of black males’ relationship to the female. Toward the end of this illuminat-
ing theoretical text, which concerns itself with slavery’s debilitating eff  ects 
on the Afro-American family’s constitution, Spillers envisions black male 
identity formation as a process whose movement toward successful resolution 
seems to require a serious engagement of black feminist principles and per-
spectives. Spillers asserts that as a result of those specifi  c familial patterns 
which functioned during American slavery and beyond and “removed the 
African-American male not so much from sight as from mimetic vi ew as a 
partner in the prevailing social fi ction of the Father’s name, the Father’s law,” 
the African-American male “has been touched … by the mother, handed by 
h e r  in  w a y s  th a t  h e  cann o t  es ca p e. ”  Be ca us e  o f  s e p ara ti o n  fr o m  tra di ti o n al  
Am e ri can  p a t e rn al  n am e  an d  la w ,  “th e  b la ck  Am e ri can  m al e  e m bodi es  th e  
only American community of males which has had the specifi  c occasion to 
learn who the female is within itself. … It is the heritage of the mother that the 
African-American male must regain as an aspect of his own personhood—the 
power of ‘yes’ to the ‘female’ within.”
22
Rather than seeing the “female” strictly as other for the Afro-American 
male, Spillers’s afrocentric revisioning of psychoanalytic theory insists that 
we consider it an important aspect of the repressed in the black male self.
23 
Employing Spillers’s analyses as a starting point, we might regard Afro-American 
males’ potential “in-ness” vis-à-vis feminism not, as Paul Smith insists in Men 
in Feminism, as a representation of male heterosexual desires to penetrate and 
violate female spaces
24 but rather as an acknowledgment of what Spillers con-
siders the distinctive nature of the Afro-American male’s connection to the 
“female.” If Afro-American males are ever to have anything to say about or to 
black feminism beyond the types of refl  ex-action devaluations and diatribes 
about divisiveness that critics such as McDowell and Valerie Smith rightly 
decry, the investigative process of which womanist acts by Spillers and Williams 
speak is indispensable. Such a process, if pursued in an intellectually rigorous 
manner, off ers a means by which black men can participate usefully in and 
contribute productively to the black feminist project.
Black womanism demands neither the erasure of the black gendered other’s 
subjectivity, as have male movements to regain a putatively lost Afro-American 
RT54118_C004.indd   77RT54118_C004.indd   77 8/6/06   2:24:00 PM8/6/06   2:24:00 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
78 • Th e Womanist Reader
manhood, nor the relegation of males to prone, domestic, or other limiting 
positions. What it does require, if it is indeed to become an ideology with wide-
spread cultural impact, is a recognition on the part of both black females and 
males of the nature of the gendered inequities that have marked our past and 
present, and a resolute commitment to work for change. In that sense, black 
feminist criticism has not only created a space for an informed Afro-American 
male participation, but it heartily welcomes—in fact, insists upon—the joint 
participation of black males and females as comrades, to invoke, with a diff er-
ence, this paper’s epigraphic reference to Sula.
Reading “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe” was of special importance to me 
in part because it helped me to clarify and articulate my belief that my rela-
tionship to feminism need not mark me necessarily as a debilitatingly split 
subject. Th e source of that relationship can only be traced autobiographically, 
if at all. Having been raised by a mother who, like too many women of too 
many generations, was the victim of male physical and psychological brutal-
ity—a brutality which, according to my mother, resulted in large part from 
my father’s frustrations about his inability to partake in what Spillers calls 
masculinity’s “prevailing social fi ction”—my earliest stories, my familial nar-
ratives, as it were, fi gured “maleness” in quite troubling terms. My mother told 
me horrifi c stories, one of which I was, in a sense, immediately involved in: my 
father—who left  us before I was one year old and whom I never knew—kicked 
her in the stomach when my fetal presence swelled her body, because he 
believed she’d been unfaithful to him and that I was only “may be” his baby.
As a youth, I pondered this and other such stories oft  en and deeply, in 
part because of the pain I knew these incidents caused my mother, in part 
because, as someone without a consistent male familial role model, I actively 
sought a way to achieve a gendered self-defi nition. As one for whom maleness 
as manifested in the surrounding inner city culture seemed to be represented 
only by violence, familial abandonment, and the certainty of imprisonment, 
I found that I was able to defi  ne myself with regard to my gender primarily 
in oppositional ways. I had internalized the cautionary intent of my mother’s 
narratives, which also served as her dearest wish for me: that I not grow up to 
be like my father, that I not adopt the defi nitions of “maleness” represented by 
his example and in the culture generally. Because the scars of male brutality 
were visibly etched—literally marked, as it were—on my mother’s fl esh and on 
her psyche, “maleness,” as fi gured both in her stories and in my environment, 
seemed to me not to be a viable mimetic option. I grew up, then, not always 
sure of what or who I was with respect to prevailing social defi  nitions of gen-
der but generally quite painfully aware of what I could not become.
In order to begin to understand who my mother was, perhaps also who my 
father was, what “maleness” was and what extra-biological relationship I could 
hope to have to it, I needed answers that my mother was unable [to] provide. 
I found little of value in the black masculinist discourse of the time, which 
RT54118_C004.indd   78RT54118_C004.indd   78 8/6/06   2:24:01 PM8/6/06   2:24:01 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 79
spoke endlessly of the dehumanization and castration of the Afro-American 
male by white men and black women—our central social narrative for too 
long—for this rhetoric seemed simplistic and unself-consciously concerned 
with justifying domestic violence and other forms of black male brutality.
Afro-American women’s literature, to which I was introduced along with 
black feminism in 1977 as a sophomore at Brandeis University, helped me 
move toward a comprehension of the world, of aspects of my mother’s life, and 
of what a man against patriarchy could be and do. Th ese discourses provided 
me with answers, nowhere else available, to what had been largely unresolv-
able mysteries. I work within the paradigm of black feminist literary criticism 
because it explains elements of the world about which I care most deeply. I 
write and read what and as I do because I am incapable of escaping the mean-
ings of my mother’s narratives for my own life, because the pain and, in the fact 
of their enunciation to the next generation, the sense of hope for better days 
that characterizes these familial texts are illuminatingly explored in many 
narratives by black women. Afro-American women’s literature has given me 
parts of myself that—incapable of a (biological) “Fatherly reprieve”—I would 
not otherwise have had.
I have decided that it is ultimately irrelevant whether these autobiographical 
facts, which, of course, are not, and can never be, the whole story, are deemed 
by others suffi  cient to permit me to call myself “feminist.” Like Toril Moi, I have 
come to believe that “the important thing for men is not to spend their time 
worrying about defi nitions and essences (‘am I really a feminist?’), but to take 
up a recognizable anti-patriarchal position.”
25 What is most important to me 
is that my work contribute, in however small a way, to the project whose goal 
is the dismantling of the phallocentric rule by which black females and, I am 
sure, countless other Afro-American sons have been injuriously “touched.”
My indebtedness to Spillers’s and other womanist perspectives is, then, 
great indeed, as is my sense of their potential as illuminating moments for 
a newborn—or not-yet-born—black male feminist discourse. But to utilize 
these perspectives requires that we be more inquiring than Spillers is in her 
formulations, not in envisioning liberating possibilities of an acknowledgment 
of the “female” within the black community and the male subject, but in not-
ing potential dangers inherent in such an attempted adoption by historically 
brutalized Afro-American men whose relationship to a repressed “female” is 
not painstakingly (re)defi ned.
Clearly, more thinking is necessary not only about what the female within 
is but about what it can be said to represent for black males, as well as serious 
analysis of useful means and methods of interacting with a repressed female 
interiority and subject. Spillers’s theorizing does not perform this task, in 
part because it has other , more compelling interests and emphases—among 
which is the righting/(re)writing of defi  nitions of “woman” so that they will 
refl ect Afro-American women’s particular, historically conditioned “female 
RT54118_C004.indd   79RT54118_C004.indd   79 8/6/06   2:24:01 PM8/6/06   2:24:01 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
80 • Th e Womanist Reader
social subject” status—but a black male feminism must be especially focused 
on exploring such issues if it is to mobilize Spillers’ s suggestive remarks as a 
means of developing a fuller understanding of the complex formulations of 
black manhood found in many texts and contexts, including Afro-American 
women’s narratives.
I want to build briefl y on Spillers’s provocative theorizing about the Afro-
American male’s maturational process and situation on American shores. To 
this end, I will look at an illuminating moment in Toni Morrison’s Sula, a text 
that is, to my mind, not only an unparalleled Afro-American woman’s writ-
ing of the complexities of black female subjectivity and experience but also 
of black males’ relationship to the female within as a consequence of their 
limited access to “the prevailing social fi  ction” of masculinity . In this novel, 
the diffi  culty of negotiating the spaces between black male lack and black 
female presence is plainly manifested in such fi gures as the undiff erentiatable 
deweys; BoyBoy, whose name, in contrast to most of the authorial designa-
tions in Sula, speaks unambiguously for him; and Jude, whose diffi   culty in 
assuming the mantle of male provider leads him to view his union with Nel as 
that which “would make one jude.”
26
Th e response of Plum, the most tragic of Sula’s unsuccessful negotiators of 
the so-called white man’s world, vividly represents for me some of the contem-
porary dangers of black male “in-ness” vis-à-vis the “female.” Despite a child-
hood which included “fl oat[ing] in a constant swaddle of love and aff  ection” 
and his mother’s intention to follow the Father’s law by bequeathing “every-
thing” to him (38), Plum appears incapable of embracing hegemonic notions 
of masculinity. Instead, he returns from World War I spiritually fractured but, 
unlike a similarly devastated Shadrack, lacking the imaginative wherewithal 
to begin to theorize or ritualize a new relationship to his world. He turns to 
drugs as a method of anesthetizing himself from the horrors of his devastation 
and, in his mother’s view, seeks to compel her resumption of familiar/familial 
patterns of caretaking. In the following passage, Eva explains to Hannah her 
perception of Plum’s desires, as well as the motivation for her participation in 
what amounts to an act of infanticide:
When he came back from that war he wanted to git back in. Aft er all that 
carrying’ on, just gettin’ him out and keepin’ him alive, he wanted to 
crawl back in my womb and well … I ain’t got the room no more even if 
he could do it. Th ere wasn’t space for him in my womb. And he was craw-
lin’ back. Being helpless and thinking baby thoughts and dreaming baby 
dreams and messing up his pants again and smiling all the time. I had 
room enough in my heart, but not in my womb, got no more. I birthed 
him once. I couldn’t do it again. He was growed, a big old thing God-
havemercy, I couldn’t birth him twice. … A big man can’t be a baby all 
wrapped up inside his mamma no more; he suff ocate. I done everything 
RT54118_C004.indd   80RT54118_C004.indd   80 8/6/06   2:24:01 PM8/6/06   2:24:01 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 81
I could to make him leave me and go on and live and be a man but he 
wouldn’t and I had to keep him out so I just thought of a way he could die 
like a man not all scrunched up inside my womb, but like a man. (62)
27
What is signifi cant about this passage for an analysis of the possibilities of 
a non-oppressive black male relationship to feminism—to female experience 
characterized by a refusal to be subjugated to androcentric desires—is its sug-
gestiveness for our understanding of the obstacles to a revised male view of 
the repressed “female,” obstacles which result in large part from black males’ 
r e l a ti v e  s o c i al  p o w e r l e s s n e s s .  I f  b l a c k  f e mini s m  i s  p e r s u as i v e  in  i ts  an al y s i s  
of the limitations of Afro-American masculinist ideology, emphasizing as it 
does achievement of black manhood at the expense of black female subjectiv-
ity, and if we can best describe an overwhelming number of Africa’s American 
male descendants as males-in-crisis, the question a black male feminism must 
ask itself is, On what basis, according to what ideological perspective, can an 
Afro-American heterosexual male ground his notions of the female? Beyond 
its heterosexual dimension, can the “female” truly come to represent for a 
traditional black male-in-crisis more than a protective maternal womb from 
which he seeks to be “birthed” again? Can it serve as more than a site on which 
to fi nd relief from or locate frustrations caused by an inability to achieve puta-
tively normative American male socioeconomic status? If embracing norma-
tive masculinity requires an escape from the protection and life-sustaining 
aspects symbolized by maternal umbilical cords and apron strings and an 
achievement of an economic situation wherein the male provides domestic 
space and material sustenance for his dependents (including “his woman”), 
black manhood generally is, like Plum, in desperate trouble. And if, as has 
oft en been the case, a black female can be seen by an Afro-American male-in-
crisis only if she has been emptied of subjectivity and selfh ood, if she becomes 
vi s i b l e  f o r  th e  m al e  o nl y  w h e n  s h e  i s  s u b s um e d  b y  m al e  d es ir e ( s ) ,  th e n  th e  
types of refi guration and redefi nition of black male subjectivity and engage-
ment with the “female” central to Spillers’s formulations are highly unlikely.
Th is question of seeing and not seeing, of the male gaze’s erasure and re-
creation of the female, is crucial to Sula’s general thematics. It seems to me that 
in all of her novels Morrison’s fi guration of black female subjectivity is largely 
incomprehensible without some serious attention both to her representation 
of black manhood and to her exploration of the relationships between socially 
constructed gendered (and racial) positions. To return explicitly to the case of 
Eva: What Eva fears, what appears to be a self-interested motivation for her 
killing of her intended male heir, is that Plum’s pitiful, infantile state has the 
potential to reduce her to a static female function of self -sacrifi  cing mother, 
which, according to Bottom legend, had already provoked her decision to lose a 
leg in order to collect insurance money with which to provide for her children. 
H a vi n g  p e r s o n all y  l o s t  s o  m u c h  al r e a d y ,  E v a  c h o o s e s ,  i n s t e a d  o f  s a c r i fi cing 
RT54118_C004.indd   81RT54118_C004.indd   81 8/6/06   2:24:02 PM8/6/06   2:24:02 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
82 • Th e Womanist Reader
other essential parts of her self, to take the life of her self-described male heir. 
And if Plum dies “like a man” in Eva’s estimation, his achievement of man-
hood has nothing to do with an assumption of traditional masculine traits, 
nothing to do with strength, courage, and a refusal to cry in the face of death. 
Instead, that achievement results from Eva’ s creation of conditions that have 
become essential components of her defi nition of manhood: death forces him 
to “leave” her and to “keep … out” of her womb. It would appear that manhood 
is defi ned here not as presence as typically represented in Western thought, 
but—by and for Eva at least—as liberating (domestic and uterine) absence.
One of the intentions of this chapter is to suggest that feminism represents 
a fruitful and potentially not oppressive means of reconceptualizing, of fi  gu-
ratively birthing twice, the black male subject. But, as a close reading of the 
aforementioned passage from Sula suggests, interactions between men and 
women motivated by male self-interest such as necessarily characterizes an 
aspect of male participation in feminism are fraught with possible dangers for 
the biological/ideological female body of an enactment of or a capitulation to 
hegemonic male power. Indeed, if it is the case that, as Spillers has argued in 
another context, “the woman who stays in man’s company keeps alive the pos-
sibility of having, one day, an unwanted guest, or the guest, deciding to ‘hump 
the hostess,’ whose intentions turn homicidal, then male proximity to feminism 
generally creates the threat of a specifi cally masculinist violation.”
28 If, as I noted 
earlier, the dangers of a hegemonic, heterosexual Euro-American male’s “in-
ness” vis-à-vis feminism include (sexualized) penetration and domination, then 
those associated with a heterosexual black male’s interactions with the ideologi-
cal female body are at least doubled, and potentially involve an envisioning of 
the black female body as self-sacrifi cingly maternal or self-sacrifi cingly sexual. 
Because of a general lack of access to the full force of hegemonic male power, 
Afro-American men could see in increasingly infl uential black female texts not 
only serious challenges to black male fi ctions of the self but also an appropriate 
location for masculine desires for control of the types of valuable resources that 
the discourses of black womanhood currently represent.
But a rigorous, conscientious black male feminism need not give in to tra-
ditional patriarchal desires for control and erasure of the female. To be of any 
sustained value to the feminist project, a discourse must provide illuminating 
and persuasive readings of gender as it is constituted for blacks in America 
and sophisticated, informed, contentious critiques of phallocentric practices 
in an eff ort to redefi ne our notions of black male and female textuality and 
subjectivity. And in its diff erences from black feminist texts that are produced 
by individual Afro-American women, a black male feminism must be both 
rigorous in engaging these texts and self-refl  e c t i v e  e n o u g h  t o  a v o i d ,  a t  a l l  
costs, the types of patronizing, marginalizing gestures that have traditionally 
characterized Afro-American male intellectuals’ response to black woman-
hood. What a black male feminism must strive for, above all else, is to envision 
RT54118_C004.indd   82RT54118_C004.indd   82 8/6/06   2:24:02 PM8/6/06   2:24:02 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
Sisters and Brothers • 83
and enact the possibilities signaled by the diff  erences feminism has exposed 
and created. In black feminist criticism, being an Afro-American male does 
not mean attempting to invade an/other political body like a lascivious soul 
snatcher or striving to erase its essence in order to replace it with one’s own 
myth of what the discourse should be. Such a position for black men means, 
above all else, an acknowledgment and celebration of the incontrovertible fact 
that “the Father’s law” is no longer the only law of the land.
Notes
 1. Joseph Boone’s and Gerald MacLean’s essays in Gender and Th eory  assume that the 
foregrounding of gendered subjectivity is essential to the production of a male feminist 
critical practice. Consequently, in an eff  ort to articulate his perspectives on the possibili-
ties of a male feminist discourse, Boone shares with us professional secrets—he writes of 
his disagreement with the male-authored essays in Alice Jardine and Paul Smith’s Men 
and Feminism,  and of being excluded, because of his gender, from a Harvard feminist 
group discussion of Elaine Showalter’s “Critical Cross-Dressing.” And MacLean’s essay 
discloses painfully personal information about his diffi   cult relationship with his mother, 
his unsatisfying experience with psychoanalysis, and an incident of marital violence.
 2. Joseph Boone, “Of Me(n) and Feminism: Who(se) Is the Sex Th  at Writes?” in Gender and 
Th eory,  158–80. Here and below, I quote from p. 159. For my purposes, Boone’s remarks 
are suggestive despite their use of language that might seem to mark them as a heterosex-
ualization of men’s participation in feminism (“open up a space,” “discover a position”). I 
believe that Boone’s passage implies less about any desire for domination on his part than 
it does about the pervasiveness in our language of terms which have acquired sexual con-
notations and, consequently, demonstrates the virtual unavoidability of using a discourse 
of penetration to describe interactions between males and females. But it also appears to 
refl ect a sense of frustration motivated by Boone’s knowledge that while feminism has 
had a tremendous impact on his thinking about the world he inhabits, many feminists do 
not see a place in their discourse for him or other like-minded males. In order to make 
such a place for himself, violation and transgression seem to Boone to be unavoidable.
 3. Alice Jardine, “Men in Feminism: Odor di Uomo or Compagnons de Route?” in Men in 
Feminism,  58.
 4. Andrew Ross, “No Question of Silence,” in Men in Feminism,  86.
 5. See Georges Poulet, “Criticism and the Experience of Interiority,” in Reader-Response 
Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism,  ed. Jane P. Tompkins (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1980), 41–44.
 6. Houston A. Baker, Jr., Afro-American  Poetics, 8.
 7. Elizabelh Weed, “A Man’s Place,” in Men in Feminism,  75.
 8. Michael Awkward, Inspiriting Infl uences: Tradition, Revision, and Afro-American Wom-
en’s Novels (New York: Columbia University Press, 1989).
 9. About his relationship to feminism, Nelson writes: “Feminism is part of my social and 
intellectual life, has been so for many years, and so, to the extent that writing is ever 
‘natural,’ it is natural that I write about feminism” (153). Nelson’s “Men, Feminism: Th  e 
Materiality of Discourse” ( Men in Feminism,  153–72) is, in my estimation, a model for 
self-referential male feminist inquiries that assume—or, at the very least, seek to demon-
strate—a useful place for males in the discourse of feminism.
 10. Jardine and Smith, Men in Feminism,  vii–viii.
 11. See Craig Owens, “Outlaws: Gay Men in Feminism,” in Men in Feminism, 219–32. It is hard 
to believe that Jardine and Smith’s diffi  culty refl ected a lack of interest among Afro-Ameri-
cans in exploring the relationship of men to black feminism. A number of texts give evidence 
of interest in “the problem”: the 1979 Black Scholar special issue devoted to investigating 
black feminism as manifested primarily in Ntozake Shange’s for colored girls and Michele 
Wallace’s Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman. Mel Watkins, “Sexism, Racism, and 
Black Women Writers,” New York Times Book Review, June 15, 1986, p. l; Darryl Pinckney, 
“Black Victims, Black Villains,” New York Review of Books 34 (January 29, 1987: 17–20); and 
essays by Valerie Smith and Deborah McDowell from which I draw below.
RT54118_C004.indd   83RT54118_C004.indd   83 8/6/06   2:24:03 PM8/6/06   2:24:03 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
84 • Th e Womanist Reader
  Jardine and Smith’s diffi   culties might have stemmed from the facts that most of the men 
who had spoken publicly on the subject were open about their hostility to black feminism, 
and most of them did not speak the language of contemporary theory, a high academic 
idiom which demonstrates that the contributors to Men in Feminism  are, despite signifi -
cant diff erences among them, members of the same speech community.
 12. Stephen Heath, “Male Feminism,” Men in Feminism,  1.
 13. Ibid., 9.
 14. Barbara Smith, “Toward a Black Feminist Criticism,” 173, 172; Michele Wallace, “Who 
Dat Say Dat When I Say Dat? Zora Neale Hurston Th en and Now,” Village Voice Literary 
Supplement,  April 1988, p. 18.
 15. Sherley Anne Williams, “Some Implications of Womanist Th  eory,” Callaloo 9 (1986): 304.
 16. Valerie Smith, “Gender and Afro-Americanist Literary Th  eory and Criticism,” in Speak-
ing of Gender, 68.
 17. Jardine, “Men in Feminism,” Men in Feminism,  60.
 18. Williams, “Some Implications,” 307.
 19. Deborah McDowell, “Reading Family Matters,” in Changing Our Own Words: Essays on 
Criticism, Th eory, and Writing by Black Women,  ed. Cheryl Wall (New Brunswick: Rut-
gers University Press, 1989), 84.
 20. Toril Moi, “Men against Patriarchy,” in Gender and Th eory,  181–88.
 21. McDowell’s views notwithstanding, constructions of black male and black female sub-
jectivity are too obviously interrelated in black women’s narratives for feminist criticism 
to profi t in the long run from ignoring—or urging that others ignore—the important 
function that delineations of black male subjectivity play in these narratives’ thematics. 
Certainly the threat of antifeminist male critical bias is not cause to erase or minimize the 
signifi cance of black male characters in these writers’ work.
 22. Spillers, “Mamas Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,” 80.
 23. In this sense, Spillers’s perspectives complement those of Sherley Anne Williams, for the 
latter demands, in eff ect, that we consider the extent to which black male repression of the 
“female” results from an attempt to follow the letter of the white Father’s law.
 24. Paul Smith, “Men in Feminism: Men and Feminist Th  eory,” Men in Feminism,  3.
 25. Moi, “Men against Patriarchy,” 184.
 26. Toni Morrison, Sula (New York: Plume, 1973), 71. Subsequent references to this novel 
appear in the text in parentheses.
 27. At least one other reading of Eva’s murder of her son is possible: as protection against 
the threat of incest. In a section of her explanation to Hannah—very little of which is 
contained in my textual citation of Sula—Eva discusses a dream she has had concerning 
Plum:
   I’d be laying here at night and he be downstairs in this room, but when I closed my 
eyes I’d see him … six feet tall smilin’ and crawlin’ up the stairs quietlike so I wouldn’t 
hear and opening the door soft  so I wouldn’t hear and he’d be creepin’ to the bed try-
ing to spread my legs trying to get back up in my womb. He was a man, girl, a big old 
growed-up man. I didn’t have that much room, I kept on dreaming it. Dreaming it 
and I knowed it was true. One night it wouldn’t be no dream. It’d be true and I would 
have done it, would have let him if I’d’ve had the room but a big man can’t be a baby 
all wrapped up inside his mamma no more; he suff ocate. (72–73)
  Morrison reverses to some extent the traditional dynamics of the most prevalent form 
of intergenerational incest. Instead of the male parent creeping to the bed and spreading 
the legs of his defenseless female child, in Eva’s dream her man-child Plum is the active 
agent of violation. Eva’s emphasis on Plum’s immensity and her own uterus’s size makes 
connections to incestuous creeping and spreading possible. It is not diffi   cult to imagine 
given Plum’s constantly drugged state, that frustrations caused by an inability to re-insert 
his whole body into his mother’s womb during what Eva views as an inevitable encounter 
might lead to a forced insertion of a part that “naturally” fi ts, his penis. At any rate, a read-
ing of this scene that notes its use of language consistent with parent–child incest serves 
to ground what appear to be otherwise senseless fears on Eva’s part concerning both the 
possible eff ects of Plum’s desire for reentry into her uterine space and her own inability to 
deny her son access to that space (“I would have done it, would have let him”).
 28. Spillers, “Black, White, and in Color, or Learning How to Paint: Toward an Intramural 
Protocol of Reading.”
RT54118_C004.indd   84RT54118_C004.indd   84 8/6/06   2:24:03 PM8/6/06   2:24:03 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
85
5
Daughters and Sons: The Birth 
of Womanist Identity
Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women and the 
Bringing of the Everyday into Academe, or 
Why We Started The Womanist (1995)
LAYLI PHILLIPS AND BARBARA McCASKILL
A Story: Layli
I became a womanist the moment I read Michele Russell’s “Black-Eyed Blues 
Connections: T eaching Black W omen” in Gloria T . Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, 
and Barbara Smith’s All the Women Are White, All the Blacks Are Men, but 
Some of Us Are Brave: Black Women’s Studies  (Russell 1982). At the time, I 
was a single-parenting, food stamp-getting, ’hood-living graduate student in 
supposed preparation for a high-powered, mainstream, solidly middle-class 
career in teaching and research. Before I read Michele Russell’s essay, my life 
was the story of polarities: going back and forth between the food stamp line 
and the graduate seminar, between the WIC appointment and the halls of 
academe. I tried as hard as possible to keep the two worlds separate, to act as 
though my less than optimal grades (despite my “stellar” intellect) had noth-
ing to do with the fact that I could not aff  ord the textbooks and had no food 
in the refrigerator, and as though my “strange” way of raising my kids had 
nothing to do with the fact that I was being trained as a developmental psy-
chologist and was, by virtue of the nature of graduate school, spending most of 
my time around considerably older, better-heeled, and “diff  erently cultured” 
colleagues/models of parenthood than with other young sister-mothers with 
young children like myself. It was a schizophrenic existence, and “Black-Eyed 
Blues Connections” came to the rescue.
In her essay, Michele Russell writes:
In Detroit, I am at the Downtown YWCA. Rooms on the upper fl  oors 
are used by Wayne County Community College as learning centers. 
It is 10 A.M. and I am convening an introductory Black studies class 
RT54118_C005.indd   85RT54118_C005.indd   85 8/11/06   4:24:35 PM8/11/06   4:24:35 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
86 • Th e Womanist Reader
for women on Community and Identity. Th e twenty-two women who 
appear are all on their way from somewhere to something. Th  is is a 
breather in their day. Th ey range in age from nineteen to fi  ft y-fi ve. Th ey 
all  h a v e  b e e n  p r e gn an t  m o r e  th an  o n c e  an d  h a v e  m a d e  v ari o u s  d e c i -
sions about abortion, adoption, monogamy, custody, and sterilization. 
Some are great-grandmothers. A few have their children along. Th ey are 
a cross-section of hundreds of Black women I have known and learned 
from in the past fi ft een years. … We have an hour together. Th e course 
is a survey. Th e fi rst topic of conversation—among themselves and with 
me—is what they went through just to make it in the door, on time. 
Th at, in itself, becomes a lesson. (1982, 196–97)
She continues, describing the beginnings of a working methodology:
We start where they are. We exchange stories of children’s clothes ripped 
or lost, of having to go to school with sons and explain why Che is always 
late and how he got that funny name, anyway, to teachers who shouldn’t 
have to ask and don’t really care. Th ey tell of waiting for men to come 
home from the night shift  so they can get the money or car necessary to 
get downtown, or power failures in the neighborhood, or administra-
tive red tape at the college, or compulsory overtime on their own jobs, 
or the length of food stamp lines, or just being tired and needing sleep. 
Some of the stories are funny, some sad; some elicit outrage and praise 
from the group. It’s a familiar and comfortable ritual in Black culture. 
It’s called testifying. (197)
Finally she concludes: “Th e role of the teacher? Making the process con-
scious, the content signifi  cant. … Learn what daily survival wisdom these 
women have. Care. Don’t let it stop at commiseration. Try to help them gen-
eralize from the specifi  cs” (197). Encapsulated, her view is that “political 
education of Black women in America … becomes radical when, as teachers, 
we develop a methodology that places daily life at the center of history and 
enables Black women to struggle for survival with the knowledge that they are 
making history” (196).
White men have had the luxury of knowing that they are making his-
tory. All the history books—the histories of every discipline—attest to this. 
Black women, on the other hand, have had to construct this knowledge 
outside the traditional locale of knowledge validation, that is, outside the 
academy. Over many generations of constructing this knowledge and grad-
ually chipping away at the impermeability of the academy, Black women 
intellectuals, whether inside or outside the academy, have created systems 
of translation between these two milieus—the academic and the everyday. 
Th ey have created tools with which to work on the problems of exclusion and 
marginalization.
RT54118_C005.indd   86RT54118_C005.indd   86 8/11/06   4:24:39 PM8/11/06   4:24:39 PM


--- PAGE 144 ---
Daughters and Sons • 87
Michele Russell’s essay, as emblematized by her subtitle, spoke to and recon-
ciled both sides of my dilemma: the teacher (i.e., the academic) and the Black 
woman. It translated and connected the two worlds for me. As a result of her 
essay, I was able to reformulate these disparate yet fundamental elements of my 
existence in terms of complementarity rather than tension and to realize that 
both could be harmonized without the sacrifi ce of either. Her essay had been a 
tool, the ultimate function of which was my liberation.
It has been traditional to conceptualize education as emanating out from 
the academy to “the community” and to conceptualize helping as emanating 
out from those with more socially sanctioned power and wealth to those who 
are considered disenfranchised or marginal. Th  is schematic has perpetually 
placed Black women—who have since their arrival in this country borne the 
brunt of the triple oppression of race, class, and gender—on the receiving end 
of every handout or supposed charitable act, as if to proclaim, “Y ou are only 
needy; you have nothing to off  er.” Such posturing has been a long-standing 
in s ul t  t o  B l a ck  w o m e n  as  h um an  be in g s  an d  as  p arti ci p an ts  in  so ci ety ,  n o t  
to mention to Black women as card-carrying members of the sweat equity 
club and possessors of a unique wisdom born of a particular social and cul-
tural history. Such posturing has permitted the interpretation that the acad-
emy has nothing to gain from everyday Black women and their experiences 
and that everyday Black women have everything to gain from the academy. 
In addition, this unspoken assumption has permitted—even tacitly encour-
aged—a dismissal of everyday Black women’s experiences as material worthy 
of scholarly investigation and of everyday Black women themselves as capable 
generators, interpreters, or validators of knowledge, even when that knowl-
edge pertains to their o wn experiences. M y argumen t, ho w ever , is that this 
exquisite and ironic marginalization has not only hurt Black women, it has 
hurt the academy.
In her essay, Russell focuses on the education of everyday Black women and 
the validation of Black women’s everyday experiences by Black women them-
selves within academic settings. Th e concealed premise is that entry into aca-
demic settings for everyday Black women has been facilitated by a “teacher”—a 
Black woman who has, in all historical probability, “played the game” well 
enough and long enough to persuade the academy that she is nonthreaten-
ing and will not subvert its traditional objectives. Yet, this Black woman, this 
teacher, has, like the Trojan horse or trickster, managed to maintain, cultivate, 
or shield her Black womanness beyond the academy’s line of vision. It—her 
Black womanness—has become her secret weapon for both the liberation of 
more sisters and the revolutionizing of the academy itself.
When Black women enter the academy, they bring with them diff erent kinds 
of lives—lives shaped by the ubiquitous and historically inescapable fact of triple 
oppression. All Black women, regardless of their social background, have had to 
formulate themselves in response to this fact. It becomes inevitable, then, that 
RT54118_C005.indd   87RT54118_C005.indd   87 8/11/06   4:24:40 PM8/11/06   4:24:40 PM


--- PAGE 145 ---
88 • Th e Womanist Reader
when Black women enter academe, they bring with them all of the knowledge 
and expertise that has accrued around this particular fact of their existence. 
Black women’s lives are not, however, defi ned by the fact of triple oppression; 
Black women also bring with them intergenerationally transmitted experien-
tial and metatheoretical frameworks based on their ancient African origins and 
what it meant to be a woman in Black Africa. Together, these two facts—triple 
oppression and African origins—generate unique thematic concerns and inter-
pretive frameworks that, when brought in by Black women, enrich the academy, 
further humanize it, and make it more accessible to a wider segment of humanity, 
including, but not limited to, Black women.
Examples of these themes, which can be gleaned from the writings of 
numerous womanist and Black feminist scholars, include spirituality, struggle 
and activism, work, and the politics of interlocking oppressions. Black women 
draw interpretive frameworks from their unique social, cultural, and historical 
experiences. For example, from their integral knowledge of extended family, 
Black women have drawn valuable models of harmonizing complex and diverse 
social systems. From their notion of sisterhood, Black women have drawn mod-
els of research in which research “subjects” are not “subjected” to objectifi  ca-
tion, anonymity, and power imbalances but, rather, are elevated to esteemed 
research collaborators, named historical personages, and empowered citizens. 
From their history of dance, Black women have constructed polyrhythmic 
understandings of complex natural and human phenomena. Th  e metaphors 
Black women bring to the table of scholarly activity have the potential to benefi t 
both the humanities and the sciences, whether social, biological, or physical, 
by increasing the number and variety of models and frames available for the 
explanation of phenomena and the construction of knowledge.
Perhaps the central organizing principle of womanism (if it can be said 
that there is one ) is the absolute necessity of speaking from and about one’ s 
own experiential location and not to or about someone else’s. Black women’s 
scholarship has placed Black women and their experiences at the center of 
analysis just like traditional White men’s scholarship has placed White men 
and their experiences at the center of analysis; the crucial diff  erence is that 
Black women’s scholarship has articulated and owned the centering, whereas 
traditional White men’s scholarship has not. Black women’s scholarship does 
not parade as universal, but rather it emanates from a point of acute authen-
ticity and invites others to participate in a similar, equally authentic, process. 
While traditional White men’s scholarship presumes to have a monopoly on 
content as well as method, Black women’s scholarship underscores the fal-
lacy and pomposity of such a presumption. Ironically, universality emerges 
not from the imposition of sameness and the enforced proclamation that 
“we’re all just human underneath it all,” but from the careful and respect-
ful acknowledgment that both individuals and groups have experiences that 
generate diff erences in both vision and concern and the recognition that these 
RT54118_C005.indd   88RT54118_C005.indd   88 8/11/06   4:24:40 PM8/11/06   4:24:40 PM


--- PAGE 146 ---
Daughters and Sons • 89
diff erences can contribute to the robustness and optimal functioning of the 
human race as a whole.
Because Black women are intimately familiar with the experience of hav-
ing one’s experience appropriated, exploited, misconstrued, and ultimately 
dismissed, Black feminists and womanists have developed an epistemological 
stance that demands the acknowledgment of one’s particular location prior to 
the pronouncement of knowledge. Furthermore, because Black women carry 
with them an Afrocentric cultural ethos that purports that reality is both spiri-
tual and material, that self-knowledge is the basis of all knowledge, that knowl-
edge can be obtained through the use of symbolic imagery (metaphor/parable) 
and rhythm (pattern), and that positive relationships among humans are the 
highest value (Myers 1991), Black feminists and womanists off  er a method-
ological stance that is dialogic or co n v ersatio nal in app roach, that views the 
relationship between researcher and research subject as collaborative and 
equal, that incorporates activism into the scientifi c method, and that does not 
discount the importance of spiritual as well as material (including concrete, 
everyday) scientifi c concerns (Collins 1990). Black feminist/womanist science 
speaks unapologetically and authoritatively in the fi  rst person and resists 
the excessive canonization that would suggest that science and scholarship 
are essentially exclusive or objective pursuits. In fact, Black feminist/womanist 
science and scholarship utilize dialogue and story as metaphors for knowledge 
construction and validation.
Another Story: Barbara
I am an endangered species, but I sing no victim’s song.
I am a woman. I am an artist. And I know where my voice belongs. 
(Diana Reeves 1994)
Th is is my location. It is not at all easy to revolutionize the question and 
t o  a s k ,  W h a t  i s  i t  t h a t  n o n a c a d e m i c ,  e v e r y d a y  w o m e n  b r i n g  t o  w o m a n i s t  
scholarship in the academy? I am troubled by this question. Perhaps I am 
troubled because, as a predominately white university-trained scholar of lit-
erature and literary history, I am disciplined to think all too oft  en from the 
center—my center, my area of specialization, my research orientation, or what 
ha v e  y o u — an d  th e n  t o  sp iral  o u t.  M o r e  than  this,  I  am  tr o u b l ed  b y  wha t  I  
perceive to be this question’s concealed ahistorical, elitist assumption, in spite 
of Layli’s appropriate recentering of everyday women, that the center of an 
aspiring womanist academic originates in academe. Th  is question and its 
reverse seem, fi rst, to propose that a kind of Demilitarized Zone distinguishes 
universities from the communities that surround them; then, that this Zone, 
once transgressed by Someone Like Me, morphs to an Ivory Curtain crashing 
down between the esoteric womanist scholars that Someone Like Me aspires 
to and the nonscholars, relevant and accountable, that Someone Like Me once 
RT54118_C005.indd   89RT54118_C005.indd   89 8/11/06   4:24:41 PM8/11/06   4:24:41 PM


--- PAGE 147 ---
90 • Th e Womanist Reader
resembled. I would like to see womanist scholarship progress so that neither 
this question nor an inversion of it necessitates a proposal in the fi rst place. To 
me, both sides of the question constitute the tip of a glacier to which many of 
us black women scholars cling.
1 Meanwhile, our base is evaporating at warp 
speed in a terminal moment of meltdown. And our hands are slipping.
So I am going to practice what I preach in my approach to this issue of the 
intersection of womanist scholarship and black women out there, by referring 
in my section of this viewpoint to both nonacademic and academic, wom-
anist and nonwomanist black women as we. I will extend Layli’s fi  rst-person 
statement to the fi rst-person plural. Because I am out there,  too—and more 
frequently, at times with staccato, fortissimo frequency, than I am in here . 
I am out there when white students complain that I read race in every text, 
and when students and faculty, both black and white, insinuate that I owe 
my appointment solely to such benefactors as “generous standards,” “admis-
sions adjustments,” “administrative pressures”/“administrative rewards,” 
and “minority initiatives.” I am  in here  when I read article aft  er article on 
the endangered black male species, and when my analyst’s mind engages such 
facts as my mother is fi ghting breast cancer and so little research dispatches 
specifi c protocols for black women, that black women are soaring in the AIDS 
statistics, that black women are most likely to suff er depression and least likely 
to have this depression diagnosed, that black women are the most underpaid 
of all Americans. I am a virtual simulcast of out there and in here.
So where do I hang the curtain rods?
Where do you?
And what exactly do we everyday, academic black women bring to 
womanist scholarship, to womanist research and practice? Foremost, I think 
w e  b r i n g  a n  a s s u m p t i o n  t h a t  w h a t  w e  a c c o m p l i s h  b e c o m e s  r e l e v a n t  a n d  
accountable especially when and since our lives do not dovetail materially, 
culturally, socially, or historically. Layli’s observation bears repeating here: 
“Black women’s scholarship does not parade as universal. ” In “Th e Respon-
sibility of Intellectuals in the Age of Crack,” a November 1993 forum at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Regina Austin commented, “Th e issue 
is not whether intellectuals are doing well; it’s whether other folks are doing 
well. And other folks are not doing well” (1994, 6). By virtue of its interdis-
ciplinary and multilateral focus, womanist scholarship proposes that as long 
as “other folks” are not doing well, academics—be they womanists, femi-
nists, Marxist feminists, postmodernists, anarchists, or what have you—are 
not doing well either. I guess that I am off  ering womanist scholarship as a 
critique of the assumption that an electrifi  ed ideological barricade a priori 
stands between us based on academic pedigree, class affi  liation, sexual prefer-
ence, make and plate of car, degree of literacy attained, pre- or postmarital 
status, and other factors. Th is is not to say that we do not disagree or divide 
RT54118_C005.indd   90RT54118_C005.indd   90 8/11/06   4:24:42 PM8/11/06   4:24:42 PM


--- PAGE 148 ---
Daughters and Sons • 91
among ourselves. Rather, at the center of womanist scholarship stands a for-
gone conclusion that we do demonstrate the capabilities of collaborating and 
withstanding the walls that divide us. And we do this more frequently and 
harmoniously than is reported.
In womanist scholarship operates a mystique that many of us surely rec-
ognize. Michele Russell’s classes at the downtown YWCA speak to this mys-
tique. With no romanticization or exoticism intended, I think of this as the 
mystique of the Tribe. In my high school, circa 1975, a microscopic nucleus of 
African American students diverged in many directions on just about every 
issue. Yet we thought of ourselves as the Tribe. We came from diff erent classes. 
We were tracked at diff erent levels. Some of us had traveled; some had families 
that never had moved from the same hometown. We had naturals and perms, 
platforms and loafers, A-line skirts and attitudes, the latest issues of X-Men 
and the library’s only copy of War and Peace. Yet we thought of ourselves as 
the Tribe.
Th e Tribe did not contravene these distinctions; rather, it proliferated them 
and exploited their potential. We were the Family Stone and the P-Funk Moth-
ership Connection, and sometimes our attire came pretty close to rivaling Sly, 
George, Bootsie, Maceo, and the rest! When one of us became pregnant and 
school policy dictated her expulsion, the T ribe, all nine of us then as I recall, 
left  our tasks and trooped before the entranceway’s heavy double doors so that 
she saw us when the principal rifl ed the contents of her locker and ushered her 
away. Th us, we were a community that theorized: we critiqued the stigmas and 
stereotypes that estranged our lives from academic protocol, and in opportune 
moments we mobilized and blew the suckers up! Every Tribal member carved 
her or his niche; where none was apparent, one was nurtured: sports, chemistry, 
debate, even clowning. Th e Tribe was delicate and solid, consensual, a self-gen-
erated confi guration that easily slipped into the dictatorial or patriarchal, but 
most of the time meant a dynamic construction that accomplished results.
Th is is the sort of impulse that we bring to womanist scholarship. By dint 
of our diff erences, womanist scholarship is composed of transformative har-
mony, proactive tension, and regenerative collaboration. Womanist scholar-
ship resists dogma, and it off  ers a vision of intellectual leadership in which 
reliance and responsibility are not approached as handicaps but as liberatory 
strategies. Joy James’s theory of black women autobiographers/activists as “liv-
ing thinkers” concretizes this philosophy and resists “the worldview that cor-
porate academia sells: self-reliant isolation and competition” (1993, 43). James 
presents such revolutionary black women as Assata Shakur, Bernice Johnson 
Reagon, Anne Moody, and Angela Davis as such living thinkers whose theoriz-
ing “requires understanding or at least recognizing the conditions and sources 
of oppression, both specifi c to one people and universal,” as thinkers whose 
t h e o r i z i n g  “ b o u n d  t o  t h e  c o m m u n i t y ,  f o r c e s  a  r e s p o n s e  n o t  o n l y  t o  | t h e i r |  
struggles as a revolutionary but to those of the community as well” (1993, 41).
RT54118_C005.indd   91RT54118_C005.indd   91 8/11/06   4:24:43 PM8/11/06   4:24:43 PM


--- PAGE 149 ---
92 • Th e Womanist Reader
So the hardest part for many of us is not bringing womanist pedagogy/wom-
anist practices into anything. Th e diffi  culty is generating out of self-reliant, self-
serving academic societies, like the proverbial round peg in the square hole, 
the responsibility for collective well-being, women’s and men’s, and the reli-
ance upon each other that are second nature to most contemporary womanist 
enterprises. As we practice a community-bound scholarship, we black women 
oft en fi nd ourselves divided between offi  cial commitments to our disciplinary 
homes and commitments to cultivating black women’s studies in sociopoliti-
cal realms that we oft en consider more satisfying, and our peers regard as less 
enriching, than the former. Just how many of us, for example, are cultivat-
ing curricula vitae in two departments for tenure? And of this population, 
how many of us hold appointments in only one institute, department, or pro-
gram? As we strive to create a community-bound intellectual record, we black 
women are too oft en asked to make an all-or-nothing choice: either generate 
our own scholarship or retrieve and evaluate the talents of other generations of 
black women and risk dire consequences. Just how many of us have risked the 
breach, editing as many projects as we have authored individually? How many 
of us are guilty of sneaking in just one more lecture to a student or civic group 
during Kwanzaa or black or women’s history month, even though we know our 
colleagues mightily disapprove?
Th e academy bifurcates our pursuits into two paths—focused (or tenurable) 
and scattered (or irrelevant). It pits us in an adversarial relationship that 
opposes home, family, neighborhood, church, and culture versus Quality 
Time on the PC for our focused, relevant, academic projects. Th is dichotomy 
stands as another exquisite marginalization that harms both black women and 
the academy. It implies that well-roundedness is a pathology, the equivalent 
of academic arrested development, and it condemns our real black women’s 
lives as at best inconsequential precisely because we fi nd this well-roundedness 
unavoidable and vital.
Black women, Latina women, Asian women, Native women, white women—
women—all, to greater and lesser degrees, experience the restrictions of this 
Hobson’s choice between scholarship and community. Yet there are palpable 
cultural perspectives that infl uence how black women experience and negoti-
ate these restrictions diff erently from other women. Black culture converges 
the meanings of the terms intellectual, teacher, and activist. Black culture views 
academic institutions as vehicles for knowledge production, preservation, and 
dissemination that are irreducible to four walls, one canon, and scores of 
competing theoretical and discursive fi  efdoms. Black culture, fi nally, defi nes 
a community as inclusive of both individual, blood-related, family members 
and broader social networks. Th ese legacies, among others, make pursuing an 
academic profession more than any single black woman’s choice of family time 
over career advancement. It is a choice that places the body of black female 
intellectual endeavor on a course that collides head-on with academic culture.
RT54118_C005.indd   92RT54118_C005.indd   92 8/11/06   4:24:44 PM8/11/06   4:24:44 PM


--- PAGE 150 ---
Daughters and Sons • 93
Womanist philosophy jettisons these tensions and helps us black women 
to understand that our well-roundedness fulfi  lls our highest expectations as 
scholars and can function as its own reward. Womanist philosophy appreciates 
and cultivates the well-rounded, dialectical teachers/researchers, the Michele 
Russells of knowledge construction. Womanism resists the dichotomy between 
focused and scattered pursuits by its emphasis on the community work that is 
foundational in the collective histories of black women. “Community work,” 
as Cheryl Townsend Gilkes explains, “is a constant struggle, and it consists of 
everything that people do to address oppression in their own lives, suff  ering 
in the lives of others, and their sense of solidarity or group kinship” (1994, 
231). When we integrate this womanist interpretation of community work into 
our colleges and universities, we arrest focus and elevate struggle. We write, 
produce, grade papers, edit Th e Womanist  in the ghettoes of midnigh t work 
sessions and the gulped-down, solitary lunch hours at our desks—between 
classes, committees, advising sessions, seminars, and consultations. We strug-
gle on, determined to accomplish our eff orts without sacrifi cing our commit-
ments for focus, because those workers that we know—workers, incidentally, 
who we are—know that the eff orts must be made.
Finally, we bring to womanist enterprises the insight that culture thrives on 
a creole diet. Womanists sample. Another way to articulate this is to say, as one 
of my Afrocentric students loved to proclaim, that we clothe ourselves in our 
culture. “Go to the source,” advice we have oft en heard as students and schol-
ars, is a moot point to us. We are the sources, the everyday black women, as 
much as we are the gatherers/interpreters of the data, the “capable generators,” 
as Layli describes us. We are like rappers who engage each other’s rhythms 
and rhymes: borrowing from records, infi  ltrating them with our own lyrics 
and sounds, and then becoming the new source that is borrowed. In other 
words, we do not have a problem with our own subjectivity. To speak from 
our own locations, as Layli has put it, is not an issue. As Patricia Hill Collins 
writes, “For ordinary African-American women, those individuals who have 
lived through the experiences about which they claim to be experts are more 
believable and credible than those who have merely read or thought about 
such experiences” (1990, 209). Wherever we are as womanists, “lived through” 
or “read about,” out there or in here, we bring a confi dence in evaluating our 
own experiences, dictating our own discourses, and defi  ning our own terms. 
Maybe this is what we bring the most. Maybe this is where we belong.
Why We Started Th e Womanist:  Layli and Barbara
Th e idea for Th e Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric Feminist Research-
ers was born out of a desire to empower others as Michele Russell and other 
Black feminists/womanists had empowered us as well as a desire to “create 
more space” for Black feminism and womanism in the academy. Knowing that 
the project entailed some professional risk, we initially vacillated, but our 
RT54118_C005.indd   93RT54118_C005.indd   93 8/11/06   4:24:45 PM8/11/06   4:24:45 PM


--- PAGE 151 ---
94 • Th e Womanist Reader
decision to publish it, one way or another, was cemented when we attended 
the fi rst national conference of Black women academics, “Black Women in the 
Academy: Defending Our Name, 1894–1994,” held at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, January 13–15, 1994. Good fortune followed in the form 
of a grant from the Institute for African-American Studies at the University 
of Georgia, under the direction of R. Baxter Miller, who agreed to underwrite 
the production.
Th e Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric Feminist Researchers  was con-
ceived as a forum for the exposition of theory and research. Quoting from 
the statement of purpose that appeared on the initial announcement for Th e 
Womanist, “Th e Womanist  is meant to be a gathering place for Afrocentric 
feminist researchers who are struggling to devise, develop, and disseminate 
womanist methodologies within traditional (or non-traditional) academic 
disciplines … a place where we can share ideas, ask questions, and engage in 
supportive criticism, in order to strengthen our mission, de-marginalize our 
activities, and provide wider access to our perspectives” (Th e Womanist  1994). 
Th e essential purpose of the publication was to help Black women who are 
trying to bring the everyday into the academy as well as to help the academy 
by presenting the everyday in a format that academicians could understand. 
Th e idea was to disrupt the traditional notion that Black women are merely 
the benefi ciaries of academia in favor of the notion that the academy, particu-
larly in this era of anxiety about “changing demographics,” is the benefi  ciary 
of Black women’s presence. In addition, the idea was to provide validation 
for Black women that, having entered the doors of academia, we neverthe-
less have not left  our beloved everyday lives behind. Th e choice of a one-word 
moniker—womanist—refl ected our position that Afrocentric feminism is 
more than just the sum of Afrocentrism and feminism.
We view Th e Womanist  as a tool—a testament to the fact that, with all respect 
to Audre Lorde (1984), you can dismantle the master’s house with the master’s 
tools (aft er all, that’s what he built it with) at the same time as you are forging 
new tools and building new structures. In addition, we view Th e Womanist  as 
part of a larger project on the part of Black women everywhere: to make the 
institutional realm more accurately refl ect our presence and our experiences. 
In such an endeavor, however, Black women also open the door for other mar-
ginalized or excluded groups and for the inclusion and institutional validation 
of their experiences and concerns. For this reason, Black feminism/womanism 
is a crucial aspect of the reformulation of the academy as a whole.
In sum, to interrogate “Who’s Schooling Who?” is to look at what the acad-
emy has to gain (and has gained) from Black women, Black feminists, wom-
anists, and their kin. It is to recognize how Black women have educated and 
can educate the academy about knowledge—its collection, its generation, its 
validation, and its dissemination. It is our hope that Th e Womanist  can in 
some way assist in this undertaking.
RT54118_C005.indd   94RT54118_C005.indd   94 8/11/06   4:24:46 PM8/11/06   4:24:46 PM


--- PAGE 152 ---
Daughters and Sons • 95
Note
 1. Th  e diff  erence in the capitalization of the term black in the two parts of this essay is 
intentional, marking a diff erence of opinion between the authors. One of the main tenets 
of womanism is such accommodation of diversity.
References
Austin, Regina. 1994. “Th e Responsibility of Intellectuals in the Age of Crack.” Boston Review  
19 (11): 3–9.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics 
of Empowerment.  New York: Routledge.
Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend. 1994. “ ‘If It Wasn’t for the Women … : African American Women, 
Community Work, and Social Change.” In Women of Color in U.S. Society,  ed. Maxine 
Baca Zinn and Bonnie Th ornton Dill, 229–46. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
James, Joy. 1993. “African Philosophy, Th eory, and ‘Living Th inkers.’ ” In Spirit, Space and Sur-
vival: African American Women in (White) Academe,  ed. Joy James and Ruth Farmer, 
31–46. New York: Routledge.
Lorde, Audre. 1984. Sister Outsider . Trumansburg, N.Y.: Crossing.
Myers, Linda James. 1991. “Expanding the Psychology of Knowledge Optimally: Th  e Impor-
tance of Worldview Revisited.” In Black Psychology,  ed. Reginald Jones, 15–28. Berkeley: 
Cobb & Henry.
Reeves, Diana. 1994. “Endangered Species.” Song 6 on her compact disc Art and Survival . 
EMI Records.
Russell, Michele. 1982. “Black-Eyed Blues Connections: Teaching Black Women.” In All the 
Women Are White, All the Blacks Are Men, but Some of Us Are Brave: Black Women’s 
Studies,  ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 196–207. New York: 
Feminist Press.
Th e Womanist . 1994. Th e Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric Feminist Researchers,  promo-
tional fl yer. Presented at “Black Women in the Academy: Defending Our Name, 1894–
1994,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, January 13–15.
RT54118_C005.indd   95RT54118_C005.indd   95 8/11/06   4:24:46 PM8/11/06   4:24:46 PM


--- PAGE 153 ---
96
To Be Black, Male, and “Feminist”: Making 
Womanist Space for Black Men (1997)
GARY L. LEMONS
If black men and women take seriously Malcolm [X]’s charge that we 
must work for our liberation “by any means necessary,” then we must be 
willing to explore the way feminism as a critique of sexism, as a move-
ment to end sexism and sexist oppression, could aid our struggle to be 
self-determining.
1
—bell hooks
Womanist. … A black feminist or feminist of color … [c]ommitted to 
survival and wholeness of entire people, male and female. … Womanist 
is to feminist as purple to lavender.
2
—Alice Walker
bell hooks says in “Reconstructing Black Masculinity” that “[c]ollectively we 
can break the life threatening choke-hold patriarchal masculinity imposes on 
black men and create life sustaining visions of a reconstructed black mas-
culinity that can provide black men ways to save their lives and the lives of 
their brothers and sisters in struggle” (113). Toward the work of political 
(re)unifi cation of the genders in black communities today, black men must 
acknowledge and begin to confront the existence of sexism in black liberation 
struggle as one of the chief obstacles impeding its advancement. Making wom-
anist space for black men to participate in allied relation to feminist move-
ment to oppose the oppression of women means black men going against 
the grain of the racist and sexist mythology of black manhood and masculinity 
in the U.S. Its underlying premise rooted in white supremacist patriarchal 
ideology continues to foster the idea that we pose a racial and sexual threat to 
American society such that our bodies exist to be feared, brutalized, imprisoned, 
annihilated—made invisible.
It has been the fear of emasculinization originating in the history of black 
male lynching where the power of white (male) supremacy performed itself 
in the ritual act of castration (the violent sexual dismembering of our bod-
ies) as a tool “to put/keep us in our place”—expressly because we were black 
and male—to “feminize” us. Th us, it is the fear of feminization in the minds 
of many black men that has led us to over-determine our sexuality, believing 
RT54118_C005.indd   96RT54118_C005.indd   96 8/11/06   4:24:47 PM8/11/06   4:24:47 PM


--- PAGE 154 ---
Daughters and Sons • 97
the idea that our identity as men resides only in the power of our penises. 
Against the inhumanity of our past—we must create a place/space to make 
ourselves over again in our own image. It must not be one reconstructed in the 
very mythology which sexually demonized our bodies as the scourge of white 
womanhood, but rather one which frees us to be black in the most radically 
revolutionary manner, to be male in the most non-oppressive, anti-sexist way, 
to be feminist in the most supportive, non-patriarchal way to bring about an 
end to the domination, subordination, and mistreatment of women exactly 
because they are women.
I believe womanism, as Alice Walker conceived it, to be a liberatory loca-
tion for remaking black manhood toward a male identity that transgresses the 
boundaries of patriarchy—freeing us from the oppressive racist/sexist, sexually 
“othered” space we occupied in the past. Th eorizing a womanist space for black 
men means focusing on the historical impact castration and lynching have had 
on the black male psyche and on ways we construct our identity as men. It 
may begin to tell us why many black men have internalized the racist sexual 
myths of black manhood and masculinity such that images of “black macho” 
and the super sexual “buck/stud” have prevailed in black communities as 
legitimate representations of black male power. hooks maintains that “[B]lack 
men who are most worried about castration and emasculation are those who 
have completely absorbed white supremacist patriarchal defi nitions of mascu-
linity” (“Reconstructing Black Masculinity,” 93). Th e black buck stereotype, 
conceived in the white racist imagination during the period of slavery, signifi ed 
that every black male (who did not fi t the “Uncle Tom,” older non-sexualized 
type) stood as the symbol of the sexually brutalizing phallus operating always 
already as a sexual threat to the purity of white womanhood—thus the need 
for castration.
As a controlling image in the contemporary period, phallic representations 
of black masculinity in the Black Power Movement of the 1960s manifested 
themselves in popular culture via the performance of hyper-masculinity as 
witnessed in the popularity of blaxploitation fi lms in the 1970s (a genre made 
famous by the movie Shaft  and a host of others featuring the “superfl  y” or 
the hyper-cool black male stereotype). Yet the mythology of black machismo 
remains grounded in the black man as super-sexual savage created to control 
black men during slavery.
3 Th e (re)production and perpetuation of a hyper-
sexualized, hard black manhood/masculinity in white supremacist capitalist 
media is fed by stereotypical portrayals of black males. Th e very sexually over-
determined images that have “essentially” typed us through history are played 
out repeatedly on the contemporary scene in the arena of popular culture, 
where the “dick-clutching” posture of many black male rappers has obtained 
as a status symbol of male power in Hip-hop.
I defy the notion that black manhood and masculinity is about a “dick 
thing.” Progressive black men renouncing sexist, misogynist, and patriarchal 
RT54118_C005.indd   97RT54118_C005.indd   97 8/11/06   4:24:48 PM8/11/06   4:24:48 PM


--- PAGE 155 ---
98 • Th e Womanist Reader
practice against women—that is the taproot of the “dick thing” mentality—
begin to mediate the painful historical memory of our own dehumanization. 
Challenging the white supremacist stereotype of the “super dick” (that so 
many black men have internalized as the symbol of black male power) means 
resisting the racist/sexist sexual mythology created to control us. It would 
have us believe that we are no more than one big collective “walking, bru-
talizing phallus.” When we begin to interrogate its oppressive power over 
us, we start to perceive the interrelated ways racism and male supremacist 
privilege work together to dehumanize all black men. Understanding the 
link between white privilege and male privilege—realizing that empowered 
images of black manhood do not rest in the reclamation of lost phallic power 
(the pre-eminent fallacy of manhood thinking in general)—black men come 
t o  expe ri e n ce  tran s f o rm a ti v e,  li be ra t o ry  p o w e r  as  m e n.  Wh e n  w e  begin  t o  
claim our bodies as our own—beyond the bounds of white supremacist capi-
talist patriarchal control—we no longer have to fear that our penises will be 
cut off  for being black and male. When we fully realize this, we confront the 
psychic/sexual wound/violation that castration/lynching represents, discov-
ering that our quest for power in the myth of the “big black dick” is a self-
dehumanizing act—physically, psychologically, and spiritually. Black men 
coming to feminist consciousness signifi  es a radical departure from the rac-
ist/sexist ideology of black manhood/masculinity that has consumed many 
of us. Black men moving to reclaim our womanist/feminist past contest the 
power of the phallus in our lives and the lives of women, toward truly liberatory 
meanings of manhood.
Th eorizing Black Men as Pro-feminist Comrades
In this essay, I address the problematics of being a black male feminist focusing 
on African-American men’s historic relation to feminism and their relation-
ship to black liberation struggle and issues of sexism, patriarchy, misogyny. 
Examining the interrelation of these modes of female oppression to racism 
in the light of black feminist critique of the multiplicity of oppression in the 
history of black women’s lives in the United States, I call for the creation of 
a political space for black men “in” feminism grounded in the history of the 
fi ght African-Americans waged for race and gender rights.
In the process, I address a set of questions which strike at the core of con-
temporary black resistance to feminism, while critically asserting the need 
for contemporary black men (and women) to come together in “womanist” 
solidarity to reclaim black male commitment to a liberatory movement rooted 
in struggle against racism and sexism. Can black people in the U.S. reconceive 
a freedom movement beyond the imperatives of male identity toward a pro-
gressive platform which opposes not only racism, sexism, and classism—but 
homophobia as well? Can feminist and anti-racist strategies share the same 
political agenda in the spirit of coalition movement?
RT54118_C005.indd   98RT54118_C005.indd   98 8/11/06   4:24:51 PM8/11/06   4:24:51 PM


--- PAGE 156 ---
Daughters and Sons • 99
In a period when white supremacist groups are re-emerging in the form 
of a militia movement, when a new black manhood movement predicated on 
the black patriarchal capitalist ideas of Louis Farrakhan—can a progressive 
coalition movement against domination be forged that transgresses the bor-
ders of identity politics to aff  ect a truly liberatory ideology that embraces a 
multiplicity of struggle? Can the academy be a site of oppositional struggle 
where progressive educators employ the classroom as a strategic location for 
liberatory education practice? And fi  nally, what diff erence can a black male 
feminist make toward a vision of “wholeness” in black communities, where 
every individual woman, man, and child is valued and cared for? Addressing 
these questions, as a black male feminist, I envision a space in feminism where 
black men can work to empower themselves in feminist solidarity—working 
in the tradition and spirit of their womanist legacy.
Today black men must begin remembering their feminist past, one in which 
the fi ght against racist oppression was integrally linked to women’s liberation 
struggle. Comprehending the power of this crucial fact, we will have to rethink 
the meaning of contemporary black liberation struggle. Beyond the exclusion-
ary politic of anti-racist strategizing based solely on a masculinist recupera-
tion of manhood, black men must begin resisting sexist propaganda that tells 
us wrongfully that to be fully empowered as black men we should strive to 
“atone” for its loss. Progressive black people in the U.S., calling out sexist and 
misogynist practice perpetrated by black men, create counter-hegemonic black 
male and female space where locations of race, gender, and sexual healing are 
created. At this particular historical moment, considering the fact that there is 
an emerging movement around the repatriarchalization of black masculinity, 
black men in particular need to recognize the vital link between the histories 
of feminist movement and black liberation movement connected to womanist 
concerns—acting to reconnect politically the integral line that connects both 
struggles. Only then will black men achieve a status of dignity and self-worth 
that is not always already tied to patriarchy—constructing an integrative, 
holistic movement against the dehumanizing power of patriarchal thinking.
In 1925, Amy Jacques Garvey, editor of the “Women’s Page” of the Negro 
World and wife of Marcus Garvey, declared—
We are tired of hearing Negro men say, “Th ere is a better day coming” 
while they do nothing to usher in the day. We are becoming so impatient 
that we are getting in the front ranks and serve notice that we will brush 
aside the halting, cowardly Negro leaders. … Mr. Black Man watch your 
step! … Strengthen your shaking knees and move forward, or we will 
displace you and lead on to victory and glory. (quoted in Giddings, 195)
Exh o rtin g  b l a c k  m e n  t o  a ct  m o r e  aggr e s s i v e l y  t o w ar d  ra c i al  p r o gr e s s  o r  b e  
“displace[d]” by more radically mobilized black women, Amy Garvey wrote 
without regard to the disposition of the black male ego. From the rise of black 
RT54118_C005.indd   99RT54118_C005.indd   99 8/11/06   4:24:53 PM8/11/06   4:24:53 PM


--- PAGE 157 ---
100 • Th e Womanist Reader
feminism in the second half of the 19th century and the fervor of its move-
ment in the 1920s, through its re-emergence in the writings of contemporary 
black women novelists, critics, poets, theorists, and academics—black women 
feminists have determined for themselves a course of action oft  en set against 
the grain of black racial and gender party lines. Always having to weigh their 
actions with regard to notions of race solidarity and the defense of themselves 
as women, black feminists share a history of liberation struggle cultivated in a 
political (inter)relation of racism and sexism.
In the text above Amy Jacques Garvey (author)itatively calls into question 
black male power (without compromising the movement for racial liberation). 
(Re)writing the destiny of black women in liberation struggle, she proclaims 
the power of black female agency. Yet when black women have written or spo-
ken out in critique of black male status, privilege, and/or sexism—black men 
have accused them of perpetuating white supremacist emasculation of the black 
male. In the contemporary period, feminist black women writers continue to 
be “object” of anti-feminist rhetoric. Th inking about the Black Scholar essay 
Robert Staples’ wrote in 1979 which initiated “Th e Debate on Black Sexism,” I 
maintain that the critique he wrote opposing black feminist writings by Michele 
Wallace and Ntozake Shange foreshadowed subsequent attacks on Alice Walker, 
Gayle Jones, Gloria Naylor, Toni Morrison, and Paule Marshall, among others, 
through the 1980s and ’90s marked by the onslaught of black male criticism 
against the fi lm version of Terry McMillan’s recent novel Waiting to Exhale.
Th e anti-womanist response many black men voiced against the fi lm echoed 
the negative reaction expressed toward the cinematic representation of Th e 
Color Purple,  Alice Walker’s epistolary novel of black female search for self-
empowerment. Scoring big at the box offi  ce during the fi  rst weeks it played, 
Waiting to Exhale generated signifi cant dialogue among black women and men 
on the current state of gender relations in black communities. Yet many black 
men contested male representation in the fi lm asserting that once again a black 
woman had misrepresented them, focusing on negative images. Viewing it as 
nothing more than black male bashing, they saw no redeeming value to “airing 
the dirty laundry of black people.” Listening to a radio program in which call-
ers discussed their views of the fi lm, I found myself wondering why every male 
who phoned in severely lambasted McMillan for having “(mis)treated black 
men in such stereotypical ways.” A couple of weeks earlier, one black man I 
encountered one aft ernoon while sitting on a bus came on equipped with a 
copy of Waiting to Exhale in his hand ranting to black female passengers that 
he had to read “another male-bashing-book by a sister.” Rather than challenge 
my black “brother” to rethink his misguided notion of black women writers, I 
sat in silence remembering the outspoken manner in which I had defended the 
book and fi lm version of Th e Color Purple more than a decade ago.
As a black feminist man (having declared my political affi   liation to femi-
nism some years ago as the only [black] male student in a graduate women’s 
RT54118_C005.indd   100RT54118_C005.indd   100 8/11/06   4:25:02 PM8/11/06   4:25:02 PM


--- PAGE 158 ---
Daughters and Sons • 101
feminist organization) the manner in which I have articulated a pro-femi-
nist positionality has taken many turns—some representing a radical “out” 
posture, others aff ecting a more subversive stance. In part, this essay works 
to oppose black male anti-feminist contempt and mistrust of contemporary 
black women writers as my work is an attempt to recover and reaffi   rm the 
history of black men in pro-feminist alliance with black and white women 
begun in the Woman Suff rage Movement. It also functions to assert the idea 
that black feminist critique of sexism and misogyny in black communities 
is not about “black male bashing”—but about black women confronting the 
reality of patriarchy acted out by black men. Th  e “black male bashing” atti-
tude only perpetuates popular media sensationalization of black life grounded 
in the myth of a black gender war. Creating space for progressive dialogues 
on the prevalence of black sexism need not be governed by male supremacist 
thinking as if the black male ego remains too fragile for the rigor of critique, 
even as black women labor under the myth of the matriarch, a castrating 
“superwoman.” Recovering black men’s pro-feminist past acts to engender a 
politic of intervention whereby black men (and women) come to understand 
the necessity of feminist critique in liberation struggle as a critical means to 
empower all black people.
Black Women Writing to Liberate Themselves: Breaking a Tradition of Silence
If the fi rst wave of American feminism in the 19th century represented the 
struggle of black women to be recognized as “women”—the second movement 
for women’s liberation set the stage for a renaissance of black women writ-
ers who employed literature as a vehicle for self-empowerment. Misguidely, 
the liberatory writings of black women have become the targets of black male 
anti-feminists precisely because many believe that the sole aim of black female 
writers is to bash them. Critical dialogue during and since “Th  e Debate on 
Black Sexism” has continued around what black male detractors of feminism 
consider the emasculation of black men by “angry black feminists,” Robert 
Staples calls Wallace and Shange. Black men opposed to feminism, such as 
Ishmael Reed, have accused black women writers of complicity with white 
women feminists toward the racist castration of all black men.
Black women writers have been accused of breaking faith with a stand-
ing agreement with their male counterparts and black female representation 
of black men said to be counter-productive to African-American struggle 
against racist oppression. Yet few of the black male critics of black women 
writers are willing to acknowledge the reality of sexism in black communities. 
In “Family Plots: Black Women Writers Reclaim Th  eir Past,” Th ulani Davis 
articulates the perceived attack on black men this way—
Contemporary [women] writers are being accused of pillorying black 
men, promoting homosexuality, ignoring sociological overviews of black 
RT54118_C005.indd   101RT54118_C005.indd   101 8/11/06   4:25:04 PM8/11/06   4:25:04 PM


--- PAGE 159 ---
102 • Th e Womanist Reader
oppression—and they’re oft en pegged as the fi rst black writers to commit 
such sins. (14)
To the extent that black women have embraced feminism, many black 
anti-feminists believe it has led them into acts of betrayal through a 
“(Ms.)representation” of black men. Th e price black women writers pay is 
expulsion from the Tradition of (“racial uplift ”) writing hereto dominated by 
African-American male writers. According to Mel Watkins in “Sexism, Racism 
and Black Women Writers,”
Th ose black women writers who have chosen black men as a target have 
set themselves outside a tradition that is nearly as old as black Ameri-
can literature itself. Th ey have, in eff  ect, put themselves at odds with 
what seems to be an unspoken but almost universally accepted covenant 
among black writers. (36)
Th e “unspoken covenant” to which Watkins refers resides in myth. Black 
writers have never had such an unstated agreement. In African-American 
literary history, prescriptive notions of representation have traditionally met 
opposition (example: the Harlem renaissance). To suggest (as Watkins does 
later in his article) that the Harlem renaissance was a period during which “the 
earliest fi ction by American blacks, produced by the Talented Tenth school 
of writers … [was] characterized by [its] emphasis on establishing humane, 
positive images of blacks” (36) reveals a limited knowledge of the period’s lit-
erary crisis regarding the representation of blacks in fi  ction. Watkins com-
pletely ignores the many black female and male writers who contested the 
provincialism, sexism, and homophobia of the black middle class. Watkins’ 
claim that contemporary African-American women writers initiated a trend 
toward negative images of black men ignores those less than positive portray-
als created by a number of black male writers. Like Watkins, Robert Staples 
would have us believe Shange and Wallace were the fi rst (rightly) “angry black 
feminists.” How would black men like Mel Watkins and Robert Staples read 
the feminist writings of Frederick Douglass and W.E.B. Du Bois? Would they 
be called “angry black feminists”? Apparently, contemporary black men who 
oppose feminism have no knowledge of Shange and Wallace’s historical black 
male womanist counterparts.
(Re)constructing a Black Male Feminist Past, toward a 
Black Womanist Future
Considering the diff erence race makes in relation to black men and feminism, 
my analysis of black male feminism is situated in the historical light of African-
American male participation in the Woman Suff  rage Movement. It forms 
the basis for theorizing black male feminism as a site of resistance to anti-
womanist thinking and a location for gender solidarity, where transformative 
RT54118_C005.indd   102RT54118_C005.indd   102 8/11/06   4:25:05 PM8/11/06   4:25:05 PM


--- PAGE 160 ---
Daughters and Sons • 103
ideas of black manhood and masculinity in support of women’s rights work 
against the ideology of male supremacy. Contesting black male attacks 
on black feminists—from Michele Wallace and Ntozake Shange in the late 
1970s to Alice Walker and Terry McMillan in the following decades—black 
men understanding the longstanding relationship between black women 
and men in coalition struggle for woman suff  rage in the 1920s disrupts the 
contemporary myth that all black men are anti-feminists. (Re)establishing a 
black men’s womanist history represents an important step toward ending the 
myth of feminism as an (alien)ating force in black lives.
On the one hand, racial imperatives articulated in the framework of race 
and cultural nationalism since the 1960s—during the rise of the Black Power 
Movement and most recently in the call for black male repatriarchalization 
by Louis Farrakhan with the Million Man March—“blackness” has again 
become synonymous with “ maleness, ” reinscribing a male-centered view of 
race that always already ignores issues of sexism. On the other, in the ’60s 
issues of gender equality and women’s rights led the agenda of the Women’s 
Liberation Movement, principally dominated by middle class white women. 
And for many white women feminists still, the relation of men to feminism 
continues to be articulated in terms of gender alone, excluding the impact race 
has had and continues to have on gender relations in the U.S. By the end of 
the Black Power Movement, just as racial injustice had come to be identifi  ed 
mostly with the plight of the black male, so at the height of the Women’s Lib-
eration Movement the oppression of women had come to be associated with 
women who were white and middle class.
Refl ecting on the race and gender politics of the 1960s, I have come to view 
the Black Power Movement and the second wave of feminism as important 
clarifying moments in my evolution as a black male feminist teacher in the 
1990s. But like black women feminists advocating the struggle against racism, 
black men supporting women against sexism fi nd ourselves on the margins of 
both black liberation and women’s movements. Oft en having to confront the 
question: Are you “black” fi rst or “feminist”? we fi nd ourselves walking a race/
gender tight-rope always having to negotiate a position of split allegiance. For 
black women feminists, emphasis on their status as women in many black com-
munities has been equated with a betrayal of race solidarity and lesbianism (as 
if heterosexual affi  liation alone should determine one’s affi  nity to blackness).
Th e absence of a large-scale political pronouncement of black men in sup-
port of anti-sexist activism suggests that in the contemporary period some-
thing called “black male pro-feminism” is invisible. And in many ways, being 
black and male in feminist alliance means being an “invisible (wo)man”—not 
a woman but neither a man in traditional phallocentric terms. Without over-
simplifying this condition, perhaps, there is a kind of gender/race ambigu-
ity that informs the idea of black male feminist positionality. But, as I have 
stated before, it is the idea of feminism connected to a perverse notion of the 
RT54118_C005.indd   103RT54118_C005.indd   103 8/11/06   4:25:06 PM8/11/06   4:25:06 PM


--- PAGE 161 ---
104 • Th e Womanist Reader
feminine that in the historical memory of black men conjures up images of 
feminization, castration, and ultimately death which may partly account for 
contemporary black male antifeminism. Th us, in white supremacist capitalist 
patriarchal culture, to many black men feminism represents a threat to their 
vision of black masculinity and manhood—of familial and cultural authority, 
responsibility, nationhood, and “manliness.” Many view feminism in synony-
mous relation to white supremacist attempt to reinact the sexual “un-maning” 
of black men as the prime spectacle in the contemporary period of a “high 
tech” lynching.
Yet we can no longer use the myth of feminism as a racist ploy to emasculate 
black men while we assert our power as men to oppress women. Progressive 
black men, whether or not we advocate feminism, ought to begin divesting 
ourselves of male privilege in support of black women. Opposing sexism and 
misogyny, we embrace our history of pro-feminist alliance in women’s rights 
struggle. Confronting the fear of the feminine that feminism represents to 
many men, black men begin to formulate eff ective, liberatory strategies of gen-
der empowerment in black communities which affi  rm the rights of all women. 
Moreover, as we insist upon our right to be treated with dignity and respect 
in this society, we do so not because we are men but because we are human 
beings. Black men need to know that feminism—as a belief rooted in the right 
of women to lead non-oppressive, non-objectifi ed lives—is not racist, sexist, 
or classist. We must vigorously denounce black male anti-feminist rhetoric 
that reduces the feminism of black women to a diatribe against black men.
If black women feminists are “angry” with black men (to recite Robert Sta-
ples’ choice of words), then we need to ask why—without the cloak of self-pity 
that so many of us wear as we hide behind the wall of sexist denial to defend 
our oppressive behavior and misogynist ways. We can no longer construct 
ourselves as innocent victims of racism—castrated by “our” women who have 
no sympathy for the battle we wage against the (white) “Man” who refuses us 
a bigger slice of patriarchal pie. Black men in the Woman Suff rage Movement 
speaking and writing in feminist alliance rejected the “black-man-as-victim” 
status as they fought to obtain social, economic, and political rights for black 
men and women—while working to secure certain rights for women particu-
larly based on the condition of gender oppression across the boundaries of 
race. Why can’t we?
Black Men Speaking and Writing in Feminist Alliance
Fu nd a ment a l ly, it mu s t b e s t ate d t hat f rom Fre der ic k Dou g l a s s to W. E . B . D u B oi s ,  
feminist movement in black communities has had a signifi cant impact on the 
representation of African-Americans in black discourse. Th e emergence of a 
black female intelligentsia in the last decade of the 19th century was preceded by 
the rise of Douglass as one of the century’s most recognized black intellectuals, 
and followed by Du Bois as the major arbiter of the intellectual and artistic 
RT54118_C005.indd   104RT54118_C005.indd   104 8/11/06   4:25:07 PM8/11/06   4:25:07 PM


--- PAGE 162 ---
Daughters and Sons • 105
movement known as the Harlem renaissance. In the African-American literary 
tradition these men stand as acknowledged leaders of the “race,” but each in his 
own right commanded more than one discursive fi eld in which he spoke and 
wrote on the subject of women’s rights. To view Douglass and Du Bois only as 
race leaders obscures and diminishes their distinguished careers as advocates 
of women’s rights. To overlook their active participation in the developing stage 
of black women’s intellectual and political enterprise (from which African-
American feminist movement emerged) represents a grave oversight. Frances 
Ellen Harper, Pauline Hopkins, Anna Julia Cooper, and Ida B. Wells, among 
others, constituted a feminist intellectual body of which Frederick Douglass and 
W.E.B. Du Bois were an integral part.
As pro-woman speakers and writers, these men fi t within the black feminist 
tradition at the incisive juncture of black women’s political and social activ-
ism, characterized in the writings of the “Woman’s Era.” I assert the impor-
tance of the pro-woman position Douglass and Du Bois held partly to counter 
the phallocentric identifi cation of blackness, though at times both men repre-
sented themselves in rather traditionally patriarchal ways. In recovering the 
women’s rights discourse of Douglass and Du Bois as models of black ma le pro-
feminism, I employ it to counterpose contemporary black male anti-feminist 
sentiment. I argue that the vision of liberation struggle these men constructed 
around a race/gender coalition politic holds transformative possibilities for 
black liberation movement today. Th e liberatory nature of feminist writings 
b y  D o u g l a s s  a n d  D u  B o i s  r e s t  p r e c i s e l y  o n  t h e  c o n j o i n m e n t  o f  g e n d e r  a n d  
race issues. Th is way of thinking is representative of the ideals early coalition 
strategists conceived in linking abolitionism to feminism. Douglass, Eliza-
beth Cady Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony among others viewed gender and 
race oppression in coterminous relation (notwithstanding the racist ideology 
of the Woman Suff rage Movement). Th erefore, a movement to oppose gender 
and race oppression could constitute a much more politically viable and pow-
erful location from which to strategize black enfranchisement and the politi-
cal freedom of women.
Relying on black feminists theorizing race, gender, and class as interlock-
ing systems of oppression, I look to the work of Paula Giddings, Angela Davis, 
and hooks on the history of black women and men in feminist movement to 
clarify the dual positions Douglass and Du Bois occupied as race spokesmen 
and advocates of women’s rights. As standpoints determining their views of 
black liberation, race/gender duality inform the complex ideological structure 
of the men’s feminist writings. Grasping the strategy Douglass and Du Bois 
conceived to advance the struggle of black people enables contemporary black 
men to reconceptualize a movement in resistance to white supremacy which 
encompasses strategies that oppose the oppression of women.
While the history of joint movement involving black and white people against 
racism and sexism in the U.S. presents less than a glowing model of success, as a 
RT54118_C005.indd   105RT54118_C005.indd   105 8/11/06   4:25:08 PM8/11/06   4:25:08 PM


--- PAGE 163 ---
106 • Th e Womanist Reader
feminist I believe progressive feminism (founded on the liberation of all people, 
female and male) remains a crucial site in which to foster a coalition politic—
linking political resistance to gender, race, class, and sexual oppression (across 
the boundaries of identity politics). I believe the infusion of coalition politics, 
informed by feminist thinking, in black people’s movement for liberation would 
transform the dynamics of gender relations in black communities such that no 
one—regardless of sex, sexual preference, and/or class—is excluded from the bat-
tle for black people to live as whole beings. In the process, black men interrogat-
ing meanings of manhood (beyond white supremacist patriarchal denial of black 
male humanity) come to view feminism as a life-sustaining way of thinking that 
enhances rather than threatens our lives. As woman suff ragists and advocates of 
women’s rights, Frederick Douglass and W.E.B. Du Bois have much to off er us as 
black male feminists.
“(Black) Men in Feminism?” Th e “Ins” and “Outs” 
of (White) Male Feminism
In the 1980s male feminism was debated in Men in Feminism (1987), edited 
by Alice Jardine and Paul Smith. Centering on the theoretical problematics of 
male feminism, essays in the anthology focused on issue of men’s relation (or 
nonrelation) to feminist theory. Given the ever-increasing presence of male 
critical and theoretical discourse on women, a volume such as Men in Feminism 
possessed the potential to be crucially important to a continuing dialogue on 
where men stand in relation to feminism. But it woefully failed. Th e essays, for 
the most part, exclude a discussion of race and sexuality. Th e volume includes 
not one essay by a woman or man of color. What references there are to black 
men and women are only incidental. Th e relation of men of color to feminism 
is never addressed. We remain invisible at nearly every level of discussion. Only 
one essay written by a white gay man overtly engages “men in feminism” and 
male sexuality. Jardine and Smith blame the virtual absence of gay and non-
whi te perspectiv es o n th eir “tr o ub l e l oca ting in tell ectuals, wh o , ha ving sh o wn 
interest in the question, would off er … a gay or black perspective on the problem.” 
Rather than simply confess to the failure of their search, they point to academia’s 
lack of institutional commitment to diversity in its hiring practices (vii–viii).
I seriously question how extensively the editors’ looked for the “Other” per-
spective when by 1987 bell hooks had already written on the relationship of 
men of color to feminism in Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center ,  1984. 
In spite of its glaring silence on the subject of black men and feminism, con-
ceptually Men in Feminism raises a fundamental question as to whether male 
feminists can work to empower women in non-patriarchal ways. In “Male 
Feminism,” Stephen Heath addresses this question asserting that “[m]en’s 
relation to feminism is an impossible one … politically. Men have a necessary 
relation to feminism … and that relation is also necessarily one of a certain 
exclusion … no matter how ‘sincere,’ ‘sympathetic’ or whatever, we are always 
RT54118_C005.indd   106RT54118_C005.indd   106 8/11/06   4:25:08 PM8/11/06   4:25:08 PM


--- PAGE 164 ---
Daughters and Sons • 107
i n  a  m al e  p o s i ti o n  w h i c h  b r i n g s  wi th  i t  all  th e  i m p l i c a ti o n s  o f  d o m i n a ti o n  
and appropriation …” (1). Th e idea that men cannot in feminist alliance with 
women politically subvert the power of male supremacy is like saying white 
people in anti-racist solidarity with black people cannot divest themselves of 
white supremacist thinking.
Considering the institutionalization of women’s studies in the academy 
and the proliferation of feminist scholarship by men (mostly white), I too am 
suspicious of male presence into this arena—particularly when so much of 
it appears appropriative, motivated by professional advancement. Yet male 
feminism situated in activist relation to feminist movement demonstrates a 
necessary engagement in theory and practice. Otherwise, the “in” space of 
“feminist” men construct can only be patriarchal—one of control, penetra-
tion, and violation. Discovering and writing about the lives of Douglass and 
Du Bois as woman suff ragists has helped me to free myself from the kind of 
paralyzing male feminist theorizing trap that Stephen Heath sets up. If all 
feminist men concluded as he does that our relation to feminism is indeed 
an  im p o s s i b l e  o n e ,  w e  w o ul d  n e v e r  g e t  o n  wi th  th e  t a s k  a t  h an d — t o  e n d  
sexism and the oppression of women. Th  e history of black male pro-femi-
nist relation to women’s movement against sexism shows that despite the 
patriarchal baggage all men carry, we can be men without being oppressors 
of women.
(Black) male feminism as a politic of intervention (opposing sexism in 
black communities) represents a crucial step toward educating men on the 
ill-eff ects of male domination. According to bell hooks, the struggle against 
sexist oppression will be most successfully fought when men undergo femi-
nist transformation—only when we are challenged by women to understand 
that the oppression of women is a form of self-oppression. Women can no 
longer aff ord to theorize men on the margin of feminism when sexist prac-
tice impacts the lives of women daily as its victims and men as its perpetra-
tors. Women accepting progressive men as feminist allies end the stigma of 
feminist movement as a separatist enterprise. While separatist thinking may 
free women from the presence of men, it does not eradicate sexism in the 
society at large. Instead, it mirrors the very sexist behavior feminist women 
seek to end.
“Re-membering” in Feminist Solidarity, Renewing Progressive 
Partnerships between Black Women and Men
As the 1960s brought forth with it a renaissance of black women writers, so 
it gave birth to a new generation of black female scholar/critics who would 
become the architects of a black feminist theory and criticism. From the re-
emergence of feminism in black communities in the 1960s, came some of 
today’s most outspoken black feminists. Of them, bell hooks, more than any 
other has addressed the necessity of black men in feminist movement. “Men: 
RT54118_C005.indd   107RT54118_C005.indd   107 8/11/06   4:25:09 PM8/11/06   4:25:09 PM


--- PAGE 165 ---
108 • Th e Womanist Reader
Comrades in Struggle” (in Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center ) critically 
addressed the need for men’s political engagement in feminism. In one of her 
most radical essays on the subject, “Feminist Focus on Men” (from Talking 
Back: Th inking Feminist, Th inking Black,  1989)—she calls for women scholars 
to begin writing on men:
Now we [women] can acknowledge that the reconstruction and trans-
formation of male behavior, of masculinity, is a necessary and essen-
tial part of feminist revolution. … While it is critical that male scholars 
committed to feminist struggle do scholarship that focuses on men, it is 
equally important that women scholars focus on men. (127, 132)
Putting into practice that which she advocates, hooks works in the tradi-
tion of 19th and early 20th-century black feminist coalition struggle. Yearn-
ing: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics (1990) includes “Black Women and 
Men: Partnership in the 1990s,” a dialogue between herself and Cornel West. 
Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life (1991), co-authored with 
West, opens with the essay above as the basis for what represents a book-length 
continuation of the conversation the two began earlier. As intellectual “part-
ners” discussing the challenge of integrating radical intellectualism into the 
struggle against racism, sexism, and the economic and cultural exploitation of 
African-Americans, they become comrades of the mind negotiating—
[T]he point of connection between black women and men [that is the] 
space of recognition and understanding, where we know one another so 
well, our histories, that we can take the bits and pieces, the fragments of 
who we are, and put them back together, re-member them. (19)
In “re-member[ing]” black women and men’s histories, hooks and West 
remember the legacy of those gone before them, who fought for the liberation 
of black people. Th at hooks and West would frame their coming together in 
the tradition of African-American intellectualism brings a new, even more 
lucid understanding of a historic exchange between black women and men. 
Well known dialogues have been recorded between Frederick Douglass and 
black women intellectuals including Sojourner Truth, Frances Harper, and Ida 
B. Wells-Barnett, among others. Dialogues have been documented which took 
place between W.E.B. Du Bois and Mary Church Terrell, Anna Julia Cooper, 
and Jessie Fauset—as well as those he had with a number of other black female 
thinkers of his day. Breaking Bread is about maintaining and preserving the 
historical continuity of black intellectual life. In the company of Douglass and 
Du Bois, bell hooks and Cornel West fi nd their dialogue solidly grounded in a 
long history of black female/male “partnership” in feminist movement.
Claiming the feminist positionality of Douglass and Du Bois as a critical 
standpoint from which to call contemporary black men into renewed dialogue 
with black women on the status of gender relations in black communities, as 
RT54118_C005.indd   108RT54118_C005.indd   108 8/11/06   4:25:10 PM8/11/06   4:25:10 PM


--- PAGE 166 ---
Daughters and Sons • 109
a feminist black male college professor teaching African-American literature, 
I have constructed a cluster of courses in which the focus is the examina-
tion of the gender, race, class, and sexual politics of black people in the U.S. 
Teaching as a feminist, I aim my courses (while focusing on the experiences 
of black Americans) to engender the anti-racist/anti-sexist agenda Douglass 
and Du Bois conceived. Th e remainder of this essay works to explain the per-
formance of anti-racist-feminism in my education practice—where the class-
room is employed as a space not only for teaching progressive race and gender 
politics but for creating a liberatory location in which students learn about the 
transformative power of human rights activism.
From Th eory to Practice: Teaching Feminism to Re-member
Committed to progressive feminist movement as articulated by hooks, I envi-
s i o n  t e a c hin g  as  a  p r o c e s s  o f  “ r e - m e m b e rin g ”  in  w hi c h  Afri can - Am e ri can  
l i t e r a ry  n a r r a t i v e s  b e c o m e  a g e n t s  o f  s o c i al  h e al i n g ,  a c r o s s  th e  b o u n d a r i e s  
of race, gender, class, and sexuality. Many students interested in ways these 
categories intersect come to my classes seeking an approach to understand 
the complex relation between them. I set up the political struggle of black 
Americans recounted in fi  ction, poetry, and/or essay form as a model for 
liberation politics.
Over the past fi ve years, I have developed a course repertory grounded in 
feminism.
4 Working from my background in African-American literature, the 
courses I teach apply a sociological perspective to the representation of black 
female/male gender relations rather than a strictly traditional “literary” inter-
pretation. Th is approach illustrates the juncture where the personal, political, 
and pedagogical meet to establish the classroom as a space of feminist activ-
ism, where teaching black literature serves a liberatory purpose.
But it is the standpoint from which I perform an anti-racist/feminist ped-
agogy in the classroom that distinguishes my teaching as a male feminist. 
Th inking about ways to contest male privilege, sexism, and patriarchal hege-
mony and the power of the maternal in my life as a man, a husband, a father, 
and a teacher—I have come to draw upon the style, attitudes, and critical 
thinking about life experience my mother passed on to me. For me, perform-
ing a black male feminist positionality in the classroom means tapping into 
the maternal as a transformative space in which to nurture the development 
of critical consciousness in my students. I work to achieve a relationship with 
them associated with a maternal posture rather than paternal, patriarchal, or 
traditionally masculine-identifi ed interaction. Following Sara Ruddick’s pro-
gressive line of thought that “a man who engages in mothering to some extent 
takes on the female condition and risks identifi cation with the feminine” (45), 
I claim the act of “mothering” as a liberatory location to employ the maternal 
as a strategy of nurturance in my pedagogical practice in opposition to ways 
of the Father.
RT54118_C005.indd   109RT54118_C005.indd   109 8/11/06   4:25:11 PM8/11/06   4:25:11 PM


--- PAGE 167 ---
110 • Th e Womanist Reader
Growing up in a patriarchal household where my father’s experience as a 
military offi  cer informed the masculine rigidity of its day-to-day operation—
as an oft en withdrawn timid little boy, I came to fear, despise, and later resist 
his notions of manhood, manliness, and masculinity. But in refl  ection, I was 
never drawn to the idea of male supremacy. More than anything, I identifi  ed 
with my mother’s condition as black woman who, as a house-keeper/cook for a 
period in her life working tirelessly at the whims of elite white women, always 
had to enter the back door of their elegantly appointed homes to perform her 
duties as a servant. But it is my mother’s sharp tongue, her resolute will to 
struggle, her critical understanding of the way race shaped her experience as a 
black female working class mother and wife that have informed how and what 
I teach. Teaching students (male students in particular) to resist anti-feminist 
ideas that men embracing feminism necessarily means a loss of a masculinity, 
I hold to Ruddick’s idea that: “Th e fear of becoming ‘feminine’…is a motivat-
ing force behind the drive to master women and whatever is ‘womanly.’ … 
[G]rown men should confront the political meaning of ‘femininity’ and their 
own fear of the feminine. A man does not, by becoming a mother, give up his 
male body or any part of it. To be sure, by becoming a mother he will, in many 
social groups, challenge the ideology of masculinity” (45).
I t stands to reason that men who embrace feminist thinking risk having 
their masculinity called into question; this is the point exactly. A man advo-
cating and teaching feminism means taking risks—breaking through barriers 
of manhood and masculinity inscribed in patriarchy, where qualities of nur-
turance and mothering are devalued. Th e maternal, as Ruddick insists, pos-
sesses transgendered capabilities.
Since my fi rst course in feminism nearly ten years ago in graduate school 
when I read Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center for the fi rst time, hooks’ 
progressive vision of feminist movement against all forms of domination 
has shaped and guided my vision of the classroom as a space for liberatory 
education practice. But feminism itself remains a contested ideology in and 
outside the classroom not only because it subverts patriarchal power but also 
because it is bound up in complicated issues of race, class, and sexuality. For 
any teacher—whether female or male, black or not, gay or straight—employing 
progressive feminist politics to teach against white supremacy and male 
domination represents a transgressive act. Anti-racist feminist practice in 
the classroom requires risk-taking by the teacher and student. Oft en it means 
speaking from the personal, a space loaded with ideological baggage in need 
of exposure and examination.
When declaring to students that I am a feminist, they always react in com-
plex ways, depending upon their race, gender, and sexual affi   liations. But a 
feminist black man in (or outside) the classroom is an oddity. First of all, I am 
at odds with many white students’ fear of black men and racist attitudes about 
black people in general. Secondly, I am at odds with many black students whose 
RT54118_C005.indd   110RT54118_C005.indd   110 8/11/06   4:25:11 PM8/11/06   4:25:11 PM


--- PAGE 168 ---
Daughters and Sons • 111
rage against and contempt for all white people blind them to the possibilities of 
progressive coalition movement across racial boundaries in resistance to rac-
ism, when we begin to de-essentialize “blackness.” I am also at odds with male 
students especially (of color and not) who buy into male supremacist ideas of 
manhood and masculinity. Th ey view me as a traitor to mankind, a misan-
thrope of the worst kind!
As a black man teaching feminism as a strategy to combat racism, I take 
risks in the classroom posing a particular challenge to essentialized meanings 
of black liberation and racial solidarity linked to narrow ideas of black man-
hood and masculinity. Like black women feminists, my commitment to black 
struggle against racism is called into question by students of color who (always 
few in number at my institution) argue that “feminism is a white woman’s 
thing.” As a black man teaching in a predominately white, private institution 
who advocates an end to male privilege, sexism, and misogyny from a par-
ticularly “black” feminist perspective, my color and gender pose problems for 
white students in my classes. While white male presence in them is rare, those 
white men they do attract are oft  en in the process of coming to grips with 
their fear of “blackness”—especially that personifi  ed in negative stereotypes 
of black men. Similarly, white women in my classes, whether feminist or not, 
respond to me in ways that suggest they too are working to fi  gure out their 
own relationship to a “feminist black man.” Feminist students who are female 
(of color and not), suspicious of men’s motives for teaching and claiming femi-
nist alliance, oft en display attitudes of distrust toward the notion of a male 
feminist. Generally, in the minds of both white students and students of color, 
I represent an image of black manhood and masculinity out of synch with 
the racist and sexual mythologies inscripted on the black male body over the 
course of time. I am not a Sambo, an Uncle Tom, a buck, a rapist, or a dope-
dealer. But I am a black man who must downplay the fact of my tallness (6’4”) 
and my “loud” voice (which I have been told by white females in my classes 
that these aspects of my identity frighten them)—because I am specifi  cally 
“black” and “male.”
By the same token, disclaiming a patriarchal nationalist black masculinity 
(as represented by the ideas of Farrakhan dramatically played out in the Mil-
lion Man March), I am viewed by many black male students as not only having 
sold out my blackness but my manhood as well because I critically opposed 
the March and most of its “Mission Statement.” I maintain that a major con-
tributing factor to the failure of black liberation movement in the 1960s had 
to do with its over-emphasis on issues relating to the needs of black men that 
excluded those of black women. Th e inability of the movement to sustain a 
successful oppositional stance and resistance to white supremacy and white 
supremacist capitalist patriarchal exploitation of black culture resided in the 
fact that many black men who participated in the movement viewed the strug-
gle against racism solely in male-identifi ed terms as I have already argued.
RT54118_C005.indd   111RT54118_C005.indd   111 8/11/06   4:25:12 PM8/11/06   4:25:12 PM


--- PAGE 169 ---
112 • Th e Womanist Reader
Black students in my classes (oft en because they feel threatened by implicit 
and explicit acts of racism perpetrated by white administrators, faculty mem-
bers, and staff  persons in a predominately white university setting) resist my 
claim that anti-racist ideology must be aff  ected through a number of radical 
strategies—beyond the limited perspective of black male identity politics. 
Toward bell hooks’ liberatory vision of “education as the practice of freedom,” 
I claim a pedagogical strategy rooted in the politics of progressive feminist 
movement against all forms of domination, where teachers committed to coali-
tion building cross race, gender, class, and sexual borders teach students ways 
to oppose the dehumanization of all people.
Contemporary black men actively calling into question male supremacy 
represents a potentially powerful voice for rethinking black masculinity. 
T ransformative strategies of black liberation linked to a liberatory vision of 
black manhood and masculinity refl ect a critically oppositional view of black 
men’s racial oppression and the power we possess to oppress women precisely 
because we are men. When black men begin to construct a large-scale move-
ment against racism and sexism,  we embark upon a new path of struggle—
one of feminist reclamation, not patriarchal atonement. Accepting our past 
as black men fi ghting racism as we waged with women the battle for gender 
rights, we claim a destiny beyond the bounds of patriarchy.
Notes
 1. Excerpted from Alice Walker’s defi  nition of “womanist” in I n  S e a r c h  o f  O u r  M o t h er s ’  
Gardens (San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers), 1983.
 2. From “Reconstructing Black Masculinity” in Black Looks: Race and Representation  (Bos-
ton: South End Press), 1992.
 3. In Soul on Ice and Sex and Racism in America,  respectively, both Eldridge Cleaver and 
Calvin Hernton off er provocative versions of U.S. race, gender sexual hierarchy in which 
the racist sexualization of the black male operates.
 4. For example, students in a course I teach called “Black Female Representation in the Har-
lem Renaissance” focus on the politics of gender and race in the U.S. during the 1920s. 
Th ey study fi  ctional accounts of “mixed-race” women in the African-American literary 
genre known as the “novel of passing.” Examining the impact of miscegenation on the 
female body , students call into question “race” as an inherently natural category while 
analyzing the interrelated ways white supremacy, male privilege, classism, and homopho-
bia function to shape the destiny of “biracial” women. Female and male students reading, 
discussing, and writing about the dilemma of “the tragic mulatta” come to understand 
the value of progressive feminist critique to engage the multiple oppression she expe-
riences. Interrogating the fallibility of racial categorizing and the fallacy of whiteness, 
they comprehend the oppression of women as bound up in complex matrix of competing 
po w e r  r e la ti o ns.  M o r eo v e r ,  th ey  co m e  t o  un d e rstan d  th a t  all  f o rms  o f  d o min a ti o n  ar e  
interconnected. I suggest to them that for individuals concerned with issues of social 
justice, coalition politics rooted in feminist movement can be a powerful force toward 
mobilizing people across borders. For me, the classroom serves as a viable site for the 
development of critical consciousness that values coalition building that resists the 
dehumanization of all people. Teaching in the spirit of feminist black men like Frederick 
Douglass and W.E.B. Du Bois advocating feminism who have come before me, I put into 
practice the anti-racist-feminist legacy they created.
RT54118_C005.indd   112RT54118_C005.indd   112 8/11/06   4:25:13 PM8/11/06   4:25:13 PM


--- PAGE 170 ---
Daughters and Sons • 113
Bibliography
Cleaver, Eldridge. Soul on Ice. New York: Dell Publishing Co., Inc., 1968.
Davis, Th ulani. “Family Plots: Black Women Writers Reclaim the Past.” Voice Literary Supple-
ment Mar. 1987: 14–17.
Giddings, Paula. When and Where I Enter: Th  e Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in 
America . New York: Bantam Books, 1984.
Hernton, Calvin. Sex and Racism in America . New York: Grove Press, 1965.
hooks, bell. Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center . Boston: South End Press, 1984.
———. Talking Back: Th inking Feminist, Th inking Black . Boston: South End Press, 1989.
———. Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics . Boston: South End Press, 1990.
———. Black Looks: Race and Representation . Boston: South End Press, 1992.
hooks, bell, and West, Cornel. Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life . Boston: South 
End Press, 1991.
Jardine, Alice and Paul Smith, eds. Men in Feminism . New York: Routledge, 1987.
Ruddick, Sara. Maternal Th inking: Toward a Politics of Peace . New York: Ballantine Books, 1989.
Staples, Robert. “Th e Myth of Black Macho: A Response to Angry Black Feminists.” Th e Black 
Scholar. Mar.–Apr. 1979: 24–32.
Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens . San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Pub-
lishers, 1983.
Watkins, Mel. “Sexism, Racism and Black Women Writers.” Th e New York Times Book Review . 
June 1986: 36.
RT54118_C005.indd   113RT54118_C005.indd   113 8/11/06   4:25:14 PM8/11/06   4:25:14 PM


--- PAGE 171 ---
RT54118_C005.indd   114RT54118_C005.indd   114 8/11/06   4:25:15 PM8/11/06   4:25:15 PM


--- PAGE 172 ---
Part 3
Womanist Theory and Praxis: 
Womanism in the Disciplines
RT54118_S003.indd   115RT54118_S003.indd   115 6/2/06   7:15:49 PM6/2/06   7:15:49 PM


--- PAGE 173 ---
RT54118_S003.indd   116RT54118_S003.indd   116 6/2/06   7:15:49 PM6/2/06   7:15:49 PM


--- PAGE 174 ---
117
6
Theology
Womanist Theology: Black Women’s Voices (1986)
DELORES S. WILLIAMS
Daughter:  Mama, why are we brown, pink, and yellow, and our   
cousins are white, beige, and black?
Mother:  Well, you know the colored race is just like a fl  ower 
 garden, with every color fl ower represented.
Daughter:  Mama, I’m walking to Canada and I’m taking you and 
a bunch of slaves with me.
Mother: It wouldn’t be the fi  rst time.
In these two conversational exchanges, Pulitzer Prize–winning novelist Alice 
Walker begins to show us what she means by the concept “womanist.” Th  e 
concept is presented in Walker’s In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens, and many 
women in church and society have appropriated it as a way of affi  rming them-
selves as black while simultaneously owning their connection with feminism 
and with the Afro-American community, male and female. Th  e concept of 
womanist allows women to claim their roots in black history, religion, and 
culture.
What then is a womanist? Her origins are in the black folk expression “You 
acting womanish,” meaning, according to Walker, “wanting to know more and 
in greater depth than is good for one … outrageous, audacious, courageous 
and willful behavior.” A womanist is also “responsible, in charge, serious.” She 
can walk to Canada and take others with her. She loves, she is committed, she 
is a universalist by temperament.
Her universality includes loving men and women, sexually or nonsexually. 
She loves music, dance, the spirit, food and roundness, struggle, and she loves 
herself “Regardless.”
Walker insists that a womanist is also to “committed survival and whole-
ness of entire people, male and female.” She is no separatist, “except for health.” 
A womanist is a black feminist or feminist of color. Or Walker says, “Womanist 
is to feminist as purple to lavender.”
RT54118_C006.indd   117RT54118_C006.indd   117 8/9/06   7:07:19 PM8/9/06   7:07:19 PM


--- PAGE 175 ---
118 • Th e Womanist Reader
Womanist theology, a vision in its infancy, is emerging among Afro-American 
Christian women. … Ultimately many sources—biblical, 1 theological, eccle-
siastical, social, anthropological, economic, and material from other religious 
traditions—will inform the development of this theology. As a contribution to 
this process, I will demonstrate how Walker’s concept of womanist provides 
some signifi cant clues for the work of womanist theologians. I will then focus 
on method and God-content in womanist theology. Th is contribution belongs 
to the work of prolegomena—prefatory remarks, introductory observations 
intended to be suggestive and not conclusive.
Codes and Contents
In her defi nition, Walker provides signifi  cant clues for the development of 
womanist theology. Her concept contains what black feminist scholar bell 
hooks in From Margin to Center identifi es as cultural codes. Th ese are words, 
beliefs, and behavioral patterns of a people that must be deciphered before 
meaningful communication can happen cross-culturally. Walker’s codes 
are female-centered and they point beyond themselves to conditions, events, 
meanings, and values that have crystalized in the Afro-American community 
around women’s activity and formed traditions.
A paramount example is mother-daughter advice. Black mothers have 
passed on wisdom for survival—in the white world, in the black community, 
and with men—for as long as anyone can remember. Female slave narratives, 
folk tales, and some contemporary black poetry and prose refl  ect this tradi-
tion. Some of it is collected in “Old Sister’s Advice to Her Daughters,” in Th e 
Book of Negro Folklore edited by Langston Hughes and Arna Bontemps (Dodd 
Mead, 1958).
W alk e r ’ s  all u s i o n  t o  s kin  c o l o r  p o in ts  t o  an  hi s t o ri c  tr a di ti o n  o f  t e n s i o n  
between black women over the matter of some black men’s preference for 
light-skinned women. Her reference to black women’s love of food and round-
ness points to customs of female care in the black community (including the 
church) associated with hospitality and nurture.
Th ese cultural codes and their corresponding traditions are valuable resources 
for indicating and validating the kind of data upon which womanist theologians 
can refl ect as they bring black women’s social, religious, and cultural experience 
into the discourse of theology, ethics, biblical and religious studies. Female slave 
narratives, imaginative literature by black women, autobiographies, the work 
by black women in academic disciplines, and the testimonies of black church 
women will be authoritative sources for womanist theologians.
Walker situates her understanding of a womanist in the context of non-
bourgeois black folk culture. Th e literature of this culture has traditionally 
refl ected more egalitarian relations between men and women, much less rigid-
ity in male-female roles, and more respect for female intelligence and ingenuity 
than is found in bourgeois culture.
RT54118_C006.indd   118RT54118_C006.indd   118 8/9/06   7:07:21 PM8/9/06   7:07:21 PM


--- PAGE 176 ---
Th  eology • 119
Th e black folk are poor. Less individualistic than those who are better off  , 
they have, for generations, practiced various forms of economic sharing. For 
example, immediately aft  er Emancipation mutual aid societies pooled the 
resources of black folk to help pay for funerals and other daily expenses. Th e 
Book of Negro Folklore  describes the practice of rent parties which fl  ourished 
during the Depression. Th e black folk stressed togetherness and a closer con-
nection with nature. Th ey respect knowledge gained through lived experience 
monitored by elders who diff er profoundly in social class and world view from 
the teachers and education encountered in American academic institutions. 
Walker’s choice of context suggests that womanist theology can establish its 
lines of continuity in the black community with non-bourgeois traditions less 
sexist than the black power and black nationalist traditions.
I n  t h i s  f o l k  c o n t e x t ,  s o m e  o f  t h e  b l a c k  f e m a l e - c e n t e r e d  c u l t u r a l  c o d e s  i n  
Walker’s defi nition (e.g., “Mama, I’m walking to Canada and I’m taking you and 
a bunch of slaves with me”) point to folk heroines like Harriet Tubman, whose 
liberation activity earned her the name “Moses” of her people. Th is allusion to 
Tubman directs womanist memory to a liberation tradition in black history in 
which women took the lead, acting as catalysts for the community’s revolution-
ary action and for social change. Retrieving this oft  en hidden or diminished 
female tradition of catalytic action is an important task for womanist theolo-
gians and ethicists. Th eir research may well reveal that female models of authority 
have been absolutely essential for every struggle in the black community and for 
building and maintaining the community’s institutions.
Freedom Fighters
Th e womanist theologian must search for the voices, actions, opinions, experi-
ence, and faith of women whose names sometimes slip into the male-centered 
rendering of black history, but whose actual stories remain remote. Th is search 
can lead to such little-known freedom fi ghters as Milla Granson and her coura-
geous work on a Mississippi plantation. Her liberation method broadens our 
knowledge of the variety of strategies black people have used to obtain freedom. 
According to scholar Sylvia Dannett, in Profi les in Negro Womanhood,
Milla Granson, a slave, conducted a midnight school, for several years. She 
had been taught to read and write by her former master in Kentucky … and 
in her little school hundreds of slaves benefi ted from her learning. … Aft er 
laboring all day for their master, the slaves would creep stealthily to Milla’s 
“schoolroom” (a little cabin in a back alley). … Th e doors and windows 
… had to be kept tightly sealed to avoid discovery. Each class was com-
posed of twelve pupils and when Milla had brought them up to the extent 
of her ability, she “graduated” them and took in a dozen more. Th rough 
this means she graduated hundreds of slaves. Many of whom she taught to 
write a legible hand [forged] their own passes and set out for Canada.
RT54118_C006.indd   119RT54118_C006.indd   119 8/9/06   7:07:21 PM8/9/06   7:07:21 PM


--- PAGE 177 ---
120 • Th e Womanist Reader
Women like T ubman and Granson used subtle and silent strategies to liber-
ate themselves and large numbers of black people. By uncovering as much as 
possible about such female liberation, the womanist begins to understand the 
relation of black history to the contemporary folk expression: “If Rosa Parks 
had not sat down, Martin King would not have stood up.”
While she celebrates and emphasizes black women’s culture and way of 
being in the world, Walker simultaneously affi   rms black women’s historic 
connection with men through love and through a shared struggle for sur-
vival and for productive quality of life (e.g., “wholeness”). Th  is suggests that 
two of the principal concerns of womanist theology should be survival and 
community building and maintenance. Th  e goal of this community build-
ing is, of course, to establish a positive quality of life—economic, spiritual, 
educational—for black women, men, and children. Walker’s understanding of 
a womanist as “not a separatist” (“except for health”), however, reminds the 
Christian womanist theologian that her concern for community building and 
maintenance must ultimately extend to the entire Christian community and 
beyond that to the larger human community.
Yet womanist consciousness is also informed by women’s determination 
to love themselves. “Regardless.” Th is translates into an admonition to black 
women to avoid the self-destruction of bearing a disproportionately large 
b ur d e n  in  th e  w o r k  o f  co mm uni ty  b uil din g  an d  m ain t e n an ce.  W alk e r  s ug -
gests that women can avoid this trap by connecting with women’s communi-
ties concerned about women’s rights and well-being. Her identifi  cation of a 
womanist as also a feminist joins black women with their feminist heritage 
extending back into the nineteenth century in the work of black feminists like 
Sojourner Truth, Frances W. Harper, and Mary Church Terrell.
In making the feminist-womanist connection, however, Walker proceeds 
with great caution. While affi  rming an organic relationship between woman-
ists and feminists, she also declares a deep shade of diff  erence between them. 
(“Womanist is to feminist as purple to lavender.”) Th is gives womanist schol-
ars the freedom to explore the particularities of black women’s history and 
culture without being guided by what white feminists have already identifi  ed 
as women’s issues.
But womanist consciousness directs black women away from the nega-
tive divisions prohibiting community building among women. Th  e woman-
ist loves other women sexually and nonsexually. Th erefore, respect for sexual 
preferences is one of the marks of womanist community. According to Walker, 
homophobia has no place. Nor does “Colorism” (i.e., “yella” and half-white 
black people valued more in the black world than black-skinned people), which 
oft en separates black women from each other. Rather, Walker’s womanist 
claim is that color variety is the substance of universality. Color, like birth and 
death, is common to all people. Like the navel, it is a badge of humanity con-
necting people with people. Two other distinctions are prohibited in Walker’s 
RT54118_C006.indd   120RT54118_C006.indd   120 8/9/06   7:07:22 PM8/9/06   7:07:22 PM


--- PAGE 178 ---
Th  eology • 121
womanist thinking. Class hierarchy does not dwell among women who “… 
love struggle, love the Folks … are committed to the survival and wholeness 
of an entire people.” Nor do women compete for male attention when they “… 
appreciate and prefer female culture … value … women’s emotional fl exibility 
… and women’s strength.”
Th e intimations about community provided by Walker’s defi nition suggest 
no genuine community building is possible when men are excluded ( except 
when women’s health is at stake). Neither can it occur when black women’s 
self-love, culture, and love for each other are not affi  rmed and are not consid-
ered vital for the community’s self-understanding. And it is thwarted if black 
women are expected to bear “the lion’s share” of the work and to sacrifi ce their 
well-being for the good of the group.
Yet, for the womanist, mothering and nurturing are vitally important. 
Walker’s womanist reality begins with mothers relating to their children and 
is characterized by black women (not necessarily bearers of children) nur-
turing great numbers of black people in the liberation struggle (e.g., Harriet 
Tubman). Womanist emphasis upon the value of mothering and nurturing is 
consistent with the testimony of many black women. Th e poet Carolyn Rogers 
speaks of her mother as the great black bridge that brought her over. Walker 
dedicates her novel Th e Th ird Life of Grange Copeland  to her mother “… who 
made a way out of no way.” As a child in the black church, I heard women (and 
men) give thanks to God for their mothers “… who stayed behind and pulled 
the wagon over the long haul.”
It seems, then, that the clues about community from Walker’s defi nition of a 
womanist suggest that the mothering and nurturing dimension of Afro-Amer-
ican history can provide resources for shaping criteria to measure the quality 
of justice in the community. Th ese criteria could be used to assure female-male 
equity in the presentation of the community’s models of authority. Th ey could 
also gauge the community’s division of labor with regard to the survival tasks 
necessary for building and maintaining community.
Womanist Theology and Method
Womanist theology is already beginning to defi  ne the categories and meth-
ods needed to develop along lines consistent with the sources of that theol-
ogy. Christian womanist theological methodology needs to be informed by 
at least four elements: (1) a multidialogical intent, (2) a liturgical intent, (3) 
a didactic intent, and (4) a commitment both to reason and to the validity of 
female imagery and metaphorical language in the construction of theological 
statements.
A multidialogical intent will allow Christian womanist theologians to advo-
cate and participate in dialogue and action with many diverse social, political, 
and religious communities concerned about human survival and productive 
quality of life for the oppressed. Th e genocide of cultures and peoples (which 
RT54118_C006.indd   121RT54118_C006.indd   121 8/9/06   7:07:22 PM8/9/06   7:07:22 PM


--- PAGE 179 ---
122 • Th e Womanist Reader
has oft en been instigated and accomplished by Western white Christian groups 
or governments) and the nuclear threat of omnicide mandates womanist par-
ti ci pa ti o n  in  s u ch  dial ogu e/ acti o n.  B u t  in  this  dial ogu e/ acti o n  th e  w o manist 
also should keep her speech and action focused upon the slow genocide of poor 
black women, children, and men by exploitative systems denying them produc-
tive jobs, education, health care, and living space. Multidialogical activity may, 
like a jazz symphony, communicate some of its most important messages in 
what the harmony-driven conventional ear hears as discord, as disruption of 
the harmony in both the black American and white American social, political, 
and religious status quo.
I f  w o m a n i s t  t h e o l o g i c a l  m e t h o d  i s  i n f o r m e d  b y  a  l i t u r g i c a l  i n t e n t ,  t h e n  
womanist theology will be relevant to (and will refl  ect) the thought, worship, 
and action of the black church. But a liturgical intent will also allow woman-
ist theology to challenge the thought/worship/action of the black church with 
the discordant and prophetic messages emerging from womanist participation 
in multidialogics. Th is means that womanist theology will consciously impact 
critically upon the foundations of liturgy, challenging the church to use justice 
principles to select the sources that will shape the content of liturgy. Th e ques-
tion must be asked: “How does this source portray blackness/darkness, women 
and economic justice for nonruling-class people?” A negative portrayal will 
demand omission of the source or its radical reformation by the black church. 
Th e Bible, a major source in black church liturgy, must also be subjected to the 
scrutiny of justice principles.
A didactic intent in womanist theological method assigns a teaching func-
tion to theology. Womanist theology should teach Christians new insights 
about moral life based on ethics supporting justice for women, survival, and a 
productive quality of life for poor women, children, and men. Th is means that 
the womanist theologian must give authoritative status to black folk wisdom 
(e.g., Brer Rabbit literature) and to black women’s moral wisdom (expressed in 
their literature) when she responds to the question, “How ought the Christian 
to live in the world?” Certainly tensions may exist between the moral teach-
ings derived from these sources and the moral teachings about obedience, 
love, and humility that have usually buttressed presuppositions about living 
the Christian life. Nevertheless, womanist theology, in its didactic intent, must 
teach the church the diff erent ways God reveals prophetic word and action for 
Christian living.
Th ese intents, informing theological method, can yield a theological lan-
guage whose foundation depends as much upon its imagistic content as upon 
reason. Th e language can be rich in female imagery, metaphor, and story. 
For the black church, this kind of theological language may be quite useful, 
since the language of the black religious experience abounds in images and 
metaphors. Clift on Johnson’s collection of black conversion experiences, God 
Struck Me Dead, illustrates this point.
RT54118_C006.indd   122RT54118_C006.indd   122 8/9/06   7:07:23 PM8/9/06   7:07:23 PM


--- PAGE 180 ---
Th  eology • 123
Th e appropriateness of womanist theological language will ultimately 
reside in its ability to bring black women’s history, culture, and religious expe-
rience into the interpretive circle of Christian theology and into the liturgical 
life of the church. Womanist theological language must, in this sense, be an 
instrument for social and theological change in church and society.
Who Do You Say God Is?
Regardless of one’s hopes about intentionality and womanist theological 
method, questions must be raised about the God-content of the theology. 
Walker’s mention of the black womanist’s love of the spirit is a true refl  ec-
tion of the great respect Afro-American women have always shown for the 
presence and work of the spirit. In the black church, women (and men) oft en 
judge the eff ectiveness of the worship service not on the scholarly content of 
the sermon nor on the ritual nor on orderly process. Rather, worship has been 
eff ective if “the spirit was high,” i.e., if the spirit was actively and obviously 
present in a balanced blend of prayer, of cadenced word (the sermon), and of 
syncopated music ministering to the pain of the people.
Th e importance of this emphasis upon the spirit is that it allows Christian 
womanist theologians, in their use of the Bible, to identify and refl  ect upon 
those biblical stories in which poor oppressed women had a special encoun-
ter with divine emissaries of God, like the spirit. In the Hebrew T estament, 
Hagar’s story is most illustrative and relevant to Afro-American women’s 
experience of bondage, of African heritage, of encounter with God/emissary 
in the midst of fi  erce survival struggles. Kate Cannon among a number of 
black female preachers and ethicists urges black Christian women to regard 
themselves as Hagar’s sisters.
In relation to the Christian or New Testament, the Christian womanist 
theologian can refocus the salvation story so that it emphasizes the beginning 
of revelation with the spirit mounting Mary, a woman of the poor: (“… the 
Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over-
s h a d o w  t h e e  … ”  L u k e  1 : 3 5 ) .  S u c h  a n  i n t e r p r e t a t i o n  o f  r e v e l a t i o n  h a s  r o o t s  
in 19th-century black abolitionist and feminist Sojourner Truth. Posing an 
important question and response, she refuted a white preacher’s claim that 
women could not have rights equal to men’s because Christ was not a woman. 
Truth asked, “Whar did your Christ come from? … From God and a woman! 
Man had nothin’ to do wid Him!” Th is suggests that womanist theology could 
eventually speak of God in a well-developed theology of the spirit. Th e sources 
for this theology are many. Harriet Tubman oft en “went into the spirit” before 
her liberation missions and claimed her strength for liberation activity came 
from this way of meeting God. Womanist theology has grounds for shaping a 
theology of the spirit informed by black women’s political action.
Christian womanist responses to the question “who do you say God is?” will 
be infl uenced by these many sources. Walker’s way of connecting  womanists 
RT54118_C006.indd   123RT54118_C006.indd   123 8/9/06   7:07:23 PM8/9/06   7:07:23 PM


--- PAGE 181 ---
124 • Th e Womanist Reader
with the spirit is only one clue. Th e integrity of black church women’s faith, 
their love of Jesus, their commitment to life, love, family, and politics will 
also yield vital clues. And other theological voices (black liberation, feminist, 
Islamic, Asian, Hispanic, African, Jewish, and Western white male tradi-
tional) will provide insights relevant for the construction of the God-content 
of womanist theology.
Each womanist theologian will add her own special accent to the under-
standings of God emerging from womanist theology. But if one needs a fi  nal 
image to describe women coming together to shape the enterprise, Bess B. 
Johnson in God’s Fierce Whimsy off ers an appropriate one. Describing the dif-
ference between the play of male and female children in the black community 
where she developed, Johnson says:
the boys in the neighborhood had this game with rope … tug-o’-war … 
till fi nally some side would jerk the rope away from the others, who’d fall 
down. … Girls … weren’t allowed to play with them in this tug-o’-war; 
so we fi gured out how to make our own rope—out of … little dandeli-
ons. You just keep adding them, one to another, and you can go on and 
on. … Anybody, even the boys, could join us. … Th e whole purpose of 
our game was to create this dandelion chain—that was it. And we’d keep 
going, creating till our mamas called us home.
Like Johnson’s dandelion chain, womanist theological vision will grow as 
black women come together and connect piece with piece. Between the pro-
cess of creating and the sense of calling, womanist theology will one day pres-
ent itself in full array, refl ecting the divine spirit that connects us all.
Note
 1. [Th  e following was a box in the original article]
Womanist Theology: Some Beginnings
  Black female theologians, ethicists, sociologists, and scholars in religious studies are 
exploring the meaning of womanist. Ethicist Katie G. Cannon speaks of a black woman-
ist tradition in her contribution, “Th  e Emergence of Black Feminist Consciousness,” in 
Feminist Interpretation of the Bible  (Westminster Press, 1985). Th is tradition “identifi  es 
those [biblical] texts which help black womanists to celebrate and rename … innumer-
a b l e  i n c i d e n t s  o f  un p r e di c t a b il i ty  i n  e m p o w e r i n g  w a y s .  Th e black womanist identifi  es 
with those biblical characters who hold on to life in the face of formidable oppression.”
At the Womanspirit Rising Conference sponsored by the United Campus Ministries 
of Ohio University October 1986, Sandra Overby of Wilberforce University and Payne 
Th eological Seminary convened a workshop entitled Womanist Th  eology: A Th  eology 
with Black Women at the Center.
S o c i o l o g i s t  C h e r y l  T o w n s e n d  G i l k e s  c l a i m s  t h a t  m u c h  o f  W a l k e r ’ s  d e fi nition of a 
womanist converges with the idea of “holy boldness” possessed by certain women in 
our society. Th ey are the women who occasionally remind us, quite assertively, that “if it 
wasn’t for the women you wouldn’t have a church.” Th ese ideas are presented in “Th e Role 
of Women in the Sanctifi ed Church,” in the Spring-Summer 1986 issue of the Journal of 
Religious Th ought .
RT54118_C006.indd   124RT54118_C006.indd   124 8/9/06   7:07:24 PM8/9/06   7:07:24 PM


--- PAGE 182 ---
Th  eology • 125
Th eologian Jacqueline Grant, at Inter-denominational Th  eological Center, is also pio-
neering in womanist theology. In her major lecture at the last meeting of the Women’s 
Inter-Seminary Conference, Grant used a womanist framework to structure her message. 
My own paper, “Poke Sallit,  Mullein, Sassafras, and God: Survival Resources in Black 
Women’s Literature,” given in the women’s section at the 1985 meeting of the American 
Academy of Religion, considers the possible task of a womanist theology in light of the 
survival concerns expressed in black women’s literature.
RT54118_C006.indd   125RT54118_C006.indd   125 8/9/06   7:07:25 PM8/9/06   7:07:25 PM


--- PAGE 183 ---
126
Roundtable Discussion: Christian Ethics and 
Theology in Womanist Perspective (1989)
CHERYL J. SANDERS, KATIE G. CANNON, EMILIE M. TOWNES, 
M. SHAWN COPELAND, bell hooks , AND 
CHERYL TOWNSEND GILKES
Cheryl J. Sanders
One of the most exciting developments in the theological scholarship of the 
1980s has been the emergence of womanist ethics and theology. Womanist 
refers to a particular dimension of the culture of black women that is being 
brought to bear upon theological, ethical, biblical and other religious stud-
ies. Th ese new interpretations of black women’s religious experience and ideas 
have been sparked by the creative genius of Alice Walker. She defi nes the term 
womanist in her 1983 collection of prose writings In Search of Our Mothers’ 
Gardens.
1 In essence, womanist means black feminist.
As early as 1985, black women scholars in religion began publishing 
works that used the womanist perspective as a point of reference. Th  e major 
sources for this work are the narratives, novels, prayers and other materi-
als that convey black women’s traditions, values and struggles, especially 
during the slavery period. Methodologically, womanist scholars tend to 
process and interpret these sources in three ways: (1) the celebration of 
black women’s historical struggles and strengths; (2) the critique of vari-
ous manifestations of black women’s oppression; and (3) the construction of 
black women’s theological and ethical claims. Th  e content of womanist eth-
ics and theology bears the distinctive mark of black women’s assertiveness 
and resourcefulness in the face of oppression. Th  e womanist ideal impels 
the scholars who embrace it to be outrageous, audacious and courageous 
enough to move beyond celebration and critique to undertake the diffi   cult 
task of practical constructive work, toward the end of black women’s liberation 
and wholeness.
Does the term womanist provide an appropriate frame of reference for 
the ethical and theological statements now being generated by black women? 
T o answ er this q u esti o n, i t is n ecessary fi rst to examine critically Walker’s 
own understanding and use of the term, and then to construct some basis 
for assessing its adequacy as a rubric for Christian ethical and theological 
discourse.
In 1981 Alice Walker wrote a review of Gift s of Power : Th e Writings of 
Rebecca Jackson for Th e Black Scholar .
2 Th e review lift  s up the spiritual legacy 
RT54118_C006.indd   126RT54118_C006.indd   126 8/9/06   7:07:25 PM8/9/06   7:07:25 PM


--- PAGE 184 ---
Th  eology • 127
of the nineteenth-century black Shaker, Rebecca Jackson, who had an unusual 
conversion experience, left  her husband for a life of celibacy, and lived thereaf-
ter in close relationship with a Shaker sister, Rebecca Perot. Walker gives high 
praise to editor Jean McMahon Humez, but takes exception to Humez’s sugges-
tion that Jackson was a lesbian. Walker identifi es at least three errors in judg-
ment by Humez with respect to Jackson’s sexual orientation: (1) her disregard 
of Jackson’s avowed celibacy; (2) her questionable interpretation of Jackson’s 
dreams about Perot as erotic; and (3) her attempt to “label something lesbian 
that the black woman in question has not.” Walker’s own position regarding 
Jackson ’ s sexual orientation is that it would be “wonderful” either way . Hav -
ing thus disclaimed the moral signifi cance of Jackson’s alleged lesbianism, she 
th en g oes o n to sugg est tha t l esb ian w o ul d be an inapp ro p ria te w o r d in an y 
case, not only for Jackson, but for all black women who choose to love other 
women sexually. Walker off ers her own word womanist as a preferred alterna-
tive to lesbian in the context of black culture. Her concern is to fi nd a word that 
affi  rms connectedness rather than separation, in view of the fact that Lesbos 
was an island whose symbolism for blacks “is far from positive.” Furthermore, 
Walker concludes that “the least we can do,” and what may well be for black 
women in this society our only tangible sign of personal freedom, is to name 
our own experience aft er our own fashion, selecting our own words and reject-
ing those words that do not seem to suit.
Walker gives a more complete defi  nition of womanist as a preface to In 
Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens,  her 1983 collection of womanist prose that 
includes the Gift s of Power  review. Th is defi  nition has four parts, the fi  rst 
showing the word’s derivation from womanish (opposite of girlish) and its pri-
mary meaning “black feminist” or “feminist of color.” Th  e second part con-
veys the sense of the word as explained in the book review; as a woman who 
loves other women but is committed to the survival and wholeness of entire 
people; who is not separatist, but is “traditionally” universalist and capable 
(these traits being illustrated with excerpts of dialogue between mother and 
daughter). Th e third part celebrates what the womanist loves—music, dance, 
the moon, the Spirit, love, food, roundness, struggle, the Folk, herself—end-
ing with the word “regardless,” presumably an allusion to Walker’s earlier call 
in the review for a word that affi   rms connectedness to the community and 
the world “ regardless of who worked and slept with whom.” Th  e fourth and 
fi nal part of the defi nition compares womanist to feminist as purple to laven-
der, expressing in vivid terms the conclusion that womanist has a deeper and 
fuller meaning than feminist.
Walker’s defi nition of womanist represents a shift   in  e m p h as is  fr o m  h e r  
earlier discussion of womanist in the book review. In the fi  rst instance wom-
anist carries the connotation of black lesbian, and in the second it denotes 
black feminist, a designation that includes women who love women and those 
who lo v e m en. In bo th cases, ho w ev er , her po in t is to nam e the experien ce 
RT54118_C006.indd   127RT54118_C006.indd   127 8/9/06   7:07:26 PM8/9/06   7:07:26 PM


--- PAGE 185 ---
128 • Th e Womanist Reader
of audacious black women with a word that acknowledges their sensibilities 
and traditions in ways that the words lesbian and feminist do not. W alker’ s 
womanist defi nition and writings send a clear and consistent signal to cel-
ebrate the black woman’s freedom to choose her own labels and lovers. It is 
apparent that a few black women have responded to this call for celebration 
by writing womanist theology and womanist ethics and by calling themselves 
womanist scholars.
3 Th ose who have made use of the term womanist in their 
writing have cited the defi nition that Walker gives in her preface to In Search 
of Our Mothers’ Gardens generally without giving attention to Walker’s expla-
n a ti o n  o f  w o m anist  in  h e r  r evi ew  o f  Gift s of Power . Walker’s defi nition has 
been subjected each time to the writer’s own editing and interpretation, partly 
because each writer seems compelled to construe its meaning in light of her 
own thought. Th is process of appropriation and adaptation merits close scru-
tiny. In our eff orts to tailor Walker’s defi nition to suit our own purposes, have 
we misconstrued the womanist concept and its meaning? Is the word wom-
anist being co-opted because of its popular appeal and used as a mere title or 
postscript for whatever black women scholars want to celebrate, criticize or 
construct? Are we committing a gross conceptual error when we use Walker’s 
descriptive cultural nomenclature as a foundation for the normative discourse 
of theology and ethics? On what grounds, if any, can womanist authority and 
authenticity be established in our work? In other words, what is the neces-
sary and suffi  cient condition for doing womanist scholarship? To be a black 
woman? A black feminist? A black lesbian?
One approach to resolving these concerns would be to devise some reason-
able categories for evaluating the extent to which womanist theological and 
ethical thought conforms to (or deviates from) Walker’s basic concern for black 
women’s freedom to name their own experience and to exercise prerogatives 
of sexual preference. If we assume, rather boldly, that Walker never intended 
to reserve exclusive authority to use the word as her own private vehicle of 
expression, it can be argued that the authority to label one’s work as a woman-
ist derives directly from one’s ability to set forth an authentic representation of 
Walker’s concept in that work. Th ree categories are suggested here as grounds 
for comparison and evaluation: context, criteria, and claims.
Th e context of the womanist perspective is set forth quite clearly in Walk-
er’s long defi nition of the word. While its general context is the folk culture 
of black women, its specifi c context is the intergenerational dialogue between 
black mothers and their daughters in an oppressive society. Th  e origin of 
the word womanist is a traditional warning given by black mothers to their 
daughters, “Y ou acting womanish,” in response to their precocious behavior 
(i.e., “You trying to be grown”). Th e behavior in question is further described 
as outrageous, audacious, courageous, and willful, words suggesting rebellion 
a g a i n s t  t h e  m o t h e r ’ s  a u t h o r i t y ,  a s  w e l l  a s  r e s i s t a n c e  t o  o p p r e s s i v e  s t r u c -
tures that would limit knowledge and self-realization. However, it is evident 
RT54118_C006.indd   128RT54118_C006.indd   128 8/9/06   7:07:26 PM8/9/06   7:07:26 PM


--- PAGE 186 ---
Th  eology • 129
that Walker’s concern is to include the mother in the womanist context by 
ascribing to her the role of teacher and interpreter, and by portraying her as 
resigned to the daughter’s assertion of her womanhood. Th  is can be seen in 
the mother-daughter dialogues cited to illustrate the meaning of “tradition-
ally universalist,” with reference to the diversity of skin tones among blacks, 
and “traditionally capable,” i.e., the determination of slaves to persist in their 
pursuit of freedom.
Th e criteria of the womanist perspective are very clearly spelled out in 
Walker’s defi nition. To summarize, the womanist is a black feminist who is 
audacious, willful and serious; loves and prefers women, but also may love 
men; is committed to the survival and wholeness of entire people; and is 
universalist, capable, all loving, and deep. Perhaps it is unrealistic to expect 
complete compliance with all of these criteria as a prerequisite for employing 
womanist nomenclature. But it is intellectually dishonest to label a person, 
movement or idea as womanist on the basis of only one or two of these criteria 
to the exclusion of all the others. Two of these criteria tend to have the broad-
est appeal in theological-ethical statements: commitment to the survival and 
wholeness of entire people and love of the Spirit. Th  e reason for this should 
be obvious; these two criteria point directly to the self-understanding of the 
black church. However, they would seem not to merit the prominence theolo-
gians and ethicists ascribe to them, especially in view of the fact that they are 
not given any particular priority within the defi  nition itself. In other words, 
it may be a distortion of Walker’s concept to lift  up these two criteria because 
they resonate with black church norms, while quietly dismissing others that 
do not. Th e fact is that womanist is essentially a secular cultural category 
whose theological and ecclesial signifi  cations are rather tenuous. Th eologi-
cal content too easily gets “read into” the womanist concept, whose central 
emphasis remains the self-assertion and struggle of black women for free-
dom, with or without the aid of God or Jesus or anybody else. Th e womanist 
concept does lend itself more readily to ethical refl  ection, given that ethics is 
oft en done independently of theology, as philosophical discourse with greater 
appeal to reason than to religious dogma. W alker’ s defi  nition comprises an 
implicit ethics of moral autonomy, liberation, sexuality and love that is not 
contingent upon the idea of God or revelation. In any case, to be authenti-
cally “womanist,” a theological or ethical statement should embrace the full 
complement of womanist criteria without omissions or additions intended to 
sanctify, de-feminize or otherwise alter the perspective Walker intended the 
word womanist to convey.
Despite the proliferation of theological claims that have been issued under 
the authority of the womanist rubric, Walker’s womanist nomenclature 
makes only one claim—that black women have the right to name their own 
experience. Th is claim is inclusive of the prerogative of sexual preference; to 
choose one’s own labels and lovers is a sign of having fully come into one’s 
RT54118_C006.indd   129RT54118_C006.indd   129 8/9/06   7:07:27 PM8/9/06   7:07:27 PM


--- PAGE 187 ---
130 • Th e Womanist Reader
own. It may be understood theologically as the right to name one’s own deity 
and sources of revelation, but to do so is to move beyond interpretation to the 
more dubious task of interpolation. Moreover, neither Walker’s defi nition nor 
her discussion of womanist addresses the nature and purpose of God in relation 
t o  th e  p ligh t  o f  th e  o p p r essed,  as  b lacks  an d/ o r  as  w o m en.  So  i t  a p pears  tha t 
womanist theology, with its liberatory theological claims, has been built upon a 
cultural foundation that not only was not intended to sustain theological argu-
ments, but actually was fashioned to supplant ideas and images, theological or 
otherwise, that might challenge the supremacy of self-defi nition. Th is is not to 
deny the possibility of a genuine congruence between womanist theological-
ethical discourse and the claim of personal and collective self-defi  nition. Th e 
real problem here is the appropriation of the womanist concept as the prime 
ground and source for theological claims that have been extracted from the 
testimony of black women whose theology and ethics rested upon other foun-
dations, and who, given the opportunity to choose labels, might have rejected 
womanist even as a name for their own experience.
It would seem that to do ethics in womanist perspective presents less of a 
problem, insofar as the construction of ethical claims can be pursued inde-
pendently of theological considerations. Even so, one must take care not to 
force the ethical statements of one era into the ethical categories of another, 
nor to ascribe to our black foremothers womanist sensibilities shaped by a 
modernist impulse that they might not have endorsed or understood.
Th e necessary and suffi   cient condition for doing womanist scholarship 
has to be adherence to the context, criteria, and claims inherent in Walker’s 
defi nition; it would be a mistake to recognize anything that any black woman 
writes with a womanist title or reference as womanist discourse simply 
because the author is black and female. Ultimately, the authority to determine 
what qualifi es as womanist discourse rests with Alice Walker, who has defi ned 
and demonstrated the meaning of the word in her writing with great skill and 
consistency. However, given the fact that so many black female scholars have 
already taken the liberty of using her word in our work, we need to come to 
terms with the responsible exercise of the authority we have claimed.
I am fully convinced of the wisdom of Walker’s advice to black women to 
name our own experience aft er our own fashion and to reject whatever does 
not suit. It is upon the authority of this advice that I want to explore further the 
suitability of the term womanist for theological-ethical discourse. Th e context, 
criteria, and claims of the womanist perspective provide an appropriate basis 
for raising critical questions concerning the suitability of this label for the work 
black women scholars are currently doing in theology and ethics.
First, there are contextual problems, beginning with tensions inherent in 
the dialogues presented in Walker’s defi  nition. Th ere is an intergenerational 
exchange where the traditional piety of the acquiescent mother is in confl  ict 
with the brash precociousness of the womanish daughter. Th e defi nition conveys 
RT54118_C006.indd   130RT54118_C006.indd   130 8/9/06   7:07:28 PM8/9/06   7:07:28 PM


--- PAGE 188 ---
Th  eology • 131
a spirit of celebration, evoking approval of the daughter’s rebellion and the 
mother’s resignation to it. Th is push to be “womanish” or “grown” also bears 
a hint of self-assertion in a sexual sense, where sexual freedom is a sign of 
moral autonomy. Th us, the context of womanist self-assertion includes two 
apparently inseparable dimensions: the personal struggle for sexual freedom 
and the collective struggle for freedom in the political-social sense. Yet, in 
the theological-ethical statements womanist is used to affi  rm the faith of our 
mothers principally in the collective sense of struggle, that is, for freedom 
from racist and sexist oppression. Further, it should be noted that although 
the question of Rebecca Jackson’s sexual orientation is Walker’s point of 
departure for discussing the meanings of womanist, she refrains from apply-
ing the term to Jackson. Walker chides Humez for not taking seriously Jack-
son’s description of herself as celibate, but Jackson’s choice of celibacy (i.e., 
not to love either women or men sexually, not even her own husband) as an 
act of submission to a spiritual commitment to follow Jesus Christ evidently 
is not regarded by W alker as a womanist assertion of sexual freedom. Th  us 
it would seem inappropriate to label as womanist those saintly rebels (e.g., 
Sojourner Truth) whose aim was not to assert their sexual freedom but rather 
to work sacrifi cially toward the liberation of their people as followers of Jesus 
Christ. To designate a historic fi gure as womanist solely on the basis of politi-
cal-social engagement without addressing the personal-sexual dimension is 
a contextual error typical of womanist theological-ethical discourse. To be 
authentically grounded in the womanist context, these statements cannot be 
simply celebrations of black women’s assertiveness, but must also give atten-
tion to the inherent dialogical and intergenerational tensions within the black 
woman’s struggle for freedom, and to both dimensions of that struggle, the 
personal-sexual and the political-social.
A further contextual problem stems from the fact that Walker’s defi  nition 
gives scant attention to the sacred. Womanist is defi  ned in secular terms, 
centered on a worldly premise of self-assertion and self-suffi   ciency. Th e 
womanist’s concern for the sacred is demonstrated in the defi  nition by 
italicizing the verb in the statement that she “ loves the Spirit,” but otherwise 
fi nds no distinctiveness among her loves for other aspects of nature and culture 
(she also “loves the folk”). Th e term womanist theology is in my view a forced 
hybridization of two disparate concepts and may come to resemble another 
familiar hybrid, the mule, in being incapable of producing off spring. Novelist 
Zora Neale Hurston once declared in the voice of one of her characters that the 
black woman is “the mule of the world,” but unlike the mule the black woman 
has oft en sought to cast upon the Lord those burdens too hard for her to bear, 
and has reproduced herself, body and spirit, through many generations. Not 
only does this scant attention to the sacred render the womanist perspective of 
dubious value as a context for theological discourse, but it ultimately subverts 
any eff ort to mine the spiritual traditions and resources of black women. 
RT54118_C006.indd   131RT54118_C006.indd   131 8/9/06   7:07:28 PM8/9/06   7:07:28 PM


--- PAGE 189 ---
132 • Th e Womanist Reader
Th e use of black women’s experience as a basis for theology is futile if that 
experience is interpreted apart from a fully theistic context. One might argue 
h e r e  th a t  i t  i s  i n a p p r o p r i a t e  t o  m ak e  s u c h  a n  i s s u e  o f  th e  d i s t i n c t i v e n e s s  o f  
the sacred in black theological discourse in view of our African heritage that 
allegedly draws no such distinctions, at least not the way they are drawn in the 
West. In the African tradition, however, the basis for denial of the distinction 
between sacred and secular is the notion that the sacred pervades everything. 
By contrast, Western modernity exalts the secular to the point of disregarding 
or circumscribing the sacred in unhealthy ways. African American Christians, 
poised historically in a peculiar position between two incompatible world 
views, have tended to resolve this dilemma by fashioning for ourselves a world 
view that derives its power, character, and spirit from the sacred realm, from 
which we have drawn wisdom and hope to survive within the profane world 
of those who have oppressed us in the name of God and mammon. Th  us it 
would appear incongruous to try to do black women’s theology, or ever, just 
to articulate it in words, within a context that marginalizes the sacred within 
black women’s existence. Th e search for our mothers’ gardens, and our own, 
seems pointless if we remain oblivious to our mothers’ gods.
Th e womanist concept sets forth a variety of criteria that convey specifi  c 
moral values, character traits and behavior, especially with regard to sexuality. 
One important question to raise is whether or not the sexual ethics implied by 
the womanist concept can serve the best interests of the black family, church, 
and community. Part of Walker’s original intent was to devise a spiritual, con-
crete, organic, characteristic word, consistent with black cultural values, that 
would describe black women who prefer women sexually, but are connected to 
the entire community. Womanist is a preferred alternative to lesbian because 
it connotes connectedness and not isolation, and womanist is one who loves 
other women, sexually and/or nonsexually, and who appreciates and prefers 
women’s culture. Clearly, in Walker’s view, sexual preference is not a morally 
or ethically signifi cant factor in determining whether or not one is “commit-
ted to the survival and wholeness of entire people, male and female.” But the 
affi  rmation of the connectedness of all persons within the black community 
regardless of sexual preference is not the only issue at stake with respect to 
the well-being of black people. In my view there is a fundamental discrepancy 
between the womanist criteria that would affi  rm and/or advocate homosexual 
practice, and the ethical norms the black church might employ to promote 
the survival and wholeness of black families. It is problematic for those of 
us who claim connectedness to and concern for the black family and church 
to engage these criteria authoritatively and/or uncritically in the formulation 
of theological-ethical discourse for those two institutions. If black women’s 
ethics is to be pertinen t to the needs of our comm unity , then at least some 
of us must be in a position to off er intellectual guidance to the church as the 
principal (and perhaps only remaining) advocate for marriage and family in 
RT54118_C006.indd   132RT54118_C006.indd   132 8/9/06   7:07:29 PM8/9/06   7:07:29 PM


--- PAGE 190 ---
Th  eology • 133
the black community. Th ere is a great need for the black churches to promote 
a positive sexual ethics within the black community as one means of respond-
ing to the growing normalization of the single-parent family, and the atten-
dant increases in poverty, welfare dependency, and a host of other problems. 
Moreover, it is indisputably in the best interest of black children for the church 
not only to strengthen and support existing families, but also to educate them 
ethically for marriage and parenthood. Th e womanist nomenclature, however, 
conveys a sexual ethics that is ambivalent at best with respect to the value of 
heterosexual monogamy within the black community.
Th irdly, it is problematic for black women who are doing womanist schol-
arship from the vantage point of Christian faith to weigh the claims of the 
womanist perspective over against the claims of Christianity. Th  e womanist 
perspective ascribes ultimate importance to the right of black women to name 
our own experience; in the Christian perspective, Christ is the incarnation of 
claims God makes upon us as well as the claims we make upon God. While 
there may be no inherent disharmony between these two assertions, the fact 
remains that there are no references to God or Christ in the defi nition of wom-
anist. For whatever reason, christology seems not to be directly relevant to the 
womanist concept. And if we insist upon incorporating within the womanist 
rubric the christological confessions of black women of faith, or discerning 
therein some hidden or implicit christology, then we risk entrapment in the 
dilemma of reconciling Christian virtues such as patience, humility and faith, 
with the willful, audacious abandon of the womanist. Walker only obscures 
the issue by making vague references to the spirit instead of naming Christian 
faith and practice. For example, she uses terms like general power and inner 
spirit to describe Rebecca Jackson’s motive for leaving husband, home, family, 
friends and church to “live her own life.” Yet it seems obvious that Jackson 
would name her own experience simply as a call to follow Christ. I suspect 
that it is Christianity, and not womanism, that forms the primary ground of 
theological and ethical identity with our audacious, serious foremothers.
In conclusion, the womanist perspective has great power, potential and 
limitations; it may be useful as a window to the past, but a truly womanist 
tradition has yet to be fully created and understood. I have raised some 
questions concerning the suitability of womanist as a rubric for black women’s 
ethics and theology, yet I have no better word to off er, nor do I feel especially 
compelled to come up with one. I am aware that many of my colleagues in 
theological scholarship are wholly committed to the womanist perspective, 
and my principal aim has been to prod us all further in the direction of critique 
and construction. If we are going to be serious about the constructive task, 
then we must be celebrative and critical at the same time, neither letting 
ourselves become so enraptured in celebrating our heroines and ideals that 
we sweep aside the critical questions, nor allowing the critical process to 
dampen our zeal for the content of our work. I have great faith that black 
RT54118_C006.indd   133RT54118_C006.indd   133 8/9/06   7:07:29 PM8/9/06   7:07:29 PM


--- PAGE 191 ---
134 • Th e Womanist Reader
female theologians and ethicists are on target to give signifi  cant direction to 
both church and society by further exposing the roots of oppression in all its 
forms and manifestations, and by discovering more keys to our personal and 
collective survival, regardless of which labels we embrace.
Note
 1. Alice Walker, I n Search of Our Mothers ’ Gar dens (San Diego and New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1983).
 2. Jean McMahon, ed., Gift s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson (1795–1871), Black 
Visionary, Shaker Eldress  (Amherst: Univ. of Massachusetts Press, 1981); Alice Walker, 
review of Gift s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson (1795–1871), Black Visionary, 
Shaker Eldress,  edited with an introduction by Jean McMahon Humez, in Black Scholar  
(November–December 1981): 64–67. Reprinted in Alice Walker, In Search of Our  Mothers’ 
Gardens,  71–82.
 3. See, for example, Katie Geneva Cannon, Black Womanist Ethics  (Atlanta: Scholars 
Press, 1988); Toinette M. Eugene, “Moral Values and Black Womanists,” Journal of Reli-
gious Th ought  44 (Winter–Spring 1988): 23–34; Jacquelyn Grant, “Womanist Th  eology: 
Black Women’s Experience as a Source for Doing Th  eology, with Special Reference to 
 Christology,” Journal of the Interdenominational Th  eological Center  13 (Spring 1986): 
195–212; Renita J. Weems, Just a Sister Away  (San Diego: LuraMedia, 1988); and Delores 
S. Williams, “Womanist Th eology: Black Women’s Voices,” Christianity and Crisis (July 14, 
1986): 230–232.
RT54118_C006.indd   134RT54118_C006.indd   134 8/9/06   7:07:30 PM8/9/06   7:07:30 PM


--- PAGE 192 ---
Th  eology • 135
Katie G. Cannon
In preparing to write this response, I found myself repeatedly stopped by 
waves of anger at Dr. Cheryl Sanders’ treatment of womanist as a secular 
terminological issue. It was not clear to me what I, a self-avowed, practicing, 
Black-Womanist-Liberationist-Christian Ethicist, was doing responding to 
Professor Sanders’ paper. Was I trying to persuade practitioners of Afro-Chris-
tian culture to hold on to this organic concept until we debunk, unmask, and 
disentangle the political parameters of gender, class and patriarchal authority 
in the Black Church community? Was I trying to convince white establish-
ment scholars that there is genuine merit in womanist discourse? Was I trying 
to rethink my own previous work about Alice Walker’s defi nition of womanist
4—
a defi nition that has given new meaning to the Afro-Christian ambience in 
which I live, move and have my being? Was I angry with Cheryl Sanders, the 
white academy, or the African-American theological guild?
Well, all of the above. What fi nally struck me was the fact that I needed to 
transform the power of my anger into the radical work of love:
5 I needed to be 
pro-active rather than reactive in my analysis of Sanders’ paper. I needed to place 
myself simultaneously at the center of the controversy and at the edge of con-
structive envisioning. It was as though I were asking Sanders to answer some 
of her own questions. Th us, I will focus my response on what I perceive to be 
her major concern: “Does the term womanist provide an appropriate frame of 
reference for the ethical and theological statements now being generated by black 
women?”
Yes, I think it does. A womanist liberation theo-ethical framework is an 
endeavor to identify African-American women’s moral agency, eliminating, 
as far as possible, contradictory directives for character and behavior. We 
must identify the principles we act upon as agents of faith and determine how 
these are related to the principles to which we give intellectual assent (lip-
service and down-to-earth expediency), in order to assess the codifi ed ethical 
standards and justice aims of women actively involved in the Black Church 
community.
In this defi nition I am attempting a critical reappropriation of Afro-Chris-
tian culture. By looking beyond and through historical “facts” for Black wom-
en’s consciousness,
6 womanist scholars undertake the systematic questioning 
and critical examination of the moral reasoning that enables Black women to 
refuse dehumanization and to resist the conditions that thwart life.
7 A wom-
anist liberation theo-ethical critique is a theoretical frame of reference that 
is at once a comparative and an ideal construct, asking new questions of the 
Black Church community, in order to examine and confront openly the ideo-
logical nature and function of patriarchy in the Black Church.
For example, as womanist ethicists, we need to ask ourselves the following 
questions: Why are particular images of Black church women included 
RT54118_C006.indd   135RT54118_C006.indd   135 8/9/06   7:07:30 PM8/9/06   7:07:30 PM


--- PAGE 193 ---
136 • Th e Womanist Reader
and promoted in sermons and others excluded? 8 What eff  ect does the 
objectifi cation, degradation, and subjection of the female in Black preaching 
have on women’s social relations? How disruptive are androcentric sermons for 
the Black family? Are the images of Afro-Christian feminists congruent with 
social reality? What are the ideological and theological forces, the “specifi  c 
determinations” that equate Black feminism and lesbianism? Whom does 
this equation serve? A womanist liberation theological ethic rejects heuristic 
concepts such as “heteropatriarchal familialist ideology”
9 and “compulsory 
heterosexism”10 but seeks instead heuristic models that explore sacred power 
and benevolent cohumanity.
Th e concrete locus of womanist Christian praxis is the particularity of 
Black women’s eff orts to comprehend and transform alienating experiences 
and oppressive social structures. For instance, particular attention is given to 
analyzing the social power relations and organization of the Black Church—
curricula, music, leadership expectations, pastor–member interactions—as well 
as outright sex discrimination. Far too oft  en the organization of the church 
mirrors male domination in the society and normalizes it in the eyes of both 
female and male parishioners.
In essence, a womanist liberation theological ethic places Black women 
at the center of human social relations and ecclesiastical institutions. It cri-
tiques the images and paradigms that the Black Church uses to promote 
or exclude women. A womanist theo-ethical critique serves as a model for 
understanding the silences, limitations and possibilities of Black women’s 
moral agency, by identifying Afro-Christian cultural patterns and forms, 
perspectives, doctrines, and values that are unique and peculiar to the Black 
C h u r c h  c o m m u n i t y ,  i n  o r d e r  t o  a s s e s s  t h e  d i a l e c t i c a l  t e n s i o n s  i n  B l a c k  
women’s past social relations as well as our current participation in the 
Black Church. A Black womanist liberation Christian ethic is a critique of 
all human domination in light of Black women’s experience, a faith praxis 
that unmasks whatever threatens the well-being of the poorest woman of 
color.
11
Note
 4. Katie G. Cannon, “Hitting a Straight Lick with a Crooked Stick: Th  e Womanist Dilemma 
in the Development of a Black Liberation Ethic,” Th e Annual: Th e Society of Christian 
Ethics (1987): 165–177; Alice Walker, In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose  
(San Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983), xi–xii.
 5. Beverly Wildung Harrison, “Th  e Power of Anger in the Work of Love: Christian Ethics for 
Women and Other Strangers,” in Making the Connections: Essays in Feminist Social Ethics  
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1985), 3–21.
 6. Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza,  In Memory of Her: A Feminist Th eological Reconstruction of 
Christian Origins  (New York: Crossroads, 1986).
 7. Beverly Wildung Harrison, “Toward a Christian Feminist Liberation Hermeneutic for 
Demystifying Class Reality in Local Congregations,” in Beyond Clericalism,  ed. Joseph 
C. Hough, Jr. and Barbara G. Wheeler (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1988), 137–51.
 8. W. Lawrence Hogue, Discourse and the Other  (Durham: Duke University Press, 1986).
RT54118_C006.indd   136RT54118_C006.indd   136 8/9/06   7:07:31 PM8/9/06   7:07:31 PM


--- PAGE 194 ---
Th  eology • 137
 9. Cheryl Clarke, “Lesbianism: An Act of Resistance,” in Th i s  B r i d g e  C a l l e d  M y  B a c k :  
 Writings by Radical Women of Color, ed. Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua (Watertown, 
MA: Persephone Press, 1981): 128–37.
 10. Adrienne Rich, “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence,” Signs 5, no. 4 
(Summer 1980): 631 ff .
 11. Harrison, “Toward a Christian Feminist Liberation Hermeneutic,” 142.
RT54118_C006.indd   137RT54118_C006.indd   137 8/9/06   7:07:31 PM8/9/06   7:07:31 PM


--- PAGE 195 ---
138 • Th e Womanist Reader
Emilie M. Townes
Cheryl Sanders’s essay is an ambitious attempt to raise critical and con-
structive questions regarding the use of the term womanist as a point of ref-
erence for recent Afro-American women’s scholarship in theological and 
ethical inquiry. She raises both foundational and methodological questions 
to encourage critical precision and substantive depth. I join in her enthusiasm 
and advocacy for a thorough, rigorous, self-critical stance for Afro-American 
women’s scholarship.
Sanders’s essay, however, is problematic for me. Although I applaud the 
attempt, I fi nd that she begins with an integral conceptual error that leads her 
down an unproductive path. Her understanding of Walker’s discomfort with 
Humez’s imposition of the term “lesbian” to describe Rebecca Jackson’s life, 
and W alker’ s subsequent choice of “womanist” as possibly more descriptive 
of Jackson, leans too heavily on the lesbian lifestyle. As I read Walker’s essay, 
I believe she attempts to defi ne a style of living:
I can imagine black women who love women (sexually or not) hardly 
thinking of what Greeks were doing; but, instead, referring to themselves 
as “whole” women, from “wholly” or “holy.” Or as “round” women—
women who love other women, yes, but women who also have concern, 
in a culture that oppresses all black people … for their fathers, brothers, 
and sons, no matter how they feel about them as males.
12
Th is style of living is not necessarily lesbian for Walker as she stresses 
“sexually or not.” Walker is unwilling to condemn or question lesbianism as 
a lesser order of creation within the Afro-American community. Th  e focus 
I fi nd in Walker is a concern for the survival and fl  ourishing of the Afro-
American community in its diversity: age, gender, sexuality, radical activity, 
accommodationist stance, creative promise. In short, her defi  nition models 
what Peter Paris calls the fundamental principle of the black Christian tradi-
tion: Human equality under God is categorical, absolute, unconditional, and 
universally applicable.
13 Walker challenges the Afro-American community’s 
heterosexism, which places conditions on the universality of God’s grace 
and acceptance. Many womanist Christian ethicists and theologians extend 
Walker’s challenge to serious questioning of what and who constitutes family 
structures and healthy models of love and growth for Afro-Americans living 
in these pre–twenty-fi rst century times.
Th e four parts of Walker’s defi  nition of womanist must be considered as 
a whole, yet distinct in their focus. One part of her defi  nition features the 
intergenerational dialogue between mother and daughter. Th  e daughter is 
willful, courageous, audacious, and outrageous. She is about the business of 
defi ning self. Framed within an ethical context, she is asking a fundamental 
moral question in her actions: What should I be as a person? Th is person is a 
RT54118_C006.indd   138RT54118_C006.indd   138 8/9/06   7:07:31 PM8/9/06   7:07:31 PM


--- PAGE 196 ---
Th  eology • 139
sexual being but she does not hold her sexuality as a sign of moral autonomy, 
as Sanders suggests. Walker’s womanist is an integrated woman and would not 
hold parts of herself as distinct from the wholly, holy, round, whole woman 
she is. Moral autonomy for Walker’s womanist is a woman’s ability to defi  ne 
and celebrate herself and her people as agents of a human community.
Rather than fall victim to solipsism, she is in dialogue with her ancestors. 
Having been a participant in such dialogue in my youth, I can attest that the 
mother involved is far from resigned to such independent behavior. As a true 
mentor, she endeavors to encourage, restrain, and guide assertions of moral 
autonomy, liberation, and sexuality in a hostile society. She is an active par-
ticipant in the liberative process, but also a circumspect guide. Both women 
are in tension, yoking dynamically the quest for personal growth and libera-
tion with collective struggle.
Th e most terse, yet salient part of Walker’s use of womanist is in the lat-
ter two sections of the defi  nition in which she understands the womanist as 
enriching, strengthening, descriptive understanding of feminist as well as a 
woman who celebrates life and the Spirit. To suggest Walker lacks a concen-
tration on the sacred is, I believe, to miss the crux of her spirituality. Walker 
clearly spells out her conception of the divine, the Spirit, in the dialogue 
between Celie and Shug in Th e Color Purple . Th is view is implicit in her defi  -
nition of womanist. Shug tells Celie:
God is inside of you and inside of everybody else. You come into the 
w o r l d  wi th  G o d .  B u t  o n l y  th e m  th a t  s e a r c h  f o r  i t  i n s i d e  fi nd it. And 
sometimes it just manifest itself even when you not looking, or don’t 
know what you looking for.
14
Th is radically immanent concept of the divine is not readily found within the 
Afro-American religious experience. Th ere is however a strong tradition of 
a personal Jesus who walks with us and shares our burdens and knows our 
sorrows. Walker’s understanding of the Spirit challenges the Afro-American 
religious community to do what Delores Williams suggests—to create a well-
developed theology of the Spirit.
15
Rather than fi nding Walker’s understanding of the sacred marginal, I per-
ceive her understanding of the Spirit as woven intricately into the very fabric 
of existence itself. To embrace fully and to articulate such an understanding 
of the sacred can only enhance the black religious tradition of the parenthood 
of God and the kinship of all people. It challenges Afro-Americans to explore 
the profundity of the parenthood of God with its promise-invoking images of 
birthing and nurturing whole peoples into freedom and wholeness.
Walker’s understanding of the sacred in her defi nition of womanist and the 
current and future appropriations of this term have a rich historical context 
for Afro-feminists in this country. Ida B. Wells-Barnett spoke of the God of 
RT54118_C006.indd   139RT54118_C006.indd   139 8/9/06   7:07:32 PM8/9/06   7:07:32 PM


--- PAGE 197 ---
140 • Th e Womanist Reader
freedom when she urged the twelve Afro-American men jailed for allegedly 
inciting the Elaine, Arkansas riot of 1919:
I have been listening to you for nearly two hours. You have talked and 
sung and prayed about dying, and forgiving your enemies, and of feeling 
sure you are going to be received in the New Jerusalem. … But why don’t 
you pray to live and ask to be freed? … Let all of your songs and prayers 
hereaft er be songs of faith and hope that God will set you free; … Quit 
talking about dying; if you believe your God is all powerful, believe he is 
powerful enough to open these prison doors, and say so. … Pray to live 
and believe you are going to get out.
16
With such a fertile inheritance from our Afro-American foremothers, a 
seasoned theology of the Spirit is vital for Afro-American women and men 
committed to putting their faith in action as we enter the twenty-fi rst century. 
Th e articulation of the black Christian tradition demands from the womanist 
and her people strategies for the survival of the Afro-American community 
and the transformation of the socio-political structures of the United States.
Th e womanist perspective provides abundant promise for ethical 
and theological refl  ection within the Afro-American community. Th  e 
Afro-American women who base their scholarship on an unapologetic 
womanist perspective hold in tension the roots of the Afro-American reli-
gious tradition as they challenge that tradition at its points of exclusivity and 
limited vision. Th e liberating promise of an exploration of a theology of the 
Spirit as Afro-American women (whether they term themselves womanist, 
black feminist, Afro-feminist, or black/Afro-American women) can further 
strengthen and ripen the Afro-American community’s conception of not 
only God, but Jesus Christ.
Such an exploration challenges us to take a hard look at our understanding 
and interpretation of the trinity. Sanders is helpful in raising the question of how 
womanist Christian ethicists and theologians integrate christology with a radically 
immanent concept of the divine—the Spirit, and traditional understandings of 
God within the Afro-American religious context. And perhaps more to the point, 
how can womanist Christian ethicists and theologians do so with integrity and 
in true dialogue with history, with the contemporary Afro-American religious 
community, and with the larger Afro-American community?
Th e agenda of womanist Christian ethics and theology must articulate an 
understanding of liberation concerned with human equality and the ever-
present, ever-sustaining, judging, and redeeming nature of God. Our addi-
tional task is to promote the full partnership of women and men in creation 
with God—to model and embody inclusivity enveloped by justice. Womanist 
Christian ethics and theology searches for the possibilities and is so bold as to 
have the will to grasp them.
RT54118_C006.indd   140RT54118_C006.indd   140 8/9/06   7:07:32 PM8/9/06   7:07:32 PM


--- PAGE 198 ---
Th  eology • 141
Note
 12. Alice Walker, “Gift  s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson,” in In Search of Our 
Mothers’ Gardens  (San Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984), 81.
 13. Peter J. Paris, Th e Social Teachings of the Black Churches  (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 
1985), 14.
 14. Alice Walker, Th e Color Purple  (New York: Washington Square Press, 1982), 177.
 15. Delores Williams, “Womanist Th  eology: Black Women’s Voices,” Christianity and Crisis  
(2 March 1987): 70.
 16. Ida B. Wells, Crusade for Justice,  ed. Alfreda Duster (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1970), 403.
RT54118_C006.indd   141RT54118_C006.indd   141 8/9/06   7:07:32 PM8/9/06   7:07:32 PM


--- PAGE 199 ---
142 • Th e Womanist Reader
M. Shawn Copeland
In “Christian Ethics and Th  eology in Womanist Perspective,” Professor 
Cheryl J. Sanders probes the appropriation and adaptation of Alice Walker’s 
term womanist by other African American women scholars in ethics and in the-
ology. Her essay intends a foundational concern with the status, function, and 
implications of method in theology: What is it that African American women 
ethicists and theologians are doing when they appropriate and adapt “the sec-
ular term” womanist in doing Christian ethics and theology? What are the 
implications of such usage for resulting ethical and theological proposals and 
claims? What implications are posed by the use of this multivalent term for the 
moral, ethical, and theological teaching and practice of the black church?
Sanders charges that Walker’s secular term has been pried loose from the 
contexts in which it was developed.
17 Since each African American woman 
scholar has construed the meaning of womanist in light of her own thought, 
Sanders questions whether the term is being adopted and applied uncritically. 
Quite properly she asks, “Are we committing a gross conceptual error when 
we use Walker’s descriptive cultural nomenclature as a foundation for the nor-
mative discourse of theology and ethics?” (Th is question reminds us precisely 
that fi ction is Alice Walker’s primary method for recording, apprehending, 
understanding, evaluating, judging, criticizing, transforming African Ameri-
can culture and life.) “What,” then inquires Sanders “is the necessary and suf-
fi cient condition for doing womanist scholarship? To be a black woman? A 
black feminist? A black lesbian?” Professor Sanders proposes to answer this 
question by evaluating the extent to which womanist ethical and theological 
proposals conform to or deviate from Walker’s coinage.
Professor Sanders takes seriously the appropriation and adaptation of the 
term womanist by our colleagues. Th is, in itself, makes the essay important. 
Yet, notably absent from her analysis are quotations from works by those 
scholars who use womanist to describe their work. Th eir voices are silenced. 
Without their words, it is not possible to determine the accuracy of Sanders’ 
understanding, interpretation, and judgment of their work. It is not possible 
to judge her evaluation of their claims and proposals in any specifi  c way. My 
response (1) comments on some of the issues that emerge in the ways Sanders 
understands, interprets, and judges the meanings of the term womanist and 
(2) suggests other possible interpretations of the term for theology.
By positing consistency and conformity to Walker’s defi nition of womanist 
as normative for authentic use, and by insisting on its secularity in relation 
to Christian themes, the essay overlooks the creativity of Christian thinkers 
who historically have bent and shaped secular feasts, festivals, and fables 
to  Christian ends. Feminist theologians, likewise, have appropriated and 
adopted a secular term, reworking it to include meanings and concerns which 
neither Betty Friedan nor Gloria Steinem would have imagined. If it is possible 
RT54118_C006.indd   142RT54118_C006.indd   142 8/9/06   7:07:33 PM8/9/06   7:07:33 PM


--- PAGE 200 ---
Th  eology • 143
to speak of secular feminists and Christian feminists, surely it is possible to 
speak of secular womanists and Christian womanists.
More importantly , such an appeal for conformity yields the authoritative 
ground of the ethical and theological enterprise. Th at ground is the attentive, 
intelligent, rational, responsible mind of the scholar, the ethicist, the theologian 
herself. To that ground the essay, in my judgment, mistakenly opposes the 
Christian tradition. Th eologians and ethicists have minds and must use them: 
Not to use one’s mind is to fail the tradition which is not a chain, but a living 
root; not to use one’s mind is to fail the discipline which is not rote catechesis, 
but speculative exploration only begun; not to use one’s mind is to fail the 
mind.
Sanders suggests that use of the term womanist has been more celebra-
tory than critically refl ective. I agree. Yet, perhaps, the adaptation of the term 
signals the acute and seething dissatisfaction of African American women 
scholars at the “stepsister” treatment we, and indeed all women of color, have 
received from white feminists inside and outside the church. Th  e embrace 
of the term womanist by African American women scholars signifi  es our 
demand for serious, sustained, and substantive dialogue with white feminists. 
Such dialectic is crucial given Walker’s fi rst defi nition of womanist: “ A black 
 feminist or feminist of color.” Th e very term, then, implies black women’s 
reworking of the notion and term feminist. What do black women mean by 
feminist, by feminism? I believe that Walker would approve the defi  nition 
 furnished by black feminist literary critic, Barbara Smith.
Feminism is the political theory and practice that struggles to free all 
women: women of color, working-class women, poor women, disabled 
women, lesbians, old women—as well as white, economically privileged, 
heterosexual women. Anything less than this vision of total freedom is 
not feminism, but merely female self-aggrandizement.
18
Given Walker’s and Smith’s defi  ni tio ns, i t seems to me that black f eminists 
and/or womanists seek a new and common ground from which all women 
and men may vigorously oppose racism, sexism, homophobia, ageism, class 
exploitation, intentional limitation of the disabled, and—I add, as Christians 
must—anti-Semitism. Black feminists and/or womanists apprehend these oppres-
sions as interlocking and mutually conditioning; their interaction structures the 
conditions of our lives.
19
At issue in the appropriation of the term womanist is the power of defi  -
nition, of self-defi nition, of self-naming. In Beloved, T oni Morrison captures 
the importance of this audacious act. Aft  er having killed, cooked, and eaten 
a shoat Sixo argues with schoolteacher that he did not steal the shoat rather 
he was “improving [his master’s valuable] property.” Schoolteacher questions 
Sixo’s veracity and the meaning of his statement.
RT54118_C006.indd   143RT54118_C006.indd   143 8/9/06   7:07:33 PM8/9/06   7:07:33 PM


--- PAGE 201 ---
144 • Th e Womanist Reader
Sixo plant rye to give the high piece a better chance. Sixo take and feed the 
soil, give you more crop. Sixo take and feed Sixo give you more work.
Clever, but schoolteacher beat him anyway to show that defi  nitions 
belonged to the defi ners—not the defi ned.20
African American women scholars are struggling to defi  ne themselves and 
their experiences—to be defi  ners. For an African American woman scholar 
to defi ne herself to name herself womanist is to embrace, to love her culture 
and religio-cultural traditions, her people, her people’s struggle, her own 
embodiment (Walker’s third defi nition). For an African American scholar to 
defi ne herself, to name herself womanist is to tap the roots of the historical 
traditional liberation capability of black women (Walker’s second defi nition).
With the term womanist, African American women scholars of religion 
also signal our African American male colleagues. Womanist intimates a crit-
ical posture towards sexism, towards misogyny, towards the objectifi  cation 
and abuse of black women within the academy, within the African American 
community, within the dominant patriarchal culture.
Black women are among the last admitted to full participation in the theo-
logical academy. In the formative years of black theology, which coincided 
in large measure with the civil rights movement, little note was taken of the 
black woman’s peculiar position as an oppressed person within an oppressed 
group. Th e enduring and mythical sociological label of that period which 
black women continue to bear is “matriarch.” Nor did black theology in those 
formative years take note of black men’s sexism and their admittance—albeit, 
gru dgingly — thr o ugh pa triar ch y’ s mal e- bo n ding in t o limi ted p rivil eg es an d 
places. Use of the term womanist communicates to black men scholars, that 
black women scholars are aware of the complexity of our diff ering positions as 
African American scholars within the academy and within the larger socio-
cultural matrix; that black women scholars consciously name and reject the 
intimidations, manipulations, and seductions of patriarchal power, privilege, 
and place; and that black women scholars self-consciously link the historical 
and explicit struggle of the race with the struggles of all oppressed, marginal-
ized, brutalized, ostracized women and men.
It seems to me that a womanist perspective can contribute to the reshaping 
and expansion of black theology. Indeed, the continued rethinking of black 
theology is the requisite task of each African American man and woman 
who calls himself or herself a theologian, an ethicist. In the past decade, a 
renewed, prophetic black theology took up social analysis, recital, and denun-
ciation to challenge the commitment and ethical and moral responsibility of 
a growing black middle class to the demands and imperatives of the Gospel 
and to our African American people. Materials that convey black women’s 
traditions—narratives, novels, and prayers—only recently have become an 
explicit resource for black theology. Th  e term womanist makes visible and 
RT54118_C006.indd   144RT54118_C006.indd   144 8/9/06   7:07:33 PM8/9/06   7:07:33 PM


--- PAGE 202 ---
Th  eology • 145
gives voice to African American women scholars in religion who are in the 
midst of the struggle to shape a distinctive perspective that takes seriously 
the experiences and traditions of black women as a source for theologizing on 
the black experience.
Sanders seems to identify the term womanist almost exclusively with Walk-
er’s second and complex defi nition which treats sexual orientations and sexual 
practices. Sanders worries that the “womanist nomenclature conveys a sexual 
ethics that is ambivalent” with respect to the “value of heterosexual monogamy 
within the black community.” I agree with Sanders that young (and some not 
so young) African Americans need thorough education and preparation for 
responsible, i.e., ethical and moral, life-partnership or marriage and parent-
hood. I agree as well that poverty, welfare dependency, unemployment, crime, 
drugs, and AIDS have infi  ltrated the African American community in most 
pervasive and virulent strains. Yet, I believe the pathology that has metastasized 
in our community results from our angular social-cultural-economic-political 
location in the United States under late-twentieth-century supremacist capi-
talism, rather than from womanist nomenclature, its range of meanings, and 
appropriation by a handful of scholars of religion.
I conclude by repeating what I noted earlier. Th  e term womanist makes 
visible and gives voice to African American women scholars in religion who 
are in the process of craft  ing a distinctive perspective that takes the experi-
ences and traditions of black women as a source for theologizing on the black 
experience. Indeed, Walker’s defi  nitions admit a womanist continuum. By 
taking the meanings and implications of the term seriously, Professor Sanders 
reminds us of the need for on-going study and conversation about the sources 
and methods to be employed in the continued reshaping of black theology. 
Perhaps, in a few years time, we shall see a substantial corpus of womanist 
works; perhaps, conversations like this one shall have contributed to its devel-
opment or, perhaps, to its demise. Time’s gift   of wisdom will have aff  orded 
us a longer and more comprehensive viewpoint. Seven years ago Michele 
Wallace mused that black feminists seemed, of necessity, to exist as individuals—
monadic, isolated, separated—some well-known, others unknown. Wallace 
wrote:
We exist as women who are Black who are feminists, each stranded for 
the moment, working independently because there is not yet an envi-
ronment in this society remotely congenial to our struggle—because, 
being on the bottom, we would have to do what no one else has done: we 
would have to fi ght the world.
21
In appropriating and adapting Alice Walker’s multivalent term womanist, 
sift ing old notions and themes through its sieve, lacing obstacles thrown up 
against them from within and without the African American community and 
the academy, some of our colleagues are struggling to create an environment 
RT54118_C006.indd   145RT54118_C006.indd   145 8/9/06   7:07:34 PM8/9/06   7:07:34 PM


--- PAGE 203 ---
146 • Th e Womanist Reader
more congenial for the struggle of African American women theologians and 
ethicists, indeed, for all men and women committed to the sacred work of 
human liberation with and before the Great God of our forebears.
Note
 17. Walker’s fi  rst use of the term womanist may have been in the “introduction,” “fable,” 
“story , ” entitled “Coming Apart: By W ay of Introduction to Lorde, T eish and Gardner , ” 
which she wrote for an anthology on pornography, Take Back the Night. Th e material was 
subsequently published in Ms. and reprinted in Walker’s collection of short stories, You 
Can’t Keep a Good Woman Down  (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981), 41–53, 
especially 48. In this article, Walker writes, “A womanist is a feminist, only more common” 
(48). Th e context Walker creates for this use is a discussion about pornography between a 
black woman and man, who are wife and husband. Th e wife objects to her husband’s use 
of pornography; she feels demeaned by his reliance on it and is angry. He “attacks” her as 
a “women’s libber,” a “white women’s lackey,” a “pawn” (48). Given this context, I take the 
womanist to be an ordinary (common) black woman who does not want to be objectifi  ed 
or displaced under the pornographic gaze of the black man she loves.
  See Alice Walker, I n  S e a r c h  o f  O u r  M o t h e r s ’  G a r d e n s (San Diego and New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983), xi–xii, 71–82. Here Walker grounds the derivation of 
womanist in the black folk expression womanish. In this longer treatment of the term, 
W alker notes that the expression would hav e been used by ad ult black women ( moth-
e rs  o r  gran dm o th e rs  o r  gr ea t - gran dm o th e rs  o r  a un ts )  t o  co mm e n t  o n  th e  ass um p ti o n  
of adult (precocious and audacious) behavior by female children. She extends the defi  ni-
tion to include liberatory action à la Harriet Tubman; universalism; celebration of what 
the womanist loves—music, dance, the moon, the Spirit, love, food, roundness, struggle, 
the Folk, herself; and to propose the analogue: womanist is to feminist as purple is to 
lavender. It is in the review of Gift s of Power  that Walker treats the sexual connotation 
of womanist.
  Sanders insightfully notes the general and specifi  c contexts for Walker’s usage and devel-
opment—black folk culture and the intergenerational dialogue between black mothers 
and their daughters. Given the title of the text in which the term is located, I suggest 
that there may be an even further context for consideration— the gardens, our mothers’ 
gardens. In Jewish and Christian symbolism, the garden is the site of creation, light, and 
life, as well as of destruction, gloom, and death. Th  e garden is the home of the fi  rst par-
ents—the fi rst father, (the fi  rst) Adam, the fi  rst mother, Eve; the garden is the place of 
their trial, temptation, and sin. For Christians, the garden is also the site of the struggle 
and revelation of the Second Adam. Th  e garden is the place in which knowledge and 
ignorance, good and evil, sorrow and joy, blood, sweat and resurrection are revealed.
 18. Barbara Smith, “Racism and Women’s Studies,” in Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and 
Barbara Smith, eds., All the Women Are White, All the Blacks Are Men: But Some of Us Are 
Brave (Old Westbury, N.Y.: Feminist Press, 1982), 49.
 19. See the Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement,” in All the Women Are 
White, 13–22; also, Patricia Bell Scott, “Selected Bibliography on Black Feminism,” All the 
Women Are White, 23–33.
 20. Toni Morrison, Beloved (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987), 190.
 21. Michele Wallace, “A Black Feminist’s Search for Sisterhood,” in All the Women Are 
White, 12.
RT54118_C006.indd   146RT54118_C006.indd   146 8/9/06   7:07:34 PM8/9/06   7:07:34 PM


--- PAGE 204 ---
Th  eology • 147
bell hooks
As one who is politically engaged with the construction of theoretical para-
digms that call attention to the ways sexism and sexist oppression aff  ect the 
lives of black women and all black people, I believe feminist thinking and the 
feminist movement are a crucial part of the black liberation struggle. Were 
all African-Americans practicing feminist thinking there would be greater 
political solidarity between black women and men. In my Feminist Th eory: 
From Margin to Center, feminism is defi ned as a movement to end sexism and 
sexist oppression.
22 Th is defi  nition does not privilege any race, class, or gen-
dered group. It does not suggest that men are the problem or that feminism is 
a white feminist movement. It places the emphasis on eradicating a particular 
politic of domination based on gender.
As black women and men who are victimized and suff  er within white 
supremacist capitalist patriarchy, we have much to gain from using feminism 
as a critical standpoint to critique sexism and as a basis for collective struggle. 
Alice Walker’s re-visioning of the term womanist is another way of naming 
feminism, particularly black feminism, by many black women. Use of this 
term is problematic. Oft en it is used to defl  ect attention from feminism as a 
political struggle to end sexism and sexist domination and to focus attention 
instead on black female cultural practice and lifestyle.
Cheryl Sanders’s essay begins with this shift   in focus. It does not cite the 
emergence of the contemporary feminist movement, its impact on gender-
based scholarship, its insistence on the relevance of constructing theory 
from a feminist standpoint in all scholarly areas, especially theology, as the 
dynamic force motivating black female exploration of these issues. Sanders 
suggests that “new interpretations of black women’s religious experience and 
ideas have been sparked by the creative genius of Alice Walker.” Black women 
writers have been a courageous vanguard fi  ctively exploring various politics 
of domination in black life—racism, sexism, and capitalism—and questioning 
institutions religious and secular that reinforce and uphold these structures. 
Th eir writing necessarily inspires black women scholars attempting to cre-
ate new critical direction. Within theology, black women scholars have been 
among the most willing to acknowledge this supportive infl uence, identifying 
it as one of many traditions shaping their theoretical perspectives.
Signifi cantly, Katie Cannon, in her introduction to Black Womanist  Ethics, 
situates her concern with Christian ethics within a historical framework that 
encompasses various movements: black religious experience, the struggle for 
black liberation, the development of black literary traditions (especially the 
writing of black women), and the feminist movement.
23 Appropriating the 
term womanist has allowed black women scholars to do feminist thinking 
using a term that does not imply absence of concern for race or the survival of 
black people. Sanders acknowledges this eff ort, emphasizing that “in essence, 
RT54118_C006.indd   147RT54118_C006.indd   147 8/9/06   7:07:35 PM8/9/06   7:07:35 PM


--- PAGE 205 ---
148 • Th e Womanist Reader
womanist means black feminist.” Yet it is this key aspect of its defi  nition 
Sanders ignores (for Walker separates her descriptions of the term suggesting 
not a singular meaning but multiple defi nitions—one need not encompass the 
other). Without refl ecting on feminism, or black feminism, Sanders focuses on 
the aspects of the defi  nition that connect womanist with audacity, rebellion 
against authority and/or affi   rmation of black women as desiring subjects 
asserting a uto nomo us choice to engage in varied sexual p ractices, especially 
lesbianism.
Th is focus produces a blindspot. Extensive critical exploration of woman-
ism as an aspect of feminism would have indicated the powerful transfor-
mative impact of feminist theorizing within traditional theological discourse 
and the fi eld of Christian ethics. By collapsing all of Walker’s defi  nitions of 
womanist into a single category, Sanders constructs a paradigm that makes 
it appear that a womanist perspective is in many ways inimical to Christian 
belief and practice. She can then conclude that “womanist is essentially a 
secular cultural category whose theological and ecclesial signifi  cations are 
rather tenuous.” Th e aspect of W alker’ s defi nition that has the most intense 
resonance for many black female theologians has been the affi   rmation of a 
feminist standpoint that privileges the historical experiences of black women 
and our perspectives.
Walker’s term is enabling for women who are fearful that explicitly iden-
tifying themselves as feminists would alienate them from black communi-
ties. Evoking the term womanist, they are able to affi   rm their ties to black 
traditions while simultaneously rethinking and re-visioning black experience 
from a feminist standpoint. Sanders implies that these scholars are using a 
womanist perspective to “supplant” theological concerns “that might chal-
lenge the supremacy of self-defi  nition.” Affi  rming the necessity of black 
female self-defi nition is not to make that act a supreme gesture. In actuality 
black women scholars are searching for new intellectual paradigms that will 
expand our understanding of theological ethical discourse and its contem-
porary relevance for our lives. Sanders opposes the two, declaring, “it would 
seem inappropriate to label as womanist those saintly rebels (e.g., Sojourner 
Truth) whose aim was not to assert their sexual freedom but rather to work 
sacrifi cially toward the liberation of their people as followers of Jesus Christ.” 
Acknowledging that religious black women like Jarena Lee, Rebecca Jackson, 
and a host of others have had to critique and re-vision gender roles in order 
to participate fully in Christian practice, to step out on faith, is not heretical. 
Th ere is a profound connection between this commitment to spiritual practice 
and feminist struggle. Again, by focusing exclusively on sexuality, Sanders 
ignores this vital connection. Failure to affi  rm the importance of a black femi-
nist standpoint as it has emerged historically, politically devalues both the 
tremendous radical work of black women in the church and their devout spiri-
tual commitment. If the black church experience is to survive and sustain its 
RT54118_C006.indd   148RT54118_C006.indd   148 8/9/06   7:07:35 PM8/9/06   7:07:35 PM


--- PAGE 206 ---
Th  eology • 149
revolutionary theological mission, feminist re-visioning is essential. It would 
enable the black church to acknowledge that families vary, that they are not 
all heterosexually based or centered on couples. Single-parent households are 
as in need of support and affi  rmation as dual-parent families. Sanders makes 
family synonymous with heterosexual coupling. Feminist thinking enables us 
to imagine new church traditions that can affi  rm heterosexual marriage and, 
as Sanders suggests, “promote a positive sexual ethics” without promoting 
homophobia or reinscribing heterosexism as the only spiritually acceptable 
relational choice.
Concurrently, black religious traditions are informed by varied spiritual 
practices and teachings as well as Christianity. Any black church person con-
cerned with the survival of black families and black people must encourage 
respect for varied religious experience. A Christian scholar concerned with 
the mystical dimensions of religious experience may focus more attention on 
the construction of our sense of divine spirit than on Christology; this does 
not make her less devoted to Christian practice. Sanders concludes her essay 
with the insightful recognition that “a truly womanist tradition has yet to be 
fully created and understood.” To reach that goal, religious black women and 
men, and theological scholars in particular, must courageously explore the 
transformative potential of feminist struggle, the ways it can enable us to sur-
vive as a people, and enhance our understanding of the importance of spiri-
tuality in modern life.
Note
 22. bell hooks, Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center  (Boston: South End Press, 1984).
 23. Katie Geneva Cannon, Black Womanist Ethics  (Atlanta: Scholars Press. 1988).
RT54118_C006.indd   149RT54118_C006.indd   149 8/9/06   7:07:36 PM8/9/06   7:07:36 PM


--- PAGE 207 ---
150 • Th e Womanist Reader
Cheryl Townsend Gilkes
When I fi rst read Alice Walker’s defi nition of “womanist,” it engendered the 
same joy and sense of good feeling within me that I felt that day, now twenty 
years ago, when I acquired my “Afro” (a hairstyle I still wear). It just felt good. 
It fi t. It provided a way of stating who I was and how I felt about a lot of things. 
I would like to think that Alice Walker used the format of a dictionary defi  -
nition to invite a liberating and wide-ranging appropriation that refl  ects the 
diversity of women of color. Womanist also brought to mind a day several 
years earlier when, uncomfortable with the term feminist because of the abuse 
I had experienced at the hands of insensitive and racist white women and 
because of the silliness I perceived in many of the issues discussed by white 
women calling themselves feminist, I had declared myself “pro-woman” in 
my attitudes and feelings, “period!” I said in my heart, “Th ank you, Lord, for 
Alice Walker.”
As a more critical and publicly accessible exercise, I also examined my own 
work on community workers and on church women in light of Walker’s defi -
nition. I was particularly fascinated by its resonance with the women I met 
in the Sanctifi ed Church.
24 Indeed, I was attached to Walker’s term and her 
defi nition of it because I perceived that it was the most accurate distillation 
of the distinctiveness of the African-American female experience as I had 
both observed and partaken of it. It fi t.
25 It felt good. And, it provided a bridge 
between forces faced by women my age and younger, and the more tradi-
tional African-American women’s institutions within church and commu-
nity. Walker’s defi nition became a vehicle upon which Harriet Tubman (our 
foremother who walked north to freedom taking her family and community 
with her), Mary Church Terrell (our foremother who felt “the Race” should be 
called “colored” because it was so visually diverse), Mrs. Rippy (the very round, 
big-voiced, gospel soloist in my church who loved to laugh, cook, and bug 
us all and who testifi  ed openly at the church dinner table of the importance 
of caring for oneself through facial massage and through choosing life, by 
mastectomy if need be, as she did, all the while depending on the Holy Ghost, 
a.k.a. “the Spirit,” to bring her “from a mighty long way”), Margaret (my 
friend who organized the very fi  rst Th ird World Women’s Conference I ever 
attended), many many “homegirls,”
26 community and church mothers, and 
myself could all ride together as women wishing to penetrate the complexi-
ties of life as African-American women in the United States and its colonial 
antecedent.
Now Alice Walker is not the only person ever to think comprehensively 
about being black and female but she provided an “ahah!” experience that 
brought together my own thinking and research on women in the community 
and in diverse churches with black women’s literary and creative traditions. 
Her idea seemed consistent with her other writings which are full of allusions 
RT54118_C006.indd   150RT54118_C006.indd   150 8/9/06   7:07:36 PM8/9/06   7:07:36 PM


--- PAGE 208 ---
Th  eology • 151
and appropriations from the core of the African-American religious experi-
ence,27 and which draw deeply from the well of African-American women’s his-
tory as inseparable from the history of a total community—“… entire people, 
male and female.” While not primarily religious, Walker’s defi nition manages 
to draw upon the central indigenous theme of African-American spirituality, 
church formation, and construction of the pillars of religious experience: the 
importance of the Spirit as the operative manifestation of God in everyday 
life. For the vast majority of black people that emphasis has been contextual-
ized in Christian settings, and Walker’s use of the term “the Spirit,” for us, 
automatically means “the Holy Ghost”—an actualization of Jesus’s assertion 
to “the woman at the well” in John 4:24 that “God is a Spirit.” While Walker 
herself may not claim an explicitly Christian spirituality and allegiance (and a 
recent quotation in Jet affi  rms that she does not), my reading of her assertion 
that a womanist “ Loves the Spirit” resonates with my every encounter with 
“shouts” and “saints.” It points to the Christian mysticism that undergirds the 
most radical actions of our foremothers and continues to spill over into the 
lives of the most secular of black women activists.
When considering the importance of Walker’s defi  nition as a concept or 
frame of reference for ethical and theological discourse, one has to be clear 
about what the term conveys for thinking about people as agents of history, not 
for thinking about God. Her focus is on human action, an appropriate focus for 
concepts and ideas used in ethics. Race, ethnicity, class, and gender are similar 
issues and terms now considered appropriate foci for ethical and theological 
thinking. “Womanist” is a term like “afrocentric” (or more properly “afr icen-
tric”). Both terms make dramatic epistemological demands on the users while 
at the same time providing clear channels for creative thinking that do not have 
to answer to the theoretical and ideological assumptions surrounding terms 
such as “feminist” and “non-western.” I fi nd that Walker’s defi nition demands 
that we take seriously the whole of African-American women’s experience. I 
read in the defi nition more than “folk culture.” I read in that defi  nition the 
importance of the political and cultural traditions of clearly identifi  able fore-
mothers who insisted in their practice and in their thinking that black people 
must embrace one another wholeheartedly in a constructive life-affi   rming 
way,
28 an action that fi ts important understandings of love. And Walker clearly 
emphasizes love. Th e term love appears eleven times in the defi nition.
When one refers back to her discussion concerning Rebecca Jackson, a dis-
cussion whose real emphasis is distorted by an exaggerated focus on sexual 
preference, one fi nds Walker insisting that the issue of “woman-bonding” has 
to be carried back farther than the island of Lesbos in classical Greek tradi-
tion. Walker points to the probability that these were “Greek women whose 
servants, like their culture, were probably stolen from Egypt. …”
29 What is 
critical here is that she seems to agree with George G.M. James and others that 
Greek civilization had its origins in Egypt, an African civilization.
30 Walker’s 
RT54118_C006.indd   151RT54118_C006.indd   151 8/9/06   7:07:37 PM8/9/06   7:07:37 PM


--- PAGE 209 ---
152 • Th e Womanist Reader
 insistence that “black women … surely would have begun their woman-bonding 
earlier than Sappho’s residency on the Isle of Lesbos”31 points to older African 
traditions of institutionalized acceptance of women’s organization and sister-
hood as an essential part of the economic and family system.
32 Th e central 
issue for Walker around Lesbos is not really sexuality, but rather the isolation 
and aloofness implied in the notion of an island. She concludes, “Th e symbol-
ism of [an island], for a black person, is far from positive.”
33
If we are to evaluate the thought of Alice Walker, thought which is high-
lighted and summarized in her defi  nition but not presented as a fully elabo-
rated system, then we must take seriously her emphasis on the importance of 
Martin Luther King in the shaping of our generation. I consider her statement, 
“… that if it had not been for … Dr. King, I would have come of age believ-
ing in nothing and no one,” a valid directional in ethical evaluation of her 
thinking.
34 For Walker and for King, the emphasis is on love, agape love—the 
kind of love that embraces everyone for the purposes of healing, change, and 
liberation, and on the connectedness of the black struggle to the emancipa-
tion of humanity and, ultimately, creation. For Walker particularly there is an 
emphasis on the centrality of black women in that struggle.
Finally, I read the last reference to love, “… herself. Regardless,” to be a 
critical admonition for those seeking to emancipate and empower women, 
especially and most critically black women. Th  e “self” component of the 
 command to “love thy neighbor as thy self ” matches social scientists’ under-
standings of self-esteem. Th e failure to love self makes it impossible to love 
others, and our hateful acts toward others are oft  en a measure of our feel-
ings about self. Some of the greatest threats to human development among 
the poor and the non-poor, among the black and the non-black, are rooted in 
the lack of self-esteem. Teenage pregnancy, learning problems, toleration of 
abusive behavior, addictive and self-destructive behaviors, and hyper/unprin-
cipled sexuality all seem to be related to problems of low self-esteem. I also 
think that many of the problems related to political apathy are functions of 
both individual and group self-esteem. I, personally, found that the empha-
sis on “black is beautiful” taught many of us to stop speaking in terms that 
refl ected low self-esteem, for instance “bad hair,” and to recognize that chemi-
cally assaulted skin and “oppressed hair” cannot inherit the kingdom.
35 If we 
are to explore the work of Alice Walker for ethical content or for direction in 
constructing ethics and in thinking theologically, I think that the most fruit-
ful  co urse  is  h e r  artful  a d v oca cy  o f  un co n di ti o n al  l o v e  tha t  starts  wi th  o ur  
acceptance of ourselves as divinely and humanly lovable.
In her most recent book, Walker resurrects one of our favorite characters, 
Shug, making her the founder of a church in the tradition of many African-
American “sisters of the Spirit.” Walker also authors a pamphlet called “Th  e 
Gospel According to Shug.” Consistent with Walker’s most subtle appropria-
tions and reworking of the biblical imagery, ethics, and rhetoric implicit in the 
RT54118_C006.indd   152RT54118_C006.indd   152 8/9/06   7:07:37 PM8/9/06   7:07:37 PM


--- PAGE 210 ---
Th  eology • 153
faith of our mothers, Walker presents us with a reworking of the beatitudes 
in which “Blessed” is replaced with the term “HELPED.” Th  e theme of love 
for all who are living is interwoven with twenty-seven explicit admonitions 
to embrace the cosmos, to pray for peace and justice, to help the existence of 
others, and to forgive. A close reading of Shug’s gospel suggests that Walker 
affi  rms a connection between the agape love of Christian ethics and a variety 
of ethical systems concerned with the relations among human beings, their 
world, and their Creator. For Walker, and admittedly this is my reading, there 
is a consistent challenge to relate to all human beings with an all-encompassing 
non-violent, indeed anti-violent, love that challenges, changes, and liberates. 
“HELPED are those who love and actively support the diversity of life. …”
36 In 
my reading of Walker, and this would make an excellent ethical study encom-
passing all of her work, this love is the greatest issue in human existence and 
the critical point of convergence between her creative thinking and the task 
o f  Christian  ethi cs.  Lik e  m an y  o f  us  wh o  w e r e  raised  cu d dlin g  ag ainst  o ur  
many mothers and aunts under the African-American preaching tradition, 
the greatest issue gleaned from those sermons was love. For Walker and many 
others, still “the greatest of these is love” and all else is commentary.
Note
 24. Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, “Th  e Role of Women in the Sanctifi  ed Church,” Journal of 
 Religious Th ought  43 (Spring/Summer 1986): 24–41.
 25. See Delores S. Williams, “Th  e Color of Feminism: Or Speaking the Black Woman’s 
Tongue,” Journal of Religious Th ought  43 (Spring/Summer 1986): 42, where she notes the 
problem posed for black Christian women by the word “feminist,” using the metaphor of 
a dress shop. She writes, “Th e black woman in group ‘A’ said: Th is all reminds me of the 
day I went into a fancy dress shop downtown and saw a real pretty dress. … Th  ere just 
wasn’t enough material in that dress to make it fi  t me. … And what I’m wondering is: if 
you black feminists try to make feminism fi  t me, will you have the same thing?”
 26. Barbara Smith, ed., Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology  (New York: Kitchen Table: 
Women of Color Press, 1983). See pp. xix–lvi for a discussion of the term “home girls,” an 
earlier version of Walker’s defi  nition that uses the term “herstorically” rather than his-
torically, some penetrating ethical issues around the misplaced black panic over homo-
sexuality, and the need to critique the nature of heterosexuality in the black community.
 27. See especially Walker’s short story “Th  e Welcome Table,” in In Love and In Trouble: Sto-
ries of Black Women  (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973), 81–87.
 28. I disagree with Gloria Watkins’s assertion that “the term womanist is not suffi   ciently 
linked to a tradition of radical political commitment to struggle and change.” Her com-
plaint misses Walker’s very cogent reading of black women’s political history. bell hooks, 
Talking Back: Th inking Feminist, Th inking Black  (Boston: South End Press, 1989), 182.
 29. Alice Walker, “Gift  s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson,” in In Search of Our 
Mothers’ Gardens  (San Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983), 81–82.
 30. George G.M. James, Stolen Legacy  (London: Th e African Publication Society, 1954). 
Walker’s discussion alludes to James’s argument that the Greeks were not the authors of 
philosophy and civilization but appropriated the ideas and systems of the Egyptians, a 
North African people. Walker further elaborates her agreement with critiques of white 
supremacist hegemony in the study of ancient civilizations in her most recent novel, Th e 
Temple of My Familiar (Orlando, Florida: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1989).
 31. Walker, “Gift  s of Power,” 81.
 32. For a more extended discussion of African women’s traditions and their importance for 
understanding the roles of powerful women in black churches and communities, see 
Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, “Th e Roles of Church and Community Mothers: Ambivalent 
RT54118_C006.indd   153RT54118_C006.indd   153 8/9/06   7:07:37 PM8/9/06   7:07:37 PM


--- PAGE 211 ---
154 • Th e Womanist Reader
American Sexism or Fragmented African Familyhood?” Journal of Feminist Studies in 
Religion 2 (Spring 1986): 41–59.
 33. Walker, “Gift  s of Power,” 82.
 34. Alice Walker, “Coretta King, Revisited,” in In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens,  147.
 35. See Alice Walker’s essay, “Oppressed Hair Puts a Ceiling on the Brain,” in Living By the 
Word: Selected Writings 1973–1987 (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988), 69–74.
 36. Walker, Temple of My Familiar, 287–289.
RT54118_C006.indd   154RT54118_C006.indd   154 8/9/06   7:07:38 PM8/9/06   7:07:38 PM


--- PAGE 212 ---
Th  eology • 155
A Final Rejoinder, by Cheryl J. Sanders
I want to begin by expressing my profound appreciation for these fresh and 
vigorous defenses of the womanist concept and nomenclature as an appro-
priate point of departure for doing ethics and theology as black women. If 
nothing else has been accomplished by this discussion, we have succeeded, I 
believe, in giving clear defi nition and direction to the terms of womanist dis-
course. Katie Cannon off ers a helpful and signifi  cant formulation of a wom-
anist liberation theological ethic to be used as a critical tool for constructing 
a faith praxis for black women. Emilie Townes’s view of the womanist idea as 
a model of the fundamental principle of the black Christian tradition invites 
intense theological refl ection upon the question of how christology can be inte-
grated with a radically immanent concept of the divine. M. Shawn Copeland’s 
concern for theological method, for the reshaping of black theology, and for 
Walker’s derivation and development of the term enlightens our understand-
ing of the womanist concept as “normative for adoption, adaptation, and 
authentic use.” bell hooks envisions womanism as an aspect of feminism that 
invites black women to construct theoretical paradigms which call attention 
to the workings of sexist oppression, and to become engaged in the transfor-
mative potential of feminist struggle. And Cheryl Gilkes helps us to ground 
our understanding of womanist as a frame of reference for ethical and theo-
logical discourse by giving attention to the vital historical-cultural content 
and social ethical focus conveyed by the defi nition. I am satisfi ed that some of 
my most fundamental critical questions have been thoughtfully addressed by 
these several statements of how the womanist concept shapes and directs our 
ethical and theological work as black women scholars.
Each of my colleagues has taken issue on some level with two specifi c areas 
of concern lift ed up in my essay—the use of womanist as a descriptive cul-
tural nomenclature for normative ethical and theological discourse, and the 
relevance of sexual preference in assessing the use and applicability of the 
term. In fact, I perceive that my respondents are disturbed as much by my 
raising these questions as by whatever underlying assumptions and biases are 
revealed in them. Aft  er giving careful consideration to their concerns and 
objections, with particular sensitivity to Katie Cannon’s expressions of anger, 
I became aware of an important factor that I did not explicitly raise in my 
statement but that does infl uence my thought and convictions on these issues. 
As a member of the Church of God, having been brought up in this church 
from my childhood as the third generation in Church of God from both sides 
of my family, and having served this church in positions of ministerial and 
educational leadership for much of my adult life, I identify very closely with 
the holiness tradition. My education in the liberal arts (Swarthmore College) 
and liberal theological (Harvard Divinity School) tradition notwithstand-
ing, I suspect that my identifi cation with the holiness tradition, perhaps more 
RT54118_C006.indd   155RT54118_C006.indd   155 8/9/06   7:07:38 PM8/9/06   7:07:38 PM


--- PAGE 213 ---
156 • Th e Womanist Reader
than any other factor, accounts for my position on these two issues, i.e., my 
insistence upon making hard and fast distinctions between the sacred and the 
secular in theory, and my deep concern for the moral signifi  cance of sexual 
norms in praxis.
Moreover, I think it is precisely at this juncture that I feel compelled to take 
issue with the fact that Rebecca Jackson, Sojourner Truth and other foremothers 
are named in womanist discourse without giving attention to the theological 
conservatism and evangelical fervor that undergirds much of their thought and 
action. In other words, I sense that these two major points of contention in the 
roundtable discussion are energized by the confl ict between liberal and conser-
vative theological perspectives more than by a lack of consensus regarding the 
appropriate terms, procedures and content of womanist ethics and theology. To 
further complicate matters, in the Church of God tradition, in theory if not also 
in practice, our commitment to Christian unity causes us to look with suspicion 
upon any eff ort to defi ne church in terms of race, gender, class or denomina-
tion.
37 Our regard for the Bible as the supreme source of our understanding of 
the nature of divinity and the situation of humanity makes it diffi  cult to ascribe 
independent revelatory authority to any other sources or concepts in doing the-
ology apart from the light of Scripture. Th us, it is problematic for me to incor-
porate terms, concepts, practices and approaches into my own theological and 
ethical refl ection that contradict my limited but growing understanding of 
the Word of God. I might add that I am helped in my dilemma by M. Shawn 
Copeland’s suggestion that we can speak of secular womanists and Christian 
womanists. In any case, I applaud the diversity of perspectives represented in this 
roundtable discussion, and sincerely hope that my own deviance from the lib-
eral norm does not compromise my continued participation in this dialogue.
I hope that our debate on the specifi cities of theological method and the rel-
evance of sexual preference will not deter us from forthright consideration of 
the concrete concern that is at the root of these womanist ethical and theo-
logical statements, which is justice. Th e experience of sexism and racism focuses 
the black woman’s attention on the question of justice in a unique way. But our 
participation as black women in the upper echelons of graduate theological edu-
cation can be as “the blind leading the blind” if we do not bring to our work a 
passionate commitment to the transformative liberatory praxis which bell hooks 
and others have persistently brought to our attention. I believe that the woman-
ist concept, in addition to giving us an opportunity to name our own experience 
aft er our own fashion, compels us to celebrate, critique and construct resources 
provided through the lives of black women to confront the structures of injus-
tice and oppression and other forms of evil that would destroy us individually 
and collectively. One of the strengths of the womanist perspective in this regard 
is the ease with which it lends itself to analysis of both the personal and political 
dimensions of the pursuit of justice, because of its implicit focus on the indi-
vidual rights and collective responsibilities of black women.
RT54118_C006.indd   156RT54118_C006.indd   156 8/9/06   7:07:38 PM8/9/06   7:07:38 PM


--- PAGE 214 ---
Th  eology • 157
To summarize, I discern within this roundtable discussion the emergence of 
several encouraging signs of the potential impact of womanist theological scholar-
ship upon the life of the academy, the church and the community. It did my soul 
good to observe the extent to which my colleagues drew upon black women’s 
sources in formulating their responses. Th e fact that almost all of their footnotes 
are derived from the writings of black women sends the important signal that we 
are appreciating, analyzing and appropriating our own sources, and also those of 
black men, without appealing, for the most part, to white sources for sanction or 
approval of what we ourselves have said. Th is observation is especially signifi cant 
in view of the fact that in a racist society, self-hatred manifests itself as unmistak-
ably in the academy as in the ghetto when we are pressured to employ our oppres-
sors’ criteria to evaluate our own work and worth. To see black women embracing 
and engaging our own material is a celebration in itself. It may be that the best 
contribution womanist scholars can make to the church (and to the academy as 
well) by means of discussions such as these is to force the issue of acceptance of the 
diversity of perspectives, experiences and approaches to human wholeness. Th ese 
responses represent for me some exciting combinations of content and method; 
indeed, the womanist concept invites and encourages dialogue across the disci-
plines. Moreover, the fact that we are far from uniform even in some of our basic 
assumptions and ideas enlightens and enlarges the discussion in my view. Given 
the implicit and explicit pastoral concerns expressed in each of the responses, it is 
my hope that womanist ethics and theology can generate the practical enablement 
of oppressed persons in the society through the instrumentality of the church and 
the academy. Th is is not to suggest that the value of womanist thought is strictly 
reduced to its immediate applicability to pastoral ministry, but rather to recognize 
that a practical concern for enablement is the expected outcome of theological 
refl ection and action rooted in the real experience and struggle and power rep-
resented by the womanist concept. Th e intergenerational emphasis of the wom-
anist defi nition can form the basis for developing more eff ective strategies and 
resources for parents in the black community and beyond, who are faced with the 
responsibility of fi nding ways to equip our children to name and to overcome the 
many scourges and plagues which obscure our past, complicate our present and 
threaten our future. Th us it is with deep gratitude and hope that I exhort my sister 
scholars to continue the work of craft ing tools and breaking ground and planting 
seeds for a new day.
Note
 37. I have addressed the confl  ict between the doctrine of holiness and unity and the prac-
tice of racism and sexism in the Church of God in a chapter entitled “Ethics of Holiness 
and Unity in the Church of God,” in Called to Minister, Empowered to Serve,  ed. Juanita 
 Leonard (Anderson, Indiana: Warner Press, 1989).
RT54118_C006.indd   157RT54118_C006.indd   157 8/9/06   7:07:39 PM8/9/06   7:07:39 PM


--- PAGE 215 ---
RT54118_C006.indd   158RT54118_C006.indd   158 8/9/06   7:07:39 PM8/9/06   7:07:39 PM


--- PAGE 216 ---
159
7
Literature and Literary Criticism
Some Implications of Womanist Theory* (1986)
SHERLEY ANNE WILLIAMS
I am an Afro- Americanist and enough of an Africanist to know something 
of the enormous diff erences between African literatures and Afro-American 
literature, and something, too, of the remarkable parallels and similarities 
between them. We do in English, aft  er all, trace our literary roots back to 
the same fore-parents, the Senegalese American, Phillis Wheatley and the 
Nigerian American Gustavas Vassa or Olaudah Equino, the African. So you 
must make your own analogies with what follows here; I am assuming that 
feminist criticism receives much the same reception it has met with among 
Afro-American critics, male and female. Oft en, feminist concerns are seen as 
a divisive, white importation that further fragments an already divided and 
embattled race, as trivial mind-games unworthy of response while black peo-
ple everywhere confront massive economic and social problems. I don’t deny 
feminism’s potential for divisiveness, but the concerns of women are neither 
trivial nor petty. Th e relation between male and female is the very foundation 
of human society. If black men refuse to engage the unease at the race’s heart, 
they cannot speak or even see truthfully anywhere else.
Feminist readings can lead to mis-apprehensions of particular texts or even 
of a whole tradition, but certain of its formulation off  er us a vocabulary that 
can be made meaningful in terms of our own experience. Feminist theory, 
like black aesthetics, off ers us not only the possibility of changing one’s read-
ing of the world, but of changing the world itself. And like black aesthetics, it 
is far more egalitarian than the prevailing mode. What follows, then, is both a 
critique of feminist theory and an application of that branch of it Alice Walker 
has called “womanist.”
1 It is as much bolekaja criticism as “feminist” theory 
for black women writers had been urging black men, not so much to “come 
down [and] fi ght,” as to come down and talk, even before Chinweizu, Jemie 
and Madubuike coined a critical term to describe our challenge.
2
* Presented at the African Literature Conference, April 17, 1986.
RT54118_C007.indd   159RT54118_C007.indd   159 7/8/06   6:43:50 PM7/8/06   6:43:50 PM


--- PAGE 217 ---
160 • Th e Womanist Reader
Feminist criticism, to paraphrase Elaine Showalter’ s words in the “Introduc-
tion” to Th e New Feminist Criticism, 3 challenges the fundamental theoretical 
assumptions of literary history and criticism by demanding a radical rethinking 
and revisioning of the conceptual grounds of literary study that have been based 
almost entirely on male literary experiences. Some of the implications of this radi-
cal revisioning have already been realized in Afro-American literature. Th e works 
of forgotten black women writers are being resurrected and critics are at work 
revising the slighting, oft en misinformed, critical opinions of these works. We 
have a fuller understanding of these writers because feminist criticism has begun 
to eliminate much of the phallocentrism from our readings of their work and to 
recover the female aesthetics said to distinguish female creativity from male. We 
can see the results of this inquiry in the numerous monographs and articles that 
have appeared in the nine years since the publication of Barbara Smith’s ground-
breaking essay, “Towards a Black Feminist Criticism,”
4 an d  in  th a t  s o m e  b l a c k 
male critics are now numbered among the ranks of feminist critics.
Much of the present interest in black feminist criticism is rooted in the fact 
that black women writers are among the most exciting writers on the con-
temporary American literary scene, but it began in the confrontation of black 
women readers in the early ’70s with black female portraiture (or its lack) in 
fi ction by black male writers. Debra McDowell, in “New Directions for Black 
Feminist Th eory,”
5 values these pioneering studies of negative and derogatory 
female portraiture as an impetus to early black feminist inquiry and acknowl-
edges that a black feminist criticism must do more than “merely focus on how 
black men have treated black women in literature.” McDowell’s major con-
cern is with encouraging the development of theories that will help us to see 
properly and understand the themes, motifs and idioms used by black women 
writers, but she raises other important issues as well. She touches upon one 
of the more disturbing aspects of current black feminist criticism: its sepa-
ratism; its tendency to see not only a distinct black female culture but to see 
that culture as a separate cultural form having more in common with white 
female experience than it has with the facticity of Afro-American life. Th  is 
proposition is problematic, even as a theoretical conjecture, especially since 
even its adherents have conceded that, until quite recently, black women’s lit-
erary experiences were excluded from consideration in the literature of white 
feminists. For this reason, I prefer Alice Walker’s term, womanist, as the refer-
ent for what I attempt here. Womanist theory is, by defi  nition, “committed 
to the survival and wholeness of entire people,” female and male, as well as 
a valorization of women’s works in all their varieties and multitudes. Th  at 
commitment places it squarely within the challenge of engagement implicit 
in bolekaja criticism.
McDowell also calls for black feminist critics to turn their attention to the 
“challenging and necessary task” of a thoroughgoing examination of the works 
of black male writers, and suggests a line of inquiry that implicitly affi  rms kinship 
RT54118_C007.indd   160RT54118_C007.indd   160 7/8/06   6:43:51 PM7/8/06   6:43:51 PM


--- PAGE 218 ---
Literature and Literary Criticism • 161
among Afro-American writers, “the countless thematic, stylistic, and imagistic 
parallels between black male and black female writing.” Her call, however, does 
not go far enough. By limiting the studies of writings by black males to eff orts 
“to determine the ways in which these commonalities are manifested diff erently 
in black women’s writings and the ways in which they coincide with writings by 
black men,” she seems to imply that feminist inquiry can only illuminate works 
by women and works that include female portraiture, that our re-readings of 
female images will not also change our readings of men. Womanist inquiry, on 
the other hand, assumes that it can talk both eff ectively and productively about 
men. Th is is a necessary assumption because the negative, stereotyped images 
of black women are only a part of the problem of phallocentric writings by black 
males. In order to understand that problem more fully , we must turn to what 
black men have written about themselves.
Much literature, classic and popular, by white American males valorizes 
the white patriarchal ideals of physical aggression, heroic conquest, and intel-
lectual domination. Recognizing that a diff  erence in actual circumstances 
forced distinguishing and diff  erent characteristics on would-be black patri-
archs, a conventional feminist reading of literature by black males would see 
these ideals only partially “encoded” in their writings. Even so, such ideals 
would be the desired ones, and deviation from them taken as signs of dimin-
ished masculine self-esteem. Th at is, explicit social protest about racial prohi-
bitions that restrict black men from exercising patriarchial authority is part of 
their “heroic quest” because they don’t possess all the privileges of white men. 
Such a reading, of course, tends to reduce the black struggle for justice and 
equal opportunity to the right to beat one’s wife and daughter. Many black 
men refused to exercise such “rights,” and many black women resisted those 
who tried.
6 Nor was physical aggression really a value in the literature of black 
males before 1940. Physical force, even when used by non-heroic black men, 
was almost always defensive, especially against white people, and, when used 
against other blacks, generally symbolized the corruption wrought by slavery. 
Th e initial formulation, however , does serve to illuminate some instances of 
black male self-portraiture, particularly in nineteenth century non-fi  ction 
prose narrative and fi ction.
Nineteenth century black men, confronted with the impossibility of being 
the (white) patriarch, began to subvert certain of patriarchy’s ideals and values 
to conform to their own images. Th us, the degree to which, and the basis on 
which, the hero avoids physical aggression was one means of establishing the 
hero’s noble stature and contributed to the hero’s intellectual equality—not 
dominance—with the collective white man. Frederick Douglass’ 1845 autobi-
ography, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American Slave,
7 off ers 
several instances of this subversion and redefi  nition of white patriarchal ide-
als. I focus on what he will later call “Th e Fight.” 8 Douglass, an “uppity” slave, 
is hired out to Covey, a “nigger-breaker,” to have his spirit curbed. Douglass’ 
RT54118_C007.indd   161RT54118_C007.indd   161 7/8/06   6:43:51 PM7/8/06   6:43:51 PM


--- PAGE 219 ---
162 • Th e Womanist Reader
“fi ght” with Covey marks the turning point in his development from slave to 
free man. In the instant he refuses to be whipped, Douglass ceases “to be a 
slave in fact.” Yet Douglass is not the aggressor. Douglass seizes Covey by the 
throat when the later tries to tie him up and holds him “uneasy”; though Dou-
glass does draw Covey’s blood, he actually touches him only with the ends of 
his fi ngers. Douglass brings the white man to the ground but never lays violent 
hands on him; rather, he “seizes him by the collar.” Douglass is thus able to 
dominate Covey by his own self-restraint and self-control rather than force 
major. Douglass took a great delight in having bested Covey while conforming 
to a semblance of the master–slave relationship. In the later re-telling of the 
episode he returns “a polite, ‘Yes, sir,’ ” to Covey’s outraged, “ ‘Are you going to 
continue to resist?’ ” and concludes, I was “victorious because my aim had not 
been to injure him but to prevent his injuring me.” Robert B. Stepto, in From 
Behind the Veil
9 (itself a brilliant example of the use to which genre studies can 
be put), details the brilliant strokes by which “Douglass reinforces his posture 
as an articulate hero”—i.e., the intellectual equal of the white men who intro-
duce and thus vouch for the authenticity of Douglass and his narrative before 
the white world. Suffi  ce it here to say that in “supplant[ing the white men] 
as the defi nitive historian[s] of his past” Douglass self-consciously reverses 
the usual patterns of authentication in black texts and that this manifestation 
of his intellectual independence is characterized by the same restraint and 
subtlety as his description of his successful psychological rite of passage.
Th e pattern of self-restraint, of physical self-control as an avenue to moral 
superiority and intellectual equality vis-à-vis white society, dominates male 
self-portraiture in the nineteenth century, where achieving heroic stature is 
most oft en the means by which the black male hero also assumes the mantel 
of the “patriarch.” But the black patriarch in the nineteenth century has more 
to do with providing for and protecting his “dependents” than with wielding 
authority or exploiting their dependency so as to achieve his own privilege. 
Once free, Douglass marries, takes a job, becomes a leader in the struggle for 
the abolition of slavery; Josiah Henson, the model for Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 
Uncle Tom,
10 escapes from slavery with his wife beside him and two children 
on his back, works on the Underground Railroad, and founds a black township 
in Canada. Dr. Miller, the hero of Charles Chestnutt’s turn-of-the-century 
novel, Th e Marrow of Tradition,
11 is a husband, father, son, and founder of 
a hospital and school for blacks. In other words, black male heroic stature 
was most oft en achieved within the context of marriage, family, and black 
community—all of which depend on a relationship with, if not black women, 
at least other black people.
Th e nature of the black male character’s heroic quest and the means by 
which the hero achieves intellectual parity begin to change in the twentieth 
century. Th e heroic quest through the early thirties was a largely introspective 
one whose goal was the reintegration of the educated hero with the unlettered 
RT54118_C007.indd   162RT54118_C007.indd   162 7/8/06   6:43:52 PM7/8/06   6:43:52 PM


--- PAGE 220 ---
Literature and Literary Criticism • 163
black masses who symbolized his negro-ness. 12 But the valuation of black 
community and black family (oft en an extended family) continues until 1940. 
Richard Wright’s Native Son began a period in which the black heroic quest 
was increasingly externalized. A perceptive, though not necessarily articulate 
or educated, protagonist seeks recognition from the white power structure and 
in the process comes to recognize—and realize—himself. By the mid 1960s 
white society was typically characterized in the literature by physically frail 
and cowardly, morally weak, sexually impotent, eff  eminate white men and 
super-feminine white women who personifi  ed the offi  cial standard of femi-
nine beauty—delicate, dainty, sexually inhibited until liberated by a hyper-
potent black man.
13 Th e goal of the black hero’s quest was to dominate the one 
and marry the other. Black community, once the object of heroic quest, was, 
in these works, an impediment to its success; black female portraiture, when 
present, was oft en no more than demeaning stereotypes used to justify what 
even the hero sometimes recognized as a pathological obsession with the white 
woman. Th is kind of heroic quest is a dominant feature in some important 
co n tem po rary texts; ho w ev er , black male self - po rtraiture, b y the late 1 97 0s, 
was presented within a broader spectrum of themes—patriarchal responsi-
bility, sibling relations, and male bonding—that were self-questioning rather 
than self-satisfi ed or self-righteous.
14 Th ese few texts can be construed as a 
positive response to the black feminist criticism of the early 1970s. Yet they are 
largely neglected by the Afro-American critical establishment which, by and 
large, leaves to the New York Times the task of canonizing our literature. Th e 
present interest in black women’s writing arose outside that hegemony as had 
the interest in black poetry in the late 1960s. And, like the black aesthetics that 
arose as a response to black arts poetry, black feminist criticism runs the risk 
of being narrowly proscriptive rather than broadly analytic.
* * *
Using a combination of fi  ction and non-fi  ction prose by Richard Wright, 
Ralph Ellison, James Baldwin, Norman Mailer, and Eldridge Cleaver, Michele 
Wallace suggested, in Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman,
15 a black 
feminist reading of the development of modern black male self-image that is 
similar to what I have said here. Wallace was roundly damned and told by sis-
ter feminists “to read it again” as though we ourselves had not suspected, even 
suggested, these things before. And no one has quite dared since then to hold 
up the record black men have written of themselves. Rather, since black men 
gave little evidence of talking to us, we talked to each other.
Having confronted what black men have said about us, it is now time for 
black feminist critics to confront—and to confront black male writers—with 
w h a t  t h e y  h a v e  s a i d  a b o u t  t h e m s e l v e s .  W h a t  i s  n e e d e d  i s  a  t h o r o u g h g o i n g  
examination of male images in the works of black male writers. Th is is a nec-
essary step in ending the separatist tendency in Afro-American criticism and 
RT54118_C007.indd   163RT54118_C007.indd   163 7/8/06   6:43:52 PM7/8/06   6:43:52 PM


--- PAGE 221 ---
164 • Th e Womanist Reader
in  a c hi evin g,  in  Afr o- Am e ri can  li t e ra tur e,  f e minis t  th eo ry’ s  a v o w ed  aim  o f  
“challenging the fundamental theoretical assumptions of traditional literary 
history and criticism.” Black women as readers and writers have been kept out 
of literary endeavor, so we had, and have, a lot to say. But to focus solely on 
ourselves is to fall into the same hole The Brother has dug for himself—
narcissism, isolation, inarticulation, obscurity. Of course we must keep talk-
ing to and about ourselves but literature, as Chinweizu and Walker remind us, 
is about community and dialogue; theories or ways of reading ought actively 
to promote the enlargement of both.
Notes
 1. Alice Walker, In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens (New York, 1984).
 2. Chinweizu, Onwuchekwa Jemi, and Ihechukwu Madubuike, Toward the Decolonization 
of African Literature (Washington, D.C., 1983).
 3. Elaine Showalter, ed., Th e New Feminist Criticism (New York, 1985).
 4. Barbara Smith in Showalter, op. cit.
 5. In Showalter, op. cit., 186–99.
 6. Further research in both traditional and contemporary Afro-American orature just 
might document that the community valued going “upside” anyone’s head as a last, rather 
than the fi rst, resort at least as much as they admired the ability or will to do so.
 7. Benjamin Quarles, ed. (Cambridge, 1960).
 8. My Bondage and My Freedom (1855; rep. New York, 1969).
 9. Urbana, 1979.
 10. Father Henson’s Own Story (1849; rep. Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1970).
 11. 1901; rep. Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1969.
 12. Th  e key texts include James Weldon Johnson’s Th e Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man 
(1912), Jean Toomer’s Cane (1923), and Langston Hughes’s Not without Laughter (1930).
 13. Th  e terminology is drawn from Eldridge Cleaver’s Soul on Ice (New York, 1968) but the 
portrayal can be found in the works of black male writers from Richard Wright and Ralph 
Ellison to Ishmael Reed.
 14. Ernest J. Gaines’s In My Father’s House (1978), Wesley Brown’s Tragic Magic (1978) come 
most readily to mind; however, the works of William Melvin Kelley, John McCluskey, 
and John A. Williams present a range of black male characters that still await close 
discussion.
 15. New York, 1978.
RT54118_C007.indd   164RT54118_C007.indd   164 7/8/06   6:43:52 PM7/8/06   6:43:52 PM


--- PAGE 222 ---
165
A Womanist Production of Truths: The 
Use of Myths in Amy Tan (1995)
WENYING XU
Women as sexed subjects 1 are produced by centuries of ideological indoctri-
nation inscribing social and sexual mores in girls and women. Mythologies 
are one of the most appetizing, saturating, and thus most vicious components 
of gender ideologies, for mythologies ar e capable of shaping female subjects 
who take as their own vital survival the perpetuation of existent social and 
sexual order. As we have oft en seen and read, sometimes women have a more 
desperate sense of peril than men when there is any transgression of sexual 
morals, particularly if the transgression is done by another woman. Human-
ist and individualist traditions have further captivated women under their 
oppression with the philosophy of the Intended Subject. If one fails to recog-
nize the subject as ideologically molded and thus fractured and incoherent, 
one cannot understand women as gendered subjects who are not identical to 
their intentions. If there were a self before language and culture that was iden-
tical to its intentions, it has been irretrievably lost.
It is not my desire, however, to speculate on the nature of the primordial; 
rather I would like to discuss through the reading of Amy Tan’s novels how 
women can take possession of myths and make them produce truths that 
enable women to revise their self-understanding and thus gain a renewed 
sense of self. Th eir production of truths is an act of transgression against 
established norms and ideals, facilitating the loosening of the foundations of 
female subject constitution.
How Asian American writers use myths and legends has been at the cen-
ter of a debate concerning the truthfulness of the representation of Chinese 
culture. In Th e Big Aiiieeeee!  Frank Chin tries to distinguish the real Chinese 
myths and legends from the fake ones as he fi nds them in Maxine Hong Kings-
ton, Amy Tan, and David Henry Hwang.
2 Chin accuses these Asian American 
writers of having “faked” Chinese legends and myths to confi  rm “the white 
racist” belief that Chinese are cruel and misogynous. Th  ese writers’ revision 
of Chinese myths and legends is condemned as “a device for destroying his-
tory and literature” (Chin 2–3).
It seems that what Frank Chin demands of Chinese American writers is 
their loyalty to their ancestral culture and history to such an extent that it 
precludes any concern about gender issues which challenge the patriarchal 
order, for his charge against Kingston, Tan, and Hwang is that these writ-
ers have rewritten Chinese myths and legends in order to highlight either 
RT54118_C007.indd   165RT54118_C007.indd   165 7/8/06   6:43:52 PM7/8/06   6:43:52 PM


--- PAGE 223 ---
166 • Th e Womanist Reader
the victimization of women or women’s self-empowerment. As a man well 
versed in Chinese culture and history, Chin has to work very hard to forget the 
misogynous portrayals of women in Chinese literature and the gendered Chi-
nese language. In his “Th is Is Not an Autobiography,” Chin’s repeated use of 
“Chinaman” functions to demarcate “the yellow agents of yellow extinction” 
or “ornamental orientals” (among whom he locates Maxine Hong Kingston, 
Betty Bao Lord, and David Henry Hwang) from the “real Chinaman” (Chin 
110). Th is male universal as the incorruptible genuine embodiment of Chi-
nese culture and history further blinds Chin to the blatant male domination 
inherent in the Chinese language. He writes: “Whatever language a China-
man speaks, it is always Chinaman, and the fi  rst person pronoun I, in any 
language, means ‘I am the law’ ” (Chin III). In order to make this Kwan Kung 
bold statement (Chin 121–22), Chin must forget the humble Chinese female 
pronoun “I” (nu) which is synonymous with slave.
Chin ’ s desire to separate the real from the fake is thus gender driven. In 
opposing the feminization of Chinese myths or legends, he is not simply (and 
naively) guarding the purity of his ancestral culture; he is glorifying and con-
tinuing the male militant heroism in that culture.
3 What Frank Chin does not 
seem to understand is the fact that myths and legends are neither immutable 
nor unmediated in the sense of being sacred and gender free. Th e story of Fa 
Mu Lan, for example, has several versions in the Tang, Ming, and Qing dynas-
ties as well as in the modern period.
4 Myths and legends also are the very stuff  
that renders ideologies invisible. 5
For me it was a rare pleasure to fi  nd in Amy Tan’s novels revisions of 
mythologies that subvert gender ideologies and gain women a measure of 
freedom from patriarchal domination. Th e two main myths Amy Tan uses 
are the myth of the Moon Lady in Th e Joy Luck Club  ( 1989 ) and that of the 
Kitchen God in Th e Kitchen God’s Wife  (1991).
6 For my purpose I will give a 
fuller account of both myths than that given by Amy Tan.
Th e Moon Lady myth tells the story of the master archer, Yi, and his wife, 
Chang Eh, who became the Moon Lady. 7 B o t h  w e r e  o r i g i n a l l y  l e s s e r  g o d s  
but as a punishment they had been turned into mere mortals by the supreme 
father god and his wife, the sun goddess. Normally only one solar son at a 
time was permitted to appear in the sky and meet the needs of the mortals 
on earth. Once, however, choosing to be playful rather than dutiful, all ten 
sons appeared at the same time, scorching the earth. Yi, the master archer, 
had been sent to earth merely to discipline the sons of the sun goddess so as 
to restore the order normal to the relation between the heaven and the earth. 
Yi, in overzealous compassion for mortals, angrily shot down nine of the sons 
and thus, with his wife, was forced to become mere mortals. Yi and Chang Eh 
never gave up hope of recapturing immortality. Yi eventually found a crea-
ture who possessed a tree on which grew a ten-thousand-year rare fruit which 
either could provide human immortality for two people or could send one to 
RT54118_C007.indd   166RT54118_C007.indd   166 7/8/06   6:43:52 PM7/8/06   6:43:52 PM


--- PAGE 224 ---
Literature and Literary Criticism • 167
heaven as a god. Because of Yi’s earlier compassion for mortals, the creature 
gave him the fruit, and in similar compassion he chose to share it with his wife 
so both could become immortal. His wife, Chang Eh, however, who had killed 
no one but still had been punished along with her husband, was not content 
to share the fate of being merely an immortal human with her husband; she 
ate the fruit by herself in order to again become a goddess. Instantly, she felt 
as light as a feather and fl  oated out of an open window up to the moon. In 
one ending of the myth, as soon as she got to the moon she became a toad in 
punishment for her disloyalty. In the other ending, she was compelled to live 
for eternity on the moon as a beautiful but utterly lonely young woman. In 
Th e Joy Luck Club  Ying-Ying recalls a celebration of the Moon Festival in her 
childhood. Th e opera of the Moon Lady is customarily staged on the night 
o f  A ugust  1 5  wh e n  th e  m oo n  is  th e  full est.  Aft er the Moon Lady takes the 
“peach” of immortality, the drama turns didactic.
As soon as she tasted it, she began to rise, then fl  y—not like the Queen 
Mother—but like a dragonfl y with broken wings. “Flung from this earth 
by my own wantonness!” she cried just as her husband dashed back 
home, shouting, “Th ief! Life-stealing wife!” … there stood the poor lady 
against a moon as bright as the sun. Her hair was now so long it swept 
the fl oor, wiping up her tears. An eternity had passed since she last saw 
her husband, for this was her fate: to stay lost on the moon, forever seek-
ing her own selfi sh wishes.
“For woman is yin,” she cried sadly, “the darkness within, where untem-
pered passions lie. And man is yang, bright truth lighting our minds.” 
(Club 81)
Th e moral lesson of the Moon Lady aims at curbing women’s desire for 
agency by describing it as “wanton” and “selfi sh.” Myths mapping such explicit 
limitations on women’s desires and actions are analogous to what Spivak calls 
“symbolic clitoridectomies” (10). Th ey mark, expose, and slice off   the place of 
women’s desire. Th e agents of perpetrating such removal of desire are oft  en 
women themselves. Myths and traditional wisdom engender and legitimate 
the removal of agency in women. As a child Waverly Jong learns from her 
mother “Bite back your tongue. … Strongest wind cannot be seen” ( Club 89). 
Only silent wishes get fulfi lled. Ying-Ying as a child cannot understand why a 
secret wish is “what you want but cannot ask.” She demands an answer from 
Amah, “Why can’t I ask?” “It’s because … if you ask it … it is no longer a wish 
but a selfi sh desire,” says Amah. “Haven’t I taught you that it is wrong to think 
of your own needs? A girl can never ask, only listen” ( Club 70).
Th e real beginning of the narrative of Th e Joy Luck Club  is the mother’s 
killing secret. When Jing-mei is summoned by her father to take her mother’s 
“corner” at the mah jong table, he tells her his suspicions: “My Father thinks she 
was killed by her own thoughts.”
RT54118_C007.indd   167RT54118_C007.indd   167 7/8/06   6:43:53 PM7/8/06   6:43:53 PM


--- PAGE 225 ---
168 • Th e Womanist Reader
“ ‘She had a new idea inside her head,’ said my father. ‘But before it could 
come out of her mouth, the thought grew too big and burst. It must have been 
a very bad idea’ ” ( Club 19). It is a desire too great to be good for a woman. 
A mortal woman dies because of a great desire and an immortal woman 
becomes exiled for it. Tales or myths of this sort are gendering and regulating 
biographies for the constitution of the sexed subject. Th rough them Chinese 
women learn not to desire, not to demand, not to act out of their wishes. Win-
nie remembers that all the stories she knows
had to do with lessons learned too late—not to eat too much, not to talk 
too loudly, not to wander out at night by yourself—in any case, always 
about people who fell off  the earth and into the sky because of their will-
ful ways. (Wife 230)
Amy Tan gives the Moon Lady an alternative ending that counteracts the 
gendering “truth” of the myth. Aft  er the opera is over, Ying-Ying follows the 
Moon Lady hoping to get her wish granted.
“I have a wish,” I said in a whisper, and still she did not hear me. So I 
walked closer yet, until I could see the face of the Moon Lady: shrunken 
cheeks, a broad oily nose, large glaring teeth, and red-stained eyes. … 
And as the secret wish fell from my lips, the Moon Lady looked at me 
and became a man. (Club 82)
Th is ending removes the glamour of the Moon Lady as a beautiful yet pitiful 
sinner, thus disclosing the ugliness of women’s victimization and crystalliz-
ing the insidious “secret” behind the making of the myth. Now if we recall the 
truth uttered by the Moon Lady at the end of the opera, “Women are yin, the 
darkness within. … And man is yang, bright truth lighting our minds,” we see 
the comical twist in Tan’s telling of the Moon Lady. Th e “truth,” declared by a 
declining man disguised as a beautiful young woman, now appears to be a bad 
joke that strips the grandeur of the universal claim about the sexes. With this 
comical twist of the story of the Moon Lady, Amy Tan reminds her reader that 
mythologies are not authorless and therefore free from intentions to manipu-
late. Rather myths have been authored by the intentions of gender ideologies 
to subjugate women and turn them into sexed subjects.
In Th e Kitchen God’s Wife  Winnie Louie chooses to tell the unknown story 
of a god’s wife who was the hand behind his glory and wealth.
Fish jumped in his river, pigs grazed his hand, ducks fl  ew around his 
yard as thick as clouds. And that was because he was blessed with a hard-
working wife named Guo. She caught his fi  sh and herded his pigs. She 
fattened his ducks, doubled all his riches, year aft er year … (Wife 54)
But the husband “was not satisfi  ed” and began philandering around (54). 
His wife, refusing to wait on his lovers, left   him for good. Years later, having 
RT54118_C007.indd   168RT54118_C007.indd   168 7/8/06   6:43:53 PM7/8/06   6:43:53 PM


--- PAGE 226 ---
Literature and Literary Criticism • 169
squandered all his wealth, Zhang as a beggar met his wife again, who now was 
a lady of a rich house. Out of shame he jumped into the fi replace and his ashes 
fl ew up to heaven. “For having the courage to admit you were wrong,” the 
Jade Emperor (ruler of heaven) declared to Zhang, “I make you Kitchen God, 
watching over everyone’s behavior. Every year you let me know who deserves 
good luck, who deserves bad” (Wife 55).
In one of the common versions of the Kitchen God myth, the god began 
as a good, hard working, and honest man, fated, however , to be poor all his 
life.
8 Th e extreme poverty forced him to sell his wife to a wealthy man as a 
concubine. She never forgot him and once when he came to work for her new 
husband, even though he never even recognized her, she gave him some cakes 
into which she had hidden money. Not knowing they contained money, this 
man on his way home shared one of them with a hungry stranger at a tea 
house. Discovering the money in the cake, the stranger swindled him into 
selling them for almost nothing. Later, learning that his ever loving former 
wife had fi lled the cakes with money, he decided that his fate was too heavy 
and ended his own life. With his eff  orts in this life receiving no reward, he 
nevertheless was rewarded by being appointed the God of the Kitchen.
Winnie’s rendition of the myth focuses on the injustice that the wife suf-
fered. Winnie also denaturalizes the husband’ s poverty , explaining it as the 
result of his bad character rather than his fate. In her story the husband and 
his lover “slaughtered ducks just to eat a plate of their tongues. And in two 
years’ time, all of Zhang’s land was empty, and so was his heart” ( Wife 54). 
Such revision enables Winnie to indignantly disavow this myth. “Why should 
I want that kind of person to judge me, a man who cheated his wife? His wife 
was the good one, not him” (Wife 55).
For someone from the old China, Winnie is not only courageous but also 
enlightened to denounce the god and demand justice for the forgotten wife. 
Aft er all, as she very well knows,
“All year long you have to show him [the kitchen god] respect—give him 
tea and oranges. When Chinese New Year’s time comes, you must give 
him even better things—maybe whiskey to drink, cigarettes to smoke, 
candy to eat, that kind of thing. You are hoping all the time his tongue 
will be sweet, his head a little drunk, so when he has his meeting with 
the big boss, maybe he reports good things about you. Th  is family has 
b e e n  g o o d ,  y o u  h o p e  h e  s a y s .  P l e a s e  gi v e  th e m  g o o d  l u c k  n e xt  y e ar . ”  
(Wife 55)
Following further Winnie’s account of her life in China, one fi  nds out that 
the story of the Kitchen God is also her own story. She is the kind-hearted 
hard-working wife, who is constantly humiliated and abused by her ruth-
less and black hearted husband, Wen Fu. It seems that her life in China is an 
unbreakable chain of bad luck—female child of a concubine, abandoned by 
RT54118_C007.indd   169RT54118_C007.indd   169 7/8/06   6:43:53 PM7/8/06   6:43:53 PM


--- PAGE 227 ---
170 • Th e Womanist Reader
both parents, married to a murderous man, two dead children, several abor-
tions, China’s war with Japan, and her one and half years in jail. … Perhaps 
it is her incessant bad luck that has made her defi  ant of the Kitchen God, for 
she certainly deserves good luck because of her unbending observation of the 
traditional codes for women. But in contradiction with the tradition she also 
learns that being born a female (in the old China) certifi  es all kinds of rotten 
luck to appear on her path of life.
9
In her narrative of her past life, Winnie casts herself in the role of the 
Kitchen God’s wife whose good behavior secured her nothing. She has fol-
lowed closely the prescription of a virtuous woman and a good wife, but she 
has always been made to feel inadequate by her husband’s dissatisfaction 
expressed in torrents of abuse. Winnie becomes furious but helpless as she 
watches her husband being rewarded with good luck for simply being his hor-
rible self. Winnie’s revision of the myth of the Kitchen God produces the truth 
of the masculine use of women as instruments of self-assertion. She makes it 
clear that it is through the use of women that Zhang became a kitchen god, 
and it is by abusing women that Wen Fu perceives himself as a “real man.”
When Winnie fi nally understands that if she does not fi ght back, she will be 
like many other women who become sacrifi ces on the altar of the patriarchal 
tradition, she casts off  the respectable robe of tragedy and compares herself to 
“a chicken in a cage, mindless, never dreaming of freedom, but never worry-
ing when your neck might be chopped off  ” (Wife 313). It is this recognition of 
the inhumanity of her life that fi  nally motivates her to seek a change in life. 
In retrospect she tells her daughter, “If I had had to change the whole world to 
change my own life, I would have done that” (Wife 355–56).
To save herself Winnie chooses to do what only “bad” women do—running 
away from her husband and moving in with the man she loves. Only when she 
refuses to be a virtuous woman and good wife does good luck begin to fl ow into 
her life. Even the good luck, however, does not come without the company of 
patriarchal bullying. When Winnie is sued by her husband, Wen Fu, the court 
sentences her to two years in prison for “deserting her husband” ( Wife 373). 
Already disentangled from the grip of her traditional female consciousness, 
Winnie feels no shame but anger over the injustice of China’s legal system. 
Aft er one and half years in prison, aft  er being raped by Wen Fu once again, 
and aft er she has pointed his gun at his head, Winnie fi nally gains her freedom 
from Wen Fu and begins her new life with Jimmie Louie in America. In the 
new country she refuses to continue the tradition that demands in women 
silent desires and self-eff acement. She teaches her daughter with her own life 
stories the courage to be “selfi sh.”
10
At the end of Th e Kitchen God’s Wife,  Winnie shops for a goddess for the 
red altar which her daughter Pearl has inherited from Auntie Du. Dissatisfi ed 
with all the existent goddesses, who are helplessly entrenched in the tradition 
of female servility, she tells the shop owner: “I am looking for a goddess that 
RT54118_C007.indd   170RT54118_C007.indd   170 7/8/06   6:43:54 PM7/8/06   6:43:54 PM


--- PAGE 228 ---
Literature and Literary Criticism • 171
nobody knows. Maybe she does not yet exist” ( Wife 413). Th e shop owner is 
delighted to part with the statue of a goddess on which the factory forgot to 
inscribe her name.
So I bought that mistake. I fi  xed it. I used my gold paint and wrote her 
name on the bottom. … I could see this lady statue in her new house, the 
red temple altar with two candlesticks lighting up her face from both 
sides. She would live there, but no one would call her Mrs. Kitchen God. 
Why would she want to be called that, now that she and her husband are 
divorced. (Wife 414)
Th is “mistake,” the object that has made the husband of the shop owner “so 
mad,” takes on the life that has been traditionally impossible for women—she 
is named “Lady Sorrowfree” ( Wife 414–15). Now divorced and deifi  ed, she 
fi nally becomes a goddess by her own merit. “She will listen. She will wash 
away everything sad with her tears. She will use her stick to chase away every-
thing bad” (Wife 414–15).
Th is gesture of celebration and self-affi  rmation is also present in Tan’s use 
of the myth of the Moon Lady. At the end of her children’s book, Th e Moon 
Lady (1992),
11 Nai-nai (Grandma Ying-Ying) tells her three granddaughters 
that her secret wish to the Moon Lady has already been answered—“I had 
found myself. I found out what kind of tiger I really was. … And I knew what 
the best wishes were: those I could make come true by myself” ( Lady 27). Th e 
story ends with Nai-nai and her granddaughters dancing “by the light of the 
full moon,” casting Nai-nai as the new Moon Lady who has outlived the pun-
ishment, the misery, and the loneliness ( Lady 27).
Notes
 1. See Gayatri Spivak, Th e Post-Colonial Critic: Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues  (New York: 
Routledge, 1990) Chapter 1.
 2. See Frank Chin’s “Come All Ye Asian American Writers of the Real and the Fake,” Th e Big 
Aiiieeeee! , 1–92.
 3. For an excellent study of Frank Chin’s charge against Kingston’s feminist revision of Chi-
nese myths, see King-Kok Cheung, “Th e Woman Warrior versus the Chinaman Pacifi  c: 
Must a Chinese American Critic Choose between Feminism and Heroism?” Confl icts in 
Feminism,  eds. Marianne Hirsch et al.
 4. See Sau-ling Cynthia Wong, “Kingston’s Handling of Traditional Chinese Sources,” in 
Approaches to Teaching Kingston’s Woman Warrior, 26–36. (New York: Th e Modern lan-
guage Association of America, 1991).
 5. My critique focusing on the issue of gender should not be interpreted as a total rejection 
of Chin’s criticism of Asian Americans for buying into the hegemonic Christian culture.
 6. Amy Tan, Th e Joy Luck Club  (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1989). Th e Kitchen God’s 
Wife (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1991). All further references to these editions will 
be cited parenthetically in the text, as Club and Wife.
 7. My narration of the myth is based on the untranslated Chinese Mythology  by Yuan Ke.
 8. Th  is version of the Kitchen God is based on “Th  e Kitchen Deity” in Folk Tales of China,  
ed. Wolfram Eberhard.
 9. Marina Heung succinctly describes the life of women in the old China. She writes: “Because 
of their historical devaluation, women in the Chinese family are regarded as disposable 
property or detachable appendages despite their crucial role in maintaining the family 
RT54118_C007.indd   171RT54118_C007.indd   171 7/8/06   6:43:54 PM7/8/06   6:43:54 PM


--- PAGE 229 ---
172 • Th e Womanist Reader
line through childbearing. Regarded as expendable ‘objects to be invested in or bartered,’ the 
marginal status of Chinese women shows itself in their forced transfer from natal families 
to other families through the practice of arranged marriage, concubinage, adoption, and 
pawning. Th e position of women—as daughters, wives, and mothers—in Chinese society is 
therefore markedly provisional, with their status and expendability fl uctuating according to 
their families’ economic circumstances, their ability to bear male heirs, and the proclivities 
of authority fi gures in their lives” (601).
 10. Th  is, of course, does not guarantee that the daughter would be less vulnerable than her 
mother to gender ideologies. In Amy Tan America does not dissolve women’s oppression. 
She has An-mei, Rose’s mother, complain: “I was raised the Chinese way; I was taught 
to desire nothing, to swallow other people’s misery, to eat my own bitterness. And even 
though I taught my daughter the opposite, still she came out the same way … she was 
born a girl” ( Club 215). Th rough the stories of the daughters in Th e Joy Luck Club,  Tan 
successfully portrays the asymmetrical power relations between men and women in this 
country. However, Tan is also naive in seeing sexism in the U.S. mainly as unmediated 
male domination in families and heterosexual relationships. Th is critique will be the sub-
ject of another essay.
 11. Amy Tan, Th e Moon Lady  (New York: Macmillan, 1992). All further references will be to 
this edition and will be cited parenthetically in the text, abbreviated Lady.
References
Chan, Jeff ery Paul et al. eds. Th e Big Aiiieeeee!  New York: A Meridian Book, 1991.
Cheung, King-Kok, “Th e Woman Warrior versus Th e Chinaman Pacifi  c: Must a Chinese Ameri-
can Critic Choose between Feminism and Heroism?” Confl icts in Feminism,  eds. Mari-
anne Hirsch et al. New York: Routledge, 1990. 234–51.
Chin, Frank, “Th is Is Not an Autobiography,” Genre 18 (Summer 1985): 109–30.
Eberhard, Wolfram, ed. Folk Tales of China. Chicago: Th e University of Chicago Press, 1965.
Heung, Marina. “Daughter-Text/Mother-Text: Matrilineage in Amy Tan’s Joy Luck Club,” Femi-
nist Studies  Fall 1993: 597–616.
Lim, Shirley Geok-lin. Approaches to Teaching Kingston’s Th e Woman Warrior. New York: Th e 
Modern Language Association of America, 1991.
Spivak, Gayatri. Th e Post-Colonial Critic: Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues . New York: Rout-
ledge, 1990.
Tan, Amy. Th e Joy Luck Club . New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1989.
———. Th e Kitchen God’s Wife . New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1991.
———. Th e Moon Lady . New York: Macmillan, 1992.
Yuan, Ke. Chinese Mythology.  Beijing: Chinese Book Bureau Press, 1960.
RT54118_C007.indd   172RT54118_C007.indd   172 7/8/06   6:43:54 PM7/8/06   6:43:54 PM


--- PAGE 230 ---
173
8
History
Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and 
the Independent Order of Saint Luke (1989)
ELSA BARKLEY BROWN
In the fi rst decades of the twentieth century Maggie Lena Walker repeatedly 
challenged her contemporaries to “make history as Negro women.” Yet she 
and her colleagues in the Independent Order of Saint Luke, like most black 
and other women of color, have been virtually invisible in women’s history and 
w o m e n ’ s  s t u d i e s .  Al th o u g h  r e c e n t  b o o ks  an d  a rt i c l e s  h a v e  b e gu n  t o  r e d r e s s  
this,
1 the years of exclusion have had an impact more signifi  cant than just 
the invisibility of black women, for the exclusion of black women has meant 
that the concepts, perspectives, methods, and pedagogies of women’s history 
and women’s studies have been developed without consideration of the expe-
riences of black women. As a result many of the recent explorations in black 
women’s history have attempted to place black women inside feminist per-
spectives which, by design, have omitted their experiences. Nowhere is this 
exclusion more apparent than in the process of defi  ning women’s issues and 
women’s struggle. Because they have been created outside the experiences of 
black women, the defi nitions used in women’s history and women’s studies 
assume the separability of women’s struggle and race struggle. Such argu-
ments recognize the possibility that black women may have both women’s 
concerns and race concerns, but they insist upon delimiting each. Th ey allow, 
belatedly, black women to make history as women or as Negroes but not as 
“Negro women.” What they fail to consider is that: women’s issues may be race 
issues, and race issues may be women’s issues.
2
Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, in “Discontented Black Feminists: Prelude and Post-
script to the Passage of the Nineteenth Amendment,” an essay on the 1920s 
black women’s movement, of which Walker was a part, persuasively discusses 
the continuing discrimination in the U.S. women’s movement and the focus 
of black women on “uplift ing the downtrodden of the race or … representing 
people of color throughout the world.” Subsequently she argues for the “unique 
nature of feminism among Afro-American women.” Th  e editors of Decades 
RT54118_C008.indd   173RT54118_C008.indd   173 7/8/06   6:45:38 PM7/8/06   6:45:38 PM


--- PAGE 231 ---
174 • Th e Womanist Reader
of Discontent: Th e Women’s Movement, 1920–1940,  the 1983 collection on 
post–Nineteenth Amendment feminism, however, introduce Terborg-Penn’s 
article by mistakenly concluding that these black women, disillusioned and 
frustrated by racism in the women’s movement, turned from women’s issues 
to race issues. Using a framework that does not conceive of “racial uplift , fi ght-
ing segregation and mob violence” and “contending with poverty” as women’s 
issues, Lois Scharf and Joan Jensen succumb to the tendency to assume that 
black women’s lives can be neatly subdivided, that while we are both black 
and female, we occupy those roles sequentially, as if one cannot have the two 
simultaneously in one’s consciousness of being.
3 Such a framework assumes a 
fragmentation of black women’s existence that defi es reality.
Scharf and Jensen’s conclusion is certainly one that the white feminists of 
the 1920s and 1930s, who occupy most of the book, would have endorsed. 
When southern black women, denied the right to register to vote, sought help 
from the National Woman’s Party, these white feminists rejected their peti-
tions, arguing that this was a race concern and not a women’s concern. Were 
they not, aft er all, being denied the vote not because of their sex but because 
of their race?
4
Black women like Walker who devoted their energies to securing universal 
suff rage, including that of black men, are not widely recognized as female suf-
fragists because they did not separate their struggle for the women’s vote from 
their struggle for the black vote. Th is tendency to establish false dichotomies, 
precluding the possibility that for many racism and sexism are experienced 
simultaneously, leads to discussions of liberation movements and women’s 
movements as separate entities.
Quite clearly, what many women of color at the United Nations Decade for 
Women conference held in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1985, along with many other 
activists and scholars, have argued in recent years is the impossibility of sepa-
rating the two and the necessity of understanding the convergence of women’s 
issues, race/nationalist issues, and class issues in women’s consciousnesses.
5 
Th at understanding is in part hampered by the prevailing terminology: femi-
nism places a priority on women; nationalism or race consciousness, a priority 
on race. It is the need to overcome the limitations of terminology that has led 
many black women to adopt the term “womanist.” Both Alice Walker and 
Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi have defi  ned womanism as a consciousness 
that incorporates racial, cultural, sexual, national, economic, and political con-
siderations.
6 As Ogunyemi explains, “black womanism is a philosophy” that 
concerns itself both with sexual equality in the black community and “with the 
world power structure that subjugates” both blacks and women. “Its ideal is 
for black unity where every black person has a modicum of power and so can 
be a ‘brother’ or a ‘sister’ or a ‘father’ or a ‘mother’ to the other. … [I]ts aim is 
the dynamism of wholeness and self-healing.”
7
RT54118_C008.indd   174RT54118_C008.indd   174 7/8/06   6:45:39 PM7/8/06   6:45:39 PM


--- PAGE 232 ---
History • 175
Walker’s and Ogunyemi’s terminology may be new, but their ideas are not. 
In fact, many black women at various points in history had a clear under-
s tan din g  th a t  ra ce  iss u es  an d  w o m e n ’ s  iss u es  w e r e  in e xtri ca b l y  link e d,  th a t  
one could not separate women’s struggle from race struggle. It was because 
of this understanding that they refused to disconnect themselves from either 
movement. Th ey instead insisted on inclusion in both movements in a man-
ner that recognized the interconnection between race and sex, and they did so 
even if they had to battle their white sisters and their black brothers to achieve 
it. Certainly the lives and work of women such as Anna Julia Cooper, Mary 
Church Terrell, and Fannie Barrier Williams inform us of this. Cooper, an 
early Africanamerican womanist, addressed the holistic nature of the struggle 
in her address to the World’s Congress of Representative Women:
Let woman’s claim be as broad in the concrete as in the abstract. We 
take our stand on the solidarity of humanity,  the oneness of life, and the 
unnaturalness and injustice of all special favoritisms, whether of sex, 
race, country, or condition. If one link of the chain be broken, the chain 
is broken. … We want, then, as toilers for the universal triumph of jus-
tice and human rights, to go to our homes from this Congress, demand-
ing an entrance not through a gateway for ourselves, our race, our sex, 
or our sect, but a grand highway for humanity. Th e colored woman feels 
that woman’s cause is one and universal; and that not till … race, color, 
sex, and condition are seen as the accidents, and not the substance of 
life; … not till then is woman’s lesson taught and woman’s cause won—
not the white woman’s, nor the black woman’s, nor the red woman’s, but 
the cause of every man and of every woman who has writhed silently 
under a mighty wrong. Woman’s wrongs are thus indissolubly linked 
with all undefended woe, and the acquirement of her “rights” will mean 
the fi nal triumph of all right over might,  the supremacy of the moral 
forces of reason, and justice, and love in the government of the nations 
of earth.
8
One of those who most clearly articulated womanist consciousness was 
Maggie Lena Walker. Walker (1867–1934) was born and educated in Richmond, 
Virginia, graduating from Colored Normal School in 1883. During her school 
years she assisted her widowed mother in her work as a washerwoman and 
cared for her younger brother. Following graduation she taught in the city’s 
public schools and took courses in accounting and sales. Required to stop 
teaching when she married Armstead Walker, a contractor, her coursework 
had well prepared her to join several other black women in founding an insur-
ance company, the Woman’s Union. Meanwhile, Walker, who had joined the 
Independent Order of Saint Luke at the age of fourteen, rose through the ranks 
to hold several important positions in the order and, in 1895, to organize the 
RT54118_C008.indd   175RT54118_C008.indd   175 7/8/06   6:45:39 PM7/8/06   6:45:39 PM


--- PAGE 233 ---
176 • Th e Womanist Reader
juvenile branch of the order. In addition to her Saint Luke activities, Walker 
was a founder or leading supporter of the Richmond Council of Colored 
Women, the Virginia State Federation of Colored Women, the National Asso-
ciation of Wage Earners, the International Council of Women of the Darker 
Races, the National Training School for Girls, and the Virginia Industrial 
School for Colored Girls. She also helped direct the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People, the Richmond Urban League, and the 
Negro Organization Society of Virginia.
9
Walker is probably best known today as the fi rst woman bank president in 
the United States. She founded the Saint Luke Penny Savings Bank in Richmond, 
Virginia, in 1903. Before her death in 1934 she oversaw the reorganization 
of this fi nancial institution as the present-day Consolidated Bank and Trust 
Company, the oldest continuously existing black-owned and black-run bank 
in the country. Th e bank, like most of Walker’s activities, was the outgrowth 
of the Independent Order of Saint Luke, which she served as Right Worthy 
Grand Secretary for thirty-fi ve years.
Th e Independent Order of Saint Luke was one of the larger and more 
successful of the many thousands of mutual benefi  t societies that have devel-
oped throughout Africanamerican communities since the eighteenth century. 
Th ese societies combined insurance functions with economic development 
and social and political activities. As such they were important loci of com-
munity self-help and racial solidarity. Unlike the Knights of Pythias and its 
female auxiliary, the Courts of Calanthe, societies like the Independent Order 
of Saint Luke had a nonexclusionary membership policy; any man, woman, 
or child could join. Th us men and women from all occupational segments, 
professional/managerial, entrepreneurial, and working-class, came together 
in the order. Th e Independent Order of Saint Luke was a mass-based orga-
nization that played a key role in the political, economic, and social develop-
ment of its members and of the community as a whole.
10
Founded in Maryland in 1867 by Mary Prout, the Independent Order of 
Saint Luke began as a women’s sickness and death mutual benefi  t associa-
tion. By the 1880s it had admitted men and had expanded to New York and 
Virginia. At the 1899 annual meeting William M.T. Forrester, who had served 
as Grand Secretary since 1869, refused to accept reappointment, stating that 
the order was in decline, having only 1,080 members in fi  ft y-seven councils, 
$31.61 in the treasury, and $400.00 in outstanding debts. Maggie Lena Walker 
took over the duties of Grand Worthy Secretary at one-third of the position’s 
previous salary.
11
According to Walker, her “fi  rst work was to draw around me women.”12 
In fact, aft er the executive board elections in 1901, six of the nine members 
were women: Walker, Patsie K. Anderson, Frances Cox, Abigail Dawley, 
Lillian H. Payne, and Ella O. Waller.
13 Under their leadership the order and 
its affi  liates fl ourished. Th e order’s ventures included a juvenile department, 
RT54118_C008.indd   176RT54118_C008.indd   176 7/8/06   6:45:40 PM7/8/06   6:45:40 PM


--- PAGE 234 ---
History • 177
an educational loan fund for young people, a department store, and a weekly 
newspaper. Growing to include over 100,000 members in 2,010 councils and 
circles in twenty-eight states, the order demonstrated a special commitment 
to expanding the economic opportunities within the black community, espe-
cially those for women.
It is important to take into account Walker’s acknowledgment of her female 
colleagues. Most of what we know about the Order of Saint Luke highlights 
Walker because she was the leader and spokeswoman and therefore the most 
visible fi gure. She was able, however, to function in that role and to accomplish 
all that she did not merely because of her own strengths and skills, consider-
able though they were, but also because she operated from the strength of the 
Saint Luke collective as a whole and from the special strengths and talents of 
the inner core of the Saint Luke women in particular. Deborah Gray White, 
in her work on women during slavery, underscores the importance of black 
women’s networks in an earlier time period: “Strength had to be cultivated. It 
came no more naturally to them than to anyone. … If they seemed exception-
ally strong it was partly because they oft  en functioned in groups and derived 
strength from numbers. … [T]hey inevitably developed some appreciation of 
one another’s skills and talents. Th is intimacy enabled them to establish the 
criteria with which to rank and order themselves. ” It was this same kind of 
sisterhood that was Walker’s base, her support, her strength, and her source of 
wisdom and direction.
14
Th e women of Saint Luke expanded the role of women in the community to 
the political sphere through their leadership in the 1904 streetcar boycott and 
through the St. Luke Herald’s pronouncements against segregation, lynching, 
and lack of equal educational opportunities for black children. Walker spear-
headed the local struggle for women’s suff rage and the voter registration cam-
paigns aft er the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. In the 1920 elections 
in Richmond, fully 80 percent of the eligible black voters were women. Th  e 
increased black political strength represented by the female voters gave incen-
tive to the growing movement for independent black political action and led to 
the formation of the Virginia Lily-Black Republican Party. Walker ran on this 
ticket for state superintendent of public instruction in 1921.
15 Th us Walker and 
many other of the Saint Luke women were role models for other black women 
in their community activities as well as their occupations.
Undergirding all of their work was a belief in the possibilities inherent in 
the collective struggle of black women in particular and of the black com-
munity in general. Walker argued that the only way in which black women 
would be able “to avoid the traps and snares of life” would be to “band them-
selves together, organize, … put their mites together, put their hands and their 
brains together and make work and business for themselves.”
16
Th e idea of collective economic development was not a new idea for these 
women, many of whom were instrumental in establishing the Woman’s Union, 
RT54118_C008.indd   177RT54118_C008.indd   177 7/8/06   6:45:40 PM7/8/06   6:45:40 PM


--- PAGE 235 ---
178 • Th e Womanist Reader
a female insurance company founded in 1898. Its motto was Th  e Hand Th at 
Rocks the Cradle Rules the World. 17 But unlike nineteenth-century white 
women’s rendering of that expression to signify the limitation of woman’s 
infl uence to that which she had by virtue of rearing her sons, the idea as these 
women conceived it transcended the separation of private and public spheres 
and spoke to the idea that women, while not abandoning their roles as wives 
and mothers, could also move into economic and political activities in ways 
that would support rather than confl ict with family and community. Women 
did not have to choose between the two spheres; in fact, they necessarily had to 
occupy both. Indeed, these women’s use of this phrase speaks to their under-
standing of the totality of the task that lay ahead of them as black women. It 
negates, for black women at least, the public/private dichotomy.
Saint Luke women built on tradition. A well-organized set of institutions 
maintained community in Richmond: mutual benefi  t societies, interwoven 
with extended families and churches, built a network of supportive relations.
18 
Th e families, churches, and societies were all based on similar ideas of collec-
tive consciousness and collective responsibility. Th us, they served to extend 
and reaffi  r m  n o ti o n s  o f  f am il y  th r o u gh o u t  th e  b l a c k  c o m m un i ty .  N o t  o nl y  
in their houses but also in their meeting halls and places of worship, they 
were brothers and sisters caring for each other. Th e institutionalization of this 
notion of family cemented the community. Community/family members rec-
ognized tha t this had to be main tain ed fro m g en era ti o n to g en era ti o n; this 
was in part the function of the juvenile branches of the mutual benefi t associa-
tions. Th e statement of purpose of the Children’s Rosebud Fountains, Grand 
Fountain United Order of True Reformers, clearly articulated this:
Teaching them … to assist each other in sickness, sorrow and affl  ictions 
and in the struggles of life; teaching them that one’s happiness greatly 
depends upon the others. … Teach them to live united. … Th e children 
of diff erent families will know how to … talk, plot and plan for one 
another’s peace and happiness in the journey of life.
Teach them to … bear each other’s burdens … to so bind and tie their 
love and aff ections together that one’s sorrow may be the other’s sorrow, 
one’s distress be the other’s distress, one’s penny the other’s penny.
19
Th rough the Penny Savings Bank the Saint Luke women were able to affi   rm 
and cement the existing mutual assistance network among black women and 
within the black community by providing an institutionalized structure for 
these activities. Th e bank recognized the meager resources of the black com-
munity, particularly black women. In fact, its establishment as a penny savings 
bank is an indication of that. Many of its earliest and strongest supporters 
were washerwomen, one of whom was Maggie Walker’s mother. And the bank 
continued throughout Walker’s leadership to exercise a special commitment 
to “the small depositor.”
20
RT54118_C008.indd   178RT54118_C008.indd   178 7/8/06   6:45:40 PM7/8/06   6:45:40 PM


--- PAGE 236 ---
History • 179
In her eff orts Walker, like the other Saint Luke women, was guided by 
a clearly understood and shared perspective concerning the relationship of 
black women to black men, to the black community, and to the larger society. 
Th is was a perspective that acknowledged individual powerlessness in the face 
of racism and sexism and that argued that black women, because of their con-
dition and status, had a right—indeed, according to Walker, a special duty and 
incentive—to organize. She argued, “Who is so helpless as the Negro woman? 
Who is so circumscribed and hemmed in, in the race of life, in the struggle for 
bread, meat and clothing as the Negro woman?”
21
In addition, her perspective contended that organizational activity and the 
resultant expanded opportunities for black women were not detrimental to 
the home, the community, black men, or the race. Furthermore, she insisted 
that organization and expansion of women’s roles economically and politically 
were essential ingredients without which the community, the race, and even 
black men could not achieve their full potential. Th  e way in which Walker 
described black women’s relationship to society, combined with the collective 
activities in which she engaged, give us some insight into her understanding 
of the relationship between women’s struggle and race struggle.
Walker was determined to expand opportunities for black women. In 
fulfi lling this aim she challenged not only the larger society’s notions of the 
proper place of blacks but also those in her community who held a limited 
notion of women’s proper role. Particularly in light of the increasing necessity 
to defend the integrity and morality of the race, a “great number of men” and 
women in Virginia and elsewhere believed that women’s clubs, movements 
“looking to the fi  nal exercise of suff  rage by women,” and organizations of 
black professional and business women would lead to “the decadence of home 
life.”
22 Women involved in these activities were oft en regarded as “pullbacks, 
rather than home builders.” 23 Maggie Walker countered these arguments, 
stressing the need for women’s organizations, saying, “Men should not be so 
pessimistic and down on women’s clubs. Th ey don’t seek to destroy the home 
or disgrace the race.”
24 In fact, the Richmond Council of Colored Women, of 
which she was founder and president, and many other women’s organizations 
worked to elevate the entire black community, and this, she believed, was the 
proper province of women.
In 1908 two Richmond men, Daniel Webster Davis and Giles Jackson, pub-
lished Th e Industrial History of the Negro Race of the United States,  which 
became a textbook for black children throughout the state. Th  e chapter on 
women acknowledged the economic and social achievements of black women 
but concluded that “the Negro Race Needs Housekeepers … wives who stay 
at home, being supported by their husbands, and then they can spend time 
in the training of their children.”
25 Maggie Walker responded practically to 
those who held such ideas: “Th e bold fact remains that there are more women 
in the world than men; … if each and every woman in the land was allotted 
RT54118_C008.indd   179RT54118_C008.indd   179 7/8/06   6:45:40 PM7/8/06   6:45:40 PM


--- PAGE 237 ---
180 • Th e Womanist Reader
a man to marry her, work for her, support her, and keep her at home, there 
would still be an army of women left   uncared for, unprovided for, and who 
would be compelled to fi ght life’s battles alone, and without the companion-
ship of man.” 26 Even regarding those women who did marry, she contended, 
“Th e old doctrine that a man marries a woman to support her is pretty nearly 
thread-bare to-day.” Only a few black men were able to fully support their 
families on their earnings alone. Th us many married women worked, “not for 
name, not for glory and honor—but for bread, and for [their] babies.”
27
Th e reality was that black women who did go to work outside the home 
found themselves in a helpless position. “How many occupations have Negro 
Women?” asked Walker. “Let us count them: Negro women are domestic 
menials, teachers and church builders.” And even the fi  rst two of these, she 
feared, were in danger. As Walker perceived it, the expansion of opportunities 
for white women did not mean a corresponding expansion for black women; 
inst ea d,  this  tr e n d  mi gh t  a ctuall y  l ea d  t o  an  ev e n  gr ea t e r  limi ta ti o n  o n  th e  
economic possibilities for black women. She pointed to the fact that white 
women’s entry into the tobacco factories of the city had “driven the Negro 
woman out,” and she, like many of her sisters throughout the country, feared 
that a similar trend was beginning even in domestic work.
28
In fact, these economic realities led members of the Order of Saint Luke 
to discuss the development of manufacturing operations as a means of giving 
employment and therefore “a chance in the race of life” to “the young Negro 
woman.”
29 In 1902 Walker described herself as “consumed with the desire to 
hear the whistle on our factory and see our women by the hundreds coming 
to work.”
30 It was this same concern for the economic status of black women 
that led Walker and other Saint Luke women to affi   liate with the National 
Association of Wage Earners (NAWE), a women’s organization that sought to 
pool the energies and resources of housewives, professionals, and managerial, 
domestic, and industrial workers to protect and expand the economic position 
of black women. Th e NAWE argued that it was vital that all black women be 
able to support themselves.
31 Drawing on traditional stereotypes in the same 
breath with which she defi ed them, Walker contended that it was in the self-
interest of black men to unite themselves with these eff  orts to secure decent 
employment for black women: “Every dollar a woman makes, some man gets 
the direct benefi t of same. Every woman was by Divine Providence created 
for some man; not for some man to marry, take home and support, but for 
the purpose of using her powers, ability, health and strength, to forward the 
fi nancial … success of the partnership into which she may go, if she will. … 
[W]hat stronger combination could ever God make—than the partnership of 
a business man and a business woman.”
32
By implication, whatever black women as a whole were able to achieve 
would directly benefi t black men. In Walker’s analysis family is a reciprocal 
metaphor for community: family is community and community is family. 
RT54118_C008.indd   180RT54118_C008.indd   180 7/8/06   6:45:41 PM7/8/06   6:45:41 PM


--- PAGE 238 ---
History • 181
But this is more than rhetorical style. Her discussions of relationship net-
works suggest that the entire community was one’s family. Th  us Walker’s 
references to husbands and wives refl  ected equally her understandings of 
male/female relationships in the community as a whole and of those rela-
tionships within the household. Just as all family members’ resources were 
needed for the family to be well and strong, so they were needed for a healthy 
community/family.
In the process of developing means of expanding economic opportunities in 
the community, however, Walker and the Saint Luke women also confronted 
white Richmond’s notions of the proper place of blacks. While whites found a 
bank headed by a “Negress” an interesting curiosity,
33 they were less receptive 
to other business enterprises. In 1905 twenty-two black women from the Inde-
pendent Order of Saint Luke collectively formed a department store aimed 
at providing quality goods at more aff  ordable prices than those available in 
stores outside the black community, as well as a place where black women 
could earn a living and get a business education. Th  e Saint Luke Emporium 
employed fi ft een women as salesclerks. While this may seem an insignifi  cant 
number in comparison to the thousands of black women working outside the 
home, in the context of the occupational structure of Richmond these women 
constituted a signifi cant percentage of the white-collar and skilled working-
class women in the community. In 1900 less than 1 percent of the employed 
black women in the city were either clerical or skilled workers. Th  at num-
ber had quadrupled by 1910, when 222 of the more than 13,000 employed 
black women listed their occupations as typists, stenographers, bookkeepers, 
sales-clerks, and the like. However, by 1930 there had been a reduction in the 
numbers of black women employed in clerical and sales positions. Th is under-
scores the fact that black secretaries and clerks were entirely dependent on 
the fi nancial stability of black businesses and in this regard the Independent 
Order of Saint Luke was especially important. With its fi  ft y-fi ve clerks in the 
home offi  ce, over one-third of the black female clerical workers in Richmond 
in the 1920s worked for this order. Th  e quality of the work experience was 
signifi cantly better for these women as compared to those employed as labor-
ers in the tobacco factories or as servants in private homes. Th  ey worked in 
healthier, less stressful environments and, being employed by blacks, they also 
escaped the racism prevalent in most black women’s workplaces. Addition-
ally, the salaries of these clerical workers were oft  en better than those paid 
even to black professional women, that is, teachers. While one teacher, Ethel 
Th ompson Overby, was receiving eighteen dollars a month as a teacher and 
working her way up to the top of the scale at forty dollars, a number of black 
women were fi nding good working conditions and a fi  ft y-dollar-per-month 
paycheck as clerks in the offi  ce of the Independent Order of Saint Luke. Nev-
ertheless, black women in Richmond, as elsewhere, overwhelmingly remained 
employed in domestic service in the years 1890–1930.
34
RT54118_C008.indd   181RT54118_C008.indd   181 7/8/06   6:45:41 PM7/8/06   6:45:41 PM


--- PAGE 239 ---
182 • Th e Womanist Reader
Located on East Broad Street, Richmond’s main business thoroughfare, 
the Saint Luke Emporium met stiff   opposition from white merchants. When 
the intention to establish the department store was fi rst announced, attempts 
were made to buy the property at a price several thousand dollars higher 
than that which the Order of Saint Luke had originally paid. When that did 
not succeed, an off er of ten thousand dollars cash was made to the order if 
it would not start the emporium. Once it opened, eff  orts were made to hin-
der the store’s operations. A white Retail Dealers’ Association was formed 
for the purpose of crushing this business as well as other “Negro merchants 
who are objectionable … because they compete with and get a few dollars 
which would otherwise go to the white merchant.” Notices were sent to whole-
sale merchants in the city warning them not to sell to the emporium at the 
risk of losing all business from any of the white merchants. Letters were also 
sent to wholesale houses in New York City with the same warning. Th  ese 
letters charged that the emporium was underselling the white merchants 
of Richmond. Clearly, then, the white businessmen of Richmond found the 
emporium and these black women a threat; if it was successful, the store could 
lead to a surge of black merchants competing with white merchants and thus 
decrease the black patronage at white stores. Th e white merchants’ eff orts were 
ultimately successful: the obstacles they put in the way of the emporium, in 
addition to the lack of full support from the black community itself, resulted 
in the department store’s going out of business seven years aft  er its found-
ing.
35 Th ough its existence was short-lived and its demise mirrors many of 
the problems that black businesses faced from both within and without their 
community, the eff ort demonstrated the commitment of the Order of Saint 
Luke to provide needed services for the community and needed opportunities 
for black women.
Maggie Walker’s appeals for support of the emporium show quite clearly 
the way in which her notions of race, of womanhood, and of community fused. 
Approximately one year aft er the opening of the emporium, Walker called for 
a mass gathering of men in the community to talk, in part, about support 
for the business. Her speech, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only,” 
opened with an assessment of white businessmen’s and offi   cials’ continuing 
oppression of the black community. In her fi ne rhetorical style she queried her 
audience. “Hasn’t it crept into your minds that we are being more and more 
oppressed each day that we live? Hasn’t it yet come to you, that we are being 
oppressed by the passage of laws which not only have for their object the deg-
radation of Negro manhood and Negro womanhood, but also the destruction 
of all kinds of Negro enterprises?” Th en, drawing upon the biblical allegory of 
Beniah and the lion, she warned, “Th ere is a lion terrorizing us, preying upon 
us, and upon every business eff ort which we put forth. Th e name of this insa-
tiable lion is prejudice. … Th e white press, the white pulpit, the white business 
associations, the legislature—all … the lion with whom we contend daily … 
RT54118_C008.indd   182RT54118_C008.indd   182 7/8/06   6:45:41 PM7/8/06   6:45:41 PM


--- PAGE 240 ---
History • 183
in Broad Street, Main Street and in every business street of Richmond. Even 
now … that lion is seeking some new plan of attack.” 36
Th us, she contended, the vital question facing their community was how to 
kill the lion. And in her analysis, “the only way to kill the Lion is to stop feed-
ing it.” Th e irony was that the black community drained itself of resources, 
money, infl uence, and patronage to feed its predator.
37 As she had many 
times previously, Walker questioned the fact that while the white community 
oppressed the black, “the Negro … carries to their bank every dollar he can 
get his hands upon and then goes back the next day, borrows and then pays 
the white man to lend him his own money.”
38 So, too, black people patron-
ized stores and other businesses in which white women were, in increasing 
numbers, being hired as salesclerks and secretaries while black women were 
increasingly without employment and the black community as a whole was 
losing resources, skills, and fi  nances.
39 W a l k e r  c o n s i d e r e d  s u c h  b e h a v i o r  
racially destructive and believed it necessary to break those ties that kept “the 
Negro … so wedded to those who oppress him.”
40 Th e drain on the resources 
of the black community could be halted by a concentration on the develop-
ment of a self-suffi  cient black community. But to achieve this would require 
the talents of the entire community/family. It was therefore essential that black 
women’s work in the community be “something more tangible than elegant 
papers, beautifully framed resolutions and pretty speeches.” Rather, “the exer-
cising of every talent that God had given them” was required in the eff  ort to 
“raise … the race to higher planes of living.”
41
Th e Saint Luke women were part of the Negro Independence Movement 
that captured a large segment of Richmond society at the turn of the century. 
Disillusioned by the increasing prejudice and discrimination in this period, 
which one historian has described as the nadir in U.S. race relations, black 
r es i d e n ts  o f  Ri chm o n d  n ev e rth e l ess  h e l d  o n  t o  th e ir  be li e f  in  a  co mm uni ty  
that they could collectively sustain.
42 As they witnessed a steady erosion of 
their civil and political rights, however, they were aware that there was much 
operating against them. In Richmond, as elsewhere, a system of race and 
class oppression including segregation, disfranchisement, relegation to the 
lowest rungs of the occupational strata, and enforcement of racial subordina-
tion through intimidation was fully in place by the early twentieth century. 
In Richmond between 1885 and 1915 all blacks were removed from the city 
council; the only predominantly black political district, Jackson Ward, was 
gerrymandered out of existence; the state constitutional convention disfran-
chised the majority of black Virginians; fi rst the railroads and streetcars, and 
later the jails, juries, and neighborhoods were segregated; black principals 
were removed from the public schools and the right of blacks to teach was 
questioned; the state legislature decided to substitute white for black control 
of Virginia Normal and College and to strike “and College” from both name 
and function; and numerous other restrictions were imposed. As attorney 
RT54118_C008.indd   183RT54118_C008.indd   183 7/8/06   6:45:42 PM7/8/06   6:45:42 PM


--- PAGE 241 ---
184 • Th e Womanist Reader
J. Th omas Hewin noted, he and his fellow black Richmonders occupied “a pecu-
liar position in the body politics”:
He [the Negro] is not wanted in politics, because his presence in offi  cial 
positions renders him obnoxious to his former masters and their descen-
dants. He is not wanted in the industrial world as a trained handicraft s-
man, because he would be brought into competition with his white brother. 
H e is n o t wan ted in ci ty posi ti o ns, beca use posi ti o ns o f tha t kin d ar e 
always saved for the wardheeling politicians. He is not wanted in State 
and Federal offi  ces, because there is an unwritten law that a Negro shall 
not hold an offi  ce. He is not wanted on the Bench as a judge, because 
he would have to pass upon the white man’s case also. Nor is he wanted 
on public conveyances, because here his presence is obnoxious to white 
people.
43
Assessing the climate of the surrounding society in 1904, John Mitchell, Jr., 
editor of the Richmond Planet,  concluded, “Th is is the beginning of the age 
of conservatism.”
44 Th e growing movement within the community for racial 
self-determination urged blacks to depend upon themselves and their com-
munity rather than upon whites: to depend upon their own inner strengths, 
to build their own institutions, and thereby to mitigate the ways in which their 
lives were determined by the white forces arrayed against them. Race pride, 
self-help, racial cooperation, and economic development were central to their 
thinking about their community and to the ways in which they went about 
building their own internal support system in order to be better able to strug-
gle within the majority system.
Th e Saint Luke women argued that the development of the community 
could not be achieved by men alone, or by men on behalf of women. Only a 
strong and unifi ed community made up of both women and men could wield 
the power necessary to allow black people to shape their own lives. Th erefore, 
o nl y  wh en  w o m en  w er e  ab l e  t o  ex er cise  th eir  full  str en gth  w o ul d  th e  co m -
munity be at its full strength, they argued. Only when the community was at 
its full strength would they be able to create their own conditions, conditions 
that would allow men as well as women to move out of their structural isola-
tion at the bottom of the labor market and to overcome their political impo-
tence in the larger society. Th e Saint Luke women argued that it was therefore 
in the self-interest of black men and of the community as a whole to support 
expanded opportunities for women.
Th eir arguments redefi  ned not only the roles of women but also the roles 
and notions of manhood. A strong “race man” traditionally meant one who 
stood up fearlessly in defense of the race. In her “Address for Men” Walker 
argued that one could not defend the race unless one defended black women. 
Appealing to black men’s notions of themselves as the protectors of black 
womanhood, she asked on behalf of all her sisters for their “FRIENDSHIP, … 
RT54118_C008.indd   184RT54118_C008.indd   184 7/8/06   6:45:42 PM7/8/06   6:45:42 PM


--- PAGE 242 ---
History • 185
LOVE, … SYMPATHY, … PROTECTION, and … ADVICE”: “I am asking 
you, men of Richmond, … to record [yourselves] as … the strong race men of 
our city. … I am asking each man in this audience to go forth from this build-
ing, determined to do valiant deeds for the Negro Women of Richmond.”
45 
And how might they off er their friendship, love, and protection; how might 
they do valiant deeds for Negro womanhood? By supporting the eff  orts of 
black women to exercise every talent; 46 by “let[ting] woman choose her own 
vocation, just as man does his”; 47 by supporting the eff orts then underway to 
provide increased opportunities—economic, political, and social—for black 
women.
48 Once again she drew upon traditional notions of the relationship 
between men and women at the same time that she countered those very 
notions. Black men could play the role of protector and defender of woman-
hood by protecting and defending and aiding women’s assault on the barri-
ers generally imposed on women.
49 Only in this way could they really defend 
the race. Strong race consciousness and strong support of equality for black 
women were inseparable. Maggie Walker and the other Saint Luke women 
therefore came to argue that an expanded role for black women within the 
black community itself was an essential step in the community’s fi ght to over-
come the limitations imposed upon the community by the larger society. Race 
men were therefore defi ned not just by their actions on behalf of black rights 
but by their actions on behalf of women’s rights. Th e two were inseparable.
Th is was a collective eff  ort in which Walker believed black men and black 
women should be equally engaged. Th  e r e f o r e ,  e v e n  i n  c r e a t i n g  a  w o m a n ’ s  
organization, she and her Saint Luke associates found it essential to create 
space within the structure for men as well. Unlike many of the fraternal orders 
that were male or female only, the Order of Saint Luke welcomed both genders 
as members and as employees. Although the offi  ce force was all female, men 
were employed in the printing department, in fi  eld work, and in the bank. 
Principal offi  ces within the order were open to men and women. Ten of the 
thirty directors of the emporium were male; eight of the nineteen trustees of 
the order were male. Th e Saint Luke women thus strove to create an equalitar-
ian organization, with men neither dominant nor auxiliary. Th eir vision of the 
order was a refl ection of their vision for their community. In the 1913 Saint 
Luke Th anksgiving Day celebration of the order, Maggie Walker “thank[ed] 
God that this is a woman’s organization, broad enough, liberal enough, and 
unselfi sh enough to accord equal rights and equal opportunity to men.”
50
Only such a community could become self-sustaining, self-suffi  cient, and 
independent, could enable its members to live lives unhampered by the mach-
inations of the larger society, and could raise children who could envision 
a diff erent world in which to live and then could go about creating it. Th  e 
women in the Order of Saint Luke sought to carve a sphere for themselves 
where they could practically apply their belief in their community and in the 
potential that black men and women working together could achieve, and 
RT54118_C008.indd   185RT54118_C008.indd   185 7/8/06   6:45:42 PM7/8/06   6:45:42 PM


--- PAGE 243 ---
186 • Th e Womanist Reader
they sought to infuse that belief into all of black Richmond and to transmit it 
to the next generation.
Th e Saint Luke women challenged notions in the black community about 
the proper role of women; they challenged notions in the white community 
about the proper place of blacks. Th  ey expanded their roles in ways that 
enabled them to maintain traditional values of family/community and at the 
same time move into new spheres and relationships with each other and with 
the men in their lives. To the larger white society they demonstrated what 
black men and women in community could achieve. Th is testifi  ed to the idea 
that women’s struggle and race struggle were not two separate phenomena but 
one indivisible whole. “First by practice and then by precept.”
51 Maggie Lena 
Walker and the Saint Luke women demonstrated in their own day the power 
of black women discovering their own strengths and sharing them with the 
whole community.
52 Th ey provide for us today a model of womanist praxis.
Womanism challenges the distinction between theory and action. Too oft en 
we have assumed that theory is to be found only in carefully articulated posi-
tion statements. Courses on feminist theory are woefully lacking on anything 
other than white, Western, middle-class perspectives; feminist scholars would 
argue that this is due to the diffi  culty in locating any but contemporary black 
feminist thought. Th ough I have discussed Maggie Lena Walker’s public state-
ments, the clearest articulation of her theoretical perspective lies in the orga-
nization she helped to create and in her own activities. Her theory and her 
action are not distinct and separable parts of some whole; they are oft  en syn-
onymous, and it is only through her actions that we clearly hear her theory. 
Th e same is true for the lives of many other black women who had limited 
time and resources and maintained a holistic view of life and struggle.
More important, Maggie Lena Walker’s womanism challenges the dichoto-
mous thinking that underlies much feminist theory and writing. Most femi-
nist theory poses opposites in exclusionary and hostile ways: one is black and 
female, and these are contradictory/problematical statuses. Th  is either/or 
approach classifi es phenomena in such a way that “everything falls into one 
category or another, but cannot belong to more than one category at the same 
time.”
53 It is precisely this kind of thinking that makes it diffi   cult to see race, 
sex, and class as forming one consciousness and the resistance of race, sex, and 
class oppression as forming one struggle. Womanism fl  ows from a both/and 
worldview, a consciousness that allows for the resolution of seeming contra-
dictions “not through an either/or negation but through the interaction” and 
wholeness. Th us, while black and female may, at one level, be radically dif-
ferent orientations, they are at the same time united, with each “confi  rming 
the existence of the other.” Rather than standing as “contradictory opposites,” 
they become “complementary, unsynthesized, unifi ed wholes.”
54 Th is is what 
Ogunyemi refers to as “the dynamism of wholeness.” Th is holistic conscious-
ness undergirds the thinking and action of Maggie Lena Walker and the other 
RT54118_C008.indd   186RT54118_C008.indd   186 7/8/06   6:45:43 PM7/8/06   6:45:43 PM


--- PAGE 244 ---
History • 187
Saint Luke women. Th ere are no necessary contradictions between the public 
and domestic spheres; the community and the family; male and female; race 
and sex struggle—there is intersection and interdependence.
Dichotomous thinking does not just inhibit our abilities to see the lives of 
black women and other women of color in their wholeness, but, I would argue, 
it also limits our ability to see the wholeness of the lives and consciousnesses 
of even white middle-class women. Th e thinking and actions of white women, 
too, are shaped by their race and their class, and their consciousnesses are 
also formed by the totality of these factors. Th  e failure, however, to explore 
the total consciousness of white women has made class, and especially race, 
nonexistent categories in much of white feminist theory. And this has allowed 
the development of frameworks which render black women’s lives invisible. 
Explorations into the consciousnesses of black women and other women of 
color should, therefore, be a model for all women, including those who are not 
oft en confronted with the necessity of understanding themselves in these total 
terms. As we begin to confront the holistic nature of all women’s lives, we will 
begin to create a truly womanist studies. In our eff  orts Maggie Lena Walker 
and black women like her will be our guide.
Notes
 1. Th  e recent proliferation of works in black women’s history and black women’s studies 
makes a complete bibliographical reference prohibitive. For a sample of some of the grow-
ing literature on black women’s consciousness, see Evelyn Brooks, “Th  e Feminist Th  e-
ology of the Black Baptist Church, 1880–1900,” in Class, Race, and Sex: Th  e Dynamics 
of Control,  ed. Amy Swerdlow and Hanna Lessinger (Boston: G.K. Hall, 1983), 31–59; 
Hazel V. Carby, Reconstructing Womanhood: Th e Emergence of the Afro-American Woman 
Novelist (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); Elizabeth Clark-Lewis, “ ‘Th is Work 
Had a’ End’: Th e Transition from Live In to Day Work,” Southern Women: Th  e Intersec-
tion of Race, Class, and Gender Working Paper no. 2 (Memphis, Tenn.: Memphis State 
University, Center for Research on Women, 1985); Patricia Hill Collins, “Th e Social Con-
struction of Black Feminist Th ought,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society  14, 
no. 4 (Summer 1989), forthcoming; Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, “ ‘Together and in Harness’: 
Women’s Traditions in the Sanctifi  ed Church,” Signs 10, no. 4 (Summer 1985): 678–99; 
Deborah Gray White, Ar’n’t I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South (New York: 
Norton, 1985). Also note: Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women,  now in its fi ft h year, 
has published issues that focus on education, health, work, mother–daughter relation-
ships, and creative artists.
 2. On a contemporary political level, this disassociation of gender concerns from race con-
cerns was dramatically expressed in the 1985 United Nations Decade for Women confer-
ence held in Nairobi, Kenya, where the offi  cial U.S. delegation, including representatives 
of major white women’s organizations but not one representative of a black women’s 
organization, insisted upon not having the proceedings become bogged down with race 
and national issues such as apartheid so that it could concentrate on birth control and 
other “women’s” issues. Delegates operating from such a perspective were unable to see 
African, Asian, and Latin American women who argued for discussion of national politi-
cal issues as anything other than the tools of men, unfortunate victims unable to dis-
cern true women’s and feminist struggles. For a discussion of the ways in which these 
issues were refl ected in the Kenya conference, see Ros Young, “Report from Nairobi: Th  e 
UN Decade for Women Forum,” Race and Class  27, no. 2 (Autumn 1985): 67–71; and the 
entire issue of African Women Rising,  vol. 2, no. 1 (Winter–Spring 1986).
RT54118_C008.indd   187RT54118_C008.indd   187 7/8/06   6:45:43 PM7/8/06   6:45:43 PM


--- PAGE 245 ---
188 • Th e Womanist Reader
 3. See Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, “Discontented Black Feminists: Prelude and Postscript to the 
Passage of the Nineteenth Amendment,” 261–78; Lois Scharf and Joan M. Jensen, “Intro-
duction,” 9–10, both in Decades of Discontent: Th e Women’s Movement, 1920–1940,  ed. 
Lois Scharf and Joan M. Jensen (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1983).
 4. Terborg-Penn, 267. A contemporary example of this type of dichotomous analysis is 
seen in much of the discussion of the feminization of poverty. Drawing commonalities 
between the experiences of black and white women, such discussions generally leave the 
impression that poverty was not a “feminine” problem before white women in increas-
ing numbers were recognized as impoverished. Presumably, before that black women’s 
poverty was considered a result of race, now it is more oft en considered a result of gender. 
Linda Burnham has eff ectively addressed the incompleteness of such analyses, suggesting 
that they ignore “class, race, and sex as simultaneously  operative social factors” in black 
women’s lives (“Has Poverty Been Feminized in Black America?” Black Scholar  16, no 2 
[March/April 1985]: 14–24 [emphasis mine]).
 5. See, e.g., Parita Trivedi, “A Study of ‘Sheroes,’ ” Th ird World Book Review  1, no 2 (1984): 
71–72; Angela Davis, Women, Race, and Class (New York: Random House, 1981); Nawal el 
Saadawi, Th e Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World,  trans. Sherif Hetata (Boston: 
Beacon, 1982); Jenny Bourne, “Towards an Anti-Racist Feminism,” Race and Class  25, 
no. 1 (Summer 1983): 1–22; Bonnie Th ornton Dill, “Race, Class, and Gender: Prospects 
for an All-inclusive Sisterhood,” Feminist Studies  9, no. 1 (Spring 1983): 131–50; Evelyn 
Nakano Glenn, Issei, Nisei, War Bride: Th ree Generations of Japanese American Women 
in Domestic Service  (P hiladelphia: T emple U niversity Press, 1 986 ) ; A udre Lorde, Sister 
Outsider: Essays and Speeches  (Trumansburg, N.Y.: Crossing Press, 1984); Barbara Smith, 
“Some Home Truths on the Contemporary Black Feminist Movement,” Black Scholar 16, 
no. 2 (March/April 1985): 4–13; Asoka Bandarage, Toward International Feminism: Th e 
Dialectics of Sex, Race and Class  (London: Zed Press, forthcoming). For a typology of 
black women’s multiple consciousness, see Deborah K. King, “Race, Class, and Gender 
Salience in Black Women’s Feminist Consciousness” (paper presented at American Soci-
ological Association annual meeting, Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities, New York, 
August 1986).
 6. Alice Walker’s oft  -quoted defi nition is in In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist 
Prose (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1983), xi–xii: “Womanist. 1. … Responsi-
ble. In Charge. Serious . 2. … Appreciates … women’s strength. … Committed to survival 
and wholeness of entire people, male and female. Not a separatist, except periodically, 
for health. Traditionally universalist. … Traditionally capable. … 3. … Loves struggle. 
Loves the Folk. Loves herself. Regardless  4. W omanist is to feminist as purple is to lav-
e n d e r . ”  C h e r y l  T o w n s e n d  G i l k e s ’ s  a n n o t a t i o n  o f  A l i c e  W a l k e r ’ s  d e fi nition (“Women, 
Religion, and Tradition: A Womanist Perspective” [paper presented in workshop at Sum-
mer Research Institute on Race and Gender, Center for Research on Women, Memphis 
State University, June 1986]) has been particularly important to my understanding of this 
term.
 7. Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi, “Womanism: Th  e Dynamics of the Contemporary Black 
Female Novel in English,” Signs 11, no. 1 (Autumn 1985): 63–80.
 8. May Wright Sewall, ed., World’s Congress of Representative Women  (Chicago, 1893), 715, 
quoted in Bert James Loewenberg and Ruth Bogin, eds., Black Women in Nineteenth-Century 
American Life: Th eir Words, Th eir Th oughts, Th eir Feelings (University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1976), 330–31 (emphasis mine). See also Anna Julia Cooper, A 
Voice from the South: By a Black Woman of the South  (Xenia, Ohio: Aldine. 1892), esp. 
“Part First.”
 9. Although there exists no scholarly biography of Walker, information is available in sev-
eral sources. See Wendell P. Dabney, Maggie L. W alker and Th e I.O. of Saint Luke: Th  e 
Woman and Her Work  (Cincinnati: Dabney, 1927); Sadie Iola Daniel, 
Women Builders  
(Washington, D.C.: Associated Publishers, 1931), 28–52; Sadie Daniel St. Clair, “Maggie 
Lena Walker,” in Notable American Women,  1607–1960 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
U n i v e r s i t y  P r e s s ,  B e l k n a p ,  1 9 7 1 ) ,  5 3 0 – 3 1 ;  E l s a  B a r kl e y  B r o w n ,  “ M a g g i e  L e n a  W a l k e r  a n d  
the Saint Luke Women” (paper presented at the Association for the Study of Afro-American 
Life and History 69th annual conference, Washington, D.C., October 1984), and “ ‘Not 
Alone to Build Th is Pile of Brick’: Th e Role of Women in the Richmond, Virginia, Black 
Community, 1890–1930” (paper presented at the Midcontinental and North Central 
RT54118_C008.indd   188RT54118_C008.indd   188 7/8/06   6:45:43 PM7/8/06   6:45:43 PM


--- PAGE 246 ---
History • 189
American Studies Association joint conference, University of Iowa, April 1983); Lily 
Hammond, In the Vanguard of a Race (New York: Council of Women for Home Missions 
and Missionary Education Movement of the United States and Canada, 1922), 108–18; 
A.B. Caldwell, ed., Virginia Edition,  vol. 5 of History of the American Negro  (Atlanta: 
A.B. Caldwell, 1921), 9–11; Rayford Logan, “Maggie Lena Walker,” in Dictionary of American 
Negro Biography,  ed Rayford W. Logan and Michael R. Winston (New York: Norton, 
1982), 626–27; Gertrude W. Marlowe, “Maggie Lena Walker: African-American Women, 
Business, and Community Development” (paper presented at Berkshire Conference on 
the History of Women, Wellesley, Mass., June 21, 1987); Kim Q. Boyd, “ ‘An Actress Born, 
a Diplomat Bred’; Maggie L. Walker, Race Woman” (M.A. thesis, Howard University, 
1987); Sallie Chandler, “Maggie Lena W alker ( 1867– 1934): An Abstract of Her Life and 
Activities,” 1975 Oral History Files, Virginia Union University Library, Richmond, Va., 
1975; Maggie Lena Walker Papers, Maggie L. Walker National Historic Site, Richmond, 
Va. (hereaft er cited as MLW Papers). Fortunately, much of Walker’s history will soon be 
available; the Maggie L. Walker Biography Project, funded by the National Park Service 
under the direction of Gertrude W. Marlowe, anthropology department, Howard Univer-
sity, is completing a full-scale biography of Walker.
 10. Noting the mass base of mutual benefi  t societies such as the Independent Order of 
Saint Luke, August Meier has suggested that the activities of these organizations “refl  ect 
the thinking of the inarticulate majority better than any other organizations or the state-
ment of editors and other publicists” ( Negro Th ought in America, 1880–1915: Racial Ide-
ologies in the Age of Booker T. Washington  [ Ann Arbor: U niversity of Michigan Press, 
1963], 130).
 11. 50th Anniversary—Golden Jubilee Historical Report of the R.W.G. Council I.O. St. Luke, 
1867–1917 ( R i c h m o n d ,  V a . :  E v e r e t t  W a d d e y ,  1 9 1 7 ) ,  5 – 6 ,  2 0  ( h e r e a ft er cited as 50th 
Anniversary).
 12. Maggie L. Walker, “Diary,” March 6, 1928, MLW Papers. My thanks to Sylvester Putman, 
superintendent, Richmond National Battlefi  eld Park, and Celia Jackson Suggs, site histo-
rian, Maggie L. Walker National Historic Site, for facilitating my access to these unpro-
cessed papers.
 13. 50th Anniversary,  26.
 14. White (n. l above), 119–41. Although I use the term “sisterhood” here to refer to this female 
network, sisterhood for black women, including M.L. Walker, meant (and means) not 
only this special bond among black women but also the ties amongst all kin/community.
 15. Of 260,000 black Virginians over the age of twenty-one in 1920, less than 20,000 were 
eligible to vote in that year’s elections. Poll taxes and literacy tests disfranchised many; 
white Democratic election offi  cials turned many others away from the polls; still others 
had given up their eff orts to vote, realizing that even if they successfully cast their ballots, 
they were playing in “a political game which they stood no chance of winning” (Andrew 
Buni, Th e Negro in Virginia Politics, 1902–1965  [Charlottesville: University of Virginia 
Press, 1967], 77–88). Th e high proportion of female voters resulted from whites’ success-
ful eff orts to disfranchise the majority of black male voters, as well as the enthusiasm 
of women to exercise this new right: see, e.g., Richmond News-Leader  (August–October 
1920); Richmond Times-Dispatch  (September–October, 1920). Rosalyn Terborg-Penn 
(n. 3 above, 275) reports a similarly high percentage of black female voters in 1920s Bal-
timore. In Richmond, however, black women soon found themselves faced with the same 
obstacles to political rights as confronted black men. Independent black political parties 
developed in several southern states where the lily-white Republican faction had success-
fully purged blacks from leadership positions in that party; see, e.g., George C. Wright, 
“Black Political Insurgency in Louisville, Kentucky: Th  e Lincoln Independent Party of 
1921,” Journal of Negro History  68 (Winter 1983): 8–23.
 16. M.L. Walker, “Addresses,” 1909, MLW Papers, cited in Celia Jackson Suggs. “Maggie 
Lena Walker.” truth: Newsletter of the Association of Black Women Historians  7 (Fall 
1985): 6.
 17. Four of the women elected to the 1901 Saint Luke executive board were board mem-
bers of the Woman’s Union, which had offi  ces in Saint Luke’s Hall; see advertisements in 
Richmond Planet  (August 1898–January 3, 1903).
 18. Some of the societies had only women members, including some that were exclusively for 
the mutual assistance of single mothers. For an excellent discussion of the ties among the 
RT54118_C008.indd   189RT54118_C008.indd   189 7/8/06   6:45:44 PM7/8/06   6:45:44 PM


--- PAGE 247 ---
190 • Th e Womanist Reader
societies, families, and churches in Richmond, see Peter J. Rachleff  , Black Labor in the 
South: Richmond, Virginia, 1865–1890  (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984).
 19. W.P. Burrell and D.E. Johnson, Sr., Twenty-Five Years’ History of the Grand Fountain of 
the United Order of True Reformers, 1881–1905  (Richmond, Va.: Grand Fountain, United 
Order of True Reformers, 1909), 76–77.
 20. Saint Luke Penny Savings Bank records: Receipts and Disbursements, 1903–1909; 
Minutes, Executive Committee, 1913; Cashier’s Correspondence Book, 1913; Minutes, 
Board of Trustees, 1913–1915, Consolidated Bank and Trust Company, Richmond. Va.; 
Cleveland Plain Dealer  (June 28, 1914), in Peabody Clipping File, Collis P. Huntington 
Library, Hampton Institute, Hampton, Va. (hereaft  er cited as Peabody Clipping File), 
no. 88, vol. 1. See also Works Progress Administration, Th e Negro in Virginia  (New York: 
Hastings House, 1940), 299.
 21. Th  is analysis o w es m uch to Cheryl T o wnsend Gilkes’ s work on black women, particu-
larly her “Black Women’s Work as Deviance: Social Sources of Racial Antagonism within 
Contemporary Feminism,” working paper no. 66 (Wellesley, Mass.: Wellesley College 
Center for Research on Women, 1979), and “ ‘Holding Back the Ocean with a Broom’: 
Black Women and Community Work,” in Th e Black Woman,  ed. LaFrances Rodgers-Rose 
(Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1980). Excerpt from speech given by M.L. Walker at 1901 
annual Saint Luke convention, 50th Anniversary  (n. 11 above), 23.
 22. Th  e prevailing turn-of-the-century stereotype of black women emphasized promiscuity 
and immorality; these ideas were given prominence in a number of publications, includ-
ing newspapers, periodicals, philanthropic foundation reports, and popular literature. 
Th e attacks by various segments of the white community on the morality of black women 
and the race at the turn of the century are discussed in Beverly Guy-Sheft  all, “ ‘Daughters 
o f  S o r r o w ’ :  A t t i t u d e s  t o w a r d  B l a c k  W o m e n .  1 8 3 0 – 1 9 2 0 ”  ( P h . D .  d i s s . ,  E m o r y  U n i v e r -
sity, 1984), 62–86; Darlene Clark Hine, “Lift  ing the Veil, Shattering the Silence: Black 
Women’s History in Slavery and Freedom,” in Th e State of Afro-American History: Past, 
Present, and Future,  ed. Darlene Clark Hine (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University 
Press, 1986), 223–49, esp. 234–38; Willi Coleman, “Black Women and Segregated Public 
Transportation: Ninety Years of Resistance,” truth: Newsletter of the Association of Black 
Women Historians  8, no. 2 (1986): 3–10, esp. 7–8; and Paula Giddings, When and Where 
I Enter: Th e Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America  (New York: William 
Morrow, 1984), 82–86. Maggie Walker called attention to these verbal attacks on Negro 
womanhood in her speech, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only,” Saint Luke 
Hall, March 1, 1906, MLW Papers (n. 9 above). It was in part the desire to defend black 
women and uplift  the race that initiated the formation of the National Federation of Black 
Women’s Clubs.
 23. Charles F. McLaurin, “State Federation of Colored Women” (n.p., November 10, 1908). 
Peabody Clipping File, no. 231, vol. 1.
 24. Chandler (n. 9 above), 10–11.
 25. Daniel Webster Davis and Giles Jackson, Th e Industrial History of the Negro Race, of the 
United States  (Richmond Virginia Press, 1908), 133. Similar attitudes expressed in the 
Virginia Baptist  in 1894 had aroused the ire of the leading fi gures in the national women’s 
club movement. Th e Baptist had been particularly concerned that women, in exceeding 
their proper place in the church, were losing their “womanliness” and that “the exercise of 
the right to suff rage would be a deplorable climax to these transgressions”; see discussion 
of the Baptist in Women’s Era 1, no. 6 (September 1894): 8.
 26. M.L. Walker, “Speech to Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs,” Hampton, Va., July 14, 
1912, MLW Papers (n. 9 above).
 27. M.L. Walker, “Speech to the Negro Young People’s Christian and Educational Congress,” 
Convention Hall, Washington, D.C., August 5, 1906, MLW Papers.
 28. Quotations are from M.L. Walker, “Speech to the Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs.” 
Th ese ideas, however, were a central theme in Walker’s speeches and were repeated 
throughout the years. See, e.g., “Speech to the Negro Young People’s Christian and Edu-
cational Congress” and “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only” (n. 22 above). See 
also the St. Luke Herald ’s fi rst editorial, “Our Mission” (March 29, 1902), reprinted in 
50th Anniversary  (n. 11 above), 26.
 29. Excerpt from speech given by M.L. Walker at 1901 annual Saint Luke convention 50th 
Anniversary, 23.
RT54118_C008.indd   190RT54118_C008.indd   190 7/8/06   6:45:44 PM7/8/06   6:45:44 PM


--- PAGE 248 ---
History • 191
 30. See “Our Mission” (n. 28 above).
 31. Th  e NAWE, having as its motto “Support Th yself—Work,” armed at making “the colored 
woman a factor in the labor world.” Much of its work was premised upon the belief that 
white women were developing an interest in domestic science and other “Negro occupa-
tions” to such an extent that the prospects for work for young black women were becom-
ing seriously endangered. Th ey believed also that when white women entered the fi  elds of 
housework, cooking, and the like, these jobs would be classifi  ed as professions. It there-
fore was necessary for black women to become professionally trained in even domestic 
work in order to compete. Container 308, Nannie Helen Burroughs Papers, Manuscript 
Division, Library of Congress.
 32. M.L. Walker, “Speech to Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs” (n. 26 above).
 33. See, e.g., “Negress Banker Says If Men Can, Women Can,” Columbus Journal  (September 
1 6,  1 909 ) ,  P ea bod y  Cli p p in g  F il e  ( n.  20  a bo v e ) ,  n o .  2 3 1 ,  v o l.  7 ,  see  also  Ch an dl e r  ( n.  9  
above), 32.
 34. In 1900, 83.8 percent of employed black women worked in domestic and personal service; 
in 1930, 76.5 percent. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Twelft h Census of the United States Taken 
in the Year 1900, Population Part 1  (Washington, D.C.: Census Offi  ce, 1901), Th irteenth 
Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1910,  vol. 4: Population 1910—Occupation 
Statistics  (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Offi  ce, 1914), 595, and Fift eenth Cen-
sus of the United States: Population,  vol. 4: Occupations, by States  (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Offi  ce, 1933); Benjamin Brawley, Negro Builders and Heroes (Chapel 
H i l l :  U n i v e r s i t y  o f  N o r t h  C a r o l i n a  P r e s s ,  1 9 3 7 ) ,  2 6 7 – 7 2 ;  U . S .  B u r e a u  o f  t h e  C e n s u s ,  
Fourteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1920,  vol. 4: Population 1920 —
Occupations  (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Offi   ce, 1923); Ethel Th ompson 
Overby, “It’s Better to Light a Candle Th an to Curse the Darkness”: Th  e Autobiographical 
Notes of Ethel Th ompson Overby  (1975), copy in Virginia Historical Society, Richmond.
 35. Th  e business, which opened the Monday before Easter 1905, offi   cially closed in January 
1912. Information on the emporium is found in 50th Anniversary  (n. 11 above), 55, 70, 77. 
New York Age, March 16, 1905, Peabody Clipping File, no. 88, vol. 1, “Maggie Lena Walker 
Scrapbook,” MLW Papers (n. 9 above); Daniels (n. 9 above), 41. Th e most detailed descrip-
tion of the opposition to the emporium is in M.L. Walker, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address 
for Men Only” (n. 22 above), quote is from this speech.
 36. M.L. Walker, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only.”
 37. Ibid.
 38. Chandler (n. 9 above), 30.
 39. M.L. Walker, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only.”
 40. Chandler, 30.
 41. New York Age (June 22, 1909), Peabody Clipping File, no. 231, vol. 1.
 42. Rayford W. Logan, Th e Betrayal of the Negro from Rutherford B. Hayes to Woodrow Wilson  
(New York: Collier, 1965; originally published in 1954 as Th e Negro in American Life and 
Th ought: Th e Nadir ).
 43. J. Th  omas Hewin, “Is the Criminal Negro Justly Dealt with in the Courts of the South?” in 
Twentieth Century Negro Literature, or a Cyclopedia of Th ought on the Vital Topics Relat-
ing to the American Negro,  ed. D.W. Culp (Toronto: J.L. Nichols, 1902), 110–11.
 44. Richmond Planet  (April 30, 1904).
 45. M.L. Walker, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only” (n. 22 above).
 46. New York Age (June 22, 1909), Peabody Clipping File, no. 231, vol. 1.
 47. M.L. Walker, “Speech to the Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs” (n. 26 above).
 48. M.L. Walker, “Beniah’s Valour: An Address for Men Only.” Th  is appeal for support of 
increased opportunities for black women permeated all of Walker’s speeches. In her last 
speeches in 1934 she continued her appeal for support of race enterprises (newspaper 
clipping [n.p., n.d.], “Maggie Laura Walker Scrapbook,” MLW Papers [n. 9 above]). Maggie 
Laura Walker is Walker’s granddaughter.
 49. W.E.B. DuBois, who explored extensively the connection between race struggle and 
women’s struggle in “Th e Damnation of Women,” also challenged men’s traditional roles: 
“Th e present mincing horror of a free womanhood must pass if we are even to be rid of the 
bestiality of a free manhood; not by guarding the weak in weakness do we gain strength, 
but by making weakness free and strong ” (emphasis mine, Darkwater, Voices from within 
the Veil [New York: Harcourt, Brace, & Howe, 1920], 165).
RT54118_C008.indd   191RT54118_C008.indd   191 7/8/06   6:45:45 PM7/8/06   6:45:45 PM


--- PAGE 249 ---
192 • Th e Womanist Reader
 50. M.L. Walker, “Saint Luke Th  anksgiving Day Speech,” City Auditorium, March 23, 1913, 
MLW Papers (n. 9 above).
 51. M.L. Walker, “Address—Virginia Day Th  ird Street Bethel AME Church,” January 29, 
1933, MLW Papers.
 52. Ogunyemi (n. 7 above, 72–73) takes this idea from Stephen Henderson’s analysis of the 
role of the blues and blues women in the Africanamerican community.
 53. Th  e essays in Vernon J. Dixon and Badi G. Foster, eds., Beyond Black or White: An Alter-
nate America  (Boston: Little, Brown, 1971) explore the either/or and the both/and world-
view in relation to Africanamerican systems of analysis; the quote can be found in Dixon, 
“Two Approaches to Black–White Relations,” 23–66, esp. 25–26.
 54. Johnella E. Butler explores the theoretical, methodological, and pedagogical implications 
of these systems of analysis in Black Studies: Pedagogy and Revolution: A Study of Afro-
American Studies and the Liberal Arts Tradition through the Discipline of Afro-American 
Literature (Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1981), esp. 96–102.
RT54118_C008.indd   192RT54118_C008.indd   192 7/8/06   6:45:45 PM7/8/06   6:45:45 PM


--- PAGE 250 ---
193
9
Theater and Film Studies
Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): 
Womanist Film (1991)
MARK A. REID
One has only to peruse the shelves of a university bookstore or page through 
“academic” journals to discover that members of the academy have indirectly 
reifi ed feminism as a discourse by, for, and about white, heterosexual, Western 
women. Corrective energy is best directed toward the development of theories 
of representation which describe the voices that mainstream feminism ignores, 
for the employment of critical approaches which consider race, class, and sexual 
affi  liation would cure academic feminism of its narcissistic gaze upon the 
white, middle-class female subject.
In an eff ort to assist in the building of a black feminist theory of fi  lm pro-
duction and reception, this paper presents a “womanist” interpretation of three 
aspects of black independent fi lm. First, I explore the term black womanist fi lm 
in the context of the production and reception of any womanist fi lm. Second, 
I discuss the politics of black womanist discourse as a form of resistance to a 
raceless feminism and a phallocentric pan-Africanism. Th ird, I analyze three 
spectatorial relationships that black womanist fi lms elicit from two “interested” 
spectatorial groups—feminists and pan-Africans. Finally, informed by my 
description of black womanist fi lm, its politics of blackness and womanness, 
and its three receptive modes, I interpret how certain narrative fi  lms present 
African and African diasporic women’s subjectivity as a polyvalent idea.
I do not intend to prescribe conditions for black womanist fi  lmmaking 
or its spectatorial readings. Nonetheless, I do consider how certain processes 
of representation and reception permit diff  erent readings of black womanist 
fi lms. Finally, when I speak of African or black women, I am making reference 
to the many black African women who exist, survive, and struggle in Africas 
throughout the world. Th erefore, I am explicating an international black wom-
anist theory—a theory which rejects the closures of nation, race, gender, and 
class exclusivity. However, I must limit this present study to an analysis of 
black-directed independent fi lms.
RT54118_C009.indd   193RT54118_C009.indd   193 7/8/06   6:47:04 PM7/8/06   6:47:04 PM


--- PAGE 251 ---
194 • Th e Womanist Reader
Black Womanist Film: A Working Defi nition
Th roughout this paper, I will employ the term black womanist fi lm to refer to 
narrative constructions as well as viewing positions which permit “womanish,” 
as opposed to “girlish,” processes of black female subjectivity. Films belonging 
to this category dramatize the shared experiences of black women. I have bor-
rowed the term womanist from Alice Walker, who provides, as one of its prin-
cipal defi nitions:
A woman who loves other women, sexually and/or nonsexually. Appre-
ciates and prefers women’s culture, women’s emotional fl exibility … and 
women’s strength. Sometimes loves individual men, sexually/or nonsex-
ually. Committed to survival and wholeness of entire people, male and 
female. Not a separatist, except periodically, for health. Traditionally 
universalist, as in: “Mama, why are we brown, pink, and yellow, and our 
cousins are white, beige, and black?” (xi)
In relation to black fi lm, the term womanism refers to certain black-oriented 
fi lms (not their authors) and reading strategies whose narrative and receptive 
processes permit polyvalent female subjectivity.
Th e term black womanist fi lm describes two levels of fi  lmic production: 
(1) the narrative content which constructs black womanist subjectivity and 
(2) the various processes by which an audience might receive the narrative’s 
construction of this subjectivity. Th e two levels conjoin and articulate an ide-
ology of black womanism as a twofold process of construction and reception. 
Black womanist fi lm does not describe all fi lms made by African and African 
diasporic women. However, black womanist fi  lm results from imaginatively 
representing the socio-psychic and socio-economic experiences of African 
and African diasporic women. Th is fi  lm calls forth “black womanist specta-
tors” and creates a spectatorial space for such an audience.
Th e concept black womanist spectatorship should not  be taken “to refer 
directly to the [black] woman who buys her ticket and enters the movie the-
ater as the member of an audience, sharing a social identity but retaining a 
unique psychical history. Frequently, [it] do[es] not even refer to the spectator 
as a social subject but, rather, as a psychical subject, as the eff ect of signifying 
structures.”
1 Black womanist spectatorship, then, is a socio-psychical process, 
not a biological trait. It cannot totally exclude or include its audience based on 
race or gender.
Womanism and Post-Negritude: Th eorizing Black Experience
Black womanism is a form of resistance to a raceless feminism and a phallo-
centric pan-Africanism. As a theoretical tool, it requires that one scrutinize how 
its closest supporter decodes black womanist fi  lm. Th is is especially true for 
feminism and pan-Africanism, because each of these movements has ignored 
the triple oppression of black women. Black female subjectivity, as woman 
RT54118_C009.indd   194RT54118_C009.indd   194 7/8/06   6:47:06 PM7/8/06   6:47:06 PM


--- PAGE 252 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 195
and African, is historically positioned at the boundaries of gender, sexuality, 
and race. Th is subjectivity conjoins the two limit-texts of feminism and pan-
Africanism, but has been heretofore on the margins of these discourses. As an 
eff ect of a womanist ideology, black womanist fi  lms resist dramatizing one-
dimensional struggles which ignore the black woman’s three-pronged oppres-
sion. Th erefore, Safi  Faye’s La passante (Th e Passerby,  Senegal, 1972) criticizes 
the sexist expectations of a white French man as well as a black African man; 
Sara Gomez’s De cierta manera (One Way or Another, Cuba, 1974/1977) pres-
ents sexism in post-revolutionary Cuba; and Michelle Parkerson’s Storme: 
Th e Lady of the Jewel Box  (USA, 1987) constructs black gay history while 
documenting the life of Storme, a male impersonator. Th ese black womanist 
fi lms question patriarchal and heterosexist notions of black female subjec-
tivity. Additionally, each fi  lm creates a spectatorial position which speaks 
to micro- as well as macro-struggles against phallic forms of knowledge and 
power within and without the black community.
2
A theory and practice of black fi lm, if based on a womanist ideology of the 
polyphony of blackness, initiates possible receptive processes. A womanist recep-
tion occurs only aft er an “interested” spectator actively participates in a system-
atic critique of the singularity of canonical (con)texts. Stressing the importance 
of an “interested” reader in the production of a plural text, Catherine Belsey 
writes,
In the writable … wholly plural text all statements are of indeterminate 
origin, no single discourse is privileged, and no consistent and coher-
ent plot constrains the free play of the discourses. Th  e totally writable, 
plural text does not exist. At the opposite extreme, the readable text is 
barely plural. Th e readable text is merchandise to be consumed, while 
the plural text requires the production of meanings through the identi-
fi cation of its polyphony. (105)
Th us, black womanism, as a theory of reception and production, requires an 
“interested” spectator to decode the plurality of (con)texts, which include intra- 
as well as interracial forces that dehumanize the community . Equally , black 
womanist critical strategies deconstruct narrative systems and viewing posi-
tions which reduce racial, sexual, and class diff erences to one of gender. Black 
womanism, as Alice Walker suggests, represents universalist notions of black-
ness which conjoin African and African diasporic cultures. Consequently, the 
black womanist fi lm project constructs a post- Negritude theory of reception 
and production.
Before defi ning post- Negritude, I would like to suggest the polyphonic 
quality of the movement and concept that preceded it and shares in its global 
concerns. Nigerian philosopher Abiola Irele writes that Negritude
has acquired, in the way it has been used by diff  erent writers, a multi-
plicity of meanings covering so wide a range that it is oft  en diffi  cult to 
RT54118_C009.indd   195RT54118_C009.indd   195 7/8/06   6:47:06 PM7/8/06   6:47:06 PM


--- PAGE 253 ---
196 • Th e Womanist Reader
form a precise idea of its particular reference at any one time or in any 
one usage. Th e diffi  culty stems from the fact that, as a movement and as 
a concept, Negritude found its origin and received a development in a 
historical and sociological context whose implications for those whom 
it aff ected were indeed wide-ranging, and which ultimately provoked in 
them a multitude of responses [readings] that were oft en contradictory, 
though always signifi cant. … Th e term has thus been used in a broad 
and general sense to denote the black world in its historical being, in 
opposition to the West, and in this way resumes the total consciousness 
of belonging to the black race, as well as an awareness of the objective 
historical and sociological implications of that fact. (67)
Similarly, post-Negritude refers to any moment when members of the black 
community, through their literature, art, and politics, recognize that black 
culture “is, concretely, an open-ended, creative dialogue of subcultures, of insid-
ers and outsiders, of diverse factions.” Correspondingly, these members share 
a language of black subjectivity that celebrates “the interplay and struggle of 
regional dialects, professional jargons, generic commonplaces, the speech 
of diff erent age groups, individuals, and so forth” (Cliff  ord 46). Contrary to 
Negritude, the recognition and shared productivity of the post-Negritude 
project result from the active participation of an interested audience that 
decodes the black subject using discourses which surround and construct 
representations of gender, race, class, sexuality, and nation. An “interested” 
audience scrutinizes the incorporation of these images as an internal regula-
tory agency of the representation as well as themselves. Th  rough this shared 
post-Negritude recognition, respective black audiences will question their own 
(and, by implication, others’) interpretations (Hutcheon 180).
Reception: Resistance, Accommodation, Assimilation
In the analysis of black womanist fi  lms, I propose three general modes of 
reception—resistance, accommodation, and assimilation. Th ese three recep-
tive modes represent the dialogic quality of any particular black womanist 
fi lm. In the resistance mode, the source of the rejection of a particular black 
womanist fi lm lies in its inability to mirror a given audience’s partial vision of 
themselves. Th e desired image that a group holds of itself may be derivative of 
an authorized hegemonic image, a resistant radical image, or a combination 
of the two which produces a constant tension for both the viewer and artist 
in question. Th is tension combines race, sexuality, and gender subjectivity. 
Th e blurring of racial, sexual, and gender hierarchies permits free zones of 
discourse and makes the black womanist project a most dynamic movement. 
Th eorizing this post-Negritude moment permits one to understand the recep-
tion of any black womanist fi lm.
Since spectatorship is a psychical investiture, certain black womanist texts 
permit spectatorial positions that criticize sexism but maintain black communal 
RT54118_C009.indd   196RT54118_C009.indd   196 7/8/06   6:47:06 PM7/8/06   6:47:06 PM


--- PAGE 254 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 197
solidarity. Contrarily, black womanist fi lms which depict non-sexist men may 
threaten the psychical desires of certain feminists—for example, separatists 
who deplore any feminism which includes men. In addition, non-black femi-
nist spectators who maintain a hierarchic allegiance to a raceless, classless, 
and nondescript sexuality may deplore this form of black feminism, because 
it criticizes racial, class, and sexual discrimination within the women’s move-
ment. Nonetheless, such feminists may still enjoy black womanist fi lms. Enjoy-
ment demands that black womanist fi lms represent, and their viewers/listeners 
identify with, some nexus of desire which results in accommodative readings 
of these fi lms. Th e same criterion is equally true for raceless feminists and for 
phallocentric pan-African spectators.
Certain pan-Africans might regard black womanist narratives as too hos-
tile toward black patriarchal fi gures or might view black feminism as a threat 
to black communal solidarity because, according to them, the natural place 
for black women is within a nuclear family as the provider of moral support to 
her husband. Generally speaking, this point of view naturalizes the subordi-
nation of women; it refl ects a phallic hierarchical system which processes false 
notions of black masculinity and femininity. Consequently, this phallic type 
of pan-African thought denies both male and female pan-Africans the ability 
to appreciate black womanist ideology as represented in fi lm. Black psycholo-
gist Vickie M. Mays writes,
Th e Afro-American woman has been denied power and privilege. She 
has been raised expecting to work, as she will need to assist in supporting 
her family. She will also be asked to do all she possibly can to advance 
the Black man and the Black race—at the cost of ignoring the oppres-
sion of sexism. Indeed, the Black woman has been taught from early 
childhood that one way to survive in this society is through marriage or 
in a male-female relationship. (75)
Pan-Africans who deny or devalue the oppression of black women are as 
demeaning as white feminists who disregard racial and class factors. Yet, on 
viewing black womanist fi lms, these same pan-Africans might identify with 
the cinematic use of African and African diasporic elements, while resist-
ing the elements that evoke identifi  cation among non-black feminists. Th us, 
like some non-black feminists, pan-Africans may assume an accommodative 
viewing relationship to a black womanist fi lm.
Contrary to the two discussed accommodative positions, an assimilative 
reception tends to accept a fi lm as a “realistic” vision, rather than an imaginative 
representation open to revision of black womanhood. Assimilative spectatorial 
positions, as organizing concepts, promote authoritarian conformity among 
creator, discursive apparatus, and consumer. Authoritarian discourses elimi-
nate the tension between the desire to resist and the desire to accommodate. 
In the assimilative mode, audience members’ consumptive habits are eased 
RT54118_C009.indd   197RT54118_C009.indd   197 7/8/06   6:47:06 PM7/8/06   6:47:06 PM


--- PAGE 255 ---
198 • Th e Womanist Reader
when their identity (their imagined subjectivity) is not threatened by what they 
feel are contradictory images of themselves. Singularity is also part of the 
spectatorial mode which produces resistance among certain feminists and pan-
Africans when they view the more radical aspects of black womanist ideology 
as constructed in fi lms.
Th e authoritarian discourse process is present in rigid systems as well as 
those contesting on the margins of discourse. Like any discursive appara-
tus, the black womanist fi  lm has an assimilative mode of construction and 
reception capable of denying “unauthorized” readings. If eff ective, this mode 
protects against uncritical acceptance and duplication of black womanist dis-
cursive strategies. Once black womanist theory moves from the periphery to 
the center, assimilative readings of black womanist discourses might retain 
their protective strategies and oppose their initial, heteroglossic conception 
of black womanism. Th e move from liberation to repression occurs because 
modernist projects require a closure of their imagined boundaries—a refl ec-
t i o n  o f  h e g e m o n y ’ s  n e e d  t o  c o n t a i n  p o l yv al e n t  s u b j e c t i vi ty  b y  m a i n t a i n i n g  
segregated sites of “resistance,” such as women’s liberation, gay liberation, and 
black liberation. Black womanist subjectivity, however, blurs these imagined 
boundaries of black selfh ood. Th is post-Negritude blurring refl  ects the dia-
logic possibilities of blackness in womanist fi lm.
Black Womanist Praxis
Some of the earliest work of black women fi  lmmakers appeared in the 1970s 
and was fi lmed by women from the Americas and Africa. Madeline Anderson, 
Sarah Maldoror, Safi  Faye, and Sara Gomez are representative of the fi rst wave 
of black womanist fi lmmakers. Th e beginning of an international black femi-
nist fi l m  p r a c t i c e  i s  r e fl ected in Anderson’s I Am Somebody  (USA, 1970), 
Maldoror’s Des Fusils pour Banta  (Guns for Banta, Guinea-Bissau, 1971), and 
Gomez’s De cierta manera (One Way or Another, Cuba, 1974/1977). Admitting 
the historical importance of these fi  lmmakers and their works, I confi  ne my 
analysis to Alile Sharon Larkin’s A Diff erent Image (USA, 1981), Safi  Faye’s La 
passante (Th e Passerby,  Senegal, 1972), and Kathleen Collins’s Losing Ground 
(USA, 1982). I will conclude with some general statements on black womanist 
fi lms and post-Negritude.
In 1981, Alile Sharon Larkin focused on sexism and African heritage in 
A Diff erent Image. Interestingly, the fi lm previewed at the Second International 
Women Filmmakers Symposium, which underlines the fi  lm’s importance to 
this audience. In addition to being a woman-centered fi lm, A Diff erent Image 
is equally resilient in its celebration of a pan-African consciousness which is 
at odds with the sexism and racism of the West. Larkin says, “Th  e fi lm deals 
with assimilation … of Western sexism and how racism is inherently a part 
of that, … can’t be separated from it. When I say that the racism and the 
sexism are inseparable, this also applies to defi  nitions of manhood as well 
RT54118_C009.indd   198RT54118_C009.indd   198 7/8/06   6:47:07 PM7/8/06   6:47:07 PM


--- PAGE 256 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 199
as womanhood” (“ Your Children”). Larkin underscores the black womanist 
belief that racism is an inherent part of sexism, and to ignore this fact is coun-
terproductive to the black womanist struggle for equality.
Th e fi lm focuses on Alana, a young black woman, and her friend Vincent, 
an equally young black man. Aft er a male acquaintance has ridiculed Vincent’s 
platonic relationship with Alana, Vincent tries to assert his manhood by forc-
ing himself on Alana, who has fallen asleep on his bedroom fl oor. Aft er Alana 
accuses him of attempted rape and severs their friendship, Vincent, missing 
her companionship, reexamines the question of the appropriate kind of rela-
tionship between a man and a woman. Finally, he initiates a reconciliation by 
giving her earrings shaped like the Egyptian goddess Isis.
In the fi lm, Larkin focuses on a touchy gender-related problem within the 
black community: Black women are expected to submit to the sexual desires 
of their black male friends. Larkin does not limit this problem to America. By 
introducing the fi lm with a collage of photographs of black women, and by 
using an African goddess as the symbol of Vincent’s eff  ort of reconciliation, 
Larkin underscores the correspondence between the experiences of black 
women in America and Africa. She writes,
If you look at Africa today, you see that people there face the same prob-
lem with sexism[; therefore,] I am saying that there were other cultures 
and other ways that men and women related to each other … before the 
African slave trade, before Islam, before the patriarchal religions came 
in. So, we have to study those ways before we [black people] took on 
these [patriarchal] values. (“ Your Children”)
Larkin understands the need for solidarity among black fi  lmmakers around 
a commonly shared ideology that refl ects a post-Negritude openness to femi-
nism, classism, and sexuality. She writes, “An ideology or belief which attempts 
to compartmentalize the nature and form of the oppression of African peo-
ple solely into gender and/ or class is ultimately destructive to our achieving 
genuine equality and liberation” (“Black Women” 158). Larkin refuses to per-
mit authoritarian ideologies of opposition to determine or speak for a black 
womanist fi lm practice. She recognizes the ease with which some groups have 
co-opted the civil rights struggle to benefi t their very white agendas:
As a Black woman I experience all areas of oppression—economic, racial, 
and sexual. I cannot “pick and choose” a single area of struggle. I believe 
it is in this way that feminists and other progressive whites pursue their 
own interests at the expense of those of us subjected to racism. Th ey do 
not have to deal with the totality of oppression, and instead may conform 
to, or accept the policies of, institutional racism. …
Feminism succumbs to racism when it segregates Black women from 
Black men and dismisses our history. (“Black Women” 158)
RT54118_C009.indd   199RT54118_C009.indd   199 7/8/06   6:47:07 PM7/8/06   6:47:07 PM


--- PAGE 257 ---
200 • Th e Womanist Reader
To understand A Diff erent Image as an articulation of feminist ideas, as opposed 
to black womanist ideology, would be aberrant reading and would instance 
the authoritarian mode of feminism. Larkin argues,
Th e assumption that Black women and white women share … similar 
histories and experiences presents an important problem. … Both his-
torically and currently, white women participate in and reap the benefi ts 
of white supremacy. Feminism must address these issues[;] otherwise 
its ahistorical approach towards Black women can and does maintain 
institutional racism. (“Black Women” 158–59)
A pan-African reading which recognizes the abuses black women experience 
will produce a diff erent set of articulations and assumptions about the simi-
lar histories of women and men in the black community. For example, if the 
viewer focuses on the visual allusions to African women and Alana’s color-
ful dress, and if this viewer listens to the musical score, which connotes an 
African rhythm, then this viewer/listener might perceive Alana as the female 
representative of pan-African subjectivity, which, for the woman of color, is 
more dynamic than a generalized female subjectivity. I am not proposing that 
the black womanist and the feminist readings are binary opposites. I merely 
want to show that the same text can activate certain accommodative readings 
for these two audiences.
A black womanist reading would combine the latter two spectatorial 
positions—feminist and pan-African—and articulate the importance of the 
refi gured African-American male, Vincent. Th is dialogic reading of A Diff erent 
Image would resist the processes of gender and racial closure. In discussing 
the problematics of feminist thinking, Hortense J. Spillers writes, “Sexual-
ity as a term of power belongs to the empowered. Feminist thinking oft  en 
appropriates the term in its own will to discursive power in a sweeping, patri-
archal, symbolic gesture that reduces the human universe of women to its own 
image” (78). Equally, certain forms of black nationalism belong to the empow-
ered, and such nationalist thinking oft  en appropriates the term pan-African 
culture in its own will to discursive power in a sweeping, patriarchal, symbolic 
gesture that reduces black humanity to its own image. Both of these reduc-
tive forms of empowerment deny the micro-politics of struggle within their 
specifi c groups. Th ey attempt to force the assimilation of radical members by 
creating a politics of binary opposition which discounts individual diff erences. 
Alile Sharon Larkin’s fi lm dramatizes the micro-politics of diff  erence within 
the black community and portrays the shared phallic notions that some men 
and women act upon. Th e fi  lm denies a hypothetical sweeping, patriarchal 
gaze as biologically determined, since the patriarchal gaze is an “ideologi-
cal construct” which is fi gured in men as well as women. Th e fi lm privileges 
a text constructed on pan-African historical subjects who are embedded in 
RT54118_C009.indd   200RT54118_C009.indd   200 7/8/06   6:47:07 PM7/8/06   6:47:07 PM


--- PAGE 258 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 201
the maternal voice of Alana’s mother and the embodied portraits of African 
women.
Th e black womanist reading/viewing position avoids the inherent sexual 
dualism which engenders both the “dominant, male-centered position” and its 
appropriation by a “female-phallic position.” It acknowledges that the goals 
of black feminist theory are a revision of gender relations and an open-ended 
sexuality. Womanist goals do not attempt a simple appropriation of hierar-
chic systems to continue oppressive processes of subjectivity. Consequently, 
the black womanist fi  lm project proposes the collective refi  guration of the 
pan-African community. Such a purpose requires an artist/critic/audience to 
re-vision “possible” black others in a post-Negritude world.
Alile Sharon Larkin’s A Diff erent Image pursues the refi guration of gender 
through deconstructing the illusion that all black men are phallocrats and 
all black women are oppressed by such men. Th e fi  lm presents sexism as an 
ideological construct rather than a biological trait of the male. Larkin’s fi  lm 
portrays how phallic ideas call forth (hail) men, women, boys, and girls. 
According to the fi lm, phallocentric thought is not limited to men; it is pres-
ent in the baiting that Vincent receives from his male friend as well as the 
teasing that Alana receives from her female friend. Larkin’s womanist fi  lm 
demystifi es the totalizing eff ects of phallic ordering. Th e reconciliation of the 
Alana–Vincent friendship resists patriarchal closure. Th  e idea that men are 
contentedly contained within a sexist system is revised, and the unquestioned 
fate of women as sex objects or reproductive apparati-in-waiting is denied.
Black fi lmmakers in Africa have represented black Africa through wom-
anist discourse strategies in which the experiences of women are central to 
the fi lm narrative. Th is is true of the fi  rst black-directed African feature fi lm, 
Ousmane Sembene’s La Noire de (Senegal, 1968), as well as other African fi lms 
directed by black men (Vieyra 162).
Concurrent with the development of black African cinema in the late ’60s, 
Safi  Faye, an African-born Senegalese, directed African fi lms. Faye’s fi rst fi lm, 
La passante (Th e Passerby,  Senegal, 1972), depicts the Parisian experiences of 
an African woman who is preyed upon by African and French men. Interest-
ingly , Faye was both fi lmmaker and the fi  lmed subject, since she performed 
the role of the f emale who is the ob ject of the gaze of both men. F a ye does 
not agree with the closed status of the male gaze
3 but views the male gaze as 
a matter of who is behind, who is in front of, and who belongs to the audi-
ence that participates in this relationship. In Th e Passerby,  a 10-minute nar-
rative fi lm, she disrupts the male gaze upon female body parts by giving the 
female object a transitive quality and, thereby, both reversing the source of 
the gaze and providing an “other” meaning. A series of shot-reverse shots and 
point-of-view shots decenters the authority of the male point of view, as well as 
its discourse, and exposes the polyvalent quality of the male gaze.
RT54118_C009.indd   201RT54118_C009.indd   201 7/8/06   6:47:08 PM7/8/06   6:47:08 PM


--- PAGE 259 ---
202 • Th e Womanist Reader
Th us, as early as 1972, Faye was constructing a black womanist gaze to 
resist dominant viewing relationships. Th is permitted spectatorial positions 
of resistance, accommodation, and assimilation. While I have not attempted 
an in-depth study of the possible receptions of this fi  lm, I fi  nd Faye’s Th e 
Passerby equal in receptive possibilities to Larkin’s A Diff erent Image. Each fi lm 
criticizes a sexism that crosses racial boundaries. Yet Safi  Faye rejects identifi ca-
tion as a woman fi lmmaker:
I never say that I am a woman fi  lmmaker. I think I am a human being 
like the others. I never put someone under me but I never accept to be 
placed in a submissive position. Th e only diff  erence between me and a 
man is my familial responsibilities. When I think about my daughter 
Zeiba, I say OK, I am a woman. But when I think of my job or a fi  lm 
project, I am like … African men. (Reid)
Faye’s response raises two important issues. First, the product should not be con-
fused with its author any more than authorial intent should describe the fi nal 
product. Second, Faye refuses the label woman fi lmmaker because, according 
to her, her fi lms are not solely about women. She views the struggle in a larger 
frame—a sort of womanist struggle to counter dehumanizing relationships 
which oppress men and women.
Th e representation of black African women should not be limited by a 
choice between motherhood and a career. Faye, for instance, acknowledges that 
African Serrer customs form her concept of womanhood—womanism. She feels 
a deep commitment to motherhood, but is equally committed to fi lmmaking:
Since I am an African woman, I was educated in this way. I have remained 
close to the traditional role of mother, and this responsibility is not a 
burden to me. I try to keep my job near my eight-year-old daughter. Men 
do not have the responsibilities of caring for children, because they have 
wives to care aft er them. When I think about this, I realize that I am 
a woman. But I cannot be a fi  lmmaker without being a mother. As an 
African woman fi lmmaker, the two are very much a part of me. (Reid)
Like Safi  Faye, there are other black women fi lmmakers who see motherhood 
and fi lmmaking as inseparable. Kathleen Collins was, until her death in 1988, 
a mother, a writer, a university professor, and the fi  rst African-American 
woman to direct a feature-length fi lm, Losing Ground.
Womanist Film and the Black Professional
In 1982, Kathleen Collins directed Losing Ground,  in which she dramatized 
a critique of sexism. Here, however, she did not employ the pan-African 
sensibility of Larkin’s fi lm. Sara, her protagonist, is a black professor of phi-
losophy who is married to an insensitive black artist. Perceiving her husband’s 
interest in an attractive, extroverted Puerto Rican woman, the introverted 
RT54118_C009.indd   202RT54118_C009.indd   202 7/8/06   6:47:08 PM7/8/06   6:47:08 PM


--- PAGE 260 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 203
Sara reevaluates her career, marriage, and life. Altering her inhibited beliefs 
about actions appropriate to women professors, Sara takes a role as Johnnie in 
a dramatization of the story in which Johnnie shoots and kills her boyfriend 
Frankie because he has proved unfaithful. At the end of the fi lm, Sara, turning 
the blank pistol away from the man playing Frankie, symbolically points it at 
her own philandering husband. Losing Ground marks the fi rst appearance of 
a black professional woman as protagonist in black independent fi lm, and it is 
one of very few portrayals of developing consciousness in a black professional 
woman in any feature-length fi lm.
It is benefi cial neither to feminism nor to black womanist creativity to col-
lapse the socio-economic diff  erences of race and gender into a generalized 
feminist or women’s fi lm aesthetic of purity. Collins speaks of an “imperfect 
s yn th e s i s ”  o f  th e  Afr i c an - Am e r i c an  c o n di ti o n .  S h e  i s  “ will i n g  t o  r e c o gn i z e  
that being Black is without purity. Th  at one cannot achieve [racial] purity 
in … [American] culture. Th at one can only achieve some kind of emotional 
truth. … Th at’s what characterizes my work. … I am much more concerned 
with how people resolve their inner dilemma in the face of external reality” 
(Nicholson 12). But Collins is quick to affi  rm the cultural diff erences between 
black women fi lmmakers and their white colleagues, and acknowledges that 
such diff erences inform the aesthetic choices of these fi lmmakers:
I would think that there is a Black aesthetic among Black women fi  lm-
makers. Black women are not white women by any means; we have 
diff erent histories, diff erent approaches to life, and diff  erent attitudes. 
Historically, we come out of diff erent traditions; sociologically, our pre-
occupations are diff erent. However, I have a lot of trouble with this ques-
tion because I do not feel that there has been a long enough tradition. 
(Campbell 62)
Granted, the history of black fi lmmaking presents a discontinuous pattern 
of false starts and long production gaps. Yet there are fi lms to document these 
attempts. Th e archaeology of the black woman’s participation is no more than 
a twenty-year eff ort. Nevertheless, black womanist fi  lms have pioneered cre-
ative processes for the reception and production of racialized, sexualized, and 
engendered black subjectivities. Cultural studies and visual research must 
freely consult the sacred (legitimized) discourses on blackness as well as those 
deemed profane in order to make visible the histories of the ignored members 
of the black community, and to permit a dialogue within this community and 
across its imagined boundaries of race, gender, sexuality, class, and nation.
If the dialogic aspects of blackness(es) remain invisible and ignored, then 
we further the fragmentation of black communities. It is time to affi   rm and 
celebrate the sonorous polyphony of black voices. Let us not welcome them 
only to deny their voices and our attention. Why imitate the history that hum-
bled and shamed us?
RT54118_C009.indd   203RT54118_C009.indd   203 7/8/06   6:47:08 PM7/8/06   6:47:08 PM


--- PAGE 261 ---
204 • Th e Womanist Reader
Notes
 1. Mary Ann Doane writes, “It is important to specify precisely what is meant by the ‘female 
spectator’ or ‘female spectatorship.’ Clearly these terms are not meant to refer directly to 
the woman who buys her ticket and enters the movie theater as the member of an audi-
ence, sharing a social identity but retaining a unique psychical history. Frequently, they 
do not even refer to the spectator as a social subject but, rather, as a psychical subject, as 
the eff ect of signifying structures. … Women spectators oscillate or alternate between 
masculine and feminine positions, … and men are capable of this alternation as well” (8).
 2. When referring to phallic forms of knowledge and power within the black community, 
I make reference to discourses which refl ect a “tendency in every form to harden its generic 
skeleton and elevate the existing norms to a model that resists change. … Canonization 
is that process that blurs heteroglossia; that is, that facilitates a naive, single-voiced read-
ing” (Bakhtin 425). Phallic gender or race reasoning refl  ects any socio-psychical attempt 
to disavow the fact that the male (and white) subject, like the female (and black) subject, 
is surrounded by and constructed through discourses which he also incorporates as an 
internal regulatory agency (see Silverman 99).
 3. Taking a diff  erent approach, Laura Mulvey argues that the “male gaze” is an inherent and 
uncontestable property of narrative cinema.
References
Bakhtin, M.M. Th e Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by M.M. Bakhtin . Ed. Michael Holquist. 
Trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: U of Texas P, 1981.
Belsey, Catherine. Critical Practice . New York: Methuen, 1980.
Campbell, Loretta. “Reinventing Our Image: Eleven Black Women Filmmakers.” Heresies 4.4 
(1983): 58–62.
Cliff ord, James. Th e Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature, and 
Art. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1988.
Doane, Mary Ann. Th e Desire to Desire: Th e Woman’s Film of the 1940s . Bloomington: Indiana 
UP. 1987.
Faye, Safi . Personal interview. 26 May 1986.
Hutcheon, Linda. A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Th  eory, Fiction . New York: Routledge, 
1988.
Irele, Abiola. Th e African Experience in Literature and Ideology . London: Heinemann, 1981.
Larkin, Alile Sharon. “Black Women Filmmakers Defi  ning Ourselves: Feminism in Our Own 
Voice.” Ed. E. Deidre Pribram. Female Spectators: Looking at Film and Television . Lon-
don: Verso, 1988. 157–73.
———.  “Your Children Come Back to You and a Diff  erent Image .” Debate “Lutte actuelle des 
noirs américains” (Debate on “Th e Afro-American Contemporary Struggle”), 8eme Fes-
tival du Cinéma des Minorités Nationales (Eighth Festival of National Minority Cinema). 
Douarnenez, France. 28 Aug. 1985.
Mays, Vickie M. “I Hear Voices but See No Faces.” Heresies 3.4 (1981): 74–76.
Mulvey, Laura. “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.” 1975. Visual and Other Pleasures . 
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1989. 14–26.
Nicholson, David. “ A Commitment to Writing: A Conversation with Kathleen Collins Prettyman.” 
Black Film Review  5.1 (1988–89): 6–15.
Pfaff , Francoise. Twenty-Five Black African Filmmakers . New York: Greenwood, 1988.
Silverman, Kaja. Th e Acoustic Mirror: Th e Female Voice in Psychoanalysis and Cinema. Bloomington: 
Indiana UP, 1988.
Spillers, Hortense J. “Interstices: A Small Drama of Words.” Pleasure and Danger: Exploring 
Female Sexuality . Ed. Carole S. Vance. Boston: Routledge, 1984. 73–100.
Vieyra, Paulin Soumanou. Le Cinéma africain: Des origines à 1973 . Paris: Éditions Présence 
Africaine, 1975.
Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens . New York: Harcourt, 1983.
Filmography
Anderson, Madeline. I Am Somebody . USA, 1970. 30 min., 16mm. Documentary on the 1969 
hospital workers’ strike in Charleston, SC.
RT54118_C009.indd   204RT54118_C009.indd   204 7/8/06   6:47:08 PM7/8/06   6:47:08 PM


--- PAGE 262 ---
Th  eater and Film Studies • 205
Collins, Kathleen. Losing Ground . USA, 1982. 86 min., 16mm.
Faye, Safi . La passante (Th e Passerby ). Senegal, 1972. 10 min., 16mm.
Gomez, Sara. De cierta manera (One Way or Another ). Cuba, 1974/1977. 97 min., 16mm. Semi-
documentary depicting post-revolutionary sexism in an individual’s relationship that 
aff ects his lover as well as the men with whom he works; ends with a political analysis of 
the protagonist’s actions.
Larkin, Alile Sharon. A Diff erent Image . USA, 1981. 51 min., 16mm.
Maldoror, Sarah. Des Fusils pour Banta (Guns for Banta). Guinea-Bissau, 1971. 105 min., 35mm. 
Portrays a Guinea-Bissau woman who develops a program of armed resistance against 
the Portuguese but dies before the actual struggle begins. According to Francoise Pfaff  , 
this fi  lm “never went beyond the editing stages” due to a verbal confrontation Maldoror 
had with a high-ranking Algerian offi  cer (207).
Parkerson, Michelle. Storme: Th e Lady of the Jewel Box . USA, 1987. 21 min., 16mm. Archival 
materials used to document the story of Storme DeLarverie, a male impersonator and 
f o rm e r  m as t e r  o f  c e r e m o ni e s  a t  th e  J e w e l  B o x  R evu e ,  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  Am e ri ca ’ s  fi rst 
integrated female impersonation show.
RT54118_C009.indd   205RT54118_C009.indd   205 7/8/06   6:47:09 PM7/8/06   6:47:09 PM


--- PAGE 263 ---
RT54118_C009.indd   206RT54118_C009.indd   206 7/8/06   6:47:09 PM7/8/06   6:47:09 PM


--- PAGE 264 ---
207
10
Communication and Media Studies
A Womanist Looks at the Million Man March (1996)
GENEV A SMITHERMAN
Womanist: referring to an African American woman who is rooted in 
the Black community and committed to the development of herself and 
the entire community.
I saw all that crowd, and I thought, uh-oh, But I never heard so many 
“Scuse me’s” and “Sorry, Brothaman’s” in my life. —Kofi  , my 15-year-
old nephew from Detroit, who attended the March with his father.
Th e Million Man March—and make no mistake about it, at least a million 
Black men were there—on October 16, 1995, in the nation’s capitol, marked 
the culmination of Minister Louis Farrakhan’s “Stop the Killing” lecture 
campaign, which he embarked on several years ago. Controversy surround-
ing Farrakhan notwithstanding, everyone agrees that the condition of Black 
males is at an unprecedented low. Th e indices are undeniable. One in three 
Black males in the age group 20–29 is under the criminal justice system. Th ere 
are 72 Black male homicide victims per 100,000, compared to 9.3 homicides 
per 100,000 for white males. In terms of work, 11.1% of Black males are unem-
ployed, compared to 4.9% of white males. For at least the past seven years, in 
the age group 16–19, the Black male unemployment rate has been over 50%; 
it hit 59.3% in 1993. For those fortunate enough to be holding down a job, 
there is still an inequity in wages: the median salary for Black men is $23,020, 
compared to $31,090 for white men. And in a nation rapidly deindustrializing, 
30.7% of Black males’ jobs are in the category of industrial labor.
For me as the mother of a son, a Womanist, and an educator, the Million 
Man March brought back memories of the King (“Black English”) Federal 
court case: of the eleven children remaining in the case—several had moved 
away—by the time it fi nally came to trial in July of 1979, nine were boys. Th e 
King case involved a group of African American women, all single parents 
 living in a housing project, who had sued the Ann Arbor, Michigan School 
District for failing to provide equal educational opportunities for their 
RT54118_C010.indd   207RT54118_C010.indd   207 7/10/06   6:36:20 PM7/10/06   6:36:20 PM


--- PAGE 265 ---
208 • Th e Womanist Reader
 children. I served as an expert witness and advocate for these Sisters who 
had been frustrated for years as their children, of normal and above average 
intelligence, were labelled “learning disabled,” tracked, and trapped in reme-
dial classes. Th ey were not taught and were not expected to learn. Th  e ruling 
in our favor essentially mandated the School District to educate the children 
and teach them to read, rather than throwing them upon the ash heap of spe-
cial education merely because of their language (and cultural) diff  erences. As 
a much-too-young parent during my son’s elementary schooling, I had almost 
let this same thing happen to him because his school had deemed him “hyper-
active” and in need of medication and special classes. Only the intervention 
of an older Sister that I used to baby-sit for saved him. I remember her words 
well: “Well, I ain’t got no whole lotta education, but ain’t nothing wrong with 
that boy—it just don’t sound right to me.” Compared to Black females, and 
white males and females, Black males are disproportionately placed in special 
education and other kinds of slow track classes in the educational systems of 
this nation. Still today. Yeah, we needed that March—and anything else that 
will highlight what is happening to our boys and our men.
Th ere were two marches, the one in D.C. and the “march” at home. Black 
folk on the homefront used the day to gather in churches, community centers, 
and around television sets and discuss the Black condition, critique the speak-
ers, and debate African American issues. All over African America, block 
clubs, community organizations, and individuals who don’t belong to any 
organization came out to participate in local marches and to hear speeches 
about the crises facing African Americans and ways of addressing these prob-
lems. Any forward thinking Black person had to love it. For that one day we 
were all focused on the same thing. What if we did that all year long, over the 
long haul, on other issues? Th at’s movement.
Yet some Blacks, such as 1960’s activist and writer, Amiri Baraka, took issue 
with the March because it did not include women. Baraka remarked that if he 
were going to war, he wouldn’t leave half the army at home. In fact, only half 
the army has been fi ghting the war over the past two decades! With so many 
Black men dead or injured from street violence, in jail, on drugs, or unem-
ployed, it is Black women who have been raising the children, battling school 
boards for adequate education for Black youth, providing fi  nancial support 
for the Black elderly, sustaining the churches, and doing most of the work in 
the NAACP, the Urban League, PUSH, and other Black institutions. Props to 
Brother Farrakhan for sounding the clarion call to wake up the other half of 
the Black army.
A group of Black women intellectuals, notable among them 1960’s activ-
ist, Angela Davis, called a press conference to denounce the March on the 
grounds of sexism. To be sure, the request for women to remain home may 
h a v e  s e e m e d  t o  r e s o n a t e  w i t h  p a t r i a r c h a l  p r e s c r i p t i o n s  o f  o l d .  H o w e v e r ,  
women were not urged to stay at home for the sake of staying at home. Rather, 
RT54118_C010.indd   208RT54118_C010.indd   208 7/10/06   6:36:21 PM7/10/06   6:36:21 PM


--- PAGE 266 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 209
the charge to women was to use this time to revisit Black issues and Black 
historical traditions. Further, women, and men who would not be journeying 
to D.C., were urged to implement a work stoppage and an economic boycott of 
places of business on the day of the March.
Black women must be wary of the seductive feminist trap. White males hold 
the power in this society, not Black males. (Does it need saying? It seems so 
obvious.) Black males—as well as all members of the UNworking class—are 
victims of the machinations of a capitalist monopoly and a technology-  gone-
wild system which has been set up and continues to be run by white males. To 
launch an attack against the fi rst mass-based, sorely needed, long overdue, pos-
itive eff ort by Black men on the grounds of sexism is to engage in a misguided, 
retrogressive brand of feminism. With the ratio of Black men to women being 
33 to 100, I would think my Sisters are weary of bearing the burden of the 
Black family and the Black struggle alone. Th e fact of the matter is we can’t do 
it alone. Sisters have been climbing up the rough side of the mountain, and, yes, 
we have produced some successes here and there. But the crisis of Black youth 
sharply demonstrates what happens when only half the army is doing battle. 
And unless we do something quick, this will be the plight of the next genera-
tion of African Americans in the 21st century.
Th is is not to argue that Black men don’t display sexist attitudes. Of course. 
Such attitudes are in the very fi ber of American society; they have infected us 
all—including women. However, the practice of patriarchy, the subordination 
of women, and men, requires power, on a grand scale, and control over the 
nation’s institutions. Sorry, but the Brothers ain’t there.
Sadly, many Black intellectual women, like those at the anti-March press 
conference, seem out of touch with mainstream Black women in our com-
munities. Lacking the privileged station of the “D” women (i.e., Ph.D., M.D., 
J.D., etc.), our less fortunate Sisters do not have the luxury of debating the pos-
sible sexism of the Million Man March. Th ey know that their/our men need 
healing, inspiration, uplift  , and a Farrakhanesque talk about responsibility, 
respecting women, caring for children, standing up, and stopping the killing. 
I’m sure these feelings were on the minds of Black Women Behind the March, 
a Los Angeles group organized to raise money to send Brothers to the March. 
According to a report in Newsweek, one Sister said, “I think the March will 
last us a while. I really think the Brothers got the message this time.” Another 
talked about the telephone call from her husband the night of the March: “He 
… began telling me how much he loved me and how much he wanted to make 
what we had work. He hadn’t said that to me in years … I haven’t heard him 
this happy in a long time … I don’t know how long this will last, but I’m going 
to ride it as long as I can.”
About the numbers. 400,000? One million? 670,000? Two million? Minister 
Farrakhan attacked the National Park Service’s count of 400,000 as a racist eff ort 
to write the hundreds of thousands of Black men at the March out of history. He 
RT54118_C010.indd   209RT54118_C010.indd   209 7/10/06   6:36:21 PM7/10/06   6:36:21 PM


--- PAGE 267 ---
210 • Th e Womanist Reader
threatened to sue. A reanalysis of the Park Service’s photographs by Boston Uni-
versity’s Center for Remote Sensing produced an estimate of between 670,000 
and 1.04 million men. A Detroit Free Press headline four days aft er the March 
stated: “New estimate: 870,000.” All of the men I’ve talked to who attended the 
March estimated the attendance fi gure as “easily a million.”
Contrary to Black journalist Carl Rowan’s dismissive comment that this is 
a “stupid debate,” the numbers are crucial because they provide political lead-
ership with a gauge of the people’s will. Th e expression of public opinion, via 
support of a march in the nation’s capital, provides the potential for shaping 
public policy. In the case of African American men, marginalized in so many 
ways, their political will is unknown since many do not vote and few write 
letters to their Congresspersons. But over a million showed up for the March. 
Farrakhan had his hand on something.
I have said little about Minister Louis Farrakhan, the “messenger” as the 
media hyped his role. Th at is because in the fi  nal analysis, the Million Man 
March was not his. Yes, he called it. And yes, given the current leadership 
vacuum, he is the only one a million men would have journeyed to Washing-
ton for.
Quiet as it’s kept, Farrakhan is respected by millions of African Americans, 
on all socio-economic levels, for his courage in standing up to an oppressive 
system and his penchant for calling white folk out. Truly “unbought and 
unbossed,” he oft en says the things that many Blacks feel but don’t have the 
freedom to express. According to a poll reported in Time, 59% of Blacks 
believe Farrakhan is a good role model for Black youth and that he speaks the 
truth. (Since the March, some Black folk have started saying things like: “Now, 
I tell you what the problem is with her son, even though it’s gon hurt, cause I’m 
like Farrakhan, uhma tell the truth.”)
When Farrakhan sent out the call to the Black universe, the March took 
on a life of its own. Men—and yes, women—battlescarred, weary, and hun-
gry for creative answers and new thought vibed with the call. And gradually 
“Farrakhan’s March” became Black people’s March—a defi  ning moment in 
our history calling all Black men to task. In an article in Th e New York Times, 
a Brother from Maryland, speaking from the Update Barber Salon, summed it 
up this way: “Th e March is a line. Th is is where we cut the madness off  .”
Now, a little more than two weeks aft  er the March, one looks for signs of 
the March’s impact. To be sure, in the long run, we have to come to grips with 
the profound economic and structural problems plaguing African Ameri-
cans. Jobs are few and decreasing rapidly, even for those with a four-year 
college degree. Wealth continues to be concentrated in a small white male seg-
ment of the population. And the Republicans’ “Contract with America” only 
increases America’s economic injustices. Th e systemic problems of inequality, 
which hurt African Americans more than any other group, will have to be 
dealt with.
RT54118_C010.indd   210RT54118_C010.indd   210 7/10/06   6:36:22 PM7/10/06   6:36:22 PM


--- PAGE 268 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 211
In the short run, though, the focus has to be on those areas in African 
America that we ourselves can do something about—right now. In his talk at 
the March, Farrakhan outlined an eight-point agenda for Black men which 
incl uded some things that could be put in to place as soon as they returned 
home, such as setting aside their individualism and joining organizations 
working for Black uplift .
Signs of renewed social commitment are emerging. Newsweek described 
Th omas J. Miller of Atlanta who came home, turned over management of his 
company to his wife, and volunteered to work full-time at the Southern Chris-
tian Leadership Conference to help in that organization’ s community work. 
In Los Angeles, former members of the Crips and Bloods, Charles Rachal and 
Leon Gulette, renewed their pledge to work with gangbangers to get them to 
lay down their weapons. (My nephew Kofi  couldn’t believe his eyes when he 
saw rival gang members hugging each other at the March.)
In the city I know best, the “Big D,” as we Detroiters call it, the aft er-eff ects 
of the March are being displayed everywhere. Th e new Big Brothers–Big Sis-
ters mentoring center is now getting daily phone calls from Black men. Associ-
ate Pastor Mangedwa Nyathi, of Detroit’s Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, 
said that for the fi rst time, 150 men attended their recent men’s group, which 
focuses on problems of the elderly and economic development. Th e “East Side 
Chapter-Million Man March” has been es tablished to work on problems of 
blight, crime, and other ills plaguing Detroit’s east side neighborhoods. A 
Detroit Public Schools-based organization has been formed to recruit Black 
male mentors for every Detroit Public School. One hundred fi ft y men, includ-
ing a State Representative and members of the New Marcus Garvey Move-
ment, marched on Detroit’s west side to protest a crack house that has been 
operating there for the past two years.
Th e big pay-off   for my city was the reduced arson rate for the Halloween 
period, a long-standing problem for Detroiters. Th  is year, with over 30,000 
v o l u n t e e r s  ( c o m p a r e d  t o  a b o u t  3 , 0 0 0  i n  1 9 9 4 ) ,  t h e  n u m b e r  o f  fi res for the 
three-day period was 158, compared to 354 last year. While the Mayor (who 
attended and spoke at the March) did signifi cantly more to mobilize the com-
munity this year, credit and praise must be given to the people themselves, 
especially Black men inspired by the March, who turned out in such large 
numbers. One of the fi rst-time volunteers, Brother J.J. Webster, a 42-year-old 
cook who attended the March, put it this way: “… there’s a new spirit of deter-
mination by Black men in the city.”
As a Womanist, I am encouraged by these signs of the Brothers’ involve-
ment in our struggle to be free. In the absence of a movement that would 
provide a space to focus our pain, to analyze it, and devise ways to stop it, 
our men (and a few of my Sisters too) seemed to have resigned themselves to 
powerlessness, given up on the ability to make our communities work, and 
retreated from responsibility to and for Black youth. Th e Million Man March 
RT54118_C010.indd   211RT54118_C010.indd   211 7/10/06   6:36:22 PM7/10/06   6:36:22 PM


--- PAGE 269 ---
212 • Th e Womanist Reader
was a symbolic reminder to Brothers of middle class persuasion not to for-
get the ones they have left  behind. It was an admonition to Brothers of “thug 
life” persuasion to abandon the streets and reclaim their legacy of strength, 
pride and brotherhood. And it was rejuvenation for all of the faithful who 
have stayed on the battlefi eld of the Struggle: the posse is on the way, yall just 
keep on keepin’ on.
RT54118_C010.indd   212RT54118_C010.indd   212 7/10/06   6:36:22 PM7/10/06   6:36:22 PM


--- PAGE 270 ---
213
Assessing Womanist Thought: The Rhetoric 
of Susan L. Taylor (2000)
JANICE D. HAMLET
Rhetoric has always been an instrument for liberation in African American 
thought. Th e power of rhetoric to transform racial consciousness has given 
sustenance and inspiration to African Americans in their darkest hours. 
However, within the parameters of African American rhetoric, there has 
always existed a rich and diverse women’s rhetoric that has traditionally been 
devalued if not ignored. Th rough the sharing of common lived experiences 
and modes of expression, African American women have created ways that 
specifi cally address their realities and ways of knowing while also off  ering an 
antidote of motherwit (common sense) to the nation’s ills.
Th ese modes of expression were not created out of a desire to be creative, 
but out of a deep necessity to survive, due to the fact that both historically 
and contemporaneously, African American women are perceived negatively 
in this country. Stereotypes depicting them as inherently evil, loud, emascu-
lating (toward African American males), unattractive, sexually promiscuous, 
unintelligent, and fi  ercely strong and independent dominate the American 
psyche. Consequently, these stereotypes have served to dehumanize and objec-
tify African American women regardless of their individual professional and 
social status. So successful are these stereotypes that many African American 
women contribute to their own victimization by internalizing the stereotypes, 
which has led to a high rate of depression and suicide among them.
Equally signifi cant, as noted by Deborah K. King in her ground-breaking 
essay, “Multiple Jeopardy, Multiple Consciousness: Th  e Context of a Black 
Feminist Ideology” (1988), the experiences of African American women are 
assumed though never explicitly articulated to be synonymous with either 
African American males or white females. Because the experiences of both 
are equivalent, a discussion of African American women in particular is con-
sidered to be unnecessary. Th is position erroneously takes for granted that 
either there is no diff erence in being African American and female from being 
generically African American or generically female (p. 45). Th e emergence and 
development of a womanist epistemology and methodology presents African 
American women and the scholarship about them as distinct subjects of the 
human family worthy of acknowledgment and study.
Womanist thought is an area of study that combines race, gender, and class 
in critically assessing the historical, cultural, intellectual, socio-political, and 
spiritual consciousness of African American women. Its focus suggests a more 
RT54118_C010.indd   213RT54118_C010.indd   213 7/10/06   6:36:22 PM7/10/06   6:36:22 PM


--- PAGE 271 ---
214 • Th e Womanist Reader
holistic understanding of African American women, their history, culture, 
and lived experiences thereby instilling and/or enhancing a rhetoric of self-
affi  rmation and self-healing. In doing so, womanist thought has provided 
the missing components that have alienated African American women from 
traditional feminist perspectives and respectful inclusion in academia as well 
as society.
Th e term, womanist, fi  rst coined by novelist and poet, Alice Walker, refers 
to a black feminist or feminist of color (Walker, 1983). Womanist scholarship 
positions African American women at the center of their own experiences 
and, in doing so, connects the everyday lives of African American women 
with the intellectual positions held by African American academicians and 
others in the academy. An elaboration of this cultural perspective can be 
found in Patricia Hill Collins’ seminal text, Black Feminist Th ought: Knowl-
edge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment  ( 1990). In this body of 
work, Hill Collins defi nes how the black feminist operates.
Th e black feminist:
•  Refuses to reinforce the social relations of domination. Her work 
is accessible to women from many walks of life while still being 
rigorous and well researched.
•  Does not privilege elites but rather recognizes that everyone has a 
privileged view from their own vantage point.
•  Encourages people to examine their location, share their location, 
and pay attention to other peoples’ locations.
• Places Black women’s experiences and ideas at the center of analysis.
•  Does not try to accommodate the dominant or traditional dis-
course by using its language to fi t in.
• Incorporates the everyday unapologetically.
• Rejects dualism and objectivity in favor of both/and perspectives.
•  Is actively challenging the existing notions of intellect as well as 
traditions of knowledge production and validation.
Th us, the black feminist or womanist challenges the public discourse about 
African American women by presenting themselves as they know themselves 
to be and not as others choose to see them. Th is area of thought and study was 
originated from the premise that despite age, marital status, social status, sex-
ual orientation, regionality, or profession, all African American women share a 
common culture and common experiences. Th is commonality of experiences 
suggests that certain core themes shape African American women’s rhetoric 
and rhetorical behavior. Th ese core themes are: (a) a legacy of struggle against 
racism, sexism, classism and other “isms”; (b) the search for voice as African 
American women battle their invisibility and fi  ght to erase the controlling 
images that continue to denigrate them; (c) the interdependence of thought 
RT54118_C010.indd   214RT54118_C010.indd   214 7/10/06   6:36:22 PM7/10/06   6:36:22 PM


--- PAGE 272 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 215
and action whereby intellectualism and political activism are conjoined; and 
(d) empowerment in the context of everyday life (pp. 19–38).
From these core themes emanating from the history of African American 
women, black feminism/womanism has emerged as the intellectual and social 
voice and vision of an African American women’s consciousness. Th is conscious-
ness grew out of African American women’s need to defi ne their own realities, 
shape their own identities, hear their own voices, and fi nd inner peace.
Th e Rhetoric of Susan L. Taylor
One rhetor whose work has contributed to womanist thought is Susan L. Tay-
lor, communications director and former editor of Essence, the nation’s largest 
lifestyle monthly magazine for African American women. Her most notable 
contribution to womanism is strongly refl ected in her monthly column enti-
tled “In the Spirit.”
Th e purpose of this essay is to illuminate a cultural conceptual framework 
in which to evaluate the rhetoric of African American women by presenting 
Susan L. Taylor as a rhetor who uses the tenets of womanist epistemology and 
methodology as a means of transforming African American women’s race, 
gender and class consciousness. Taylor’s columns are not only informative, but 
also overtly rhetorical, designed to change attitudes and establish a healthier 
agenda among her readers. Taylor’s methodology consists of linking African 
American women’s “ways of knowing” with their quest for empowerment by 
teaching them how to tap into and use their spirituality.
Taylor is an ideal subject for scholarly analysis for several reasons. First, by 
using her work as the data for rhetorical and cultural analysis, I am attempting 
to infl uence and connect two communities simultaneously: the fi  eld of com-
munication by introducing to this scholarly community an important fi gure to 
African American women—both academic and non-academic; the community 
of African American women who read and admire Susan L. Taylor by putting 
a diff erent angle, the academic angle, on her work. In doing so, I am attempting 
to bridge the gap between the academic and the everyday, the very foundation on 
which womanist epistemology originated, thereby forging a connection between 
the two which has ranged from underacknowledged to non-existent.
Taylor is also an ideal subject for scholarly analysis because she represents 
the multiple oppressions indicative of womanist thought or what sociologist 
Rose Brewer refers to as “the polyvocality of multiple social locations” (1994, 
p. 13). Taylor can speak as a poor, single mother, or as a middle-class profes-
sional simultaneously, and therefore to both groups equally well because in 
her own life she has known both experiences and has forgotten neither. Poly-
vocality of voice is an essential feature of most African American women’s 
standpoints and from which they speak simultaneously (i.e., race, gender, 
class, and sometimes sexuality) in their daily experiences.
RT54118_C010.indd   215RT54118_C010.indd   215 7/10/06   6:36:23 PM7/10/06   6:36:23 PM


--- PAGE 273 ---
216 • Th e Womanist Reader
Finally, a study of Taylor’s commentaries challenges the existing focus of 
the male-centered Afrocentric perspective. Her writing off  ers empirical evi-
dence of how a female Afrocentric standpoint might be diff erent from a male 
Afrocentric standpoint because Afrocentric theories have marginalized Afri-
can American women’s history and experiences just as traditional feminist 
theories have done.
In the following discussion, Taylor is presented as a rhetorical fi gure and her 
writings as rhetoric developed within a womanist framework. A brief discussion 
of Essence magazine is provided followed by an analysis of a sample of her col-
umns. Finally, I will explain Taylor’s worldview and purpose as well as her con-
tribution to African American women’s rhetorical and womanist scholarship.
1
Essence Magazine
Essence was born out of the Civil Rights Movement. As African Americans 
were fi ghting for their civil rights, African American women were at the center 
of this monumental upheaval, although their participation was marginalized 
and their voices were silenced. Ironically, Essence was the brainchild of four 
African American men. Although they had no experience in magazine pub-
lishing, they were interested in creating a magazine that would showcase Afri-
can American women’s intellect, beauty, and talent. When Essence debuted in 
1970, many predicted a magazine catering to African American women would 
fail because African American women were positioned at the bottom of the 
socio-political and economic ladder. Moreover, many took for granted that 
African American women did not have an existence and/or agenda apart from 
white women or African American men (Oder, 1995, p. 26).
Most women’s magazines (e.g., Ms., McCall’s,  and Cosmopolitan) have 
space devoted to the voice of the extant editor. Th ese editorial comments usu-
ally address current events, recent issues relevant to women, or a comment 
celebrating the specifi c month and/or season. Taylor’s “In the Spirit” column, 
h o w ev er , serv es a m o r e signifi can t p urpose than m er ely to off er an editorial 
comment. Unlike most columns from editors, which are found in the front of 
the magazine, Taylor’s columns have always been prominently positioned in 
the middle of Essence. Th is position is signifi cant because the spirituality com-
ponent that the column off ers to the magazine aligns itself with other columns, 
articles, essays and sometimes short stories focusing on such diverse topics as 
relationships, workplace politics, health and beauty care, economics, and edu-
cation. In doing so, the magazine communicates that our lives exist on several 
planes: the physical, the emotional, the intellectual and the spiritual and all of 
these planes need to be nurtured. As we begin to improve ourselves, we must 
be aware of these planes and keep them in balance. Th is spiritual component is 
so signifi cant that even though a new editor now heads the magazine with her 
own column called “Within,” Taylor’s “In the Spirit’’ column continues to be 
featured in Essence and remains within the body of the magazine.
RT54118_C010.indd   216RT54118_C010.indd   216 7/10/06   6:36:23 PM7/10/06   6:36:23 PM


--- PAGE 274 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 217
With the fi rst issue, however, Essence became a lifeline for African Ameri-
can women showcasing their existence. Th e founders had originally planned 
to call the magazine Sapphire. Although the word means “a precious jewel,” 
it was rejected by African American women because it was also the name of a 
stereotypical bossy and emasculating African American female character on 
the early sitcom, “Amos ’n Andy.” Th e name Essence was suggested by Ruth 
Ross, the magazine’s fi rst editor and was enthusiastically received (Lewis, 1990, 
p. 20). Although the magazine started out as a conventional fashion magazine, 
diff erent editors gradually shift ed the focus of the magazine from fashion to 
social conscience issues such as single parenting, sexual harassment, health 
issues, employment skills and issues, racism, sexism and classism (Wolseley, 
1990). Later years would include issues related to lesbianism and biraciality.
Susan L. Taylor, a former fashion and beauty editor with the magazine, 
assumed the position of editor in 1981, giving a spiritual dimension to the 
magazine. When she took over the magazine, she informed readers:
I want Essence to give readers a clear vision of themselves and their 
world. I want to help my sisters realize all their opportunities for self-
actualization. Now more than ever Essence must be a source for black 
women, a handbook that inspires and informs us. (Taylor, 1990, p. 263)
Taylor’s “In the Spirit” column made its debut in May 1981. Th is monthly col-
umn focused on self-actualization and personal growth and urged readers to 
take control of their lives.
In the succeeding two decades, Taylor’s columns provided inspiration for 
many of Essence’s 7.2 million readers of which over fi  ft y percent are African 
American women. Although twenty-seven percent of Essence’s subscribers are 
African American males and an additional twenty percent are white women, 
Essence focuses unapologetically on African American women (Essence 
Communications, 2000). So popular are the “In the Spirit” columns, that col-
lections of them have been published in two volumes, In the Spirit (1993) and 
Lessons in Living  (1995), both selling over 350,000 copies each (Janis, 1995). 
Th ese columns and books have been instrumental in making Taylor a national 
motivational speaker on college campuses and African American women’s 
conferences across the nation.
Methodology
Taylor published 228 columns from July 1981 to July 2000 (although the col-
umns debuted in May of 1981, I chose to begin with July, thereby selecting the 
last six columns of that fi rst year). In addition to these six columns, I selected 
six columns from the succeeding years. My method of selection was as fol-
lows: beginning with the six columns in 1981 (July–December), I selected the 
January through June columns for 1982; the July through December columns 
for 1983 and so on in this rotating pattern of either the fi  rst six columns or 
RT54118_C010.indd   217RT54118_C010.indd   217 7/10/06   6:36:23 PM7/10/06   6:36:23 PM


--- PAGE 275 ---
218 • Th e Womanist Reader
the second six columns of each year from 1981 to 2000. Th is selection process 
resulted in 120 columns for critical analysis.
Th ese columns advocated African American women’s race, gender, and 
social consciousness and revolved around seven interrelated themes. Th  e 
themes were identifi ed by using a methodological approach known as cluster 
analysis (Burke, 1961; Berthold, 1976). Cluster analysis is a tool that helps the 
critic discover a rhetor’s worldview. Th e meanings that key terms have for the 
rhetor are discovered by charting the symbols that cluster around those key 
terms in the rhetorical artifact. Signifi  cance of terms is determined on the 
basis of frequency and intensity.
2
Oft en the terms selected as key terms are considered “god” and “devil” 
terms. “God” terms represent the rhetor’s view of what is best or perfect. “Devil” 
terms represent what the rhetor perceives as negative or evil (Burke, 1945).
To discover the meanings a rhetor has for key terms and what those mean-
ings suggest about the worldview of the rhetor, the critic using cluster analy-
sis goes through four steps: (1) identifi  cation of key terms or symbols in the 
rhetorical artifact; (2) charting of terms that cluster around the key terms; (3) 
discovery of patterns in the clusters around the key term to determine the 
meaning of the key terms; and (4) meaning of the rhetor’s worldview on the 
basis of the meanings of the terms (Foss, 1989, p. 368).
Although cluster analysis was used to identify the themes in the columns, 
an analysis of the messages categorized under each theme was done using 
the components of womanist epistemology. Epistemology refers to the study 
of the philosophical problems in concepts of knowledge and truth. However, 
a womanist epistemology violates traditional epistemological thought and 
assumptions in the social sciences by incorporating specialized knowledge and 
experiences of African American women that are used as criteria for meaning, 
thereby challenging the knowledge validation system. Womanist epistemol-
ogy combines Afrocentric and feminist consciousness with the uniqueness of 
African American female history, culture, and experiences. Th is epistemology 
consists of (a) the use of concrete experience as a criterion for meaning, render-
ing knowledge as subjective and relying on the wisdom of African American 
women; (b) the use of humanizing dialogue that is rooted in the oral tradition of 
the African American culture and recognizes the connectedness as a primary 
characteristic of women’s ways of knowing; (c) an ethic of caring that empha-
sizes individual uniqueness, personal expressiveness, emotion and empathy; 
(d) an ethic of personal accountability, whereby African American women 
assume full responsibility for the positions they take (Hill Collins, 1990).
Signifi cantly inclusive in this Afrocentric/feminist worldview is the notion 
of an “optimal conceptual system” (Myers, 1988). An optimal conceptual sys-
tem assumes that the way a person views the world is so important because 
it ultimately determines our experience and history. All people view the 
world based upon their own particular belief systems. Th e conceptual system 
RT54118_C010.indd   218RT54118_C010.indd   218 7/10/06   6:36:23 PM7/10/06   6:36:23 PM


--- PAGE 276 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 219
to which a person subscribes, determines the way that individual perceives, 
thinks, feels, and experiences the world. A deeper appreciation of one’s own 
culture and respect for other cultures is a result of optimal psychology. Racism 
and anger are the result of sub-optimal systems (p. 12).
Th is Afrocentric ideal, based on feminist principles, is described as “opti-
mal” because it is structured toward the achievement of everlasting peace and 
happiness. Th e role of consciousness is primary. Consciousness is identifying 
that permeating essence or pervasive energy known as spirit. Th  e role and 
importance of consciousness in African thought is evident in concepts such as 
Mdw Ntr (divine speech) and Nommo (power of the spoken word) (p. 12).
Th e role of power is also signifi  cant in the optimal conceptual system. 
Power is the ability to defi ne reality. All of us have the same amount of power. 
What diff erentiates us, notes Myers, is that some of us give up our power more 
readily to the defi  nition of others and our own fear arising from sub-opti-
mal reasoning. In the process of people of African descent rediscovering their 
heritage, this way of viewing life in total is recaptured, and is consequently 
termed Afrocentric (pp. 12–13).
Within this cultural framework, Taylor’s “In the Spirit” columns about 
life—how to survive it, embrace it, and rejoice in it—off  er African American 
women an agenda on how to achieve the power to defi  ne themselves and to 
transform their realities, thus reducing some of the complexities in their lives. 
And, in the process, they may begin see an old world in a new way. Taylor is 
eff ective in articulating these messages to her audience because she speaks as 
one of them. What then does Susan L. Taylor have to say to African American 
women about combating the negative stereotypes and other complexities they 
confront in their daily lives?
Th e Th emes
Following is a womanist analysis of the seven interrelated themes identifi ed in 
Taylor’s columns: (1) spirit power; (2) harmony and balance; (3) self-affi  rma-
tion; (4) cultural history and ancestral reverence; (5) love; (6) collective power; 
and (7) self-destruction.
Spirit Power
Being in tune with the Creator and maintaining a spiritual connection domi-
nate T a ylor’ s writings ha ving been iden tifi ed in 50 of her col umns. Spirit is 
the life force of every living element in the universe; the life essence that is 
covered and protected by the skeletal frame and fl  esh we call the body. Spirit 
is the energy of the Creator manifesting itself in many forms. According to 
 Afrocentric thought, there exists the notion that there is an all-pervasive 
energy that is the source, the sustainer, and the essence of all phenomena. 
In this regard, everything becomes one thing, spirit manifesting. When an 
individual adheres to the spiritual/material ontology, that person loses the 
RT54118_C010.indd   219RT54118_C010.indd   219 7/10/06   6:36:24 PM7/10/06   6:36:24 PM


--- PAGE 277 ---
220 • Th e Womanist Reader
sense of individualized ego/mind and experiences the harmony of the col-
lective identity of being one with the source of all good. Consubstantiation, 
the whole being in each of its parts, is assumed (Frye, 1979). Based on this 
African belief of being one with the spirit, Taylor advises African American 
women to tap into and feed their spiritual selves on a daily basis. Th  is, she 
argues, is the key to survival and achievement. Here are a few typical state-
ments from her columns:
Th ere is something within us, God power, that has the answer to every 
human crisis, that is stronger and more potent than any external force 
or worry we could ever experience. Each of us is gift ed with that creative 
spirit. It’s always waiting to serve us and help us make the most of our lives. 
We need only to recognize it and reach for it. (Essence, March 1983)
If I have a gripe it’s that I wasn’t taught about inner power in my 
youth. Aft er eight years of religious school training and going to church 
seven times a week I came to adulthood with a limited view of myself, 
ignorant of my inner power. But one of the most wonderful things about 
livin g  this  lif e  is  tha t  n o  ma tter  h o w  o ff  track we may seem at times, 
we can get on course whenever we decide to use our superintelligence. 
(Essence, April 1984)
Each  o f  us  has  th e  inn er  po w er  t o  make  wha t  w e  will  o f  o ur  liv es.  
We can make our own miracles. Our challenge is to not let other peo-
ple’s negative ideas and the unreal standards that are inculcated in us 
through media confuse us about ourselves and one another. ( Essence, 
April 1984)
According to Taylor, the thing that unites African American women is shar-
ing the same spiritual base, homes that relate to the power of God. However, 
while the grandmother might believe in God in the traditional sense, younger 
women might see God as a force or energy. Th erefore, in addition to using the 
words, “God” and “Spirit,” words and phrases like “energy,” “consciousness,” 
“mind,” “the creative force,” “divine assurance,” “presence,” “divine order,” 
and “spiritual communion” cluster around the identifi  cation of spirit power. 
Th ese substitutions do not change the meaning of spirituality in Afrocentric 
thought; they enhance it. Also, an Afrocentric feminist perspective deems it 
important to note how spirit manifests. Human behavior is spirit made evi-
dent and readily perceived by the senses. Th rough their behavior, people are 
revealing to you what is in their consciousness, what thoughts and emotions 
are in it, and how they interact within their conceptual framework. All speech 
and actions become telling from this perspective. Th  erefore, it is important 
that African American women exercise control over their thoughts because 
words have power. Th ey label experience and therefore give thoughts form 
(Myers, 1988, p. 41).
RT54118_C010.indd   220RT54118_C010.indd   220 7/10/06   6:36:24 PM7/10/06   6:36:24 PM


--- PAGE 278 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 221
Th rough the use of self-affi   rming language, which communicates a “can-
do spirit,” Taylor teaches African American women how to rely on their own 
power, the power of their deep-seated and cosmic spirituality and the power 
that comes from the ultimate unshakable inner knowledge of their own value 
and talent.
Awakening to our spirituality requires that we regularly create quiet 
spaces in our lives to listen to our own sacred voice—our intuition—and 
that we trust and practice acting from our inner wisdom in our daily 
lives. (Essence, August 1994)
Harmony and Balance   
Staying centered or seeking a balanced life is a major component of Afro-
centric thought. Th e terms “focused,” “in tune,” “stability,” “equilibrium,” 
and “centered” used in her columns also relate to this key theme. Th  e theme 
appeared in 30 of the columns.
I n  A f r o c e n t r i c  t h o u g h t ,  e v e r y t h i n g  i s  f u n c t i o n a l l y  c o n n e c t e d .  W e  a r e  
one with nature. To destroy one category of our existence would cause the 
destruction of our total existence. As in the traditional African cultural real-
ity, there is no formal distinction between the sacred and the secular, religious 
and nonreligious, spiritual and material areas of life. Th  erefore, Afrocentric 
thought constitutes looking at the whole rather than specifi  cs within the 
whole (Asante, 1980). Balance comes in the realization that one’s self-analysis 
is guided by an infi nite wisdom accessed by letting go of one’s sense of separ-
ateness, and subsequent individual ego and personality needed to control and 
compete with nature and the infi nite (Myers, p. 33).
T aylor builds on this Afrocentric thinking when she encourages African 
Am e ri can  w o m e n  t o  m ak e  a  c o mmi tm e n t  t o  tak e  car e  o f  th e m se l v es  s p iri -
tually, physically, psychologically, intellectually, and morally. Th us, when we 
feed the spirit, the mind and body respond in kind. Th  is notion is related to 
the Judeo-Christian teachings that proclaims “all things work together for 
those who love the Lord” (Rom. 8:28).
In one column Taylor advises:
We are a part of nature, governed by its laws. To feel in tune, to function 
in divine order, we must have balance. … For lasting success we must 
understand and develop every aspect of our multifaceted selves. We must 
be in touch with and nurture our wholeness. (Essence, April 1986)
A positive mind-set doesn’t change things; it changes you. It changes 
the energy fi eld surrounding you. It brightens your aura, makes you 
stronger, clearer, healthier. Yes, it’s simple. And it’s true. I’m a witness. 
When you’re focused on that which is good in your life, you think good 
thoughts, speak high, loving words. And this fi  lls your heart and mind 
with love and hope, which opens the way. (Essence, September 1990)
RT54118_C010.indd   221RT54118_C010.indd   221 7/10/06   6:36:24 PM7/10/06   6:36:24 PM


--- PAGE 279 ---
222 • Th e Womanist Reader
Taylor suggests that self-empowerment begins with being healthy and feeling 
strong. Achieving harmony and a balanced life is the most politically impor-
tant work African American women can do for themselves.
Everything in nature is in harmonious balance. God has wisely given us 
mountains for our valleys, summers for our winters, days and nights, 
work and rest, and music in which silences are as vital to the song as the 
notes that are sung. Life breathes, and in quietly breathing in and out 
we fi nd the rhythms by which life itself creates and maintains balance. 
Create a new way of living that has your total well-being at its center. 
Eliminate anything that is not nourishing, nurturing or life-sustain-
ing. Don’t wait until mental and physical exhaustion force you to make 
changes. Take steps to begin and see how quickly the universe sends 
forth encouragement for your eff orts. (Essence, January 1999)
Consequently, Taylor argues, if we would take time to explore our interior 
world and listen to our inner voice, we would master ourselves and our lives. 
Th en we would not feel overwhelmed or out of harmony. By heeding our inner 
voice we affi  rm our self-worth.
Self-Afﬁ  rmation
From a spiritual perspective, we can create our reality through speech. Afri-
cans refer to it as “Afose,” the power to bring about occurrence through the 
power of speech. Th e process is called “affi  rmation” and it requires that we use 
our thoughts and emotions to create what we want and then speak the words 
which will then manifest as reality. Everything we say—positive or negative—
is an affi  rmation. Th e universe does not censor what we say, it simply creates it 
(Vanzant, 1992, p. 62). By one’s statement of affi  rmation, the person is plant-
ing a powerful suggestion in her mind. Affi   rmation is the foundation from 
which mutual respect with others can be established and maintained.
In response to the assigned status of African American women given by 
mainstream society, Taylor advises African American women to affi  rm their 
individual intelligence, beauty, and inner strength by defying the stereotypes 
and myths that have been attached to them.
We all need affi  rm a ti o n .  W e  n e e d  t o  f e e l  v al u e d  an d  a p p r e c i a t e d  in  
order to keep on with gusto. We may be too busy to give one another 
regular encouragement, but it’s crucial to our feelings of self-worth 
that we encourage and refl  ect on the wonder of our lives. Affi   rm that 
you have the power to control your life and to live in harmony with 
yourself and those around you. Affi   rm that any discordant thoughts 
and feelings keeping you from realizing your best self are dissolved. 
Affi  rm that each day you will take time to get still, to step out of the 
world and into yourself, to stay in touch with who you are, what you’re 
RT54118_C010.indd   222RT54118_C010.indd   222 7/10/06   6:36:25 PM7/10/06   6:36:25 PM


--- PAGE 280 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 223
feeling and to celebrate yourself for coming this far. ( Essence,  May 
1987)
We must make the words “I love you, I celebrate you” our Mantra, a 
daily affi  rmation. If we Black women don’t celebrate our own successes, 
if we don’t give ourselves and one another our due, who will? ( Essence, 
March 1989)
Afrocentric psychology (Myers, p. 14) informs us that it is the sub-optimal 
worldview that is faulty because it socializes its adherents to follow a system 
that, by its nature, can never work. Self-worth, that basic sense of security, 
peace, and value that all human beings seek, can never be achieved through 
the external, which by its very nature is temporary. Th  e only thing that can 
happen is that you get some, you want more, you get more, you want more 
and more, and so on. Consequently, the sense of inadequacy, anxiety, depres-
sion, guilt, resentment, and hostility that builds up within can only be turned 
outward. When you feel good about yourself, you feel good about others, the 
reverse is true as well. Nothing can come out of you that is not fi  rst in you. 
Related terms she oft en uses to advocate self-affi  rmation are “acknowledge,” 
“declare,” “vow,” “praise,” “commemoration,” “glorify,” “honor,” and “rejoice.” 
Th e theme was identifi  ed in 30 of the columns.
Cultural History and Ancestral Reverence
In Afrocentric thought, each person is a product of her (or his) individual 
history, but they are all standing on the shoulders of their ancestors. Ancestry 
is the sum of the accumulated wisdom of the race, it manifesting itself in the 
living. In the Afrocentric worldview, the center of the African’s morality was 
the life process and the sacredness of those who brought them into existence. 
Africans’ relationship to the future was determined by their relationship to 
the young. Th eir relationship to the past was determined by their relationship 
to their parents. Th e maintenance of this continuity from generation to gener-
ation was justifi cation for their being and the basis on which they determined 
proper behavior (Stuckey, 1987, p. 41).
Taylor’s columns reinforce this belief through her discussion of African 
American history and ancestral reverence and an allegiance to the African/
African American past.
Th ink about our ancestors who were cargoed to this alien land. It was 
faith that sustained them. Have we become too sophisticated to believe? 
Faith played a big part in all our grandmothers’ lives—that should tell 
us something. Th ey were strong women, sensitive and sensible. Th  ey 
took us higher. Truth gave them the inner security to know they could 
overcome all the forces arrayed against them even when they couldn’t 
see the light. (Essence, July 1981)
RT54118_C010.indd   223RT54118_C010.indd   223 7/10/06   6:36:25 PM7/10/06   6:36:25 PM


--- PAGE 281 ---
224 • Th e Womanist Reader
Assessing that African Americans have been taught European history for so 
long that they’ve forgotten their own, Taylor continually reminds readers that 
if a people are unaware of their history, then their personal and collective 
experiences and challenges will overwhelm them. African American history 
gives African Americans perspective and strength. If African Americans tap 
into their history they will discover that the survival of African American 
people in the Western Hemisphere is a great story of the triumph of the spirit 
and the will to survive. Th is success can serve as a motivator to African Amer-
icans in facing daily challenges. Taylor professes:
We also have a historical power we can draw from for inspiration and 
direction. Ours is a potent legacy that has gathered strength from gener-
ations of black women who’ve overcome greater obstacles than we’ll ever 
face. We see our lives in clearer perspective, too, when we acknowledge 
the struggles and triumphs of our mothers and grandmothers. We are 
the most blessed generation of black women ever, and we must affi   rm 
that our lives are precious and worth preserving. When we’re tired and 
burned out, we lose sight of who we are, of our magnifi  cence and the 
incredible contributions we make to this world. ( Essence, May 1987)
Th rough the use of this key theme, Taylor teaches that even though most 
p eo p l e  use  p o li ti cal ,  ec o n o mi c  an d  so ci al  s ta tus  as  m o ti v es  t o  h e l p  m an ag e  
the confl icts in their lives, African American women should also use their 
cultural history as instruments of inspiration and empowerment.
Our foreparents’ endurance must awaken in us renewed courage and 
determination. It must make us surrender any untruths we hold about 
ourselves, about weaknesses or incompleteness. It must dash those fears 
and doubts that limit our thinking and performance and ensure that we 
never underbid or devalue ourselves. We must hold fast to our history, 
feel empowered by it. (Essence, February 1992)
Other words like “culture,” “past,” “history,” “the elders,” “motherland,” “fore-
parents” are related terms Taylor uses to communicate this theme which was 
discovered in 34 of the columns.
Love
Love in its various forms is stressed throughout the history of Taylor’s col-
umns, beginning with self-love. Before one can genuinely love others, one 
must fi rst learn to lo v e o neself. On ce self - lo v e is established, then an d o nly 
then, writes Taylor, can we begin to love others.
When you allow love to express itself through all facets of your being, 
your life isn’t so much of a struggle. You are living on higher ground. 
Love is like a magnet; it attracts the best of everything. Looking to a 
RT54118_C010.indd   224RT54118_C010.indd   224 7/10/06   6:36:25 PM7/10/06   6:36:25 PM


--- PAGE 282 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 225
relationship for love is like looking outside yourself for a lifeline. It’s 
also putting the cart before the horse. Th e simple truth is that until you 
discover love within yourself you can’t recognize it or appreciate it in 
anyone else. Without loving feelings swelling up inside, we confuse love 
with good sex, good looks and money in the bank. Trying to fi nd love is 
a fruitless quest. First we must let love fl ow from our inexhaustible sup-
ply within. (Essence, February 1984)
We don’t have to settle for the confusion, anxiety and turmoil that 
have become the collective consciousness of humanity. Because love is 
our source and the substance of who we are, and because loving is the 
very purpose of our existence, our capacity to love is never lost. We can 
return to love at any moment. We only need to recognize the Holy Pres-
ence everywhere we are—as the night sky, each blade of grass, our own 
heartbeat, love enfolds you simply because you live and breathe. You can 
enter the kingdom of love and begin healing your life just by choosing to 
turn the key that is your mind. ( Essence, August 1993)
In celebrating love for others, Taylor advocates:
Together, we also have the ability and the responsibility to develop a 
collective consciousness to take care of one another and this good earth 
too. (Essence, July 1984)
Each of us is at a diff  erent point in self-awareness and understanding 
of life. We must try to love one another as God loves us, with a Divine 
love. God’s love is unchanging, not arbitrary, or conditional. It supports 
us whether we are right or wrong, whether we behave lovingly or badly. 
(Essence, February 1992)
Taylor’s messages about love inform us that with or without a relationship, 
love exists in us. Relationships merely provide opportunities to express it. 
Words such as “aff ection,” “passion,” “emotion,” “charity,” “joy,” “adoration,” 
and “friendship” are also related terms Taylor regularly uses. Th  e theme of 
love was noted in 30 of the columns.
Collective Power
Another principle of Afrocentric thought is the survival of the group. Th  e 
individual cannot and does not exist alone, but owes her/his very existence 
to other members of the group or community, including ancestors and those 
yet unborn. Th e essence of this principle is best summarized by the African 
adage: “I am because we are, and because we are therefore I am” (Mbiti, 1970). 
“I” is the individual and the infi  ni t e  wh o l e.  “W e ”  r ep r ese n ts  th e  in di vi d ual  
and collective manifestation of all that is “Self” and includes all ancestors, the 
unborn, the entire community, and all of nature (Myers, 1988, p. 13).
RT54118_C010.indd   225RT54118_C010.indd   225 7/10/06   6:36:25 PM7/10/06   6:36:25 PM


--- PAGE 283 ---
226 • Th e Womanist Reader
Taylor communicates this principle by fi rst focusing on the individual, the 
notion of African American women identifying themselves for themselves, 
t aki n g  c a r e  o f  th e m s e l v e s — p h y s i c all y ,  m e n t all y  a n d  s p i r i t u all y ,  a n d  t aki n g  
care of one another. A strong healthy individual contributes to the making 
and continuity of a strong healthy community. Individually, African Ameri-
can women have long displayed varying types of consciousness regarding 
their shared angle of vision. But by aggregating and articulating these individ-
ual expressions of consciousness, a focused collective consciousness becomes 
possible.
African American women’s ability to forge these individual unarticulated, 
yet potentially powerful expressions of everyday consciousness into an articu-
lated self-defi ned, collective standpoint is the key to African American wom-
en’s survival (Hill Collins, 1990, p. 26). Knowledge is gained not by solitary 
individuals but by African American women as socially constituted members 
of a group (Narayan, 1989). Taylor advocates collective power and support 
among African American women.
O ur  c o m b in e d  p o w e r  i s  gr e a t e r  th an  o ur  in di vi d u al  p o w e r .  W e  dr a w  
strength from the triumphs of other women. ( Essence, May 1987)
Africans on both sides of the Atlantic need to embrace the truth and 
be made whole by it. It’s an ancient political strategy to divide those 
you wish to conquer; to fi ght among ourselves is to give up our power. 
Instead we must be one another’s eyes and ears and voices. We must lift  
one another up, protect one another, show love and compassion for one 
another. Otherwise we probably won’t survive. ( Essence, May 1989)
Today, a thirst for spiritual communion is pushing Black women to meet 
at the well. We may call it our book club, sister circle, study group or just 
hanging with the girls, but these sisterhood gatherings are the spaces 
we claim to speak the truth about our lives and drink the life-giving 
water. However we regularly gather—in small intimate groups or large 
councils, in coalitions or sororities—we are called to have on our agenda 
a project that benefi ts our people. (Essence, May 1999)
Acknowledging that in many instances African Americans are their own worst 
enemies, Taylor teaches that they must celebrate each other’s victories as well 
as encourage one another. Most importantly, they must not allow jealously or 
envy to interfere with individual and collective progress. Th e message is sim-
ple: for African American women, unity is not only a strength but a necessity.
Th e theme of collective power is not only refl  e ct e d  in  w h a t  T a yl o r  c o m -
municates but also in how she communicates. Th  e collective pronoun “we” 
dominates her writing. It is important to note that when the rhetor, regardless 
of her educational or socio-economic status, is a member of the same gender 
or racial group that she is addressing, the voice is a familiar one symbolized 
RT54118_C010.indd   226RT54118_C010.indd   226 7/10/06   6:36:26 PM7/10/06   6:36:26 PM


--- PAGE 284 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 227
through the use of the collective pronouns “we,” “our,” “us,” “unity, “ and “my 
sisters.” Advocating collective power was identifi ed in 25 of the columns.
Self-Destruction
Finally, self-destruction is an important “devil” term signifi  cant in Taylor’s 
writing, appearing in 20 of her columns. Taylor reminds African American 
women of the things that they have allowed to get in the way of obtaining suc-
cess, happiness, and inner peace: anger, bitterness, self-doubt, self-pity, hold-
ing on to the past, fear, and so on. However, Taylor reinforces how one can 
proceed to eliminate these feelings. She argues that when a person is centered 
in her wholeness and oneness with her spiritual center, these feelings don’t 
knock you out. Th ere are no physical, mental or fi  nancial diffi  culties that can 
overtake you. One can possess the spiritual armor to be empowered or to be 
destroyed.
Stress is cumulative. If we don’t take time to examine our feelings and 
to regenerate, we’re bound to end up with the warning signs of illness—
insomnia and anxiety, migraines, depression and more. Stress weakens 
the defense making the body vulnerable to illness. Ultimately, stress 
destroys. (Essence, April 1985)
It’s rare that we go from feeling great to feeling out of sorts overnight. 
Depression usually works its way into our lives gradually, as we accept 
self-limiting thoughts of doubt and fear. But we do have a defense against 
the gravity of negative ideas that threaten to drag us into a downward 
spiral. (Essence, October 1986)
In this society we fi  nd it easy to use self-destructive methods to anes-
thetize ourselves. We turn to drugs, alcohol, food—anything that seems 
to soothe the tempest within. But we can’t slay our fears by avoiding 
them or denying them or sedating ourselves. To overcome fears we must 
admit to them. Being truthful with ourselves is the fi rst step toward per-
sonal freedom. (Essence, April 1988)
Words such as “chaos,” “confusion,” “disempowering,” “war,” “hurt,” “failure,” 
“disappoint,” “defeat,” “depression,” “fearful,” “untrusting,” “destroy,” “self-doubt,” 
“self-pity,” “anger,” “greed,” “racism,” “sexism,” “sin,” “evil,” “homophobia,” “vio-
lence,” and “rejecting one’s culture” are related devil terms that Taylor uses.
Taylor’s Worldview
Worldview refers to how we make sense of the nature of the universe, and 
the eff ects of the operation of the universe on our social environment (Dodd, 
1982). Th e Afrocentric worldview is rooted in the historical, cultural, and 
philosophical tradition of African people. Th is worldview interprets African 
American behaviors and psychological functioning from the perspectives of 
RT54118_C010.indd   227RT54118_C010.indd   227 7/10/06   6:36:26 PM7/10/06   6:36:26 PM


--- PAGE 285 ---
228 • Th e Womanist Reader
a value system, which prioritizes the affi  rmation of African American life. It 
is defi ned by two guiding principles: “a oneness with nature” and “survival of 
the group” (Baldwin, 1980; Mbiti, 1970; Nobles, 1980).
Th e principle of “oneness with nature” asserts that all elements in the uni-
verse are interconnected. Th e principle of “survival of the group” as noted 
earlier, prioritizes the survival of the community, which includes self, ances-
tors, all people of African descent. Th  is Afrocentric perspective encourages 
the interaction between the individual and the group. Africans believed that 
the community made, created, or produced the individual. Th  us, unless the 
individual was corporate or communal, she or he did not exist (Nobles, 1972, 
p. 29). Cultural values consistent with these basic principles of the Afrocen-
tric worldview are interdependence, cooperation, unity, mutual responsibility, 
and reconciliation (Dixon, 1976; Nobles, 1972). All worldviews are accessible 
through an individual’s consciousness.
Taylor’s worldview embraces this Afrocentric consciousness, but she also 
embraces the oft en overlooked feminist consciousness in Afrocentric thought. 
Taylor’s worldview can be described as an optimal womanist epistemology, rooted 
in an Afrocentric worldview and a feminist consciousness. It is optimal because 
it is structured to yield maximally positive experiences in a holistic way.
Implicit in Taylor’s worldview is the interdependence of the individual and 
the community. Th e individual is empowered through spirituality, self-affi   r-
mation, love, achieving harmony, and balance, and by not allowing jealousy, 
stress, and anger to lead to self-destruction. An empowered individual has 
the potential to contribute to an empowered community strengthened by its 
cultural history, ancestral reverence and collective power.
Even a cursory examination of African American life and culture informs 
us that African American women are the center of the African American 
community; the keepers of the culture, the healers of the community. Taylor, 
however, teaches that African American women cannot be eff  ective centers 
of the community if they are not centered themselves. When a community 
loses its center, things fall apart. Th  erefore, African American women have 
to become serious about establishing their own agendas, affi   rming and cele-
brating themselves and each other. Th ey must also build bridges with African 
American males, establishing and maintaining healthy supportive relation-
ships while maintaining their own identity and voice.
Dominant in Taylor’s worldview is the distinction of spirituality as being 
separate but interdependent from religion. African Americans have long been 
regarded as a religious people. But Taylor focuses on spirituality as a separate 
entity, an experience that has more to do with receiving inner power than an 
outward display of emotion and ritual. A major argument consistent in all of 
her columns is the belief that “divinity is within.” We are socialized to think 
that spiritual power is outside of us in churches, synagogues and mosques, 
etc. But Taylor teaches, through her columns, that understanding our power 
RT54118_C010.indd   228RT54118_C010.indd   228 7/10/06   6:36:26 PM7/10/06   6:36:26 PM


--- PAGE 286 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 229
begins with understanding the spirit within us. When we allow our spiritu-
ality to take charge, w e affi  rm ourselves and others. Th us, Taylor advocates 
internal power leading to outward manifestations of the divinity within us.
Th e columns take a “hey girl” approach with readers, off  ering a sister-
to-sister dialogue about African American women taking responsibility for 
everything that happens in their space and being wise enough to learn from 
their pain. “We journey for a purpose: to discover our divinity and to use 
its power. Th is is the simple truth we were born to discover,” notes Taylor 
(Manning, 1995). Th is affi  rmation is the dominant thread that connects all 
of the themes discovered in Taylor’s columns.
Taylor began calling her monthly columns “In the Spirit” because they 
were a refl ection of her own spiritual journey. Th ey also express other African 
American women’s realities as well as their spiritual, physical, intellectual, 
and artistic potential within the dominant culture with race and gendered-
centered analysis.
Taylor’s columns are designed to communicate to African American women 
a sense of consciousness and culture. Th e columns are also a metaphor of the 
struggle of African American women to attain a dignifi  ed and self-conscious 
womanhood. As a result, Taylor articulates a set of values African American 
women need to adopt in order to become healthier functioning members of 
American society rather than to be destroyed by it.
Conclusion
Susan L. Taylor’s “In the Spirit” columns articulate a rhetoric of womanist 
thought. Grounded in Afrocentric philosophy and feminism, the columns 
conjoin spirituality and intellect, appreciate subjectivity, reject duality, and 
advocate multiplicity of voice and social locations. But most importantly, 
the columns place African American women’s experiences at the center of 
these discussions. With the style of a wise and loving girlfriend, Taylor 
weaves her own struggles into each subject as if to assure readers that she 
knows what they are experiencing because she has also had challenging 
experiences.
Black feminist thought demonstrates African American women’s emerg-
ing power as agents of knowledge. By portraying African American women as 
self-defi ned, self-reliant individuals confronting race, gender, and class oppres-
sions, Afrocentric feminist thought speaks to the importance that knowledge 
plays in empowering oppressed people (Hill Collins, 1990, p. 221). Equally 
signifi cant, when African American women defi  ne themselves, they clearly 
reject the assumption that those in positions granting them the authority to 
interpret their reality are entitled to do so. Regardless of the actual content 
of African American women’s self-defi nitions, the act of insisting on African 
American female self-defi nition validates African American women’s power 
as human subjects (Hill Collins, 1990, pp. 106–07).
RT54118_C010.indd   229RT54118_C010.indd   229 7/10/06   6:36:27 PM7/10/06   6:36:27 PM


--- PAGE 287 ---
230 • Th e Womanist Reader
Th e power of such texts as Taylor’s “In the Spirit” columns to educate, 
inspire, and empower African American women readers lies in its inclusivity 
and its epistemology.
Th eoretica lly, if t his gendered Afrocentric epistemolog y were followed Afri-
can Americans as well as all Americans would not experience the dualities so 
confl ictual and commonplace in this society, i.e., mind/body, theory/practice, 
art/science, and so on, nor racism/sexism to the degree that they do in this 
society. Equally signifi cant, Taylor’s columns are refl ective of this growth of a 
more explicit feminist message in African American women’s rhetoric. Th  is 
is her contribution to rhetorical and womanist scholarship. Only a woman-
ist/black feminist perspective that acknowledges the polyvocality of multiple 
social locations in the lives of African American women will acknowledge 
African American women’s rhetoric as the transformer of consciousness that 
it is.
Notes
 1. Although there exists public debate among African American female scholars as to which 
label, Black feminist  or womanist,  is more appropriate, I choose to use the terms inter-
changeably. Call it Black feminism  or womanism. Th is perspective is about the recognition 
of a distinct African American women’s standpoint, both intellectually and socially.
 2. It is important to note that a complete interpretation of the cluster of terms would also 
include an analysis of the rhetor’s motive as well as an agon analysis. An agon analy-
sis involves the critic identifying oppositions among key terms in an attempt to better 
understand any confl icts in the rhetor’s discourse. However, in this essay, cluster analy-
sis was used only as a means of identifying important themes for Afrocentric feminist 
analysis.
References
Asante, M.K. (1980). Afrocentricity: Th e theory of social change . Buff alo, New York: Amulefi  Pub-
lishing Co.
Baldwin, J. (1980). Th e psychology of oppression. In M.K. Asante and A. Vandi (Eds.), Contem-
porary Black thought: Alternative analyses in social and behavioral science . Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage.
Berthold, C.A. (1976). Kenneth Burke’s cluster-agon method. Central States Speech Journal,  27 
(pp. 302–309).
Brewer, R. (1994). “Th eorizing race, class, gender: Th e new scholarship of black feminist intellec-
tuals and black women’s labor”: In S.M. James and A.P.A. Busia (Eds.), Th eorizing black 
feminism (p. 13). New York: Routledge.
Burke, K. (1945). A grammar of motives . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1961). Attitudes toward history . Boston: Beacon Press.
Dixon, V. (1976). World views and research methodology. In L. King, V. Dixon and W. Nobles 
(Eds.), African philosophy: Assumptions and paradigms for research on Black persons . Los 
Angeles: Fanon Center.
Dodd, C.H. (1982). Dynamics of intercultural communication . Dubuque, Iowa: William C. 
Brown Publishers.
Essence Communications, Inc. Essence celebrates  30 years. Retrieved April 13, 2000, from World 
Wide Web: http://www.essence.com/
Foss, S.K. (1989). Rhetorical criticism: Explorations and practice . Prospect Heights, IL: Wave-
land Press.
Frye, C. (1979). Einstein and African religion and philosophy: Th  e hermatic lattice . Hempstead, 
New York: Albert Einstein Centennial Conference, Hofstra University.
Hill Collins, P. (1990). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics of 
empowerment. New York: Routledge.
RT54118_C010.indd   230RT54118_C010.indd   230 7/10/06   6:36:27 PM7/10/06   6:36:27 PM


--- PAGE 288 ---
Communication and Media Studies • 231
Janis, P. (1995). Th e essence of Susan Taylor. Th e Detroit News  (November 28).
King, D.K. (1988). Multiple jeopardy, multiple consciousness: Th  e context of a black feminist 
ideology. Signs: Th e Journal of women in culture and society  14(1) (August): 42–72.
Lewis, E. (1990). In celebrating of our twentieth anniversary. Essence (May), 20.
Manning, K. (1995). Profi  le of Susan L. Taylor. St. Louis Post-Dispatch  (December 23).
Mbiti, J. (1970). African religions and philosophy . New York: Doubleday Press.
Myers, L.J. (1988). Understanding an Afrocentric world view: Introduction to an optimal psychol-
ogy. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall-Hunt.
Narayan, U. (1989). Th e project of feminist epistemology: Perspectives from a nonwestern femi-
nist. In A.M. Jaggar and S.R. Bordo (Eds.), Gender/body/knowledge: Feminist reconstruc-
tions of being and knowing  (pp. 256–69). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Nobles, W. (1972). African philosophy: Foundations for black psychology. In R. Jones (Ed.), 
Black psychology  (p. 29). New York: Harper and Row.
Oder, N. (1995). Essence. Publishers Weekly,  Vol. 242, 37, p. 26.
Stuckey, S. (1987). Slave culture . New York: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, S.L. (1981, July). Coming to faith, Essence,  63.
Taylor, S.L. (1983, March). Reach for it, Essence,  65.
Taylor, S.L. (1984, February). You are love, Essence,  69.
Taylor, S.L. (1984, April). Inner power, Essence,  73.
Taylor, S.L. (1984, July). Our time! Essence,  69.
Taylor, S.L. (1985, April). Take time, Essence,  57.
Taylor, S.L. (1986, April). Sweet success, Essence,  81.
Taylor, S.L. (1986, October). Say yes to life, Essence,  49.
Taylor, S.L. (1987, May). Affi  rmation, Essence,  55.
Taylor, S.L. (1988, April). Slaying our fears, Essence,  55.
Taylor, S.L. (1989, March). Celebrating success, Essence,  47.
Taylor, S.L. (1989, May). A call for unity, Essence,  59.
Taylor, S.L. (1990). In R. Wolseley, Th e black press, U.S.A. Iowa: Iowa State University Press, 
p. 263.
Taylor, S.L. (1990, September). Give thanks, Essence,  57.
Taylor, S.L. (1992, February). Word from the motherland, Essence,  49.
Taylor, S.L. (1993, August). Th e power of love, Essence,  55.
Taylor, S.L. (1994, August). Th e fl ow of life, Essence,  59.
Taylor, S.L. (1993). In the spirit. New York: Amistad Press.
Taylor, S.L. (1995). Lessons in living . New York: Amistad Press.
Taylor, S.L. (1999, January). A new way of living, Essence,  85.
Taylor, S.L. (1999, May). Claiming a space, Essence,  117.
Vanzant, I. (1992). Tapping the power within: A path to self-empowerment for black women . New 
York: Harlem River Press, p. 62.
Walker, A. (1983). I n  s e a r c h  o f  o u r  m o t h e r s ’  g a r d e n s :  W o m a n i s t  p r o s e. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace, Jovanovich, pp. xi–xii.
Wolseley, R. (1990). Th e black press, U.S.A.  Iowa: Iowa State University Press, p. 263.
RT54118_C010.indd   231RT54118_C010.indd   231 7/10/06   6:36:27 PM7/10/06   6:36:27 PM


--- PAGE 289 ---
RT54118_C010.indd   232RT54118_C010.indd   232 7/10/06   6:36:28 PM7/10/06   6:36:28 PM


--- PAGE 290 ---
233
11
Psychology
Womanist Archetypal Psychology: A Model of Counseling 
for Black Women and Couples Based on 
Yoruba Mythology (2006/1995)
KIM MARIE VAZ
Yemoja, the Great Mother, was once married to Ogun, the Great God 
of the Hunters, and together they had two children. In contracting their 
marriage, both revealed their respective taboos to one another. Ogun 
knew not to insult Yemoja’s breasts and Yemoja knew not to touch Ogun’s 
medicines. Once Ogun was out hunting and he left  his medicines outside 
to dry in the sun. It began to rain and Yemoja wanted to put Ogun’s medi-
cine inside to avoid its being damaged. She covered her eyes and used a 
stick and a broken pot to remove the medicine and threw it in his room. 
Ogun knew instan tly that his medicine had been touched. H e returned 
home demanding to know who had touched his medicine. Realizing that 
it had been Y emoja, he insulted her breasts. Y emoja withdrew from him 
and became cold. She took his pot of medicinal herbs, placed it on her 
head, put her suckling infant on her back and swallowed her other child. 
She began to walk quickly away from him. Ogun did not want her to leave 
and he reached out to grab her but she quickly eluded him and kept walk-
ing. She began to sing a jingle about informing people of one’s taboos. 
Ogun leapt over hills trying to cut off   her progress. She fell down as he 
pursued her and medicinal water started oozing out of the pot. Th e spot at 
which she fell is known as Yemoja’s river, called the River Oggun, the river 
of medicine. Ogun used his own magical medicines to try and increase his 
power to prevent the river from fl  owing past the hills. Yemoja called on 
her son Sango to split the hills for her and she rolled on past Ogun, form-
ing nine estuaries and ending in a lagoon. Because he could not control 
the force of the river, Ogun abandoned his pursuit.
Among the Yoruba, symbolically, female power is contained in vessels and 
women’s breasts are vessel-like structures. Yemoja forbids anyone from touching 
RT54118_C011.indd   233RT54118_C011.indd   233 7/5/06   1:28:03 PM7/5/06   1:28:03 PM


--- PAGE 291 ---
234 • Th e Womanist Reader
her breasts or speaking ill of them. Th e violation of her taboo can be read as an 
aggression against women’s power. Yemoja’s breasts encapsulate an enormous 
amount of power, since she is the mother of all orisa (i.e., the pantheon of Yoruba 
divinities). She is known as “the woman whose breast is so long, she must wrap 
it in white cloth.” In myth, Ogun, Yemoja’s husband, either touches her breast 
or insults it. By either slipping through his fi ngers or outpacing him as the river, 
her transformation makes her elusive to male control. In another version of this 
myth, Ogun wants to please Yemoja. He goes into the kitchen to prepare a meal 
for her, but he winds up breaking her pots. Because they agreed to keep each 
other’s taboos, which, for Ogun, meant not touching her pots and, for Yemoja, 
meant not insulting his bloodshot eyes, Ogun’s action is read as a violation of 
their marital agreement. Not waiting for an explanation from Ogun, Yemoja 
immediately proceeds to ridicule his eyes. He strikes her, and she falls out. As he 
tries to revive her by stroking her breasts, she transforms into a river.
In this paper, I describe a syncretic counseling approach for treating narcis-
sistically injured adults. Th e syncretism involves the self-psychology of Heinz 
Kohut and the mystical practices of priests and priestesses of the Yoruba 
religion known as the Ifa system, to form a therapy approach grounded in 
“womanism.” As a theoretical system, womanism entails an “empowering asser-
tion of black women’s voice,” “a critical refl ection of black women’s place in the 
world,” and an examination of the social construction of black womanhood 
in the context of gender, race, class, and sexuality. It seriously considers the 
contributions of the African ancestral heritage and Africans’ life today and 
pursues the sanctity of the family broadly defi ned (Th omas 1998). Womanism 
validates the past lives of enslaved African women by remembering, affi  rming, 
and glorifying their contributions. Aft  er excavating analytically and refl  ect-
ing critically on the life stories of our foremothers, the methodology entails a 
construction and creation of a novel paradigm. We who are womanists con-
coct something new that makes sense for how we are living in complex gender, 
racial, and class social confi  gurations. We use our foremothers’ rituals and 
survival tools to live in hostile environments.
As a relational psychoanalytic theory, self-psychology privileges the view 
of the individual as embedded within a social environment as opposed to 
viewing the individual as a lone soul pursuing a reduction of those phenom-
ena that cause stress, tension, and unpleasure. Kohut outlines the individual’s 
psychic structure as deriving in infancy from the interactions with empathetic, 
affi  rming caretakers whose ministrations enable the child to develop the psy-
chic structure he calls the “self.” Th  e self is seen as having two dimensions: 
an exhibitionist side that needs to feel great and powerful ( mirroring) and an 
idealizing side that holds others in high esteem and derives a sense of self-
worth from the identifi cation with highly valued individuals (idealizing mode). 
Th e healthy dimensions of these two poles are the transformation of mirror-
hunger into assertiveness, empathy, and respect, on one hand, and idealizing 
RT54118_C011.indd   234RT54118_C011.indd   234 7/5/06   1:28:04 PM7/5/06   1:28:04 PM


--- PAGE 292 ---
Psychology • 235
modes that must be transformed into realistically seeing oneself and the val-
ued object and the development of an independent center of initiative (i.e., one 
has an independent set of ideas rather than merely mimicking the idealized 
other). Th e sturdy adult personality is built largely around one of these two 
poles. When there is not suffi  cient development in at least one pole, narcissis-
tic psychopathology develops. Th e narcissistically injured person sees the self 
as defective, and self-esteem regulation as a chore. Obsessions break through 
the repression barrier. Destructive aggression predominates, others need to be 
controlled to ensure a steady stream of feeling personally validated, and much 
energy is invested in shoring up a faltering sense of self.
Narcissistically wounded individuals are said to arise because these are indi-
viduals who in their early childhood interactions encountered chronic empathic 
failures from their caretakers. Also, early caretaker psychopathology gives 
rise to children who become “mirror-hungry individuals.” Th e developmental 
arrest in the pole of mirroring leads to the narcissistically vulnerable person 
experiencing even the slightest turn of attention away from him or her as an 
attack on the integrity of the self. Mirror-hungry people are those who need to 
see themselves as perfect and have others admire them (“I am perfect and you 
admire me”) (Greenberg and Mitchell 1983, p. 354). Individuals who operate 
within the idealizing mode seek to merge with powerful others to regulate 
their self-esteem. Th ey harbor the conviction that “You are perfect and I am 
part of you” (Greenberg and Mitchell 1983, p. 354).
Womanism, with its attention to social forces that subject African American 
people to race, class, and gender discrimination, off ers to the Kohutian expla-
nation further environmental factors that strain the intrapsychic processes of 
people of African descent. Th e dominant society, which continues to margin-
alize black women, only reinforces defi cits in the self-structure, complicating 
the intrapsychic processes in black women, making them strain for the mirror 
either by undermining aspects of their self-confi  dence through invalidating 
images and microaggressions
1 o r  b y  f o r c i n g  t h e m  t o  m e r g e  w i t h  i d e a l i z e d  
objects that subvert their well-being (e.g., the cultural press to engage in crass 
materialism, unhealthy intimate relationships, drug addictions, and the like). 
Only a psychology that is grounded in the tenets of womanism can develop 
pragmatic social changes and therapeutic responsiveness for women of color.
Narcissistic Rage
Narcissistic rage, according to Kohut (1972), is an insatiable search for revenge 
aft er an individual has incurred a narcissistic injury. Such injuries in vulner-
able individuals stem from a range of behaviors on the part of others, from 
not being acknowledged in return for one’s show of concern or another’s 
“failure” to laugh at the individual’s joke. Responses to these actual and per-
ceived wounds are either shamefaced withdrawal (manifested by a desire to 
fl e e  f r o m  t h e  s i t u a t i o n  o r  t h e  w i s h  t o  d i s a p p e a r ,  o r  i n d i c a t e d  b y  d o w n c a s t  
RT54118_C011.indd   235RT54118_C011.indd   235 7/5/06   1:28:04 PM7/5/06   1:28:04 PM


--- PAGE 293 ---
236 • Th e Womanist Reader
eyes) or narcissistic rage (i.e., the thirst for revenge). Narcissistic rage is a spe-
cifi c type of aggression and diff  ers from mature aggression. Narcissistic rage 
is characterized by a desire for retribution—the unrelenting need to right a 
wrong or undo a hurt by any means. It is marked by a “boundless wish to 
redress an injury and obtain revenge.” Mature aggression, on the other hand, 
is marked by those activities that fl ow from mature causes. Mature aggression 
is not limitless; its goal is defi nite (such as victory over those who would block 
one’s progress toward an important goal); is under the control of the ego; and 
the individual can recognize that the opponent is separate from herself or 
himself and that is that the other is “a center of independent initiative” (Kohut 
1972, p. 362).
Narcissistic rage occurs in those possessing a grandiose self—a belief that 
the self is more unique, perfect, clever, attractive, or strong than anyone else—
and is distinguished by the narcissistically fi  xated adult insisting on being 
admired by archaic self-objects (transferences of the early objects of infancy 
and childhood into present-day situations) and a compulsion to control them 
so that they deliver the desired mirroring and affi  rmation. It is a self charac-
terized by the compulsive need to exercise control over other people who are 
s e e n  n o t  as  th ey  ar e,  n o t  as  a u t o n o m o us  b e in g s  b u t  ra th e r  as  e xt e n s i o n s  o f  
the self. It is a desperate attempt to maintain needed narcissistic supplies to 
prevent the self from fragmenting. It is a Herculean attempt to modulate the 
regulatory system of self-esteem maintenance. Th e self is felt to be under threat 
of annihilation. Such a self wants control and wants it completely, expecting 
to dominate those it sees as part of itself. Aggression in the grandiose self is 
mobilized in the service of maintaining the conception of the self as knowing 
all and outshining all. Rage develops when either the individual or the other 
person (who is designated as part of the self and who is expected to function in 
a particular capacity) “fails” to live up to its assigned role. Th is is particularly 
irritating to the vulnerable self because it serves as a reminder that s/he is not 
in full control. Th e “off ender” is not seen as having her or his own needs and 
desires but is thought of as “a recalcitrant part of an expanded self over which 
he expects to exercise full control and whose mere independence or otherness 
is an off ense” (Kohut 1972, p. 385).
To correct this outrage, the wounded person cannot settle down until s/he 
has blotted out the one who “dared to oppose her,” dared to disagree with her, 
or “outshone” her (or him). Th ose in the throes of a narcissistic rage show an 
absolute lack of empathy toward the “off ender.” In the story at the beginning 
of this chapter, Ogun’s omniscience immediately allows him to know that his 
medicine has been handled, and this is against his strict prohibitions. Th  at 
there may have been reasonable cause for the handling of his medicines never 
gives him pause. His word has been issued, and he expects it to be followed 
absolutely. Kohut suggests that the tendency toward narcissistic rage may never 
be cured totally, and one may have to become aware of the need to monitor 
RT54118_C011.indd   236RT54118_C011.indd   236 7/5/06   1:28:04 PM7/5/06   1:28:04 PM


--- PAGE 294 ---
Psychology • 237
this reaction. For Kohut, signs of incomplete analytic work in the narcissistic 
sector include a person’s inability to “mobilize even a modicum of empathy for 
the person who is the target of that anger”—“there exists a total and abiding 
lack of compassion for the off ender” and “an arrogant and rigid refusal even 
to consider the other’s person’s position or motivation” (Kohut 1972, p. 393). 
Clearly Ogun’s unforgiving fury, his utter determination to stop Yemoja from 
fl eeing, and his attempt to cut her off   at every turn are an archetypal drama 
that replays itself in couples across centuries and across cultures.
Human Nature and the Change Process
Self-psychology and human change . Kohut’s self-object psychology holds that 
all human beings have a self-structure that begins developing through expe-
riences with signifi cant others during childhood. Th e formation of a strong 
self is dependent on the following: childhood experiences of being affi   rmed, 
admired, respected, and protected; opportunities to observe role models; opportu-
nities to oppose or disagree with others while remaining connected with those 
same others; and opportunities to demonstrate one’s capabilities while still a 
child, despite the presence of more powerful, competent adults. Th e adult with 
a strong self (who on occasion may still feel somewhat drained, diminished, or 
less than cohesive) organizes her or his environment in a way that fulfi lls these 
needs. Th ese self-objects do not necessarily have to be human; they can be any-
thing that affi  rms or soothes the self; for example, music. Th e individual with 
a strong self can engage in “the rough and tumble of everyday life, not without 
fear, but undeterred” (Wolf 1989, p. 102). Th e environmental responses to the 
child mold and shape the self and, if too many inimical human exchanges 
take place, the child’s self ends up fragile. Faulty self-object experiences lead 
to individuals’ feeling fragmented and empty. Th  ey feel diminished or less 
than they were before the experience took place and may engage in a number 
of destructive activities to restore feelings of cohesion. Change in the self is 
forthcoming only when the individual reexperiences the archaic trauma in 
the here and now with an empathic therapist whom the client experiences as 
affi  rming.
Yoruba cosmology and human change . Yoruba cosmology includes predes-
tination through its concept of ori or “inner head.” Th e ori is selected by the 
individual before she or he is born. Life becomes a process of discovering what 
that destiny is and what must be done to fulfi  ll it, if it is a good destiny, and 
what to do to avert its dangers and secure one’s desires if the destiny is unde-
sirable. People rely on “readings” from various divinatory systems to discover 
their destinies. Th e fi  ndings of divinatory systems are generally relayed in 
poetic verses, such as the Odu Ifa, where stories of mythic characters who have 
faced similar dilemmas as the client are recounted. How the mythical fi  gure 
resolved the problem is key to understanding what must be done in the cur-
rent instance. Th e more such readings an individual obtains over the course 
RT54118_C011.indd   237RT54118_C011.indd   237 7/5/06   1:28:04 PM7/5/06   1:28:04 PM


--- PAGE 295 ---
238 • Th e Womanist Reader
of a lifetime, the better s/he or he understands the self and the more prepared 
s/he is to face life’s challenges and emerge victorious (Drewal 1992).
Womanist Psychology and the Orisas as Archetypes
As an African American woman, I am keenly aware of the damaging images 
and unique stressors that African Americans face. Living in this society, our 
primary self-object needs are constantly under attack by a disaffi   rming soci-
ety. Th us, whatever damage is done in the early developmental period aff  ect-
ing our object relations is exacerbated by living in a racist, sexist, classist, 
homophobic, ageist, lookist society, and whatever strengths one has issuing 
forth from positive early object relations development can be compromised by 
these stressors. Since Western psychology does not construct models of eff ec-
tive personal functioning from the mythology of African cultural sources, 
wherein strong Black womanhood is routinely represented, it cannot and does 
not adequately account for the nature of Black women’s psychosocial chal-
lenges or fully guide the development of sturdy egos that must eff ectively cope 
with the demeaning images of womanhood and Blackness that originate in 
the West.
In developing a theory of womanist psychology, I draw on the mythology 
of the powerful Yoruba female divinities (e.g., Odu, Osun, and Yemoja) as 
archetypes for creative personal functioning (Abiodun 1989). Th  ese female 
divinities are described in the oral literature of West Africa, as well as African-
derived religions around the globe, as self-possessed, wealthy, and intelligent 
leaders who dispense gift s that aff ord humans status and prestige, as well as 
well-being. Literary critic Chikwenye Ogunyemi (1996) notes the myths of 
Yoruba female deities resemble those of Isis and Demeter, among others in 
that “themes of beauty, love, sexuality, rape, immaculate conception, fertility, 
grief, separation, mediation, and reconciliation are interconnected motifs in 
Yoruba, Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Christian myths. Th e protagonists are 
all variations on the theme of the great ancestral mother in a hostile universe. 
Her greatness lies in her policy of containment of her anguish for the good of 
all” (p. 23).
Oya, Odu, and Osun, for example, represent primal emotional states that 
are routinely seen in the therapy offi  ce. In Oya, In Praise of an African Goddess, 
Judith Gleason (1992) writes of the Yoruba deity Oya—virginal river, tornado 
witch, and buff alo woman. Oya is the wind that comes before the thunderstorm 
(i.e., her husband Sango). Th e author applies the idea of Oya as tornado—
contrasting streams of dry air (energy) accumulated and then released violently 
to roam earth and sky—to the individual psyche. Th e storm hits anything in 
its way. “Th en suddenly, somebody’s house, enveloped in low-pressure cas-
ing, explodes from within and the roof whirls off  , joints, struts, and all to be 
deposited in somebody else’s yard” (p. 20). Using the tornado Oya as a meta-
phor, Gleason proposes that Western patriarchal society has turned away from 
RT54118_C011.indd   238RT54118_C011.indd   238 7/5/06   1:28:05 PM7/5/06   1:28:05 PM


--- PAGE 296 ---
Psychology • 239
the storm at the door and thus courts danger. Western patriarchy discounts 
powerful emotions, and compliant Western mothers coach their daughters to 
stifl e rather than outride their inner storms, to dam and conceal their own 
fl oods. Tornados prefer warm and unstable air-mass parcels as opposed to 
cool and stable ones; hotheadedness and instability give rise to insanity and 
domestic violence. Th e solution is to claim one’s tornadoes (Oya), that is, to 
own “one’s violence thereby transforming its capricious destructive aspects 
into creative libidinal energy” (p. 40).
Margaret Drewal (1992) in her study of Yoruba Ritual: Performers, Play, Agency 
discusses the Yoruba idea of “rituals as journeys.” Parades, masking displays, 
and possession trances are all aspects of symbolic journeys signaling the 
transformative experiences of ritual. She describes several such ceremonies, 
but one of the most exciting for the purposes of this chapter is the Itefa ritual. 
In this event, Odu, wife of the chief diviner Orunmila, teaches him how to 
bring about the rebirthing of an individual with a scattered, shattered life and 
how to help individuals from infancy to avoid the pitfalls that keep them from 
being “together.” Yoruba scholar and Awise Awo Ni Agbaye
2 Wande Abimbola 
(1975) discusses the odus (i.e., the verses of the Ifa system), as codes of conduct 
that counsel the reorganization of one’s social relationships that would make 
possible the attainment of their destinies. Odu is a female orisa that contains 
all wisdom and embodies the system of knowledge that male Ifa priests study 
through long periods of apprenticeship and ironically try to keep out of the 
hands of women.
Literary critic Diedre Badejo (1989) suggests that the images of Osun con-
veyed in her oral literature feature the coexistence of power and femininity. 
In this literature, Osun is characterized as having played a pivotal role in the 
creation of human civilization, seeking to learn the art of divination, and hav-
ing protected the town of Osogbo against invasions in the nineteenth century, 
as well as being a wife, mother, and orisa. She is depicted as strong in charac-
ter, self-defi ning, and life sustaining.
Th e intimate relationships of the river deities Oya, Odu, Osun, and Yemoja 
with a variety of other divinities, mostly male, provide a mythic source of infor-
mation that can inform relationship counseling. Power struggles are endemic 
to the nature of the relationships between male and female orisa. Chikwenye 
Ogunyemi (1996) observes that masculinist Ifa tradition strives to make Odu 
Ifa’s “insignifi cant” other. Odu off  ers psychological stability to supplicants 
because she contains secret knowledge of their destiny. Collecting readings 
from the odus off ers solutions and interpretations for life predicaments. Yet 
the masculinist Ifa tradition tries to “displace Odu through the continual 
appropriation of her power” (p. 28). In her iconography, Osun was the lone 
female, along with seventeen male deities, sent to help establish the earth. 
In the building of the community, they excluded her, and in turn she made 
reproduction and fertility of land impossible for them. Forced by Olodumare, 
RT54118_C011.indd   239RT54118_C011.indd   239 7/5/06   1:28:05 PM7/5/06   1:28:05 PM


--- PAGE 297 ---
240 • Th e Womanist Reader
a higher power, to reconcile, the men came to learn of Osun’s power.3 She was 
pregnant, and they were in awe of the womb, “stunned by the silence of the 
womb which they could not hear, the darkness they could not read, the mys-
tery of the womb they could not decipher” (p. 22). In her exile from the male 
community, she established her life on the bank of a river and continued her 
profession of her hair braiding. Th ey needed her and the water she had come 
to reside next to.
Th e clash in the myth about the relationships between two widely wor-
shiped deities,
4 Ogun and Yemoja, who were once husband and wife, sym-
bolizes the essence of a narcissistically injured spouse’s interpretation of her 
or his partner’s “failure” to respond in a way that affi   rms. Th ese times of 
not being responded to as one would wish/expect/demand to be remind the 
“injured” spouse of her or his painfully alone position in the world and engen-
der feelings of disappointment that s/he has not achieved the desired merger 
or oneness with a protecting, approving, constantly supporting, nurturing 
other. Instead s/he is reminded of her or his powerlessness or separateness. 
Th e response is then to rage or withdraw to escape the excruciating feelings 
and make the other respond as desired. Th ese instances of “failure to respond 
as needed” oft en lead to the most virulent fi ghts between couples, causing not 
o nl y  h ar d  f ee lin g s  an d  d e m o raliza ti o n  b u t,  as  in  th e  instan ce  o f  O gun  an d  
Yemoja, domestic violence.
Th e Psychodynamic Th erapy Approach
Th e goal of self-object therapy is to strengthen the self. Th  e goal from the 
Yoruba side is to obtain asé (pronounced ah-SHAY)—the ability to be calm, 
composed, and self-possessed. Techniques and procedures required to attain 
this goal in self-object psychology include the therapeutic ambience and the 
disruption-restoration process of the therapeutic transference. During ther-
apy, as the narcissistic rage emerges as part of the transference, Kohut suggests 
that this act is a sign that the rigid personality structure is loosening. Th  e 
therapist should accept this rage, but not confuse it with mature aggression. 
For Kohut, transformation of narcissistic rage is not achieved directly, that is, 
through appeals to the ego to increase its control over the furious impulses. 
Instead, focus is on the web of narcissism from which the rage arises. Archaic 
exhibitionism and grandiosity have to be transformed into aim-inhibited self-
esteem (widening the range of experiences that bring self-respect) and realistic 
ambitions. Th e wounded, psychologically immature individual gets into trou-
ble because of her or his desire to win approval by doing something (exhib-
iting herself or himself in some way), as well as the desire to be totally and 
completely one with another person. Th e aspiration to merge with an archaic 
omnipotent self-object has to be substituted with attitudes that are within the 
conscious control of the ego. In this way the rage reaction subsides. Th e client 
must know to monitor her/his propensity for rage. It is hoped that through 
RT54118_C011.indd   240RT54118_C011.indd   240 7/5/06   1:28:05 PM7/5/06   1:28:05 PM


--- PAGE 298 ---
Psychology • 241
the empathic therapeutic relationship, the client will grow more tolerant and 
accepting of the demands of the grandiose self and its tendency for rage in the 
same way that the therapist is understandingly tolerating.
Th e techniques in the Yoruba problem-solving system, whether physical, 
spiritual, or emotional, always begin with a reading from one of the divina-
tory systems. Th e Yoruba recognize Ifa as containing their collective history, 
mythology, and philosophy. Th rough their preliterate academic system, Yoruba 
priests were rigorously trained in religion and philosophy and also in psychia-
try, midwifery, and medicine—taking one of the three areas as their specialty. 
Th e Ifa system involves literature, art, and ritual. Ifa is thought to have the 
answers to all human problems. Ifa is consulted for any important decisions 
and to fi nd out the true path of one’s destiny. Some of the most important 
instruments of Ifa are the sixteen palm nuts used with a wooden Ifa tray and 
the divining chain. It is through the manipulation of the nuts or the chain and 
the resulting odu, which is one of the 256 confi gurations that may result from 
their manipulation, that the priests advise clients on the nature of the prob-
lem and the sacrifi ces necessary to alleviate it. In the Ifa system, the world is 
conceived as a continuous battle with the malevolent powers of death, illness, 
and loss. Th ese are the eternal enemies of human life, and the forces associated 
with them must be placated through sacrifi ce. Th e food off ered for sacrifi ce is 
actually eaten by the family, pets, neighbors, or wild animals. Although there 
are 256 odu, or poems, with numerous versus, only 16 are considered “major,” 
and each priest will know more of some verses than others. Many of the odus 
are associated with various minor divinities and deifi ed ancestors. Within the 
verses of the odus are contained the life histories of these divinities or ances-
tors, the problems they encountered, and the sacrifi ces they made to alleviate 
them. In addition to sacrifi ces made, the verses outline the codes of conduct 
and reorganizations of social relationships that these fi  gures engaged in to 
make possible the attainment of their destinies.
Th e counselor, if versed in these systems, can do a reading for the client or 
use one that has been done by a practitioner. Th e results of these readings can 
be analyzed for their immediate relevance to the situation. Th ere are a host of 
other relevant techniques that might include the mixing and application of 
certain oils, the wearing of certain beads, the performance of certain rituals, 
and so forth. In both self-object therapy and Yoruba religion, the empathic 
intuitiveness of the counselor and priest provide a crucial affi  rming self-object 
experience for the client. Th e mystic provides a deeper experience because 
so many more modalities are incorporated, deeper regressions are facilitated, 
and so on.
Applicable Situations
Numerous African Americans are turning toward African religions not only 
to provide the affi  rmation and expansion of the self, but also to form new 
RT54118_C011.indd   241RT54118_C011.indd   241 7/5/06   1:28:05 PM7/5/06   1:28:05 PM


--- PAGE 299 ---
242 • Th e Womanist Reader
communities that ensure a sense of belonging to its members, literally as 
privileged children. Th e priest is the spiritual mother or father of the omo-orisa 
(i.e., the child of the goddesses and gods). Th  us, those following the various 
Yoruba traditions and those individuals wanting an African-based healing 
system will fi nd this approach useful.
Th erapeutic issues where competition for power is the central psychodynamic 
force. Power struggles characterize the narcissistically injured adults’ relation-
ship patterns. In one version of the myth, Yemoja wants to protect Ogun’s 
medicine and therefore prepares to handle them for the stated purposes of 
shielding them from harm. In another version of the myth, Ogun wants to 
please Yemoja by making her a meal and thus touches her pots and subse-
quently destroys them. We can interpret the myth at face value in line with 
their stated aims as an intention to be kind to the spouse. Th e manifestly stated 
love for the spouse is seen by the other person as malicious behavior, and the 
misadventure goes terribly wrong to the point of the destruction of the mar-
riage. I do not want to interpret the myth so literally, and I chose to read it 
as a wish to possess and destroy what the other has; it is a problem of spou-
sal envy and territoriality. Y emoja would like either to have access to Ogun’s 
powerful medicines (that allow him to fashion metal into objects than enable 
the domestication of the forest, e.g., knives and guns) or to at least not be 
subjected to a relationship in which he has certain secret and privately con-
trolled powers. Ogun would like to be able to use Yemoja’s pots, a euphemism 
perhaps for her powerful womb, an attribute completely unavailable to him, 
so he tries to appropriate or destroy her source of power. Destructive rage can 
be mobilized because of an “indomitable self-interest” (Raphling 1998, p. 103) 
and can rationalize itself as “indignant sense of being wronged” to justify the 
use of violence and destruction to achieve one’s aims (p. 101). Th  e couple’s 
prohibitions regarding the breaking of their taboos stand as cover for the lack 
of communication around sharing resources and abilities. In satisfying their 
need for revenge, each becomes a social isolate and a tad paranoid (Ornstein 
1998). Th ey become harpy and hypervigilant. “Who is daring to touch my pots 
[medicine]?” they both bellow. Yemoja, operating within the “strong black 
woman matrix,”
5 withdraws into defensive autonomy. 6 In leaving, she takes 
something that is shared to possess fully for herself—their children. She swal-
lows one and fuses the other to her. She uses her relationship with her son 
Sango, commanding him to split the mountain, to humiliate and defeat her 
husband. Th e problem for the developing psyches of each is how to become 
related and autonomous at the same time, avoiding “sacrifi cing relationship to 
a disturbed autonomy and sacrifi cing autonomy to a disturbed relationship” 
(Layton 1990, p. 427).
A womanist perspective is necessary in the fi eld of psychology because women 
of African descent live within a historic context that promotes their need to 
be autonomous, that is, to be income earning, to be the pillar of the church 
RT54118_C011.indd   242RT54118_C011.indd   242 7/5/06   1:28:05 PM7/5/06   1:28:05 PM


--- PAGE 300 ---
Psychology • 243
and community, and to try for sexual relationships only to be frustrated 
oft en with a life of celibacy in the long and later years. Her defensive auton-
omy has been enforced by the social workings of racism involving the African 
American community as a whole, sexism applied in a racist way, and eco-
nomic exploitation of her group. Th e paradigm of white women’s psychoanal-
ysis that engages her in a cultural split between the autonomous man and 
the communal woman (Layton 1990) is outside the purview of the woman 
of African descent. Most women of African descent have always been forced 
to be both. Because her potential pool of mates also encounters the slews and 
arrows of race and class stratifi cation, her moving from reactive and defensive 
autonomy to healthy relatedness is a liberatory and intrapsychic struggle.
Th erapeutic issues where feeling of the inferiority of the body is the central 
psychodynamic force. Ogun, Yoruba god of iron/technology, and war, is fi erce 
and tough and very sensitive about his bloodshot eyes. If one states the obvi-
ous fact of the life and terror blazing through his eyes, it is to risk life and limb. 
Ogun’s bloodshot eyeballs hint at his concerns about his virility and mascu-
linity in a displacement of the genitals upwards. All people owe their existence 
to Yemoja, primeval mother, yet her exquisite sensitivity to the unevenness 
in the length of her breasts cannot be mentioned without incurring her 
destructiveness. Th ese two powerhouses can coexist only if their femininity 
and masculinity are not commented on, and they cannot talk to each other 
about their vulnerabilities. Mere discussion about their bodies risks their 
experiencing psychic pain. Gutwinski (1997) describes a phenomenon where 
a person would regress to “early bodily experiences of unpleasure and pain 
whenever the psychic insights” provided in therapy became intolerable (p. 54). 
In Gutwinski’s view, pain is the opposite of language, signaling a terrible feel-
ing of being completely alone. Painful bodily states can be used as a defense 
against hearing perspectives that seem too diffi   cult to consider. Th e painful 
aloneness is preferred over the genuine connectedness to another, and the 
energy used to form relationships with others is withdrawn and injected into 
an organ of the body. Even though is it preferred to object relatedness, the 
organ also becomes hated, because it too infl icts pain.
Kohut (1972) suggests that the shame felt by an adult when a defective body 
part is looked at by another and the accompanying belief that others are star-
ing at it stems from a cathexis of the defective body part with the childhood 
wish to exhibit one’s body and have it admired. Kohut believed that narcis-
sistic vulnerability came not from the defect but from the failures in respon-
siveness and rejection of the child’s body by early caretakers. Th e therapeutic 
endeavor can reduce the outbreaks of narcissistic rage, then, by helping to 
make the self more cohesive. Rage “arises from the matrix of a fragmented 
self or a self that is threatened with fragmentation. In the course of treatment, 
what appears as a ‘transformation’ of the rage into a signal aff ect is, in reality, 
indicative of the changes that had occurred in the structure of the self: the 
RT54118_C011.indd   243RT54118_C011.indd   243 7/5/06   1:28:06 PM7/5/06   1:28:06 PM


--- PAGE 301 ---
244 • Th e Womanist Reader
increased consolidation of the self reduces the threat of fragmentation and 
narcissistic rage may then be experienced in the form of fl  eeting annoyance” 
(Ornstein 1998, p. 57).
Given the archaic origins of narcissistic vulnerability, Almansi’s (1960) obser-
vation is useful here in that when regressed, adults can experience a fusion of 
two images, the breast (with the nipples as the eyes of the breasts) and the face, 
and equate them. From the very origins of life, the infant gazes at the mother’s 
face and her breasts, and the mother’s face and breasts gaze back as some-
times “loving and inviting” and sometimes “angry and forbidding” (p. 43). 
Considering the breast–eye confl ict for Yemoja and Ogun, I posit the follow-
ing: seeing the breast and not getting it on demand, Ogun judges Yemoja as 
withholding, attacking, and sadistic and insists on enacting his omnipotence 
by attempting to gain absolute control over her to force her to accommodate 
his need for affi  rmation.
Growing themselves to psychic maturity and soft ening the association of their 
bodily defects with their infantile desires to be admired will lead to “an increase in 
self-cohesion” and “an increase in self-refl ection and insight” (Ornstein 1998, 
p. 65). Here is where Odu can assist. Th rough continued readings with divin-
ers of the Yoruba religion, the dilemmas and solutions about ordinary human 
problems that are contained within the sacred literature can help to further 
the development of refl ective capacities, to review codes of conduct, and to 
e v al u a t e  s o c i al  e n g a g e m e n t s  wi th  th e  aim  o f  h e l p in g  p e o p l e  w o r k  w e ll  an d  
love well.
Skills Required of the Th erapist
Th e therapist must be well versed in self-psychology literature and techniques 
and, most important, must have a concrete and fi rsthand knowledge of Yoruba 
religious practices as well as some positive connection with practitioners. 
When consultations are needed, both Western-trained therapists and priests 
of particular orisa/deities (known as iyaolorishas w h e n  f e m al e  an d  babalo-
rishas when male) and priests of Ifa ( iyan ‘ifas  when female and babalawos 
when male) are potential professionals with whom one might want to discuss 
a case.
Limitations
Because so much knowledge about Yoruba religion is required, the therapist 
must be willing to go deeply into the tradition, ideally being initiated into one 
of the groups. Th is is so because ritual knowledge is shared only with the initi-
ated and those with solid and long-standing ties to practitioners. Currently, 
th e a vailab ili ty o f su ch d ually train ed co unsel o rs is limi ted; h o w ev er , giv en 
the growth of participation in African-derived religions by people outside 
Africa, this number probably will increase over time. Another limitation is that 
RT54118_C011.indd   244RT54118_C011.indd   244 7/5/06   1:28:06 PM7/5/06   1:28:06 PM


--- PAGE 302 ---
Psychology • 245
while there is much research on Yoruba religion, there is less research—in fact, 
no published book-length studies currently exist—outlining Yoruba religion’s 
signifi cant psychotherapeutic effi  cacy in combination with Western-oriented 
insight and behavioral-change techniques. Th us, this fi eld is brand new. Unfor-
tunately, the need for it issues forth from a past that has provided only the 
most stereotyped and caricatured information on African religion—a deliber-
ate attempt to demoralize and cause fragmentation to the selves of Africans, 
African Americans, and other people of African descent worldwide. Bridging 
Western and African approaches to counseling and therapy will go far in 
healing the fragmentation caused by these conditions as well as open the door 
to the consideration of psychological insights gleaned from numerous cultures 
and spiritual systems currently ignored by or underrepresented within the fi eld 
of psychology.
Th is chapter addressed the narcissistic vulnerability that leads to intense 
rage reactions that defeat the ambitions of people of African descent to have 
healthy interpersonal relationships. According to Cannon, Johnson, and Sims 
(2005), “We oppressed people tend to fashion ourselves as the imagined others 
b y  g e n e r a tin g  a  c o n tr as tin g  i d e n ti ty  fr o m  th a t  o f  an  im p o s e d  n e g a ti v e  s e lf ,  
with the hope of locating ourselves closer to those in power.” By sanctioning 
the use of the African wisdom tradition, womanism does not consign the 
African theological traditions to academic mutism and insignifi  cance. 
Instead womanism champions the inclusion of biotexts of ordinary women of 
African descent and the epic tales of African people as material for scholarly 
deliberation in the central conversations of academic disciplines. When 
traditional scholarly paradigms fail to account for the complex sources of 
intrapsychic fragmentations of people of African descent, we can, by working 
within the womanist theoretical tradition that attributes the perpetuation of 
negative self-images and problems in self-esteem regulation to a system to 
internalized oppressions, widen the scope of learning about ourselves through 
a critical use of psychodynamic observations.
Notes
 1. Microaggressions are subtle and cumulative forms of racism and prejudice (Delgado and 
Stefancic 2001).
 2. Spokesperson and ambassador for the Yoruba religion and culture in the world. Th  is is a 
position he was chosen to fi  ll in 1987 by the assembled elder babaláwos of Nigeria. Cited 
from http://www.louisville.edu/a-s/lbst/calendar.html.
 3. Recently, a non–African American colleague narrating her experience as the lone woman 
in an all-white male committee said she threatened to leave the committee because the 
men, though very nice and well intentioned, were not interested in pursuing the issues 
that were important to her. To their credit, they rallied and became more inclusive in their 
collective work. Woman’s exclusion from male centers of power can be accounted for 
by a womanist psychology that is grounded in African epic literary and psychodynamic 
thought.
 4. Th  is pair is revered and appears in the mythologies of African-derived religions in Trinidad, 
Cuba, Brazil, Haiti, and Puerto Rico.
RT54118_C011.indd   245RT54118_C011.indd   245 7/5/06   1:28:06 PM7/5/06   1:28:06 PM


--- PAGE 303 ---
246 • Th e Womanist Reader
 5. Th  e concept of the “strong black woman” is the idea passed down in African American 
families from mother to daughter that Black women can survive anything (Beauboeuf-
Lafontant 2003).
 6. Defensive autonomy contains the elements of stereotypical self-suffi   ciency and is gener-
ally defi ned as a “powerful resistance to intimacy” (Alperin 2001, p. 146).
References
Abimbola, W. 1975. Sixteen great poems of Ifa . Zaria, Nigeria: UNESCO.
Abiodun, R. 1989. Woman in Yoruba religious images. African Languages and Cultures 2:1–18.
Almansi, R.J. 1960. Th e face–breast equation. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Associa-
tion 8:43–70.
Alperin, R.M. 2001. Barriers to intimacy. Psychoanalytic Psychology 18:137–56.
Badejo, D. 1989. Th e goddess Osun as a paradigm for African feminist criticism. Sage 6:27–32.
Beauboeuf-Lafontant, T. 2003. Strong and large black women? Exploring relationships between 
deviant womanhood and weight. Gender and Society  17:111–21.
Cannon, K.G., A. Johnson, and A.D. Sims. 2005. Living it out: Womanist works in word. Journal 
of Feminist Studies in Religion  21:135–46.
Delgado, R., and J. Stefancic. 2001. Critical race theory . New York: New York University Press.
Drewal, M. 1992. Yoruba ritual: Performers, play, agency . Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.
Gleason, J. 1992. Oya: In praise of an African goddess . San Francisco: Harper.
Greenberg, J., and S. Mitchell. 1983. Object relations in psychoanalytic theory . Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Gutwinski, J. 1997. Hypochondria versus the relation to the object. International Journal of Psy-
choanalysis  78:53–68.
Kohut, H. 1972. Th oughts on narcissism and narcissistic rage. Th e Psychoanalytic Study of the 
Child 27:360–400.
Layton, L. 1990. A deconstruction of Kohut’s concept of the self. Contemporary Psychoanalysis 
26:420–29.
Ogunyemi, C.O. 1996. Africa wo/man palava: Th e Nigerian novel by women . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Ornstein, A. 1998. Th e fate of narcissistic rage in psychotherapy. Psychoanalytic Inquiry 18:55–70.
Raphling, D.L. 1998. Th e narcissistic basis of aggression. Psychoanalytic Inquiry  18:100–106.
Th omas, L. 1998. Womanist theology, epistemology, and a new anthropological paradigm. Cross 
Currents 48 (4), http://womenshistory.about.com/gi/dynamic/off  site.htm?site=http%3A
%2F%2Fwww.aril.org%2Fthomas.htm (accessed December 22, 2005).
Wolf, E. 1989. Treatment of the self. New York: Guilford.
RT54118_C011.indd   246RT54118_C011.indd   246 7/5/06   1:28:06 PM7/5/06   1:28:06 PM


--- PAGE 304 ---
247
12
Anthropology
Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciada s: Womanist Pedagogies 
of the Everyday, the Mundane and the Ordinary 1 (2001)
RUTH TRINIDAD GALVÁN
On the way to a pequeño group de ahorro  (small savings group), I gaze 
over the land. It is an arid place, where the lack of rainfall has made the 
growing of crops nearly impossible. Upon entering Jovita’s2 rural commu-
nity, ten women sit directly in front of their small church. In spite of the 
low production of crops, the women have gathered to save money. Jovita, 
la animadora  (motivator/educator), begins her reunion with new infor-
mation. She stands nervously in front of the women of her community. 
At times her voice breaks, but she continues to read slowly through the 
information in her notebook. Aft er the meeting she mentions secretively: 
“No sé, no sé de donde saco las fuerzas ” (“I don’t know, I don’t know where 
I get the strength from”). Th is humble woman fi nds the courage and pro-
ceeds to read. Th e women listen attentively. Immediately aft  er fi nishing 
the text, Jovita asks: “¿Qué podemos aprender de ésta lectura? ” (“What can 
we learn from this story?”). Th e question sparks a discussion that reminds 
the women of the need to rescatar (recover) the history, stories and legends 
of their ancestors. Immediately aft  er the discussion, the women gather 
briskly to pick up their morrales ( small bags ). As a closing ritual Jovita, 
Doña Berta, Doña Pilar, Rocio, Mariana, Doña Cristina, a group of young 
catequists and myself proceed to enter the church. Th e meeting ends with 
a short station of the rosary and songs, all dedicated to their patron—
El Señor San José.
Th is reunion unfolds in the midst of a fi  ve year dry spell aff  ecting Jovita’s 
and other neighboring communities. Furthermore, the overall development 
of these communities and their inhabitants are aff  ected by various economic 
and socio-cultural factors. Th  ese factors infl  uence the manner campesinas 
(rural women) come together and the teachings and learning, or pedago-
gies, they enact. Th e small savings groups (SSG), like the one led by Jovita, 
RT54118_C012.indd   247RT54118_C012.indd   247 7/8/06   6:55:34 PM7/8/06   6:55:34 PM


--- PAGE 305 ---
248 • Th e Womanist Reader
 represent a space where some of the women of these communities cultivate 
compañerismo (companionship) and build strength to tackle the numerous 
personal and communal problems they confront every day.
Th e small savings group constitutes an organizing method utilized in 
various states of the Mexican Republic. In poverty-stricken countries where 
families struggle to make ends meet one might ask the purpose of these small 
savings groups. Th e long held tradition of grassroots organizing and popular 
education in Latin America (Cagan, 1999; Fink, 1992; McKelvey, 1999; Puig-
grós, 1983; Valdes, 1992), and parts of the United States (Delgado Bernal, 1997; 
Torruellas et al., 1991; Young & Padilla, 1990) has mainly focused on diverse 
m e t h o d s  o f  o r g a n i z i n g  m a r g i n a l i z e d  g r o u p s  o f  p e o p l e  t o  m a k e  c h a n g e s  i n  
their communities. Similarly, the small savings groups function as organizing 
mechanisms because as groups of people come together to save, they engage 
in critical refl ections and discussions. Th e SSGs operate with the help of three 
leading coordinators and its members. Th e animadora,
3 for instance, fosters 
the engagement of members in various activities, such as, a habit for saving, 
an increase in reading and writing, and the direction of group refl ections and 
conversations. Each member of the group has a morral (small bag) in the com-
munal box where they place their money. Th e tesorera (treasurer) responsible 
for the savings box, is in charge of distributing and collecting the morrales 
from every member, while the vigilanta (guard) is in charge of securing the 
money by handling the key. Individual groups choose a day in the week, time 
and meeting place. During the group’s weekly meetings the members save and 
engage in various activities, such as, the refl  ection and solution of personal 
and communal problems. Furthermore, because it is mainly women who 
attend and direct the groups, they also fi  nd in the SSGs a space for fostering 
compañerismo.
Campesinas,  like other underprivileged women, find possibilities for 
creating solidarity, resiliency and support in intimate community spaces. 
These spaces, like the SSGs, for example, symbolize safe locations among 
close compañeras with similar experiences (Scott, 1990). Collins finds these 
same safe spaces among Black women who intimately relate to one another 
in Black churches (Collins, 1991). Similarly, campesinas  find  comfort in 
e a c h  o th e r ’ s  c o m p an y ,  i n  c h u r c h  s p a c e s  an d  i n  p r o j e c t s  s t i m ul a t i n g  th e  
development of their communities. These spaces foster feelings of easiness 
in which women may exercise their right to remain silent, to conversar  or 
be confrontational. The PLAMAC project leader, for example, states:
No tengan miedo opinar, no siempre vas a convencer a las demás, pero 
por lo menos diste tu punto de vista . (Group discussion, May 2000)
(Don’t be afraid to give your opinion, you’re not always going to con-
vince others, but at least you gave your point of view.)
RT54118_C012.indd   248RT54118_C012.indd   248 7/8/06   6:55:35 PM7/8/06   6:55:35 PM


--- PAGE 306 ---
Anthropology • 249
Mae Henderson refers to women’s ability to “voice” their diff erences and sim-
ilarities by describing it as both a “dialogic of diff  erence and a dialectic of 
identity.” “Th us, the contours of women’s ‘voice’ are simultaneously confron-
tational ( in response to diff erent interests) and collaborative (in response to 
shared interests)” (as cited in Collins, 1998, p. 238). While some of the women 
of the SSGs may share similar experiences or diff er in their personal interests, 
all of these contours infl uence their campesina pedagogies.
I consider the pedagogies emanating from the SSGs as encompassing a 
womanist perspective because they are altered by and representative of wom-
en’s diverse experiences and the arenas in which they take place. Th us, campe-
sina pedagogies of the everyday highlight the mundane and the ordinary as 
powerful sites for learning and teaching. Consequently, an understanding 
of campesina pedagogies requires a context-embedded understanding of 
women’s realities and that of their communities, as well as an exploration of 
campesinas’ socio-cultural and economic daily conditions. In this manner, 
the idea of “pedagogy” is extended to include everyday teachings and learning 
within a multitude of spaces (Hernández, 1997).
In this article, I address the multiple enactments of campesina teachings 
and learning as “pedagogical forms.” Consequently, I seek to excavate new 
understandings of pedagogy by eliciting the pedagogical forms en la vida 
cotidiana de mujeres campesinas  (in the everyday lives of campesinas). I aim 
to demonstrate its womanist qualities with portraits of women’s intimate rela-
tions with family and community, as well as the many socio-cultural and eco-
nomic factors aff ecting these relations. Certainly, these portraits of new and 
multiple pedagogical forms cue us into the teachings and learning, knowledge 
creation, and identity production in oft  en “forgotten” communities. Th ese 
portraits also challenge critical educators to transform our notions of “peda-
gogy” in centering the lives and sensibilities of women en la vida cotidiana .
Womanist Pedagogies de Mujeres Desjuiciadas
Th e scene is a fairly new neighborhood on the outskirts of town. Th e main 
street is newly paved, however, Carolina’s house still sits on a dirt road. 
Her home is a place for another small savings group. As the women enter 
continually, “las Buenas Tardes” (“Good Aft ernoon”) are heard for at least 
half an hour. Carolina, then, opens her notebook and begins to call out 
the members’ names. Julieta approaches and hands Carolina her money 
and places a coin in a communal bag. Later in the week, Carolina will 
take a bus downtown and secure the women’s money in a popular sav-
ings bank to earn interest. On this occasion, the small savings group’s 
discussion focuses on the literacy training of three group members. Dur-
ing the session, Carolina, Fabiola, and Julieta discuss their unexpected 
position as future educators. Th ey are amused at the irony that as formally 
RT54118_C012.indd   249RT54118_C012.indd   249 7/8/06   6:55:36 PM7/8/06   6:55:36 PM


--- PAGE 307 ---
250 • Th e Womanist Reader
 uneducated women they are handed the responsibilities of educators. 
Th ey laugh loudly and tears of joy roll down their cheeks when Fabiola 
fi rst refers to themselves as “ Mujeres Desjuiciadas, mujeres sin juicio ” 
(women lacking judgement or care). “ Estamos bien locas ” (“we’re crazy”) 
is Carolina’s response. We all laugh for the next half hour. Th  eir amuse-
ment and fancy confi  rm ed to m e th eir gr ea t self -assuran ce an d oa th to 
their endeavor.
Mujeres desjuiciadas,  Carolina, Julieta and Fabiola describe themselves as 
w o m e n  “ l a c k i n g  s e n s e ,  r e a s o n  o r  s a n i t y . ”  Th is description is very similar 
to one of Alice Walker’s defi  nitions of womanist, derived from womanish, 
“usually referring to outrageous, audacious, courageous or willful behavior” 
(Walker, 1983, p. xi). Women actively involved in the small savings groups are 
labeled by men and women in their communities as uncontrollable women 
who “govern” their husbands and want “to know more and in greater depth 
than is considered ‘good’ for them” (Walker, 1983, p. xi). Carolina, Julieta and 
Fabiola, however, consider their behavior and interests as expressing “ una 
inquietud” (a restlessness for more), both in their choice to be on the “street” 
working with people and in their fury to learn more about their community’s 
social conditions. Th i s  fu s i o n  o f  d e d i c a ti o n  an d  i m p ul s e ,  una inquietud,  is 
what inspires women of these rural communities to act upon their commu-
nity’s problems.
Th at same inquietud inspired me to leave my comfort zone to trial the fi elds 
of the intelligencia and rummage through the archives of my ancestry and 
culture. While my initial encounter with Carolina, Julieta and Fabiola came as 
a result of my affi  liation with PLAMAC ( Proyectos Laubach de Alfabetización 
Popular en México, Asociación Civil —Laubach Popular Literacy Projects in 
Mexico, Civil Association), a grassroots organization, our friendship fl  our-
ished as I associated my own “willful behavior,” untamed soul and spiritual 
nature to their self-defi  nition of mujeres desjuiciadas . Initially, I was inter-
ested in the impact the ideology and methodology of the organization had on 
the rancherias. Interestingly enough, it was the women’s own appropriation of 
the SSGs that eventually became the focus of my study. Seven rancherias and 
one colonia (neighborhood), all centred in a historical city in the state of Gua-
najuato, are involved in PLAMAC’s popular literacy programs. I participated 
in and observed their intimate spaces of home, church, business and alter-
native medical treatmen ts. H o wever , m y insider / outsider position (Villenas, 
1996) as a Mexic Amerindian/Xicana
4 ethnographer in Central Mexico was 
also an issue I contended with. My Mexicanidad, as the daughter of a Mexican 
couple once forced to immigrate to the United States, facilitated my entrance 
and our future relationship. Conversely, my affi  liation to a country set on keep-
ing families apart raised some questions and distrust, but helped me under-
stand the many barriers separating and disrupting entire communities. Th  e 
RT54118_C012.indd   250RT54118_C012.indd   250 7/8/06   6:55:36 PM7/8/06   6:55:36 PM


--- PAGE 308 ---
Anthropology • 251
barriers women of these communities encounter led me to examine the SSGs 
as more than mere savings groups. A reconceptualization of pedagogy evolved 
centering campesinas’ diverse teachings and learning as they were enacted in 
the small savings groups. Consequently, aft  er participating and bearing wit-
ness to the women’s various pedagogical forms, existing notions of pedagogy 
seemed far less liberating.
Th us, to expand the idea of pedagogy it is necessary to untangle how inclu-
sive or exclusive the discourse on pedagogy has been, and how and where 
barriers are placed in terms of what may be considered pedagogical. Certainly, 
great strides have been made to conceptualize a more encompassing notion of 
pedadogy (Freire, 1998), by emphasizing the co-construction of knowledge 
and furthering the unidirectional view of teaching traditionally enacted in 
the school system by an instructor towards his/her students. However, ref-
erence to pedagogy in this manner fails to account for the everyday teach-
ings and learning of ordinary women. Because campesinas’ multiple subject 
positions represent an interlocking of multiple oppressions, where one is not 
more important than the other; neither a solely classed (Freire, 1998; Shor, 
1993) or gendered (Ellsworth, 1992; Gore, 1992; Luke, 1992) analysis captures 
and explains their pedagogical form. Furthermore, everyday ways of learning 
and teaching that arise around kitchen tables, on church steps, in local stores, 
and in family courtyards remain untheorized as distinct pedagogical forms 
(Guerra, 1998). Traditionally, reference to the kitchen table, for example, is 
still considered too personal and not rigorous enough (Collins, 1991). Conse-
quently, some scholars underestimate the importance of the “where” of teach-
ing and learning. For instance, a well-known critical pedagogue in response to 
my critique of male and public dominant pedagogical spaces, stated, “no, the 
classroom is not the kitchen table, and thus it can not be run like one.” Indeed, 
the classroom is not the kitchen table, but the kitchen table and church steps 
m ust also be analyzed as real pedagogical spaces for man y underprivileged 
groups. Instead, consideration of the multiplicity of factors aff ecting campesi-
nas’ personal and communal development requires an expanded conception 
of pedagogy that accounts for the severe discrimination their campesina sta-
tus represents (as poor women in a highly migratory sector of the country). 
For instance, Fink states, “with Paulo Freire, popular education has tried to 
create a pedagogy for the oppressed, but it has not delved deeply enough into 
how to address the problem of women. A popular education that does not 
recognize women’s subordination is not removed from the reproduction of 
the sex-gender system of domination” (1992, p. 278). Womanist pedagogies 
advance traditional notions of “pedagogy” by situating it among groups of 
people traditionally unheard and spaces continually unexplored. Moreover, 
womanist pedagogies of the everyday, enacted by everyday people serve to 
reclaim campesina intellectual traditions, like those found among ourselves 
in our churches, our reunions, and in our everyday learning and teachings 
RT54118_C012.indd   251RT54118_C012.indd   251 7/8/06   6:55:36 PM7/8/06   6:55:36 PM


--- PAGE 309 ---
252 • Th e Womanist Reader
with our family and community members (Collins, 1991). Furthermore, 
analyses of these spaces open a diff  erent window to our notion of pedadogy 
and the knowledge created. To sit under the family tree is to hear the spo-
ken, but untold stories, those not entering the classroom of white privileged 
male scholars. In addition, the pedagogies, knowledge and experiences that 
arise further expand our understanding of Mexicana/o, Latina/o knowledge 
(Behar, 1993; Carger, 1996; Delgado-Gaitan & Trueba, 1991; Guerra, 1998; 
Valdés, 1996; Vasquez et al., 1994; Vélez Ibáñez & Greenberg, 1992) and the 
theories emerging.
While some Feminists of Color speak directly to the issue of pedagogy 
(Hernández, 1997; Villenas & Moreno, 2001) and others indirectly (Anzaldúa, 
1987, 1990; Behar, 1993; Collins, 1991; Davis, 1981; hooks, 1989; Walker, 
1983), their analyses of Th ird World women’s knowledge and experience pro-
vide great insight and understanding to womanist pedagogies encompassing 
women’s ways of expressing and sharing their lived realities. Our perceptive-
ness emanates from our personal and communal experience as Women of 
Color with inseparable ties to our people’s socio-economic and historical con-
ditions. We oft en share the experiences of operating “in a pluralistic mode” 
(Anzaldúa, 1987, p. 79), as well as an understanding that ultimately all these 
experiences shape the diverse ways we engage, teach and learn from one 
another. Women’s perceptiveness and vision draw attention to “other forms 
of life” and “worldviews” traditionally ignored (Hernández, 1997, p. 24), so as 
women conceive of communal change it is acutely informed by their personal 
vision. Hernández writes, “the conception of the subject as ‘compound iden-
tities’ points to a pedagogy that recognizes not only a multiplicity of subject 
positions, but also the tension among them” (1997, p. 19). I would add that 
the “multiplicity of subject positions” and “tensions among them” construct 
a diversity of pedagogical forms (spirituality, well-being and convivencia, for 
instance) enacted in women’s reunions. Moreover, equally important to the 
knowledge being constructed among campesinas is the spatial choice foster-
ing fruitful sharing.
Th e pedagogies Julieta, Carolina and Fabiola live everyday refl  ect rest-
lessness for learning and teaching. Th  e small savings groups represent a 
space where the women fi  nd personal growth and community in a manner 
fl exible to their positions as heads of households and working women. Th  e 
creation of community in the SSGs establishes coalitions of women ready to 
provide each other moral, spiritual, curative, and economic support. Hence, 
the portraits are a glimpse into the lived realities of Mexicanas  participat-
ing in the small savings groups. Th  ey describe a “collective response to … 
class [gender and other] problems, where to fi  ght for the whole community 
is to fi ght for oneself” (Collins, 1998, p. 27). Th  e SSGs, therefore, provide 
women a space from which to theorize about the larger context and build 
the strength to deal with communal problems. Th  e barriers, discussed next, 
RT54118_C012.indd   252RT54118_C012.indd   252 7/8/06   6:55:36 PM7/8/06   6:55:36 PM


--- PAGE 310 ---
Anthropology • 253
off er an examination of the larger context in which campesinas  fi nd them-
selves every day.
High Wire Fences: Ruptures in Family and Community Composure
A womanist focus encompasses the reasons why groups of people come 
t o g e t h e r  a s  t h e y  d o .  I t  i s  c l e a r  t h a t  p e o p l e ’ s  s o c i o - h i s t o r i c a l  a n d  e c o n o m i c  
conditions determine how they come together and for what ends, thus, it 
is equally important and inevitable to discuss whole groups of peoples and 
the factors aff ecting their livelihood. Poor and discriminated women do not 
count on the privilege of ignoring the social and economic conditions that 
keep their families from living with dignity and subsisting economically. 
Womanist pedagogies, therefore, emerge to include whole communities of 
people—elders, women, men and children of entire communities kept on the 
margins of Mexico’s socio-political and economic development. Womanist 
pedagogies respond to the necessities of entire groups of peoples by confront-
ing and engaging with those factors or barriers most aff  ecting their personal 
and communal development.
Environmental and Socioeconomic Conditions
Th e most prominent high wire fence aff  ecting this region of the country and 
its inhabitants is the lack of precipitation, and the semi-desert, and ruggedness 
of the land. Established agricultural areas struggle to produce just enough for 
the personal consumption of their population. In town, men and women can 
only expect to make minimum wages in the production of craft s, pottery, tex-
tiles, and footwear. In the state of Guanajuato, the two most important occu-
pations are those dedicated to the agriculture and livestock industry (21.7%) 
and craft smanship (18.5%) (Guanajuato Demográfi co, 1995). In both occupa-
tions women play an important role. In the rancherias, for example, women 
work both out in the fi eld and in their homes. Similarly, in town, women work 
both in their home talleres (shops) and attend to numerous household chores. 
Because most of the women perform their work at home or nearby the per-
centage of economically inactive women in the state is said to be high (80%) 
(Consejo Estatal de Poblacion, 1995). Th ese numbers, however, clearly ignore 
in-house talleres and women’s work in the home space.
Another factor limiting local development is the lack of roads and poor 
transportation in town, which is easily disrupted by what little rainfall there 
is. Th ese factors make low-paying jobs in town unattractive and higher educa-
tion impossible. Student and teacher attendance is sporadic, since both must 
walk long distances and in potentially fatal conditions. For instance, young 
women must literally carry their younger siblings through the river to get to 
school.
One determining factor explaining the high concentration of all women 
SSGs is the absence of men in the communities. Womanist pedagogies are 
RT54118_C012.indd   253RT54118_C012.indd   253 7/8/06   6:55:37 PM7/8/06   6:55:37 PM


--- PAGE 311 ---
254 • Th e Womanist Reader
non-exclusionary and the men of these communities can equally benefi t from 
the educational, spiritual, and collective support of these reunions. However, 
as a result of the high wire fences mentioned earlier, these communities wit-
ness the emigration of about 80% of their men. Some men migrate to larger 
cities in the Mexican republic, but most are known to enter Mexico’s neigh-
boring country to the north. Rural communities suff  er from higher numbers 
of emigration, but the state, in general, ranks third in the country with the 
highest expulsion of migrants (Consejo Estatal de Poblacion, 1997). Th  ese 
numbers leave almost every family with one or no men. Consequently, what 
remain are whole communities of women with few men over the age of 14. 
Women are left  to assume the production of the land, the care and education 
of the children, and the overall management of the community.
Socially Constructed Gender-Speciﬁ  c Beliefs
Many of the high wire fences aff  ecting Mexico’s rural communities directly 
implicate women. Barriers aff ecting women are of domestic, social, and eco-
nomic nature. For instance, many women still fi  nd themselves restricted to 
their household chores without the freedom to come and go, even to church 
activities. Both family obligations and male domination hinder women’s per-
sonal and social development outside the home. Housework and attending to 
the needs of the family keep women fully occupied. Women fi  nd this work 
exhausting, monotonous, and spiritually dead. In relation to getting out of the 
house, Julieta, for instance, states:
Y o  q u i e r o  s a l i r  d e  l a  r u t i n a  d e  l a  c a s a ,  y  q u i e r o  r e l a c i o n a r m e  a m  l o s  
demás. No nomás estar ahí [en la casa], como muerta—] si yo vivo! Y 
cuando sal go me distraigo más, ya no ando de malas, y hasta regreso a la 
casa con más ganas de hacer el quehacer y atender a los niños. (Interview, 
March 28, 2000)
(I want to get out of the routine and connect with others. Not just be 
there [at home], like I am dead—I am alive! And when I get out, I amuse 
myself, and am not in a bad mood. I even get back home with more 
energy to do my chores and attend to the children.)
Like the women in Villenas’s study (2001), the women of these communities 
have great respect and admiration for the home and the work they do in it. 
However, they also fi nd that it is unrecognized and unappreciated work and 
it is from these attitudes that the monotony and feeling of complete seclusion 
from the rest of the community arise.
Many of the women’s chores and family obligations restrict their time out-
side the home. Th is is apparent in their absenteeism and “fate” to save but 
not participate in the conversation or convivencia (gathering) of the small 
savings groups. Moreover, they have been socialized to believe that spending 
RT54118_C012.indd   254RT54118_C012.indd   254 7/8/06   6:55:37 PM7/8/06   6:55:37 PM


--- PAGE 312 ---
Anthropology • 255
time with other women denotes extraneous unproductive gossiping. Further 
restricting the engagement of women is the lack of time women are “allowed” 
to spend outside the home. Marisol, a SSG participant, comments that she can 
only get out once a day because the work she does in the fi  eld, in her home, 
and her husband’s attitude towards her “extraneous” activities do not allow 
for more. She states:
Es que es difícil para la mayoría de las mujeres salir. No podemos salir a 
la hora que queremos. Después que me regreso a la casa ya no me dejan 
salir. Mi esposo se pone muy sospechoso de lo que hago en éstas reuniones 
(pequeños grupos de ahorro). (Informal interview, September 20, 1999)
(It’s diffi  cult for the majority of the women to get out. We can’t just get 
out at whatever time we please. Aft er I get back home I don’t have per-
mission to get out anymore. My husband gets real suspicious of what I 
do at these reunions [small savings groups].)
Campesínas organizing is limited both by their workload and by the overall 
attitudes of the men and community at large. Socially constructed beliefs of 
women’s place in the home remain a huge barrier for campesinas. Even though 
a large portion of the men of the communities are not physically present their 
beliefs with regard to women’s place in society holds strong. Women are col-
lectively forsaken for not conforming to community gender-specifi  c expec-
tations. Th e overall dynamic of the group, then, changes when androcentric 
attitudes infi ltrate SSG spaces. For example, Angelica explains the infl  uence 
one man had on the overall ambience of her small savings group:
Yo si he tenido problemas ahora que ha llegado mi cuñado de los Estados 
Unidos. No deja a su esposa participar, y como que el grupo ha cambiado. 
El no deja a nadie participar (agusto). Como él no hace nada (Group dis-
cussion, October 21, 1999)
(I have had problems now that my brother-in-law has arrived from 
the United States. He doesn’t let his wife participate, and like the group 
has changed. He doesn’t let anyone participate [comfortably]. Since he 
doesn’t do anything.)
A p p a r e n t  i n  A n g e l i c a ’ s  c o m m e n t  i s  t h e  d e g r e e  o f  i n fl uence absent men 
(through their constant communication with family and male returnees) and 
sociall y  co nstru ct ed  i d eals  o f  g e n d e r  r o l es  ha v e  o n  th e  o v e rall  gr o u p .  Th us, 
women constantly struggle not only with the men in their immediate family 
(present or absent) but against gender-specifi c attitudes deeply embedded in 
the culture of the community. Th is is also apparent in a popular saying used 
both by the men and women of these communities: Las mujeres juntas, sólo 
difuntas (W omen together, only dead). Or when Jovita’ s husband says to her 
Primero la obligatión y lue go la devoción  (First to your obligation and then to 
RT54118_C012.indd   255RT54118_C012.indd   255 7/8/06   6:55:37 PM7/8/06   6:55:37 PM


--- PAGE 313 ---
256 • Th e Womanist Reader
your devotion). Sayings like these are founded on the idea that women must 
fi rst attend to their chores and obligations and then to “extraneous” activities. 
Moreover, if the activities involve only women they are considered danger-
ous and undeserving. Campesinas who dare to organize and convivir in very 
womanist ways expose themselves to ridicule and criticism not only of them-
selves but also of their husband and family. Th ey are many times referred to 
as women que no tienen gobierno; viejas huevonas que no tienen quehacer; 
traen el viejo entre las patas y él no las puede controlar (they don’t have anyone 
to govern them; they are lazy women that don’t have anything better to do; 
they’ve got their husband between their feet and he can’t control them). Th ese 
attitudes demoralize even the few husbands who do support their wives, by 
questioning their manliness and ability to “govern” in their home.
Th e small savings groups, therefore, serve as organizing mechanisms 
intended to solve some of the above economic and social dilemmas. For 
instance, the SSGs off  er credit possibilities to men and women, resulting in 
viable alternatives to generate self- or communal employment, suitable to the 
region. For example, one objective of the small savings groups is to decrease 
the level of consumerism and instead emphasize the production of goods. 
Women are encouraged to invest in farm animals, the production of fruit 
trees, and reforestation. Th e small savings groups also serve as educational 
settings by creating a space of convivencia (coming together), recovery of his-
tory, identity and self-esteem of the community, as well as the promotion of 
literacies (Street, 1984). Th e lessons learned and experienced contribute to the 
overall organization and leadership of women and men, ultimately contrib-
uting to the overall development of their communities. Consequently, what 
pedagogical form does women’s teachings and learning take in the small 
savings groups? As mentioned previously, womanist pedagogies are formed 
through and from the conditions of women and their communities. Women 
of the SSG, dedicated to the wholeness of their entire community, express 
their teachings and learning in what I found to be three pedagogical forms: 
spirituality, well-being and convivencia.
Campesina Pedagogical Forms
Spirituality: A Pervasive Force in Women’s Lives (Austin, 1999)
Campesinas’ spiritual inclination is intimately tied to their everyday teachings 
and learning. In Latin America and Mexico the church represents one of the 
few human development options for women in rural communities. In this 
part of the country church activities are/were one of the only means of per-
sonal, spiritual, and intellectual growth for women. Similarly today, church 
activities continue to be spaces where women can participate in a “dignifi  ed” 
manner outside the home (Consejo Estatal de Poblacion, 1994). At the same time 
that the church is partially responsible for the repressive patriarchal  ideologies 
RT54118_C012.indd   256RT54118_C012.indd   256 7/8/06   6:55:38 PM7/8/06   6:55:38 PM


--- PAGE 314 ---
Anthropology • 257
among Latinas/os, Popular Catholicism 5 remains a presence of spiritual and 
moral support against injustices. For example, prominent fi  gures of the 
c h u r c h  p l a y e d  i m p o r t a n t  r o l e s  i n  M e x i c o ’ s  i n d e p e n d e n c e  f r o m  S p a i n ,  t h e  
Chicano/a movement of the 1960s (Hurtado, 1996), and recently in the upris-
ing of indigenous peoples in Chiapas. On a more personal and everyday level, 
however, the spiritual connection men and women have to Popular Catholi-
cism serves as a means to deal with daily problems. Women’s spirituality 
serves as a catalyst with which to struggle and combat the daily turmoil of their 
home, work or community. As Collins states, “spirituality comprises articles 
of faith that provide a conceptual framework for living everyday life” (Collins, 
1998, p. 245). Pedagogies, henceforth, manifest in the manner campesinas 
learn, teach and express themselves in their spirituality. Th  is is apparent in 
the manner in which spirituality permeates women’s everyday activities and 
language, such as women’s frequent reference to the Virgin Mary, Jesus, and 
God in their speech. When they state “Dios se lo pague” or “Dios mediante nos 
vemos mañana” (“God will repay you” or “God willing we will see each other 
tomorrow”), their statements represent not only their recognition of some 
spiritual form in their lives, but Its power to help them and others through 
the day. Th eir spiritual inclination is also apparent in their direct and indi-
rect participation in the church. Directly, many of the women are involved as 
honorarias, participate actively in the pastoral social,
6 and in their reverence 
of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Indirectly, many attend pastoral social workshops 
on such themes as alternative medicine and nourishment.
Women’s involvement in the pastoral social  is an infl uential motivator to 
their participation in other communal activities. For instance, most of the 
women involved in the SSGs, especially in Carolina’s group, are members of the 
pastoral social. Carolina describes the work of the pastoral social as follows:
Vieron (la iglesia)  que Jesus cuando vino aquí no trabajo sólo lo espiri-
tual, trabajo también lo social, y lo político. El anduvo afuera, allá viendo 
como trabajaban, que hacian. Siempre se intereso en los demás. Y por los 
demás es que … nace la pastoral social . (Interview, January 18, 2000)
(Th ey [the church] understood that when Jesus was here, he didn’t 
just work the spiritual, rather also the social and the political. He was 
out, seeing how people worked and what they did. He was always inter-
ested in others, in helping others. And for others is that … the pastoral 
social is born.)
Th e pastoral social serves as a medium for the Catholic Church to have the laity 
refl ect on their condition, spirituality, rights as humans, health, and nutrition. 
Th rough the pastoral social  the women attend various workshops on such 
themes as human rights, alternative medicine, and nutrition. Th ese workshops 
are an attempt to provide poor communities alternative ways of being in the 
RT54118_C012.indd   257RT54118_C012.indd   257 7/8/06   6:55:38 PM7/8/06   6:55:38 PM


--- PAGE 315 ---
258 • Th e Womanist Reader
world. Th us, women’s direct or indirect participation in the church gives them 
access to personal or communal development programs. Foremost, women’s 
involvement in the church demonstrates women’s mode of learning and shar-
ing knowledge is intimately tied to their spiritual expression.
Apparent in the portraits is the presence of women’s spirituality as the 
driving force igniting their personal growth and ability to act on their com-
mitment to community. Further theorizing the concept of pedagogy needs to 
include the manner in which women live their spirituality everyday, since it 
is through their spirituality that they fi  nd the strength to defy their fears and 
embark on new ground. Women, like Carolina, fi  nd in their spirituality and 
commitment the strength to lead groups of women in prayer, organization, 
and convivencia (gathering). She describes her experience in the honorarias 
as follows:
Me costó mucho [hablar y organizar a la gente]. Te juro que lagrimas me 
costaron porque yo no sabia hablar … yo empezaba a leer el ritual del-
ante del grupo, hijole sentia que me ponia bien colorada, sentia fellisimo. 
Y lue go tenia que llevarles la semilla eucaristica, y muchas cosas no las 
sabia hacer. Y llevar la lista de cada una, y los aportes, pagar las misas 
y todo, todo. Llegaba a mi casa y hijole hasta queria dejarme caer ahí y 
revolcarme. “Soy una imítil no se hacer nada,” así me decia, por que no 
estaba acostumbrada hablar, bien encerrada. No pues ahora hablo más 
que una perica. (Interview, January 19, 2000)
(It cost me a lot [to speak and organize people]. I swear it cost me 
tears, because I didn’t know how to speak. I would start to read the rit-
ual in front of the group, and boy I would feel myself getting all red, 
and I just felt awful. And then I had to take them the Eucharist, and 
there were many things I didn’t know. Like take roll and all their con-
tributions, pay masses, everything. I would come home and boy I even 
wanted to throw myself there and roll on the ground, “I am useless, I 
can’t do anything.” Th at’s what I use to say to myself. All of that because 
I wasn’t use to speaking in front of people, always confi  ned. But now I 
talk more than a parrot.)
Carolina mentions that from her spiritual inclination to help others she 
felt compelled to get out of her home and become more involved. It was her 
involvement in the honoraria group mentioned above that prepared her to 
later act as director and animadora of the pastoral social  and small savings 
group, respectively. Her experience is grounded in a web of interpersonal rela-
tions with her spiritual self, her commitment to others and her involvement 
in the church (Rodriguez, 1994). Indeed, women’s spirituality permeates their 
daily living by manifesting itself subtly or boldly in their speech and actions. 
Even though it usually “manifests in the form of Catholicism because it is the 
RT54118_C012.indd   258RT54118_C012.indd   258 7/8/06   6:55:38 PM7/8/06   6:55:38 PM


--- PAGE 316 ---
Anthropology • 259
religion she has been taught” it is the spirituality “which has been with women 
since pre-Conquest times and which precedes Christianity in Europe, [which] 
is the unspoken key to her strength and endurance as a female throughout all 
the ages” (Castillo, 1994, p. 95).
Jovita’s small savings group in the second portrait is also an example of 
women’s spiritual nature. Th eir spirituality manifests itself in their speech 
and actions, as well as their meeting choice. Th  eir small chapel represents a 
sacred intimate safe space inviting women to converse, learn, and convivir. A 
fi nalizing prayer and song also accompany their reunions, a giving of thanks 
for a day’s accomplishment and living another day. Th e small savings groups 
are also given a name, a way of remembering community elders now deceased 
but not forgotten. Some groups choose to name their group aft er a saint. One 
group mimed their group in homage to Nuestra Virgen de Guadalupe,  Virgin 
of the Americas. In order to foster the practice of reading and writing the 
groups are also encouraged to write songs about the initiation of their sav-
ings groups. Th ese women’s songs talk about the joyful spirit of what has been 
learned, of the accomplishments and of their convivencia. Many songs give 
thanks to those involved, while others rejoice women’s existence and their 
devotion to Our Lady of Guadalupe. One group in particular sang reverence 
to Our Lady of Guadalupe in the form of a corrido (Mexican ballad/song), to 
the music of La Carta Abierta,  with the following words:
Voy a formar un grupo de unas doce personas para animarlos ha ahorrar 
y también, y también a estudiar, y así poder lograr muchas cosas más. 
El nombre de muestro grupo es la Guadalupana, es la que siempre guía, 
a toditas nuestras almas para hacer todo bien y querernos también … 
(Personal communication, June 14, 2000)
(I am going to form a group of about 12 people, so that I can encour-
age them to save and also to learn, and then accomplish lots more things. 
Th e name of our group is the Guadalupana. She is the one that always 
guides our souls to do things right and also to love each other.)
Th e women have also written communal prayers. In them they ask for the 
strength to defend their rights as women and help their communities move 
forward. In the reading and writing aspect of their small savings groups the 
women have also learned humility to teach others. Th  e reading and writing 
method used emphasizes the need to meet the spiritual needs of the groups, 
their self-esteem, security, independence, self-improvement, participa-
tion, and aff ection (Documento de Educación de Adultos). Th eir actions are 
informed by the Laubach method of literacy, which intends to cultivate these 
characteristics in people in order to prepare them to change their community 
and society.
RT54118_C012.indd   259RT54118_C012.indd   259 7/8/06   6:55:38 PM7/8/06   6:55:38 PM


--- PAGE 317 ---
260 • Th e Womanist Reader
Jovita and Carolina’s groups, as well as other small savings groups, manifest 
a spirituality refl exive of their Mexicanidad, as women of rural communities 
with ties to Otomi and Chichimeca peoples, 7 as well as an undeniably strong 
Catholic infl uence. Women’s spirituality prevails as the most signifi cant energy 
in women’s lives. It continues to be the driving force for women’s commitment 
to family and community, their dedication in search of alternative answers, and 
the source from which women fi nd the strength to overcome and deal with the 
daily turmoil of life. How pedagogies manifest themselves through women’s 
spirituality is of an essence to expanding our notion of pedagogy. However, the 
connections between spirituality and women’s well-being and folk traditions 
are inseparable. Ideally, to speak of pedagogies is to converse simultaneously 
with women’s spirituality, use of folk medicine, and convivencia.
Folk Medicine and Campesina Well-Being
On this day Carolina is not her usual self, she is serene and walks cautiously 
throughout the room. As the women enter, she quietly opens her notebook 
an d  b e gin s  t o  call  e n d  mim es.  U p o n  fi nishing, several women ask about 
her health. “¿Esta bien Doña Carolina?” (“Are you alright?”) Carolina, then, 
spiritually compelled to share what to her was a calling from God, proceeds 
to share her recent miscarriage. “ Sentí morirme, y lo único que pude pen-
sar es que me voy a morir y nadie ésta aquí. Como es posible que teniendo 
siempre reuniones con mujeres me vaya morir sola.” (“I felt like dying, and 
the only thing I could think of is that I will die and no one is here. How can 
it be possible that if I always have reunions with women I will die alone.”) 
Carolina shares her anguish, need for assistance and distrust of doctors and 
mainstream medicine. Doña Celina, then, reminds the group to remain 
close, to continue building compañerismo so that no woman feels alone in a 
time of need. Several suggestions and alternative medical treatments come 
out of the discussion. Alone with me, Carolina ends the reunion pondering 
how much she still feels she needs to do: “Señor no me lleves porque todavía 
no me realizo, falta mucho que corregir” (“Lord, don’t take me, I am not yet 
fulfi lled, there is still so much to correct”).
For hundreds of years as Mexicanas we have both celebrated and problema-
tized our mestizaje (the union of two worlds) (Anzaldúa, 1987, 1990; Castillo, 
1994; Moraga & Anzaldúa, 1983; Paz, 1996). Th  is union, more like a colli-
sion, has in actuality forced us to reject our Indianness, its knowledge and 
belief system, and privileged what was once considered a more civilized and 
advanced culture. As Castillo writes, “as Christianized mestizas we have been 
conditioned for generations to reject our indigena blood, as well as invalidate 
folk medicine for Western medical practices” (Castillo, 1994, p. 87). Tradi-
tions and beliefs lost and in many cases destroyed include ancient and natural 
ways of healing the body and soul. Some of these natural methods endured 
RT54118_C012.indd   260RT54118_C012.indd   260 7/8/06   6:55:39 PM7/8/06   6:55:39 PM


--- PAGE 318 ---
Anthropology • 261
colonization, imperialism, and genocide, while others forever lost or just now 
resurrecting symbolize attempts at revitalizing strong pieces of ourselves. “In 
other words, we are reclaiming all that which was taken away from us by the 
particular direction civilization took. We will determine for ourselves what 
makes us feel whole, what brings us tranquility, strength, courage to face the 
countless—not for one moment imagined—obstacles in the path on our jour-
ney toward being fulfi lled human beings” (Castillo, 1994, p. 147). As Castillo 
states, poor women of color face tremendous daily turmoil that positions us 
to search for the means to proceed as “fulfi  lled human beings.” Campesina 
well-being, consequently, relies on the nature of her spirituality to fi  nd solu-
tions to ailments, a spirituality that takes many forms, such as: an affi   nity 
to her Cristianismo, devotion to a particular saint, seeking the help of folk 
practitioners (who themselves use various spiritual mediums), curanderos 
(folk healers), espiritistas  ( spiritual guides or psychics ), hueseros (folk chiro-
practors), and a reliance on her dreams and intuition (Castillo, 1994). Many 
Mexicanas utilize their indigenous and Spanish curative and spiritual ties to 
withstand life’s lesions and live a joyful existence. Julieta, for instance, during 
many of our visits together commented on her health and state of mind. Th  e 
absence of her husband coupled with her added responsibilities as sole parent, 
provider, and educator to her four children resulted in various health prob-
lems. Occasionally she relied on her dreams and intuition to determine the 
source of her health problems and from them detect possible solutions. Such 
remedies included a limpia (spiritual cleansing) she herself conducts, prepara-
tion of particular herbs she is familiar with, or a visit to her local dispensario 
(dispensary), curandera or traditional doctor. Most commonly, if personal 
treatment of her ailments did not function, attendance at the town’s dispensa-
rio or local curandera was the next choice of preference.
Th e dispensario, located in a room adjacent to the town’ s Catholic Cathe-
dral, represents what seems to be the church’s attempt to trabajar lo social  
(work the trenches of its congregation) and recover what it once lived to anni-
hilate. Th e dispensario provides herbal, therapeutic, and chiropractic healing 
at extremely low cost by utilizing various methods being revived and imple-
mented by professionals in Mexico and Cuba. One method in particular is the 
Microdosis (literally meaning minute dosage). La microdosis  is a therapeutic 
method used in small quantities on the tongue, skin or ear, utilizing plants, 
patent medication, and fetal or adult tissue. Th  e origin, development, and 
future of the Microdosis are based on the herb tradition. Indigenous medicine 
people, women and campesino elders bestow their knowledge with regards 
to identifying plants, their habitat, method, and time of collection. Andrea, 
Carolina, and Julieta, aside from frequenting the dispensario for their own 
health purposes, refer other women and families to the dispensario, attend 
workshops on the implementation of the Microdosis, and engage in the per-
sonal processing and consumption of plants in their communities.
RT54118_C012.indd   261RT54118_C012.indd   261 7/8/06   6:55:39 PM7/8/06   6:55:39 PM


--- PAGE 319 ---
262 • Th e Womanist Reader
El Curanderismo (folk medicine), another frequent curative method utilized 
by some of the women in the small savings groups, embodies “Judeo-Chris-
tian religious beliefs, symbols, and rituals; early Arabic medicine and health 
practices (combined with Greek humoral medicine, revived during the Renais-
sance); medieval and later European witchcraft ; Native American herbal lore 
and health practices; modern beliefs about spiritualism and psychic phenom-
ena; and scientifi c medicine” (Trotter II & Chavira, 1997, p. 25). Th is tradition 
continues to exist in Mexico and Mexican and Mexican-American commu-
nities in the United States (Rose, 1978; Sherman, 1975; Trotter II & Chavira, 
1997). Curanderismo continues to be popular among Mexicanas/os in Mexico 
and the United States for various reasons. First, Mexicanas/os’ “cultural frame-
work acknowledges the existence of two sources of illness, one natural and one 
supernatural” (Trotter II & Chavira, 1997, p. 42). Each treated by its respec-
tive healer; Mexicanos/as treat the “natural” source through modern medicine 
and the “supernatural” by curanderos ( T r o tt e r  I I  &  C h a vi r a ,  1 9 9 7 )  o r  o th e r  
folk healers (i.e., espritistas). Second, the high cost of traditional health care, 
bureaucracy, and discrimination within the system represent another obstacle. 
Andrea, for instance, refused to visit a medical doctor during the extent of 
her pregnancy and only delivered in a medical clinic aft er her mother refused 
to serve as her partera (midwife). Her experience in the delivery room made 
her vow to never again deliver in a medical offi  ce (she delivered her fi rst two 
children in her home with the help of her mother and sisters). Inappropri-
ate questions with regard to the number of children she already had and her 
rural demarcation as a mujer de rancho (rural woman) hinted at the obvious 
discrimination. Th ird, “ curanderismo, as an alternative system of health care, 
places a strong emphasis on the social, psychological, and spiritual factors con-
tributing to illness and poor health” (Trotter II & Chavira, 1997, p. 45). For 
women raised with the belief that our well-being is linked to our body, soul, 
and state of mind and that all are aff ected by elements transpiring around our 
daily existence, it is not diffi  cult to conceive of our well-being as not necessarily 
bound to a medical disposition internal to our bodies, but rather to an aff ected 
psychic, soul, or aura. Lastly, curanderismo represents a traditionally cultural 
choice for many Latino Americanos. As mentioned earlier, Mexicanos/as uti-
lize one curative method over another depending on the source of their illness. 
Women who frequent curanderas make a conscientious choice to heal intuitive 
lesions in their spirit, body, and mind. It is their inner self informing them.
Women’s experience, intuitive sense, and participation in the processing and 
use of alternative medical treatments and the frequenting of curanderas emerge 
in the small savings groups. Pedagogies, in this sense, encompass an articulation 
of health issues, such as the discovery of remedies, and the sharing and alle-
viation of illnesses. Th is is apparent in Carolina’ s portrait regarding her recent 
miscarriage. Not only was she able to ease the feeling of anguish and near-death 
experience, but she also received healing suggestions and compañera support. 
RT54118_C012.indd   262RT54118_C012.indd   262 7/8/06   6:55:39 PM7/8/06   6:55:39 PM


--- PAGE 320 ---
Anthropology • 263
Th e everyday pedagogies of poor women include conversations surrounding 
health issues far removed from a doctor’s offi  ce. Women also fi nd that even if 
a cure is not recommended, el desaho go (alleviation) exists. Doña Imelda, for 
instance, does not attend the SSGs to save, as much as she does to desahogarse, 
relieve herself of ailments she can share with the group. Th  e SSGs are places 
where women can share health problems amongst compañeras tha t will n o t 
judge their situation as medically untreatable. Poor women tire or lose faith in 
the misdiagnosis of traditional medicine’s surmise of their ailments as psycho-
logical and untreatable, explaining the frequency of their resort to curanderas. 
Instead, women’s ailments are recognized in the SSGs as real symptoms of real 
health problems many times caused by life’s lesions (Finkler, 1994). Julieta, 
Andrea, and Fabiola’s life lesions, for example, are intensifi  ed by the absence 
of their husbands or sons, the anguish of their illegality in the US and some-
times their disappearance or death. Many women grieve day and night as they 
pray for the safe arrival of their men in the United States.
8 Fabiola’s prayers, 
however, were to no avail; her son disappeared in the Rio Grande 18 months 
ago. Many of these “health problems” go undetected or ignored by traditional 
medical staff  who treat only the body. Womanist pedagogies embody conver-
sations surrounding women’s ailments, which serve as relief systems, as well as 
moral, spiritual, and medical support. Hence, as Castillo states, once a woman’s 
knowledge and experiences are shared and reaffi  rmed (as they oft en are in the 
SSGs), she uses the affi  rmation “to strengthen herself and to share her knowl-
edge with others. Ultimately we seek to propel ourselves into a collective state 
of being, which is so ancient we will consider it new” ( 1994, p. 1 60 ). Clearly , 
t o  e xp an d  o ur  un d e r s t an din g  o f  p e d a g o gi e s  th e y  m u s t  b e  un d e r s t o o d  a s  a  
 collective form of teaching and learning responding to the everyday, ordinary, 
and mundane lesions and joys of all peoples. Pedagogies, in this sense, can 
be understood as taking various forms depending on those groups of peoples 
engaging in them. Th  e intuitive and experiential knowledge women hold, 
however, should be shared, and so the beauty of convivencia (coming together) 
lies in the teachings and learning materializing every day.
Convivencia: We Gather to LIVE among One Another
Th e word convivir literally means to live life among others, to learn and share. 
Th e women of the small savings groups frequently use the word convivir when 
describing their reunions. For the women la convivencia is a way of gathering 
to live, to coexist. Th e most frequent answer to the questions “What have you 
learned in the small savings groups?” and “How have you benefi  ted from the 
small savings groups?” is convivir can los demás (to gather and live among oth-
ers). La convivencia, which the SSGs foster, brings people together to share their 
everyday problems, ideas, knowledge, and experiences. Th e women of the small 
savings groups learn they share similar experiences, such as the migration of the 
men in their family. Th ey are not alone in their feelings that they act as father 
RT54118_C012.indd   263RT54118_C012.indd   263 7/8/06   6:55:40 PM7/8/06   6:55:40 PM


--- PAGE 321 ---
264 • Th e Womanist Reader
and mother of the family, lack the support of another adult, and their children 
respond aggressively to the absence of male fi  gures in the family. However, 
women not only share mutual experiences but also encounter and try to make 
sense of their diverse experiences. Th is is apparent in a Community experience 
recovery workshop,
9 in which the women discussed the migration problem in 
their communities. Part of the conversation is as follows:
Marlen: Pues yo veo que están mejor económicamente  (las que tienen 
esposos en los Estados Unidos).  La manera de vivir es diferente, cam-
bian su cuartito su cuartito viejo por uno nuevo, visten mejor .
Angelica: Pent no es tanto, pierden (los niños) el amor del padre. Los hijos 
se rebelan.
Julieta: Mi opinión es como que si les afecta mucho (a los hijos), se enferman 
mucho, se ponen agresivos. Y yo estoy igual que las demás (económica-
mente), pero ellas lo disfrutan más. No nos podemos resignar. Es hor-
rible, sabe horrible . (Workshop discussion, January 18, 2000)
(Marlen: Well, I see that they are better off   economically [women who 
h a v e  h us b an ds  in  th e  U ni t ed  S ta t es ] .  Th eir living style is diff  erent, 
they change their old room for a new one, they dress better.
Angelica: But it is not that much, they [the children] lose the love of their 
father. Our children become rebellious.
J ulieta: M y o p ini o n is i t does aff ect them [the children], they are sick 
more oft en, they become aggressive. I am the same [economically] 
as the rest, but they enjoy what they have more. We can’t resign our-
selves to this situation. It’s horrible, it tastes horrible.)
Th e conversation brought women with similar and diff  erent experiences 
together to learn and negotiate pre-existing ideas of a common theme. Even 
though Marlen later sympathizes with the other women, her closing remarks, 
“poor but together” (with regard to her own situation) further demonstrate 
that a constant exchange of ideas and experiences is needed to make sense of 
even familiar problems. Th e connections made with women who we some-
times think have quite similar experiences turn out to be moments of refl  ec-
tion and problem solving. Th e convivencia women live in the SSGs nurtures 
the (re)discovery of experiences as well as a defi ance of old held beliefs.
Work and traditional perceptions of women’s place in the home persist 
as high wire fences disabling women’s organization. Th  us, recognition and 
not criticism is urgently needed for the overall development of campesinas 
and their communities. Patriarchal perceptions of what women’s roles are in 
society materialize into negative attitudes towards women deviating from tra-
ditional roles. As women come together they attempt to shatter a discourse 
socially enmeshed with the idea of governance, where to be singled out as a 
woman without “government” (mujeres sin gobierno) requires great strength, 
self-assurance, and resiliency. An integral part of the SSGs, therefore, is the 
RT54118_C012.indd   264RT54118_C012.indd   264 7/8/06   6:55:40 PM7/8/06   6:55:40 PM


--- PAGE 322 ---
Anthropology • 265
continual support of women’s personal development. For example, the SSG 
program leaders attempt to deal with community antagonism of women’s 
work outside the home by encouraging the animadoras to have group refl ec-
tions about women’s roles and the sharing of dilemmas or barriers encountered 
(such as Angelica’s example of her disruptive brother-in-law). Guillermina, 
PLAMAC leader, highlights women’s changing views as starting points for the 
whole community, when she states to the women:
Piensen en la educación que estamos obteniendo, el cambió de Mujer, nuestro 
cambió de actitud, ahí esta el cambió. (Group discussion, May 2000)
(Th ink of the education we are gaining, the change in what is Woman, 
the change in our attitude, there is the change.)
Women in the SSGs are responding to changes by taking great pride in the work 
they do in their home and community. For instance, Rebeca is quick to men-
tion she has never neglected her family obligations for those of her commu-
nity. She demonstrates great pride in her ability to compliment both, since both 
are essential for her well-being and development. Th  is change, nevertheless, 
requires strength to endure the hostility of those opposed to change. For this 
and the reasons mentioned earlier, campesinas need to build alliances with other 
women who support these changes. Th e small savings groups, hence, represent 
spaces where women learn to help each other with simple tasks, such as their 
knitting work, and with hard times, such as during economic troubles. Th ese 
alliances also serve as networking mechanisms for the implementation of new 
community development programs, attendance at workshops, and employment 
possibilities. Campesinas connect with other women, create friendships and 
alliances, and break from the monotony of housework. Hence, pedagogies need 
to be re-examined as a coming together to live, pedagogies of everyday living.
Conclusion
C l e a r l y ,  w o m a n i s t  p e d a g o g i e s  h e l p  e x p l o r e  t h e  m u l t i p l e  w a y s  w o m e n  a n d  
men live, learn, and teach each other every day. Mexico’s proximity to the US 
simplifi es the border-crossing of campesina portraits that shed light on many 
Mexican and Latin American immigrant communities in the US. Th  e high 
wire fences mentioned here refer to conditions aff ecting groups of  Mexicanas/
os both in Mexico and in the United States. Most specifi cally, my reference to 
Guanajuato’s migration dilemma provides further insight to groups of people 
residing in or entering the United States. Studies (Behar, 1993; Carger, 1996; 
Castillo, 1994; Delgado-Gaitan & Trueba, 1991; Diaz Soto, 1997;  Finkler, 
1994; Guerra, 1998; Paz, 1996; Rodriguez, 1994; Valdés, 1996; Vasquez et al., 
1994; Vélez Ibáñez & Greenberg, 1992; Villenas, 2001) stressing the wealth of 
knowledge immigrant communities “demonstrate that members of the immi-
grant groups currently transforming the complexion of this country bring 
RT54118_C012.indd   265RT54118_C012.indd   265 7/8/06   6:55:40 PM7/8/06   6:55:40 PM


--- PAGE 323 ---
266 • Th e Womanist Reader
rich caches of social, cultural, linguistic, and discursive values and  practices 
t h a t  h a v e  t h e  p o t e n t i a l  t o  e n r i c h  r a t h e r  t h a n  i m p o v e r i s h  t h e  n a t i o n  a s  a  
whole” (Guerra, 1998, p. 158). Furthermore, campesina pedagogies expand 
US kno wledge of immigran t peoples’ val ues and experiences, as well as the 
way they live, learn, and teach each other every day. Th eir vision and method 
of organization also provide a design for diverse racial and ethnic groups who 
may benefi t from their organizational insight. Th  ese pedagogies, “commit-
ted to the survival and wholeness” of entire peoples, key us into ways groups 
of peoples may maintain/recover their history and traditions (Walker, 1983, 
p. xi). Ultimately, the everyday, mundane and ordinary portraits of campesi-
nas inspire us to refl ect on the connections groups make as they gather, and 
“propel [us] into a collective state of being everyday” (Castillo, 1994, p. 160). 
Evidently, people’s history and traditions, intimately tied to their spiritual 
expression and material conditions, and the many obstacles campesinas and 
other groups, confront, transform our understanding of what shapes the con-
cept of pedagogies. By utilizing womanist pedagogies the overall understand-
ing of pedagogies becomes more encompassing of the everyday, the mundane, 
and the ordinary, and the spaces fostering them.
Notes
 1. Can todo mi respeto y cariño le doy las gracias a las mujeres de la cuenca que me con-
fi aron sus experincias, prestaron sus palabras, y instruyeron con sus conocimientos. Gra-
cias par las tortillas .
 2.  Pseudonyms are used throughout to protect the anonymity of the women’s identity.
 3.  Th  e animadora takes on many functions and no translation entirely conveys her respon-
sibilities. Generally, she is the motivator/educator of the group, since she has been trained 
in the Laubach literary method by the organization and receives frequent workshops and 
in-services on ways to motivate or direct the group in various discussions. She also serves 
as liaison for the organization and her community.
 4.  Ana Castillo’s (1994) reference to Mexic Amerindian strives to “assert both our indigenous 
blood and the source, at least in part, of our spirituality” by turning to our ethnic and racial 
makeup (p. 10). Xicanisima also makes reference to our unique positionality as hybrid peoples 
with multiple ties and struggles to contend with. Xicanisima situates Chicana Feminism ideo-
logically and theoretically outside the confi nes of White Feminism and the White Women’s 
movement who have ignored the discrimination and struggles of Women of Color. Keen on 
focusing on gender specifi c discrimination, White feminists incessantly ignore/refuse to dis-
cuss their class and race privileges, thus making little room in their movement for the multiple 
discriminatory struggles of Women of Color. A Xicanisima take, consequently, places campe-
sina’s, for instance, multiple issues at the forefront. For further discussion on these themes see 
Moraga, C. & Anzaldúa, G. (1983). Th is bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of 
color. Lanthan, New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press.
 5.  Popular Catholicism encompasses the spiritual beliefs and traditions handed down through 
generations, not institutionalized by the Catholic church, because of its historical and spiri-
tual ties to indigenous cultures. See Rodriguez, J. (1994). Our Lady of Guadalupe: Faith and 
empowerment among Mexican-American women. Austin: University of Texas Press.
 6.  Considered part of the Catholic church’s pastoral mission, women participating in the 
pastoral social  p art ak e  in  c h ur c h  r e l a t e d  a cti vi ti e s  t o  b e n e fi t the people in their com-
munity. For instance, some women assist the ill by serving as company and taking them 
meals. Many of the women in the pastoral social  are also honorarias . Honorarias  are a 
special women’s prayer group that meets once a month and pays homage to el santisimo  
(Christ in the form of the Eucharist) as it is exposed in the custodia  (monstrance). As it 
is exposed, Christ is considered en presencia, potencia y divinidad  (in presence, power 
RT54118_C012.indd   266RT54118_C012.indd   266 7/8/06   6:55:40 PM7/8/06   6:55:40 PM


--- PAGE 324 ---
Anthropology • 267
and divinity). Women, through constant prayer and songs, stand guard throughout the 
day, while men pay homage during the night. Once a year every participating community 
takes a special trip to the church located on a remarkable hill of the state capital ( serro del 
cubilete). All through the night men and woman pay this special homage to el santisimo. I 
had the great fortune of participating, with the women of the communities I worked with, 
in this special observance during the year I lived there.
 7. Th  e women’s ancestry goes back to Otomi and Chichimeca peoples. Th e Otomi peoples, in 
particular, continue to maintain their language and culture in this and surrounding states.
 8.  Consider, for example, Arizona’s recent anti-immigration uproar, where Arizonan 
ranchers have shot at undocumented men and women attempting to cross the U.S./Mex-
ico border. Furthermore, such is the antagonism of many US citizens against Latino/a 
immigrants that recently the death of two immigrants was video taped as they attempted 
to cross the Rio Bravo without a rescue attempt. Th  e Mexican community I was in at 
the time was deeply aff  ected and disgusted by the apathetic attitudes of the overseeing 
authorities. As was expected, this triggers immense fear to the many families in these 
rancherias  (and Mexicans in general) whose husbands, brothers, sons or friends consider 
entering the United States in the same manner.
 9.  PLAMAC, as well as other grassroots organizations, are also dedicated to the recovery 
and documentation of community history and culture. One of the ways PLAMAC pro-
motes literacy in rural communities is through the investigation and recording of the 
community’s history and culture. On this occasion, the women of the SSGs were being 
trained by project leaders in the recovery of their history and culture.
References
Alfabetización Laubach Mexicana, A. C. Documento de Educatión de Adultos . México. D.F.
Anzaldúa, G. (1987). Borderlands/La frontera: Th e new Mestiza . San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books.
Anzaldúa, G. (1990). Making faces, making soul: Creative and critical perspectives by feminists of 
color. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books.
Austin, R. (1999). Popular history and popular education: El consejo de educación de adultos de 
América Latin. Latin American Perspectives,  26(4), 39–68.
Behar, R. (1993). Translated woman: Crossing the border with Esperanza’s story. Boston: Beacon Press.
C a g a n ,  E .  ( 1 9 9 9 ) .  W o m e n  a n d  g r a s s r o o t s  d e m o c r a c y  i n  E l  S a l v a d o r .  I n  J .  B y s t y d z i e n s k i  &  
J. Sekhon (Eds.), Democratization and women’s grassroots movements  (pp. 173–195). Indi-
anapolis: Indiana University Press.
Carger, C. (1996). Of borders and dreams: A Mexican-American experience of urban education . 
New York: Teachers College Press.
Castillo, A. (1994). Massacre of the dreamers: Essays on Xicanisima . London: Plume Book.
Collins, P. (1991) Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empower-
ment. New York: Routledge.
Collins, P. (1998). Fighting words: Black women and the search for justice . Minneapolis: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press.
Consejo Estatal de Población. (1994). Informe sobre la situación de la mujer en el estado de Gua-
najuato—Un reconocimiento . Guanajuato.
Consejo Estatal de Población. (1995). Guanajuato demografi co. Guanajuato.
Consejo Estatal de Población. (1997). GENTE. Guanajuato .
Davis, Angela. Woman, Race and Class . New York, Random House, 1981.
Delgado Bernal, D. (1997). Grassroots leadership reconceptualized: Chicana oral histories and 
the 1968 East Los Angeles school blowouts. Frontiers: A Journal of Women’s Studies, 19(2), 
113–142.
Delgado-Gaitan, C., & Trueba, H. (1991). Crossing cultural borders: Education for immigrant 
families in America.  London: Falmer Press.
Diaz Soto, L. (1997). Language, culture, and power: Bilingual families and the struggle for quality 
education . Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ellsworth, E. (1992). Why doesn’t this feel empowering? Working through the repressive myths 
of critical pedagogy . In C. Luke & J. Gore (Eds. ), Feminisms and critical pedagogy  (pp. 
60–119). New York: Routledge.
Fink, M. (1992). Women and popular education in Latina America. In N. Stromquist (Ed.), 
Women and education in Latin America: Knowledge, power, and change  (pp. 171–193). 
Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
RT54118_C012.indd   267RT54118_C012.indd   267 7/8/06   6:55:41 PM7/8/06   6:55:41 PM


--- PAGE 325 ---
268 • Th e Womanist Reader
Finkler, K. (1994). Women in pain: Gender and morbidity in Mexico . Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Freire, P. (1998). Pedagogy of the oppressed . Albany: State University of New York Press.
Gore, J. (1992). What we can do for you! What can “We” do for “You”? In C. Luke & J. Gore 
(Eds.), Feminisms and critical pedagogy  (pp. 54–73). New York: Routledge.
Guerra, J. (1998). Close to home: Oral and literate practices in a transnational Mexicano commu-
nity. New York: Teachers College Press.
Hernández, A. (1997). Pedagogy, democracy, and feminism: Rethinking the public sphere . New 
York: State University of New York Press.
hooks, b. (1989). Talking back: Th inking feminist, thinking black . Boston: South End Press.
Hurtado, A. (1996). Th e color of privilege: Th ree blasphemies on race and feminism . Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press.
Luke, C. (1992). Feminist politics and radical pedagogy. In C. Luke & J. Gore (Eds.), Feminisms 
and critical pedagogy  (pp. 25–53). New York: Routledge.
McKelvey, C. (1999). Feminist organizations and grassroots democracy in Honduras. In 
J. Bystydzienski & J. Sekhon (Eds.), Democratization and women’s grassroots movements  
(pp. 196–213). Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Moraga, C., & Anzaldúa, G. (1983). Th is bridge called my back: W ritings by radical women of 
color. Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press.
Paz, O. (1996). El laberinto de la soledad . Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Puiggrós, A. (1983). Discusiones y tendencies en la educación popular latinoamericana. Nueva 
antropolugía-Revista de Ciencias Sociales,  VI(21), 15–40.
Rodriguez, J. (1994). Our lady of Guadalupe: Faith and empowerment among Mexican-American 
women. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Rose, L. (1978). Disease beliefs in Mexican-American communities . San Francisco: R & E 
Research Associates.
Scott, J. (1990). Domination and the arts of resistance: Hidden transcripts . New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Sherman, J. (1975). Spiritualistic Curanderismo . Doctoral dissertation, United States Interna-
tional University [Dissertation Information Service].
Shor, I. (1993). Empowering education: Critical teaching for social change . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Street, B. (1984). Literacy in theory and practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Torruellas, R., Benmayor, R., Goris, A., & Juarbe, A. (1991). Affi  rming cultural citizenship in the 
Puerto Rican community: Critical literacy and the El Barrio Popular Education Program. 
In C. E. Walsh (Ed), Literacy as praxis: Culture, language, and pedagogy  (pp. 183–219). 
Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Trotter II, R., & Chavira, J. (1997). Curanderismo: Mexican American folk healing . Athens: Uni-
versity of Georgia Press.
Valdés, G. (1996). Con respeto: Bridging the distances between culturally diverse families and 
schools. New York: Teachers College Press.
Valdes, X. (1992). Th  e women’s rural school: An empowering educational experience. In 
N. Stomquist (Ed.), Women and education in Latin America: Knowledge, power, and 
change (pp. 277–302). Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Vasquez, O., Pease-Alvarez, L., & Shannon, S. (1994). Pushing boundaries: Language and culture 
in a Mexicano community . New York: Cambridge University Press.
Vélez Ibáñez, C., & Greenberg, J. (1992). Formation and transformation of funds of knowl-
edge among U.S.-Mexican households. Anthropology and Education Quarterly,  23(4), 
313–335.
Villenas, S. (1996). Colonizer/colonized Chicana ethnographer: Identity marginalization, and 
co-optation in the fi eld. Harvard Educational Review,  66(4), 711–731.
Villenas, S. (2001). Latina mothers and small town racism: Constructing narratives of dignity 
and moral education in North Carolina. Anthropology and Education Quarterly .
Villenas, S., & Moreno, M. (this issue). To valerse por si misma: Between race, capitalism, and 
patriarchy—Latina mother/daughter pedagogies in North Carolina. International Quali-
tative Studies in Education,  16(5).
Walker, A. (1983). In search of our mothers’ gardens: Womanist prose. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Young, E., & Padilla, M. (1990). Mujeres unidas en acción: A popular education process.  Harvard 
Educational Review, 60(1), 1–17.
RT54118_C012.indd   268RT54118_C012.indd   268 7/8/06   6:55:41 PM7/8/06   6:55:41 PM


--- PAGE 326 ---
269
13
Education
Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruction—
A Womanist Perspective (1994)
VA N E S SA SH E A R E D
Be the best! If you are a thief, be the best one that you can be. If you are 
a doctor, be the best.
—Ms. Jones, seventh-grade teacher
Th ese words are ingrained in my memory. To the ordinary reader, they might 
not mean very much, but to that seventh grader who heard these words, the 
meaning was quite clear. For me growing up in one of the many varied com-
munities on the south side of Chicago, these words refl ected the reality of the 
many faces and voices in that classroom. Th  is teacher knew that some chil-
dren w o uld g o o n to beco me teachers, la wy ers, docto rs, an d en trep ren eurs. 
And she knew that others would live their lives in constant retreat from the 
law. She understood their diff ering worlds and realities, and she interpreted 
and refl ected these realities in the words that she spoke.
As adult educators, we do not always get an opportunity to encourage our 
students to become the best that they can be. Th eir worlds, ideas, perceptions, 
and values have already been molded, perhaps by someone like the teacher 
whom I encountered at the impressionable age of twelve. So what is the role 
of the adult educator? Is it to continue to mold the worlds of students? Or are 
we to become instruments through which our students begin to refl ect on the 
multiple and varied realities that they, like we, bring to the classroom? And if 
the latter is the case, then through what means must we instruct them?
Educators in general and adult educators in particular are becoming increas-
ingly concerned by the question, How are we to deliver course content in such 
a way that classroom discourse acknowledges all voices—the multiple ways 
in which people interpret and refl ect their understandings of the world? Mul-
ticulturalism, Africentrism,
1 bilingualism, feminism, womanism, perspective 
transformation, critical consciousness, cooperative learning are just some of 
the methods and theoretical constructs that adult educators have explored or 
RT54118_C013.indd   269RT54118_C013.indd   269 7/10/06   6:33:21 PM7/10/06   6:33:21 PM


--- PAGE 327 ---
270 • Th e Womanist Reader
are currently exploring and implementing (Colin and Preciphs, 1991; Freire, 
1970; Hayes, 1989; Mezirow, 1978; Ross-Gordon, 1991). Each of these methods 
and constructs refl ects an attempt to give voice to political, economic, and social 
life stories, experiences, cultures, and histories that have been excluded from 
the educational mainstream.
Th is chapter has three goals: to introduce the womanist critique into the 
discourse on gender and race in adult education, to challenge adult educators 
to incorporate polyrhythmic realities into their instructional practices, and to 
defi ne the role and purpose of education by off ering a womanist instructional 
methodology intended to give voice to those whom traditional and unidimen-
sional methods of instruction have silenced.
Th e womanist methodology acknowledges the ways in which the polyrhythmic 
realities (Barkley-Brown, 1990) of the instructor and students help to shape the 
learning environment. Th ese polyrhythmic realities either limit or increase 
t h e  i n d i v i d u a l ’ s  a b i l i t y  t o  e n g a g e  i n  c r i t i c a l  r e fl ective learning at a given 
moment in time. Th e concept of polyrhythmic reality refl  ects the belief that 
individuals do not just have multiple realities and distinct understandings of 
them. Instead, individuals experience intersecting realities simultaneously—
their realities are polyrhythmic. Th  is concept represents a radical depar-
ture from Western, linear notions of the world and reality. Polyrhythms are 
characteristic of the aesthetic sense as refl ected in African American art, music, 
and dance, as well as language. Barkley-Brown (1988, pp. 11–12) describes 
this aesthetic in African American quilts as “creating the impression of sev-
eral patterns moving in diff  erent directions or multiple rhythms within the 
context of a controlled design. … Th e symmetry in African-American quilts 
does not come from uniformity as it does in Euro-American quilts; rather, the 
symmetry comes through the diversity.” Applying the concept to individuals, 
she suggests the importance of recognizing that “people and actions do move 
in multiple directions at once. If we analyze these people and actions by linear 
models, we will create dichotomies, ambiguities, cognitive dissonance, dis-
orientation, and confusion in places where none exist” (Barkley-Brown, 1988, 
pp. 17–18).
Th is concept is analogous to the womanist perspective proposed by Walker 
(1983). Th e womanist perspective seeks to expose the diff  erences and similari-
ties that human beings experience in the classroom as a result of skin color, 
language, economic status, and personal experiences. Th  ese experiences are 
relevant to individuals’ social, cultural, political, and historical understanding 
of themselves in relation to others. According to Williams (1990, p. 70), use of 
the term womanist represents a “commitment to the survival and wholeness 
of entire people—men and women.” I believe that the womanist perspective is 
more inclusive and that it challenges us to think critically about such issues as 
racism, sexism, language, religious orientation, and sexual orientation. More 
important, its aim is to reinterpret the word—the ways in which we read, hear, 
RT54118_C013.indd   270RT54118_C013.indd   270 7/10/06   6:33:22 PM7/10/06   6:33:22 PM


--- PAGE 328 ---
Education • 271
and ultimately speak and listen to one another. Th  is perspective, along with 
its corresponding relationship to giving voice, will be discussed more fully in 
this chapter. Th e discussion that follows is intended to be in relevant for all 
practitioners in adult education programs, whether they work in adult literacy 
classes, adult graduate programs, or training programs. Th e terms Africentric 
feminist and womanist are used interchangeably throughout this discussion.
Silencing of Others
Since the 1960s, historians, educators, political activists, and others have raised 
concerns that the contributions of women, African Americans, and other 
groups to the historical, economical, and political development of the United 
States are invisible. Studies on gender and race have shown that the exclusion 
of these groups from written texts has silenced their voices. While the pri-
mary locus has been on the silencing by the dominant culture of others’ voices 
in written texts, concerns also have been raised about the silencing of voices 
in public speaking.
Th e Africentric feminist perspective is not just about the voices that have 
been silenced on the grounds of race or gender but instead considers the 
simultaneous eff ects of race and gender (Collins, 1990). While both Africen-
tric and feminist scholars discuss the silencing of voices and marginalization, 
Africentric feminist scholars suggest that Africentric scholars and feminist 
scholars fail to address both gender and race as a unifying whole (Collins, 
1991; hooks, 1984). As a result, the black woman’s voice, as well as other mar-
ginalized voices, has been silenced. Wallace (1990, p. 70) asserts that “there is 
no question … that the unrelenting logic of dualism or polar opposition, such 
as black and white, good and evil, male and female, is basic to the discourse of 
the dominant culture and tends to automatically erase black female subjectiv-
ity.” Th us, black women’s issues become secondary to the dominant discourse 
on race, gender, and class.
Th e Womanist Perspective
Th e womanist perspective acknowledges the intertwining realities that human 
beings experience within society. Race, gender, and class are interwoven. Th e 
relationship between race, gender, class, and the womanist perspective can 
best be illustrated with a triangle. Race, gender, and class are intersecting 
lines of reality, and the womanist perspective views these realities from within 
the triangle. Th e womanist perspective is grounded in the African American 
woman’s marginalized status in relation to race, gender, and class.
Although her experiences are grounded in this experience, her reality is 
shaped by others. Th e womanist perspective is born of a direct response to 
the exclusion of the African American woman’s voice from the discourse on 
race, gender, and class. Many European American feminist scholars as well 
as scholars engaged in the discourse on race would say that, when they speak 
RT54118_C013.indd   271RT54118_C013.indd   271 7/10/06   6:33:23 PM7/10/06   6:33:23 PM


--- PAGE 329 ---
272 • Th e Womanist Reader
on issues related to women or race, they include the voice of the African 
American woman. However, African American feminist scholars do not believe 
this to be true (Collins, 1990; Dill, 1990; King, 1990).
Some African American women scholars use the term feminist, while 
others use the term womanist. Many have used the term womanist to refl ect 
an understanding of race, gender, and class that is grounded in “a commit-
m en t to the survival an d wholen ess o f en tir e peo ple— m en an d w o m en —as 
well as to a valorization of women’s works in all their varieties and multitudes” 
(Williams, 1990, p. 70). People’s race, gender, ethnicity, sexual preference, and 
religious orientation must be acknowledged and examined for individuals to 
be recognized in their fullness as interconnected human beings.
“Black women,” as opposed to “blacks and women,” is used by Africentric 
feminist scholars to indicate that African American women are not “both/or” 
but rather “both/and.” King (cited by Collins, 1990, p. 309) has described the 
both/and orientation as “the act of being simultaneously a member of a group 
and yet standing apart from it.” Th e experience of African American women 
has been further described as the other of the other (Wallace, 1990). Accord-
ing to this perspective, African American women’s voices have been silenced 
because the discourse on race and gender has negated their signifi  cance. It 
excludes their unique experiences in favor of the larger good (Sheared, 1992).
A both/and nondichotomous relationship represents the wholeness and the 
connectedness of entire people. It does not tear them apart. It is grounded in 
an understanding of what King (1990) describes as a double or multiple con-
sciousness that develops as a result of the multiple jeopardies that women and 
blacks have experienced historically, socially, and economically. Th e woman-
ist perspective shapes the both/and reality into a connected polyrhythmic 
whole. We no longer see ourselves as separate beings but as communal spirits. 
We are more than black and woman. We are black women connected to all 
brothers and sisters engaged in the struggle against oppression based on race, 
gender, and class.
A Womanist Perspective on Adult Education
Many marginalized or underrepresented adult students enrolled in adult edu-
cation classes confront the experience that King (1990) describes as both/or 
and Wallace (1990) as the other of the other—that is, the individual’s voice is 
negated as the result of being grouped with others on the basis of similarities 
in race and gender. Each student brings a set of experiences to the learning 
environment that refl ects his or her status at work and at home and within 
his or her family, his or her relative positions in time (history), and his or her 
understandings of these factors. Polyrhythmic reality refl  ects the wholeness, 
the uniqueness, and—most important—the connectedness of individuals to 
others in society, their both/and realities.
RT54118_C013.indd   272RT54118_C013.indd   272 7/10/06   6:33:23 PM7/10/06   6:33:23 PM


--- PAGE 330 ---
Education • 273
Barkley-Brown (1990) has described quilting by African American women 
as analogous to what occurs between teachers and students in the classroom. 
It is useful in helping us to understand the relationship of instruction to both/
and reality. First, the designs used in these quilts are not necessarily sym-
metrically organized. Instead, the quilting refl ects an aesthetic understanding 
by the makers of what the quilt represents for them in their everyday expe-
rience. For instance, pieces of cloth from old family clothes and heirlooms 
are used to represent an interconnectedness that goes beyond the confi  nes of 
geometrically correct forms. Th e shape of the quilt results from the meanings 
that individual quilters give to the pieces that compose it. Barkley-Brown (1990) 
uses the Creole term gumbo ya ya— everybody talking at once—to describe 
this art form.
African American women’s quilting and gumbo ya ya can be used to describe 
what Barkley-Brown (1990) calls the polyrhythmic way of understanding. In 
other words, rather than espousing one uniform center or reality, the stu-
dent and the teacher embrace multiple or dualistic realities. Th e teacher must 
decenter or disempower himself or herself in order to empower the students. 
Th e teacher allows students to seek and interpret their world and their words 
in a political, social, historical, and economic context. Th e self is understood 
in relation to its connectedness with others and their perceptions of reality. 
Th e process is a communal experience.
Our goal as adult educators is to fi  nd ways in which we can uncover and 
acknowledge the voice of each student; to recognize that we, like our students, 
bring polyrhythmic realities to the learning environment; to fi  nd ways of dis-
empowering ourselves in the learning environment so that students begin to 
take responsibility for their learning; and to understand that the information 
we proff er is grounded in a political, social, historical, sexual, racial, and eco-
nomical context that is unique to us (in other words, we recognize that our 
subjective understandings of the world are diff erent yet interconnected).
How is this learning environment created? Th  e next section describes a 
process that adult educators can use to create a learning environment that 
meets the goals just outlined.
Giving Voice
As noted earlier, giving voice has become an aim of those who seek to provide 
students and educators with an opportunity to become engaged in a critically 
refl ective dialogue regardless of the subject matter. Th  is aim is based on the 
proposition that all knowledge is grounded in a social, political, economic, 
and historical context. To give voice requires us to acknowledge diff  erent 
realities and understand that there are diff  erent ways of interpreting reality. 
“Voice is related to the means whereby teachers and students attempt to make 
themselves present in history and to defi  ne themselves as active authors of 
RT54118_C013.indd   273RT54118_C013.indd   273 7/10/06   6:33:23 PM7/10/06   6:33:23 PM


--- PAGE 331 ---
274 • Th e Womanist Reader
their own worlds” (Weiler, 1989, p. xiii). According to this author, it “repre-
sents those multiple subjectivities, discourses, and biographies that constitute 
teachers and students alike within relations of power, history, and experience” 
(Weiler, 1989, p. xiii). Giroux and McLaren (1986, p. 235) state that the 
“concept of voice constitutes the focal point for a theory of teaching and 
learning … as well as new and challenging ways of confronting and engaging 
in everyday life. ” V oice is the active engagement of students and teachers in 
dialogue with one another. Both are heard and “defi  ne themselves as active 
authors of their worlds … it is the unique instance of self-expression through 
which students affi  rm their own class, cultural, racial, and gender identities” 
(Giroux and McLaren, 1986, p. 235).
Quite simply, giving voice allows students and teachers to engage and dis-
e n g a g e  i n  p o l y r h y t h m i c  r e a l i t i e s .  G i r o u x  a n d  M c L a r e n  ( 1 9 8 6 ,  p .  2 3 5 )  c o n -
cluded that voice is not static but rather used “to make ourselves understood 
and listened to and to defi ne ourselves as active participants in the world.” An 
Africentric feminist analysis acknowledges voice in the contextual framework 
of social class, historical and political hegemony, and its relationship with 
gender and racial oppression. It recognizes but does not negate the realities of 
both the oppressed and the oppressor, the learned and the learner.
My research (Sheared, 1992) incorporates the Africentric feminist episte-
mology (Collins, 1990, 1991) because it clearly communicates the oppositional 
worldview that was essential to understanding the educational, political, and 
social realities of African American women receiving public assistance. Th  e 
Africentric feminist epistemology diminishes the negative eff ects of what King 
(1990) describes as multiple consciousness and the both/or orientation. It sup-
ports Dill’s (1990) dialectics of black womanhood and Wallace’s (1990) other 
of the other. Th e Africentric episteme allows the stories of African American 
women to be told in ways that do not tear apart or objectify their lives. It also 
does not obfuscate or mystify the words that they use to interpret and under-
stand the word and the world.
Collins (1990, 1991) depicts the Africentric epistemology as a method that 
Africentric scholars can use to uncover and describe knowledge produced 
within the African diaspora. I believe that adult educators can use the follow-
ing process to reach the goal of giving voice to the many realities that students 
bring to the learning environment. Th e process is grounded in two epistemo-
logical and two axiological assumptions.
Concrete experience is used as a criterion of meaning. Th is assumption acknowl-
edges that there is more than one way of knowing. Both knowledge and wis-
dom are important. Knowledge is grounded in the individual’s race, gender 
and class. Knowledge consists of one’s everyday lived experiences and under-
standings of that reality in terms of dominance and authority. In contrast, 
wisdom is what one uses to read, interpret, and speak in order to survive, given 
the information that one receives.
RT54118_C013.indd   274RT54118_C013.indd   274 7/10/06   6:33:24 PM7/10/06   6:33:24 PM


--- PAGE 332 ---
Education • 275
Collins (1990) concludes that the narrative method is one way of uncover-
ing the criterion of meaning. An individual’s words tell her or his story and 
are narrated either in print or by voice. Th e story is “not torn apart in analysis, 
and trusted as core belief, not admired as science” (Collins, 1990, p. 312). 
Students are given an opportunity to read and listen to the words that they use 
to describe a particular event or a skill that they use to accomplish a particular 
task. Ultimately, the way in which students read and interpret the symbols 
used to communicate information must change. Th ey must act on that infor-
mation in the class, on the job, or in their personal life.
For example, math learning for literacy students can be enhanced if stu-
dents talk about the mathematical skills that they use in their everyday lives. 
Th ese skills can include measuring ingredients for cooking and determining 
the distance between point A and point B or the time that it takes to prepare 
and cook a certain dish. Th  ese skills can be incorporated into a lesson on 
counting, addition, or subtraction skills. Discussion of  these concepts in rela-
tionship to everyday examples enables the teacher and others in the class to 
introduce ways in which numbers and simple mathematical processes aff  ect 
us in a political, social, economical, and historical context. For example, ques-
tions can be asked about the ways in which escalating costs have aff ected peo-
ple’s ability to prepare certain meals. How do they aff  ect the learner and his 
or her ability to purchase ingredients? What can the learner do or what has 
the learner done to change his or her ability to purchase the products needed? 
Th is is just one example of the way in which individuals’ concrete frame of 
reference can be used either to teach new skills or to show learners that they 
already have the power or information necessary to create change within their 
own environment.
Dialogue is the basis for assessing knowledge claims . A primary epistemo-
logical assumption is that connectedness rather than separation is essential 
to the knowledge validation process. Collins (1990, p. 317) concludes that the 
use of dialogue for African American women might be a way of “invoking a 
particular female way of knowing.” Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger, and Tarule 
(1986) list several ways in which women construct their realities about truth, 
knowledge, and authority. Th ey conclude that women proceed through several 
stages as they move from silence to an ability to construct knowledge. Th  ey 
contend that these stages illustrate that women move from a position of total 
subordination to one in which they share equal voice, or connectedness, in the 
decisions and choices that they make. Dialoguing gives students an opportu-
nity to challenge the knowledge constructed by others. In so doing, they apply 
their own understanding to determine what needs to be done.
As students dialogue with one another , they begin to explore alternative 
ways of viewing the world. More important, they begin to voice their under-
standing of the ways in which they have learned to operate within the world. 
If we return to the example just used, math students begin to see how the 
RT54118_C013.indd   275RT54118_C013.indd   275 7/10/06   6:33:24 PM7/10/06   6:33:24 PM


--- PAGE 333 ---
276 • Th e Womanist Reader
mathematical skills that they have used aff  ect their lives while at the same 
time learning new ways of using skills to create changes in their lives.
An ethic of caring emphasizes the uniqueness of individuals, elicits appro-
priate emotion from the dialogue, and recognizes empathetic understanding. 
Th e three elements of an ethic of caring permeate African American culture. 
One example is the call-and-response discourse that many African American 
preachers have used in churches. Th e minister is responsible for pointing out 
principles from the Bible in a way that evokes a response of understanding 
from the congregation. Both the aff ective and the cognitive domains are involved. 
Th e process goes beyond simple questions and answers to questions that invoke 
complex responses. Moreover, the preacher shares a part of himself with the 
congregation. He must be willing to listen to its responses, react, and then 
f o ll o w  u p  wi th  r es p o n s es  th a t  s ugg es t  h e  un d e r s tan ds  th e m  as  w e ll  as  th ey  
understand him. In other words, the minister and the congregation talk back 
and forth to each other. It represents an interconnectedness based on an under-
standing of the meanings that they each have of what they hear and observe 
in that moment.
For educators, an ethic of caring creates an environment in which partici-
pants come to an interconnected state of being through call and response. Th e 
question and the answer determine the level of trust and caring that is neces-
sary if learning is to occur.
An ethic of personal accountability guides both teaching and learning. Not 
only must individuals develop their knowledge claims through dialogue, but 
they must present these claims in a style proving their concern for their 
ideas. People are held accountable for what they want to learn. Th  e teacher 
is accountable for structuring the learning experience and enabling the stu-
dents. In other words, the responsibility for learning is not just the domain of 
the teacher but of the learner as well.
I used this method in a course titled “Educating Disadvantaged Adults. ” 
In one activity, students were asked to rethink the title of the course in rela-
tionship to the materials that they read (the narration) and the discourse that 
had occurred in class (the dialogue). Each student was responsible for rethink-
ing and renaming the course. Students worked individually and in groups 
to uncover their own biases and the impact that these had on the ways they 
thought and taught those whom they considered to be disadvantaged. At the 
end of the course, each student presented his or her title to the entire group. 
Students were given an opportunity to question and respond to the ideas 
presented.
At the end of the course, students acknowledged that they had changed 
their opinions about who the disadvantaged were. Th ey also stated that they 
had begun to change the way in which they taught them—because they no 
longer saw them as beings outside and unconnected to who they were. No 
longer did my students dichotomize us and them. It became we as the term 
RT54118_C013.indd   276RT54118_C013.indd   276 7/10/06   6:33:24 PM7/10/06   6:33:24 PM


--- PAGE 334 ---
Education • 277
disadvantaged becam e r ela tiv e. I t h el ped th em to gain an un derstan ding o f 
their political, economical, social, and historical being and its connectedness 
to their race, gender, and class status. Change had occurred not only in stu-
dents’ thought but in their proposed behavior.
Conclusion
Although the womanist method helps us to understand and grapple with our 
polyrhythmic realities, it is in no way meant to be the only method that edu-
cators use to help their students activate their voices in the confi nes of formal 
and informal educational settings. To limit ourselves to one methodological 
paradigm risks silencing those to whom we hope to give voice. As long as we 
couch issues in the terms of a black cause or white woman’s cause, we maintain 
the risk of negating black women as well as others. In other words, the woman-
ist perspective must be placed in a context that allows voices to be heard and 
specifi c content information to be learned. Alternative instructional methods 
need to note this caveat: “Feminist readings can lead to misapprehensions of 
particular or even of a whole tradition, but certain of its formulations off er us 
a vocabulary that can be meaningful in terms of our own experience, Femi-
nist theory … off ers us not only the possibility of changing one’s reading of 
the world but of changing the world itself” (Wallace, 1990, p. 68).
Th e womanist perspective is aimed at aiding the instructional process, not 
at becoming the content. Giving voice acknowledges that there are multiple 
ways of presenting and interpreting information and knowledge. Th  is then 
means that one accepts and celebrates the polyrhythmic realities of both the 
student and the teacher in the learning environment.
As a fi nal recommendation, before any adult educator initiates a particular 
method or model, she or he should engage in the following call and response 
activity. I have provided some suggested responses, but your own may vary.
CALL: What is my role and goal as an adult educator?
RESPONSE:  I believe that my role and my goal as an adult educator is 
to help students refl ect on the multiple realities of gender, 
race, and class and their relationship to history, socio-
economics, and politics. More important, I should seek 
not only to uncover discrepancies and injustices within 
our educational process, but I must seek to help create 
environments for change.
CALL:  Should my role be primarily to shape and mold the worlds 
of students, or should I become an instrument through 
which students begin to refl ect on the polyrhythmic reali-
ties that they and I bring to the classroom environment?
RESPONSE:  I am not here to shape or mold my students’ thinking, but 
I am here to be used as a vessel to help students uncover 
RT54118_C013.indd   277RT54118_C013.indd   277 7/10/06   6:33:24 PM7/10/06   6:33:24 PM


--- PAGE 335 ---
278 • Th e Womanist Reader
the polyrhythmic realities that they and I possess in the 
learning environment.
CALL: Th  rough what means must I instruct them?
RESPONSE:  I must learn to give voice to my students. Giving voice 
occurs as a result of me decentering and centering self 
along with my students. Together we develop new mean-
ings, understandings, and ways of thinking about the world 
and the word. In other words “we must pivot” the center 
in order to center in another’s experience (Aptheker, 1989; 
Barkley-Brown, 1990). Th e dignity and rights of all—men 
and women—must be valued through the way we teach, 
speak, and interact with one another.
If your responses are similar to the ones shown here, then you should review 
readings and materials aimed at giving voice to your studen ts. Some of the 
references used in this chapter can help you to begin this process.
Note
 1. Th  e use of Africentrism rather than the more common Afrocentrism is explained [in the 
original source, ed.].
References
Aptheker, B. Tapestries of Life. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1989.
Barkley-Brown, E. “African American Women’s Quilting: A Framework for Conceptualizing and 
Teaching African American Women’s History.” In M. Malson, E. Mudimbe-Boyi, J. O’Barr, 
and M. Wyer (eds.), Black Women in America: Social Science Perspectives. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1990.
Belenky, M., Clinchy, B., Goldberger, N.R., and Tarule, J.M. Women’s Ways of Knowing: Th e Devel-
opment of Self, Voice, and Mind. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Colin, S.A.J., III, and Preciphs, T.K. “Perceptual Patterns and the Learning Environment: Con-
fronting White Racism.” In R. Hiemstra (ed.), Creating Environments for Eff ective Adult 
Learning. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, no. 50. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1991.
Collins, P.H. “Th e Social Construction of Black Feminist Th ought.” In M. Malson, E. Mudimbe-
Boyi, J. O’Barr, and M. Wyer (eds.), Black Women in America: Social Science Perspectives. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Collins, P.H. Black Feminist Th ought. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Dill, B.T. “Th e Dialectics of Black Womanhood.” In M. Malson, E. Mudimbe-Boyi, J. O’Barr, and 
M. Wyer (eds.), Black Women in America: Social Science Perspectives. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1990.
Freire, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Herder and Herder, 1970.
Giroux, H.A., and McLaren, P. “Teacher Education and the Politics of Engagement: Th e Case for 
Democratic Schooling.” Harvard Educational Review,  1986, 56(3), 213–238.
Hayes, E. “Insights from Women’s Experiences for Teaching and Learning.” In E. Hayes (ed.), 
Eff ective Teaching Styles. New Directions for Continuing Education, no. 43. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1989.
hooks, b. From Margin to Center. Boston: South End Press, 1984.
King, D.K. “Multiple Jeopardy, Multiple Consciousness. Th  e Context of Black Feminist Ideol-
ogy.” In M. Malson, E. Mudimbe Boyi, J. O’Barr, and M. Wyer (eds.), Black Women in 
America: Social Science Perspectives . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Mezirow, J. “Perspective Transformation,” Adult Education,  1978, 18(2), 100–110.
RT54118_C013.indd   278RT54118_C013.indd   278 7/10/06   6:33:25 PM7/10/06   6:33:25 PM


--- PAGE 336 ---
Education • 279
Ross-Gordon, J.M. “Needed: A Multicultural Perspective for Adult Education Research.” Adult 
Education Quarterly,  1991, 42(1), 1–16.
Sheared, V. “From Workfare to Edfare: African American Women and the Elusive Quest for 
Self-Determination.” Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Leadership and 
Educational Policy Studies, Northern Illinois University, 1992.
Walker, A. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens.  San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1983.
Wallace, M. “Variations on Negation and the Heresy of Black Feminist Creativity.” In H. Gates 
(ed.), Reading Black, Reading Feminist: A Critical Anthology . New York: Meridian Books, 
1990.
Weiler, K. Women Teaching for Change (Gender, Class, and Power).  Boston: Bergin and Garvey, 
1989.
Williams, S.A. “Some Implications of Womanist Th  e o r y . ”  I n  H .  G a t e s  ( e d . ) ,  Reading Black, 
Reading Feminist: A Critical Anthology . New York: Meridian Books, 1990.
RT54118_C013.indd   279RT54118_C013.indd   279 7/10/06   6:33:25 PM7/10/06   6:33:25 PM


--- PAGE 337 ---
280
A Womanist Experience of Caring: Understanding the 
Pedagogy of Exemplary Black Women Teachers (2002)
TAMARA BEAUBOEUF-LAFONTANT
Over the last 15 years, educational researchers and theorists have decried 
the lack of caring in our schools (Grumet, 1988; Noddings, 1984; Valenzuela, 
1999). As researchers have sought to address this problem, they have called for 
teachers to transform themselves into adults who can relate to and thus more 
eff ectively teach all children in our schools (e.g., Bartolome, 1994; Cochran-
Smith, 1995; Delpit, 1995; Nieto, 1999). Amidst these calls for teacher transfor-
mation have been examples of the types of teachers who are eff ective. Striking 
about such portrayals is that a number of these exemplars are black women, 
which I believe is more than coincidence. I believe that researchers have come 
across a womanist tradition of caring that extends throughout the history of 
African-American women.
Womanism
Womanism is a standpoint epistemology (Collins, 1991). It is derived from 
Alice Walker’s (1983) term womanist and is used generally to represent the 
cultural, historical, and political positionality of African-American women, 
a group that has experienced slavery, segregation, sexism, and classism for 
most of its history in the United States. Used interchangeably with black femi-
nism, it is a theoretical perspective that sees the experiences of black women 
as normative, not as a derivation or variation of black male or white female 
behavior (Collins, 1991). Womanists recognize that because so many black 
women have experienced the convergence of racism, sexism, and classism, they 
oft en have a particular vantage point on what constitutes evidence (Collins, 
1991), valid action (Welch, 1990), and morality (Cannon, 1995). Th ree central 
points support womanism. First, womanists understand that oppression is an 
interlocking system, providing all people with varying degrees of penalty and 
privilege. Second, they believe that individual empowerment combined with 
collective action is key to lasting social transformation. Last, they embody a 
humanism, which seeks the liberation of all, not simply themselves (Collins, 
and Tamarkin 1990/1982). Given that womanism seeks to elucidate the expe-
riences, thoughts, and behaviors of black women, in order to understand the 
caring demonstrated by African-American women teachers, it is critical that 
we contextualize their thoughts and actions within their particular cultural 
and historical legacies. In doing so, three characteristics are noteworthy: the 
embrace of the maternal, political clarity, and an ethic of risk.
RT54118_C013.indd   280RT54118_C013.indd   280 7/10/06   6:33:25 PM7/10/06   6:33:25 PM


--- PAGE 338 ---
Education • 281
Embrace of the Maternal
In both lay and academic analyses of exemplary teachers committed to social 
justice, the maternal image is particularly visible in the pedagogy of African-
American women teachers. A public example of such teaching is that of Marva 
Collins, the founder of the renowned Westside Preparatory School in Chicago. 
Over the last 25 years, Collins has drawn out “extraordinary” capabilities 
from her students, who are “at risk” for school and social failure because they 
are poor African-American children living in the neighboring housing proj-
ects. While her successes are clearly signifi  cant and have garnered the atten-
tion of many Americans wanting to see improvements in our public schools, 
notable about her work is the maternal sensibility she brings to her pedagogy. 
As the jacket of her book, “Ordinary” Children, Extraordinary Teachers (1992), 
reads:
Marva Collins embodies all that is meant by that hallowed word … 
teacher. She gives of herself tirelessly so that those whose minds are 
supple may grasp knowledge and power through her love. Indeed love, 
like that of a mother for her children, is the essence of the Marva Collins 
Way … love of learning, love of leaching, and love of sharing.
Such a connection with a maternal form of caring is also evident in Collins’s 
own descriptions of her work. Refl  ecting on her frustration with the public 
school she left  to begin her own academy, Collins explicitly connects her teach-
ing visions to her sensibilities as a mother:
Th e search for a school for my own three children opened my eyes: the 
public schools had no monopoly on poor education. … What was once 
the poor man’s burden had become everyone’s.
With this came another realization, that I couldn’t escape the prob-
lem, as a teacher or as a mother. Th ese parts of my life were inextricably 
interwoven; at Delano I was fi ghting for the kind of education I wanted 
for my own children. As a parent I tended to be protective, and I always 
felt that same driving concern as a teacher. I could never walk out of 
Delano at 3:15 and leave the school and the students entirely behind 
me. Were my students going home or would they wander the streets? 
Were their clothes warm enough? Would their stomachs be full tonight 
and would they have sheets on their beds? (Collins and Tamarkin, 1990/ 
1982, p. 73)
Collins views her inability not to mother her students as a matter of fact, 
and as an emotional strength rather than as a weakness. If anything, her par-
enting experiences as a mother seem to have informed her teaching so that she 
has brought the same standards of care and accountability to her students as 
she would to her own children. “If the school was going to be good enough for 
RT54118_C013.indd   281RT54118_C013.indd   281 7/10/06   6:33:26 PM7/10/06   6:33:26 PM


--- PAGE 339 ---
282 • Th e Womanist Reader
other children, it had to be good enough for my own,” she reasoned (Collins and 
Tamarkin, 1990/1982, p. 80). As a public school teacher, caring like a mother 
focused her decision to take maternal steps, that is, to create a structure in 
which she could educate and shelter her students/children from adversity. 
Indeed, in the Ten Teaching Commandments that she has developed for her 
own faculty, the fi rst reads, “Th ou shalt love thy students as you would love 
your own children” (Collins, 1992, p. 178).
Such a maternal caring for students is also a central theme of a People mag-
azine article entitled “Momma Knows Best.” Aff  ectionately called “Momma 
Hawk” by her middle-school students, Corla Hawkins is another Chicago 
teacher. Like Collins, Hawk began her own school, Recovering the Gift  ed 
Child Academy, aft er seeing too many poor children systematically failed by 
the public schools. For Hawkins, her teaching very clearly emanates from a 
vocation to extend herself to those children who needed her most:
I felt I could take the dysfunctional family structure these children were 
used to and replace it with a new family structure that stresses success, 
personal achievement and self-esteem. … God gave me a dream—to 
take care of children of rejection. I literally saw myself going around the 
world hugging and loving children nobody else wanted. (Valente, 1996, 
pp. 45, 47)
Describing Momma Hawk, a board member of the school says, “Corla is 
so successful because she is so human. … She’s not on a pedestal. She feels 
things deeply. She hurts” (Valente, 1996, p. 46). At the same time, however, 
such emotional connection with her students does not preclude Hawkins from 
“run[ning] my school based on a corporate model” (p. 46), complete with a 
time clock and strict discipline.
As educator Lisa Delpit (1995) and others have described, schools too oft en 
replay the racial and economic biases of the larger society. Distinctions, both 
overt and subtle, abound between majority member students (“our children”) 
and children from minority groups (“other people’s children”). Drawing atten-
tion to this split, Delpit identifi es educational reform as centrally concerning 
our identities and relationships as educators:
Th e teachers, the psychologists, the school administrators … look at 
“other people’s children” and see damaged and dangerous caricatures 
of the vulnerable and impressionable beings before them. … What are 
we really doing to better educate poor children and children of color? … 
Wh a t  s h o ul d  w e  b e  d o in g ?  Th e answers, I believe, lie not in a prolif-
eration of new reform programs but in some basic understandings of 
who we are and how we are connected to and disconnected from one 
another. (Delpit, 1995, pp. xiii, xiv, xv)
If school failure is a result of a “relational breakdown” (Ward, 1995) between 
teachers and students, where both groups see little in common or shared in 
RT54118_C013.indd   282RT54118_C013.indd   282 7/10/06   6:33:26 PM7/10/06   6:33:26 PM


--- PAGE 340 ---
Education • 283
purpose, then the academic success of poor, immigrant, and minority children 
lies very much in the quality of the relationships that their teachers establish 
with them.
Exemplary African-American women teachers use the familiar and famil-
ial mother–child relationship as a guide for their interactions with students. 
As Kathe Jervis (1996) concludes in her article about an innovative public 
school:
For such a promise of personalized schools to be fulfi lled, faculties have 
to adopt Carrie’s [an African-American teacher’s] attitude about chil-
dren. She oft en says, “When I am in a quandary about how to handle a 
child, I think, ‘What would I do if that child were my child?’ and ‘How 
would I want that child handled were my son or daughter in that situa-
tion?’ ” Parents have an urgency about their own children. We need to 
feel the same urgency when we teach other people’s children. (p. 570)
However, to have such an urgency about children is to recognize that teachers 
may be failing precisely those students considered to be failures. As Momma 
Hawk notes, when a student is disruptive, “the teacher’s fi  rst reaction is to 
get him out of the class instead of saying maybe this child doesn’t have any-
body” (Valente, 1996, p. 44). Too oft  en, in her opinion, teachers lacking a 
parental urgency take the easy, nonfamilial/nonmaternal way out of diffi   cult 
situations.
As insightful and active as the maternal connection to students appears among 
womanist teachers, not all women adopt it in their pedagogy. Kathleen Casey’s 
(1990, 1993) phenomenological study of teaching and women-identifi ed values 
perhaps best illuminates the diff erences in caring among women. Investigat-
ing the role of such values in the work of socially progressive Jewish, Catho-
lic, and African-American teachers, Casey (1990) found that many of these 
women had a desire to “deconstruct the maternal.” Both the secular Jewish 
women and the Catholic nuns interviewed saw schools as sites of the patriar-
chal domination closely resembling traditional middle-class families. In these 
families, maintains Casey, there is a pattern of “maternal nurture and paternal 
authority” (p. 307). Signifi cantly, neither group of teachers had experienced 
this stereotypical family pattern in their own upbringing. However, both the 
Jewish and Catholic teachers felt that the only concept of mother that they 
could manifest in the classroom was that prescribed by the school culture: 
“mother” as an agent of the patriarchal domination of women and children. 
As a result, they sought to assert an identity in the classroom that challenged 
such a conception of teacher as mother.
In a very real manner, these educators were trapped in a mainstream, patri-
archal notion of teaching. Signifi  cantly, they did not call on the ennobling 
models of women as mothers from their personal lives and use these to resist 
the patriarchal expectations of women. Rather, as they decried hierarchical 
gender distinctions, the Jewish teachers resented the gender stereotyping within 
RT54118_C013.indd   283RT54118_C013.indd   283 7/10/06   6:33:26 PM7/10/06   6:33:26 PM


--- PAGE 341 ---
284 • Th e Womanist Reader
schools and thought of teaching “in terms of intellectual challenge and politi-
cal effi  cacy” (p. 305), not in terms of making school family-like. Similarly, 
in their criticism of school patriarchy, the Catholic nuns portrayed them-
selves as the sisterly allies of students. In other words, for both groups of these 
women educators, commitments to social justice hinged on their reworking 
of their professional relationships, as women, to both children/ students and 
men/administrators. Casey’s (1990) interviews with older white teachers who 
taught before and aft  er raising their own children led her to conclude that 
“since the maternal relationship can leave a woman in our society so mate-
rially and psychologically vulnerable, it is no wonder that so many look for 
another metaphor to describe their connections with children” (p. 313).
Th e black women teachers in Casey’s study, however, did not evidence a 
domesticated view of womanhood or mothering in their refl  ections on their 
educational philosophies and practice. Within their cultural construction of 
womanhood, they profoundly embraced a maternal image. Based on their lives 
and experiences outside the classroom, the maternal served as a relational 
compass for their teaching. Like the Jewish teachers and Catholic nuns, these 
educators did not accept the defi nition of “mother” found in the schools and in 
society. However, unlike their colleagues, the African-American women did not 
rely on the school’s appropriation of the maternal to circumscribe their own 
desire to relate to students in a familiar, maternal way. In fact, these teachers 
saw their maternal qualities and the mother–child relationship as central to 
their resistance to domination, both patriarchal and racial. As Casey (1990) 
clarifi es the black teachers’ maternal orientation to students:
Th e relationship between mother and child is not exclusive and private, 
but is part of the wider family which is one’s “people.” … Because of the 
social context out of which this understanding has been constructed, the 
maternal is not seen as an individual burden, but as reciprocity among 
members of the group. Whatever nurture these teachers provide, it comes 
back to them; as one teacher says about her students, “they love your 
very soul.” (p. 316)
Rather than envision mothering primarily in terms of women’s individual rela-
tionships with men and children (as Casey reports the Jewish and Catholic 
teachers doing), the African-American teachers regarded mothering broadly 
as a communal responsibility. Casey (1990) explains, “Th e defi  nition of nur-
ture which is presented in the narratives of these Black women teachers is 
inclusive in several senses: it is not limited to women, it is expressive of rela-
tionship within community and it is not separate from the exercise of author-
ity. An exceedingly powerful version of nurture emerges from this particular 
social context” (p. 317).
Racism and the collective struggle against injustice comprise the particular 
social context of which Casey speaks. Th e black women teachers were raised 
RT54118_C013.indd   284RT54118_C013.indd   284 7/10/06   6:33:26 PM7/10/06   6:33:26 PM


--- PAGE 342 ---
Education • 285
in households in which their identity as African-Americans, as people treated 
as second-class citizens in a democracy, was discussed. Furthermore, in con-
ceptualizing their own agency, these black women did not believe that their 
view of maternal responsibility implicated them in a patriarchal family struc-
ture. Drawing on the cultural norms of West Africa and the oppressive reali-
ties that people of African descent have faced in this country , these women 
viewed the maternal as a profound commitment to the well-being and survival 
of black children and black people. Th e maternal lens they brought to their 
practice powerfully connected their personal relationships with students to an 
active engagement with social reality.
Several recent studies have suggested a similar cultural connection between 
the pedagogy of culturally relevant black teachers and a concept of the maternal 
in their practice (Case, 1997; Delpit, 1995; Foster, 1993). For example, Michele 
Foster (1993) maintains that the use of kin terms among black women teach-
ers as “mothers, aunts, and grandmothers” toward their students is a long-
standing practice within black communities. In this tradition, teachers oft  en 
see themselves as “othermothers” or women who, through feelings of shared 
responsibility, commit themselves to the social and emotional development of 
all children in a community (Collins, 1991). “Othermothering” has also been 
described as a “universalized ethic of care” or a “collective social conscience” 
(Case, 1997, pp. 26, 36) in which the caring that othermothers engage in is not 
simply interpersonal but profoundly political in intent and practice. Explains 
Patricia Hill Collins (1991):
By seeing the larger community as responsible for children and by giving 
other-mothers and other nonparents “rights” in child rearing, African-
Americans challenge prevailing property relations. It is in this sense that 
traditional bloodmother/other-mother relationships in women-centered 
networks are “revolutionary.” (p. 123)
Th is concept of othermothering is germane to education because teaching in 
the African-American community, as in other ethnic groups, has been domi-
nated by women since the turn of the 20th century. However, the profound 
relational capacities of womanist teachers are vitally connected to another 
d i m e n s i o n — t h e i r  i d e n t i t y  a s  p o l i t i c a l  b e i n g s  w h o  m a k e  c o n s t a n t  p a r a l l e l s  
between schooling and society, school practices and social reality. Th  us, as 
the traditions of caring in which black women have been involved have had an 
explicit focus on helping other women and their children survive the degrada-
tions of physical, economic, and political enslavement (Collins, 1991), so has 
womanism provided an interpersonal base for social action in education.
Political Clarity
Political clarity is the recognition by teachers that there are relationships 
between schools and society that diff  erentially structure the successes and 
RT54118_C013.indd   285RT54118_C013.indd   285 7/10/06   6:33:27 PM7/10/06   6:33:27 PM


--- PAGE 343 ---
286 • Th e Womanist Reader
failures of groups of children (Bartolome, 1994). Womanist teachers see racism 
and other systemic injustices as simultaneously social and educational prob-
lems. Consequently, they demonstrate a keen awareness of their power and 
responsibility as adults to contest the societal stereotypes imposed on children.
Th e presence of political clarity among womanist teachers is a recurring 
theme in historical and autobiographical analyses of black segregated schools 
that were valued by their communities (Beauboeuf-Lafontant, 1999). In tak-
ing on the role of surrogate parents toward their students (Cecelski, 1994; 
Siddle-Walker, 1996), the teachers believed that they were both ethically and 
“ethnically responsible for preparing these youth for future leadership and 
for making contributions to this unique mission, namely the liberation 
and enhancement of the quality of life for Black people” (Adair, 1984; cited 
in Siddle-Walker, 1996, p. 206). Educators were exhorted to use their sense of 
collective responsibility to help the masses of their fellow African-Americans 
understand and act on their rights as citizens in a democracy (Higginbotham, 
1992; Perkins, 1983).
As a result, their concern was for the “whole child,” not simply their students’ 
academic well-being. As Mamie Garvin Fields (1983) recalls from her lifetime of 
teaching in the segregated state of South Carolina:
I taught the schoolchildren the same way I taught my sons, but not 
everybody approved. …
My point always was that the “good manners” of some black people 
didn’t help their black child to “come up in the world.” Th  ose man-
ners kept us “in our place.” Th ey conditioned us in the Old South ways. 
So the next thing you know, that black child is grown up and calling 
white people “sir” and “ma’am.” … For example, many teachers would 
say, “Don’t bother the white people to get necessities for your school.” 
Afraid, you see. My attitude was, “He’s a man and speaks English. I will 
ask him.” So the other teachers would send me to see Mr. Welch in his 
offi  ce. I became the spokesman. (p. 221)
Most black teachers during segregation had few illusions about their freedom 
and knew that, even as adults, they were considered inferior to all whites. 
Th us, for Mamie Fields to refuse to model subservience for all her children—
those of her family as well as of her classroom—was to “teach against the 
grain” (Cochran-Smith, 1993) in a profoundly political manner. As she also 
says, “White people had so many ways to degrade the Negro. I always tried 
to oppose that” (Fields, 1983, p. 214). Th  us, her caring and pedagogy were 
very much contextualized by and responsive to the needs of her students for 
someone who would value them and expect greatness of them, even if the 
larger society (and some of their other black teachers) did not. In the words 
of one former student of a segregated school, “Our teachers could see our 
RT54118_C013.indd   286RT54118_C013.indd   286 7/10/06   6:33:27 PM7/10/06   6:33:27 PM


--- PAGE 344 ---
Education • 287
potential even when we couldn’t, and they were able to draw out our potential. 
Th ey helped us imagine possibilities of life beyond what we knew” (Foster, 
1997, p. 99).
In a similar way, Marva Collins emphasizes the promise of her students, fi nd-
ing something admirable about each child every day (Collins and Tamarkin, 
1990/1982, p. 61). Th is habit is tied to her fundamental belief that
a good teacher can always make a poor student good and a good student 
superior. Th e word teacher has its roots in the Latin word meaning to 
lead or to draw out. Good teachers draw out the best in every student; 
they are willing to polish and shine until the true luster of each student 
comes through. (p. 6; emphasis in original)
In “shining” her students, Collins also confronts them with social reality. In 
other words, she does not uncritically glorify children. Nor does she simply 
strive to make students feel good about themselves. Th e purpose of her teach-
ing is much more political: to help them question reality along with her and to 
discuss its implications for them.
Because Collins’s students are poor children from housing projects located 
in an urban ghetto, the social assumption (and perhaps desire) is that they 
will fail, both in school and in life. Rather than ignoring or minimizing the 
presence of derogatory stereotypes, Collins makes the political ramifi  cations 
of their failures to learn clear to them:
If you throw away your life, you’re just letting society have its way. … 
You know, boys and girls, there are some people who look at places like 
this, neighborhoods like Garfi eld Park, and they say, “Oh, children from 
there are not very smart. Th ey aren’t going to grow up to be anyone or 
do anything special.” If you decide to waste your lives, you are letting 
all those people be right. No one can tell you what you will be. Only you 
have the power to decide for yourselves. (Collins and Tamarkin, 1990/ 
1982, p. 85)
While Collins speaks of her children needing to make choices that have life-
long implications, she also recognizes that they need guidance and sponsors, 
in their families as well as in their school:
In this messed up world, the only children who are going to make some-
thing of themselves are those who come from strong parents or those 
who have had a strong teacher. One or the other. Or both. (Collins and 
Tamarkin, 1990/1982, p. 54)
As a result, Collins repeats to her students, “I am not going to give up on you. 
I am not going to let you give up on yourself” (Collins and Tamarkin, 1990/ 
1982, p. 87).
RT54118_C013.indd   287RT54118_C013.indd   287 7/10/06   6:33:27 PM7/10/06   6:33:27 PM


--- PAGE 345 ---
288 • Th e Womanist Reader
Ver y signifi cantly, Collins lays bare the political realities that her students, 
all elementary-aged, are experiencing. Such honesty about the stakes of getting 
an education, particularly when one is marginalized and oppressed by soci-
ety, is not common practice in our schools, even at the secondary level (Fine, 
1991). Teachers apparently fear that being truthful with minority children will 
demoralize them even further and seal their fate. Yet, from the perspective of 
these African-American teacher-mothers, to withhold knowledge is to disem-
power those children.
Politically clear womanist educators understand the necessity of seeing through 
stereotypes as false representations of children’s realities and possibilities. As 
one communications teacher remarks:
I teach you the way I perceive you to be. … [One of the problems I had 
with Teach for America] is that, you know, “White savior” type thing. 
Susie Bonnie Joe … is going into 125th, you know, and Adam Clayton 
Powell Boulevard, and teaching people who look nothing like her, people 
who are of a totally diff erent economic class, and she’s “taming the sav-
ages.” But she sees them as savages. She’s perpetuating [bitter chuckle] 
the very self-hatred and degradation that, I think, is characteristic of 
so many people who have been othered by our society. … So you’ve got 
to start with a base level of understanding these kids as human beings. 
We’re all subject to the stereotypes of our society, and we can’t assume 
that because we’re well-intended [chuckle], we don’t carry with us all 
of that. You know, that sheltering, “Don’t teach them that history.” Or, 
“Don’t tell them that.” Or, “I feel so sorry for you. I expect you to be poor. 
I know you only have one parent. Your mother probably doesn’t know 
how to be a mother” [all said in a gentle, yet condescending voice]. Hey, 
you’ve got to help them see within their own situation the strength and 
the richness. (Beauboeuf, 1997, pp. 122–123)
Th us, womanist teachers readily demonstrate their political clarity: With their 
students, both in deed and in word, they share their understanding of soci-
ety, an understanding that does not shy away from the reality of domination 
nor from the existence of resistance struggles against oppression. In essence, 
loving students means discussing such insights with them, not withholding 
knowledge from them. Audrey Th ompson (1998) describes the cultural sig-
nifi cance of such openness: “Caring in the Black family has had to be, in part, 
about the surrounding society, because it has had to provide children with 
the understanding and the strategies they need to survive racism. … [Th  us] 
love and caring [in the womanist tradition] do not step back from the world 
in order to return to innocence, but step out into the world in order to change 
it” (p. 532; emphasis in original). Being a womanist educator entails more 
than simply having a professed love for children: A womanist educator loves 
RT54118_C013.indd   288RT54118_C013.indd   288 7/10/06   6:33:27 PM7/10/06   6:33:27 PM


--- PAGE 346 ---
Education • 289
children, especially those considered “other” in society, out of a clear-sighted 
understanding of how and why society marginalizes some children while 
embracing others.
While political clarity and a maternal sensibility are central to the everyday 
practice of womanist teachers, their overall investment in the teaching profes-
sion emerges from an ethical perspective of risk taking. It is this ethic of risk 
that provides such educators with the moral fortitude and vision to persevere 
in their fundamentally political and maternal form of caring.
An Ethic of Risk
A womanist engagement with oppressive realities occurs in spite of an educa-
tor’s recognition that social injustice is deep-seated and not easily dismantled. 
Sharon Welch (1990), a white feminist theologian, has remarked on the “ethic 
of risk” she observed in the literature of noted black women authors, all of 
whom describe intergenerational struggles against injustice:
Within an ethic of risk, actions begin with the recognition that far too 
much has been lost and there are no clear means of restitution. Th e fun-
damental risk constitutive of this ethic is the decision to care and to act 
although there are no guarantees of success. … It is an ethos in sharp 
contrast to the ethos of cynicism that oft  en accompanies a recognition 
of the depth and persistence of evil. (p. 68)
Th us, when Momma Hawk (Valente, 1996) speaks of her dream of “tak[ing] 
care of children of rejection” or of her belief that “every child is a gift  from God 
and our job as teachers is to fi nd the gift  in each” (p. 44), she frames her teach-
ing as a mission and sees herself as a child of God and as having the spiritual 
resources to undertake that mission. A similar belief in students and in one-
self emanates from a high school English teacher’ s conviction that studen ts 
“can be great achievers. It’s so much in them, you know, but it takes a skill-
ful teacher, it takes a skillful woman to draw it out” (Beauboeuf, 1997, p. 83). 
Or in the words of a junior high school communications educator, teaching 
becomes a process of “manifest[ing] the divinity within you”:
And that means for me … I want to develop a kindness and a love and 
a patience … [a] level of understanding, of humility, of groundedness, of 
goodness. … I think that there’s something really spiritual about being 
an educator, because I think the only reason to learn is to teach. (Beau-
boeuf, 1997, p. 126)
Because their ethic of risk is rooted in their sense of an existential interdepen-
dence, womanist educators recognize and accept “not that life is unfair, but 
that the creation of fairness is the task of generations, that work for justice is 
not incidental to one’s life but is an essential aspect of affi   rming the delight 
and wonder of being alive” (Welch, 1990, p. 70).
RT54118_C013.indd   289RT54118_C013.indd   289 7/10/06   6:33:28 PM7/10/06   6:33:28 PM


--- PAGE 347 ---
290 • Th e Womanist Reader
While individuals have an ethic of risk, their commitments to working for 
social justice rest on a concept of self that is part of rather than apart from 
other people. From their embrace of an ethic of risk, womanist educators 
understand morality not in abstract principles but in personal, and specifi  -
cally maternal, terms (Colby and Damon, 1992; Koonz, 1987). In other words, 
their capacity to act morally is based on “the ability to perceive people in their 
own terms and to respond to need” (Gilligan, 1986, p. 292). It is an intimacy 
with and not an aloofness from other people that motivates womanist educa-
tors to see personal fulfi llment in working toward the common good.
From this sense of interdependence, womanist educators establish class-
room routines that model such mutual responsibility. Such routines are well 
described by educational researcher George Noblit (1993) in his ethnography 
of the classroom dynamics of one African-American teacher, Pam. Noblit 
maintains that Pam created rituals with her second-grade students so that as 
they performed daily tasks—such as cleaning the board, sharpening pencils, 
and reading the calendar—they were “serv[ing] the collective good” (p. 29). 
Moreover, academically weak children were not left  to themselves, and no one 
was ever singled out for praise at the cost of others. In her interactions with 
students who were unable to answer questions, Pam still held them respon-
sible for acquiring academic skills; however, she allowed them to do so in a 
supportive environment fi lled with “a lot of coaching to get it right and a lot 
of room to fi gure it out for yourself” (p. 29). Even when asking a question and 
choosing one student to answer, Pam would try to include the whole class: 
She would “let the hands wave for a while—long enough to allow the maxi-
mum number of hands to raise … smile and make eye contact with all she 
could” (p. 33). And regardless of whether the answer given was correct, “she 
would connect for a brief moment with her eyes, words, humor, and attention” 
(p. 33). Instructive about Pam’s teaching is how she acknowledged, but did not 
resign herself to, the “diffi  cult” students and parents: “She could laugh at a lot 
of the tribulations of classroom life because neither the events nor her enjoy-
ment of her students threatened her authority. In many ways, they constituted 
her moral authority” (Noblit, 1993, pp. 27, 28).
In emic discussions of African-American culture, such an assertion of the 
individual existing within a web of community and history is very common 
(Collins, 1991; Hord and Lee, 1995). Not only is the tie between the individual 
and the community a guiding cultural belief, but the conditions of slavery 
and continued oppression have heightened this interdependence as not sim-
ply a preferred existential state but a critical component of survival: “Black 
service providers and community activists alike have long recognized that 
their own destiny was inextricably linked to the destiny of other Blacks, and 
that in forging ties of mutual support, collective survival and racial progress 
would be achieved” (Ward, 1995, pp. 176–177). Signifi cant about this concept 
RT54118_C013.indd   290RT54118_C013.indd   290 7/10/06   6:33:28 PM7/10/06   6:33:28 PM


--- PAGE 348 ---
Education • 291
of interdependence is its charge that “you must have some practical purpose 
and benefi t to others and to self. You must” (Beauboeuf, 1997, p. 83). As a 
junior-high-school history teacher explains, the interdependence of woman-
ist caring requires that teachers see both teaching and change as interpersonal 
processes:
I mean, it’s not that you have all the answers. … I think you have to have 
the right attitude, the right outlook that, “I’m about change; I’m not per-
fect.” … And I think we’ve got to sort of remove it from being sort of a 
personal attack to like trying to help us understand who we are so that 
we can help our students understand better who they are. (Beauboeuf, 
1997, p. 95)
Because they include self-change in the project of social change, womanist 
educators are guided by a humility in their teaching:
To suggest “I’m going to change you,” is to suggest, “I know everything, 
and I have the right answer.” … People aren’t victories. It’s about, “So, what 
have you got to tell me? So let’s talk for awhile, let’s keep the conver-
sation going, and maybe we’ll both be changed by the end of this.” … 
[Change] is increments. It’s little steps. And I value the process. … It’s 
the process through which we go that’s oft en the time during which you 
learn the most. (Beauboeuf, 1997, p. 127; emphasis added)
Th us, informed by an ethic of risk, womanist caring encourages educators 
to see their action as a humble, yet essential, contribution to an extensive, 
 collaborative, and enduring project of social change.
Conclusion and Implications
If black women exemplars are truly models of the types of teachers that our 
students need, then recognizing a womanist orientation to teaching compels 
us to reconsider several assumptions we may make about women, caring, and 
education. First, it suggests that caring need not be regarded simply as an inter-
personal, dyadic, and apolitical interaction; to see caring in such terms is to 
disregard its potential for communal engagement and political activism. Fur-
thermore, to see children as innocent and incapable of wondering about the 
problems of our society is in fact to condemn them to the same despair we 
have about our social ills. Once we begin to see caring and mothering in larger, 
sociohistorical realms, we can recognize how in sharing knowledge we can 
also share power. As Alice W alker ( 1983) notes, womanists pride themselves 
on “wanting to know more and in greater depth than is considered ‘good’ for 
one” because they like being “responsible. In charge. Serious” (p. xi). Th us, for 
those women (and men) uncomfortable with the political nature of teaching, 
we might ask, “Whose limitations are they embracing as their own? And to 
RT54118_C013.indd   291RT54118_C013.indd   291 7/10/06   6:33:28 PM7/10/06   6:33:28 PM


--- PAGE 349 ---
292 • Th e Womanist Reader
what end?” Noblit’s (1993) admission of his own uneasiness with the authority 
and caring of Pam’s womanist pedagogy is instructive here:
I understood caring as relational and reciprocal. … I, who saw power 
linked to oppression in everything, did not want caring to be about power, 
and thereby about oppression. … I wanted the “ethic of caring” to be 
pristine, to be somehow beyond issues of power that I considered to be 
essentially hegemonic and masculine. (p. 26)
By associating power with masculininty and oppression and caring with fem-
ininity and liberation, Noblit acknowledges that he erroneously left   no room 
to explain the pedagogy of Pam, a woman whose pedagogy combined both 
power and caring. However, as a result of being instructed in her methods as 
a participant -observer in her class, he realized that power in and of itself is 
not hurtful and that power is not the same as the exploitation or oppression 
of another person. As a result, he concludes that the real task of teaching is to 
fi nd ways of holding truth to power , of using power to promote rather than 
thwart human development. A key way of manifesting this “good” power, 
notes Noblit, is heeding Pam’s “emphasis on collectivity … as a corrective for 
the seemingly rampant individualism of Americans in general” (p. 37).
Lacking such interdependence and an ethic of risk, one can easily succumb 
to despair given the many problems of urban education. However, to sub-
scribe to a form of mothering in which the nature and purpose of one’s caring 
are not interrogated, out of the belief that good intentions necessarily result 
in good actions, is also deeply problematic. Alice McIntyre ( 1997) describes 
the politically unclear caring of several white female students in a preservice 
teaching program:
Th e observations that are made by the participants reveal several stereo-
types about students of color (e.g., unkempt, violent, unprepared). Con-
founding that is the fact that the participants’ perceptions of themselves 
as caring and benevolent teachers make it diffi  cult for them to even rec-
ognize those stereotypes. … Rather than expressing anger and rage at 
children coming to school with no coats and “not having” what “they 
have,” the participants’ discourse lacked a sense of urgency about the 
need to restructure educational institutions. Th e participants conceptu-
alize the problem as being internal to their students. Th e solution then 
is to “save” them. (pp. 667, 668)
In resorting to such a paternalistic pedagogy or what Sara Ruddick (1992) terms 
“maternal militarism” (p. 147), women fail to see or care about “others,” those 
beyond their immediate families and communities. As teachers, they also run 
the risk of succumbing to self-righteous despair about the enormity of the social 
problems of poverty, racism, and general injustice, by seeing these problems as 
insurmountable because they are rooted in the ways of “other people.”
RT54118_C013.indd   292RT54118_C013.indd   292 7/10/06   6:33:28 PM7/10/06   6:33:28 PM


--- PAGE 350 ---
Education • 293
Womanism, however, in positing our fundamental interdependence, regard-
less of the social divisions of class, race, and gender, off  ers heartening, yet 
sobering, information about the nature of social activism. It suggests that car-
ing may not result in immediate, self-congratulatory successes. In fact, because 
the struggle is long and social in nature, one cannot egocentrically base one’s 
commitment on seeing instantaneous change: One must have the faith, as 
N oblit ( 1 99 3 ) writes o f Pam, that “Y o u ’ll lo v e me mo re aft er you leave me.” 
As a womanist educator, one must reconcile oneself to the paradox that “peace 
is the struggle”—that is, “life is [lived] on the edge, and that’s when the best 
self emerges” (Beauboeuf, 1997, p. 150). Th us, womanist teachers see them-
selves as dynamic agents for social justice precisely because they defi ne them-
selves as having a sense of connection with and responsibility to the human 
struggle for freedom and justice. In other words, the hopefulness of the ethic 
of risk keeps people from falling into the numbness and self-absorption of 
despair. From a womanist standpoint, we understand that oppression, as a 
misuse of power, occurs when there is a disconnection between people—when 
p e o p l e  r e fus e  o r  f ail  t o  car e  f o r  e a c h  o th e r .  As  a  r e s ul t,  w o m ani s t  t e a c hin g  
off ers ways to repair such relational breakdowns by emphasizing the follow-
ing: the agency that each of us has to treat others as our own; the obligation 
we have to understand as fully as we can the world around us; and the respon-
sibility we have to make sure that our actions contribute to the larger human 
goal of freedom for all.
I have intended the foregoing examples of black womanist teachers to help 
teachers refl ect on their own pedagogy. Not all black teachers are womanists, 
and not all womanists are African-American women. Because womanism is a 
politicized appropriation of some of the cultural values of black women, people 
choose whether or not to become womanists. It is my hope that teachers will 
use the womanist tradition to inform their own pedagogy and professional 
identities and will begin to see themselves as part of a long-standing American 
tradition in which women and men have seen teaching as their contribution 
to the making of a socially just society . W e exist at a time when our access 
to multicultural histories is a powerful tool at our disposal for “rewriting 
autobiography” (Cochran-Smith, 1995) to create empowering images of our 
 possibilities, culled from various cultural and political legacies.
References
Bartolome, L. (1994). Beyond the methods fetish: Toward a humanizing pedagogy. Harvard 
 Educational Review 64(2): 173–194.
Beauboeuf, T. (1997). Politicized Mothering among African American Women Teachers: A Quali-
tative Inquiry. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cambridge, Harvard Graduate School 
of Education.
Beauboeuf-Lafontant, T. (1999). A movement against and beyond boundaries: “Politically relevant 
teaching” among African American teachers. Teachers College Record 100(4): 702–723.
Cannon, K. (1995). Katie’s Canon: Womanism and the Soul of the Black Community. New York: 
Continuum.
RT54118_C013.indd   293RT54118_C013.indd   293 7/10/06   6:33:29 PM7/10/06   6:33:29 PM


--- PAGE 351 ---
294 • Th e Womanist Reader
Case, K. (1997). African American othermothering in the urban elementary school. Th e Urban 
Review 29(1): 25–39.
Casey, K. (1990). Teacher as mother: Curriculum theorizing in the life histories of contemporary 
women teachers. Cambridge Journal of Education 20(3): 301–320.
Casey, K. (1993). I Answer with My Life: Life Histories of Women Teachers Working for Social 
Change. New York: Routledge.
Cecelski, D. (1994). Along Freedom Road: Hyde County, North Carolina and the Fate of Black 
Schools in the South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina.
Cochran-Smith, M. (1993). Learning to teach against the grain. In K. Geismar and G. Nicoleau 
(Eds.), Teaching for Change: Addressing Issues of Diff  erence in the College Classroom, 
pp. 191–223. Cambridge, MA: Harvard College.
Cochran-Smith, M. (1995). Uncertain allies: Understanding the boundaries of race and teach-
ing. Harvard Educational Review 65(4): 541–570.
Colby, A., and Damon, W. (1992). Some Do Care: Contemporary Lives of Moral Commitment. 
New York: Free Press.
Collins, M. (1992). “Ordinary” Children, Extraordinary Teachers. Charlottesville, VA: Hampton 
Roads.
Collins, M., and Tamarkin, C. (1990/1982). Marva Collins’ Way: Returning to Excellence in Edu-
cation. New York: Putnam.
Collins, P. (1991). Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empow-
erment. New York: Routledge.
Delpit, L. (1995). Other People’s Children: Cultural Confl  ict in the Classroom. New York: Th e 
New Press.
Fields, M. (1983). Lemon Swamp and Other Places: A Carolina Memoir. New York: Free Press.
Fine, M. (1991). Framing Dropouts: Notes on the Politics of an Urban Public High School. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Foster, M. (1991). Constancy, connectedness, and constraints in the lives of African American 
teachers. NWSA Journal 3(2): 233–261.
Foster, M. (1993). Othermothers: Exploring the educational philosophy of black American 
women teachers. In M. Arnot and K. Weiler (Eds.), Feminism and Social Justice in Educa-
tion: International Perspectives, pp. 101–123. Washington, DC: Falmer Press.
Foster, M. (1997). Black Teachers on Teaching. New York: New Press.
Gilligan, C. (1986). Exit-voice dilemmas in adolescent development. In A. Foxley, M. McPherson, 
and G. O’Donnell (Eds.), Development, Democracy and the Art of Trespassing: Essays in 
Honor of Albert O. Hirschman, pp. 283–300. South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame.
Grumet, M. (1988). Bitter Milk: Women and Teaching. Amherst: University of Massachusetts.
Higginbotham, E. (1992). Righteous Discontent: Th e Women’s Movement in the Black Baptist 
Church, 1880–1920. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Hord, F., and Lee, J. (1995). I Am Because We Are: Readings in Black Philosophy. Amherst: Uni-
versity of Massachusetts.
Jervis, K. (1996). “How come there are no brothers on that list?” Hearing the hard questions all 
children ask. Harvard Educational Review 66(3): 546–576.
Koonz, C. (1987). Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family, and Nazi Politics. New York: 
St. Martin’s Press.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). Th e Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Chil-
dren. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
McIntyre, A. (1997). Constructing an image of a white teacher. Teachers College Record 98(4): 
653–681.
Nieto, S. (1999). Th e Light in Th  eir Eyes: Creating Multicultural Learning Communities. New 
York: Teachers College Press.
Noblit, G. (1993). Power and caring. American Educational Research Journal 30(1): 23–38.
Noddings, N. (1994). Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. Berkeley: 
University of California.
Perkins, L. (1983). Th e impact of the “Cult of True Womanhood” on the education of black 
women. Journal of Social Issues 39(3): 17–28.
Ruddick, S. (1992). From maternal thinking to peace politics. In E. Cole and S. Coultrap-McQuin 
(Eds.), Explorations in Feminist Ethics: Th  eory and Practice, pp. 141–155. Bloomington: 
Indiana University.
RT54118_C013.indd   294RT54118_C013.indd   294 7/10/06   6:33:29 PM7/10/06   6:33:29 PM


--- PAGE 352 ---
Education • 295
Siddle-Walker, V. (1996). Th eir Highest Potential: An African American School Community in the 
Segregated South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina.
Th ompson, A. (1998). Not the color purple: Black feminist lessons for educational caring. Harvard 
Educational Review 68(4): 522–554.
Valente, J. (1996). Momma knows best: Chicago’s Corla Hawkins simply won’t let kids fail. People 
(November 18).
Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive Schooling: US-Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring. Albany: 
SUNY Press.
Walker, A. (1983). In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose by Alice Walker. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Ward, J. (1995). Cultivating a morality of care in African American adolescents: A culture-based 
model of violence prevention. Harvard Educational Review 65(2): 175–188.
Welch, S. (1990). A Feminist Ethic of Risk. Minneapolis: Fortress Press.
RT54118_C013.indd   295RT54118_C013.indd   295 7/10/06   6:33:29 PM7/10/06   6:33:29 PM


--- PAGE 353 ---
RT54118_C013.indd   296RT54118_C013.indd   296 7/10/06   6:33:29 PM7/10/06   6:33:29 PM


--- PAGE 354 ---
297
14
Social Work
Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African American Reformer 
of Womanist Consciousness, 1908–1940 (1997) 
IRIS CARLTON-L aNEY
As a pioneer social worker, author, politician, “race woman,” and community 
activist, Elizabeth Ross Haynes constantly advocated and agitated for the rights 
of African Americans and for the rights of women. In 1937 she challenged her 
contemporaries with the following question:
If Frances Perkins (the Honorable Frances Perkins), secretary of labor, 
can fi ll one of the most diffi  cult posts in the Cabinet of the President 
of these United States—and this she had done superbly despite any 
criticisms—is not the time ripe for women, black and white, to extend 
and enlarge the opportunity fought for by Susan B. Anthony and 
Sojourner Truth, especially since the latter could neither read nor write? 
(Haynes, n.d.)
Haynes off ered herself as a role model. She involved herself in researching, writ-
ing, and speaking about women’s labor issues, women’s spiritual and Christian 
growth, women’s roles in the political arena, and women’s use of all their talents 
and skills and did these to such an extent that she can be described as a pioneer 
in the women’s movement of the Progressive Era and beyond.
Like most African American women of her time, however, Haynes has been 
virtually ignored in the study of women’s contributions to social welfare history 
and to the development of social welfare institutions for African Americans 
and for the larger community. Th is invisibility of African American women in 
history leaves gaps in social workers’ cognition, distorting the knowledge base. 
As Brown (1989) noted, an even greater problem is that because of the exclu-
sion of African American women like Haynes, the “concepts, perspectives, 
methods, and pedagogues of women’s history and women’s studies have been 
developed without consideration of the experiences of black women” (p. 610). 
Furthermore, recent eff orts to uncover African American women’s history 
occurred parallel to the development of feminist theory. Th  e consequence 
RT54118_C014.indd   297RT54118_C014.indd   297 7/8/06   4:48:40 PM7/8/06   4:48:40 PM


--- PAGE 355 ---
298 • Th e Womanist Reader
of this timing is that African American women’s history is oft  en couched 
inside the feminist perspective, which, according to Brown, was designed to 
omit the experiences of women of color. African American women generally 
have held marginal positions in the feminist movement. Th  e misperception 
is that African American women deal either with women’s issues or with race 
issues, and then sequentially, not simultaneously. White women have com-
plained that they did not want to dissipate their energies dealing with issues 
of race, because their time could be better spent addressing issues of impor-
tance to all women (Giddings, 1984; Smith, 1985). For them, the primacy 
of female oppression denies the structured inequalities of race. On the other 
hand, McDougald (1925) stated that the African American woman’s “feminist 
eff orts are directed chiefl y toward the realization of the equality of the races, 
the sex struggle assuming a subordinate place” (p. 691).
Some writers (Palmer, 1983; Terborg-Penn, 1983) have argued that the term 
“feminism” is partly responsible for the exclusion that African American women 
feel, because “feminism” puts a priority on gender, not race. To deal with the 
problem of terminology, author Alice Walker (1983) and others (Hine, 1996; 
Ogunyemi, 1985) have used the words “womanist” and “womanism” to describe 
the African American female experience. Walker defi  ned womanist as a con-
sciousness that incorporates racial, cultural, sexual, national, economic, and 
political considerations for all people. Hine believed that womanism speaks 
to a double legacy of oppression and a resistance movement among African 
American women. Th e term may be uncomfortable for some, but its ideals 
are descriptive of the life careers of many African American pioneer social 
welfare leaders of the Progressive Era. Leaders such as Ida B. Wells-Barnett, 
Janie Porter Barrett, and Birdye Henrietta Haynes knew that their oppressed 
positions in society resulted from both gender and race and that their struggle 
must include both, because they were not fragmented individuals but whole 
and holistic in consciousness and purpose.
Th is article focuses on Haynes’s work in the interest of African American 
social welfare. With race and gender consciousness as the foundation of 
her social welfare activism, Haynes worked with African American women 
through the Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA) and the U.S. 
Department of Labor’s Women in Industry Service (WIS). Her role as an 
elected leader in Harlem’ s 21st Assembly District is also discussed as one of 
several mechanisms for planned change on the community level.
“Womanist Race Worker”
Th roughout her life, Haynes, aff  ectionately known as “Rossie,” articulated a 
w o m a n i s t  c o n s c i o u s n e s s .  I t  i s  u n l i k e l y  th a t  H a yn e s  w o ul d  h a v e  c o n s i d e r e d  
herself a feminist. She may well have been aff  ronted by such a label, because 
her life’s work incorporated the numerous issues of race, gender, culture, 
economics, and politics. Born in Mount Willing, Lowndes County, Alabama, 
RT54118_C014.indd   298RT54118_C014.indd   298 7/8/06   4:48:41 PM7/8/06   4:48:41 PM


--- PAGE 356 ---
Social Work • 299
in 1883, Haynes was the only child of Henry and Mary Ross. Lowndes County 
was one of the poorest areas in Alabama, where African Americans far out-
numbered white people. Th e Ross family amassed some wealth through the 
purchase of land, which eventually grew to become a 1,500-acre plantation, 
giving them the luxury of educating their daughter at a level well beyond that 
of most African Americans of their time (Bogin, 1980; Lasch-Quinn, 1993). 
Haynes attended the State Normal School in Montgomery and later won a 
scholarship to Fisk University, where she was awarded an AB degree in 1903. 
She taught school in Alabama and Texas for several years aft  er graduation, 
and during the summers of 1905 and 1907 she attended summer school at the 
University of Chicago.
In 1908 Haynes was invited to work with “colored students” for the 
Student Department of the National Board of the YWCA. She traveled to col-
lege campuses and cities where branches of the YWCA were established for 
African Americans. Although Haynes resigned from paid employment with 
the YWCA in 1910 when she married George Edmund Haynes, cofounder 
and fi rst executive director of the National Urban League, her work with this 
organization continued for many years thereaft er (Bogin, 1980). Her concern 
for women’s equity and economic well-being was just beginning.
Labeling Haynes is a challenge, because the scope of her work is so broad 
and varied. McDougald (1925) described the following four groups into which 
African American women were divided during the 1920s, based on their work 
and activities:
First, comes a very small leisure group—the wives and daughters of men 
who are in business, in the professions, and in a few well-paid personal 
service occupations. Second, a most active and progressive group, the 
women in business and the professions. Th ird, the many women in the 
trades and industry. Fourth, a group weighty in numbers struggling on 
in domestic service, with an even less fortunate fringe of casual workers, 
fl uctuating with the economic temper of the times. (p. 689)
Haynes defi es McDougald’s categorization. Although she had a fairly privi-
leged childhood and later gave up paid employment on her marriage, she did 
not while away her time in search of other black families who could boast of 
the same achievement and leisure. In her world privilege carried an obligation 
to those less fortunate; she became a professional volunteer using her knowl-
edge, expertise, and social and political power for planned change on behalf 
of African Americans.
Haynes can be described as a “race woman” with a womanist conscious-
ness. Th e work in which she engaged can best be described, in the vocabu-
lary of her time, as “race work.” In contemporary terms, “community work” 
best identifi es her work. For Haynes, this work involved community advocacy 
coupled with the constant struggle for social justice, race uplift  , and gender 
RT54118_C014.indd   299RT54118_C014.indd   299 7/8/06   4:48:41 PM7/8/06   4:48:41 PM


--- PAGE 357 ---
300 • Th e Womanist Reader
equity. It included a pride in self, a collective consciousness, and the dynamics 
of multiple commitments, which according to Higginbotham (1992), resisted 
white hegemonic discourses. Gilkes (1988, pp. 67–68) used the phrase “lots of 
small pieces” to describe the “web of affi  liations” in which African American 
women engaged to be eff  ective community advocates. Th is wide variety of 
involvement with numerous organizations, whose aims included interracial 
cooperation, political empowerment, economic advancement, education, cul-
tural enhancement, and community endurance, illustrates the complexity 
and multiplicity of women’s activities. “Lots of small pieces” is a fi tting phrase 
to describe Haynes’s “womanist race work.”
Preparing Girls for Womanhood through the YWCA
Haynes began her social work career as the fi  rst African American national 
board staff  member with the Student Department of the YWCA. Working 
among college students for more than two years, Haynes traveled extensively 
throughout the country encouraging, supporting, and modeling expected 
behavior for African American college women. Her work also included super-
visory responsibilities in cities where African American YWCAs had been 
established.
With a genuine concern for the students’ quality of life, Haynes wrote to 
the national offi  ce that “to get a fair and true idea of the girls themselves, the 
ones in whom we are most deeply interested, it is very necessary to see them 
in and through their conditions and surroundings to know what they think 
and what they do.” She indicated that “the girls’ rooms [on the college cam-
puses], though plainly and poorly furnished, are well kept, are improved by 
artistic touches here and there, and the girls themselves for the most part are 
quite tidy in their dress.” Haynes further noted with some trepidation that 
“many work from the early morning hours steadily with just a few minutes 
between for meals until night and then attend night school. Most of them are 
able to get work in the schools, but it is necessary for some who support them-
selves entirely to live out in private families and do the cooking or the laundry 
work, or the general house work.” Haynes felt that in general the students were 
“cheerful and determined to push ahead, [but] occasionally an almost dis-
couraged girl has made her way to my room seeking advice, information, and 
more than all a word of encouragement” (Ross, 1909). Haynes had tremendous 
respect for these young women and saw in them the irrepressible spirit that 
characterized her own life.
Haynes was realistic and positive in her reports. She also was observant, 
with a particular eye for the student who showed unusual promise. On visit-
ing Paine College, which Haynes described as “one of the strongest Associa-
tions on the fi eld,” she found that the young president of the association was 
“worthy of being kept in mind as a possible Association worker somewhere” 
(Ross, 1909).
RT54118_C014.indd   300RT54118_C014.indd   300 7/8/06   4:48:41 PM7/8/06   4:48:41 PM


--- PAGE 358 ---
Social Work • 301
Haynes was proud of her work with the YWCA and noted that aft er one year 
as “special worker,” the “colored student associations” had increased in number 
from only 17 in 1909 to 50 by 1910, and that seven associations were subscrib-
ers to the Association Monthly, the literary organ of the YWCA, whereas only 
three had subscribed the previous year. She also noted the extent to which the 
students and the teachers at the various schools had contributed money to the 
national board in support of the secretary’s work and of the conferences spon-
sored in support of African American YWCAs (Ross, 1910).
Although Haynes acknowledged that the amount contributed was minimal, 
she felt that “it is a sign of wonderful progress along several lines and espe-
cially in self - hel p” ( Ross, 1 9 1 0 ) . Self - hel p eff orts have a distinguished tradi-
tion in the African American community and are recognized as mechanisms 
for counteracting adverse societal forces and social policies (Hill et al., 1993; 
Peebles-Wilkins & Francis, 1990). Furthermore, self-help has formed the foun-
dation of social welfare for African Americans. In Haynes’s assessment, self-help 
was a major strength of the African American college YWCA and indicated 
the students’ commitment to participate in determining their life’s courses.
When she resigned from the YWCA, Haynes recommended that Cecelia 
Holloway, a Fisk University graduate, succeed her as “special worker.” Her rec-
ommendation was accepted, and Haynes worked with Holloway, participating 
in her training for several months. Such mentoring and training were com-
mon among African American women and served to broaden and strengthen 
the sociopolitical network within which Haynes thrived. Haynes rejoined 
the YWCA in 1922, when she was named to the newly created Council on 
Colored Work. In 1924 she became the fi rst African American member of the 
association’s national board, remaining in the post for 10 years.
African American Women’s Work
In 1 9 1 8, when George Edm und Haynes accepted the position of director of 
Negro economics for the U.S. Department of Labor, Haynes accompanied her 
husband to Washington, DC, and busied herself with issues of women in indus-
try. In 1919 she became a dollar-a-year worker for the Department’s WIS (aft er 
World War I, this section became the Women’s Bureau). Mary Van Kleeck was 
the director of WIS; Haynes and Helen Irvin, a Howard University graduate, 
were appointed to serve as special aides to Van Kleeck (Neverdon-Morton, 
1989). New York City Tribune reporter Hannah Mitchell found the two women 
fascinating, but something of an enigma. Mitchell (1919) described in great 
detail the two women’s light skin color, gentle manner, immaculate clothing, 
physical stature, and diction. Mitchell also spoke of their expertise in the area 
of women in industry service. But, almost as if to rationalize her praise of the 
two women, to justify their worthiness, and to account for her own comfort in 
their presence, the reporter wrote that when Irvin spoke, “she has the charm 
of not appearing to possess consciousness of race,” and “the listener loses race 
RT54118_C014.indd   301RT54118_C014.indd   301 7/8/06   4:48:42 PM7/8/06   4:48:42 PM


--- PAGE 359 ---
302 • Th e Womanist Reader
consciousness himself” (p. 7). With a low-key, analytical, and dramatic speak-
ing style (Giddings, 1984), Haynes also may have appeared to be dispassionate 
(it is more likely, however, that her style was a carefully developed mechanism 
used to persuade and to put the listener at ease). Furthermore, in describing 
Haynes’s speaking voice as “beautifully modulated” and her diction as “perfect,” 
Mitchell seemed to have felt that these signifi cant attributes were rare among 
African Americans.
Van Kleeck relied heavily on Haynes and Irvin’s expert advice regarding 
issues of African American women in industry. Haynes believed that many of 
the problems that African American women faced in industry were the results 
of inadequate training and preparation, and she was a strong advocate for 
job training as a prerequisite to economic self-suffi  ciency. Haynes and Irvin’s 
investigations found conditions very good in two large mail-order houses 
(presumably Montgomery Ward and Sears and Roebuck) in Chicago. Th  ese 
mail-order houses had certain educational requirements and provided train-
ing to new employees. Haynes believed that complaints of absenteeism in some 
Chicago industries could be accounted for because the young women lived 
great distances from the factories and did not have access to transportation. 
Haynes did not blame these young women for their conditions and work habits. 
Rather, she felt that the women had responded to a national labor crisis in time 
of war and that “the country should have a sense of duty to them and help 
them procure the training which they needed” (Mitchell, 1919, p. 7). Haynes 
also believed that access services such as transportation were essential.
Of economic necessity, African American women had participated in the 
labor market at a rate much higher than their white counterparts and yet were 
given limited choices about the types of work in which they engaged (Dill, 
1983). Haynes praised “Negro girls” for their willingness “to take up hard and 
heavy work,” or the “dirty work” of industry (Mitchell, 1919, p. 7). She also 
noted that white girls were unwilling to do these jobs and had refused them in 
the past. Haynes concluded that “Negro women … have one advantage over 
white women as a class. Th ey have the habit of work. … Th ere are few Negro 
women in the world who do not do their share, and sometimes more, in the 
support of their families” (Mitchell, 1919, p. 7). Involvement in the labor market 
served women in a number of ways. It helped to reduce economic dependence, 
but it also gave African American women a distinctive set of experiences that 
provided a diff erent view of their material reality. Furthermore, the world of 
work provided the women an opportunity to identify with a self-suffi  cient and 
powerful group, distinct from their families (Collins, 1989).
Haynes also served as domestic service employment secretary of the U.S. 
Employment Service in Washington, DC, from January 1920 to May 1922. In 
1922 she became the examiner. While in that post, she wrote of the conditions 
of African American women in labor in an article entitled, “Two Million Negro 
Women at Work.” In that article, Haynes identifi ed (1) domestic and personal 
RT54118_C014.indd   302RT54118_C014.indd   302 7/8/06   4:48:42 PM7/8/06   4:48:42 PM


--- PAGE 360 ---
Social Work • 303
service, (2) agriculture and manufacturing, and (3) mechanical industries as 
the three occupations in which the majority of women were engaged. Haynes 
found that aft er the war some women had lost their jobs to returning soldiers 
and declining labor needs. Companies no longer paid the minimum wage 
but expanded the duties of workers. Haynes ( 1922 ) also noted that with the 
increasing number of white women available for work, “Negro women were 
to a very large extent displaced” (p. 64). She also found that “as soon as some 
of the laundries [in Washington, DC] began to fear that they would be forced 
to pay the minimum wage they began to ask the employment bureaus about 
the possibility of obtaining white girls” (p. 65). According to Haynes, these 
employers were “perfectly satisfi ed with Negro women” (p. 65) as long as they 
were not required to pay them a minimum wage.
Haynes’s research further revealed that among domestic servants, “the bond 
between mistress and maid … is not suffi   ciently strong for the mistress to 
learn her maid’s surname or her address” (Haynes, 1922, p. 66). In fact, a pat-
tern of exploitation was the norm for domestic workers in both the North and 
the South, and social distance was the rule. Mistrust and disrespect seemed 
to form the basis of their relationship, a recapitulation of the mistress-slave 
relationship. According to Jones (1985), white women justifi ed the low wages 
they paid their African American servants by arguing that the servants were 
thieves who took both food and clothing at will. Feeling the weight of disdain 
and oppression, some African American domestic servants considered “toting” 
as their right, “a hard earned form of ‘pay’ for a distasteful job” (Jones, 1985, 
p. 132). Haynes (1922) noted that neither the domestic servant nor her white 
mistress “seemed personally interested in the other” and that in “too many 
cases the feelings of each borders on real dislike for the other.” Haynes con-
cluded that “neither has for the other that priceless possession—confi  dence” 
(p. 66).
Like many in the African American intelligentsia, Haynes (1922) advocated 
for “standardization of domestic service” and for “domestic-training schools 
in connection with public employment agencies” (pp. 66–67). On the other 
hand, women employed in these areas sought only to escape from what they 
perceived to be the most degrading of all women’s work. Th e African American 
factory workers promised never to return to domestic work. Haynes’s research 
showed that with economic shift s, scarcity of jobs, and racial discrimination, 
these women would easily be displaced, forcing them to return to domestic 
service. She understood the reality of limited opportunities available to those 
who lacked marketable skills. More trenchantly, middle-class African Ameri-
can women knew that even when they were well-educated, opportunities for 
employment commensurate with their training oft en eluded them because of 
the hatred and resentment of racism. Haynes emphasized the need for African 
American women to struggle constantly against restricted job opportunities 
in search of “economic independence.”
RT54118_C014.indd   303RT54118_C014.indd   303 7/8/06   4:48:42 PM7/8/06   4:48:42 PM


--- PAGE 361 ---
304 • Th e Womanist Reader
In 1923, while pursuing an MA in political science at Columbia University, 
Haynes wrote an outstanding thesis analyzing domestic working women, entitled 
“Negroes in Domestic Service in the United States.” In this study, she exam-
ined numerous issues including demographic data, turnover rates, training 
and effi  ciency, and wages. Haynes was holistic in her approach and to that end 
surveyed the living conditions, health, social life, and organizational affi   lia-
tions of domestic workers. She found that the church played a signifi cant role 
in their lives, as did secret orders (for example, the Eastern Star). Younger 
domestic workers spent leisure time in dance halls and billiard rooms. Haynes 
(1923) lamented that the meager social options open to younger domestic 
workers largely were the result of “social stigma attached to domestic service,” 
which barred them from “many of the entertainments of real value and ben-
efi t” (p. 442).
Th e “Lady Politician”
Aft er moving to New York, Haynes worked with her husband while he served 
as Secretary of the Department of Race Relations of the Federal Council of 
the Churches of Christ in America, from 1922 to 1946. During this time she 
also became very involved in the politics of the Harlem community and was 
elected coleader of the 21st Assembly District in 1935. Haynes was committed 
to the political process and believed that the time was right for women to seek 
leadership positions in the political arena (Haynes, n.d.).
As coleader of the 21st district, Haynes worked for two years with a 
man whom she grew to distrust and with whom she ultimately severed ties. 
Herbert L. Bruce, a Harlem restaurateur born in Barbados and educated in 
New York, became the fi rst African American member of the executive com-
mi ttee  o f  T amman y  H all  wi th  his  el ecti o n  in  1 9 3 5  as  th e  l eader  o f  th e  2 1 st  
district. Haynes served as Bruce’s “lady coleader” for two years. Bruce was a 
well-respected community and business leader in Harlem (Lewinson, 1974; 
McKay, 1940). During the two years that Haynes worked with Bruce, however, 
she grew to disrespect him. She believed that he exercised poor judgment in 
his support of one of New York’s elder senators who, as Haynes noted, “in all 
his years in the United States Senate, never lift  ed his voice in behalf of the 
Anti-Lynching Bill, voted to cut off  Relief from the poor and [voted] to block 
th e  p ur e  F o o d  an d  D ru g  A ct”  ( H a yn e s ,  1 9 3 7 ) .  S h e  furth e r  c ri ti c ize d  B ru c e  
for being a pawn under Al Smith’s control, noting that while Smith was New 
York’s governor, he “refused to sign a bill for a Judicial District wherein two 
Negro magistrates might be elected, saying he could not see two Negro men 
dressed up in black robes sitting on a judicial bench questioning white women.” 
H a y n e s  ( 1 9 3 7 )  a l s o  b e l i e v e d  t h a t  B r u c e ’ s  “ s t u b b o r n  i n t o l e r a n c e  o f  p e o p l e  
whose opinions are diff  erent from his, [stood] between him and any great 
good to the people.” Furthermore, she believed that Bruce was mean-spirited 
and insincere. As an elected offi  cial, she felt he had “become too important 
RT54118_C014.indd   304RT54118_C014.indd   304 7/8/06   4:48:42 PM7/8/06   4:48:42 PM


--- PAGE 362 ---
Social Work • 305
to treat his electorate courteously, fairly and squarely,” ultimately failing to 
provide genuine service to the people of Harlem. Finally, in 1937, she dissolved 
her political relationship with Bruce and ran unsuccessfully with Alderman 
Eustace V. Dench for coleadership of the 21st district.
Haynes (1937) believed that “Negro leadership, which is to serve the people, 
must be of such sterling character that it could not and would not stoop to 
any attempt to humiliate or frustrate every eff  ort of any woman, black or 
white, whose reputation and character are unassailable and whose ability and 
cooperative spirit have been tried and proven.” Haynes obviously felt that 
Bruce devalued her because of her gender. She proclaimed that as coleader 
of the 21st district, she had “worked day and night for the people” because 
of her genuine interest and appreciation of their confi  dence. Yet she felt that 
her eff orts were taken for granted. She intimated that her former captain, like 
other male leaders, took credit for the hard work that female coleaders had 
done. Haynes believed that the time was right “for women … to step forward 
as aspirants, bargainers, and if necessary, contenders for the choicest offi   cial 
plums” (Haynes, n.d.). Weary of women staying in their traditional roles as 
helpmates, Haynes encouraged women to abandon the “hang over training 
to shove [men] forward instead of ourselves.” She further acknowledged that 
“[women’s] petty jealousness of one another are such mill stones about our 
necks.” Always mindful of women’s need to mobilize and have a voice in the 
politics that aff e ct  th e ir  li v es,  H a yn es  ( n . d. )  sai d  “ I  h a v e  n o  f ear s  in  ur gin g  
the women of the country, irrespective of race, to awake, register, vote, work 
and enlarge the fi ght for equality of opportunity in jobs, in offi  ce for women.” 
Haynes clearly had no patience with leaders who were deceitful and who lacked 
commitment, and she was not reticent about expressing her opinion. In fact, 
she (1937) stated that her truthful assertions held “malice toward none, and 
justice for all.” Haynes believed that candor and honesty were important qual-
ities, and although she clearly held the honest person in high regard, she also 
understood that stating certain truths could be unpopular.
Outreach and Organizing with “Lots of Small Pieces”
Haynes was determined to serve wherever need existed and spent some of 
her vacation time in Alabama tutoring children in her community for several 
hours each aft ernoon. As she off ered services to poor people, Haynes docu-
mented social problems as she saw them. Speaking out on the evils of the 
system was a hallmark of Haynes’s style. On a visit to her home in Alabama, 
Haynes (Ross, 1910) noted that the
three greatest immediate evils in the country life of that section of Alabama 
are the following: very poor school teachers, most incompetent min-
isters and most unworthy lawmakers and executors, who encouraged 
crime by permitting men of some means to buy off   criminals for a few 
RT54118_C014.indd   305RT54118_C014.indd   305 7/8/06   4:48:43 PM7/8/06   4:48:43 PM


--- PAGE 363 ---
306 • Th e Womanist Reader
dollars, provided the criminals are spoken of as good work hands and 
are willing to enter a contract and that crimes are committed against 
other Negroes.
Haynes concluded this refl ection of Lowndes County’s social problems by citing 
“the very, very early marriage of so many children” as an evil certain to ensure 
a life of poverty and want. Acknowledging the desperate social, economic, 
and political conditions in her community, Haynes made monetary contribu-
tions to support African American social welfare. Alabama’s Calhoun School 
benefi ted from Haynes’s benevolence (Jones, 1936). Th  e school’s mission—
to attack the social conditions diminishing the quality of life for Lowndes 
County residents—was a goal that Haynes shared. Furthermore, the school 
represented a grand self-help eff ort (Lasch-Quinn, 1993), a feature Haynes praised 
as essential for any successful race work.
Although Haynes engaged in solitary social action, she understood the 
importance of group eff  orts. To both surround herself with women who 
shared her vision of progressive African American womanhood and encour-
age and infl uence the lives of younger women, Haynes became a member 
of the Alpha Kappa Alpha (AKA) sorority in 1923 and a charter member 
of the Tau Omega graduate chapter in 1925. Th  rough these organizations 
and others with which she was affi   liated, Haynes continued to nurture and 
strengthen her relationships with other African American women. (Th  is 
group of college-educated African American women also formed another 
network through which Haynes could work on behalf of women and girls.) 
Haynes believed that part of the sorority’s purpose was “to build more 
stately mansions for womanhood” (“Proclamation,” 1953) through social 
welfare programs, race work, and educational opportunities. By 1925 the 
AKA sorority’s national agenda included programs that increased race con-
sciousness and that fostered “aesthetic development of the public” as well as 
“increased community involvement” (McNealey, 1993, p. 24). In harmony 
with the national mandate, the New Y ork chapter of the sorority conducted 
annual literary contests for high school girls in New York and New Jersey. 
Th e sorority and its members were prominent enough in the area that liter-
ary giants such as Langston Hughes and Countee Cullen, two of the Har-
lem Renaissance’s greatest poets, served as judges for the literary contest at 
Haynes’s request (Haynes, 1926).
Haynes also was a member of the National Association of Colored Women 
(NACW) and served as chair of the Industry and Housing Department of that 
organization. Her “web of affi  liations” also included the Harlem Branch of 
the YWCA, the Mary F. Waring Club, the Dorrence Brooks Ladies’ Auxil-
iary No. 528 of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the New York Fisk University 
Club, and the Advisory Committee of Harlem Works Progress Administra-
tion (WPA) Th eatrical Project. She also served as superintendent of the Junior 
RT54118_C014.indd   306RT54118_C014.indd   306 7/8/06   4:48:43 PM7/8/06   4:48:43 PM


--- PAGE 364 ---
Social Work • 307
Department of Abyssinian Baptist Church and as secretary of the board of 
managers of the Adam Clayton Powell Home for the Aged.
In 1937 New York Governor Herbert H. Lehman appointed Haynes to serve 
on the Temporary Commission on the Conditions of the Urban Colored Pop-
ulation. Th e commission was designed to study the economic and social con-
ditions of urban African Americans in the state. Haynes was well-prepared for 
this charge, having committed much of her career to the study and eradica-
tion of social problems aff ecting African Americans. She was also appointed 
by Mayor Fiorello La Guardia to serve on the New York City Planning Com-
mission. She was a member of the National Advisory Committee on Women’s 
Participation in the 1939 New York World’s Fair. Th rough her eff orts the AKA 
sorority hosted a luncheon given at the Women’s National Advisory Building 
of the World’s Fair, an activity described by sorority members as “one of the 
most brilliant events of our history” (“Proclamation,” 1953).
In addition, Haynes was recognized as a writer of stature. A Los Angeles 
YWCA girl’s group voted to name their club the “Elizabeth Ross Haynes Club” 
in honor of Haynes’s work with the YWCA and her literary contributions. 
Greater and more public recognition of Haynes’s literary prowess came with 
her acceptance of an invitation to become an honorary member of the Interna-
tional Mark Twain Society. Th is award was an indication of public recognition 
of her contributions to literature (“Historical Statement,” n.d.). Committed to 
an accurate historical record of African American people, Haynes wrote two 
books: Unsung Heroes (1921) was written, according to Haynes, to tell of the 
“victories in spite of the hardships and struggles of Negroes whom the world 
failed to sing about,” and Th e Black Boy of Atlanta  (1952) tells the story of 
Major Richard Robert Wright, a community leader, educator, and banker.
Implications for Social Work Practice
Haynes had a clear understanding that race problems and gender concerns were 
intertwined, and her work was based on the interconnection between the two. 
Haynes’s work epitomized the elements of feminist organizing as described in 
contemporary America. Gutierrez and Lewis (1995) indicated that the goal of 
feminist organizing is to eliminate permanent power hierarchies among all 
people that can prevent the realization of human potential. Th  ey identifi  ed 
six factors that are common to feminist organizing: (1) using a gender lens to 
analyze the causes and solutions of community problems; (2) attending to the 
process of practice in an eff ort to create organizations based on feminist prin-
ciples; (3) empowering through consciousness-raising; (4) assuming that the 
personal is political, with organizing therefore taking a grassroots, bottom-up 
approach; (5) bridging diff erences among women based on factors like race, 
class, physical ability, and sexual orientation, with the guiding principle that 
diversity is strength; and (6) organizing holistically. A discussion of Haynes’s 
work based on these principles follows.
RT54118_C014.indd   307RT54118_C014.indd   307 7/8/06   4:48:43 PM7/8/06   4:48:43 PM


--- PAGE 365 ---
308 • Th e Womanist Reader
Gender Lens
Haynes recognized that her gender gave her a unique perspective. She was a 
member of a community of African American women through her sorority, the 
NACW, and the “colored” branches of the YWCA. Haynes lived and worked 
near the women and girls she tried to help. She understood their problems, 
shared their discomfort in race and gender isolation, and rejoiced in their tri-
umphs (Carlton-LaNey, 1996).
Process of Practice
Th e NACW, one of the many organizations to which Haynes belonged, 
adhered to the motto “lift  ing as they climb.” Th  is motto suggests that the 
women’s group work aff ected the conditions of all African American women 
and simultaneously helped the empowerment process for the race. It also sug-
gests a collective identity and voice in an environment that was nurturing and 
supportive.
Consciousness-Raising
Th rough various group activities, Haynes engaged in consciousness-raising. Th e 
consummate teacher, she took every available opportunity to expose, educate, 
and enlighten girls and women to their strengths and potential for personal 
and system change. Th  ese opportunities included holding private, small-
group tutorials on her back porch in Alabama, establishing literary contests 
for high schools in New York and New Jersey, and participating on speaker’s 
bureaus for national organizations. Th rough these eff orts, women were able to 
see the relationship between personal problems and political issues (Gutierrez 
& Lewis, 1995).
Grassroots Organizing
Haynes involved herself in service delivery at various points along a contin-
uum. She held elected public offi  ce in New York City, served the state and city 
at the request of the governor and mayor, served on the national board of the 
YWCA, and served on the board of a local church-affi  liated home for elderly 
people. Th e creation of services such as the Adam Clayton Powell Home for 
the Aged and many others were examples of service delivery to meet the needs 
of African Americans where the white system would not. Providing direct 
services to girls and women via women’s groups like the NACW and the AKA 
sorority also were signifi  can t  t o  H a yn es ’ s  w o r k  as  an  o r g anize r .  O n e  o f  th e  
most outstanding projects of the sorority was the delivery of alternative health 
care services to African American sharecroppers in Holms County, Mississippi, 
during the summers from 1935 to 1942 by the Mississippi Health Project 
(Gordon, 1991). Haynes’s organizing work and that of the myriad organiza-
tions with which she was affi  liated refl ect the issues and problems confronting 
women and African Americans daily.
RT54118_C014.indd   308RT54118_C014.indd   308 7/8/06   4:48:44 PM7/8/06   4:48:44 PM


--- PAGE 366 ---
Social Work • 309
Strength through Diversity
During the early 1900s, the Harlem community where Haynes lived was 
extremely diverse, consisting of African American migrants from the rural 
South, people from the West Indies, the subculture of extraordinarily tal-
ented Harlem Renaissance artists, poor, low-skilled laborers, and wealthy 
professionals and entrepreneurs. Th ere were individuals who spoke of Amer-
ica with passion and patriotism and those who longed for the land of their 
ancestry through the Marcus Garvey Pan-African Movement. Within that 
community, Haynes was a member of an elite group. Her middle-class status 
set her apart from most other women of her time. Sometimes criticized as “a 
set of butterfl ies on dress parade” (DuBois, 1909, p. 88), Haynes and women 
like her put petty criticisms to rest through their dedication and commit-
ment, through their recognition that diversity is strength, and through their 
identifi ca ti o n  wi th  th e  lif estyl es  o f  th e  peo p l e  th ey  se rv ed  ( Car l t o n - LaN ey ,  
1989).
Holistic Organizing
Haynes’ s career is an example of holistic organizing. Her keen insigh ts and 
ability to identify needs from the minuscule and personal to the organiza-
tional and systemic provided numerous avenues for intervention. Her ability 
to operate within a holistic framework encouraged her to use the emotional, 
intellectual, spiritual, and artistic as avenues for creating group identity and 
solidarity among women and African Americans.
Conclusion
Elizabeth Ross Haynes died in 1953 in New York City at the age of 70. She left  a 
legacy of activism, agitation for change, and eff ective race work. Her commit-
ment to race work and the economic independence of all women regardless of 
color set a high standard for others to follow. Haynes’s approach to dealing with 
race and gender oppression was to fi rst prepare herself by gaining the neces-
sary knowledge, skill, and expertise. As she matured personally and profes-
sionally, she used her web of affi  liations to enhance her political powers, to 
provide skilled leadership, to model attainable goals for women, to organize 
communities, and to attack social problems at various levels along the causal 
chain. Th e social work profession has yet to recognize the pioneering eff  orts 
of Haynes, but it is not too late for social workers to learn from her life’s work 
as a scholar, elected leader, social worker, and womanist.
References
Bogin, R. (1980). Elizabeth Ross Haynes. In B. Sicherman, C.H. Green, I. Kantrov, & H. Walker 
(Eds.), Notable American women: Th  e modern period  (pp. 324–325). Cambridge, MA: 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Brown, E.B. (1989). Womanist consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the Independent Order 
of Saint Luke. Signs, 14, 610–631.
RT54118_C014.indd   309RT54118_C014.indd   309 7/8/06   4:48:44 PM7/8/06   4:48:44 PM


--- PAGE 367 ---
310 • Th e Womanist Reader
Carlton-LaNey, I. (1989). Old folks’ homes for Blacks during the Progressive Era. Journal of 
Sociology and Social Welfare,  26, 43–60.
Carlton-LaNey, I. (1996). George and Birdye Haynes’ legacy to community practice. In I. Carlton-
LaNey & N. Burwell (Eds.), African American community practice models historical and 
contemporary responses  (pp. 27–48). Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.
Collins, P. (1989). Th e social construction of black feminist thought. Signs, 14, 745–773.
Dill, B. (1983). Race, class, and gender: All-inclusive sisterhood. Feminist Studies,  9, 129–150.
DuBois, W.E.B. (1909). Eff orts for social betterment among Negro Americans . Atlanta: Atlanta 
University Press.
Giddings, P. (1984). When and where I enter: Th  e impact of black women on race and sex in 
America . New York: Bantam Books.
Gilkes, C.T. (1988). Building in many places: Multiple commitments and ideologies in black 
women’s community work. In A. Bookman & S. Margin (Eds.), Women and the politics of 
empowerment  (pp. 53–76). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Gordon, L. (1991). Black and white visions of welfare: Women’s welfare activism, 1890–1945. 
Journal of American History,  78, 559–590.
Gutierrez, L., & Lewis, E. (1995). A feminist perspective on organizing with women of color. In 
F.G. Rivera & J.L. Erlich (Eds.), Community organizing in a diverse society  (pp. 95–112). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Haynes, E.R. (1922). Two million Negro women at work. Southern Workman,  51, 64–72.
Haynes, E.R. (1923). Negroes in domestic service in the United States. Journal of Negro History,  
8, 384–442.
Haynes, E.R. (1926, April 20). Letter to Langston Hughes. New Haven, CT: Yale University, 
James Weldon Johnson Memorial Collection.
Haynes, E.R. (1937, September 11). Open letter to voters. New Haven, CT: Yale University, James 
Weldon Johnson Memorial Collection.
Haynes, E.R. (n.d.). Women aspire for political plums.  New Haven, CT: Yale University, James 
Weldon Johnson Memorial Collection.
Higginbotham, E.B. (1992). African-American women’s history and the metalanguage of race. 
Signs, 17, 251–274.
Hill, R.B., Billingsley, A., Engram, E., Malson, M.R., Rubin, R.H., Stack, C.B., Stewart, J.B., & Teele, 
J.E. (1993). Research on the African-American family.  Westport, CT: Auburn House.
Hine, D.C. (1996). Speak truth to power . New York: Carlson.
Historical Statement of the International Mark Twain Society. (n.d.). New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity, James Weldon Johnson Memorial Collection.
Jones, E.K. (1936, May 7). Letter to Elizabeth Ross Haynes. New Haven, CT: Yale University, 
James Weldon Johnson Memorial Collection.
Jones, J. (1985). Labor of love, labor of sorrow . New York: Vintage Books.
Lasch-Quinn, E. (1993). Black neighbors race and limits of reform in the American settlement 
house movement, 1890–1945 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Lewinson, E.R. (1974). Black politics in New York City . New York: Twayne.
McDougald, E.J. (1925). Th e double task. Survey Graphics, 53, 687–691.
McKay, C. (1940). Harlem: Negro metropolis. New York: E.P. Dutton.
McNealey, E.G. (1993). Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority. In D. Hine, E. Brown, & R. Terborg-Penn 
(Eds.), Black women in America: An historical encyclopedia (pp. 23–25). Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Mitchell, H. (1919, March 23). Colored women represent their race in state and nation. New York 
City Tribune, p. 7.
Neverdon-Morton, C. (1989). Afro-American women of the South and the advancement of the 
race, 1895–1925. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Ogunyemi, C. (1985). Womanism: Th  e dynamics of the contemporary black female novel in 
English. Signs, 11, 63–80.
Palmer, P.M. (1983). White women/black women: Th e dualism of female identity and experience 
in the United States. Feminist Studies, 9, 151–170.
Peebles-Wilkins, W., & Francis, A. (1990). Two outstanding black women in social welfare his-
tory: Mary Church Terrell and Ida B. Wells-Barnett. Affi  lia, 5, 87–100.
Proclamation. (1953, October). New Haven, CT: Yale University, James Weldon Johnson Memo-
rial Collection.
RT54118_C014.indd   310RT54118_C014.indd   310 7/8/06   4:48:44 PM7/8/06   4:48:44 PM


--- PAGE 368 ---
Social Work • 311
Ross, E. (1909, March 31). Special worker report to the YWCA. New York; Archives of the National 
Board of the YWCA.
Ross, E. (1910, May 25). Special worker report to the YWCA.  New York: Archives of the National 
Board of the YWCA.
Smith, B. (1985). Some home truths on the contemporary black feminist movement. Journal of 
Black Studies and Research, 16,  4–13.
Terborg-Penn, R. (1983). Discontented black feminists: Preludes and postscript to the passage of 
the Nineteenth Amendment. In L. Scharf & J.M. Jensen (Eds.), Decades of discontent: Th e 
woman’s movement, 1920–1940  (pp. 261–278). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Walker, A. (1983). In search of our mothers’ gardens: Womanist prose. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
RT54118_C014.indd   311RT54118_C014.indd   311 7/8/06   4:48:45 PM7/8/06   4:48:45 PM


--- PAGE 369 ---
RT54118_C014.indd   312RT54118_C014.indd   312 7/8/06   4:48:45 PM7/8/06   4:48:45 PM


--- PAGE 370 ---
313
15
Nursing Science
Womanist Ways of Knowing: Theoretical Considerations 
for Research with African American Women (2000)
JoANNE BANKS-WALLACE
Feminist psychologists Mary Belenky, Blythe Clinchy, Nancy Goldberger, and 
Jill Tarule caused shock waves in both academia and clinical practice with 
the introduction of their book, Women’s Ways of Knowing: Th e Development 
of Self, Voice, and Mind .1 In it, they challenged dominant paradigms regard-
ing the nature of truth, reality, knowledge, and one’s relationship to the larger 
world. As they noted,
For many women, the real and valued lessons learned did not neces-
sarily grow out of their academic work but in relationships with friends 
and teachers, life crises, and community involvements. … [E]ducation 
and clinical services, as traditionally defi  ned and practiced, do not ade-
quately meet the needs of women.1
(p4)
Th eir goal was to assist educators in working with women to develop their 
own authentic voice and to use women’s personal experiences as the founda-
tion for knowledge development. Women’s Ways of Knowing heralded a major 
shift  in thinking regarding the signifi  cant infl uence of gender with respect to 
how people know and how they respond to this knowledge. Th  e important 
contribution of these scholars cannot be overlooked. However, sampling pro-
cedures may have greatly compromised the generalizability of these fi  ndings. 
Current or former students of elite colleges were overrepresented in this study. 
Th e ethnic racial breakdown of participants was not specifi  cally addressed. 
However, based on available demographic information regarding these insti-
tutions, one could assume that the majority of women recruited from these 
places would be European American. In contrast, institutions identifi  ed as 
either being more ethnically diverse or serving minorities were noted to be 
“less advantaged” or “at risk.” Furthermore, no information was given about 
the women recruited from the family agencies or “invisible colleges.” Th  us, 
one could logically conclude that the sample was suffi  ciently diverse to allow for 
RT54118_C015.indd   313RT54118_C015.indd   313 8/11/06   1:57:25 PM8/11/06   1:57:25 PM


--- PAGE 371 ---
314 • Th e Womanist Reader
examination of the infl uence that being a European American or non-European 
American woman has on knowledge generation and testing. However, interpre-
tations derived from a sample that potentially overrepresents both women of 
color who are socially or economically disadvantaged and European American 
women who are socially and economically advantaged are extremely prob-
lematic. In addition, the lack of information regarding the specifi c racial back-
ground of the non-European American women makes it impossible to answer 
questions about variation in ways of knowing within or across racial groups.
Th ere is evidence that race/ethnicity and class signifi  cantly infl uence peo-
ple’s ways of knowing. Turton2 found that among American Indians living in 
the Great Lakes region, ways of knowing about health were directly connected 
to the stories, spiritual practices, and traditions of relationships that have 
long been a part of the ways of life of their communities. Luttrell3 concluded 
that complex gender, class, and racial relations of power infl  uenced diff er-
ences regarding how Black and White working-class women defi ne and claim 
knowledge. Study designs and sample sizes that adequately allow researchers to 
examine inner group diversity among non-European Americans are viewed 
to be critical prerequisites to the development of culturally competent and 
relevant scholarship.
4,5
Th e purpose of this article is to explicate a womanist epistemologic frame-
work that can undergird the development of intervention research to assist 
African American women in incorporating health-promoting behaviors into 
their lives. Many researchers are either unfamiliar with womanist thought, or 
unsure of how it can be used to inform specifi c aspects of research design. Th e 
importance of research designs that are congruent with theoretical frameworks 
of African American women
6,7 and other women of color 8–10 has been noted 
by nursing scholars. Interventions that are consistent with African American 
women’s ways of knowing are more likely to be successful in promoting behav-
ior change amongst this population. Furthermore, research designs grounded 
in culturally consistent epistemologic frameworks may off er opportunities to 
integrate healing and scholarly inquiry consciously.
2,6,7,9,11
Th e seminal work of Patricia Hill Collins 11 forms the cornerstone of this 
discussion. An overview of contextual factors infl uencing the development of 
an African American woman’s perspective is followed by a discussion of the 
four dimensions of womanist epistemology as articulated by Collins. Impli-
cations for research design are addressed throughout the article. Examples 
are provided to illustrate potential ways of attending to specifi  c dimensions 
within the research setting. Many of the examples will refl ect the author’s par-
ticular interest in interventions that promote cardiovascular health.
Context, Shared Experiences, and Standpoint Development
Th e negative impact that living in the United States has on the health and well-
being of African American women remains a controversial area of concern. 
RT54118_C015.indd   314RT54118_C015.indd   314 8/11/06   1:57:26 PM8/11/06   1:57:26 PM


--- PAGE 372 ---
Nursing Science • 315
Scholars have raised questions about the infl uence of race-, gender-, or class-
based oppression on a variety of health issues such as cardiovascular disease,12 
hypertension,13 obesity,14 and depression.15 Byllye Avery,16 founding president 
of the National Black Women’s Health Project, suggests that daily struggles 
stemming from being an African American woman may be one of the biggest 
barriers to self-care among this population. She states:
I thought, “Oh this is a piece of cake. Obviously these sisters don’t have 
any information. I’ll go in there and talk to them about losing weight, 
talk to them about high blood pressure, talk to them about diabetes—
it’ll be easy.” Little did I know that when I got there, they would be able 
to tell me everything that went into a 1200-cal-a-day diet. Th ey all had 
been to W eight W atchers at least fi ve or six times; they all had blood-
pressure reading machines in their homes as well as medications they 
were on. And when we sat down to talk, they said, “We know all that 
information, but what we also know is that living in the world that we 
are in, we feel like we are absolutely nothing.”
16(p7)
Avery concluded that a piece of the health puzzle was missing. It was not 
just about giving information. She argued that providing a space for renewal 
or “breathing fi re and life into ourselves” is crucial to improving the health of 
African American women.
African American women have many shared experiences and ideas that 
stem from living in a society that denigrates both women and people of African 
descent.
17,18 Th ese experiences provide a unique perspective or standpoint for 
examining self, community, and society. Th  e commonality of experiences 
is refl ected through the prominence of several characteristic themes within 
an African American woman’s standpoint. 11 Core themes include a legacy 
of struggle against racism, classism, and sexism 19 that is inextricably linked 
with a parallel struggle for independence, self-reliance, and self-defi nition.20,21 
Th ese struggles are conceptualized within African American communities 
as having both spiritual and material components. 22—24 Th e goal of struggle 
is to live a meaningful life refl  ective of the uniqueness of African American 
culture.
African American women have a range of experiences and responses related 
to the core themes of struggle against oppression and fi ght for independence or 
self-defi nition. Th e consciousness of individual women regarding these themes 
varies widely. Likewise, the ability to articulate one’s personal experience and 
consciousness regarding the presence of these themes varies from woman to 
woman. However, African American women’s ability to aggregate and articu-
late individual expressions of everyday consciousness as a self-defi ned, collec-
tive standpoint is key to their survival.
11,25 Each woman’s theoretical database 
for decision making is broadened by having access to both her personal expe-
riences and the collective experiences of a population of women living with 
RT54118_C015.indd   315RT54118_C015.indd   315 8/11/06   1:57:26 PM8/11/06   1:57:26 PM


--- PAGE 373 ---
316 • Th e Womanist Reader
similar issues. Furthermore, facing the reality of what it is to be an African 
American woman with all the experiences encompassed therein is integral to 
maintaining health-promoting behaviors or moving beyond behaviors that 
are barriers to optimal well-being.
21,26 Stewart states:
Accepting the truth of one’s condition means that both truth and the 
nascent condition in which one fi nds oneself can be used as instruments 
for freeing the mind and spirit. … Affi  rming the truth of one’s existence 
creates a freedom of the self that surpasses the superfi  cial constraints 
created by the realities and mythologies of racial oppression in American 
society.
24(p37)
Th erefore, interventions that facilitate an increased consciousness and articula-
tion of an African American woman’s standpoint may prove an invaluable tool 
for assisting women in selecting or evaluating the effi  cacy of health behaviors 
within the context of their lives.
Womanist Th ought
Women scholars of African American descent have developed theoretical frame-
works that articulate and interpret an African American woman’s standpoint. 
Analysis of the infl uence that race, class, and gender have on the lives of women 
is a central feature of these frameworks. Womanist theory,
27,28 womanism,7 and 
Black feminist thought6,11 have been used interchangeably to designate this body 
of work. Africana womanism extends the conceptual core to include women of 
African descent throughout Africa and the African Diaspora, and it priori-
tizes racism and classism as more critical issues than sexism with respect to 
the daily lives of women of African descent.
29
Walker’s28 defi nition of womanist provides a space to (1) recognize the unique-
ness of African American women’s experiences, (2) articulate the similarities 
and diff erences between these experiences and those of other women of color, 
and (3) address explicitly the important bond between African American 
women and men. Th e ability to see connections between diverse groups and 
to work toward eliminating all forms of oppression is a defi  ning attribute of 
womanist thought. Th erefore, for the sake of clarity, in this article the term 
“womanist thought” will be used to denote theoretical frameworks developed 
by, for, and about African American women.
A defi ning feature of womanist thought is the interdependence of experi-
ence, consciousness, and action.
11 Collins argues that “Th is standpoint rejects 
either/or dichotomous thinking that claims that either thought or concrete action 
is desirable and that merging the two limits the effi  cacy of both.”
11(pp28–29) Th e 
interdependence of thought and action allows for the possibility that changes in 
thinking will be accompanied by changes in actions and that altered experiences 
may be a catalyst for a changed consciousness. Collins concludes that woman-
ist thought does not seek to raise consciousness; instead, it seeks to affi  rm and 
RT54118_C015.indd   316RT54118_C015.indd   316 8/11/06   1:57:26 PM8/11/06   1:57:26 PM


--- PAGE 374 ---
Nursing Science • 317
rearticulate a consciousness that already exists. Th e goals of womanist thought 
include stimulating resistance and empowering African American women and 
others to actualize a humanistic vision of society.
Intersections between Womanist, Afrocentric, and Feminist Th eories
Womanist thought encompasses philosophic and cultural elements cen-
tral to both Afrocentric and feminist theories. Th  is is the result of a shared 
experience of racial oppression among people of African descent on the one 
hand and a common history of gender oppression that transcends racial, 
ethnic, or class groups.
11 An Afrocentric world view exists that is distinct 
from and in many ways opposed to an Eurocentric world view. Th  is stand-
point encompasses both the experience of living as a member of a racially 
oppressed group as well as group valuation of a longstanding, independent 
system of beliefs and consciousness among people of African descent.
17,20,23,30  
In contrast, a feminist standpoint is an outgrowth of women’s self-conscious 
struggles to among other things: (1) reject patriarchal perceptions of women, 
(2) place women and women’s issues at the center of analysis, and (3) value 
women’s ideas and actions.
31 Feminist standpoints provide a foundation for 
critiquing male dominance as both a material reality and an ideologic prin-
ciple.
32,33 Afrocentric and feminist theories overlap with womanist thought 
in many areas. However, neither Afrocentric nor feminist theories can fully 
account for the combined eff  ects of being both African American and a 
woman.
Womanist, Afrocentric, and feminist theories fall within the larger rubric 
of what Berman and colleagues
34 call a critical paradigm. Th  is term “refers 
to multiple perspectives that diff  er on certain dimensions but that share 
as a goal the generation of knowledge, which contributes to emancipation, 
empowerment, and change.”
34(p3) From the critical perspective, knowledge 
is assumed to be value laden and shaped by historical, social, and political 
concerns stemming from among other things gender, economic, and race 
conditions. Critical theories posit that “taken for granted” assumptions and 
values, although usually hidden, create a social structure that oppresses par-
ticular groups by limiting their options. Critical scholars embrace the idea 
of research as a tool that serves dual purposes: knowledge development and 
promotion of change.
Womanist Epistemology
Womanist epistemology centers the everyday experiences of African American 
women as a prerequisite to addressing philosophic problems related to the con-
cepts of knowledge and truth.
7,35 Collins11 delineates four dimensions of wom-
anist epistemology: (1) concrete experience as a criterion of meaning, (2) use of 
dialogue in assessing knowledge claims, (3) an ethic of caring, and (4) an ethic 
of personal responsibility. An overview of each dimension follows.
RT54118_C015.indd   317RT54118_C015.indd   317 8/11/06   1:57:27 PM8/11/06   1:57:27 PM


--- PAGE 375 ---
318 • Th e Womanist Reader
Experience as a Criterion of Meaning
Many African American women view experience as a distinguishing feature 
that separates knowledge from wisdom. Knowledge in this sense is akin to 
having particular information, whereas wisdom is understanding how to 
apply the information appropriately to achieve the desired results in a given 
situation. Having wisdom based on experience is seen as crucial to individual 
and collective survival in the midst of an oppressive environment.
11 Collins 
notes that from an African American woman’s standpoint, “individuals who 
lived through the experiences about which they claim to be experts are more 
believable and credible than those who have merely read or thought about 
such experiences.”
11(p209)
Th e author was a co-principal investigator in a study exploring barriers to 
women of African descent participating in research. 27,36 During one session, a 
woman noted the distinction between wisdom and knowledge in the follow-
ing manner:
And there’s the whole diff erence that I wanted to speak to when we were 
talking before, between knowledge—which is what white people went 
aft er. It was just knowledge. As opposed to wisdom, but they have very 
little wisdom, which is the ability to synthesize, to make meaningful 
discourse between knowledge and whatever you are going to produce.
27
Th e importance of experience as a vehicle for developing and testing knowl-
edge is emphasized by womanist,11 Afrocentric,22 and feminist scholars. Luttrell3 
found racial and class diff erences in relationship to the valuing of experiential 
knowledge. Black women received support from Black communities and insti-
tutions for experiential knowledge they had acquired, whereas White com-
munities and institutions did not support experiential knowledge. Th erefore, 
even though White working-class women felt they had experiential knowledge, 
they did not view it as real intelligence; however, Black women did.
Opportunities to develop or refi ne particular behaviors and self-monitoring 
skills are prerequisites to using experience as the basis for generating and cri-
tiquing knowledge related to health promotion. Instruction about and prac-
tice of specifi c behaviors and self-monitoring skills can be incorporated into 
the research design. For example, interventions to promote physical activity 
can provide opportunities for women to participate in various types of indi-
vidual and group exercises. Th is can be accompanied by instruction on using 
pulse rates, breathing patterns, fatigue level, or other self-monitoring cues to 
evaluate the appropriateness of a particular activity level. Moreover, this can 
be supplemented with information on how recording information in diaries 
or journals can allow women to evaluate change in their experiences over 
time. Notably, opportunities to experience positive movement toward desired 
RT54118_C015.indd   318RT54118_C015.indd   318 8/11/06   1:57:27 PM8/11/06   1:57:27 PM


--- PAGE 376 ---
Nursing Science • 319
behavior over time 37 and self-monitoring 38 improve the success of behavioral 
change interventions.
Providing opportunities for women to share their prior experiences may play 
an important role in establishing the credibility of a given health-promotion 
intervention. Moreover, investigators must be prepared to discuss their lived 
e xp e ri e n ces  as  w e ll  as  th e ir  “ p a p e r  cr e d e n ti als ”  an d  th eo ri es  wi th  p o t e n ti al  
research participants. Experiences may be shared in several ways. For exam-
ple, time can be allotted during group interventions for women to share their 
experiences related to the health issue under investigation. Informal sharing 
of experiences can take place as part of the “check-in” at the beginning of the 
group meeting or as part of the debriefi ng at the end of a session. Interventions 
that do not take place in a group can also facilitate sharing of experiences. 
Excellent strategies include incorporating a brief story about the principal 
investigator’s experience with the health issue or intervention strategy into 
the study information consent form, hosting a group meeting as a recruit-
ment strategy, or designating specifi c times during the study for participants 
to come together and share their experiences.
Use of Dialogue in Assessing Knowledge Claims
Dialogue with members of one’s community is very important to the develop-
ment and testing of knowledge claims generated within a womanist frame-
work. It provides a means of refl ecting upon or sharing experiential knowledge 
with others. A primary assumption is that knowledge will be used to build 
or nurture connections between people.
11 Th is is accomplished through the 
selection of specifi c stories, proverbs, or sayings deemed appropriate for the 
knowledge to be conveyed. 39 Using dialogue to promote harmony and build 
connections is also a major focus of Afrocentric 30 and feminist1 frameworks. 
Asante argues that “to become human, to realize the promise of becoming 
human, is the only important task of the person.”
30(p185) He notes that this pro-
cess takes place only in the midst of others and by striving for individual and 
collective harmony. Taken together, these perspectives suggest that building 
community is essential to development of knowledge and that active partic-
ipation in dialogue by all members is crucial.
23 Womanist and Afrocentric 
models concerning the use of dialogue are rooted in African oral tradition 
and African American culture.
39,40
Th e choice of words or phrases in a dialogue provides insight into African 
Americans as a cultural group as well as being a tool for building connec-
tions. Th e language of African Americans is illustrated in casual conversa-
tions, sermons, folklore, and song.
39,41 Th is language conveys both the reality 
of ongoing struggle against racial oppression and the importance placed 
on nurturing a unique African American culture.
22,23  J o r dan highligh ts the 
signifi cance of language in her analysis of Black English:
RT54118_C015.indd   319RT54118_C015.indd   319 8/11/06   1:57:27 PM8/11/06   1:57:27 PM


--- PAGE 377 ---
320 • Th e Womanist Reader
Black English has been produced by a pre-technocratic, if not anti-
technological culture. More, our culture has been constantly threatened by 
annihilation or, at least, the swallowed blurring of assimilation. Th  ere-
fore, our language is a system constructed by people constantly needing 
to insist that we exist, that we are present. Our language devolves from 
a culture that abhors all abstraction, or anything tending to abhor or 
delete the fact of the human being who is here and now/the truth of the 
person who is speaking or listening. Consequently , there is no passive 
voice possible in Black English [italics in original]. … And every sentence 
assumes the living and active participation of at least two human beings, 
the speaker and the listener.
20(p129)
Researchers can gather signifi cant information about the everyday experiences 
that serve as context for analyzing particular behaviors by paying close atten-
tion to the language used by participants.
13 Moreover, research designs that 
facilitate dialogue, accompanied by refl  ection on and evaluation of ideas/
theories generated through this process, may enhance an individual partici-
pant’s resources for making decisions about particular health behaviors.
21,27,42 
Henderson43 discusses the important role sharing stories played in the devel-
opment of a group drug treatment program for women. Th e stories shared ulti-
mately served as the basis for designing a program that better met the needs of 
women. Henderson also noted that the process resulted in the enlightenment, 
empowerment, and emancipation of all participants involved in the group.
C r e a t i n g  v i g n e t t e s  i s  a  m o r e  f o r m a l  w a y  o f  s h a r i n g  e x p e r i e n c e s .  A s  a  
post-doctoral fellow, the author examined storytelling as a tool for assisting 
African American women decrease risks related to hypertension. Th e author 
and participants created 3- to 5-minute vignettes related to the particular 
focus of the session. Vignettes allowed women to share information related 
to a number of issues such as the meaning of being diagnosed as having 
hypertension, daily management of hypertension, impact of family and other 
obligations or hypertension management, and concerns about negative impact 
of hypertension on overall health. Th e vignettes proved to be an excellent way 
to link treatment protocols with human experiences. Th e author does not have 
hypertension, however, sharing stories about the impact of trying to balance 
a multitude of obligations and still fi  nd time to take care of her own health 
increased both the sense of community within the group and her credibility 
as a health provider. Together our stories provided insight into barriers to 
self-care and resources for optimizing cardiovascular health. Th e stories also 
provided a means to think out loud or contemplate the cost and benefi  ts of 
certain aspects of treatment.
40
Dialoguing and sharing stories, regardless of the format, provide opportuni-
ties for women to share their experience, knowledge, or wisdom. Th ey also pro-
mote the development of community among women dealing with a common 
RT54118_C015.indd   320RT54118_C015.indd   320 8/11/06   1:57:27 PM8/11/06   1:57:27 PM


--- PAGE 378 ---
Nursing Science • 321
health issue.44 Last, dialogue assists investigators in refi ning health-promotion 
interventions, taking in account the infl uence of the context in which women 
live their lives on their ability to sustain particular behaviors. 10,15
An Ethic of Caring
Th e analysis of knowledge from a womanist epistemologic framework also 
in v o l v e s  an  e v al ua ti o n  o f  th e  in di vi d ual  m akin g  th e  c l aim .  Th is evaluation 
includes the assessment of three interrelated components: (1) personal expres-
siveness, (2) emotions, and (3) empathy. Together they comprise an ethic of 
caring.
11
P e r s o n a l  e x p r e s s i v e n e s s  i s  h i g h l y  v a l u e d  i n  w o m a n i s t  e p i s t e m o l o g i c  
frameworks. Th i s  e m p h a s i s  i s  r o o t e d  i n  A f r i c a n  t r a d i t i o n s  t h a t  v i e w  e a c h  
individual as a unique exemplar of the Divine Spirit, which infuses and sustains 
all creation.
11,24 Th e affi  rmation and expression of one’s uniqueness are considered 
essential to the individual and collective well-being of African Americans. 22 
Personal expression or style includes but is not limited to language, dress, 
forms of worship, and ways of interacting with others.
Th e appropriateness of emotions in dialogues is the second component of 
the ethic of caring.
11 Knowledge claims are evaluated in terms of both content 
and depth of feeling associated with them. In other words, it is not just what 
you say but how you say it.
23 Em o ti o ns  ar e  co ns i der ed  t o  be  in di ca tiv e  o f  a  
speaker’s belief in the validity of her or his argument. Th is is in direct contrast 
to Eurocentric male models that view emotions as antithetical/inferior to logical 
or rational thought.
1,31
Th e capacity for empathy is the third component of an ethic of caring. 
A sense of concern or connection between the person making the claim and 
the individual evaluating the claim is considered an essential part of assessing 
the claim’s validity.
11 Empathy implies a level of concern grounded in the real-
ization that one’s own well-being is connected to the well-being of others. 26 It 
is very diff erent from interactions based on paternalistic or elitist beliefs about 
one’s superiority in relation to another individual or group.7 Th e ultimate goal 
of establishing an empathic relationship is the development or institution of 
actions that improve the material and social conditions of African American 
women individually and collectively.
Opportunities for personal expression and nurturing of empathic relation-
ships can be included in an array of research designs. It is important that the 
researcher as well as the participants engage in activities that promote a sense 
of community and insight into unique personal attributes.
African American women live in a society where they are oft en denigrated 
and/or made invisible.
11,18 Respite from ongoing challenges, accompanied by 
opportunities to vent frustrations and celebrate the wonderfulness of being an 
African American woman, may be integral to the success of health-promotion 
research.
16,42 Eff ective strategies for replenishing women include providing 
RT54118_C015.indd   321RT54118_C015.indd   321 8/11/06   1:57:28 PM8/11/06   1:57:28 PM


--- PAGE 379 ---
322 • Th e Womanist Reader
15 minutes at the beginning of group sessions for women to share pressing 
concerns; sharing poetry or short stories; taking breaks to hug one another; 
singing, chanting, or praying together; and sharing a meal together. Th  e last 
three strategies have the added benefi  t of nurturing spiritual development, 
which has historically played an important role in the meaningful survival 
of African Americans.
24 Eliciting information about the desire for building 
community among participants and specifi  c strategies for doing so can be 
incorporated into recruitment activities.
Activities and incentives that allow each woman to spotlight her uniqueness 
or contribute to the project also can be incorporated into a variety of research 
designs. For example, interviews and surveys can be structured in a way that 
allows women to use their natural language to answer at least some of the 
questions. If journals are to be used to collect data, the introductory session 
of a group intervention may include an opportunity for women to decorate 
their own journal or diary. For individual interventions, the researcher can 
provide funds so that each woman can select her own journal. Women also 
can be off ered a choice of incentives for participation rather than having only 
one means of compensation. Finally, attention to aesthetic details with respect 
to setting, food, and correspondence provide opportunities to celebrate the 
cultural heritage of participants without expending a lot of money or energy.
Establishing a sense of community between women and investigators is 
another essential component of developing knowledge within a womanist 
framework. Ongoing racism, as well as past and current abuses of people in 
the name of science, have led many African Americans to be leery of par-
ticipation in research.
45,46 Th erefore, demonstrating a commitment to African 
American communities beyond the immediate research goals is of particular 
importance. Th e principal investigator and other research staff   should con-
sider attending several cultural or social functions, volunteering to assist in 
community projects not related to research, and setting aside time to interact 
periodically with women on an informal basis. Th  ese activities will provide 
an opportunity to build trust and mutual respect.
45 Th e need to establish trust 
and respect is not limited to non-African American investigators. Formal 
educational training oft en socializes African American scholars away from 
research frameworks that are more consistent with African American ways of 
analyzing experiences.
47 Furthermore, African American scientists have par-
ticipated in research that has been detrimental to other African Americans.48,49 
Th us, African American scholars also must demonstrate their commitment 
to African American communities and engage in activities that promote the 
growth of mutual respect and trust.
An Ethic of Personal Responsibility
An ethic of personal responsibility is the fi nal dimension of a womanist episte-
mology. It stems from the premise that all knowledge claims are grounded in 
RT54118_C015.indd   322RT54118_C015.indd   322 8/11/06   1:57:28 PM8/11/06   1:57:28 PM


--- PAGE 380 ---
Nursing Science • 323
concrete realities rather than in mere abstractions. 11 Th e views expressed and 
the actions taken by an individual are assumed to be derivatives of her or his 
personal core beliefs. Th us, an assessment of an individual’s prior history and 
integrity is an important part of evaluating knowledge claims. Claims made 
by individuals considered to be morally and ethically connected to their ideas 
carry more weight than those off ered by people not considered as respectable. 
Th is stands in contrast to both Eurocentric
31 and Afrocentric 7,25 male models 
that oft en privilege role- or class-based authority in assessment of knowledge 
claims. Belenky and colleagues 1 note that women move beyond relying pri-
marily on role-based authority as a measure of claim validity as they become 
more secure in their own abilities to think and know. Th  ey conclude that an 
evaluation of the claimant becomes an important part of assessing knowledge 
claims as women move from simply “receiving knowledge” to “constructing 
knowledge.” Th u s ,  s c h o l a r s  a r e  r e q u i r e d  t o  s o m e  e xt e n t  t o  p r e s e n t  i n s i g h t s  
into themselves as persons in order for women to have suffi  cient information 
upon which to assess the validity of a particular knowledge claim.
Establishing credibility ideally will start prior to recruiting for a specifi  c 
project. Partici pation in community events, as mentioned earlier, is one tech-
nique that can be used. Maintaining professional and personal relationships 
with several African American women and reading literature produced by 
African American women also are important. Th  ese activities will provide 
opportunities for investigators to broaden their perspective,
19 understand pri-
orities that might impede research, 35 and develop skills important to work-
ing within other cultural frameworks prior to starting a research project. 45 
Th ey also may provide an opportunity to network with women who can vouch 
for the integrity and trustworthiness of the investigator. Researchers should 
allocate time during recruitment to answer specifi  c questions regarding their 
connections or commitment to the African American community and how 
the proposed study fi ts with their overall goals. Th is information also could be 
summarized and included as part of the written information given to poten-
tial participants. Developing a plan for dissemination of research fi  ndings 
and sharing it early on with the community could further increase credibility. 
Finally, working with participants to develop a structure for safely challenging 
each other and the investigator with regard to the research process is impor-
tant. In particular, there should be safe spaces for women to dialogue with 
the investigator regarding racism or other oppressive aspects of the research 
process. Research designs that include ongoing consultation with other inves-
tigators working with African American populations may provide researchers 
needed support and strategies for minimizing power imbalances.
Th e ethic of personal responsibility also applies to women participating in 
a research study. Active participation in development and implementation of 
interventions increases ownership of solutions provided.
44,45  In turn, this may 
increase women’s willingness to persist through diffi   culties. Participating in 
RT54118_C015.indd   323RT54118_C015.indd   323 8/11/06   1:57:28 PM8/11/06   1:57:28 PM


--- PAGE 381 ---
324 • Th e Womanist Reader
the development or implementation of interventions also may provide women 
with skills they can use in other aspects of their lives. Moreover, communal 
ownership of projects or interventions increases the likelihood that they will 
be continued aft er the study ends.
50 Women can be invited to participate at 
several levels depending on the nature of the research. Women meeting eli-
gibility requirements for a study can be employed as research associates and 
participate in various aspects of the project including recruitment, interven-
tion delivery, data collection, and data analysis. Research participants can help 
make decisions regarding the manner in which interventions will be delivered 
or assist in communicating with participants. In one study, the author con-
tracted with a participant working on a degree in graphic arts to design the 
stationery used to correspond with participants. In this same study partici-
pants were invited to serve as co-researchers, raising questions and off  ering 
suggestions for improving group dynamics.
27,36 Of  c o ur s e  i t  is  im p o rtan t  t o  
make sure that participant involvement does not compromise the integrity of 
the research. However, women should be given every opportunity to develop 
skills that will assist them in making behavioral changes consistent with the 
goals of the study or improve their overall quality of life.
Conclusion
“Our basic assumptions about the nature of truth and reality and the origins 
of knowledge shape the way we see the world and ourselves as participants in 
it.”
l(p3) In turn, the contexts in which we live our lives and the experiences that 
w e  h a v e  p r o f o u n d l y  i n fl uence our construction and validation of knowledge 
claims.7,11,21,27 Developing interventions that take into account the various ways 
of knowing is an important part of promoting health among diverse groups of 
people.
2,3 Unfortunately, the emphasis of a majority of “culture-based” interven-
tions concerns the use of appropriate language and setting, while the validity of 
knowledge claims presented within an intervention remains largely unexamined. 
Development of research designs that attend to African American women’s ways 
of knowing has been the focus of this discussion. However, womanist thought 
overlaps signifi cantly with feminist and Afrocentric theories. Th erefore, sugges-
tions off ered could be useful in the design of interventions geared toward other 
cultural groups as well. Th e closing quote from a participant in a previous study 
exemplifi es the many possibilities for developing research that is consistent with 
participants’ ways of understanding the world and their place in it:
I think, getting back to your terminology , we need to look at scholar-
ship and teaching and learning as an integrated process (interjection: 
thank you!). It should involve music, movement, dance: it should appeal 
to all of the intelligences. We have bought into the fact, if you are not 
left -brained, if you are not quantitative, you are not intelligent. I think 
we all know intuitively that’s a lie; I think our research should open up 
RT54118_C015.indd   324RT54118_C015.indd   324 8/11/06   1:57:29 PM8/11/06   1:57:29 PM


--- PAGE 382 ---
Nursing Science • 325
new ways to tap into all of our multiple intelligences and to use those to 
expand our health. 27
References
 1. Belenky M., Clinchy B., Goldberger N., Tarule J. Women’s Ways of Knowing: Th e Develop-
ment of Self, Voice, and Mind . New York: Basic Books; 1986.
 2. Turton C. Ways of knowing about health: an Aboriginal perspective. ANS. 1997; 19(3): 
28–36.
 3. Luttrell W . W orking-class women’ s ways of knowing: eff  ects of gender, race, and class. 
Sociol Educ.  1989; 62:33–46.
 4. Meleis A. Culturally competent scholarship: substance and rigor. ANS. 1996; 19(2): 1–16.
 5. Porter C, Villarruel A. Nursing research with African American and Hispanic people: 
guidelines for action. Nurs Outlook . 1993; 41(2): 59–67.
 6. Barbee E. A black, feminist approach to nursing research. West J Nurs Res. 1994; 16(5): 
495–506.
 7. Taylor J. Womanism: a methodologic framework for African American women. ANS. 1998; 
21(1): 53–64.
 8. Catolico O. Psychological well-being of Cambodian women in resettlement. ANS. 1997; 
19(4): 75–84.
 9. Henderson D, Sampselle C, Mayes F, Oakley D. Toward culturally sensitive research in a 
multicultural society. Health Care Wom Int. 1992; 13(4): 339–350.
 10. Meleis A, Arruda E, Lane S, Bernal P. Veiled, voluminous, and devalued: narrative stories 
about low-income women from Brazil, Egypt, and Colombia. ANS. 1994; 17(2): 1–15.
 11. Collins P. Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empow-
erment.  Boston: Unwin Hyman; 1990.
 12. Kumanyika S, Adams-Campbell L. Obesity, diet, and psychological factors contributing 
to cardiovascular disease in blacks. In: Saunders E, ed. Cardiovascular Diseases in Blacks . 
Philadelphia: F.A. Davis; 1991.
 13. Boutain D. Critical language and discourse study: their transformative relevance for 
critical nursing inquiry ANS. 1999; 21(3): 1–8.
 14. Myers B. Hypertension and black female obesity: the role of psychosocial stressors. In: 
Saunders E, ed. Cardiovascular Diseases in Blacks . Philadelphia: F.A. Davis; 1991.
 15. Barbee E. African American women and depression: a review and critique of the litera-
ture. Arch Psychiatr Nurs . 1992; 6(5): 257–265.
 16. Avery B. Breathing life into ourselves: the evolution of the National Black Women’s 
Health Project. In: White E, ed. Th e Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves . 
Seattle, WA: Seal Press, 1990.
 17. Boutain D. Critical nursing scholarship: exploring critical social theory with African 
American studies. ANS. 1992; 21(4): 37–47.
 18. Taylor J. Colonizing images and diagnostic labels: oppressive mechanism for African 
American winner’s health. ANS. 1999; 21(3): 32–45.
 19. Cannon K. Black Womanist Ethics . American Academy of Religion Academy Series #60. 
Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press; 1988.
 20. Jordan J. Nobody mean more to me than you and the future life of Willie Jordan. In: 
Jordan J, ed. On Call: Political Essays . Boston: South End Press; 1985.
 21. Scott K. Th e Habit of Surviving: Black Women’s Strategies for Life . New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press; 1991.
 22. Cooper-Lewter N, Mitchell H. Soul Th eology: Th e Heart of American Black Culture . San 
Francisco: Harper & Row; 1986.
 23. Smitherman G. Talkin and Testifyin: Th e Language of Black America . Boston: Houghton 
Miffl  in; 1986.
 24. Stewart C. Soul Survivors: An African American Spirituality . Louisville, KY: Westminster 
John Knox Press; 1997.
 25. Lorde A. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches . Freedom, CA: Th e Crossing Press; 1984.
 26. Cole J. Conversations: Straight Talk with America’s Sister President . New York: Doubleday; 
1993.
 27. Banks-Wallace J. Emancipatory potential of storytelling in a group. Image J Nurs Schol . 
1998; 30(1): 17–21.
RT54118_C015.indd   325RT54118_C015.indd   325 8/11/06   1:57:29 PM8/11/06   1:57:29 PM


--- PAGE 383 ---
326 • Th e Womanist Reader
 28. Walker A. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose . San Diego, CA: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich; 1983.
 29. Hudson-Weems C. Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves . Troy, Ml: Bedford; 1993.
 30. Asante M. Th e Afrocentric Idea . Philadelphia: Temple University Press; 1987.
 31. Schaef A. W omen ’ s Reality: An Emerging Female System in a White Male Society. 3rd ed. 
New York: HarperSanFrancisco; 1992.
 32. Th  e Personal Narratives Group. Origins. In: Th  e Personal Narratives Group, eds. 
Interpreting Women’s Lives: Feminist Th eory and Personal Narratives . Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press; 1989.
 33. Fonow M, Cook J. eds. Beyond Methodology: Feminist Scholarship as Lived Research. Bloom-
ington, IN: Indiana University Press; 1991.
 34. Berman H, Ford-Gilboe M, Campbell J. Combining stories and numbers: a methodologic 
approach for a critical nursing science. ANS. 1998; 21(1): 1–15.
 35. Brown E. African American women’s quilting: a framework for conceptualizing and 
teaching African American women’s history. Signs J Wom Cult Soc.  1986; 14(4): 921–929.
 36. Banks-Wallace J. Beyond survival: storytelling as an emancipatory tool among women of 
African descent. Th e Womanist . 1994; (1): 5–8.
 37. Bandura A. Self-effi  cacy: Th e Exercise of Control.  New York: W.H. Freeman; 1997.
 38. Dishman R, Buckworth J. Increasing physical activity: a quantitative synthesis. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc . 1996; 28(6): 706–719.
 39. Goss L, Goss C. Jump Up and Say: A Collection of Black Storytelling . New York: Simon & 
Schuster; 1995.
 40. Banks-Wallace J. Storytelling as a tool for providing holistic care to women. MCN Am J 
Matern Child Nurs . 1999; 24(1): 20–24.
 41. Tarpley N. On giving testimony, or the process of becoming. In: Tarpley N, ed. Testi-
mony: Young African Americans on Self-identity and Black Identity . Boston: Beacon Press; 
1995.
 42. Boyd J. Embracing the Fire: Sisters Talk about Sex and Relationships . New York: Penguin; 
1997.
 43. Henderson D. Consciousness raising in participatory research: method and methodology 
for emancipatory nursing inquiry. ANS. 1995; 17(3): 58–69.
 44. Carter-Nolan P, Adams-Campbell L, Williams J. Recruitment strategies for black women 
at risk for noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus into exercise protocols: a qualitative 
assessment. J Natl Med Assoc . 1996; 88(9): 558–562.
 45. Stillman F, Bone L, Rand C, Levine D, Becker D. Heart, body, and soul: a church-based 
smoking program for urban African Americans. Prev Med. 1993; 22(3): 335–349.
 46. Th  omas S, Quinn. S. Th e Tuskegee syphilis study 1932–1972: implications for HIV educa-
tion and AIDS risk education programs in black communities. Am J Public Health . 1991; 
81(11): 1498–1505.
 47. Brown E. Mothers of mind. Sage 1989; 6(1): 4–10.
 48. Akbar N. Visions for Black Men . Tallahassee, FL: Mind Productions & Associates; 1991.
 49. Hammonds E. Your silence will not protect you: nurse Eunice Rivers and the Tuskegee 
syphilis study. In: White E, ed. Th e Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves . 
Rev. ed. Seattle: Seal Press; 1994.
 50. Levine D, Becker D, Bone L, et al. A partnership with minority populations: a community 
model of eff ectiveness research. Ethnicity Dis . 1992; 2(3): 296–305.
RT54118_C015.indd   326RT54118_C015.indd   326 8/11/06   1:57:29 PM8/11/06   1:57:29 PM


--- PAGE 384 ---
327
16
Sexuality Studies
Kuaering  Queer Theory: My Autocritography 
and a Race-Conscious, Womanist, Transnational Turn (2003) 
WENSHU LEE
… My Nameless Everywhere …
I am a bridge connecting two shores across the Pacifi c Ocean: Taipei, Taiwan 
and San Jose, California, United States. Transnational itinerary, quite obvi-
ously, is my autobiography, and writing myself, I have come to terms with 
an elision, a void that has been a nameless, everywhere —in my youth, in 
my work, in my daily encounters and, most importantly, in my dreams. How 
was I awakened to this name and the histories of this namelessness? How 
did I manage to erase the memories of romance among my classmates in Bei 
Yi Nu, the best girls’ high school in Taipei in the 1970s? How did I bury the 
overtly friendly yet timid interest in me during my graduate school days in 
Los Angeles in the 1980s? What persona did I assume in my scholarly writ-
ings on Chinese and Taiwanese women in the U.S. academy in the 1990s? 
I have portrayed myself as a liberal straight woman from Taiwan writing 
in the United States. I have never been “homophobic” yet I am always 
“straight,” so I thought.
What has become obvious is that the chi
1 running through me is deeply 
heteropatriarchal. Do I have a heteropatriarchal mirror which I constantly 
have to dust off  ? But, if there is no mirror, whence comes the dust? For me, 
these are big questions, and I am going aft er them.
2
Th is “going aft er” is tearing me apart, tearing me into pieces. Trying not 
to feel like a thief, a language stealer, yet exploring words that reach into the 
diff erent sides of me, unseen, unspoken, and untouched, I welcome you into my 
bilingual and multi-styled journal—public, private, main text, endnotes, 
Mandarin Chinese, United Statesian English, italicized me and nonitalicized 
scholar
3—a written world where there is no common word, no common 
 sentence ready for me to use.4
RT54118_C016.indd   327RT54118_C016.indd   327 7/8/06   7:59:06 PM7/8/06   7:59:06 PM


--- PAGE 385 ---
328 • Th e Womanist Reader
My formative years off er a glimpse of the national-historical memories in 
Taiwanese society in the second half of the twentieth century. Quietly embedded 
in these memories are horrendous acts of discursive amnesia, 5 which I have 
learned to “see” and “hear” and, ultimately, to “unlearn” its incomprehen-
sion. Discursive amnesty,
6 theoretically and in praxis, is the backdrop of my 
transformed way of seeing. It involves a reorientation of my being. Inwardly, 
fl ashbacks and traces of past nu nu guan xi  (female–female connections; 
this expression sometimes will be abbreviated as nu nu in my journal)
7 dance 
at the edges of my consciousness. Socially, a cacophony of signs which lay dor-
mant in my nameless everywhere come to speak to me: jin lan hui  (golden 
orchid association), bu luo jia (unsettled into her family/home) and zi shu nu 
(self-brushing female) in the 19th century (Chen, 1928/1994; Topley, 1975); 
school girls’ romance in Ling Shuhua’s short story, “Once Upon a Time” 
(1928/1998) in the 1920s; T or tan bao (tomboy, butch), puo (femme), lazi 
(women who love women), kuer (queer) and nu tongzhi (female comrade or 
lesbian) in the 1990s in Taiwan (Hong et al., 1997).
Do you fi nd any of the above Chinese expressions yo yi ci ? Yo y i ci, 
a Mandarin Chinese phrase, carries three possible interpretations. It is a 
triple entendre.
8 Translated, yo yi ci means: “Do you fi nd any of the above 
Chinese expressions meaningful?” or “Do you fi nd any of the above Chinese 
expressions interesting/fun?” or “Do you fi  nd yourself romantically inter-
ested in any of the above Chinese expressions?” You have just learned yo 
yi ci as a triple entendre. But for me, I am experimenting with myself in two 
forms of creativity: (a) to feel free to play with words and (b) to learn to 
understand/interest/love simultaneously. It was through a journey, long but 
full of surprises and serendipity, that I found the above words from Taiwan-
ese and Chinese nu nu worlds yo yi ci.
Nu Nu Connections and Nu Nu Words
In the early 1990s, reading Adrienne Rich’s “lesbian existence” and “lesbian 
continuum” pushed me to pay attention to diff erent forms of woman–woman 
relationships.
9 Just looking at the list of friends who were invited for dinner 
at my house on a regular basis, I was dismayed by a horrendous consistency: 
middle-class professional white males, both gay and straight. No matter how 
hard I tried to overcome the separation caused by diff  erent axes of oppres-
sion in theory and in my writing, I could not escape a self-indictment—my 
life was an affl  uent, male-centered whiteness. Cherrie Moraga’s words drive 
to the heart of my painful realization: “I felt this [separation] most acutely 
with Black women—Black dykes—who I felt ignored me, wrote me off  because 
I look white. And yet, the truth was that I didn’t know Black women inti-
mately (Barbara says, ‘it’s about who you can sit down to a meal with, who 
you can cry with, whose face you can touch’). I had such strong ‘colored 
hunches’ about our potential connection, but was basically removed from 
RT54118_C016.indd   328RT54118_C016.indd   328 7/8/06   7:59:08 PM7/8/06   7:59:08 PM


--- PAGE 386 ---
Sexuality Studies • 329
the lives of most Black women. Th  e ignorance. Th e painful, painful igno-
rance” (1981, p. xvii).
When did I or do I know nu nu intimately? Whom can I sit down to have 
a meal with? Now, I am more conscious of my nu nu guan xi,  and these 
“f r i e n d s ”  f r o m  d i ff erent centuries and diff erent races, genders, nationalities, 
class and educational backgrounds have gradually assumed diff erent forms of 
“primary intensity” in my life. Th eir biographies accompany me, especially 
i n  w a v e s  o f  v o c a b u l a r y  t h a t  h a v e  a w a k e n e d  m y  c o n s c i o u s n e s s ,  a  s p e c i a l  
kind of consciousness, which I call “ kuaer.”10
First Awakening: Jin Lan Hui  and Marriage Resistance
I came across the expression jin lan hui when I was doing research on Chinese 
feminisms and anti-footbinding discourse at the turn of the 20th century. Th is 
broke the massive silence on Chinese lesbianism for me, a silence that is loudly 
naturalized by the Chinese heteropatriarchal normativity (Ng, 1997). Reading 
Chen Dongyuan’s book on Chinese women’s history (1928/1994), I came to 
appreciate his progressive criticism of Chinese patriarchy. Rendering Chinese 
“female homosexuals” visible, Chen nonetheless advanced a troubling view, 
treating female homosexuality as an endemic disease: “Endemic” because it 
was unnaturalized and peculiar to an area, and “disease” because it infected 
women and damaged their health. Let me explain.
In  a  42 6- p ag e  b o o k ,  C h e n  s p e n t  o nl y  tw o- thir ds  o f  a  p ag e  o n  “ Can t o n ese 
Nu Tong Xing Lian (female same-sex love)” (p. 300), a scant treatment. I was 
not surprised by his use of tong xing lian,
11 a general concept to refer to homo-
sexuality and homosexuals. Th is term is old-fashioned and mainly used by 
people who accept the framing of homosexuality as unorthodox and deviant, 
not seeing alternative reading and naming in their horizons. But the section 
where Chen placed his discussion struck me: Chapter Eight and Section Eleven, 
entitled “Peculiar Customs in Sundry Places.”
Among the other nine customs lumped together with nu tong xing lian or 
“female homosexuality,” the only “peculiar” custom that Chen praised overtly 
was the Miao ethnic people’s “Dancing to the Moon.” Th  e custom, though 
“barbaric,” was endorsed by Chen because Miao people based the marriage on 
free love (vs. arranged marriage) and monogamy (vs. polygamy). Th is custom, 
Chen argued further, emulates the West and is important for the Han Chinese 
to model themselves aft er.
Chen condemned nu tong xing lian . He quoted extensively from Zhang 
Xingtai’s Yue Yo Xiao Zhi (Travel Journal in Canton, undated):
In Canton, women vow to become sisters under the name of golden 
orchid association [jin lan hui].
12 Th ree days aft er the wedding ceremony, 
a woman returns to her natal family for a ritual visit. [Oft en without prior 
consummation], she does not go back to the husband’s house until her 
RT54118_C016.indd   329RT54118_C016.indd   329 7/8/06   7:59:08 PM7/8/06   7:59:08 PM


--- PAGE 387 ---
330 • Th e Womanist Reader
association sister gets married. Pressed to the extreme, association sis-
ters would commit suicide together. … In the recent decade, custom has 
changed again from sisterhood [ jie mei hua ] to marriage [ lian li zhi ]. 
When two women live together, one oft en resembles the husband. Th is 
custom was initiated in Shun De;  it then infected the Fan Yu and Sha 
Jiao areas, in which people practiced this custom more severely. It was 
unavoidable even in the county capital. It’s also named bai xiang zhi 
[avowed mutual appreciation]. Engaged as “sisters,” women’s love for 
each other is as dense and interwoven as silk, exceeding that between 
husband and wife, so that they choose to remain unmarried for the life 
time [translation mine]. (p. 300)
B o l s t e r e d  b y  Z h a n g ’ s  t r a v e l  w r i t i n g ,  C h e n  f u r t h e r  a s s e r t e d  t h a t  r e m a i n i n g  
unmarried because of same-sex love violates nature’s rule and damages women’s 
h eal th .  H e  r e m ar k e d  th a t  this  p ra cti ce  b e cam e  ev e n  m o r e  p e rv as i v e  d u e  t o  
changing economic conditions. It deterred women from marrying and made 
them sink into same-sex love, causing a big problem [for the society] (p. 300).
Chen’s judgment of “problem” is couched in terms of his heteropatriarchal 
value system, treating heterosexuality, monogamy, free love, spouses of small 
age diff erence, and getting married when one matures as “natural.” Its norma-
tiv e  po w er  is  made  vis i b l e  wh en  “ peculiar”  is  ch osen  t o  mar k  i ts  un des ir ed  
other; that is, “peculiar” takes on meaning against the backdrop of Chen’s 
normativity: class-based, Han-centric and Western-emulating compulsory het-
erosexuality. Ethnic minorities (the Manchus, Tibetans, Yaos, Miaos, and Lis) 
and lower class Han people (peasants) were also “peculiar” (read “unnatural”). 
Finally, not only were Cantonese nu nu connections “peculiar/unnatural,” but 
worse yet, they also shang (damaged) shen ti (body; it is used holistically to 
mean physical health). Like a disease, nu nu connections might deter women 
from the fulfi llment of nature’s callings to get married and bear children. Th ey 
might also cause solitude, isolation, infi rmity or suicide. Aft er all, an unmar-
ried and childless life was no life at all.
In Marjo rie T o p l ey’ s histo ri cal essa y o n marriag e r esistan ce in Can to n,
13 
I found two more terms for marriage resisters: zi shu nu (self-brushing [the 
hair] women) and bu luo jia (not settling down in the [husband’s] family) 14 
(1975, p. 67). Th ere was a hairdressing ritual for a bride before marriage. If a 
single woman chose to take the vow of spinsterhood, she would go through 
the same hairdressing ritual. But she would be assisted by “an elderly celi-
bate female” rather than “an elderly woman with many sons” (p. 83). Going 
through the hairdressing ritual by herself, she entered a new stage of life alone, 
henceforth the term zi (self ) shu (brushing) nu (female).
In contrast, some women went through their wedding ceremony but did not 
consummate their relationship with their husbands. Recall Zhang’s travel writ-
ing quoted by Chen in my earlier discussion. Th  ree days aft  er the wedding, 
RT54118_C016.indd   330RT54118_C016.indd   330 7/8/06   7:59:09 PM7/8/06   7:59:09 PM


--- PAGE 388 ---
Sexuality Studies • 331
the bride would be accompanied by the groom to pay a ritual visit to her natal 
family, called gui ning. Gui means returning and ning means safe/peaceful. 
Together, it means the bride returns home to wish her parents a safe and 
healthy life. Th e unwilling bride during the resistance era would take advan-
tage of this ritual, refusing to return to the husband’s family, henceforth 
acquiring the name bu (not) luo (settle down) jia (family/home).
In sum, golden orchid association, jin lan hui,  is a 19th century Chinese 
vocabulary for nu nu connections in Canton. Specifi  cities in jin lan hui  are 
further mapped based on (a) whether a woman resisted marriage by not mar-
rying (zi shu nu) or by marrying but not returning to the husband’s house (bu 
luo jia), and (b) whether their relationship was a celibate sisterhood ( jie mei 
hua) or female–female marriage/cohabitation (bai xiang zhi).
Economic activities made it possible for unattached women, zi shu nu and 
bu luo jia,  to be gainfully employed. Th ey became even more economically 
viable in the mid-nineteenth century when steam-driven machinery (i.e., indus-
trialization) was introduced into the silk factories (p. 72). In addition to fi nan-
cial factors, religion also contributed to the prevalence of marriage resistance. 
Bao Juan, the Precious Volume, printed by a religious sect, Xien Tien Da Dao
15 
(p. 74), especially infl uenced many of these unattached women. It preached to 
women that marriage resistance is not morally wrong; men cannot be trusted; 
childbirth is a sin; celibacy is the only way to the Happy Land (paradise); and 
suicide is a virtue if it is committed to preserve purity and chastity.
As the silk industry hit bottom in the great depression of the 1930s, mar-
riage resistance declined. Older unattached women retired early, and younger 
ones sough t em plo ymen t as domestic servan ts in Can ton as w ell as Mala ya 
and Singapore. Th e custom of golden orchid association, which had lasted for 
one hundred years or so, declined. Established society resumed its silence on 
this matter in no time.
I found myself drawn to these unattached women. What did they look 
like? What were their dreams, torments and obsessions? Employment and 
religion, especially the advocacy of celibacy and suicide, were two founda-
tions on which jin lan hui’s unorthodox practice stood. Th ese women would 
have been my great grandmothers’ peers. Had I been born into their genera-
tion, would or could I have done the same thing?
I am an agnostic and a college professor. I am gainfully employed. I have 
my “modern” beliefs—women should receive education, learn to drive, have 
the right to divorce, and so on and so forth. Th e golden orchid sisters seem 
ghostly. Yet, their existence, in mysterious ways, is beyond me, neither an 
option nor a challenge, especially for my younger self.
I feel thousands of years behind these women. Th ey were never my women, 
yet I become, little by little, part of these women, leaving my ghostly self 
behind.
RT54118_C016.indd   331RT54118_C016.indd   331 7/8/06   7:59:09 PM7/8/06   7:59:09 PM


--- PAGE 389 ---
332 • Th e Womanist Reader
Second Awakening: Ai Bao and 1990s Nu Nu Words
In 1993 and 1994, I went back to Taiwan to visit my mother, other family 
members, and friends. I met three female professor friends at Nu Shu Dien, 
the Femme Bookstore, across the street from Tai Da (National Taiwan Univer-
sity), where vibrant and oft en dissenting intellectual movements originated. 
Th ey talked about the infl uence of postmodern, poststructuralist and postco-
lonial theories in the Taiwanese academy. Th ey also mentioned that there’s 
a fi erce schism between [heterosexually unconscious] feminists and lesbian 
feminists. A breakthrough on the front of Taiwanese lesbian organizing/
theorizing, according to them, was the fi rst offi  cially registered lesbian pub-
lication in Taiwan, Ai Fu Hao Zi Zai Bao, abbreviated, as Ai Bao—the Love 
Newspaper/Magazine.
16
I thoroughly enjoyed our conversations on that hot summer aft  ernoon. 
Before returning to my mom’s house, I picked up all available issues of Ai Bao 
at the Femme Bookstore. Reading through them, I was struck by many new 
terms I had never heard of in Chinese. Moreover, what stood out beyond the 
literal content of their words were Ai Bao’s discursive strategies, a marvelous 
and sophisticated demonstration of the rhetorical art.
Ai Bao and Rhetorical Invention
Rhetoric is a “Greek” term for the study of persuasion in general and the 
practice of argument in particular. I found this focus useful in appreciating/
understanding the title of the fi rst Taiwanese lesbian magazine, Ai Bao, a remark-
ably complicated text. Here, I would like to focus on rhetoric as the art of 
invention in words, and on style as an ultimate component of rhetorical inven-
tion. Walter Watson (2001) touches on style’s oxymoronic essence:
Th e style of the speech is thus in its components both familiar and strange, 
in relation to the case at hand both common and unique, in its forms both 
recurrent and novel, and in its functioning both known and unknown. 
Th is joining of tradition and innovation corresponds to the nature of 
invention itself. (p. 398)
Relevant to my analysis here are three ways to materialize style: determining 
word choice, ensuring suitability to the situation, and using vivid/esteemed 
sayings.
Ai Bao off ers an exemplary case study of rhetorical style, specifi cally in terms 
of the use of wordplay in the contemporary Taiwanese world. Many diff  erent 
kinds of wordplay exist. Relevant to my rhetorical analyses here are two types of 
wordplay: homophonic and homonymic. According to Plett (2001), homophonic 
wordplay (e.g., soul and sole) is one where two words have diff erent spellings 
and diff erent meanings but identical pronunciation. Homonymic wordplay 
(e.g., to lie—to prostrate; to lie—to tell an untruth) off ers words that have the 
RT54118_C016.indd   332RT54118_C016.indd   332 7/8/06   7:59:09 PM7/8/06   7:59:09 PM


--- PAGE 390 ---
Sexuality Studies • 333
same phonetic components and the same spelling but diff erent meanings. I will 
now explicate multiple ways in which Ai Bao artfully achieves its rhetorical 
invention.
First Take. Translated literally, the title of the fi rst Taiwanese lesbian maga-
zine reads “Love, Luck, Good, Self at Ease Newspaper.” Ai means love, aff ec-
tion and, discursively, it draws people away from hatred. Fu means fortune or 
luck, and it marks the diff erence from bad luck. Hao means good and positive, 
and it moves people discursively away from things that are bad and disagree-
able. “Love,” “luck,” and “good” are feminine virtues authorized by the tradi-
tional Chinese patrilineal-heterosexual hegemony. A good woman is said to 
bring love, luck, and especially male off spring to the family.
Aft er this parade of feminine virtues, we encounter Zi (self ) and Zai (pres-
ent). Together, these two characters refer to “self-at-ease, self-content.” Th  is 
contemporary term is derived from the teaching of Confucius, asserting that 
a man of virtue fi nds himself at ease (content) wherever he goes. So, “self-at-
ease” marks the diff  erence between a man who feels calm and content and 
desires nothing and a man who feels inadequate and tormented by unfulfi lled 
d e s i r e s .  I t  i s  i m p o rt a n t  t o  n o t e  th a t  C o n fu c i u s ,  a  m i s o gyn o u s  p h i l o s o p h e r ,  
grouped women and ignoble men into the same category. So self-at-ease is tradi-
tionally a gendered elitist virtue. It belongs to the masculine sphere. But unlike 
the two selfl ess virtues in traditional worlds— zhong (loyalty to the emperor) 
and shao
17 (fi lial piety to the parents)— zi zai focuses more on the delight and 
joy of the male self.
Even though Zi Zai (self-at-ease) and Ai Fu Hao (love, luck and good) are 
both authorized imperial/feudal values, a discursive tension is built into the 
title because Zi Zai is masculine and self-oriented, while Ai Fu Hao is feminine 
and selfl ess. T ogether they create a perfectly traditional, innocent and positive 
title for the new magazine; that is, the title is not only familiar but also good. 
It is, therefore, persuasive: “Anything that is thought to be good can serve as a 
basis for a deliberative argument, and so the rhetor needs to know all the kinds 
of things that are thought to be good” (Watson, 2001, p. 392). Traditional good 
values are mobilized to break open new rhetorical spaces via subversive turns 
in meaning; that is, its title allows diff erent readings through wordplay.
Second Take. Ai Fu (love luck) is a homophonic wordplay for caress and 
foreplay. Hao, in addition to having the meaning of “good,” is a homonymic 
wordplay for “so, very.” Hao Zi Zai can be read as “ so very great/ free!” Th e 
ti tl e  turn s  “ risq u é”  w h e n  w e  r ea d  i t  as  “ Car ess / f o r e p l a y  so  v e ry  gr ea t/ fr ee ! ”  
It liberates a woman from the cage of selfl  ess feminine virtues espoused by 
the patrilineal and heterosexual status quo. Th  e Confucian “self-at-ease” at 
fi rst assumes a straight face, only to fi nd itself coupled with “sexual pleasure” 
replacing a scholarly, canonical image. Th e title takes hostage two discursive 
taboos that regulate female identities: (a) a woman is not supposed to mention 
sexual matters (e.g., caress, foreplay) in public, and (b) a woman is not encouraged 
RT54118_C016.indd   333RT54118_C016.indd   333 7/8/06   7:59:10 PM7/8/06   7:59:10 PM


--- PAGE 391 ---
334 • Th e Womanist Reader
to enjoy sexual pleasure in the private and public spheres, let alone in print. In 
Taiwanese society, this challenges the core of sexualized and gendered oppres-
sion, in Spivak’s words, the “eff acement of the clitoris” in subordination to a 
uterine social organization (1988, p. 151).
Th ird Take . Another combination of homonymic wordplays makes possible 
a third take on the title. Ai fu Hao is a commercial herbal drink manufactured to 
enhance male energy and, especially, to facilitate heterosexual male potency. 
Hao Zi Zai is the Chinese translation of Care Free, a brand name of sanitary 
napkins imported from the U.S.A. Th e title turns “indelicate” when it reads, 
“Chinese traditional potency drinks for men and female sanitary napkins from 
the U.S.”
Chinese patrilineal-heterosexual tradition valorizes male potency. Precious 
animal parts, for example, deer antlers and penises, have been avidly pursued 
to aid masculine potency for centuries. One of the imperial herbal doctors’ 
duties was to seek out exotic medicine to aid the Emperor’s potency. Taoist 
treatises were written to help older Chinese men practice sex without losing 
their “precious fl uid,” which they believed would help them prolong life.
Women’s menstruation, not surprisingly, receives a polar opposite treat-
m e n t .  M e n s t r u a t i o n  w a s  l o n g  h e l d  t o  b e  “ u n f o r t u n a t e . ”  S e e i n g  b l o o d s t a i n s  
from menstruation brings a man bad luck. Young women, to this day, usually 
euphemize their monthly fl  ow as “good friend.” In a traditional sense, the 
herbal drink “ Ai Fu Hao ” is discursively acceptable, while sanitary napkins 
“Hao Zi Zai” are hushed into silence. Neither will openly make it into the title 
of a magazine. A third turn in meanings via wordplay has produced subversive 
and satirical eff ects. Male potency and female monthly fl ow are clandestinely 
juxtaposed and turned into printable topics.
Fourth and Fift h Take. To make the meanings even more daring, let us con-
sider a fourth and fi ft h reading of the title: “Caress/foreplay and United Statesian 
sanitary napkins/feel great/make people self-at-ease” and “Traditional Chinese 
potency drinks for men feel great/make people self-at-ease.” Th e multiple dis-
cursive and bodily possibilities off ered b y such w o r dpla y maximize a tensio n 
between traditional values and an insurgent female sexual agency. By “agency,” 
I mean discursive subjectivity or subject positioning (Spivak, 1988, p. 216). A set 
of discursive rules allows a specifi c “I” to speak, and a group of people to grant 
this “I” a hearing. In the title of this new magazine, I hear a Taiwanese woman 
m a r c h i n g  a w a y  f r o m  a  s u b m i s s i v e ,  s i l e n c e d  n o n - e n t i t y  ( a  r o l e  t h a t  i s  a l w a y s  
talked to, ordered around, and made ashamed of and invisible) into a speaking, 
emerging identity (a role that says “I” loud and visible, makes assertions, enjoys 
sexual pleasure and feels unashamed of menstruation).
“I” have a traditional, good feminine identity coupled with “my” traditional 
male self-content. But “I” also love caress/foreplay. “I” am no longer the erotic 
object of male gaze and male fondling. What’s more, “I” enjoy potency drinks 
RT54118_C016.indd   334RT54118_C016.indd   334 7/8/06   7:59:10 PM7/8/06   7:59:10 PM


--- PAGE 392 ---
Sexuality Studies • 335
and menstruation. “I” speak in such a witty yet sophisticated way, attracting a 
group of people to listen to this irreverent female sexual “I.”
When Ai Fu Hao Zi Zai Bao is abbreviated for the ease of writing, it is called 
Ai Bao, which means “Love Paper.” It is a non-threatening title for those who 
endorse heteropatriarchy. But subversive readings, as I have shown above, make 
this title oxymoronically daring for gendered and sexual outcasts in Taiwan: 
All forms of love between women are possible!
Wordplay as Vision, Morality as Cliché
Diff erent forms of wordplay, in my view, share two discursive acts: creativity 
and defi ance. Wordplay is sign making, a creative association between mean-
ings or between sounds unthought of by unimaginative people. In other words, 
wordplay breathes the spirit of originality, freshness and spontaneity into 
the quotidian. In respelling the mundane anew, wordplay also subversively 
enacts a defi ant disassociation from the existing ideologies and moralities that 
have turned cliché. Going beyond the trite, the banal, and the stale, wordplay 
invokes experiences unconfi ned by the present: dream, trance, reverie, vision, 
the unconscious and the games of the underground (Kennard, 1997).
Performing an aura of creativity, wordplay’s simmering defi  ance renames 
the Chinese heteropatriarchal morality not so much as a system of negative 
confi nement but as cliché and, by implication, passé—it becomes the overused, 
excessively applied code that terminates thoughts and should be vanished! Put 
diff erently, to urge a diff  erent course in Ai Bao is less about defying moral-
ity/tradition than refusing to be trite, to be banal, and to be stale, a marvelous 
shift  from right/wrong to cliché/creativity. Rhetorically speaking, wordplay, 
as a creative and defi ant move, opens up thinking and off ers visions—making 
the persuasive case that the love between women psychologically and/or sexu-
ally is good and, more importantly, original and creative.
Nu Nu Words in the 1990s in Taiwan
Between 1949 and 1987, the Nationalist party ruled Taiwan through Martial 
Law . Many criminal off enses were tried in military rather than civil courts. 
Homosexual behavior was regarded as deviant, and, according to Y. Antonia 
Chao, a professor at Tunghai University in Taiwan,
… any off enders of the given social order would be demonized in politi-
cal terms (usually by being labeled as fei die [the Communist spy]), tom-
boys were frequently charged by the police on the count of treason. 
(2001, p. 188)
A new rhetorical world emerged in the nu nu sphere in Taiwan aft er July 15, 
1987, when the Martial Law of Taiwan was formally ended (Cogswell, 2000). 
With the loosening of political restraints,
18 especially since the early 1990s, not 
RT54118_C016.indd   335RT54118_C016.indd   335 7/8/06   7:59:10 PM7/8/06   7:59:10 PM


--- PAGE 393 ---
336 • Th e Womanist Reader
only did insurgent publications like Ai Bao surface, but also new terms from the 
homosexual underground began to circulate in public.
Tongzhi is an obvious example. Chou Wah-Shan, a Chinese scholar in Hong 
Kong and one of the pioneers in the gay rights movement and tongzhi dis-
course, explains,
Tongzhi is the most popular contemporary Chinese word for lesbians, 
bisexuals, and gay people. Th e word is a Chinese translation from a Soviet 
communist term “comrade,” which refers to the revolutionaries that 
shared a comradeship. Th e term was fi rst adopted by Chinese in Repub-
lican China, and then taken both by the Communist and Nationalist 
Party to refer to comrades struggling for the communist/nationalist 
revolution. Tong literally means “same/homo,” the same Chinese word 
for “homo (sexual),” and the word zhi means “goal,” “spirit,” or “orienta-
tion.” (2001, p. 27)
In other words, tongzhi is a homonymic wordplay. It off ers three meanings: 
(a) “revolutionaries” who overthrew the Qing dynasty at the turn of the 20th 
century, (b) “comrades,” a gender-neutral title which functions like “Mr.” and 
“Ms.” for men and women in Communist China, and (c) gays, lesbians and 
bisexuals of Chinese descent in the end of the 20th century and onward.
Tongzhi is the name adopted by gay and lesbian activists/organizers in 
Taiwan, China and Hong Kong.
19 Kuer, a Chinese transliteration of the Eng-
lish word “queer,”20 a lesser-known term than tongzhi in the 1990s, circulates 
more exclusively in metropolitan areas in Taiwan. Like “queer” in the United 
States, kuer is sensitive to the heterogeneities among sexual minorities. Yet 
diff erently nuanced, kuer carries another sense in Taiwan. It has an additional 
meaning of “being cool,” a partially transliterated exclamation borrowed from 
youth cultures in the United States. So being kuer is to be playful, fresh, and 
original in sexuality . It is freer and more porous than tongzhi. Discursively, 
kuer, a gender neutral term, is more into pleasure, defi  ance, heterogeneity, 
theory and critical discourse; tongzhi is also gender neutral, but it is equivalent 
to lesbians/ gays, and more associated with social change projects and activ-
ist praxis.
21 Given that the sexual insurgent movement is about one decade 
young in Taiwan, tongzhi and kuer have less deep-rooted and politically unre-
solved issues than those between gay/lesbian activists and queer theorists 
in the United States. Despite their relatively diff  erent sensibilities, tongzhi 
and kuer t e n d  t o  w o r k  c o o p e r a t i v e l y  r a t h e r  t h a n  i n  o p p o s i t i o n  i n  T a i w a n  
(Chi, 1997, pp. 15–16).
In addition to gender-neutral terms, there are new expressions in the nu 
tongzhi (female comrades) world and female kuer (children who are cool and 
queer) world. Before tongzhi consciousness was named, women who love women 
romantically were called “ chuan ku zi de, ” meaning pants wearer. When the 
RT54118_C016.indd   336RT54118_C016.indd   336 7/8/06   7:59:10 PM7/8/06   7:59:10 PM


--- PAGE 394 ---
Sexuality Studies • 337
tongzhi movement picked up momentum in the 1990s, nu tongzhi words like 
“T or tan bao,” and “puo” became more widely known.
Tomboy, abbreviated as “ T” or transliterated as “ tan bao,” which homo-
phonically also means “juicy dumpling,” means a masculine woman who loves 
other women. Having an English concept as its origin, “ T” or “ tan bao ” is 
roughly equivalent to “butch.” “Puo” has two meanings in a conventional sense: 
grandmother or wife. It means feminine women who love other women. It also 
means “the wife” of T (Hong et al., 1997, p. 52; Zhang, 2000, pp. 2–26), a role 
similar to femme in the United States.
22
Like T and puo, “lazi” is another woman-centered nu nu word. However, 
lazi is more fl uid and porous, not subscribing to T and puo’s relatively rigid 
role-diff erentiation. According to Wong (1999, p. 256), college educated lazi in 
Taiwan tend to call themselves “bu fen” (not diff erentiating), bu fen pien T (not 
diff erentiating but leaning toward T) and bu fen pien puo (not diff erentiating 
but leaning toward puo).23
In addition to its role fl  uidity, lazi is also less yang pai or “Westernized” 
than kuer. Even though lazi can be easily translated into American English 
as “lez” (an abbreviation of “lesbian”), lazi is more indigenous because it is 
originated from the main character’s name in Qiu Miaojing’s novel, Journal of 
a Crocodile (1994). In 1995, Qiu committed suicide in the Montmarte quarter 
of Paris, France, where she studied as a foreign student from Taiwan. Since 
then, many nu tongzhi and female kuer worship her like a cult fi gure. As indig-
enous as nu tongzhi, lazi is more playful and irreverent. Ultimately, lazi/lez 
becomes a popular term in Taiwan, especially on Websites and in chatroom 
conversations.
From nu tongzhi to lazi, from kuer to T/puo, I feel directly and indirectly 
the pulse of the United States—lesbian, queer, butch and femme. Yet, Taiwanese 
nu nu connections emerge with diff  erent contours and vibes, vibrating inside 
me, opening up channels for a new kind of chi
24 running through me. But the 
voices of womanists—radical women of color—and queers who are not white 
are yet to reach the shores of Taiwan, its academy and public/private discourse, 
and vice versa.
I have a deep sense of unease, longing for a diff  erent kind of connection. 
Perhaps, by crossing the ocean and the Internet between Taiwan and the United 
States, transcending nations and states, more words and spirits will come to 
speak to me.
Th ird Awakening: Kuaer, a New Name for 
“Transnational Womanist Quare”
Queer theory
25 and the gay liberation movement have increased the visibility 
of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgenders in the United States. However, 
black womanists and radical women of color have articulated and challenged 
a fundamental elision—sexual minorities who are not white, male, and affl  uent 
RT54118_C016.indd   337RT54118_C016.indd   337 7/8/06   7:59:11 PM7/8/06   7:59:11 PM


--- PAGE 395 ---
338 • Th e Womanist Reader
remain relatively invisible in their diff erent localities. Barbara Smith, a long time 
organizer and cofounder of Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, confronts 
this elision and the practical impact it has on grassroots political activity:
In most cases countercampaigns against the right are led by white gays 
and lesbians who have little idea how to communicate with and work 
eff ectively with members of the Black community. Th  e racism, white 
solipsism, and elitism that traditionally dominate the mainstream white 
gay male political agenda spell absolute disaster when what is at stake is 
changing our own communities’ attitudes about issues of sexual orien-
tation and civil rights. (1995/2000, p. 173)
Th is is not merely a local/national problem. It is inscribed in and produced 
through “theory”:
I am particularly struck by the fact that for the most part queer theory 
and queer politics, which are currently so popular, off er neither substan-
tial antiracist analysis nor practice.
26 (1999, p. 18)
Forging coalition politics and building communities among people who exist 
“as women, as people of color, and as queer,” Vera Miao remarks:
Narratives of rejection and disillusionment by many Asian American les-
bians and bisexual women, whose exclusion is caused by the homopho-
bia of racial and ethnic communities and the racism of predominantly 
white queer populations, are only a few painful interventions in prevail-
ing defi nitions of “home” and “community.” (1998, p. 70)
Addressing the same problem in Text & Performance Quarterly,  one of the 
leading journals in Communication Studies, E. Patrick Johnson (2001) recently 
off ered “quare studies,” an invention that dreams of the forgotten localities 
inhabited by shadowy fi gures—black, poor, male and female—multiply erased 
in the incubating but hegemonic queer hierarchies. Quare studies, according 
to Johnson, addresses what is left  out
27 in queer theory:
While queer theory has opened up new possibilities for theorizing gen-
der and sexuality, like a pot of gumbo cooked too quickly, it has failed 
to live up to its full critical potential by refusing to accommodate all the 
queer ingredients contained inside its theoretical pot. (2001, p. 18)
Johnson, in other words, off ers quare theory to redress the omissions of queer 
theory, featuring the specifi cities of gays and lesbians of color. His invention 
emphasizes race and class as interrelated dimensions of sexuality. It pays atten-
tion to communities, embodied performativity, and theory in the fl esh, taking 
an interventionist stance in performing critical praxis.
I fully embrace Johnson’s move from queer to quare. Here is a theory 
that is not merely brilliant but timely and useful. Yet to understand the 
RT54118_C016.indd   338RT54118_C016.indd   338 7/8/06   7:59:11 PM7/8/06   7:59:11 PM


--- PAGE 396 ---
Sexuality Studies • 339
discursive amnesia in nu nu connections in Taiwan and to push theorizing’s 
critical potential, I cannot but move further into transnational womanist 
quare studies . My rearticulation is “womanist” because I insist on noting 
gendered and racialized experiences in specifi  c localities, honoring the black 
women and radical women of color who have taught me many important 
lessons.28 My rearticulation is “quare” because, like Johnson, I can no 
longer stomach the naturalized presence of homophobia in heteronormative 
communities or whiteness in queer communities. Finally, my rearticulation 
is also “transnational” because I live in an increasingly globalized world 
t h a t  i s  d e s p e r a t e l y  i n  n e e d  o f  c r i t i c a l  p r a x i s  ( H e g d e ,  1 9 9 8 ;  S h o m e ,  1 9 9 6 ,  
1999) beyond the reach of International Monetary Fund and World Trade 
Organization; and I resist the technologies of global domination on the Th ird 
World, wittingly or unwittingly exercised by progressive First World identity 
academicians,  be they feminists, anti-racists, poststructuralists, Marxists, or 
queer theorists (Kaplan & Grewal, 1994). In sum, my critical rearticulation
29 
speaks to the importance of quare theory and quare coalition politics, making 
a transnational link between and beyond Taiwanese quare wo/men and radical 
quare wo/men in the United States.
Resonating with the sensibility of quare theory without fulminating against 
queer studies, I extend tongzhi and kuer further into kuaer, transnational 
womanist quare/s, a starting point for subversive strategy as wordplay. Kuaer 
is a transliteration of two Chinese characters kua and er. Er literally means 
child/children. Elsewhere I defi  ned it: “… the function of Er is like the y 
added to a person’ s name in English, for example, Jimmy , Jenny , T ommy . It 
makes one sound childlike” (Lee, 1999, p. 297). Rather than being childish, er 
 connotes vibrant energy, the ability to grow and to learn new things, and is 
consistent with the move to originality and away from the banal. Kua lends 
itself to multiple meanings. Depending on its tonal diff erentiations, Kua may 
mean crossing, praised or proud/boastful. Together, Kuaer has many shades 
and colors: Children who cross horizons. Children who are praised. Children 
who are proud/boastful. Children who cross worlds and understand quare 
and womanist politics. Transnational womanist quare children who are proud 
and praised and whose critical consciousness is multi-racial, multi-sexual, 
multi-gendered, and multi-class-based. Kuaering queer theory, my move to a 
transnational womanist quare theory and politics aff  ords me a more critical 
assessment of the Chinese nu nu world, from zi shu nu and bu luo jia to kuer, 
nu tong zhi,  and lazi. One of the main diff  erences between the 19th century 
and the 1990s nu nu worlds lies in whether reform is explicit or not. T opley 
comments on marriage resistance practice as “nonorthodox but nonreformist” 
(1975, p. 68). Th e nu tongzhi movement, on the other hand, is consciously 
reformist, asking for equal rights in marriage, family, employment and 
personal relationships. Th e former embraced an ambiguous “celibacy,” while 
the latter champions unambiguous “sexual pleasure.”
RT54118_C016.indd   339RT54118_C016.indd   339 7/8/06   7:59:11 PM7/8/06   7:59:11 PM


--- PAGE 397 ---
340 • Th e Womanist Reader
Both marriage resistance and nu tongzhi movement are made possible by 
women’s increased level of education/literacy and the ability to be economi-
cally independent. Th e former phenomenon originated among working classes 
aided by the silk industry in areas where international trades were prevalent 
and Western imperialism was dominant; and the latter movement originated 
with metropolitan elite classes assisted by Western human rights discourse 
and critical academic discourse, including feminism, postmodern and post-
structuralism, lesbian/gay and queer theory (Ho, 2000). What is important 
to ponder are the opportunities given to the unattached women in the midst 
of domestic industrialization and foreign imperialism at the turn of the 20th 
c e n t u ry .  W h a t  i s  al s o  im p o rt an t  t o  m ar k  i s  th a t ,  in  c o n t e m p o r ary  T ai w an ,  
the discursive existence and histories of subaltern nu tongzhi—those who are 
from the non-elite classes,
30 factory workers, the modern equivalent of zi shu 
nu and bu luo jia, those who are non-Han people, and those who live in rural 
areas and do not go to college—remain in the shadows.
Kuaering queer theory, our struggles will remain multifaceted and both 
within and from outside. Standing where we are, we need to organize against 
what Patricia Hill Collins calls the “matrix of domination” (1990) in our local 
communities transnationally, heeding how multiple systems of hierarchy in 
race, class, gender, sexuality, nationality and education work together (not in 
isolation) to create domination, inequality, and opportunities. Th is call speaks 
to the bind articulated by Audre Lorde: “Within the lesbian community I am 
black, and within the black community I am a lesbian” (1999, p. 307). It reso-
nates with Shane Phelan’s urging of critical practices:
We have to stand where we are, acknowledging the links and contradic-
tions between ourselves and other citizens of the world, resisting the 
temptations to cloak crucial diff  erences with the cloak of universality 
and to deny generalities for fear of essentialism. Only in this way will we 
be able to be free from the domination that lives both within and around 
us. (1993, p. 786)
Search your hearts and thoughts and let me ask you, “Does the name 
kuaer make you nervous? Does it stretch your horizons and help you see 
erasures that once elided you? Does it point to new directions of ‘primary 
intensity’ for you? Do you fi  nd kuaer yo yi ci  (meaningful; interesting/
intriguing; romantically engaging)?”
Postscript
I have labored in two fi elds of human communication—critical intercultural com-
munication and postcolonial womanist rhetoric. I believe that my research 
and theorizing is inherently political and I work to dismantle hierarchical 
injustice created by intersectionality (i.e., disfavored combinations of race, class, 
RT54118_C016.indd   340RT54118_C016.indd   340 7/8/06   7:59:12 PM7/8/06   7:59:12 PM


--- PAGE 398 ---
Sexuality Studies • 341
gender, nationality, etc.). I have been voicing the importance of gender, race 
and transnational/postcolonial power diff  erences in the understanding of 
human communication. Yet, the lack of dialogue between radical women of 
color and women who do “high theorizing” in poststructuralism and postco-
lonialism profoundly disturbs me. I am further troubled by my own deferral 
in addressing an aspect of intersectionality—sexuality.
A few years ago, in an essay on antifootbinding rhetoric in China, I had to 
admit, “My femaleness does not address the voices of lesbians living during 
the footbinding eras” (1998, p. 29). Recently, in a co-authored piece on critical 
intercultural communication, I asked a question: “We talk about intersection-
ality and multiple dimensions of oppression. What will a concrete intercul-
tural communication project look like if intersectionality is deeply integrated 
rather than given lip service? What are the dimensions usually left   out? I per-
sonally do not see a lot of issues regarding ‘sexuality’ raised” (Collier et al., 
2001, p. 273). Awakened by Audre Lorde’s remark, “I simply do not believe that 
one aspect of myself can possibly profi t from the oppression of any other part 
of my identity” (1999, p. 306), I vow to work in areas that do stretch beyond my 
earlier consciousness. T o go beyond my frequent use of “etc.” or the apologia 
of “future research should,” this essay is an “otherwise” project.
Kuaering queer theory, I have made a race-conscious, womanist, and trans-
national turn at the metatheoretical level. Linking the genealogy from queer 
to quare and from kuer to kuaer, I have also made an honest eff ort to under-
stand and theorize the nu nu world in Taiwan at the dawn of a new millen-
nium. But this is not so abstract as it may sound to both those who relish 
and those who scoff  at the merely academic. Beyond “project” and “work,” it 
carries with it a sensual, personal dimension or, better, commitment. I refuse 
to abandon the poetic in this personal/political struggle. I also strive to per-
form what Michael Awkward (1999), an African American literary scholar, 
calls “autocritography”—a self-refl exive academic act that strategically fore-
grounds multiple genres and provides critical accounts, both institutional and 
personal, for the production of a scholar and his/her professional concerns 
(p. 7). Stated diff erently, my project is a layered refl ection on my own margin-
alities and privileges and how I negotiate them and turn them into scholarly 
inquiries (Yep, 1998).
Ultimately, I wonder who would invite me and whom I would invite to 
have dinner? A peacock feather note to these kuaers: Ziao Yi and Ziao Wei (my 
lazi friends), Audre Lorde, S. and M. (two Mormon feminist friends), Y.S. (my 
kuaer friend from Europe), Moraga and Anzaldúa, Shu Yuan (my kuaer friend 
crossing three continents), Barbara Smith, E. Patrick Johnson, Mab Segrest, 
and more. I see their voices and they hear my dreams. Awakened to each other’s 
dreams and dreaming each other’s awakening, our crossing is, through and 
through, kuaer.
RT54118_C016.indd   341RT54118_C016.indd   341 7/8/06   7:59:12 PM7/8/06   7:59:12 PM


--- PAGE 399 ---
342 • Th e Womanist Reader
Notes
 1. It means energy running through the human body.
 2. My quest here echoes the journey outlined in Buddy Goodall Jr.’s new ethnography (2000): 
“I couldn’t answer a lot of these questions. But raising them, and fi  nding narrative meth-
ods of inquiry to explore them, opened my ethnographic self to a new rhetorical  frontier 
of inquiry. I found a way to write about how experiences of the ineff  able shape the every-
day. I learned what it means to ‘read’ between the lines of lived experience a variety of 
alternative interpretive possibilities. I became narratively involved in how individual life 
quests and communal participation fi gure into a larger puzzle about human purpose and 
agency” (p. 188). What concerns me here in this “going aft  er” project lies less in fi  nding 
answers than experiencing an embodied and evocative process of co-creation with you, 
my readers and myself. Pursuing shared subjectivities, I experiment with a cacophony of 
voices as well as genre multiplicity in this essay. See also Kenneth Gergen’s works (1999, 
2000) for similar advocacy of multiple writing styles and a fundamental rethinking of 
intellectual/research purposes.
 3. Th  e inspiration for my use of personal and scholarly voices in italicized and non-italicized 
print comes from Michael Awkward’s book, Scenes of Instruction (1999). As defi ned and 
explained in the postscript of this essay, I also perform his genre/method of “autocritog-
raphy” throughout my writing here.
 4. My inspiration comes from Trinh T. Minh-ha (1989, pp. 15–20).
 5. Discursive amnesia is defi  ned as “much deeper levels of forgetting, levels far beyond the 
need of a censor, and levels created both positively through accretions and endorsed recol-
lection (offi  cial histories) and negatively through lack of reward (under-funded histories)” 
(Lee & Wander, 1998, p. 154).
 6. I want to make it clear that discursive amnesty is not a wholesale, one-size-fi  ts-all deal. It 
has to come with a specifi c ideological shift  upheld by a critical community, a community 
that learns and interrogates forms of “discursive amnesia” and is persuaded by alterna-
tive, genealogical histories. Th e shift   such a community urges is not to turn to dualistic 
reversal (e.g., from “whites as superior” to “whites as racists” or “queers as deviant” to 
“queers as oppressed”) but to an anti-unearned-entitlement based program for social 
change and social justice.
 7 . I use this term to denote the relationships sensitized by Adrienne Rich’ s “lesbian exis-
tence” in Chinese/Taiwanese contexts. Nu means “female/s” and guan xi means relation-
ship/s or connections. Together, nu nu means female–female and nu nu guan xi means the 
relationships/connections between/among women.
 8. One phrase that carries two meanings is called shuang guan yu in Mandarin Chinese. Its 
equivalent in English is double entendre, defi ned as “a word or expression used in a given 
context so that it can be understood in two ways esp. when one meaning is indelicate or 
risqué” ( Th e Random House Dictionary of the English Language,  1971, p. 428). “Yo yi ci,” 
here, is an example of triple entendre, which means (1) possessing meaning, (2) interesting/
intriguing, and (3) romantically interested.
 9. See Rich’s essay, “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence” (1980/1993). I was 
particularly aff ected by her appeal:
To take the step of questioning heterosexuality as a “preference” or “choice” for 
women—and to do the intellectual and emotional work that follows—will call for 
a special quality of courage in heterosexually identifi  ed feminists, but I think the 
rewards will be great: a freeing-up of thinking, the exploring of new paths, the 
shattering of another great silence, new clarity in personal relationships. (p. 239)
Nevertheless, I am aware of objections to her view. For example, Esther Newton 
(1993) suggests those who work on lesbian cultures and identities not “be gobbled 
up” by detouring into “generic women’s networks or groupings” (p. 538). Per-
sonally, I endorse Rich’s view. For me, nu nu guan xi echoes Rich’s defi nition of 
lesbian existence, which means “woman-identifi  ed experience” and “forms of pri-
mary intensity between and among women” (p. 239). But I prefer nu nu guan xi 
or nu nu in abbreviation rather than a transliteration of Rich’s concept in order to 
emphasize women–women connections in Taiwanese/Chinese contexts.
 10. Kuaer is a transliteration, using the pinyin system, of two Mandarin Chinese characters 
kua and er. Kuaer has the same pronunciation as “quare” coined by E. Patrick Johnson in 
RT54118_C016.indd   342RT54118_C016.indd   342 7/8/06   7:59:12 PM7/8/06   7:59:12 PM


--- PAGE 400 ---
Sexuality Studies • 343
his ground breaking essay, “ ‘Quare’ Studies or (Almost) Everything I Know about Queer 
Studies I Learned from My Grandmother” (2001). As will be explained later in this essay, 
I appropriate existing words, both Mandarin Chinese and African American, to coin 
a richly layered term, kuaer, to name a coalitional-based positionality—“transnational 
womanist quare.” I urge a transnational study of sexuality with related dimensions of 
inequality (race, gender, class, and educational background) fi  rmly in mind.
 11. Tong means the same, xing denotes gender/sex/sexuality, and lian r e f e r s  t o  r o m a n t i c  
love.
 12. Topley (1975) provides two possible explanations for the meanings of jin lan hui:  James 
Liu of Stanford University has suggested to me that it may be derived from the following 
passage in the I-Ching: “When two persons have the same heart its sharpness can cut 
gold; words from the same heart have a fragrance like the orchid.” Winston Hsieh has 
suggested that the term may be a metaphor referring to structure—i.e., that such associa-
tions may “bud” or divide into subgroups as they enlarge, just as orchids bud into several 
fl owers on one stem (p. 76).
 13. Topley did her research in the early 1950s and in 1973 in Hong Kong (p. 69). She attempted 
to off er historical insights into “marriage resistance” among Cantonese women living in a 
small area for roughly one hundred years, from the early 19th to the early 20th century.
 14. I use the Pinyin phonetic system to translate Chinese in this essay. It diff  ers from Topley’s 
translation.
 15. Th  is sect was said to derive from the White Lotus Sect. Th e Qing government in the North 
suppressed it. Th is religion entered the marriage resistance areas in the mid-nineteenth 
century.
 16. Translated literally, Bao means “newspaper.” It is important to note that Ai Bao is a quar-
terly newsletter/magazine not a daily newspaper. For this reason, I use “magazine” rather 
than “newspaper” throughout the essay.
 17. Th  ere are three off  enses against xiao (fi  lial piety). Th e worst off  ense is not having male 
off spring.
 18. Aft  er 1987, together with the sexual minorities’ movement, Taiwan also witnessed unprec-
edented energy in women’s movement, environmental movement and labor movement, 
challenging “ruling class Confucianism” and opening up political spaces for dissenting 
viewpoints (Lee et al., 1995, p. 280), marking a transition into a more “democratic” state 
(Chiang, 1998, p. 380).
 19. I do not mean to imply that the use of the term tongzhi is uncontested. For an example of such 
a controversy, see e-mail exchanges triggered by a polemic individual. LuvBangor, aft er the 
1998 tongzhi conference in Hong Kong (Lu, 1999, pp. 335–343). LuvBangor indicted that 
the 1998 conference was part of an “‘anti-American style’ gay movement” and objected to 
the use of tongzhi in the conference title: “Finally, stop using that fucking word ‘Tongzhi,’ 
no one want[s] to be a god damn communist” (LuvBangor, 1999, pp. 336–337).
 20. In 1994, Ta-wei Chi, Ling Hong, and Tan-mou Dan coined this term, kuer, which is a 
transliteration of “queer” (Chi, 1997, p. 9 & p. 17). A revised entry on kuer in Little Kuer 
Encyclopedia is reprinted in Chi’s book (Hong et al., 1997, pp. 55–57).
 21. While I agree with Tan’s interpretation, “It [ Kuer] tends generally to denote resistance to 
mainstream culture and a deliberately pariah stance that aims for subversion. In contrast, 
tongzhi tends to denote more reformist tendency” (2001, p. 134, footnote 13), I disagree 
with Tan’s view that tongzhi and kuer are both translations of “queer” (see Tan’s footnotes 
7 and 13). Considering historically diff erent political and social constraints in the United 
States and Taiwan, I argue in this essay that tong xing lian is analogous to “homosexual-
ity,” tongzhi analogous to “lesbian/gay/bisexual,” and kuer analogous to “queer.”
 22. For an excellent essay on lesbian tomboys in Taiwan, see Chao (2001).
 23. For a nuanced analysis of lazi sensibilities and their heterogeneities, challenging the sim-
ple and uncritical dichotomy of T and puo,
 see Zhang Juenfeng’s fi eld research, Love’s Free 
Style (2001).
 24. A reader of my earlier draft   asked, “You might want to explain what you mean here, 
Wenshu. What can you imagine? What does it feel like? What kinds of transformations 
are possible? Tell us! It is so wonderful. You must not tease us. …” I drew a blank facing 
this new but ineff  able energy ( chi). Each time I tried to articulate it in a question-and-
answer way, I failed. Th en it suddenly dawned on me, recalling a passage in a powerful 
novel written by Alice Walker, “… our aff  air wasn’t like any aff  air you’ re likely to read 
about in Playboy. It had this incredible nurturing quality; it was the kind of aff  ectionate 
RT54118_C016.indd   343RT54118_C016.indd   343 7/8/06   7:59:13 PM7/8/06   7:59:13 PM


--- PAGE 401 ---
344 • Th e Womanist Reader
sex that seemed designed to reconnect me to myself, to keep me alive” (1998, p. 132). Th is 
new chi has helped to “reconnect me to myself, to keep me alive,” and an incredibly nur-
turing relationship, in my view, knows no boundaries marked by homosexuality, bisexu-
ality or heterosexuality.
 25. Given the limited space in this essay, I do not provide a systematic treatment of queer 
theory. For a good starting point to grasp the slippery semantics of queer theory and its 
genealogy, see William B. Turner (2000).
 26. It’s hard to fi  nd articles challenging racism in the gay and lesbian movement. An example 
is in Brandt (1999): “One of the biggest frustrations in compiling this book was trying 
to fi nd a contributor willing to discuss the phenomenon of gay racism … on the topic 
of racism in the history of the gay liberation movement, I was faced with a great deal of 
discomfort and silence” (p. 9).
 27. My thinking benefi  ts from the critical scholarship of Philip W ander, a rhetorical critic, 
who advanced the theoretical terms “third persona” (1984) and “rhetorical contextual-
ization” (1996) to address systematically what’s left   out and degraded in the discourse 
authorized by hegemonic ideologies. What Wander argues for is collective struggle criti-
cal of its own omissions: “Political struggle too oft en overlooks the claims of the poor, the 
immigrants, the minorities, the wives and daughters of the elites, the uneducated, the 
foreign, the others we are led to ignore, objectify, ridicule, or eliminate” (2001, p. 287).
 28. For a systematic introduction of womanism into the communication discipline, see my 
earlier writing on whiteness and “gendered colorism” (Lee, 1999).
 29. For a similar move to connect postcolonial women and minority women of color in liter-
ary criticism see Fawzia Afzal-Khan (1996). Th is coalition refuses to let globalized dema-
gogues profi t from socially constructed fi  ssures via the logic of divide and rule.
 30. Y. Antonia Chao’s work is an exception. Her research focused on “bar-oriented, working-
class individuals” and her informants “were working class or had limited access to cultural 
capital, in contrast with lesbians who have participated in Taiwan’s gay rights movement 
since the early 1990s. Th ese women are exclusively students or graduates of prestigious 
colleges and universities, and are familiar with North American notions of gay rights and 
queer theory” (p. 208).
References
Afzal-Khan, F. (1996). Bridging the gap between so-called postcolonial and minority women 
of color: A comparative methodology for Th ird World feminist literary criticism. Wom-
anist Th eory and Research, 2. Retrieved on March 16, 2001, from: http://www.uga.edu/ 
~womanist/Khan2.1.htm.
Awkward, M. (1999). Scenes of instruction: A memoir . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Brandt, E. (1999). Introduction. In E. Brandt (Ed.), Dangerous liaisons: Blacks, gays, and the 
struggle for equality (pp. 1–11). New York: Th e New Press.
Chao, Y.A. (2001). Drink, stories, penis, and breasts: Lesbian tomboys in Taiwan from the 1960s 
to the 1990s. Journal of Homosexuality,  40(3/4), 185–209.
Chen, D.Y. (1928/1994). Zhongguo funu shenghuo shi [A history of the lives of Chinese women]. 
Taipei: Chinese Commercial Press.
Chi, T.W. (1997). Queer archipelago: A reader of the queer discourses in Taiwan . Taipei: Meta 
Media Co.
Chiang, M. (1998). Coming out into the global system: Postmodern patriarchies and transna-
tional sexualities in Th e Wedding Banquet. In D.L. Eng & A.Y. Hom (Eds.), Q&A: Queer 
in Asian America (pp. 374–395). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Chou, W.S. (2001). Homosexuality and the cultural politics of tongzhi in Chinese societies. 
Journal of Homosexuality,  40(3/4), 27–46.
Cogswell, K. (2000). Lesbian and gay Taiwan: A yardstick of democracy. Retrieved on November 
23, 2001, from: http://www.thegully.com/essays/asia/000601gaylestai.html.
Collier, M.J., Hegde, R., Lee, W., Nakayama, T., & Yep, G. (2001). Dialogue on the edges: Ferment 
in communication and culture. International & Intercultural Communication Annual, 
24, 219–280.
Collins, P.H. (1990). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics of empow-
erment. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Gergen, K.J. (1999). An invitation to social construction . Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
RT54118_C016.indd   344RT54118_C016.indd   344 7/8/06   7:59:13 PM7/8/06   7:59:13 PM


--- PAGE 402 ---
Sexuality Studies • 345
Gergen, K.J. (2000). Writing as relationship. Retrieved on October 10, 2001, from: http//:www.
swarthmore.edu/SocSci/kgergen1/web/printer-friendly.phtml?id.
Goodall, Jr., B. (2000). Writing the new ethnography . Lanham, MD: Alta Mira Press.
Hegde, R. (1998). A view from elsewhere: Locating diff  erence and the politics of representation 
from a transnational feminist perspective. Communication Th eory, 8 (3), 271–297.
Ho, J. (Ed.). (2000). Cueng kuer keng jien dao jiao yu keng jien [From queer space to education 
space]. Taipei: Rye Field Publishing Company.
Hong, S., Ji, X., & Dan, T. (1997). Th e encyclopedia of little Kuer (Excerpt). In T. Chi (Ed.), Queer 
archipelago: A reader of the queer discourses in Taiwan (pp. 27–61). Taipei: Meta Media Co.
Johnson, E.P. (2001). “Quare” studies or (almost) everything I know about queer studies I learned 
from my grandmother. Text & Performance Quarterly, 21,  1–25.
Kaplan, C., & Grewal, I. (Eds.). (1994). Scattered hegemonies: Postmodernity and transnational 
feminist practices . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Kennard, L.R. (1997). Coleridge, wordplay and dream. Dreaming, 7. Retrieved on October 10, 
2001, from: http://www.asdreams.org/journal/articles/7-2_kennard.htm.
Lee, W. (1998). Patriotic breeder or colonized converts? A postcolonial feminist approach to 
antifootbinding discourse in China. In D. Tanno & A. Gonzalez (Eds.), Communication 
and identity across cultures (pp. 11–33). Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lee, W. (1999). One whiteness veils three uglinesses: From border-crossing to a womanist inter-
rogation of gendered colorism. In T .K. Nakayama & J.N. Martin (Eds.), Whiteness: Th e 
communication of social identity (pp. 279–298). Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lee, W., Chung, J., Wang, J., & Hertel, E. (1995). A sociohistorical approach to intercultural 
communication. Howard Journal of Communications, 6 (4), 262–291.
Lee, W., & Wander, P. (1998). On discursive amnesia: Reinventing the possibilities for democ-
racy through discursive amnesty . In M. Salvador & P . Sias (Eds. ), Th e public voice in a 
democracy at risk: Citizenship for the 21st century (pp. 151–172). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Ling, S. (1928/1998). Once upon a time. In A. Dooling & K. Torgeson (Eds.), Writing women in 
modern China: An anthology of women’s literature from the early twentieth century (pp. 185–
195). New York: Columbia University Press.
Lorde, A. (1999). Th ere is no hierarchy of oppressions. In E. Brandt (Ed. ), Dangerous liaisons: 
Blacks, gays, and the struggle for equality (pp. 306—7). New York: Th e New Press.
Lu, J.S. (Ed.). (1999). 1998 Chinese tongzhi conference proceedings. Hong Kong: Worldson 
Books.
LuvBangor. (1999). Email: Tongzhi conference. In J.S. Lu (Ed.), 1998 Chinese tongzhi conference 
proceedings (pp. 336–337). Hong Kong: Worldson Books.
Miao, V. (1998). Coalition politics: (Re)turning the century. In D.L. Eng & A.Y. Hom (Eds.), 
Q&A: Queer in Asian America (pp. 65–78). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Moraga, C. (1981). Preface. In C. Moraga & G. Anzaldua (Eds.), Th is bridge called my back: Writ-
ings by radical women of color (pp. xiii–xix). New York: Kitchen Table/Women of Color 
Press.
Moraga, C., & Anzaldua, G. (1981). Th is bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of 
color. New York: Kitchen Table/Women of Color Press.
Newton, E. (1993). Just one of the boys: Lesbians in Cherry Grove, 1960–1988. In H. Abelove, 
M.A. Barale and D.M. Halperin (Eds.), Th e lesbian and gay studies reader (pp. 528–41). 
New York: Routledge.
Ng, V.W. (1997). Looking for lesbians in Chinese history. In M. Duberman (Ed.), A queer world 
(pp. 199–204). New York: New York University Press.
Phelan, S. (1993). (Be)coming out: Lesbian identity and politics. Signs: Journal of Women in Cul-
ture and Society, 18 (4), 765–790.
P l ett,  H.F .  ( 200 1 ) .  P ar o n o m as i a.  In  T . O .  S l o an e  ( Ed. ) ,  Encyclopedia of rhetoric (pp. 553–554). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Qiu, M. (1994). Er yu sho ji [Journal of a crocodile]. Taipei: Shibao Publishing.
Rich, A. (1980/1993). Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence. In H. Abelove, 
M.A. Barale and D.M. Halperin (Eds.), Th e lesbian and gay studies reader (pp. 227–41). 
New York: Routledge.
Segrest, M. (1999). Race and the invisible dyke. In E. Brandt (Ed.), Dangerous liaisons: Blacks, 
gays, and the struggle for equality (pp. 45–56) New York: Th e New Press.
Shome, R. (1996). Postcolonial interventions in the rhetorical canon: An “other” view. Commu-
nication Th eory, 6 (1), 40–59.
RT54118_C016.indd   345RT54118_C016.indd   345 7/8/06   7:59:13 PM7/8/06   7:59:13 PM


--- PAGE 403 ---
346 • Th e Womanist Reader
Shome, R. (1999). Whiteness and the politics of location: Postcolonial refl ections. In T.K. Na kaya ma 
& J.N. Martin (Eds.), Whiteness: Th e communication of social identity (pp. 107–128). Th ou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Smith, B. (1999). Blacks and gays: Healing the great divide. In E. Brandt (Ed.), Dangerous liaisons: 
Blacks, gays, and the struggle for equality (pp. 15–24). New York: Th e New Press.
S m i t h ,  B .  ( 1 9 9 5 / 2 0 0 0 ) .  D o i n g  i t  f r o m  s c r a t c h :  Th e challenge of black lesbian organizing. In 
B. Smith (Ed.), Th e truth that never hurts: Writings on race, gender, and freedom (pp. 167–
177). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Spivak, G.C. (1988). In other words: Essays in cultural politics . New York: Routledge.
Staff . (1993). Ai Fu Hao Zi Zai Bao  [Love, Luck, Good, Self-at-Ease Newspaper], December, 
1–19.
Tan, C.K. (2001). Transcending sexual nationalism and colonialism: Cultural hybridization as 
process of sexual politics in ’90s Taiwan. In J. Hawley (Ed.), Postcolonial queer: Th eoreti-
cal intersections (pp. 123–137). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Th e Random House Dictionary of the English Language . (1971). J. Stein (Ed.). New York: Random 
House.
T o p l e y ,  M .  ( 1 9 7 5 ) .  M a r r i a g e  r e s i s t a n c e  i n  r u r a l  K w a n g t u n g .  I n  M .  W o l f  &  R .  W i t k e  ( E d s . ) ,  
Women in Chinese society (pp. 67–88). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Trinh, T.M. (1989). Woman, native, other: Writing postcoloniality and feminism . Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press.
Turner, W.B. (2000). A genealogy of queer theory . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Walker, A. (1998). By the light of my father’s smile . New York: Random House.
Wander, P. (1984). Th ird persona: An ideological turn in rhetorical theory. Central State Speech 
Journal, 35,  1–28.
Wander, P. (1996). Marxism, postcolonialism and rhetorical contextualization. Quarterly 
Journal of Speech, 82,  402–426.
Wander, P. (2001). Expediency. In T.O. Sloane (Ed.), Encyclopedia of rhetoric (pp. 283–288). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Watson, W. (2001). Invention. In T.O. Sloane (Ed.), Encyclopedia of rhetoric (pp. 389–404). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Wong, Q.N. (1999). Qing ai de XXX [Dear XXX]. In J.S. Lu (Ed.), 1998 Chinese tongzhi confer-
ence proceedings (pp. 254–258). Hong Kong: Worldson Books.
Yep, G.A. (1998). Freire’s conscientization, dialogue, and liberation: Personal refl  ections on 
classroom discussions of marginality. Journal of Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Identity, 
6(3/4), 159–166.
Zhang, C.T. (2000). Campus memory, identity and the emerging of lesbian subjectivities in Taiwan. 
Taipei: Tangshan Publishing.
Zhang, J.F. (2001). Ai de zi yo shi [Love’s free style]:  Lesbians like this and that . Taipei: Shibao 
Publishing.
RT54118_C016.indd   346RT54118_C016.indd   346 7/8/06   7:59:14 PM7/8/06   7:59:14 PM


--- PAGE 404 ---
347
17
Architecture/Urban Studies
Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Positionality and the 
Spatio-temporal Construction of Black Family Life (2004)
EPIFANIA AKOSUA AMOO-ADARE
Current research on the use of space shows that western design and modern 
construction technologies challenge household behaviors in many urbanizing 
societies and confront certain cultural heritages with new models of space 
and household transactions (Asiama 213; Howell & Tentokali 283; Pellow 1992, 
207). In West Africa, the onset of colonization and modernization reconfi gured 
space in such a way that urban centers were favored over rural settlements and 
men over women within those urban centers. Th  is produced a tendency in 
populations to migrate from rural areas to urban centers in search of jobs and 
infl uenced changes in traditional family household confi gurations and family 
roles between men and women. In Ghana, this uneven urban development 
has had an eff ect on residential units, lineage groupings, rules of descent, and 
inheritance (Robertson), thus challenging existing notions of who should be 
part of one’s family and transforming Ghanaian families’ traditional household 
confi gurations. For example, traditionally in Ghana’s Asante region, Asante 
women and men lived with their abusua ( m a trilin eal  famil y )  in  a  co mm u -
nal or compound house. In contrast, nowadays living with one’ s abusua is a 
diminishing practice in the Asante region and is practically non-existent in 
urban centers such as Accra where housing is designed using western archi-
tectural models such as the nuclear house, which is designed and constructed 
with a smaller patrilineal conjugal family unit in mind. Th  is contemporary 
living arrangement has a role in the predisposition of migrant Asante popula-
tions’ reconfi guration of their households into smaller nuclear family oriented 
groupings for practical or ideological reasons. It is a phenomenon that begs 
for investigation into the roles of the urban built environment in the spatio-
temporal construction of contemporary Asante families and their social life.
In this paper, I argue for the development of a womanist ethnographic 
project that constructs a critical spatial literacy on how Asante women’s socio-
spatial environments have changed in Ghana’s rapidly urbanizing capital city. 
RT54118_C017.indd   347RT54118_C017.indd   347 7/5/06   6:31:06 PM7/5/06   6:31:06 PM


--- PAGE 405 ---
348 • Th e Womanist Reader
By critical spatial literacy  I refer to the ability to read codes embedded in the 
urban built environment in order to understand how they aff  ect social life. 
To this end, I document and analyze spatial eff ects, caused by rapid urbaniza-
tion, on Asante women living in Accra, Ghana, for example, Asante women’s 
household transformation from communal matrikin households to nuclear 
conjugal households as a consequence of migration to Ghana’s capital and the 
subsequent changes in spatial understandings of what is family and how it 
manifests in one’s household. Th is includes the kind of spatial understandings 
these women have about the ideal family confi  gurations required to success-
fully live in Accra’s urban spatial politic. In presenting my work, I describe 
the signifi cance of a womanist positionality, the spatio-temporal construction 
of social life, and the importance of a critical literacy of space  for women of 
African descent. In addition, I defi ne critical spatial literacy and describe how 
it can be both a domain and the theoretical framework in my study, thus pro-
viding the context from which I argue for this critical spatial literacy.
A Womanist Positionality
In order to provide a deeper understanding of the rationale for this study, I will 
briefl y describe how my personal experience motivates this research. I make 
this assertion from the feminist understanding that “(…) feminist research-
ers begin their investigation of the social world from a grounded position in 
their own subjective oppression” (Weiler 58), in that, the personal provides an 
experiential ground from which a theoretical understanding can be made of 
material structural circumstances. I also make this assertion from a womanist 
positionality, which recognizes that critical consciousness must incorporate 
racial, cultural, national, economic, political, and sexual issues into a philoso-
phy that is committed, with love, to the survival and wholeness of an entire 
people (Ogunyemi 64; Walker xi–xii), within which the structure and ideol-
ogy of a family has direct social, economic and political signifi  cance.
I am an Asante woman who presently lives in an urban diasporic context in 
Los Angeles, California. I have always lived in urban centers and I have found 
that my understanding, negotiation, manipulation, and ownership of space (real 
and imagined) is oft en predetermined and confi ned by the prescribed, colo-
nized, gendered, racialized, and class-based social relations of global capital-
ism. As a woman and as a minority, I am particularly disadvantaged within 
the politics of space, i.e., I have been privy to a minority and female experience 
of discrimination by design of a predominantly western man-made built envi-
ronment (Weisman 2). Ironically, I experience this discrimination despite my 
access to professional and academic architectural discourse and privilege.
1
However, through the development of my own critical spatial literacy,  i.e., 
an understanding of the dominant ideologies that inform western urban archi-
tecture, I have been able to dream of alternative socio-physical space(s). For 
example, during my preliminary architectural training (from 1987 to 1990) 
RT54118_C017.indd   348RT54118_C017.indd   348 7/5/06   6:31:07 PM7/5/06   6:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 406 ---
Architecture/Urban Studies • 349
I found that my personal experience of alternative household confi  gurations, 
namely my Asante grandmother’s communal matrikin house, provided me 
with concrete examples that contested the Eurocentric and hegemonic spatial 
conceptions we were being taught, e.g., the belief that nuclear house spatial 
confi gurations and women’s roles in those private spaces was a universal norm. 
Within my grandmother’s Asante courtyard house, located in Kumase,
2 there 
were very diff erent gender socio-cultural practices and self-perceptions, for 
example, a woman’s ability to share her childrearing responsibilities with her 
abusua rather than bear the urban fi  nancial burden of childcare gave her a 
diff erent conception of what work she could do outside of the family home. 
And yet in contemporary Ghana, it is those western nuclear household models 
that prevail in housing development within large urban centers, such as Accra. 
In 1991, whilst working on a publicly funded building project in Accra (as an 
assistant site architect) I personally experienced the ludicrous extent to which 
western models of architecture were uncritically used in housing development. 
In the design of the project’s 76 housing units there was an extensive use of 
nuclear house designs and imported construction materials, i.e., from the light 
fi ttings right down to the concrete used to build the houses. For these reasons, 
in the Accra community, the houses were perceived as prestigious and valu-
able properties, despite the impractical fact that in a tropical climate imported 
English carpets had been laid over expensive imported Italian fl oor tiles.
Th e example of my grandmother’s house was just one reason for a renegade 
architectural stance
3 that I developed during my six years of architectural train-
ing. In that time, I developed a critical literacy of space as an academic survival 
mechanism and in order to decipher the political ideologies that were hidden 
in architects, planners, and developers building practices and inscribed in their 
spa tial co nstru cti o ns. I also r ealized tha t m y singular un derstan dings an d/ or 
actions were insignifi cant in the spatio-political make-up of things. And that 
perhaps substantial socio-spatial justice would be enabled if more than just 
the members of the building profession understood, re-invented and owned 
the vocabulary of the built environment. I began to question how a postmod-
ern spatio-political language could be encouraged and nurtured in the general 
public, especially those who were the most spatially disadvantaged, thus, my 
transition into the fi eld of education and my interest in developing an under-
standing of the use of a critical literacy of space .
In addition, as a consequence of my academic pursuits at that time, I developed 
an analytical understanding of women of African descent’s self-perceptions as 
a consequence of them living in urban London. Th is was achieved through a 
small-scale research study that I conducted with 10 women of African descent 
(with ages ranging from 25 to 55) in 1994. For these women, the city represented 
entrapment due to gendered racism and yet emancipation from their traditional 
cultural contexts. Also, the city for them was about a forced anonymity and 
yet a suitable release from some of the constraining cultural norms of their 
RT54118_C017.indd   349RT54118_C017.indd   349 7/5/06   6:31:07 PM7/5/06   6:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 407 ---
350 • Th e Womanist Reader
African or Caribbean societies. It was through analyzing these women’s con-
cerns and experiences that I better understood my own struggles with the urban 
built environment and my subsequent development of a critical awareness of 
the politics of space.
I further developed my understanding of urban London and the roles critical 
spatial literacy can play when I worked as a housing administrator for Grand 
Union Housing Co-operative Ltd. (GUHC) from 1995 to 1997. I worked with 
the co-op members to manage existing housing and to strategically plan future 
housing redevelopment projects. In that time, I contributed to our theoretical 
preparation towards defi ning strategies for tile re-development and mainte-
nance of their co-operative housing. An important part of this process was the 
organization of housing training workshops for staff   and members in order 
to critically analyze and understand the multiple dimensions of the urban 
housing market, including its challenges and possibilities. Knowledge gained 
in those workshops about housing policy, planning laws, housing fi nance, ten-
ant participation, and local politics informed how we proactively developed 
political strategies for garnering local government and private support for 
our housing interests and needs. In eff ect, a critical literacy of space  had been 
employed to make change in the urban spatial status quo. A critical literacy 
of space enabled our appropriation of dominant spatial ideologies and related 
discourses in order to understand and contribute to our collective methods 
for eff ecting spatial change.
Th erefore, as an Asante woman, an architect, and from my autobiographi-
cal relationship with the urban built environment, I work from the assumption 
that the social practice of building is a complex activity that has a signifi  cant 
place in our repertoire of basic human needs and the physical and ideologi-
cal groupings that we construct in order to survive. Building, both as a noun 
and a verb, makes people aware at various diff  erent levels. First, at the level 
of having to make pragmatic decisions; secondly, at the level of envisioning 
architectural spaces in the mind and on paper, and, fi nally, at the level of com-
mitting one’s whole being (mind and body) to the creation of a material form 
that captures an ideal (Tuan 106). Our buildings, neighborhoods and cities 
are indeed cultural artifacts shaped by our human intention and intervention 
(Weisman 9). So it follows that even the families that we live in are social rep-
resentations of the spaces we construct to inhabit, simultaneously the spaces 
we construct inform and transform those representations of family.
Th e Spatio-temporal Construction of Social Life
Contemporary critical social theory provides a new theory of spatiality, which 
is mainly deriv ed fr o m Lef eb vr e’ s em p hasis o n th e im po rtan ce o f space f o r 
shaping social production. Historically and to date, natural physical space has 
been appropriated and reconfi gured in the social construction of spatiality; 
thus, spatiality is the material manifestation of social relations in (and through) 
RT54118_C017.indd   350RT54118_C017.indd   350 7/5/06   6:31:08 PM7/5/06   6:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 408 ---
Architecture/Urban Studies • 351
time (Soja 93). In turn, spatiality situates social life. Th  e built environment 
clarifi es social roles and relations, thus, the built environment provides an 
essential framework for thinking about the world and the people within it, in 
that the spatial language used constantly signifi  es its function (Weisman 2). 
Spatiality is a product, producer and reproducer of socioeconomic relations 
(Soja 91). It is the arena within which social practices, power struggles, and 
identity formations are simultaneously enacted and constituted.
Yet we fi nd that especially in the modern urban context, there is far less 
awareness of built forms and space than, for example, in a traditional commu-
nity (Tuan 104). Spatial awareness is crucial especially within capitalist urban 
contexts where there is an unequal development of space. Keith and Pile argue 
that the logic of capital produces an uneven development of space. In fact, 
geographically uneven space is an essential condition of capitalist spatiality, 
as it is the concretization of capitalist relations of production and division of 
labor (Soja 118). In a capitalist spatiality, dominant capitalist groups, oft  en-
times, constrain the economic and political rights of individuals, communi-
ties, and nations by restricting and defi ning their access to space (Hayden). In 
many instances it is the poor, women, ethnic minorities and children who are 
subject to restrictive spatial allocation and movement within urban capitalist 
contexts. Th is is important to note because there are many poor ethnic minor-
ity women without spatial awareness, who are solely or mainly responsible 
for the economic and sociocultural development of family structures and the 
ideological maintenance of traditional notions of family in the face of many 
challenges and changes.
In a postmodern geography , many of us become the social eff ects of domi-
nant groups’ spatial constructs. Th e planned built environments that we inhabit 
are embedded with other people’s defi nitions or ideologies of what is housing, 
leisure space, a business district, etc. Th e built form creates a predisposition 
in us to particular spatial functions and practices from which social identities 
are ascribed ( whether or not w e choose to con test, subvert, or reject them ) . 
Furthermore, as Howell and Tentokali determined from their experience in 
conducting cross-cultural studies on domestic privacy, western urban spatiality 
confronts certain cultural heritages with new models of space and household 
transactions. Th at is, western design and modern construction technologies 
challenge household behaviors in many new urbanizing societies and reconsti-
tute what is imagined and constructed as family life. Th is is certainly the case 
in modern day West African countries which are challenged with spatial and 
social structures that are the result of at least three superimposed cultural strati-
fi cations: the traditional and pre-industrial phase, the colonial experience and 
the postcolonial economical-political structure (Boserup; Konadu-Agyemang). 
Each of these realities varies from country to country, but everywhere the 
position of women and their families depends on the interplay of these three 
elements (Boserup).
RT54118_C017.indd   351RT54118_C017.indd   351 7/5/06   6:31:08 PM7/5/06   6:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 409 ---
352 • Th e Womanist Reader
In traditional West Africa the compound—and the family it encompassed—
was usually the minimal unit of political organization. Decisions within the 
compound had implications for the wider political units in villages and in 
towns. In eff ect, the western notion of the house being female and private 
versus the outside being male and public was non-existent in West Africa. 
Th us, women could exert direct political infl  uence over males or they them-
selves play important political roles by virtue of their positions of authority, 
power or infl uence in their natal and/or affi   nal compounds (Sudarkasa 53). 
For this reason, it was common for women to have important roles within 
patrilineages as well as matrilineages in West Africa. Th  e onset of coloniza-
tion, modernization and urbanization reconfi gured household space in West 
African countries along an uneven spatial development that favored urban 
centers over rural settlements, and within urban centers men over women. 
Th us they produced a tendency in populations to migrate from rural areas 
to urban centers in search of jobs and changes in traditional social relations 
between men and women, within and amongst families. Th is uneven develop-
ment was an important factor in some West African women’s reduced economic 
autonomy and public role and their increased dependence on their spouses 
(Pellow 134), especially when they moved to live in urban city conjugal house-
hold confi gurations.
Th e uneven development of space in West Africa is clearly expressed in 
Ghana’s capital city (Accra) and its present state of housing and infrastruc-
ture underdevelopment that has its roots in British colonialism. Th e housing 
problems in Accra are not only a colonial legacy caused by urbanization poli-
cies that were insensitive to the local cultural context but also a result of the 
failure of successive governments to derive appropriate, housing policies and 
their incorporation of Ghana into a global capitalist economy. Accra is the 
largest of Ghana’s ten urban centers. Th e population in Accra is 1,657,856 of 
which 57.1% (i.e., 843,516) are female (Government of Ghana). Presently in the 
city of Accra, females head 30.5% percent of households, even though there 
are nearly as many female migrants as male, i.e., 69% and 71%, respectively 
(Konadu-Agyemang 76). Accra alone accounts for 30% of the urban popula-
tion of Ghana and 10% of the total population or Ghana. In fact, Accra has the 
highest rate of urbanization in Ghana and one of the highest in West Africa 
(Konadu-Agyemang 69). Housing occupancy rates are high in Ghana’s capi-
tal. In 1990, the UNDP and Ghana government conducted a survey in Accra 
that found that the average number of persons per room was 2.9, i.e., greater 
than the UN standard of 2.5, and that 46.3% of the city’s households occupied 
single rooms. Th is lack of space has grave implications for Ghanaian women 
living in Accra in part because they spend more time in their houses than the 
men do (Asiama 213). In addition, lack of space directly impacts how women 
contribute to the welfare and continuity of existing family structures because 
RT54118_C017.indd   352RT54118_C017.indd   352 7/5/06   6:31:08 PM7/5/06   6:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 410 ---
Architecture/Urban Studies • 353
they are oft en solely or mainly responsible for the maintenance and upkeep 
of families.
Uneven urban development in Accra has had an eff ect on residential units, 
lineage groupings, rules of descent, and inheritance (Robertson). Th ese eff ects 
are also experienced in other parts of Ghana, for example, the land tenure 
system in Asante society has undergone change. Land now has an economic 
value, which was not the case in traditional Asante society. Th  e strong links 
that existed between land ownership and Asante social and political structures 
has weakened. Land ownership structures no longer support the continua-
tion of the kingroup, and kinship ties are being weakened. In its place the 
conjugal family has begun to assert itself against the extended uterine family 
(i.e., one’s matrikin). Th is means that Asante women’s relationship with their 
kingroup have altered, especially in terms of inheritance and dependence on 
their spouse versus their matrilineal family (Asiama 225–226). As a result, 
Asante women living in urban Accra provide the ideal population group and 
setting for the development of critical spatial literacy  on how Accra’s urban 
built environment aff ects household confi guration and notions of what family 
should be. Particularly as they are oft  en migrants, in Accra, with a reduced 
likelihood of access to land and property than they would have in the Asante 
region. Research in this location and with this population group contributes 
to an understanding of a postmodern condition of uneven urban development 
due to fast encroaching western (capitalist) urban spatiality and its challeng-
ing eff ects on family dwellings and practices.
Women from the Asante clan group also make an ideal sample because 
they come from matrilineal culture, which has had more obvious and distinct 
cultural diff erences than other Ghanaian clan groups. Also, Asante tradition and, 
to some extent, Asante women’s role within it have been carefully and exten-
sively documented over a substantial period of time (e.g., Rattray, McLeod, 
Allman, Tashjian, Ward, etc.). In addition, I am interested in Asante women 
for this study because of my adherence to a feminist epistemology that roots 
investigations of the social world in personal experience. As an Asante woman 
who has lived in Accra, my personal experience provides a ground from which 
theoretical understandings can be made of Asante women’s structural circum-
stances in Ghana’s capital.
A Womanist Ethnographic Project
Research into African women and their families’ spatio-temporal experiences 
cannot simply be a theoretical and/or empirical endeavor. Instead, it must be 
a womanist spatial research agenda with a pedagogical praxis that is informed 
by a critical literacy of gender, race and space to begin with. In other words, it 
must be an endeavor to develop critical spatial literacy. I defi ne this literacy as a 
praxis that is essentially rooted in a critical understanding of the dynamics of 
RT54118_C017.indd   353RT54118_C017.indd   353 7/5/06   6:31:08 PM7/5/06   6:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 411 ---
354 • Th e Womanist Reader
the social construction of postmodern urban space and the spatial construc-
tion of social life, its practices, and its identities. So as to guide my research I 
extracted and layered themes from critical pedagogy, feminist methodology, 
cri ti cal  social  th eo ry  inf o rm ed  b y  postm od e rn  g eo gra p h y ,  an d  post co l o nial  
theory to construct a critical lens with which I develop my theorizations and 
praxis which in this defi nition, it reinforces the centrality of critical conscious-
ness in a womanist positionality by deriving its defi  nition from a palimpsest 
of the essential overlapping themes in the following:
 1. Jameson’s belief in a new view of political action in space through “an 
aesthetic of cognitive mapping” (54), which is a concept that comes out 
of Lynch’s work on imageability
4 and the critical social theory under-
standing of the inherent power struggles in the social construction of 
the spatial and the spatial construction of the social (Soja 110).
 2. A consciousness-raising feminist methodology rooted in a grounded 
position of one’s own female subjective position; a political commitment 
to changing the position of women; and an emphasis on women’s 
lived experience and the signifi cance of their everyday lives (Weiler 
58–59).
 3. Fanon’ s argument that an informed understanding of colonialism as 
the enforcement arm of western capitalism and its colonizing eff ects 
must take place to enable a Th  ird World realization of our own 
humanity.
I believe that this layered eff ect is crucial for analyzing and perhaps transform-
ing Black women’s urban spatial experiences. I envisage this critical literacy of 
space as a theorizing practice with which to understand the local grounded 
theories that emerge out of our particular socio-spatial identities, urban spa-
tio-temporal experiences, and spatio-political struggles. In this combination, 
I utilized this critical literacy of space as top-down formative theory to under-
stand the bottom-up results I found in a short study conducted.
In December 2001 and January 2002, I conducted a study (in both English 
and my mother-tongue Asante Twi). It was a small-scale experimental eff ort that 
took qualitative approaches to document Akan women’s perspectives (especially 
Asante)
5 on their socio-spatial household transformations and family life in 
Accra. In particular I identifi  ed six key informants with whom I conducted 
semistructured interviews. I interviewed Akan women for two reasons: fi  rst, 
because of an initial concern that there would not be a substantial Asante female 
population in Accra to conduct this study;
6 and, second, to determine whether 
there may be diff erences in how Asante women and other Akan women view 
and articulate their position in Accra.
My Akan informants7 are all women who have migrated to Accra and have 
lived there for long periods of time (from 15 to 32 years). In terms of the specifi c 
clan group breakdown for each informant within the larger Akan umbrella, 
RT54118_C017.indd   354RT54118_C017.indd   354 7/5/06   6:31:09 PM7/5/06   6:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 412 ---
Architecture/Urban Studies • 355
three of my informants are Asante, two are Fante, and one is Assin. In gen-
eral, I found my Asante informants to be the most confi dent, vocal, articulate, 
and opinionated of my informants. When I asked whether it was diffi  cult for 
Asante or Akan females to live in Accra, as it was a Ga8 town, it was an Asante 
woman who said that she felt that Asante women do not struggle in Accra 
because they are more hardworking than the Ga. She believed that Asante 
females saw no shame in gradually working their way up the socioeconomic 
ladder, e.g., by selling ice water on the streets, to sweeping in front of stores, to 
earning enough money to trade, and so on. For these reasons, she went on to 
jovially state that Asante females had taken ownership of Accra from the Ga.
All my informants lived in nuclear family household confi  gurations as a 
consequence of moving into urban Accra. Th is was either by themselves, with 
their children or with their husband and children. Th  ey had all, in contrast, 
previously lived in extended matrilineal family household confi  gurations in 
their respective hometowns. Oft en, this was with their mother, her sisters, her 
sister’s children and their mother’s children. None of my informants moved 
to Accra without some form of prior accommodation and work arrangement. 
Th ey also strongly advised against anyone moving to Accra without making 
those arrangements in advance. My informants moved to Accra to initially 
live with sisters, husbands or friends who provided them with opportunities 
to come to live in the city . Th ey had since moved into their own places that 
many of them o wned with spouses or alone. M y informants described ho w 
living in Accra was markedly diff erent from living in their hometowns. Th ey 
all stated that Accra was a hard place to survive in. As one informant stressed, 
“Accra’s inside is hot!”
9 Her support for this description of Accra was that exor-
bitant rent payments, high light and water expenses, the cost of food, and the 
thieves made the city a diffi  cult place to live in. Despite this perception, all my 
informants also said that even though Accra was not necessarily a better place 
to live in compared to their hometowns, they would remain in Accra because 
it provided one with educational and employment opportunities, and the abil-
ity to have your eyes opened.
10
In all circumstances, the importance of enduring the struggle in Accra was 
to gain the fi nances to build a place of one’s own, even if it is a humble chamber 
and hall arrangement. My informants were also quick to say that the ideal con-
fi guration of family, to live in their Accra homes, was small and oft en nuclear. 
When asked if they would encourage their abusua (matrilineal family) to stay 
with them in Accra the response was always negative, with some concessions 
that stemmed from the traditional Akan belief that one cannot progress in life 
if his or her abusua does not also progress with him or her. In deference to 
this belief, one informant said that she would not allow any of her abusua to 
stay for more than two weeks, aft er which time they would have to be on their 
own. Many of the informants also said that they would only allow abusua that 
had so me f o rm o f ed ucatio n, skill o r mo ney to liv e wi th them tem po rarily; 
RT54118_C017.indd   355RT54118_C017.indd   355 7/5/06   6:31:09 PM7/5/06   6:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 413 ---
356 • Th e Womanist Reader
particularly as a way of helping them transition into Accra’s hectic lifestyle. 
Most of the reasons given for discouraging abusua to stay were pragmatic and 
fi nancial, e.g., not having enough money and space for one’s own immediate 
family let alone the extended one. Th ere were also some attitudinal responses 
that categorized abusua who came from their hometown as not sophisticated 
enough to withstand the norms of city life, thus, liable to annoy their city 
dwelling relatives and/or embarrass them socially due to ignorance.
Th is preliminary research suggests that Accra’s urban built environment 
is a text that is transforming Asante female household confi  gurations, thus, 
socio-cultural practices and notions of what an ideal family should be. In this 
context, which I term as western urban spatiality, I hypothesize that there is 
a need for critical spatial literacy  in order for individuals to understand how 
the built environment is embedded with codes that both constrain and enable 
one’s ability to participate in the design, construction and/or defi nition of space. 
To rest this hypothesis, I will be conducting more specifi c and rigorous quali-
tative and quantitative research in a larger fi  eld study that should defi ne this 
complex problem that is experienced by Asante women and their families and 
is embedded in multiple systems, and to identify and explore the factors asso-
ciated with the problem by answering the following key research questions: 
(1) To what extent have Asante women experienced substantial household trans-
formations as a consequence of rapid urbanization in Accra? (2) What are the 
changes in Asante women’s family practices as a consequence of household 
transformation? (3) What is their spatial self-perception as a consequence of 
household transformation (i.e., a sense of place)? (4) How has critical spatial 
literacy infl uenced their understanding and negotiation of Accra’s urban space 
and the spatial changes it has eff ected?
A Postmodern Pedagogy of Critical Spatial Literacy
Kellner argues that in today’s multicultural societies we need to develop a post-
modern pedagogy comprised of multiple literacies, such as critical media lit-
eracy, print literacy, computer literacy, multimedia literacy, cultural literacy, 
social literacy, and ecoliteracy. He believes that a postmodern pedagogy is of 
crucial importance in this period of intense globalization, as it serves to “meet 
the challenge of new technologies,” (103) and in terms of education, it would 
begin to “foster a variety of literacies to empower students and to make edu-
cation relevant to the demands of the present and future” (103). I argue that 
an essential element of this postmodern pedagogy must be a critical spatial lit-
eracy, which serves to analyze and comprehend the profound spatial eff ects of 
a global economy, e.g., uneven urban development, the identity disorienting 
consequences of rapidly changing landscapes, and the transformation eff  ects 
on families and their practices.
Critical spatial literacy  as a praxis for Asante women and their families in 
Accra means that it is not enough to take contemporary everyday practices 
RT54118_C017.indd   356RT54118_C017.indd   356 7/5/06   6:31:09 PM7/5/06   6:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 414 ---
Architecture/Urban Studies • 357
for granted while asserting ownership over the very spaces that transform tra-
di ti o n al  wa ys  o f  li vin g .  Instea d,  w e  n eed  t o  un d erstan d  th e  co nseq u e n ce  an d 
implications of the transformative power of Accra’s urbanity. In doing so, we 
must analyze how the continued dismantling of traditional notions of physi-
cal and ideological abusua aff ect conceptions of ourselves both inside and 
out of Asante culture and national heritage. We would also investigate the 
schizophrenic nature of an Asante female identity that no w translates itself 
through western concepts of the good economics of maintaining nuclear family 
confi gur a ti o n s ,  w h il e  s im ul t an e o u s l y  a dh e rin g  t o  th e  Akan  e th i c  o f  al w a y s  
supporting abusua, a l b e i t  i n  a  t e m p o r a r y  f a s h i o n .  A s  w o m a n i s m  i s  a b o u t  
the survival and wholeness of an entire people through love and critical con-
sciousness, investigating and scrutinizing the components of migrant Asante 
women’s—and their families’—spatiality contribute to a global understand-
ing of women’s urban spatio-temporal conditions and informs transnational 
feminist and womanist practices that seek to transform the politics of uneven 
development of urban space.
Notes
 1. I am a Royal Institute of British Architects part II qualifi  ed architect.
 2. Kumase is the capital of the Asante region.
 3. By this I refer to my transition into the fi  eld of education in order to redefi ne my architec-
tural role in the politics of space. It is the boundaries or edge conditions of architecture 
(and being an architect) that I am interested in shift  ing, rather than just inhabiting their 
marginality as I did whilst studying and working in architecture. I enact the reality of this 
already dreamt spatial imaginary of my diasporic, African, female, architectural permu-
tation mainly within the praxis of critical pedagogy, critical feminist methodology from 
a womanist positionality , critical social theory as informed by postmodern geography , 
and postcolonial theory. My present agenda is to facilitate arenas for developing critical 
spatial literacy . In doing this work I will be using both my personal experience of invis-
ible homelessness, being socially housed, and my architectural skills outside the confi  nes 
of institutionalized architecture for the purpose of doing what I tongue-in-cheek call 
renegade architecture.
 4. Kevin Lynch’s work with imageability, in the 1960s and 1970s, was to demonstrate the 
diffi  culty citizens had in mapping sprawling, spatially segregated cities. He believed that 
building professionals were responsible for making the urban city more intelligible for its 
inhabitants to map. Frederic Jameson draws on Lynch’s work to argue for the more politi-
cal aesthetic of cognitive mapping.
 5. In Ghana one of the principal ethnic groups are the Akan within which are the Asante 
that originate from the Asante Region.
 6. It would be possible to make inferences about Asante female experiences if all Akan females 
are included in the ethnographic fi eld study, mainly because Asantes are part of the larger 
Akan group, which is linguistically and culturally homogenous. However, signifi  cant dif-
ferences in attitude and self-perception that Asantes have, as a consequence of their his-
torical political dominance in Ghana, would have been lost.
 7. Th  eir occupations were as follows: a retired banking professional, a fresh fi sh seller, a dried 
fi sh seller, a cassava seller, a dressmaker who is also a well-known actress in Asante TV 
productions, and a cosmetics dealer.
 8. Th  e Ga are one of the major ethnic groups in Ghana.
 9. Th  is phrase is a transliteration of the informant’s expletive in Asante-Twi “Accra emu ye 
hyewl.” To say that the inside of a place is hot, oft en refers to how diffi  cult that place is to 
be in, i.e., it is as diffi  cult as being on the inside of a boiling pot of hot water or soup.
 10. Th  is phrase is a transliteration of the Asante- T wi expression “ani bue” that refers to an 
increase in cultural awareness with a tint of social sophistication.
RT54118_C017.indd   357RT54118_C017.indd   357 7/5/06   6:31:10 PM7/5/06   6:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 415 ---
358 • Th e Womanist Reader
References
Asiama, Seth. “Crossing the Barrier of Time: Th e Asante Woman in Urban Land Development.” 
Africa, Vol. 2, 1997. pp. 212–236.
Boserup, Ester. Woman’s Role in Economic Development. Aberdeen: Aberdeen University, 1970.
Fanon, Frantz. Th e Wretched of the Earth.  2nd Edition. Translated by C. Farrington. London: 
Penguin Books, 1990 (1961).
Government of Ghana. 2000 Population and Housing Census: Provisional Results . Accra: Ghana 
Statistical Service, 2000.
Harvey, David. Th e Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change . 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Basil Blackwell, 1989.
Hayden, Dolores. Th e  P o w e r  o f  P l a c e :  U r b a n  L a n d s c a p e s  a s  P u b l i c  H i s t o r y. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press. 1995.
Howell, Sandra; Tentokali, Vana. “Domestic Privacy: Gender, Culture, and Development 
Issues.” In LOW, Setha; CHAMBERS, Erve. Housing, Culture, and Design: A Comparative 
Perspective . University Park: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989. pp. 281–297.
Jameson, Frederic. P o s t m o d e r n i s m ,  o r  t h e  C u l t u r a l  L o g i c  o f  L a t e  C a p i t a l i s m. London: Verso, 
1991.
K e i t h ,  M i c h e a l ;  P i l e ,  S t e v e .  “ I n t r o d u c t i o n :  Th e Politics of Place.” In KEITH, Michael; PILE, 
Steve. Place and the Politics of Identity . New York: Routledge, 1993. pp. 1–40.
Kellner, Douglas. “Multiple Literacies and Critical Pedagogy in a Multicultural Society.” Educa-
tional Th eory,  Vol. 48, 1998. pp. 103–122.
Konadu-Agyemang, Kwadwo. Th e Political Economy of Housing and Urban Development in 
Africa: Ghana’s Experience from Colonial Times to 1998.  Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, 
2001.
Lefevbre, Henri. Th e Production of Space . T ranslated by D . Nicholson-Smith. Oxford (U nited 
Kingdom): Blackwell, 1991 (1974).
Lynch, Kevin. Image of the City. Cambridge and Boston, Massachusetts: Joint Center for Urban 
Studies, 1964.
Ogunyemi, Chikwenye. “Womanism: Th e Dynamics of the Contemporary Black Female Novel 
in English.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society,  Vol. 11, 1985. pp. 63–80.
Pellow, Deborah. Women in Accra: Options for Autonomy.  Algonac: Reference Publications, 
1977.
——— . “Spaces that Teach: Attachment to the African Compound.” In ALTMAN, Irwin; LOW, 
Setha. Place Attachment . New York: Plenum Press, 1992. pp. 187–210.
Robertson, Claire. Sharing the Same Bowl: A Socioeconomic History of Women and Class in 
Accra, Ghana . Bloomington: Indiana University, 1984.
Soja, Edward. “Th  e Spatiality of Social Life: Toward a Transformative Retheorisation.” In 
GREGORY, Derek; URRY, John. Social Relations and Spatial Structures . Basingstoke: 
Macmillan, 1985. pp. 90–127.
Sudarkasa, Niara. “Female Employment and Family Organization in W est Africa. ” In STEAD Y , 
Filomina. Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally . 8th Edition. Rochester: Schenkuman Books, 
1994. pp. 49–64.
Tuan, Yi-Fu. Space, and Place: Th  e Perspective of Experience . Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota, 1977.
Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose . San Diego, California: Har-
court Brace, 1983.
Weiler, Kathleen. Women Teaching for Change: Gender, Class and Power . South Hadley: Bergin 
and Hadley, 1988.
Weisman, Leslie. Discrimination by Design: A Feminist Critique of the Man-made Environment . 
Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois, 1994.
RT54118_C017.indd   358RT54118_C017.indd   358 7/5/06   6:31:10 PM7/5/06   6:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 416 ---
Part 4
Critiquing the Womanist Idea
RT54118_S004.indd   359RT54118_S004.indd   359 7/5/06   6:12:25 PM7/5/06   6:12:25 PM


--- PAGE 417 ---
RT54118_S004.indd   360RT54118_S004.indd   360 7/5/06   6:12:25 PM7/5/06   6:12:25 PM


--- PAGE 418 ---
361
18
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing?
The Language of Womanism: Rethinking Difference 1 (1997)
HELEN ( charles )
Blanket Terminology and Generalizing Women
Th e politicization of the western black woman germinates at the moment of 
recognizable resistance to outside forces which deem her subordinate to oth-
ers. Th e potential to understand herself is as justifi  ed within the context of a 
feminist ideology as it is within a non-feminist ideology . Th  is chapter ques-
tions the viability of womanism as a doctrine for (black) women activists2 who 
have been visibly ignored by the white women’s movement. It is an attempt to 
think further towards an understanding of the notion of diff  erence within 
the feminist arena and examines the terminology used by women who are 
conscious of feminism but resistant to taking on the white western labelling 
that goes with it.
As the focus of this chapter is directed to language, an understanding of 
feminist nomenclature provides a means to tackle areas of black women’s 
invisibility that have long been ignored. I want to consider placing the black 
woman activist within mainstream feminist terminology. Using the notions 
of womanism and diff erence to illustrate, I argue for an examination of the 
necessity of a viable language from which the black woman activist can speak 
and, more importantly, is listened to.
Terminology: why is it needed? In what ways is it used and for what pur-
poses? In terms of progression and development, how does it manifest itself? 
Terming the activities of the Self—political or otherwise—makes it easier to 
identify the causes and circumvents the assumption that feminism is essen-
tially white feminism. It takes us to a place where we can question what femi-
nism is qua feminism. Th e possibility within women’s activism to overcome 
racial imbalances opens up greater political autonomy within such a feminism. 
Before exploring the main themes in detail I will examine briefl y some aspects 
of political activism through an analysis of terminology.
RT54118_C018.indd   361RT54118_C018.indd   361 8/11/06   4:28:12 PM8/11/06   4:28:12 PM


--- PAGE 419 ---
362 • Th e Womanist Reader
Most would agree that given the worlds that we live in, to hope that a per-
fect term could exist to encompass all identities (class-wise, gender-wise, 
colour-wise, race-wise, sexuality-wise, and so on) is a fantasy. A term that 
does not pay lip-service to, but encompasses black women’s activism would 
recognize the viability and equality of all political women in the main body of 
the women’s movement. Th e split or the branching away of ‘black’ and ‘other’ 
women from this main body would be a sign that these women are not being 
recognized for what they are worth by a dominant core. Aft  er the split three 
options are available to a black woman. First, she can join another organiza-
tion. Second, she can give up the cause altogether and get on with her life, 
creating her own individual (feminist) framework which is perhaps shared 
with friends. Th ird, she can create her own movement, academic or otherwise, 
to which she attracts others like herself. With this third option, appropriate 
language is fashioned and treated by her and her followers.
Th e evolution of the term feminist perhaps initially came about in an 
attempt to address all the issue-wise aspects of class, colour, race and sexual-
ity. As we move through progressive waves which indicate that the major-
ity view is changing, the etymology of feminism per se also changes. For 
example, in the early 1980s cultural diff erence made its debut on the feminist 
agenda, as some white women in North America collaborated with some black 
women to address issues of exclusion. Joseph and Lewis write in Common 
Diff erences: Confl icts in Black and White Feminist Perspectives (1981) that, 
‘From the early generalizations about “all women”, feminists are recognizing 
the need to understand the specifi c nature and conditions of women’s oppres-
sion in diff ering cultures, societies, and economies’ (1981: 67). Signifi  cantly, 
as a consequence of the development of feminism, the term has become not 
only arguably passé but also one of generalization and exclusion. Feminism 
now is oft en linked to the theory that it is not reaching a potential activist 
populace outside the academe. A manifestation of this was the question which 
was beginning to be asked at the end of the 1980s. Has feminism gone out of 
fashion and is it out of date? Maybe, maybe not, but the language of feminism 
has defi nitely left  newer generations and others who feel like they have seen it, 
done it, been brought up by it and read all the books, searching for alternative 
lifestyle politics.
Th ere is no single woman who encompasses all the said issues, and fi  ghts 
for rights to be equated to all of them. Where limitations abide, you will 
always fi nd the need for acknowledgement. Th  is acknowledgement oft  en 
arrives via term-creation, adding to already existing terminology. To place 
the word black, for example, or disabled before the term feminist, does not 
solve the problem. Instead, it makes it explicit that the term is exclusive of 
the previously ignored or acknowledged group. Th  is instantly valorizes the 
situation of non-acknowledgement. Th e idea of a black, disabled or feminist 
utopia for instance, is useless as an idea on which to base a reality because 
RT54118_C018.indd   362RT54118_C018.indd   362 8/11/06   4:28:15 PM8/11/06   4:28:15 PM


--- PAGE 420 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 363
its premise is not set up to encompass all of the so-called black, disabled or 
feminist people’s realities at once. Th e view that there are as many defi  nitions 
of feminism as there are feminists runs counter to what a main defi  nition of 
feminism ought to be striving for—eliminating the possibility of splits from 
the main body. While feminism should be the stem from which diff  erences 
can branch out, instead there is a reluctance to put eff  orts into maintaining 
the growth of such a stem. Indeed, it could well be said that it was because of 
the laxity of a feminism which relied on whiteness, that feminism began to 
dissipate underground.
Womanism as an (In)Suffi  cient Strategy for Black Women
Th e instance of womanism is interesting to examine at this stage, as it seeks 
to off er a universal means to a black women-based end. When Alice Walker 
came up with the idea of a special name for black women, her term ‘womanist’ 
provided an equivalent to ‘feminist’. Composed and placed at the very start of 
her book, In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens (1984a), the defi nition presents 
itself as introductory to the book’s subheading, Womanist Prose. Th is book 
begins with the very kernel of its concept: ‘Womanist. From womanish. … A 
black feminist or feminist of color’ (W alker, 1984a: xi). Th e specifi  city of the 
black woman’s experience becomes a viable basis for feminist interpretation 
right from the beginning. Although the term ‘womanist’ has not made head-
line news, there was a possibility of it becoming more than just a notion, if only 
because its germination became possible through Alice Walker. However, this 
was not to be—at least not in this century [the twientieth century, Edn]—as 
womanism’s seedling struggled from the very beginning when it was placed at 
diametrically opposed ends with feminism. It has been discussed from some 
positions in North America. bell hooks argues that womanism is not to be 
confused as an opposing doctrine to feminism: ‘I hear black women academ-
ics laying claim to the term “womanist” while rejecting “feminist”. I do not 
think Alice Walker intended this term to defl ect from feminist commitment, 
yet this is oft en how it is evoked’ (hooks, 1989: 181). Here in Britain, the term 
womanism is barely recognized or used. Nevertheless, the notion was taken 
up in the late 1980s by West African writer Buchi Emecheta (in Granqvist and 
Stotesbury, 1989: 19) and on a more local level by the London-based group, 
Camden Black Sisters (CBS). Valentina Alexander, formally of CBS, viewed 
activism for black and white women as the ‘twin revolutions of Black Wom-
anism and White Feminism’. Under ‘Some Statements of Fact’, she explains: 
‘Womanism for the Black Woman/Woman of Colour came about as a direct 
response to the oppression she experienced, through the exploitation of her 
gender, race and class’ (Alexander, 1989a: 29).
It is not always necessary to look for the origins of terms and concepts but if 
the etymology exists as womanism did, as a potential twentieth-century phenom-
enon, then it presents a good opportunity to examine the roots
3 and reasons for 
RT54118_C018.indd   363RT54118_C018.indd   363 8/11/06   4:28:15 PM8/11/06   4:28:15 PM


--- PAGE 421 ---
364 • Th e Womanist Reader
invention. Th e term, ‘womanist’, whatever its intention, is essentially for black 
feminists (Walker, 1984a). Th e black woman activist could not fail to respond 
to what seems like an answer for the need to re-evaluate an ignored, forgot -
ten, marginalized section of society. Th e excitement, no doubt, reached many 
who, like myself, fi nd it diffi  cult not only in terms of what appendage (if any) 
to attach to themselves but also in terms of what is behind the diffi   culties of 
nomenclature: why the need for labels anyhow? If the majority of black women 
are unhappy about being called feminists then the advent of a new term that 
has a potential for black women in particular would have inevitable allure on 
a socio-political platform. But somehow womanism did not make the grade 
despite Walker’s belief that she is, ‘off ering society a new word when the old 
word it is using fails to describe behaviour and change that only a new word 
can help it more fully see’ (1984b: 25). Th e crucial question is not whether wom-
anist as a new word can satisfy a new feminist vision, but whether womanist 
as a new and viable doctrine can make our ever-changing, traditional white 
feminism adapt to it. Additionally, it is important to consider at which point 
womanism as a North American experience departs from the experience of 
black feminists globally.
I want to now turn to looking closely at four sections of Walker’s defi  ni-
tion of womanism. In the fi rst section of her defi nition she states womanism 
is: ‘From the black folk expression of mothers to female ‘children’, “You act-
ing womanish,” … interchangeable with another black folk expression: “You 
trying to be grown’ ” (1984a: xi). Walker shows here that womanish as a term 
comes from the experience of the language and folk culture which is central to 
a certain group of people with roots in the southern states of North America. 
Because black languages diff er from place to place, the word womanish from a 
southern U.S. context is not necessarily linked directly to the same experience 
of girls and women elsewhere. To adopt language in one culture from another 
is not unusual, but there must exist some initial identifi cation of whatever the 
term is or is seen to substitute. Looking closely at Walker’s dictionary-style 
defi nition of womanism reveals an ambitious attempt to cater for a stylized, 
individual, all-encompassing woman.
In the second part of W alker’ s defi nition, there is evidence of her prefer-
ence to expand the defi  nition womanism in order to escape the problem of 
exclusion; which is so much a part of white-dominated women’s movements. 
Here she states that a womanish woman is:
Also, a woman who loves other women, sexually and/or non-sexually. 
Appreciates and prefers women’s culture, women’s emotional fl  exibil-
ity … and women’s strength. Sometimes loves individual men, sexually 
and/or non-sexually. Committed to survival and wholeness of entire 
people, male and female. Not separatist, except periodically for health. 
Traditionally universalist. (Walker, 1984a: xi)
RT54118_C018.indd   364RT54118_C018.indd   364 8/11/06   4:28:16 PM8/11/06   4:28:16 PM


--- PAGE 422 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 365
It is punchy and humourous, a very important ingredient for anything new 
on the market. It is also clear in this defi  nition that Walker, in off  ering a 
new concept for black women in particular, does not wish to ignore or not 
acknowledge ‘non-black’ women. Interestingly, black as a prefi  x to woman is 
not included in this second part of Walker’s defi nition of womanist. While its 
absence magnifi es a feminist need (Walker’s?) to accept all women of all skin 
colours it can also be seen as slightly confusing. If the intention is to make 
‘womanist’ follow a poly-textual mode of defi  nition, then it would be safe to 
assume the utilization of womanist by white women too; used in preference 
to, or in conjunction with feminist to illustrate white women’s development 
in changing society. However, in acknowledging the viability of black women 
who are as much women as white women are, the celebration of the possible 
change from exclusive white feminism to inclusive feminism has potential if 
we introduce the ‘white womanist’. In so doing, the promise of a truly inclu-
s i v e  w o m an i s m  w o ul d  b e  e l i m i n a t e d  i n  f a v o u r  o f  a  c o m p r o m i s o ry  c h an g e ,  
because as black feminists have suggested, in many cases the attitudes of white 
women researchers towards their Th ird World women subjects appears to be 
one of pity and distance (Kazi, 1986: 87–8; Mohanty, 1988).
On the sexuality front, there is an assumption in W alker’ s second defi  ni-
tion that womanist substitutes for lesbian as well as terms like transgendered, 
bisexual, heterosexual, celibate and so on. Does this term really have the power 
to account for all these issues, or would it give rise to exhaustive appendages? 
Having said this, issues such as class and race are strangely unrecorded in this 
second defi nition. If Walker presumes their inclusion, it is regretful to misin-
terpret the reading as equal to their explicit exclusion. Walker’s ‘universality’ 
in this sense exposes a blanket terminology; a blanketing which attempts to 
cover up exclusion and is as such questionable in its generalization.
Diana Fuss, having written extensively on the subject of essentialism versus 
constructionism, attempts to throw up old notions that have been criticized for 
lacking theoretical substance. In her writings she talks about the work of Luce 
Irigaray (a scholar who has been labelled ‘essentialist’ by many in the western 
academe) who makes an interesting comparison to Walker, here. In Essentially 
Speaking (1989), Fuss talks about Irigaray’s ‘language of essence’ in the search, 
‘not to create a theory of woman, but to secure a place for the “feminine” within 
sexual diff erence’ (1989: 72). If the invention of essentialist terminology arrives 
because of the need to fi  t in somewhere on a macro level, then linguistically 
and politically, writers like Irigaray and Walker, as Fuss has said, are opting 
out of the ‘P.C.’ rat-race and choosing a path of strategic essentialism. Walker 
in inventing womanism is, perhaps, not trying to create an essentialist theory 
of black feminism per se, but seeks to secure a home for the black feminine or 
essence embodied within racial or skin-colour diff erence which is strategic.
W alker’ s use of womanism, in raising the question of an essentialist uni-
versality, throws up more than the issue of theorizing. It also off ers the chance 
RT54118_C018.indd   365RT54118_C018.indd   365 8/11/06   4:28:17 PM8/11/06   4:28:17 PM


--- PAGE 423 ---
366 • Th e Womanist Reader
to tackle the question of politics. Th  e phrase which begins, ‘Committed to 
survival … ’ spotlights W alker’ s emphasis on the value of collective commit-
m e n t  a s  p a r t  o f  t h i s  w o m a n i s t  m a k e - u p .  B y  r e f e r r i n g  t o  t h i s  c o m m i t m e n t  
to ‘survival and wholeness of entire people’ it is diffi   cul t t o un derstan d th e 
exactitude through which this proposed method ought to be practised. Th  e 
implications of a politics of ‘entire people’ and ‘wholeness’ are at once evaded 
through a suggestion of global simplicity.
4 Conglomerated into one body, like 
her view that there can exist a ‘woman’s culture’, it is reminiscent of the notion 
of an all-encompassing ‘single black super-woman’. If ‘womanists’ were meant 
to be ubiquitous humanists, committed not merely to international aff airs but 
also to the whole notion and existence of universal aff airs, a problem surfaces: 
if to be womanist means to be black, then the issue of western racism must 
aff ect and duly concern the would-be ‘womanist’, notwithstanding the fact 
that racism ought not to be a black problem.
5
Given the triple subordination of the black-identifi  ed woman, her expe-
rience could be used to gauge the overall development towards attainment 
for freedom and recognition among all people. As Kwame Nkrumah once 
said: ‘Th e degree of a country’s revolutionary awareness may be measured 
by the political maturity of its women’ (Francis, 1983: 36). Similarly, Staples 
heroically contends that ‘Black women cannot be free qua women until all 
blacks attain their liberation’ (Staples, 1985: 348). What is recognized here is 
a project of universal humanism that black feminism represents. However, 
this political germination has been prevented. And prevention is no cure as 
the Combahee River Collective well understand: “If Black women were free, 
it would mean that everyone else would have to be free, since our freedom 
would necessitate the destruction of all the systems of oppression’ (1983: 278). 
How is the commitment to universal humanism fostered and developed and 
in what ways is its development equally benefi  cial to all black and non-black 
thinking peoples? Given these problems would it then be safer to accept that 
womanism can be a viable concept only within the realms and parameters of a 
Walker-based theory? To foster the womanist thesis may only serve to encour-
age an essentialist notion based solely on instinct, and in ‘nature’, rather than 
in combination with activism or socio-political consciousness:
I don’t choose womanism because it is ‘better’ than feminism. … I choose 
it because I prefer the sound, the feel, the fi  t of it; because I cherish the 
spirit of the woman (like Sojourner) the word calls to mind and because 
I share the old ethnic-American habit of off ering society a new word. 
(Walker, 1984b; my italics)
If term-proposal is ‘habitual’ to black people then all the more reason to take 
a serious look at the terminology.
Walker’s third defi nition of ‘womanist’ shows further, its apolitical nature. 
She states: ‘Loves music. Loves dance. Loves the moon. Loves the Spirit. Loves 
RT54118_C018.indd   366RT54118_C018.indd   366 8/11/06   4:28:17 PM8/11/06   4:28:17 PM


--- PAGE 424 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 367
love and food and roundness. Loves struggle. Loves the folk. Loves herself. 
Regardless’ (Walker, 1984a: xii). Now, some might say that in being black, 
one is already political and as Meridy Harris has rightly said, being black is 
certainly turning the English dictionary defi  nition of woman ‘upside down’ 
making it ‘an immediately satisfying subversion of “the weaker sex” ideol-
ogy which appears to be contested by far too few to eff  ect any radical change 
from within white culture’ (1991: 4). But suppose I am looking for terminol-
ogy which will give something more in the way of impact. A terminology that 
would make not only black women sit up, but will make white women listen. 
Instead of taking an ambiguous or excluded role, such a terminology would 
enable black women to be heard. Th e emphasis of Walker is not on political 
activism, as many, including bell hooks would like, and because of this, it 
could be said that Walker does not subscribe to a specifi  c woman-activism. 
Here is what bell hooks has to say:
For me, the term ‘womanist’ is not suffi  ciently linked to a tradition of 
radical political commitment to struggle and change. What would a 
‘womanist’ politic look like? If it is a term for black feminism, then why 
do those who embrace it reject the other? (hooks, 1989: 182)
Coming to W alker’ s fourth defi nition, ‘W omanist is to feminist as purple to 
lavender’, I would say that it speaks for itself in that Walker places both states 
of being into a kind of extended family situation, a brave gesture of inclu-
sion. My only diffi  culty with this is that purple and lavender, being traditional 
white feminist hues (recall 1970s British sartorial politics), are insinuative of 
a plea for inclusion. Th is attitude is not very symbolic of the western black 
woman’s amour propre and as such, indicates an inevitable death of pride in 
the family.
For one person to ‘off er’ society a new term appears somehow uncollective 
in the decision-making process, though creative. But perhaps because of what 
appears to be an apolitical gloss on Walker’s off er of womanism, this is uncol-
lectively intentional. Her womanist ideology can be seen to describe more the 
spirit of black women, which also has a place, as opposed to a fi ercely political 
identity. However, having said this, it is quite common for language to evolve 
naturally alongside political change. Th ink, for example, of the term ‘queer’, 
which has in some circles been appropriated from ‘odd’ with perjorative 
connotations, to an umbrella term of (political) pride for those who do not 
consider themselves heterosexual.
What’s the Diff erence? Ignoring Black Women’s Visibility
What can be assumed is the general feeling that black women activists in 
Britain and in North America do not wish to remain on a perpetual feminist 
agenda as marginalized contributors to a political, woman-based cause. To be 
listened to is the raison d’être. Moreover, ‘Black women resist being graft ed 
RT54118_C018.indd   367RT54118_C018.indd   367 8/11/06   4:28:18 PM8/11/06   4:28:18 PM


--- PAGE 425 ---
368 • Th e Womanist Reader
onto feminism in a tokenistic manner [and] argue that feminism has to be 
transformed if it is to address them’ (Ramdin, 1987: 469; my emphasis). Want-
ing ‘our issues to be on the agendas in a wide range of political organizations 
[struggling] to raise racism as a central issue within the women’s movement’ 
(Amos and Parmar, 1984: 7) was paramount to the black woman activist at 
a time that seems long ago now. And black women have been re-stating the 
problem over and over again as they recognize the diff  erence in approach, 
form, content and attitude within feminism. What that diff  erence is exactly 
and how it can be attributed to useful and developing practical analysis, is now 
so important that it must be viewed from as many diff erent angles as possible 
so as to provide maximum visibility. Th at this vision produces realization and 
also sets one up for exposure is inevitable and integral to moving obstinate 
and lazy ideology. What I have referred to as ‘guilt-awareness’
6 among white 
women activists, goes a long way to localizing very sore points in the activist’s 
consciousness and it is a crucial part of her self-awareness and developing or 
evolving political clout. But there must be a place at which she surpasses the 
former condition where practical activism takes over to intercept the potential 
paralysis that can emanate from guilt-awareness.
Th e Diff erence within Diff erence: Diversity and Binary Oppositions
What follows is a short dialogue in identity politics which necessarily cuts 
across any discussion about language, terminology and women. A black 
woman announces a separate identity in adopting womanism as a doctrine 
viable to her own experience as a black feminist, she could adopt ‘black femi-
nism’ as an appellation appropriate to her situation as ‘black activist’, or even 
place a safe bet and identify with an ‘intra-ethnic feminism’.
7 Th e very exis-
tence of all these terms is proof that even in the all-embracing universal world 
that Walker and her followers espouse, there is (and always will be) diff erence 
in black feminist identity. Th ere is diff  erence on two obvious counts. First, 
within the parameters of blackness, not all black women are the same. Th  ey 
are diverse politically, culturally, sexually; colour, caste and class-wise. Sec-
ond, within the parameters of whiteness, black women are seen as diff  erent 
and identifi ed as ‘other’. Th e diff  erence here is understood as a binary oppo-
sition. So, if a woman is black in, for instance, South Africa she is aware of 
her blackness as something other than ‘coloured-ness’. White South African 
women are more aware of their whiteness than those in, for example, Britain 
(Harris, 1991). A woman only knows she is black or white because the woman 
next to her is non-black or non-white. Walker’s view would incorporate ele-
ments of the latter notion of binary diff  erence to acknowledge the diff erence 
between, for example, women who are ‘capable’ or have reached the point of 
understanding and those who are not (yet) ‘womanist’. I recall Walker: Tradi-
tion assumes, because of our experiences during slavery, that black women 
already are capable’ (1984b: 25). An example of the binary opposition is for the 
RT54118_C018.indd   368RT54118_C018.indd   368 8/11/06   4:28:19 PM8/11/06   4:28:19 PM


--- PAGE 426 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 369
already capable woman calling herself ‘capable’ to be placed next to the white 
woman (against which she must defi ne herself) who is not already ‘capable’.
Explanatory of the fi rst point, that not all black women are the same, is the 
philosophy of bell hooks who tells us that diff  erence can emanate also from 
a historical praxis: ‘Oft  en professional black women with academic degrees 
are quite conservative politically. Th eir perspectives diff  er greatly from our 
foremothers, who were politically astute, assertive, and radical in their work 
for social change’ (hooks, 1989: 181). Ladner has a similar and perhaps more 
concise approach: ‘In discussing the black woman from a historical perspec-
tive, it is important to know that there is no monolithic concept of the black 
woman, but there are many models of black womanhood’ (1985: 271). Th  e 
diversity among black women can also be seen as integral to the structure of 
Filomina Chioma Steady’s work. She writes,
From the available literature it is already apparent that the black woman, 
within a cross-cultural perspective, represents much diversity in terms 
of nationality, class affi  liation, generational diff erences, and particularly 
historical experience. Th e aim of this book is not to present a uniform 
profi le or elicit a monolithic image. (Steady, 1985: 7)
In a pioneering presentation, Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally (1985), from 
which the previous extract is taken, the anthology as a whole explores the dif-
ferent experiences of black women cross-culturally. Steady provides food for 
thought on what she considers to be ‘true feminism’.
8 She says:
True feminism springs from an actual experience of oppression, a lack 
of the socially prescribed means of ensuring one’s well-being, and a true 
lack of access to resources for survival. True feminism is the reaction 
which leads to the development of greater resourcefulness for survival 
and greater self-reliance.
Above all, true feminism is impossible without intensive involvement 
in production. All over the African Diaspora, but particularly on the 
Continent, the black woman’ s role in this regard is paramount. It can, 
therefore, be stated with much justifi  cation that the black woman is to 
[a] large extent the original feminist. (Steady, 1985: 36)
True feminism does imply an essentialism and exclusivity here: placing one 
kind of woman over and above another or others. Th is can propagate negative 
divisions and visibility within a woman-based, cross-cultural experience.
9 
Conversely, Walker takes another angle on true feminism. For her feminism 
is true as in applicable to all women. She states: ‘Feminism (all colors) defi  -
nitely teaches women they are capable, one reason for its universal appeal’ 
(1984b: 25). If this is the case, it is with some concern to discover that in the 
early 1980s some women of colour right here in Britain were not aligning 
RT54118_C018.indd   369RT54118_C018.indd   369 8/11/06   4:28:20 PM8/11/06   4:28:20 PM


--- PAGE 427 ---
370 • Th e Womanist Reader
themselves to feminism, but were instead opting for a separate black women’s 
movement. Th is is explained in Th e Heart of the Race (Bryan et al., 1985) and 
warrants a full citation:
We began to discuss our common experiences of racial and sexist 
oppression, and as we forge the links we were unknowingly laying the 
foundation of the Black Women’s Movement which would emerge in the 
years to follow. (Bryan et al., 1985: 148)
Following on from this is a statement from a member of the Brixton Black 
Women’s Group:
A lot of people think black women began to challenge what was hap-
pening in mixed organisations because we were infl uenced by what was 
going on in the white women’s movement. But I think we were infl uenced 
far more … by what was happening in the liberation movements on the 
African continent … although we had begun to form women’s cau-
cuses and women’s study groups, what Samora Machel had to say about 
women’s emancipation made a lot more sense to us than what Germaine 
Greer and other middle-class white feminists were saying. It just didn’t 
make sense for us to be talking about changing life-styles and attitudes, 
w h e n  w e  w e r e  d ealin g  wi th  iss u es  o f  s urvi v al ,  lik e  h o us in g,  e d u ca ti o n  
and police brutality. (Bryan et al., 1985: 148)
Does this view make imperative the western (as opposed to universal) 
need to re-term? What of the non-western black woman activist resident 
in the west? In an interview Buchi Emecheta states fi  rmly, I will not be 
called a feminist here, [England] because it is European, it is as simple 
as that, I just resent that. Otherwise, if you look at everything I do, it is 
what the feminists do, too; but it is just that it comes from Europe, or 
European women, and I don’t like being defi ned by them. (Emecheta in 
Granqvist and Stotesbury, 1989: 19)
Th e views by black women are numerous. However the distinct diff  erences 
within black feminist ideology remain distinct and, as such, perpetuate the 
divisions between diff erent kinds of women, black and non-black.
Th e general fragmentation of the women’s movement into splinter groups 
that focus on specifi  c oppression (racism, anti-Semitism, homophobia, and 
so on) on the one hand, and concentrate on theoretical analyses of women’s 
issues on the other, has had a knock-on eff  ect within black women’s move-
ments. Here too, recognition and acknowledgement of diff  erence in black 
women’s cultures announce a stalemate: Giving voice to diff  erences of opin-
ion (an aspect that can disrupt or gel), exposes women activists as people who 
are diff erent from one another. Th eir diff erence is, of course, not just because 
of their genders, their classes, their mobilities, or their nationalities,
10 but also 
because of the un-sameness of their opinions: ‘It is not only that there are 
RT54118_C018.indd   370RT54118_C018.indd   370 8/11/06   4:28:21 PM8/11/06   4:28:21 PM


--- PAGE 428 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 371
diff erences between diff erent groups of women, but that these diff erences are 
oft en also confl icts of interest’ (Bhavnani and Coulson, 1986: 84).
In Britain, the fragmentation of OWAAD11 and the struggles of pioneering 
black women’s organizations, like the acclaimed Southall Black Sisters and the 
now defunct Brixton Black Women’s Group in London, suggest that enthusi-
asm for a black woman-based politics has waned to a non-public presence. It 
would appear that a woman-based politics only exists within smaller groups 
who practise activism mainly on a local level. Pratibha Parmar looks back in 
retrospect to the mid-1980s. She writes:
It seems diffi  cult to fathom where the optimism and stridency which 
many of us had who were active in the black women’s movement has 
gone, and why. Where are the diverse black feminist perspectives which 
we felt were in the process of growth? And where, indeed, is the move-
ment itself? In moments of despair, one wonders if those years were 
merely imagined. (Parmar, 1989: 55)
On the second point of the binary diff erence between black and white women 
there are two examples which elucidate the notion of ‘otherness’. First, more 
than two decades ago, Toni Cade questioned the emerging white women’s 
analysis of the black women’s experience. She asked whether, as another expe-
rience, diff erence ought to be treated as equivalent:
How relevant are the truths, the experience, the fi ndings of white women 
to black women? Are women, aft  er all, simply women? I do not know 
that our priorities are the same, that our concerns and methods are the 
same, or even similar enough so that we can aff ord to deal with this new 
fi eld of experts [white, female]. (Cade, 1970: 9)
Second, Rosalyn Terborg-Penn has explored the outcome of recognizing diff er-
ence between black and white women. In her article, ‘Discrimination against 
Afro-American Women in the Woman’s Movement, 1830–1920’ (1985), she 
suggests the diff erence between women in the early women’s movement was 
compounded by the fact of race-consciousness: ‘Not all Afro-American women 
sought to join racially integrated organisations. Some organised separate racial 
gr o u p s  in  r es p o n se  t o  c o mm o n  p r o b l e m s  an d  t o  a  c o mm o n  se n se  o f  i d e n ti ty’ 
(1985: 302). It must be accepted then, that if all feminists are to be regarded as dif-
ferent though they travel similar paths, the theory of diff erence ought to connect 
with the experience of diff erence within a women-based movement. It could be 
said that the theory and the experience of diff erence are separate entities:
Th e dialogues that have been attempted have been concentrated more upon 
viable empirical diff erences that aff ect black and white women’s lives than 
upon developing a feminist theoretical approach that would enable a femi-
nist understanding of the basis of these diff erences. (Carby, 1982: 221)
RT54118_C018.indd   371RT54118_C018.indd   371 8/11/06   4:28:21 PM8/11/06   4:28:21 PM


--- PAGE 429 ---
372 • Th e Womanist Reader
All too oft en there is a preoccupation with the assertion of diff  erence within 
the black (and white) woman activist’s text. Once asserted, the recognition of 
diff erence leaves no space for a ‘come back’ to a position where a total reckon-
ing of black and non-black women’s work against oppression might begin. It 
sets the ball rolling toward negating sameness. So, in terms of theory, it can be 
claimed that acknowledging diff  erence in theory begins with the realization 
of a political motive. Th at seed—the one that germinates in the black woman 
activist—grows, but in its roots there is a (feminist) theory based on recog-
nizing diff erence which is particular but not necessarily exclusive to black 
women. Th is can be seen in early black British feminist theory.
Hazel Carby’s then-controversial article, ‘White Woman Listen!’ (1982), 
was the beginning of a response to a ‘theoretical development of a critique of 
white feminist theories’ (Parmar, 1989: 56). Th eories specifi  c to challenging 
white feminism were present long before and are evident in the many letters 
and statements produced in nineteenth-century abolitionist literature. Black 
women fi ghting to be heard refused the off  ers by white women abolitionists 
(Harriet Beecher Stowe, for example) to shadow-write their misfortunes as the 
slave under-class. Instead black women wrote themselves a place in history. 
Harriet Jacobs’ Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl : Written by Herself  (1987) 
testifi es to their determination to be heard.
Th e Language of Diff  erence: Recognizing the Self
Taking the analysis of diff erence into the comparative subject area of language 
develops the theory of diff erence. It enables us to enhance and draw in inter-
related themes without which a substantial and binding case for recognizing 
diversity could not be found. Language as a medium of communication fi nds 
itself as exigent and imperative when a belief is transcended into a movement. 
It would not be conducive to the development of a theory of diff  erence for 
views which suggest a hierarchy of diff  erence, such as the following, to be 
nurtured—‘Th e very language and style of the women’s movement of the west 
i s  an  a dm i s s i o n  o f  th e  w o m e n ’ s  b e li e f  th a t  th e y  ar e  inf e ri o r  t o  m e n ’  ( J o hn ,  
quoted in Steady, 1985: 34). It would be essential that views on relative diff er-
ence and the possibility of their existence be anticipated along with any other 
rash conclusions. For it is precisely the publicized views held by people that 
will dictate the continuance of the ideology that shapes the belief or move-
ment. It is crucial to get the message across, enlighten potential followers and 
participants, work on manifestos and policies. Th ese are the basic means for 
fostering whatever belief there is. Th ese aspects need language as a vehicle. In 
the case of womanism, development of the term in language can only arise if 
it, as a doctrine, is successful in the transportation of its own meaning and is, 
therefore, meaningful (and viable) to its prospective supporters.
While diff erence exists between the black woman and the non-black 
woman, it also exists between a black woman and her individual black woman 
RT54118_C018.indd   372RT54118_C018.indd   372 8/11/06   4:28:22 PM8/11/06   4:28:22 PM


--- PAGE 430 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 373
counterparts. Th e following linguistic interpretation given by Harland (1987) 
demonstrates the diffi  culty in fi nding a term within feminist language to suit 
all black and non-black women.
Harland12 suggests that our ordinary methods of thinking are eventually 
taken over by the desire to think diff  erently. A change from A to B in our 
understanding takes place in what Harland calls a ‘superstructuralist’ way, 
th a t  i s  t o  s a y ,  th e  m e m o ry  o f  a  p a rt i c u l a r  w a y  o f  th i n ki n g  i s  r e p l a c e d  a n d  
becomes more important than the memory of what used to be a particular 
way of thinking. Without entering into the complexities of linguistic analysis, 
what I want to pinpoint is the need to locate the purveyors of language within 
political frameworks particular to their set of beliefs. Change, which frames 
the construction of meaning, can be seen to alter language and thus percep-
tion. It is this need or desire felt by Walker and others toward a new politicized 
meaning which prompts the feeling of a ‘habitual off  ering’ of terminology. 
Words such as womanist show that meaning evolves from the experience of 
diff erence. Th ere is nothing inherent or fi  xed in language. If the meaning of 
w o m a n i s m  c a m e  f r o m  th e  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  e x c l u s i o n  f r o m  f e m i n i s m  th e n  i t s  
identity as a term would depend on its diff  erence from feminism. Th is is pre-
cisely how bell hooks has treated womanist as distinct from feminist: ‘When 
I hear black women using the term “womanist”, it is in opposition to the term 
feminist; it is viewed as constituting something separate from feminist poli-
tics shaped by white women’ (hooks, 1989: 181). Th  e existence of diff  erence 
in whatever form, makes for enquiries into the need for homogeneous termi-
nology which labels representative groups of people in society. Ironically the 
most obvious reason is for the purposes of diff erentiation, for example, so that 
one group can be diff erentiated from another.
Th e persistence of reductionist terminology cannot be linked to the pro-
woman movement as it changes from suff ragette to feminist to potential wom-
anist. Th ese defi  ning terms exist in contemporary obscurity insofar as splits 
within the movement produce a hazy understanding of what the aims of each 
phase of the women’s movement actually is or was. Th at labelling gives rise to 
a form of cohesion, and is used to stabilize and bind together a newly forming 
group or movement, suggests that the process of naming is integral and imper-
ative to a society that dreams of development. To invent or adopt terminology 
to suit a proposed development is to trigger a development per se. Th e remain-
ing question is then, to what extent can the development be sustained?
As a visibilizing process, terming becomes a metalanguage to be used for 
the voicing of ideas, the standing of ground and the assertion of potentially 
viable doctrines. In the black feminist or womanist case, it is used as a specify-
ing tool for politicization. It spotlights the seeming desire to call oneself a name 
which has been chosen by a core of like-minded people. As the black woman’s 
voice is created, be it on a plantation or in a palace, a distinct and recognizable 
term from which a belief can emanate becomes more important. It stands to 
RT54118_C018.indd   373RT54118_C018.indd   373 8/11/06   4:28:23 PM8/11/06   4:28:23 PM


--- PAGE 431 ---
374 • Th e Womanist Reader
reason that if the Self, the Black Self as it is termed, is not given voice within 
the conglomerating body-term of woman, then the force with which the Self 
is asserted becomes far more exigent. Consequently, the black woman’s Self is 
shaped by an encounter with the languages of western patriarchal white dis-
courses. Th e black woman is seen in terms of non-Self. Th at is, she is untermed, 
invisible—but not absent.
13
Being defi ned in terms of the non-Self never remains a static position. For 
the condition of being untermed triggers a response among those who are 
deemed to hav e no po w er , a demand to be recognized by those in po w er; a 
demand that those with power recognize that they have it. It is, therefore, 
i m p o r t a n t  t o  f o s t e r  p o s i t i v e  s e l f - r e c o g n i t i o n  i n  ( a n d  o u t s i d e )  t h e  s p h e r e  o f  
black feminisms.
14 However, Steady speaks of the black woman’s predicament 
of how to valorize her many ‘Selves’. It is neither uncommon nor an arbitrary 
claim to acknowledge multiple identities:
Several factors set the black woman apart as having a diff  erent order of 
priorities. She is oppressed not simply because of her sex, but ostensibly 
because of her race and, for the majority, essentially because of their 
[sic] class. Women belong to diff  erent socio-economic groups and do 
not represent a universal category. (Steady, 1985: 23–4)
From Womanism to Post-Black Feminism
If I reject the notion of womanism the idea of a black feminism still remains. 
Black feminism remains current to the ideology of many black women in 
groups, organizations, and individually. Whether this is because womanism 
has not (yet?) been fully taken up, or whether it is perhaps used simultaneously 
with ‘black feminism’, I do not know. What I do know is that despite its relative 
demise, feminism has met with appreciation for a long time now. Feminism 
must change with the tide. Whether this is successful or not remains to be 
seen. Black feminism describes overall black women’s activism within a socio-
political structuring of black women’s thinking. If a black woman wants to call 
herself ‘Black-lesbian-feminist-warrior-poet’ as Audre Lorde did, it is because 
of a desire to voice that which is personally and politically important as well 
as the almost desperate need to be recognized. In the Combahee River Collec-
tive, black women activists expand: ‘A political contribution which we feel we 
[as black women] have already made is the expansion of the feminist principle 
that the personal is the political’ (Combahee River Collective, 1983: 276).
If I embrace womanism and perhaps look to creating further terms to 
describe essentially black women’s activism, the sine qua non of new termi-
nology must be approached carefully. It is essential to ascertain the degree of 
cruciality and what particular diff erences the making of new terms warrant. 
Some might say that a change in terminology would be prophylactic to the 
progress of a core idea and struggle. In seeking to clarify the terms under 
RT54118_C018.indd   374RT54118_C018.indd   374 8/11/06   4:28:24 PM8/11/06   4:28:24 PM


--- PAGE 432 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 375
which we struggle and succeed in the west, I have to say that the constant 
changing of terms can also impede the growth and development of the main 
aims and ideological development of a movement as well as of a people, never 
mind the erosion of fundamental racism.
If the focus for too long is on the terminology instead of what I call the 
inherent ‘race-sexism’ of feminism, the consequences point to serious circum-
vention of real change. Localizing the lesion where the black and white women’s 
movements fail to adhere to their own principles of inclusion is to address the 
problem of adapting to a changing society directly and eff ectively. Understand-
ing the ‘problem’ of circumvention can precipitate success. Perhaps the most 
valuable thing that came out of the birth of womanism was its direct challenge 
to white feminist racism. It provided an instantaneous critique which some 
white feminists would fi nd hard to ignore. But what worries me is that the term 
womanism could be used to further the distance between black and non-black 
women activists. How easy it would be to assume that the advent of womanism 
had absolutely nothing to do with anyone but black women, so that within a 
presumed homogeneous group of women it should stay.
Th e diff  erent and new ways that black women are organizing themselves 
(more focus on gaining higher education, fi  ghting for better employment, 
better business opportunities and more improved domestic situations) seems 
to lead to a much needed expression and acknowledgement of an up-to-date 
feminism. Th e possibility of a post-black feminist ideology surfaces to co-join 
an era of post-modern ethics and theorizing. If feminism exists as ‘post’, then 
it could be said that it is still carved out of the present defi  nition. However, 
there seems to be little point in term-proposal if there is no real demand. To 
ascertain a term’s usefulness, questions must be asked. For example, if a term 
such as ‘post’ is agreed, what use, if any, will it have for the development of the 
movement? Does it make important moves, structurally, towards a specifi  c 
and positive goal for black feminism? Does it advocate total rejection of preju-
dice—in a way that Walker’s womanism does not clarify? Has the term been 
agreed collectively? Finally and crucially, does the goal of (black) feminism 
ultimately embrace a universal unity?
With white feminism’s track record, it is not really surprising that younger 
generations are rejecting what they know older generations have been strug-
gling with for decades. In an article in Th e Chronicle of Higher Education (1994), 
bell hooks talks about how ‘most young black females learn to be suspicious 
and critical of feminist thinking long before they have any clear understanding 
of its theory and politics’ (1994: A44). She goes on to say that,
Even though feminist scholars like me have worked to create an inclusive 
feminist movement, one that acknowledges the importance of race and 
embraces black perspectives, many of today’s black students seem to reject 
the entire idea of feminism. … Just as some black males hold on to macho 
RT54118_C018.indd   375RT54118_C018.indd   375 8/11/06   4:28:24 PM8/11/06   4:28:24 PM


--- PAGE 433 ---
376 • Th e Womanist Reader
stereotypes about maleness as a way of one-upping white men, whom they 
characterise as wimpy, some young black females feel that they fi nally can 
one-up white girls by insisting that they are already ‘real’ women, taking 
care of business, with no need of feminism. (hooks, 1994: A44)
As someone who has ‘followed’ feminism for two decades, and as a victim of 
habit I, myself, cannot reject it. But I would favour more the idea of the inclu-
sive feminist movement. I acknowledge the importance of discussing the adop-
tion of more appropriate terminology, but alert the reader to the inevitable and 
eventual situation of a fait accompli in doing so. Th e preservation of the ter-
minology ‘feminism’, like the preservation of homogeneous grouping such as 
‘Asian’, ‘Black’ or ‘African-Caribbean’ ensures a strategic identity. Within black 
women’s activism it ensures kudos and sets up a legitimate basis for organized 
action. Feminism is thus constructed not as a strict and impenetrable concept 
but as one which is pervious to change. If it embraces our diff erences it can also 
give rise to our strengths.
My proposal now is for a halt to further umbrella terms until there is more 
cohesion within especially British black women’s networks. Womanist cre-
ativity and spirit as an appendage to black feminist activism does provide a 
much fuller text for feminists to work with. In conclusion, despite Walker 
having been ‘hailed as a developer of the “womanist process” ’ (Pinckney, 
1987: 18), an upsurge of womanist power and politics, and even spirituality, 
has yet to come to Britain.
Womanism might be to feminism what purple is to lavender, but it must be 
remembered that when lavender wanes annually from mid- to late summer , 
the fi rst task of the western gardener is to lop off   its purple fl owers so as to 
benefi t the lavender as a plant.
Acknowledgements
Along with Tina Papoulias, I also thank Tiz Cartwright and Heidi Safi a Mirza 
for persuading me to revive this essay.
Notes
 1. Th  is paper has been edited from the fi  rst time it was published as Occasional Paper no. 21, 
1990, University of Kent.
 2. Th  e use of the term ‘(black) woman activists’ is deliberate. It is not intended to replace or 
reject other terms such as ‘black feminist’ . It is a phrase to describe and convey (black) 
women’s political involvement. Th e use in this paper of the words ‘black’ and ‘non-black’ 
is also deliberate. It is my preference for clarifying the issue of diff  erence without add-
ing confusion to an already complex debate. ‘Black’ for me means anyone who wishes to 
publicly call themselves black for reasons that are political or otherwise. And ‘non-black’ 
can mean white, or be appropriated to those who do not feel appropriated as ‘black’. Th  is 
is also a strategy (perhaps not the most eff ective) of resistance to the continual reading of 
‘non-white’—as if most of the world operated on a white ‘control’ basis.
 3. I am not using ‘roots’ in the usual sense as an originating source as I believe that there is 
no ‘origin’ as such. Roots, for myself, are the sources that extend as far back as possible. 
But it should be noted that seeds are subsumed as roots come into existence.
RT54118_C018.indd   376RT54118_C018.indd   376 8/11/06   4:28:25 PM8/11/06   4:28:25 PM


--- PAGE 434 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 377
 4. A dedication in Walker’s Th e T emple of My Familiar (1989) displays a projection of the 
Self which is in juxtaposition with the environment, in a way that is politically suggestive, 
but evasive all the same. Th e last sentence under the acknowledgments in Temple says, ‘I 
thank the Universe for my participation in Existence’ (1989: 405).
 5. To illustrate what I mean here, I use the following which is taken from Audre Lorde’s pre-
sentation on ‘Th e Uses of Anger: Women Responding to Racism’ at the National Women’s 
Studies Association Conference, Connecticut, 1981:
  Aft  er fi  ft een years of a women’s movement which professes to address the life concerns 
and possible future of all women, I still hear in campus aft er campus, ‘How can we address 
the issues of racism? No women of Color attended’. Or, the other side of that statement, 
‘We have no-one in our department equipped to teach their work’. In other words, racism 
is a Black woman’s problem, a problem of women of Color, and only we can discuss it. 
(Lorde, 1984: 125)
 6. See (charles), H. (1992) ‘Whiteness—Th  e Relevance of Politically Colouring the “Non” ’, 
in H. Hinds, A. Phoenix and J. Stacey ( eds. ) Working Out: New Directions for Women’s 
Studies, London: Falmer.
 7. Steady explains,
  since sexism exists in the black community as well, sexism is relevant to the black 
woman, although some aspects of its analysis can best be conducted within a frame-
work of what I term ‘intraethnic feminism’—that is, within the black group’s experi-
ence. (Steady, 1985: 3)
 8. Th  is is also taken up by Alexander (1989a).
 9. Th  e diversity of Steady’s excellent essay-collection defi  es the unity promised in the title.
 10. Th  e pluralization of these issues is in recognition of the multiplicities of cultural make-up 
in the west today.
 11. Organization of Women of Asian and African Descent. For a short historiography see 
Bryan et al.  (1985: 164–81).
 12. Because Harland’s ‘superstructuralist’ thesis is taken from specifi  c male-oriented sources 
it must be understood that his language pertains to something which does not include the 
feminist theorist. It is to be regarded diff  erently and for illustrative purposes in conjunc-
tion with what I am arguing.
 13. See Toni Morrison’s Playing in the Dark (1992). She refers to this issue of the absence of 
blackness. She argues the narrative of whiteness is shaped by a fear of blackness—which 
is untermed but ever-present.
 14. I pluralize this to illustrate that there are many varied possibilities of black women’s activ-
isms, whilst also pinpointing the necessity of a viable political option for black women.
References
Alexander, V. (1989a) ‘White Feminism/Black Womanism’, Camden Black Sisters Bulletin, 
September, London.
Alexander, V. (1989b) ‘Black Woman, Black Womanism: Repainting the Rainbow’, Camden 
Black Sisters Bulletin, October, London.
Amos, V. and Parmar, P. (1984) ‘Challenging Imperial Feminism’, Feminist Review, Autumn, 
17: 3–19.
Bhavnani, K. and Coulson, M. (1986) ‘Transforming Socialist Feminism: Th  e Challenge of 
Racism’, Feminist Review, Spring, 22: 81–92.
Bryan, B., Dadzie., S. and Scafe, S. (1985) Th e Heart of the Race, London: Virago Press.
Cade, T. (ed.) (1970) Th e Black Woman: An Anthology, New York: New American Library.
Carby, H. (1982) ‘White Woman Listen! Black Feminism and the Boundaries of Sisterhood’, in 
Th e Centre for Contemporary Studies Th e Empire Strikes Back: Race and Realism in 70s 
Britain, London: Hutchinson.
Carmen, Gail, Neena and Tamara (1984) ‘Becoming Visible: Black Lesbian Discussions’, Feminist 
Review, Autumn, 17: 53–72.
Combahee River Collective (1983) ‘Combahee River Collective Statement’, in B. Smith (ed.) 
Home Girls, New York: Kitchen Table, Women of Color Press.
Feminist Review (1987) Sexuality, London: Virago Press.
Francis, A. (1983) Th e Black Triangle, London: Seed Publications.
Fuss, D. (1989) Essentially Speaking: Feminism, Nature and Diff  erence, London: Routledge.
RT54118_C018.indd   377RT54118_C018.indd   377 8/11/06   4:28:26 PM8/11/06   4:28:26 PM


--- PAGE 435 ---
378 • Th e Womanist Reader
Granqvist, R. and Stotesbury, J. (1989) African Voices: Interviews with Th irteen African Writers, 
Sydney: Dangaroo Press.
Harland, R. (1987) Superstructuralism: Th e Philosophy of Structuralism and Post Structuralism, 
London: Methuen.
Harris, M. (1991) ‘ “Colour Me Purple”: Th e White “Would-be Womanist” in Search of Community’, 
unpublished paper, Women’s Studies MA, University of Kent.
Higginbotham, E.B. (1992) ‘African-American Women’s History and the Metalanguage of Race’, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, vol. 17, no. 2: 251–74.
hooks, b. (1984) Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center, Boston: South End Press.
hooks, b. (1986) ‘Political Solidarity between Women’, Feminist Review, Summer, 23: 125–38.
hooks, b. (1989) Talking Back: Th inking Feminist, Th  inking Black, London: Sheba Feminist 
Publishers.
hooks, b. (1994) ‘Black Students Who Reject Feminism’, Th e Chronicle of Higher Education, July 13.
Hull, G.T, Scott, P.B. and Smith, B. (1982) But Some of Us Are Brave, New York: Th e Feminist Press.
Jacobs, H. (1987) Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written by Herself, London: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Joseph, G. and Lewis, J. (1981) Common Diff erences: Confl  icts in Black and White Feminist 
Perspectives, New York: Anchor/Doubleday.
Kazi, H. (1986) ‘Th e Beginning of a Debate Long Due: Some Observations on Ethnocentrism 
and Socialist-Feminist Th eory’, Feminist Review, Spring, 22: 87–91.
Kramarae, C. and Treichler, P.A. (1985) A Feminist Dictionary, London: Pandora Press.
Ladner, J.A. (1985) ‘Racism and Tradition: Black Womanhood in Historical Perspective’, in F.C. 
Steady (ed.) Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally, USA: Schenkman Books.
Lorde, A. (1984) Sister Outsider, New York: Crossing Press.
Mabey, R. et al. (eds.) (1988) Th e Complete Herbal, London: Guild Publishing.
Mohanty, T.C. (1988) ‘Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses’, 
Feminist Review, Autumn, 30: 65–88.
Morrison, T. (1992) Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination, London: 
Harvard University Press.
Ngcobo, L. (1987) Let It Be Told, London: Virago Press.
Parmar, P. (1989) ‘Other Kinds of Dreams’, Feminist Review, Spring, 31: 55–65.
Piercy, M. (1976) Woman on the Edge of Time, London: Women’s Press.
Pinckney, D. (1987) ‘Black Victims, Black Villains’, New York Review, 29 January: 17–20.
Ramdin, R. (1987) Th e Making of the Black Working Class in Britain, Hampshire: Wildwood 
House Ltd.
Segal, L. (1987) Is the Future Female? London: Virago Press.
Smith, B. (ed.) Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, New York: Kitchen Table: Women of 
Color Press.
Staples, R. (1985) ‘Myth of the Black Matriarchy’, in F.C. Steady (ed.) Th e Black Woman Cross-
Culturally, USA: Schenkman Books.
Steady F.C. (1985) ‘Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally: An Overview’, in F.C. Steady (ed.) Th e 
Black Woman Cross-Culturally, USA: Schenkman Books.
Terborg-Penn, R. (1985) ‘Discrimination against Afro-American Women in the Woman’s Move-
ment, 1830–1920’, in F.C. Steady (ed.) Th e Black Woman Cross-Culturally, USA: Schenkman 
Books.
Walker, A. (1984a) In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens, London: Th e Women’s Press.
Walker, A. (1984b) New York Times Magazine, (interview) January 8: 25.
Walker, A. (1989) Th e Temple of My Familiar, London: Th e Women’s Press.
Weedon, C. (1987) Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Th eory, London: Basil Blackwell.
Williams, F. (1996) ‘Postmodernism, Feminism and the Question of Diff  erence’, in N. Parton 
(ed.) Social Th eory, Social Change and Social Work, London: Routledge.
RT54118_C018.indd   378RT54118_C018.indd   378 8/11/06   4:28:27 PM8/11/06   4:28:27 PM


--- PAGE 436 ---
379
Warrior Marks:  Global Womanism’s Neo-colonial 
Discourse in a Multicultural Context (2001)
INDERPAL GREWAL AND CAREN KAPLAN
Imperialism’s image as the establisher of the good society is marked by 
the espousal of the woman as object of protection from her own kind.1
—Gayatri Spivak
In the last ten to fi ft een years, the fi elds of colonial and postcolonial discourses 
have produced a by-now-standard critique of objectifi  cation, essentialism, 
exoticization, and Orientalism as the representational practices of modern 
Western imperialism. Th at is, an oppositional power relation between colo-
nizer and colonized has come to be understood as a crucial dynamic at work 
in the disciplines, institutions, subjects, and practices of modernity. Less 
understood or less examined in the interdisciplinary cultural studies of colo-
nial and postcolonial discourses are the power relations between the diff erent 
hybrid subjects produced during centuries of imperialism and modernity. 
Th us, the center-periphery model, or West/Non-West binary, is inadequate to 
understand contemporary world conditions under globalization: the relations 
between gendering practices, class formations, sexual identities, racialized sub-
jects, transnational affi  liations, and diasporic nationalisms, etc. Constructing 
monolithic notions of “Western” and “non-Western” subjects in binary oppo-
sition cannot always account for the complex, hybrid, and oft en contradictory 
subject positions that mark the era of postmodernity.
We begin with this premise in order to understand the practices, womanist 
and feminist, that underlie Warrior Marks (1993), a fi lm directed by Pratibha 
Parmar and produced by Alice Walker. Since its fi  rst screenings, responses 
have ranged from celebration to angry denunciation. It has been hailed, on 
the one hand, as a fi lm that brings to light the misogynistic practice of “female 
genital mutilation”; and, on the other hand, it has also been condemned as 
a colonialist narrative that depicts African women as victims of their own 
culture, a “postcolonial civilizing mission” as Rogaia Mustafa Abusharaf 
calls it.
2 Sorting through these divergent responses helps us understand 
the contemporary transnational formations through which sexuality, race, 
and gender create new subjects. Under globalization, by which we mean the 
expansionary economic and cultural processes of advanced capitalism, these 
subjects participate in the construction of an identity politics that draws upon 
both Euro-American cultural feminism and global feminism to articulate an 
RT54118_C018.indd   379RT54118_C018.indd   379 8/11/06   4:28:28 PM8/11/06   4:28:28 PM


--- PAGE 437 ---
380 • Th e Womanist Reader
anti-racist multiculturalism. Such a multiculturalism, as evidenced by the 
Walker–Parmar fi lm, remains embedded in the practices of Western modernity. 
Th e modernity of this multicultural subject lies in the humanist metaphysics 
and liberal political formations that comprise its liberatory agenda. In Warrior 
Marks, t h i s  m o d e r n i t y  p r o d u c e s  a  g l o b a l  w o m a n i s m — t h e  b e l i e f  t h a t  t h e  
intersection of race and gender creates a homogeneous colonized female body 
as well as the conditions for the liberation of that body. Th  e Walker–Parmar 
fi lm assumes that a Euro-American multicultural agenda travels freely 
across national boundaries. Th u s ,  w e  n e e d  t o  u n d e r s t a n d  m u l t i c u l t u r a l i s m  
in a transnational perspective in order to come to grips with this relatively 
under-recognized legacy of colonial discourses at work in contemporary Euro-
American feminist and womanist practices.
In Warrior Marks, a fi lm made presumably with the very best intentions 
by two committed feminist activists of color, the articulation of a global ver-
sion of womanism derived from Euro-American cultural feminism results in 
a neo-colonial representational practice. US cultural feminism constructed an 
unproblematic narrative of liberation based on a universalized and essential-
ist identity as “woman.”
Th is form of cultural feminism, as it has been practiced in the US and in 
Europe from the 1970s to the present, oft en turns its attention to “global sis-
terhood” when faced with the dilemma of transnational feminist politics. Th is 
form of “global feminism,” as Chandra Mohanty and others have pointed out, 
can result in imperializing and racist forms of “knowing” those constituted as 
“others.”
3 O ur  tas k  in  thi s  c h a p t e r  i s  t o  in v e s ti g a t e  th e  c o m p l e x  p o s i ti o n ali ty  
of the subjects constructed through this representational practice. In order to 
analyze the contemporary reach of what we call multiculturalism’s global sister-
hood, we will examine the genealogies of these practices in colonial discourses 
about women.
As Martin Jay has argued, within Western modernity’s “scopic regime” the 
“visual” plays a primary role in communication and the institutionalization 
of knowledge.
4 Western ethnographic and documentary fi  lm traditions are 
fully implicated in the empiricist, realist, and positivist ideologies of moder-
nity, ideologies that Walker and Parmar rely upon in their multiculturalist 
project. While scholars have begun to examine the ways in which multicul-
turalism has been co-opted and commodifi  ed (limiting its oppositional pos-
sibilities),
5 we argue that in a transnational framework, US multiculturalists 
cannot address issues of inequalities and diff  erences if they presume the goal 
of progressive politics is to construct subjects, feminist or womanist, that are 
just like themselves.
Multiculturalism’s Global Sisterhood: Reading Warrior Mark s
Aft er several decades of struggle and resistance to ethnocentric and Eurocen-
tric articulations of feminism, multicultural feminism and its variants such as 
RT54118_C018.indd   380RT54118_C018.indd   380 8/11/06   4:28:29 PM8/11/06   4:28:29 PM


--- PAGE 438 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 381
womanism and global womanism have achieved considerable recognition as 
feminist practices in the United States. Even within the enabling and demysti-
fying paradigms of feminist multiculturalism, a tendency to elide geopolitical 
considerations and to promote a universalized identity for women of color can 
also produce points of alliance with colonial discourses. When Euro-Ameri-
can feminist multiculturalism links with colonial discourses that articulate 
binaries of tradition and progress, for example, or civilized and barbaric, a 
powerful form of neo-colonialism recurs in activist and progressive represen-
tational practices.
Th e fi  lm Warrior Marks and its accompanying coff ee-table print version, 
Warrior Marks: Female Genital Mutilation and the Sexual Blinding of Women, 
are recent examples of contemporary Euro-American multicultural feminism 
in its imperializing vein as global womanism.
6 Proposing “benevolent” rescues 
and principled interventions, Warrior Marks advocates a return to the inter-
locking traditions of missionary projects, modernizing practices, and global 
sisterhood. Claiming to demystify a practice from far away lands that appears 
to have origins deep in a patriarchal past, the Warrior Marks texts remystify 
genital surgeries in Africa, creating conventional subjects of an anthropologi-
cal gaze already well-known to Western viewers through ethnographic and 
documentary cinema and their popular and mainstream counterparts.
Ethnography, as Claude Levi-Strauss defi  ned it, represents “societies 
other than the one in which we live.”
7 Th is displacement from the location 
where “we” live to a gaze upon a place where “others” can be observed forms 
a foundation for representational practices and discourses under the sign of 
modernity. Th e ethnographic impulse, that is, the authority conferred upon 
the observer by modernity’s scopic regime, underlies the birth of cinema 
itself—the fi lms  o f  L umi èr e  ha v e  bee n  r ef err ed  t o  as  “dir ect”  o r  “ a ctuali ty”  
cinema, terms that can be linked to the rhetorical structure of classic ethnog-
raphy’s reliance upon positivist realism.
8 Th e rise of modern science and its 
link to discourses of vision and rationality in the West informs the voyeuristic 
practices of ethnographic cinema in its documentary mode. Western subjects 
learn to “see” in a specifi c set of historically constructed interpretive regimes 
based upon discourses of unmediated visuality , scientifi  c evidence, objectiv-
ity, and the “real.”
9
Ethnographic fi lm as an anthropological practice, David MacDougall has 
argued, has been defi ned by its intercultural and interpretive focus, in which 
foreignness, exoticism, travel, and adventure were necessary elements in con-
structing knowledge about “others.”
10 Visual anthropologists who produce 
ethnographic fi lm s  b e c o m e  cul tural  b r o k e r s  in  w h a t  M a c D o u g all  call s  “th e  
economic exchange of global images.”11 While this tradition has been subverted 
and critiqued by anthropologists and fi lmmakers such as MacDougall himself, 
Jean Rouch, Trinh T. Minh-ha, Laleen Jayamanne, and others, ethnographic 
cinema, as Fatimah Tobing Rony argues, continues a tradition of “pervasive 
RT54118_C018.indd   381RT54118_C018.indd   381 8/11/06   4:28:30 PM8/11/06   4:28:30 PM


--- PAGE 439 ---
382 • Th e Womanist Reader
‘racialization’ of indigenous peoples.”12 Such a racialization, according to Rony, 
denies people of color “historical agency and psychological complexity.”13
Warrior Marks not only relies on the positivist production of empirical 
knowledge as documentary testimony but recuperates the racialization and 
gendered “othering” of non-Western subjects from the ethnographic cinematic 
tradition. Th at the cultural producers of this work are two women of color 
raises important issues about new forms of racialization and power relations 
between women from First and Th ird World locations. While we have seen the 
appropriation and recuperation of positivist visual logics in Th ird World cul-
tural production (for instance, in nationalist, anti-colonial narratives),
14 what 
is new here is the construction of a global womanist project framed epistemo-
logically by US multiculturalism.
Given the particular intellectual and political trajectories of both Alice 
Walker and Pratibha Parmar, respectively, certain questions arise in relation to 
how Warrior Marks continues the tradition of ethnographic visual representa-
tion. Walker is best known as an award-winning novelist and anti-racist activ-
ist who has refused the label “feminist” in favor of what she terms “womanist.”
15 
Instrumental in moving US cultural feminism into discussions of racial diff er-
ence, sexual identities, and resistance to white supremacy, Walker is a primary 
fi gure in the US women’s movement in general and the movements of women 
of color in particular. Parmar, who began as an anti-racist feminist activist 
in Britain, is an increasingly well-known independent fi lmmaker whose fi lms 
have ranged from investigations of racialized sexual identity to profi les of well-
known women of color writers and activists. Parmar’s interest in coalitions 
with US women of color and Walker’s desire to address a topic with “global” 
dimensions has led to a collaboration that presents the tensions that arise in 
multicultural feminism’s imbrication within racialized diasporas.
Th e collaboration between Walker and Parmar forms a compelling and 
complicated coalition between a US-based writer and cultural fi  gure who has 
struggled to make a space for African-American women’s concerns and a Brit-
ish fi lmmaker whose family’s diaspora includes South Asia and East Africa 
and who has made a commitment to lesbian feminist and anti-racist cultural 
production. Th eir process of building an alliance and fi  nding a method of 
working together is powerfully depicted in the print text of Warrior Marks. 
Consequently, in discussing Walker and Parmar’s collaborative work, we need 
to refer to both the fi lm and the print text. Th e book Warrior Marks records 
the production of the entire project in both narrative and glossy visuals, giv-
ing more context for the project as a whole and adding appendices that docu-
ment resources. Th e print text, then, is interesting in and of itself even as it 
comments self-refl exively on the production of the fi  lm. Framed by maps of 
West Africa, the book utilizes epistolary devices, organizing sections around 
letters sent between Walker and Parmar throughout the pre- and post-produc-
tion period. In this text, the narration is evenly divided between Walker, the 
RT54118_C018.indd   382RT54118_C018.indd   382 8/11/06   4:28:31 PM8/11/06   4:28:31 PM


--- PAGE 440 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 383
fi lm’s producer and narrator, and Parmar, the director. A third section of the 
book is devoted to interviews, informational tables, networking information, 
and other appendices. Th is section attempts to provide the “voices” of other 
women, including African and European activists as well as “native” infor-
mants. In this sense, the print text diff  ers signifi cantly from the fi lm, provid-
ing the kind of production information that is edited out of conventional fi lm 
products. Nevertheless, both texts adhere to a set of ideological and discursive 
formations that produce specifi c subjects; in this case, victimized females in 
rural Africa and their First World saviors.
Because Walker and Parmar’s work has helped to shape both multicultural 
and anti-racist feminist practices, the emergence of colonial discourse in their 
collaborative texts raises important questions for many of us who share their 
political concerns. Th us, the problem is not that Walker and Parmar are not 
“post-structuralists” or “postcolonial theorists”—Parmar is the author of a 
signifi cant contribution to feminist postcolonial theory and Walker is a well-
respected public intellectual.
16 Our critique does not cast them outside our 
fi elds but, rather, seeks to situate our feminist arenas of activism and political 
struggle within a transnational framework of cultural production that can 
never be seen to be apart from the politics of representation. As producers of 
representations, Walker and Parmar can be held accountable for their choices 
of genre, format, and discursive practices. Since they chose a documentary 
form for their fi  lm, intending to use the techniques of montage, interview, 
voiceover narration, and travelogue to make a political statement about a set 
of practices in a distant location, we read the text as feminist cultural critics of 
the history of modern imperialism. Consequently, we are concerned that such 
interventions, since they rely on colonial tropes, cannot be eff  ective because 
they do not provide a socio-cultural and historical context in which activism, 
as the intersection of gender and agency, can become possible.
17
Th e project of Warrior Marks is circumscribed at the outset by its rhetorical 
strategy of global womanism. Given the history of discussions of female genital 
surgeries in Africa in the anthropological literature and the Western cultural 
feminist discourses of human rights and domestic violence, the multicultural 
feminist or womanist approach to the topic cannot escape a colonial legacy. In 
the history of the multitudinous ways in which the female gender is produced 
in various cultures, female circumcision has been given an overwhelming and 
problematic attention in the West.
18 Th e value-laden terminology justifi  es and 
rationalizes interventionist narratives and practices. Th e surgical removal or 
alteration of women’s genitals is referred to by a range of terms including cir-
cumcision, excision, genital mutilation, and clitoridectomy. FGM, the acronym 
for female genital mutilation, has come to stand for the surgical practice itself in 
many US feminist/womanist communities. Given that terms are always politi-
cal and contingent, we are opting to use the phrase “genital surgeries” following 
Isabelle Gunning’s argument that “mutilation” is ethnocentric and judgmental 
RT54118_C018.indd   383RT54118_C018.indd   383 8/11/06   4:28:32 PM8/11/06   4:28:32 PM


--- PAGE 441 ---
384 • Th e Womanist Reader
while “circumcision” is misleadingly benign.19 Th e problem of terms marks the 
social relations that structure the sexual-, gender-, and geo-politics of these 
discourses. Th at is, each term is attached to a history of colonialism linked 
to Enlightenment concepts of individuality and bodily integrity, medicalized 
notions of “cleanliness” and “health,” sexualized notions of the primacy of “cli-
toral orgasm” and cultural organizations of pleasure. Terminologies produce 
epistemic violence—the silencing and erasure that specialized language enacts 
in particular situations in reference to particular inequities.
20 Such problems of 
vocabulary characterize the fraught terrain of cultural commentary in interna-
tional and cross-cultural contexts.
Alice Walker has been investigating female genital surgeries (although she 
would insist upon the term FGM—female genital mutilation) for many years. 
Her novel, Possessing the Secret of Joy (1992), revolves around a circumcised 
protagonist, picking up one of the narrative threads of Th e Color Purple (1982). 
Warrior Marks uses a documentary format to rally opposition to FGM and 
enhance the international activist movement for its abolition. In the fi  lm, 
Walker interviews women in Europe and Africa to demonstrate the destructive 
eff ects of FGM and to draw a connection between violence against women in 
general and this practice in particular. Th e fi lm advocates a global sisterhood 
composed of diverse women of color living in the US and Europe intervening 
in order to “save” the lives of women and girls in Africa and African immigrant 
communities in the First World.
In the print text, Walker outlines clearly her personal stake in this project 
when she discusses her understanding of the metaphorical link between vari-
ous kinds of “patriarchal wounds.” Drawing upon her own experience of vio-
lence in a family setting, Walker describes a terrible childhood trauma. Her 
brother aimed his BB gun straight at her and struck her in the eye. In Walker’s 
recounting of this frightening event, it is clear that her injury was as deeply 
psychic as it was physical. Her mother and father’s distanced response to her 
pain and fright only compounded her sense of betrayal and danger. Walker 
makes a direct association between this betrayal and the role that African 
mothers and grandmothers play in FGM as reproducers of the legitimating 
ideology and as colluding participants. Her identifi  cation with the African 
victims of FGM is based on her own experience of the vulnerability of young 
girls in patriarchal families.
Th is logic of identifi  cation is used in the fi  lm to link W alker to the Afri-
can women and children and to link the fi  lm spectators to Walker’s point of 
view. Her practice depends upon a notion of interpretation whereby one sub-
ject comes to “know” another or others based on a perceived similarity that 
precludes any self-consciousness of the contingent and power-laden nature of 
relations between women. In Writing Diaspora, Rey Chow argues that several 
strands of the word “identifi cation” are at stake in the politics of identifying 
“authentic” natives: “How do we identify the native? How do we identify with 
RT54118_C018.indd   384RT54118_C018.indd   384 8/11/06   4:28:33 PM8/11/06   4:28:33 PM


--- PAGE 442 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 385
her? How do we construct the native’s ‘identity’? What processes of identifi  -
cation are involved? We cannot approach this politics without being critical 
of a particular relation to images th a t  is  in  q u es ti o n . ”21 Warrior Marks uti-
lizes visual colonial tropes not only to identify the “natives” but also to enable 
Walker herself, as narrator, to identify with this native. Doris Sommer has 
argued that a romanticized identifi  c a ti o n  wi th  c ul tur al  O th e r s  c an  b e  “ th e  
ultimate violence” as appropriation and can foreclose the possibility of any 
political alliance or solidarity across identities.
22 Th us, Walker legitimates her 
view of African genital surgeries by projecting her own tragedy—her brother’s 
assault and her injured eye—onto the bodies of women whom she perceives to 
be in peril from patriarchal violence. “I chose to be part of the subject of War-
rior Marks and not a distant observer because I wanted to directly align myself 
with genitally mutilated women,” Walker explains. “Like them, I knew I had a 
patriarchal wound.”
23 Without taking away from the horror of an attack by a 
family member, how can an analogy be made between such diff erent practices 
and events? Each has its own complex articulation within a specifi c patriarchy 
and a particular historical context that includes race, nation, gender, class, 
and other social factors. Walker’s experience of violence can be read through 
the lens of a male dominance that is complexly sanctioned within a nuclear 
and extended family both shaped and constrained by histories of racism and 
class among other social forces at work in the American South. Her identifi ca-
tion with the “victims” of female genital surgeries does not inform us about 
the nuanced relations between men and women, between women and women 
of diff erent classes, ages, nations, ethnicities, and their diff  erential participa-
tion in modernity in contemporary Africa. Like so many acts of identifi cation, 
it enacts its own epistemic violence and erasures.
24
As a representational strategy, “identifi cation” requires an elision of mate-
rial diff erence in favor of a fantasized similarity. In her section of the print 
text, Parmar describes how working on the project caused her to become 
increasingly emotionally swept up into Walker’s point of view. She reports 
that once she arrives in Africa, she wakes up from dreams screaming that she 
is in danger of being infi bulated. Th is aura of terror and helpless victimization 
pervades the entire fi lm, contradicting some of the footage itself (which shows 
local women looking healthy and happy), and punctuating the dry, documen-
tary reportage of health workers, doctors, and activists. Th roughout the fi  lm, 
a dancer is used to demonstrate the fi lmmakers’ emotional projections of ter-
ror onto the symbolic body of the African victims. Th  e visual logic brings 
viewer and dancer together into a state of fused identifi cation.
Based in part on these kinds of techniques, the fi  lm has generated strong 
and deeply felt support within particular feminist communities in Europe 
and North America. Th e relatively widespread advance publicity and distri-
bution of the fi lm and print text can be attributed to W alker’ s popularity as 
a novelist and cultural fi  gure as well as to Parmar’s growing reputation as 
RT54118_C018.indd   385RT54118_C018.indd   385 8/11/06   4:28:34 PM8/11/06   4:28:34 PM


--- PAGE 443 ---
386 • Th e Womanist Reader
an independent fi lmmaker. For example, Warrior Marks has been picked up 
for distribution by the infl  uential Women Make Movies group, and fl  agged 
for special attention beyond their general catalogue in special fl  yers on the 
subject of global feminism tied to the 1995 UN Beijing Women’s Conference. 
We attended the screening of the rough cut of the fi  lm at the 1993 San Fran-
cisco Gay and Lesbian fi  lm festival where a capacity crowd enthusiastically 
applauded the presentation of a special director’s award to Pratibha Parmar. 
Similarly large crowds greeted with strong emotion the fi lm’s opening in sev-
eral metropolitan locations in the United States. Th e journalist who covered 
the Washington, DC, premiere at Howard University for the activist publica-
tion off  our backs described an auditorium-size audience “openly weeping” 
and “spontaneously cheering,” for instance.
25
Th e reception of the fi lm in print has been divided between the global wom-
anists (many of whom identifi ed with the fi lm’s construction of universalized 
racial and sexual communities) and those who critiqued the neo-colonial rep-
resentational practices of the fi  lm ( many of them Africanists ). Th e fi  lm was 
reviewed positively in most US-based feminist and lesbian-feminist publica-
tions, where the global womanist viewpoint was overwhelmingly valorized.
26 
Th e enthusiastic support for the fi lm, refl ected in the reviews, may come from 
an affi  rmation of the Parmar–Walker project which, at the moment that it 
constructs the African woman as silent victim or global womanist/feminist, 
constitutes Western subjectivities. Th is imperialist subject is affi   rmed by the 
fi lm’s recuperation of the civilizing project of colonialism within which the 
fi gure of the colonized woman as silent victim played a key role.
Although the most prominent mainstream critique of the fi lm appeared as 
an op-ed piece by Seble Dawit and Salem Mekuria in Th e New York Times,
27 
other critiques have built upon earlier responses to Walker’s previously pub-
lished novel on the topic, Possessing the Secret of Joy. Th ese reviews argue that 
Walker’s overgeneralizing of African history and culture leads to errors of fact 
and the reproduction of long-standing stereotypes.
28 Most recently, a special 
issue of the Case Western Reserve Law Review that focused on female circum-
cision included detailed critiques of Alice Walker’s work.29 For example, while 
L. Amede Obiora argues that many Western representations of female cir-
cumcision ignore the diversity and complexity of this practice, Micere Githae 
Mugo focuses on Alice Walker’s work as an example of a Western “external 
messiah syndrome” in which activism becomes an invasive practice imbued 
with unequal power relations.
30
Th e Construction of Knowledge through Gendered Representations 
in Colonial Contexts
Th e “civilizing” practices of modern European imperialism have generated 
specifi cally gendered forms of colonial discourse within which the fi  gure of 
the “woman” plays a key role in subject constitution. Practices that pertain to 
RT54118_C018.indd   386RT54118_C018.indd   386 8/11/06   4:28:35 PM8/11/06   4:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 444 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 387
women’s lives such as suttee, seclusion, foot binding, veiling, arranged mar-
riages, and female circumcision have come to symbolize the “barbarism” 
of non-Western cultures. 31 Singling out such practices as moral anathemas, 
imperialist discourses condemn entire cultures. Feminist scholarship on colo-
nialism has given us profound insights into the ways in which such isolated 
t r o p o l o g i e s  w o r k  t o  m y s t i fy  h i s t o r i e s  o f  s o c i a l  r e l a t i o n s ,  p a r t i c u l a r l y  i n t e r -
locking patriarchal forms and the recastings of various hegemonic formations 
under colonialisms and nationalisms.
32
More recently, gendered colonial tropologies are visible in the media as 
debates over the hijab (head covering), in attacks on Muslim fundamental-
ism, sensationalized accounts of sex tourism, and eff  orts to legislate against 
female genital surgeries. Th ese representational practices produce images of 
Th ird World women as objects or victims who require First World assistance 
and direction. Within modernity, First World discourses of the Th ird World 
a s  w e l l  a s  n a t i o n a l i s t  d i s c o u r s e s  a b o u t  i t s  f e m a l e  o r  s u b a l t e r n  s u b j e c t s  c o n -
tinue such representational practices in a variety of historical contexts. When 
women are raped during a war, for example, their bodies function symboli-
cally as metaphors for “nation,” generating patriotic, patriarchal nationalist 
responses.
33 Yet, at the same time, local domestic violence and physical abuse 
do not resonate within geopolitical recuperations of nationalism. For example, 
the high incidence of rape and domestic violence in the US is not addressed as 
an international human rights problem in the mainstream press. Our point is 
not that any of these tropological instances are in and of themselves morally or 
politically defensible. Rather, their popular representation constructs a binary 
opposition between West and non-West that disallows an examination of the 
links between patriarchies in modernity and postmodernity.
For instance, female genital surgeries clearly need to be examined as a 
problematic social practice within the reconstruction of patriarchies in the 
context of decolonization. Yet, in Western contexts there is very little dis-
course on genital surgeries that does not reproduce social relations inherited 
from European imperialism.
34 Poor women everywhere, especially in the for-
merly colonized parts of the world, face limited health care and educational 
opportunities as well as the denial of economic and political agency due to 
global inequalities, rearticulations of patriarchies in specifi  c regions, and the 
legacies of colonization. Western discourse on female genital surgeries does 
not incorporate these complex factors, but continues to direct a “horrifi  ed 
gaze” toward its colonial and post-colonial subjects.
In order to understand what is at stake in such a “horrifi ed gaze,” we have to 
place female genital surgeries in the context of a long representational history in 
Western cultures. Th e ascription of such surgeries as a sign of non-Western “bar-
barism” requires the suppression of the history of this practice in the West, dis-
placing these surgeries onto an ontological “other.”
35 Th is kind of displacement 
occurs in accounts constructed by colonial bureaucrats, missionaries, health 
RT54118_C018.indd   387RT54118_C018.indd   387 8/11/06   4:28:37 PM8/11/06   4:28:37 PM


--- PAGE 445 ---
388 • Th e Womanist Reader
workers, educators, anthropologists, and travelers throughout the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries.36 Such accounts form an important textual archive as 
well as a discursive practice of empire that disciplines colonized bodies in histori-
cally specifi c ways.
37 Th is process of “othering” has constructed colonizing sub-
jects as well. Th us the colonial classifi cations of racial and ethnic types include 
notions of “whole” and “fragmented” or “mutilated” bodies. Th e “mutilated” 
b o d y  i s  a t  o n c e  a n  o b j e c t  o f  f a s c i n a t i o n ,  d e s i r e ,  a n d  r e p u l s i o n ,  d i ff erentiating 
between colonizer “self” and colonized “other.”38 European modernity utilizes 
horror, romance, and adventure genres to gain power and to construct a Western 
identity of a fi xed and stable self.
Th e modalities of such knowledge are visible in the binary division between 
modernity and tradition, the identifi cation processes of humanist subject for-
mation, the construction of subjects and objects through “ethnographic author-
ity,” the descriptive and stylistic genres of cultural productions of “diff erence” 
as “otherness.”
39 In this context, “knowing” can mean the violent imposition 
of one’s values, perspectives, and agendas on those seen as mirrors of the self 
rather than as complex, historical subjects.
40 Th ese identifi cation practices pro-
liferate in both visual and print traditions in Western modernity.
Reproducing Colonial Discourse: Global Womanism’s Narrative 
and Visual Conventions
Feminist scholarship on colonial discourse has been crucial in pointing out 
the ways in which imperialist social relations produced the female subaltern as 
a specifi cally embodied subject situated in the Th ird World. Yet, the history of 
Western feminist ideas and practices includes imperializing and racist forma-
tions. Contemporary feminist scholarship on women travelers, for example, 
has been divided between celebrations of adventurous heroines and condem-
nations of racist “memsahibs.” Such a division in representation can obscure 
the complicated class and ethnic distinctions that structure Western women’s 
travel and immigration as well as the history of both pro- and anti-imperialist 
activities on the part of Western feminists. Enmeshed in either the romance 
of individual achievement over the rigors of travel or a nationalist resistance 
to European or North American traveling cultures, W estern feminist repre-
s e n t a ti o n s  o f  tr a v e l  r e m ain  un e v e n ,  un d e r - th e o riz e d ,  an d  d e e p l y  tr o u b lin g .  
For instance, the presence of African-American missionaries in Africa in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries requires more research into and discus-
sion of these kinds of complex positionalities that cannot be understood fully 
within the binary of colonizer/colonized.
41 One of the primary technologies 
which Walker and Parmar use to convey knowledge is a map of their “trav-
els.” It is standard practice in colonial discourse to naturalize the social world 
through representation. Such maps, used in the broadest metaphorical sense, 
chart the fl ows of goods, resources, and peoples in the uneven trajectories of 
capital. Warrior Marks, markedly uninterested in class issues, makes a map of 
RT54118_C018.indd   388RT54118_C018.indd   388 8/11/06   4:28:37 PM8/11/06   4:28:37 PM


--- PAGE 446 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 389
ethnic and racial diaspora that is superimposed upon a map of a unifi  ed and 
universal female body. Th is complex mapping of modern subjects confl ates an 
“African” diaspora with a Western cultural feminist construction of “woman” 
to argue for a “return” to the mother country, to the body of the mother, to the 
source of female identity.
42
Th is universalized body—whole, unifi  ed, and organic in relation to the cir-
cumcised body of the “Other”—forms the standpoint for the feminist prac-
tices visible in Warrior Marks. Such a standpoint prevents recognition of the 
ways in which Western patriarchies are inscribed on women’s bodies through 
various technologies and disciplinary practices—breast augmentation, lipo-
suction, rhinoplasty, tubal ligations, in vitro fertilization, mastectomies, hys-
terectomies, cosmetic surgeries, etc.—within the context of a lack of health 
care and reproductive freedom for metropolitan women, especially poor 
women and women of color.
43 Geopolitics and cultural asymmetries must be 
included in our analyses of the formation of specifi c sexed and gendered sub-
jects in various locations. Th e histories and relations between such subjects 
are important topics of analysis in our struggle to deconstruct global feminist 
discourses. Western feminism’s essentialist notions of bodies and sexuality 
pervade the globalizing discourse of “sisterhood,” through imperializing rep-
resentations. Warrior Marks is only one such cultural product in circulation, 
g e n e r a t i n g  n e o - c o l o n i a l i s m s  i n  t h e  n a m e  o f  m u l t i c u l t u r a l  f e m i n i s m .  O n e  
response to Warrior Marks, therefore, is to begin a discussion of the ways 
visual representations, identities, and subjects in modernity collude with the 
power relations of late capital’s colonial ventures.
In the fi lm Warrior Marks, the primary tropes of travel that centuries of 
imperialist economic expansion have engendered are easily identifi  able. First 
and foremost, a designated area—here “Africa”—must be emptied metaphori-
cally and made culturally blank.
44 Th us, the fi  lm depicts an overwhelmingly 
rural Africa peopled only by natives dominated by cultural tradition. Warrior 
Marks acknowledges a few African doctors and activists who work against the 
practice of genital surgeries but suggests that their actions are ineff ectual and 
can only be strengthened by help from abroad. Both the fi  lm and the book 
present Walker and Parmar on a heroic mission to an Africa that is the site of 
unspeakable practices against its “women.” Indeed, in its portrayal of Africa 
as a relatively undiff erentiated space of “otherness,” Warrior Marks erases the 
histories of decolonizations and diverse formations of nation-states including 
decades of “development,” “modernization” programs, and localized strate-
gies of resistance.
Instead, Warrior Marks prefers to deploy images that could easily be culled 
from the magazine pages or documentary footage of National Geographic.
45 
Th e world the fi  lm conjures for its female heroines to travel through is one in 
which tradition is drastically diff erentiated from modernity . Th is distinction is 
drawn as a geographical map where some regions remain “dark,” unenlightened, 
RT54118_C018.indd   389RT54118_C018.indd   389 8/11/06   4:28:38 PM8/11/06   4:28:38 PM


--- PAGE 447 ---
390 • Th e Womanist Reader
and thus more dangerous for women than others. In the print version, this map 
is rendered literally, complete with insets and scales in a manner reminiscent 
of such nineteenth-century travel accounts as Mary Kingsley’s Travels in West 
Africa.
46 Th e book is organized into sections that recount the “journeys” of 
Walker and Parmar. Th ese journeys are further linked to a particular set of 
Western feminist conventions through the use of epistolary communications: 
“Dear Pratibha,” the book begins.
47 Th e fi  lm also uses the letters between 
Walker and Parmar as part of its narrative strategy. But before the literary 
convention of the epistle fully structures our understanding of the fi lm, we see 
and hear the most typical of colonial discourse tropes—we hear drumming and 
we see a muscular leg draped in a multipatterned fabric resembling “native 
garb.” We are from the fi rst instant “abroad.” More specifi cally, the drumming 
signals “Africa” to non-Africans raised on both Hollywood and standard 
ethnographic fi lms. Th at is, we, the viewers, must be assumed to be people 
who are not living in Western Africa—who are not at home there.
Although Walker’s early intention was to make a fi  lm to educate and raise 
African consciousness about genital surgeries, she and Parmar soon discover 
fi nancial and technical constraints—the cost of subtitling a fi  lm made in 
English and the lack of screening or viewing facilities, for example. In the fi  lm 
project, the rhetorical eff ect of “knowledge” must be produced in the face of a 
profound lack of information on the part of the fi  lmmakers. African women 
in diverse locations and of diff  erent classes become subsumed under the 
category “African” as the fi  lm’s shooting sites in Gambia and Senegal become 
generalizable to an entire continent and the specifi  c practices of genital 
surgeries are universalized. Although Parmar and her assistant were able to 
spend only a week in Gambia researching locations and setting up contacts 
before Walker arrived and the two-week shoot began, the presentation 
of information in the text is asserted with great confi  dence as “fact.” Yet, 
without local guides and with elusive and unreliable contacts, the fi  lm crew 
is literally “lost” ; none of the visitors speaks the relevant languages, no one 
has spent time in these places before, and no one is knowledgeable about 
this part of Africa. While Parmar spent part of her childhood in Kenya, her 
adult life in England has not been focused on African topics or studies. By 
the grace of her research for her novel, P ossessing the Secret of Joy , Walker 
becomes the production’s “expert” on female genital surgeries. Th e relatively 
short pre-production period, the great distances and language barriers, and 
their diffi  culties in linking up with prominent activists, such as Awa Th  iam, 
mean that such contacts are more haphazard than they are the product of 
long-term coalitional activity.
Th e mistrust of some local fi  gures toward the fi lmmakers may be justifi ed. 
For in order to create a global subject—“woman”—as victim of generalized 
patriarchal oppression, Walker and Parmar have to utilize both anti-feminist 
and Eurocentric discourses in the form of authoritative texts. Th  e “Selected 
RT54118_C018.indd   390RT54118_C018.indd   390 8/11/06   4:28:39 PM8/11/06   4:28:39 PM


--- PAGE 448 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 391
Bibliography and Suggested Reading” section that appears at the end of the 
print version of Warrior Marks is interesting in several regards. Th  e key 
c i t a t i o n s  f a l l  i n t o  c a t e g o r i e s  s u c h  a s  A f r i c a n  n a t i o n a l i s t s  ( J o m o  K e n y a t t a ) ,  
Euro-American popular sexologists (Masters and Johnson, Shere Hite, etc.), 
randomly selected and uncritiqued ethnographies (Marcel Griaule, Jacques 
Lantier), and African and Euro-American activists on women’s health issues 
who are heavily identifi ed with the fi ght against FGM. Absent from the bib-
liography are feminist histories of colonialism and nationalism or decolo-
nization, critiques of ethnographic knowledge in general or the surgeries in 
particular, and socio-political accounts of the lives of women in Africa. While 
Walker and Parmar acknowledge that contemporary practices of FGM may 
be attributed in part to colonialism, such an acknowledgment disallows any 
infi ltration or impact on their own dunking or ideological formation as West-
ern subjects in modernity . Th e burden of an oppressive practice falls on an 
ahistorical “tradition” in an exoticized culture.
Th e appearance of a binary opposition between tradition and modernity is 
a primary paradigm of colonial discourse. As critics and historians including 
Edward Said, Talal Asad, Johannes Fabian, Gayatri Spivak, and Ella Shohat 
have pointed out, this binary division creates a logic for Western interven-
tion because it constructs a view of modernity as a corrective to tradition.
48 
Modernity becomes a signifi er for a range of attributes including the enlight-
ened West, progress, civilization, democracy, self-determination, and free-
dom of choice. Tradition becomes the “other” by which non-Western cultures 
make their own empowerment socially, politically, and culturally. It is only by 
deconstructing this binary opposition through historicization and contextu-
alization, that tradition and modernity emerge as constructs of a European 
world view that emphasizes a teleological and rational course over and above 
other modes of representing change, diff erence, and similarity. As two aspects 
of the same paradigm, then, the oppositional relationship between tradition 
and modernity masks the power of one term to describe and evaluate cultures 
that are designated as the “other.”
Warrior Marks reinscribes this oppositional relationship that is so central to 
colonial discourse and Western, metropolitan subject formation. Rural Africa 
comes to signify “tradition,” a destructive environment for women. In the fi lm, 
the camera utilizes standard ethnographic shots to establish cultural diff  er-
ence. Th e gaze behind the camera penetrates the social space of the local peo-
ple, moving in and out of doorways, searching for “secrets.” Th e pivotal scene 
around which all these issues seem to revolve occurs in Walker’s interview with 
an elderly female “circumciser” (who has no identity or name except “Circum-
ciser 1” in both print and fi lm texts). Th is scene summons many of the tropes 
of colonial discourse as it is interpellated through global feminism, especially 
the missionary discourse of eradicating ritual practices by “outing” them, by 
bringing “light” onto the subject, as it were.
RT54118_C018.indd   391RT54118_C018.indd   391 8/11/06   4:28:40 PM8/11/06   4:28:40 PM


--- PAGE 449 ---
392 • Th e Womanist Reader
Following Gayatri Spivak’s and Rey Chow’s examination of the representa-
ti o n  o f  s u b al t e rn  s u b j e cts  in  c o l o ni al  di s c o ur s e ,  thi s  s c e n e  b e tw e e n  W alk e r  
and the “circumciser” illustrates the way resistance and silence—oft  en coded 
as “secrets”—challenge Western, liberal political formations. 49 In the inter-
view, the elderly woman is portrayed as sinisterly withholding information 
from the interviewer, Alice Walker.
50 Th is “withholding” is presented as being 
crucial to maintaining tradition. Walker’s “telling,” on the other hand, is 
seen as the key to liberating the prisoners of traditional culture. Th  e struggle 
between Walker and the nameless Gambian “circumciser” is visually and 
textually presented as a moral victory for Walker’s viewpoint. Th  e camera 
focuses repeatedly on the crude blade the woman holds in her lap, suggesting 
its deadly and cruel uses. Many reviewers comment on the powerful impact 
of the struggle between the “circumciser” and Walker’s eff  orts to force her to 
reveal her “secrets.” Indeed, the San Francisco Chronicle’s reviewer referred to 
the elderly woman as “wizened” and “ominous” while applauding Walker’s 
speech, here termed “giving the woman a piece of her mind.”
51
In this and other scenes, the fi lm makes no eff ort to question ethnographic 
authority (as the fi lms of Trinh Minh-ha or Laleen Jayamanne have attempted 
for over a decade) or to make dialogical or epistemological innovations. 52 
An uncritical use of ethnographic texts builds upon the nineteenth-century 
literary tradition that Mary Louise Pratt refers to as “manners and customs 
description,” constructing the “native” as object.
53 Walker and Parmar utilize 
ethnographic materials as “authoritative” when it suits their end. For example, 
in the print text at the end of the transcript of Walker’s interview with “Cir-
cumciser 1,” the reader fi nds a “description” of an infi  bulation from a 1978 
medical thesis from the University of Bordeaux.
54 Parmar cites A.M.I. Ver-
giat’s Moeurs et Coutumes des Manjas (1937) as the source of a “ritual” song 
sung by circumcised girls. 55 Many Th ird World and anti-imperialist feminist 
fi lmmakers and writers have struggled against the reproduction of ethno-
graphic colonial discourses in cinematic and cultural practice, critiquing and 
resisting its representational strategies. Th e Warrior Marks texts reinforce and 
reproduce colonial discourse through an unproblematized reliance upon and 
alliance with “authoritative,” Eurocentric studies.
In the standard colonial gesture of constructing a “native” through the 
operation of diff erence, the elderly circumciser in Warrior Marks is depicted as 
actively evil and passively deluded by tradition. Walker, the interviewer, on the 
other hand, throws off  the mantle of objective questioner to reveal the enlight-
ened metropolitan subject who “knows” all. In “Can the Subaltern Speak?” 
Gayatri Spivak calls the position and power of the investigator or interviewer 
into question in order to examine how the “third-world subject is represented 
within Western discourse.”
56 Rejecting the liberal demand that all subjects 
constitute themselves through public “speech,” Spivak argues that social and 
political movements cannot break the epistemological stranglehold of imperial 
RT54118_C018.indd   392RT54118_C018.indd   392 8/11/06   4:28:41 PM8/11/06   4:28:41 PM


--- PAGE 450 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 393
culture by resurrecting the “shadows” of subjectivity, the categories that impe-
rialism created. Without deconstruction, the “possibility of collectivity itself is 
persistently foreclosed through the manipulation of female agency.”
57
Read against the grain, as it were, the print text opens up some questions 
of knowledge production that could have been pursued in the fi  lm itself. For 
instance, “Pratibha’s Journey,” Parmar’s section of the print text, chronicles, 
among many things, the contradictions and tensions that emerge in the rep-
resentational politics of the project. Despite Parmar’s increasing identifi  ca-
tion with Walker’s “vision,” she expresses concern during pre-production and 
the shoot about making suffi   cient contact with local activists. Awa Th  iam, 
for instance, remains relatively elusive for reasons upon which Parmar can 
only speculate. Parmar worries that if Th  iam will not cooperate by leading 
the fi lmmakers to the “right” contacts in Senegal and elsewhere or by endors-
ing the project, their work will be hampered logistically and their credibility 
will suff er. Th iam, as it happens, is in the midst of a pre-election campaign 
for the opposition political party in her country and does not seem able to 
drop everything to meet with Parmar. While Parmar presents this situation 
as Th iam’s obstinate resistance, the text leaves the question open as to whether 
Th iam is playing the powerful diva/native informant or whether she is just a 
busy professional who has not been asked far enough ahead of time whether 
the fi lm schedule would be convenient for her.
In an interview included in the print text, Th  iam makes it very clear that 
she agrees with Walker and Parmar on the symbolic import of female genital 
surgeries. Since Th iam comes from a local group that practices, as she says, 
“80 percent female circumcision and sometimes infi  bulation,” she views the 
situation as urgent and agrees with the fi  lmmakers on the need to organize 
internationally. However, her analysis of the practice as an indication of wom-
en’s subordination that is embedded within the power structures of particular 
societies leads her, aft  er ten years of working in what she calls the “female 
circle,” to “get involved in the sphere of politics,” and to “succeed in convinc-
ing the decision makers, both male and female, and to try to struggle for the 
abolition of sexual mutilation.”
58
Th iam’s move toward participation in electoral politics highlights the sup-
pression of such socio-political and economic continuums in Warrior Marks. 
In addition to their fuzzy relationship to both state and non-governmental 
structures, Walker and Parmar’s texts erase many facets of transnational 
economic factors, mystifying the division of labor that makes possible, for 
instance, the funding of a fi  lm instead of a refrigerated truck. In the print 
version of Warrior Marks, the authors recount an extraordinary anecdote that 
describes a meeting between a group of women who run a collective garden 
and the fi lmmakers. Asked their feelings about FGM, these women respond 
by asking the “rich Americans” for a refrigerated truck they need badly to get 
their produce to outlying areas. Th e fi lmmakers, who do not perceive themselves 
RT54118_C018.indd   393RT54118_C018.indd   393 8/11/06   4:28:42 PM8/11/06   4:28:42 PM


--- PAGE 451 ---
394 • Th e Womanist Reader
as “rich” by their own cultural standards, joke that they could probably only 
pay for one tire for such a truck. Th  e request for a truck is not mentioned 
again. Th is will to ignore or misrecognize information that does not seem to 
pertain to their own project marks the imperialist tendencies of this project. 
Th e power to set an agenda, to arrive uninvited in a country for a brief period 
of time, to tell people how they ought to feel and think about their sexuality 
and their bodies, to assume the right to rescue other people’s children, and to 
use this experience as a yardstick of one’s own freedom, is standard operating 
procedure in the textual tracks of imperialism’s cultural production. Th  ese 
gestures and moves are an historical legacy—Warrior Marks does not take the 
opportunity to unlearn or even to question this representational heritage and 
th us cann o t do m o r e than r epea t i ts signs. As Chan dra M ohan ty argues in 
her critique of Western feminist discourse on female genital surgeries: “Sister-
hood cannot be assumed on the basis of gender; it must be forged in concrete 
historical and political practice and analysis.”
59
Th us, Walker and Parmar make a fi  lm that speaks directly, vividly, and 
authoritatively to demand a change in the way people conduct their lives 
in particular locations. Th eir right to make this demand comes through an 
unquestioned adherence to Western medical science, and, apparently, through 
their superior ethical positioning (their “knowledge” of right and wrong), that 
is, they “know better.” Th is positivist ethics is conjoined with an appeal to lib-
eral juridical practices, engendering a powerful set of philosophical, medical, 
and legal certainties in the eff  ort to “civilize” in the name of a multicultural 
global womanism.
Multiculturalism’s Globalizing Discourses
It is clear from the work of many scholars in recent years that what we call 
“imperial feminism” emerged during the nineteenth century to create simul-
taneously new feminist subjects in the West and their objects of rescue in the 
“periphery”—“sisters” with drastically diff  erent material conditions of life. 
Th e collusion between some Western feminist practices and colonial dis-
courses has been amply documented in over a decade of emergent critical 
work. Th e advent of “postcolonial theory” constructed by diasporas of schol-
ars who settled in Europe or in North America created a new demand for 
increased attention to the aft ermath of colonialism. Furthermore, the politi-
cization of racial minorities through multiculturalism as a social and cultural 
movement in the United States has gained its voice through the articulation 
of rights claims against the modern state. Th ese political and cultural move-
ments inform feminist practices in metropolitan locations in a profound and 
complex manner.
With this complicated social and cultural fi  eld in mind, we might see fi  g-
ures such as W alker and Parmar , with quite diff  erent historical trajectories, 
coming together for a project such as Warrior Marks through their links 
RT54118_C018.indd   394RT54118_C018.indd   394 8/11/06   4:28:42 PM8/11/06   4:28:42 PM


--- PAGE 452 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 395
with movements that have emerged through anti-colonialist eff  orts. Th is 
means that Walker’s concern with the aft  ermath of slavery in the US and 
Parmar’s participation in anti-racist movements in Britain have contributed 
to a heightened understanding of present-day gender as constructed through 
colonized patriarchies around the globe. Multiculturalism, then, has been one 
w a y  t o  d e m an d  th e  ri gh ts  o f  ci tize n s  ra ci alized  as  w e ll  as  g e n d e r ed  in  p ar -
ticular ways. Yet, when multiculturalism remains fi  xed upon state remedies, 
reinforcing national agendas, and placing less emphasis on socio-economic 
formations, the alliance between “women of color” may become strained.
To a certain extent this dilemma is being addressed by solidarity move-
ments that draw upon a range of ideologies of cosmopolitanism and global 
unity. Th us, the “global” and “transnational” are all interpellated by femi-
nist subjects who also rely upon a discourse of multiculturalism. Yet diff  er-
ences between subjects of less powerful and more powerful states remain to 
be addressed. Th is process confl  ates the racialized subject of the state with 
the global feminist or womanist who constructs a universal woman as the 
paradigmatic female subject of global sisterhood. Th us, Walker and Parmar, 
in solidarity with this global woman, wish to rescue and include her in the 
privileges of modernity and its emergent sexual subjectivities and embodied 
practices. What drops out of this gesture is any recognition that this global 
woman exists only to reaffi  rm the metropolitan subject of feminism. Th e mul-
ti cul tur al  s u b j e ct,  as  i t  i s  c o n s ti tu t e d  thr o u gh  s u c h  a  gl o b alize d  p r a cti c e  o f  
feminism, may be part of an anti-racist strategy but its only space of negotia-
tion is a modern nation-state.
In order to create a fi  lm that satisfi es the demands of Western subjectiv-
ity and the ethnographic tradition, all the complex negotiations between the 
multicultural subject and the imperial state fall away so that what remains 
are the conventional colonial tropes—the very tradition of representation that 
leads to a racism that the multiculturalism project seeks to resist. To have 
made a less “popular” fi  lm, Walker and Parmar would have had to include 
many of the tensions and confl icts that emerge in the print text (even if only in 
passing), such as the links between an analysis of diverse surgical practices as 
gendered and racialized modes of subject constitution or the diffi  culty of forg-
ing alliances and gaining the cooperation of women activists in the regions of 
Africa visited by the fi lm crew.
Warrior Marks is just one prominent instance of the diffi  culties of globaliz-
ing a multicultural feminist agenda. It is important to read the texts that come 
out of the political movements we are committed to not only in a celebratory 
manner but with an attention to these dilemmas in representational practice 
and politics. Our aim is not to destroy or take away important icons and cul-
tural practices that support communities of resistance. Rather, we want to gen-
erate debate and discussion about our representational practices and politics. 
In many ways, the dilemma for late twentieth-century multicultural feminists 
RT54118_C018.indd   395RT54118_C018.indd   395 8/11/06   4:28:43 PM8/11/06   4:28:43 PM


--- PAGE 453 ---
396 • Th e Womanist Reader
is similar to that faced by late nineteenth-century national feminists—how to 
work with, around, and against the state. Asking for rights from the nation-
state, representing others through identitarian practices, is an inevitable and 
necessary process for all social movements in modernity. But in acknowledg-
ing that inevitability, we should not abandon critique. Th  ese are challenges 
off ered by the extremely diffi  cult task of public policy formation and activist 
work. Our reading of an activist, multiculturalist feminist/womanist fi lm and 
its accompanying print text is not, therefore, simply one of opposing aesthetic 
tastes or political correctness. Given that genital surgeries and refugee asylum 
claims based on FGM are now a matter of governmental debate in the US and 
Europe,
60 it seems timely and necessary to examine the connections between 
discourses of human rights, racialized nationalisms, and multiculturalism in 
feminist and womanist frameworks.
Notes
 1. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” in Cary Nelson and Lawrence 
Grossberg, eds., Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture (Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 1988), 299.
 2. Rogaia Mustafa Abusharaf, “Th  e Resurrection of the Savage: Warrior Marks Revisited,” 
paper delivered at the seminar on “Th e Future of Gender” (2 April 1997), at the Pembroke 
Center for Teaching and Research on Women, 2.
 3. Chandra Talpade Mohanty, “Cartographies of Struggle: Th  ird World Women and the 
Politics of Feminism,” and “Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Dis-
courses,” in Chandra Talpade Mohanty, Ann Russo, and Lourdes Torres, eds., Th ird World 
Women and the Politics of Feminism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), 1–47, 
51–80. See also, Norma Alarcón, “Th e Th eoretical Subject(s) of Th is Bridge Called My Back 
and Anglo-American Feminism,” in Gloria Anzaldúa, ed., Making Face, Making Soul: 
Haciendo Caras (San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 1990), 356–369; and Norma Alarcón, 
“Traddutora, Traditora: A Paradigmatic Figure of Chicana Feminism,” in Inderpal Grewal 
and Caren Kaplan, eds., Scattered Hegemonies: Postmodernist and Transnational Feminist 
Practices ( Minn ea po lis:  Minn eso ta  U niv ers i ty  Pr ess,  1 994 ) ,  1 1 0– 1 3 3;  an d  In derpal  Gr e-
wal and Caren Kaplan, “Introduction: Transnational Feminist Practices and Questions of 
Postmodernity,” in Grewal and Kaplan, Scattered Hegemonies, 1–33.
 4. Martin Jay, “Scopic Regimes of Modernity,” in S. Lash and J. Friedman, eds., Modernity 
and Identity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994).
 5. See Ella Shohat and Robert Stam, Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and the 
Media (New York: Routledge, 1994); Avery F. Gordon and Christopher Newfi  eld, eds., 
Mapping Multiculturalism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996); David 
Th eo Goldberg, ed., Multiculturalism: A Critical Reader (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994).
 6. Here we need to diff  er from approaches such as Faye V. Harrison’s toward Alice Walker’s 
represen tation of w omen in a global framew ork. While Harrison argues that W alker’ s 
novel, In the Temple of My Familiar, is a “world cultural history from a pluralistic Th  ird 
World feminist perspective” which “deessentializes gender as well as race and class,” we 
view such projects as recuperating new kinds of global gendered subjects. See Faye V. 
Harrison, “Anthropology, Fiction, and Unequal Relations of Intellectual Production,” in 
Ruth Behar and Deborah A. Gordon, eds., Women Writing Culture (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1995), 233–245.
 7. Claude Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1963), 16–17.
 8. Noel Burch, Life to Th ose Shadows (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), 16. For 
discussion of “ethnographic authority” and the history of anthropological cultures of repre-
sentation see James Cliff ord and George Marcus, eds., Writing Culture (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1986); and James Cliff ord, Th e Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Cen-
tury Ethnography, Literature, and Art (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988).
RT54118_C018.indd   396RT54118_C018.indd   396 8/11/06   4:28:44 PM8/11/06   4:28:44 PM


--- PAGE 454 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 397
 9. See Denise Albanese, New Science, New World (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996); 
John Berger, Ways of Seeing (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977); Lisa Cartwright, Screening 
the Body: Tracing Medicine’s Visual Culture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1995); and Valerie Hartouni, Cultural Conceptions: On Reproductive Technologies and the 
Remaking of Life (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997).
 10. David MacDougall, “Prospects of the Ethnographic Film,” in Bill Nichols, ed., Movies 
and Methods (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), 136.
 11. David MacDougall, “Beyond Observation Cinema,” in P. Hockings, ed., Principles of 
Visual Anthropology (Paris: Mouton, 1975), 118, cited in Kathleen Kuehnast, “Visual 
Imperialism and the Export of Prejudice: An Exploration of Ethnographic Film,” in Peter 
Ian Crawford and David Turton, eds., Film as Ethnography (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 1992), 186.
 12. Fatimah Tobing Rony, Th e Th ird Eye: Race, Cinema, and Ethnographic Spectacle (Dur-
ham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996), 8.
 13. Ibid., 71.
 14. See Parama Roy, Indian Traffi  c (Berkeley: U niversity of California Press, 1 998 ); Nalini 
Natarajan, “Women, Nation, and Narration in Midnight’s Children, ” in Grewal and 
Kaplan, Scattered Hegemonies, 76–89; Rey Chow, Primitive Passions: Visuality, Sexuality, 
Ethnography, and Contemporary Chinese Cinema (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1995); and Shohat and Stam, Unthinking Eurocentrism.
 15. Alice Walker, In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 
1983).
 16. See Valerie Amos and Pratibha Parmar, “Challenging Imperial Feminism,” Feminist 
Review 17 (1984), 3–19.
 17.  For an extended discussion of the importance of “socio-cultural” context for black women 
cultural producers, see Gloria Gibson-Hudson, “Aspects of Black Feminist Cultural Ideol-
ogy in Films by Black Women Independent Artists,” in Diane Carson, Linda Dittmar, and 
Janice R. Welsch, eds., Multiple Voices in Feminist Film Criticism (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1994), 365–379.
 18. For a variety of anthropological, legal, historical, and cultural perspectives on female 
genital surgeries as a question of “tradition” in an era of human rights activism, see 
Bettina Shell-Duncan and Ylva Hernlund, eds., Female Circumcision in Africa: Culture, 
Controversy and Change (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2000).
 19. Isabelle Gunning, “Arrogant Perception, World-Travelling and Multicultural Femi-
nism: Th e Case of Female Genital Surgeries,” Columbia Human Rights Law Review 23 
(1992), 189. We have been inspired and encouraged by Gunning’s interventions in human 
rights discourse and by her complex, materially grounded theorization of multicultural 
feminism.
 20. For an extremely useful discussion of the history of Western representations of the clito-
ris see Lisa Jean Moore and Adele E. Clarke, “Clitoral Conventions and Transgressions: 
Graphic Representations in Anatomy Texts, c. 1900–1991,” Feminist Studies 21 (2) (Summer 
1995), 255–301.
 21. Rey Chow, Writing Diaspora: Tactics of Intervention in Contemporary Cultural Studies 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993), 28–29.
 22. Doris Sommer, “Resistant Texts and Incompetent Readers,” Poetics Today 15 (4) (Winter 
1994), 543, cited in Diana Fuss, Identifi cation Papers (New York: Routledge, 1995), 9.
 23. Evelyn C. White, “Alice Walker’s Compassionate Crusade,” San Francisco Chronicle 
(Monday, November 15, 1993), D1.
 24. Here we disagree with Diana Fuss and other psychoanalytic feminist theorists who argue 
for a politicized recognition of the erotic and mobilizing powers of identifi  cation as a 
compensation for lost love-objects. While we acknowledge the rigor of these arguments, 
examples such as Warrior Marks demonstrate the cultural and political limits of such an 
approach. See Fuss, Identifi cation Papers.
 25. Amy Hamilton, “Warrior Marks,” off  our backs 23 (11) (December 1993), 2.
 26. See Diane Minor, “ Warrior Marks: Joyous Resistance at Walker Film Debut,” National 
NOW Times (January 1994), 7; Mari Keiko Gonzalez, “Culture or Torture?” Bay Area 
Reporter (18 November 1993); White, “Alice Walker’s Compassionate Crusade,” D1; 
David A. Kaplan, “Is It Torture or Tradition?” Newsweek (December 20, 1993), 124.
RT54118_C018.indd   397RT54118_C018.indd   397 8/11/06   4:28:45 PM8/11/06   4:28:45 PM


--- PAGE 455 ---
398 • Th e Womanist Reader
 27. Seble Dawit and Salem Mekuria, “Th  e West Just Doesn’t Get It,” Th e New York Times 
(Tuesday, December 7, 1993), A27. Th is piece is an exception to the rule. Most New York 
Times op-ed pieces on the topic echo the tone and approach found in A.M. Rosenthal’s 
“Female Genital Torture,” Th e New York Times (Friday, November 12, 1993), A33.
 28. Critiques of Possessing the Secret of Joy include: Margaret Kent Bass, “Alice’s Secret,” CLA 
Journal (September 1994), 1–10, and Diane C. Menya, “Possessing the Secret of Joy,” Lancet 
341 (February 1993), 423. Critiques of Warrior Marks include Leasa Farrar-Frazer, “An 
Opportunity Missed: A Review of Warrior Marks,” Black Film Review 8 (1) (1994), 41–42; 
Gay Wilentz, “Healing the Wounds of Time,” Women’s Review of Books 10 (5) (February 
1993), 15–16; and Kagendo Murungi, “Get Away from My Genitals: A Commentary on 
Warrior Marks” Interstices 2 (1) (Spring 1994), 11–15; and Abusharaf, “Th e Resurrection of 
the Savage.”
 29. Case Western Reserve Law Review 47 (2) (Winter 1997). See in particular L. Amede Obiora, 
“Bridges and Barricades: Rethinking Polemics and Intransigence in the Campaign 
a g ain s t  F e m al e  C i r c um c i s i o n , ”  2 7 5– 3 8 7 ;  M i c e r e  G i th a e  M u g o ,  “ E li ti s t  An ti -C i r c um c i -
sion Discourse as Mutilating and Anti-Feminist,” 461–479; and Isabelle R. Gunning, 
“Uneasy Alliances and Solid Sisterhood: A Response to Professor Obiora’s ‘Bridges and 
Barricades,’ ” 445–459.
 30. Mugo, “Elitist Anti-Circumcision Discourse,” 462.
 31.  Th  e second wave, Western feminist salvo against footbinding as “gynocide” was fi  red by 
Andrea Dworkin in her well-known text Woman Hating (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1974), 
95–117. Although Elizabeth Gould Davis also outlines the history of atrocities committed 
against women, reserving special scorn for those from non-European or non-Christian 
cultures in Th e First Sex (New Y ork: Penguin Books, 1971 ), it is Mary Daly who is best 
known for her analysis of patriarchal violence that includes “Indian” suttee, “Chinese” 
footbinding, and “African” genital mutilation. See Gyn/Ecology: Th e Metaethics of Radi-
cal Feminism (Boston: Beacon Press, 1978). Th is approach lent support to and in many 
ways instigated the contemporary movement to create International Tribunals on Crimes 
against Women; see Diane E.H. Russell and Nicole Van de Ven, Crimes against Women: 
Proceedings of the International Tribunal (East Palo Alto, CA: Frog in the Well Press, 
1984). Lata Mani has documented both British and South Asian nationalist discourses 
on sati (or suttee) in “Contentious Traditions: Th e Debate on Sati in Colonial India,” in 
KumKum Sangari and Sudesh Vaid, eds., Recasting Women (New Delhi: Kali for Women, 
1989), 88–126. For a more historically complex approach to footbinding in East Asia, see 
Alison R. Drucket, “Th e Infl  uence of Western Women on the Anti-Footbinding Move-
ment, 1840–1911,” in Richard W. Guisso and Stanley Johannesen, eds., Women in China 
(Youngstown, NY: Philo Press, 1981).
 32. In addition to Gayatri Spivak’s groundbreaking work collected in In Other Worlds (New 
York: Methuen, 1987) and Outside in the Teaching Machine (New York: Routledge, 1993) 
as well as in Sarah Harasym, ed., Th e Post-colonial Critic (New York: Routledge, 1990), 
see also Cynthia Enloe, Bananas, Beaches, and Bases (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1989); Trinh T. Minh-ha, Woman/Native/Other (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1989); Shohat and Scam, Unthinking Eurocentrism; Chow, Writing Diaspora; Lisa 
Lowe, 
Critical Terrains (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991); Françoise Lionnet, 
Postcolonial Representations (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995); Nupur Chaud-
huri and Margaret Strobel, Western Women and Imperialism (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1992 ); Jenny Sharpe, Allegories of Empire (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1993); Kumari Jayarwardena, Th e White Woman’s Other Burden (New 
York: Routledge, 1995); Antoinette Burton, Burdens of History (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1994); Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather (New York: Routledge, 
1995); and Helen Callaway, Gender, Culture, and Empire (Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 1987).
 33. See Mary Layoun, “Th  e Female Body and ‘Transnational’ Reproduction; or, Rape by Any 
Other Name?” in Grewal and Kaplan, Scattered Hegemonies, 63–75; and Sharpe, Alle-
gories of Empire. See also Susan Jeff ords, “Fantastic Conquests: In U.S. Military History 
Only Some Rapes Count,” Village Voice (July 13, 1993), 22–24, 29.
RT54118_C018.indd   398RT54118_C018.indd   398 8/11/06   4:28:46 PM8/11/06   4:28:46 PM


--- PAGE 456 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 399
 34. Important exceptions include Vicki Kirby, “On the Cutting Edge: Feminism and Clitori-
dectomy,” Australian Feminist Studies 5 (Summer 1987), 35–55; Angela Davis, “Women 
in Egypt: A Personal View,” in Women, Culture, and Politics (New York: Vintage, 1990), 
116–154; Francoise Lionnet, “Feminisms and Universalisms: ‘Universal Rights’ and the 
Legal Debate around the Practice of Female Excision in France, ” Inscriptions 6 (1992), 
98–115; and the work of Gunning.
 35. See Terry Kapsalis, Public Privates: Performing Gynecology from Both Ends of the Speculum 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997); G.J. Barker Benfi eld, Th e Horrors of the Half 
Known Life: Male Attitudes toward Women and Sexuality in Nineteenth-Century America 
(New York: Harper and Row, 1976); Elaine Showalter, Th e Female Malady (New York: Pan-
theon, 1 985 ) , 7 5– 7 8; John M oney , Th e Destroying Angel (Buff alo, NY: Prometheus Books, 
1985), 119–120; John Duff y, “Masturbation and Clitoridectomy,” Journal of the American 
Medical Association 186 (3) (October 19, 1963), 246–249; J.B. Fleming et al., “Clitoridec-
tomy—Th e Disastrous Downfall of Isaac Baker Brown, F.R.C.S. (1867),” Journal of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology of the British Empire 67 (6) (October 1960), 1017–1034; and Isaac Baker 
Brown, On the Curability of Certain Forms of Insanity, Epilepsy, Catalepsy, and Hysteria in 
Females (London: Robert Hardwicke, 1866).
 36. Female circumcision or genital surgery in general has been represented in “modern” 
discussions of anatomy as well as marked as “culturally signifi  cant” in ethnographic dis-
course. For example, P.C. Remondino’s History of Circumcision from the Earliest Times 
to the Present (Philadelphia: F.A. Davis, 1900) combines ethnographic “knowledge,” folk 
legend, and medical “facts.” Richard Burton supplied ethnographic data on female infi  bu-
lation and excision in a lost fi  rst version of First Footsteps in East Africa (1856) that has 
been recovered by Gordon Waterfi eld in a 1966 edition. Burton’s characterization of this 
“remarkable method” of maintaining chastity as “barbarous” is continued in the strin-
gently “scientifi c” discourse of an article by Allen Worsley published in the Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the British Empire in 1938 in which the author refers to 
female circumcision as “evil.” Th e practice is referred to in soft  -core pornography in 1939 
in Felix Bryk’s Dark Rapture: Th e Sex-Life of the African Negro (New York: Walden, 1939) 
as well as in academia in an article by the celebrated Ashley Montague in Th e American 
Anthropologist in 1945. “Second wave,” Western feminist approaches to the topic follow 
the parameters and tone established by Fran Hosken in her work since the 1970s (gath-
ered in her 1983 Th e Hosken Report: Genital and Sexual Mutilation of Females ). See also 
Henny Lightfoot-Klein, Prisoners of Ritual: An Odyssey into Female Genital Circumcision 
in Africa (New York: Haworth, 1989); Mary Daly, Gyn/Ecology, Robin Morgan and Gloria 
Steinem, “Th e International Crime of Genital Mutilation,” Ms 8 (9) (March 1980), 65–69. 
Th ird World feminists who have published denunciations of the practice include: Awa 
Th iam, Speak Out, Black Sisters: Feminism and Oppression in Black Africa (London: Pluto 
Press, 1986); Olayinka Koso-Th omas, Th e Circumcision of Women: A Strategy for Eradica-
tion (London: Zed Books, 1987); Asma El Dareer, Woman, Why Do You Weep? (London: 
Zed Books, 1982); Efua Dorkenoo and Scilla Elworthy, 
Female Genital Mutilation: Propos-
als for Change (London: Minority Rights Group International, 1992); Nawal el Saadawi, 
Th e Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World (London: Zed Books, 1980). Female cir-
cumcision has also been featured in nationalist and decolonization discourses. See Jomo 
Kenyatta, Facing Mount Kenya: Th e Tribal Life of the Kikuyu (New York: Random House, 
1975). For a stellar discussion of the politics of female circumcision discourse in the decol-
onization struggle in Kenya, see Susan Pedersen, “National Bodies, Unspeakable Acts: 
Th e Sexual Politics of Colonial Policy-Making,” Journal of Modern History 63 (December 
1991), 647–680. We identify signifi cant participation in the discourse of sexual surgery in 
activist writing generated by groups such as the Intersex Society of North America. See, 
for example, the ISNA’s newsletter, Hermaphrodites with Attitudes, and their call for an 
end to “IGM”—Intersexed Genital Mutilation. See also our work-in-progress for a fuller 
discussion of this complex site of alliance between queer, transgender, and global feminist 
activism around sexual surgeries.
 37. See Ann Laura Stoler’s work: “Carnal Knowledge and Imperial Power: Gender, Race, 
and Morality in Colonial Asia,” in Micaela di Leonardo, ed., Gender at the Crossroads of 
Knowledge: Feminist Anthropology in the Postmodern Era (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1991), 51–101; and Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault’s “History of 
Sexuality” and the Colonial Order of Th ings (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1995).
RT54118_C018.indd   399RT54118_C018.indd   399 8/11/06   4:28:48 PM8/11/06   4:28:48 PM


--- PAGE 457 ---
400 • Th e Womanist Reader
 38. See Ann Balsamo, T ec h n o lo gi es  o f  t h e  Gen der ed  B o d y  (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 1995); Jennifer Terry and Jacqueline Urla, eds., Deviant Bodies (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1995); Cartwright, Screening the Body; Kathy Davis, Reshaping the 
Female Body (New York: Routledge, 1995); David Bell and Gill Valentine, eds., Mapping 
Desire: Geographies of Sexualities (New York: Routledge, 1995); and Mary Jacobus, Evelyn 
Fox, and Sally Shuttleworth, eds., Body Politics (New York: Routledge, 1990).
 39. See Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Random House, 1978); Cliff  ord and Mar-
cus, Writing Culture; and Cliff ord, Th e Predicament of Culture.
 40. See Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (London: 
Routledge, 1992); Shohat and Stam, Unthinking Eurocentrism; Inderpal Grewal, Home 
and Harem: Nation, Gender, Empire, and the Cultures of Travel (Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 1996); Caren Kaplan, Questions of Travel: Postmodern Discourses of Dis-
placement (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996); and Caren Kaplan, “ ‘Getting to 
Know You’: Travel, Gender, and the Politics of Representation in Anna and the King of 
Siam and Th e King and I, ” in Roman de la Campa, E. Ann Kaplan, and Michael Sprinker, 
eds., Late Imperial Culture (London: Verso, 1995), 33–52.
 41. See Sylvia M. Jacobs, ed., Black Americans and the Missionary Movement in Africa (West-
port, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982). See also Sylvia M. Jacobs, “Give a Th  ought to Africa: 
Black Women Missionaries in Southern Africa,” in Chaudhuri and Strobel, Western 
Women and Imperialism, 207–228.
 42. Th  is point is more fully discussed in our work-in-progress as part of the discourse of 
global feminism whereby a unifi ed and unfragmented female body becomes equated with 
an ideal “lesbian body.” In this context, female genital surgery eradicates or alters a zone 
that is confi gured in historically specifi  c ways by contemporary Western cultural and 
lesbian feminist discursive practices.
 43. See Davis, Reshaping the Female Body; Jennifer Craik, Th e Face of Fashion: Cultural 
Studies in Fashion (London: Routledge, 1 994 ); Hilary Radner , Shopping Around: Femi-
nine Culture and the Pursuit of Pleasure (New York: Routledge, 1995); Shari Benstock 
and Suzanne Ferriss, eds., On Fashion (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 
1994); Carol A. Stabile, Feminism and the Technological Fix (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 1994); Ann Balsamo, “On the Cutting Edge: Cosmetic Surgery and the 
Technological Production of the Gendered Body,” Camera Obscura 28 (1992), 207–238; 
and Cartwright, Screening the Body. Walker does mention cosmetic surgeries and pres-
sures on Western women to conform to patriarchal ideal forms in the written text when 
she is in the planning stages of the project, but this set of crucial ideas drops out of the 
fi l m  (Warrior Marks, 9–10).
 44. See Pratt, Imperial Eyes; Cliff ord, Th e Predicament of Culture; Shohat and Stam, Unthink-
ing Eurocentrism; and Said, Orientalism. See also Christopher Miller, Blank Darkness: 
Africanist Discourse in French (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985).
 45. See Lisa Bloom, Gender on Ice: American Ideologies of Polar Expeditions (Minneapolis: 
U ni v e r s i ty  o f  Minn es o ta  P r ess,  1 99 3 ) ;  Ca th e rin e  A.  L u tz  an d  J an e  L.  Co llin s,  Reading 
National Geographic (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993); William M. O’Barr, 
“Representations of Others, Part 1: Advertisements in the 1929 National Geographic 
Magazine,” in Culture and the Ad: Exploring Otherness in the World of Advertising (Boul-
der, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 45–72; Tamar Y. Rothenberg, “V oyeurs of Imperialism: 
Th e National Geographic Magazine before World War II,” in Anne Godlewska and Neil 
Smith, eds., Geography and Empire (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1994), 155–172.
 46. Mary H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa 1897 (Boston: Beacon Press, 1988). Kingsley’s infl u-
ence on contemporary “women’s travel” literature can be seen in works such as Caroline 
Alexander’s memoir One Dry Season: In the Footsteps of Mary Kingsley (New York: Vin-
tage Books, 1991) and in Alison Blum’s critical monograph Travel, Gender, and Imperialism: 
Mary Kingsley and West Africa (New York: Guilford Press, 1994). See also, Katherine Frank, 
A Voyager Out: Th e Life of Mary Kingsley (New York: Ballantine Books, 1986).
 47. For a discussion of epistolary conventions in women’s writing, see Linda S. Kauff man, Special 
Delivery: Epistolary Modes in Modern Fiction (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1992).
RT54118_C018.indd   400RT54118_C018.indd   400 8/11/06   4:28:49 PM8/11/06   4:28:49 PM


--- PAGE 458 ---
Harmony, Hegemony, or Healing? • 401
 48. See Said, Orientalism;  Spivak, In Other Worlds and Outside in the Teaching Machine; Sho-
hat and Stam, Unthinking Eurocentrism;  as well as Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: 
How Anthropology Makes Its Object  (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983); and 
Talal Asad, Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter  (London: Ithaca Press, 1973).
 49. See Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” 271–313; and Chow, Writing Diaspora.
 50. Alice Walker and Pratibha Parmar, Warrior Marks: Female Genital Mutilation and the 
Sexual Blinding of Women (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1993), 301–308.
 51. White, “Alice Walker’s Compassionate Crusade,” D1.
 52. For critiques of ethnographic authority in anthropological and cultural discourses see 
Cliff ord and Marcus, Writing Culture; George E. Marcus and Michael M.J. Fischer, 
Anthropology as Cultural Critique: An Experimental Moment in the Human Sciences 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986); and Cliff  ord, Th e Predicament of Culture. 
See also, Laleen Jayamanne, “Do You Th ink I Am a Woman, Ha! Do You?” Discourse 11 
( 2 )  ( S p rin g -S umm er  1 98 9 ) ,  49–6 2;  an d  T rinh  T .  Minh - ha,  Framer Framed (New York: 
Routledge, 1992).
 53. Pratt, Imperial Eyes, 58–68.
 54. See “Alice Walker and Circumciser 1,” 301–309 (including the excerpt from Alan David, 
Infi bulation en République de Djibouti, 308–309).
 55. Walker and Parmar, Warrior Marks, 179.
 56. Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” 271.
 57. Ibid., 282.
 58. Walker and Parmer, Warrior Marks,  284.
 59. Mohanty, “Under Western Eyes,” 58.
 60. See Kay Boulware-Miller, “Female Circumcision: Challenges to the Practice as a Human 
Rights Violation,” Harvard Women’s Law Journal 8 (Spring 1985), 155–177; Isabelle R. 
Gunning, “Modernizing Customary International Law: Th e Challenge of Human Rights,” 
Virginia Journal of International Law 31 (2) (Winter 1991), 211–247; Georgia Dullea, 
“Female Circumcision a Topic at U.N. Parley,” Th e New York Times (Friday, July 18, 1980), 
B4; Marlise Simons, “France Jails Woman for Daughter’s Circumcision,” Th e New York 
Times (January 11, 1993), A8; Timothy Egan, “An Ancient Ritual and a Mother’s Asylum 
Plea,” Th e New York Times (March 4, 1994), A25; Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Canada Gives 
Somali Mother Refugee Status,” Th e New York Times (July 21, 1994), A14; Jill Lawrence, 
“Women Seek Asylum in West to Avoid Abuses in Homeland,” Th e San Francisco Chroni-
cle (March 21, 1994), A3; Sophfronia Scott Gregory, “At Risk of Mutilation,” Time (March 
21, 1994), 45–46. For a vigorous discussion of the pitfalls of cultural defense arguments 
and the rhetoric of human rights in the context of racism, see Sherene Razack, “What Is 
To Be Gained by Looking White People in the Eye? Culture, Race, and Gender in Cases of 
Sexual Violence,” Signs 19 (4) (Summer 1994), 894–923.
RT54118_C018.indd   401RT54118_C018.indd   401 8/11/06   4:28:50 PM8/11/06   4:28:50 PM


--- PAGE 459 ---
RT54118_C018.indd   402RT54118_C018.indd   402 8/11/06   4:28:51 PM8/11/06   4:28:51 PM


--- PAGE 460 ---
Part 5
Womanist Resources
RT54118_S005.indd   403RT54118_S005.indd   403 7/8/06   6:27:04 PM7/8/06   6:27:04 PM


--- PAGE 461 ---
RT54118_S005.indd   404RT54118_S005.indd   404 7/8/06   6:27:04 PM7/8/06   6:27:04 PM


--- PAGE 462 ---
405
19
Selections from the First 
Quarter Century
A Womanist Bibliography (Including Internet Resources)
LAYLI PHILLIPS*
Womanist publications in print and online now number in the thousands. 
Th is includes books, book chapters, journal articles, monographs, magazine 
articles (scholarly and nonscholarly), book reviews, dissertations, theses, news 
items, multimedia items, arts items, and Web sites, not to mention editorials, 
interviews, and the occasional conference paper that appears online. Th e pur-
pose o f this selected b ibliograph y is to sam ple these off erings in a way that 
is useful to researchers, students, and general interest readers. Th ree selection 
criteria have been employed: (1) the publication date must fall within the fi rst 
25 years of womanism (1979–2004), (2) the publication must clearly focus on 
womanism (by containing “womanist” or “womanism” in the title, for instance, 
or devoting a signifi cant portion of text to either of these), and (3) the selec-
tion must contribute to the overall diversity of off erings on womanism in this 
bibliography. In many cases, these are selections that I would have liked to 
include in this volume and that, in any case, can be used to supplement the 
pieces in this collection.
Th e selections included here are organized mostly by discipline. While I do 
not wish to reify or reinscribe disciplinary boundaries by using such a scheme, 
I do want to show the breadth of womanism and the extent to which it has per-
meated even the most unexpected sectors of academia, linking these together 
by a common thread. In addition, I want to make it easy for scholars from 
diff erent disciplines to begin in a familiar place and branch out from there, 
thus facilitating the dialogue and cross-fertilization among diverse fi  elds of 
* Th i s  b i b l i o g r a p h y  w a s  p r e p a r e d  w i t h  t h e  r e s e a r c h  a s s i s t a n c e  o f  n u m e r o u s  p e o p l e ,  
including Taliba Sikudhani Olugbala, BeAnka Nyela, Melinda Mills, Angel Charmain 
Dupree Paschall, Kerri Reddick-Morgan, and the twelve students of my Maymester 
2 0 0 3  W o m a n i s m  s e m i n a r  t h a t  i n c l u d e d  i n d i v i d u a l s  f r o m  G e o r g i a  S t a t e  U n i v e r s i t y ,  
Emory University, and Spelman College.
RT54118_C019.indd   405RT54118_C019.indd   405 8/11/06   4:30:48 PM8/11/06   4:30:48 PM


--- PAGE 463 ---
406 • Th e Womanist Reader
study that is required for a full grasp of womanism. I have made every attempt 
to showcase the geographic reach of womanism, although my sampling has 
been limited to what I can access in English. Readers are encouraged to keep 
abreast of the rapidly proliferating literature on womanism and, in particular, 
to notice the emergence of womanist thought in new areas and communities, 
including communities outside the English-speaking world, outside academia, 
and in cyberspace.
To give a sense of the historical evolution and proliferation of womanist 
thought, I arranged this bibliography in a rough chronological order. Disciplines 
are more or less ordered according to the earliest document using womanist 
language that I could fi  nd. Th us, literature and literary studies, with Alice 
Walker’s “Coming Apart” (1979), is fi rst and architecture/urban studies, with 
Epifania Akosua Amoo-Adare’s “Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Posi-
tionality and the Spatio-temporal Construction of Black Family Life” (2004), 
rounds out the fi rst quarter century of womanism. However, several interdis-
ciplines that have “always already” been interlaced with the womanist proj-
ect are included at the end, along with categories for critiques of womanism, 
interviews, journals, and Web sites. Entries are arranged alphabetically within 
each discipline. Since I have made every attempt to include all of the disci-
plines in which womanism has made an appearance, and because I fully admit 
that some articles defy disciplinary classifi  cation, I take full responsibility for 
any inadvertent omissions or misclassifi cations that others may discover.
Literature and Literary Studies
Adamu, Abdalla Uma. “Parallel Worlds: Refl ective Womanism in Balaraba Ramat Yakubu’s Ina 
Son Sa Haka,” Jenda: A Journal of Culture and African Women Studies,  2003, http://www.
jendajournal.com/issue4/adamu.html.
Aegerter, Lindsey Pentolfe. “Southern Africa, Womanism, and Postcoloniality: A Dialectical 
Approach.” In Th e Postcolonial Condition of African Literature,  ed. Daniel Gover, John 
Conteh-Morgan, and Jane Bryce, 67–74. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2000.
Allan, T uzyline Jita. Womanist and Feminist Aesthetics: A Comparative Review . Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 1995.
Awkward, Michael. “A Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist Criticism.” In Negotiating Diff er-
ence: Race, Gender, and the Politics of Positionality . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1995.
Connor, Kimberly Rae. “Womanist Parables in Gift s of Power:  Th e Autobiography of Rebecca 
Cox Jackson,” a/b: Auto/Biography Studies  10 (1995): 21–38.
Herndon, Gerise. “Anti-colonialist and Womanist Discourse in the Works of Jamaica Kincaid 
and Simone Schwarz-Bant.” In Nwanyibu: Womanbeing and African Literature, ed. Phanuel 
Akubueza Egejuru and Ketu H. Katrak, 159–71. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1997.
Hudson-Weems, Clenora. Africana Womanist Literary Th eory . Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
2004.
Jaiswal, Madhavi. Writing the Ordinary: Indian South African Writing as Womanist Prose . 
Ottowa: National Library of Canada, 1996.
Jimoh, A. Yemisi. “Double Consciousness, Modernism, and Womanist Th  emes in Gwendolyn 
Brooks’s ‘Th e Anniad,’ ” MELUS 23 (1998): 167–86.
Kolawole, Mary E. Modupe. Womanism and African Gender Consciousness . Trenton, NJ: Africa 
World Press, 1997.
Langley, April. “Lucy Terry Prince: Th e Cultural and Literary Legacy of Africana Womanism,” 
Th e Western Journal of Black Studies  25 (2001): 153–62.
RT54118_C019.indd   406RT54118_C019.indd   406 8/11/06   4:30:50 PM8/11/06   4:30:50 PM


--- PAGE 464 ---
Selections from the First Quarter Century • 407
Lee, Valerie. “Testifying Th eory: Womanist Intellectual Th  ought,” Women: A Cultural Review  
6 (1995): 200–206.
Marsh-Lockett, Carol. “Womanism.” In Th e Oxford Companion to African American Literature , 
ed. William L. Andrews, Frances Smith Foster, and Trudier Harris, 784–86. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Montelaro, Janet J. Producing a Womanist Text: Th e Maternal as Signifi  er in Alice Walker’s Th e 
Color Purple. Victoria, British Columbia, Canada: English Literary Studies, University 
of Victoria, 1996.
Mori, Aoi. Toni Morrison and Womanist Discourse . New York: Peter Lang, 1999.
Ogunyemi, Chikwenye Okonjo. “Womanism: Th e Dynamics of the Contemporary Black Female 
Novel in English,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society  11 (1985): 63–80.
———. Africa Wo/Man Palava: Th e Nigerian Novel by Women . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1996.
Sherman, Charlotte Watson. Sisterfi re: Black Womanist Fiction and Poetry.  New York: Perennial, 
1994.
Stephens, Ronald J., Maureen Keaveny, and Venetria K. Patton. “Come Colour My Rainbow: 
Th emes of Africana Womanism in the Poetic Vision of Audrey Kathryn Bullett,” Journal 
of Black Studies  32 (2002): 464–79.
Strong-Leek, Linda. “Emerging Womanism in the Works of Tsitsi Dangarembga, Barbara 
Mahkalisa, and J. Nozip Maraire.” In African Literature Association Conference Proceed-
ings, 140–56. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2001.
Th ompson, Betty Taylor. “Common Bonds from Africa to the U.S.: Africana Womanist Literary 
Analysis,” Th e Western Journal of Black Studies  25 (2001): 177–84.
Viswanathan, Meera, and Evangelina Mancikam. “Is Black Woman to White as Female Is to 
Male? Restoring Alice Walker’s Womanist Prose to the Heart of Feminist Literary Criti-
cism,” Indian Journal of American Studies  28 (1998): 15–20.
Walker, Alice. “Coming Apart.” In Take Back the Night,  ed. Laura Lederer, 84–93. New York: 
Bantam, 1979.
———. “Gift s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca Jackson.” In In Search of Our Mothers’ Gar-
dens: Womanist Prose,  by Alice Walker, 71–82. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1983.
———. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1983.
——— . “Womanist.” In In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: W omanist Prose,  by Alice Walker, 
xi–xii. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983.
Williams, Sherley Anne. “Some Implications of Womanist Th eory,” Callaloo  9 (1986): 303–308.
Xu, Wenying. “ A Womanist Production of Truths: Th e Use of Myths in Amy Tan,” Paintbrush  
22 (1995): 56–66.
Th eology and Religious Studies
Baker-Fletcher, Karen. A Singing Something: Womanist Refl ections on Anna Julia Cooper. New York: 
Crossroad, 1994.
———. Sisters of Dust, Sisters of Spirit: Womanist Wordings on God and Creation . Minneapolis, 
MN: Fortress, 1998.
Baker-Fletcher, Karen, and Garth Kasimu Baker-Fletcher. My Sister, My Brother: Womanist and 
Xodus God-Talk. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1997.
Boonprasat-Lewis, Nantawan, and Marie M. Fortune, eds. Remembering Conquest: Feminist/
Womanist Perspectives on Religion, Colonization, and Sexual Violence . Binghamton, NY: 
Haworth Press, 1999.
Brown, Kelly Delaine. “God Is as Christ Does: T oward a Womanist Th  eology,” Journal of Reli-
gious Th ought  46 (1989): 7–16.
Bruce, Beverlee. “Th e Black Church and Womanist Th eology: Implications for Refugee Women.” 
GEA Publications and Resources . New York: Global Education Associates, http://www.
globaleduc.org/Publications3.shtml.
Burrow Jr., Rufus. “Enter Womanist Th eology and Ethics,” Western Journal of Black Studies  22 
(1998): 19–29.
———. “ Towa rd Woma n i s t Th eology and Ethics,” J o u r n a l  o f  F e m i n i s t  S t u d i e s  i n  R e l i g i o n 15 
(1999): 77–95.
RT54118_C019.indd   407RT54118_C019.indd   407 8/11/06   4:30:51 PM8/11/06   4:30:51 PM


--- PAGE 465 ---
408 • Th e Womanist Reader
Cannon, Katie G. Black Womanist Ethics . Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1988.
———. Katie’s Canon: Womanism and the Soul of the Black Community . New York: Continuum, 
1995.
———. A Womanist Th eology Primer: Remembering What We Never Knew; Th  e Epistemology of 
Womanist Th eology . Louisville, KY: Women’s Ministries Program Area, National Minis-
tries Division, Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), 2001.
Cannon, Katie G., Kelly Brown Douglas, Toinette M. James, and Cheryl Townsend Gilkes. “Meta-
logues and Dialogues: Teaching the Womanist Idea,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Reli-
gion 8 (1992): 125–51.
Carr-Hamilton, Jacqueline D. “Notes on the Black Womanist Dilemma,” Journal of Religious 
Th ought  45 (1988): 67–69.
Coleman, Kate. “Black Th eology and Black Liberation: A Womanist Perspective,” Black Th eol-
ogy: An International Journal  1 (1998): 59–69.
Crawford, A. Elaine Brown. Hope in the Holler: A Womanist Th eology . Louisville, KY: Westminster 
John Knox, 2002.
Douglas, Kelly Brown. Sexuality and the Black Church: A Womanist Perspective . Maryknoll, NY: 
Orbis, 1999.
Eugene, Toinette M., Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz, Kwok Pui-lan, and Judith Plaskow. “Appropriation 
and Reciprocity in Womanist/Mujerista/Feminist Work,” Journal of Feminist Studies in 
Religion 8 (1992): 91–122.
Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend. “If It Wasn’t for the Women—”: Black Women’s Experience and Wom-
anist Culture in Church and Community . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2001.
Grant, Jacquelyn. White Women’s Christ and Black Women’s Jesus: Feminist Christology and 
Womanist Response . Atlanta: Scholar’s Press, 1989.
Hayes, Diana L. Hagar’s Daughters: Womanist Ways of Being in the World . Mahwah, NJ: Paulist 
Press, 1995.
Hollies, Linda H. Bodacious Womanist Wisdom . Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 2003.
Hopkins, Dwight N., and Anthony B. Pinn, eds. Loving the Body: Black Religious Studies and the 
Erotic. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Kirk-Duggan, Cheryl A. Exorcising Evil: A Womanist Perspective on the Spirituals . Maryknoll, 
NY: Orbis, 1997.
———. Refi ner’s Fire: A Religious Engagement with Violence . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2001.
Lewis, Marjorie. “Diaspora Dialogue: Womanist Th  eology in Engagement with Aspects of the 
Black British and Jamaican Experience,” Black Th eology  2 (2004): 85–109.
Masenya, Madipoane J. “ African Womanist Hermeneutics: A Suppressed Voice from South 
Africa Speaks,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion  11 (1995): 149–55.
Miller-McLemore, Bonnie J., and Brita L. Gill-Austern, eds. Feminist and Womanist Pastoral 
Th eology . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2001.
Mitchem, Stephanie Y. Introducing Womanist Th eology . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2002.
Neuger, Christie Cozad, ed. Th e Arts of Ministry: Feminist-Womanist Approaches . Louisville, 
KY: Westminster John Knox, 1996.
Paris, Peter J. “From Womanist Th ought to Womanist Action,” Journal of Feminist Studies in 
Religion 9 (1993): 115–25.
Riggs, Marcia Y. Awake, Arise, Act: A Womanist Call for Black Liberation. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim 
Press, 1994.
———. Plenty Good Room: Women versus Male Power in the Black Church. Cleveland. OH: Pilgrim 
Press, 2003.
Sanders, Cheryl J. “Afrocentrism and Womanism in the Seminary,” Christianity and Crisis,  
April 13, 1992, 123–26.
———. Living the Intersection: Womanism and Afrocentrism in Th  eology . Minneapolis, MN: 
 Fortress, 1995.
Sanders, Cheryl J., Katie G. Cannon, Emilie M. Townes, M. Shawn Copeland, bell hooks, and 
Cheryl Townsend Gilkes. “Roundtable Discussion: Christian Ethics and Th  eology in 
Womanist Perspective,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion  5 (1989): 83–112.
Smith, Pamela A. “Green Lap, Brown Embrace, Blue Body: Th e Ecospirituality of Alice Walker,” 
Cross Currents  48 (1998/1999): 471–87.
Stewart, Dianne. “Womanist Th eology in the Caribbean Context: Critiquing Culture, Rethink-
ing Doctrine, and Expanding Boundaries,” J o u r n a l  o f  F e m i n i s t  S t u d i e s  i n  R e l i g i o n 20 
(2004): 61–82.
RT54118_C019.indd   408RT54118_C019.indd   408 8/11/06   4:30:52 PM8/11/06   4:30:52 PM


--- PAGE 466 ---
Selections from the First Quarter Century • 409
Townes, Emilie M. Womanist Justice, Womanist Hope . Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1993.
———. In a Blaze of Glory: Womanist Spirituality as Social Witness. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 
1995.
———. Breaking the Fine Rain of Death: African American Health Issues and a Womanist Ethic of 
Care. New York: Continuum, 1998.
Weems, Renita J. Just a Sister Away: A Womanist Vision of Women’s Relationships in the Bible . 
San Diego, CA: LuraMedia, 1988.
Westfi eld, N. Lynne. Dear Sisters: A Womanist Practice of Hospitality . Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim 
Press, 2001.
Williams, Delores S. “Womanist Th  eology: Black Women’s Voices,” Christianity and Crisis,  
March 2, 1987, 66–70.
———. Sisters in the Wilderness: Th  e Challenge of Womanist God-Talk . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 
1993.
History
Brown, Elsa Barkley. “Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the Independent Order 
of Saint Luke,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society  14 (1989): 610–33.
Fulmer, Constance. “A Nineteenth-Century ‘Womanist’ on Gender Issues: Edith J. Simcox in 
Her Autobiography of a Shirtmaker, ” Nineteenth-Century Prose  26 (1999): 110–26.
Ogunleye, Tolagbe. “Dr. Martin Robison Delaney, 19th-Century Africana Womanist: Refl  ec-
tions on His Avant-Garde Politics Concerning Gender, Colorism, and Nation Building,” 
Journal of Black Studies  28 (1998): 628–49.
Steinem, Gloria, and Diana L. Hayes. “Womanism.” In Th e Reader’s Companion to U.S. Women’s 
History, ed. Barbara Smith, Gloria Steinem, Gwendolyn Mink, Marysa Navarro, and Wilma 
Mankiller, 639–41. New York: Houghton Miffl  in, 1998.
Th eater and Film Studies
Carstarphen, Meta G. “Gettin’ Real Love: Waiting to Exhale and Film Representations of Woman-
ist Identity.” In Mediated Women: Representations in Popular Culture, ed. Marian Meyers. 
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1999.
Dickerson, Glenda. “Th e Cult of T rue W omanhood: T oward a W omanist Attitude in African 
American Th eatre.” In Performing Feminisms: Feminist Critical Th  eory and Th eatre,  ed. 
Sue-Ellen Case, 109–18. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990.
Giles, Freda Scott. “Methexis vs. Mimesis: Poetics of Feminist and Womanist Drama.” In Race/
Sex: Th eir Sameness, Diff erence, and Interplay (Th inking Gender),  ed. Naomi Zack, 175–82. 
New York: Routledge, 1997.
Price, Lisa. “Womanism in Film, or Why the Technicolor Dream Is Still in Black and White,” 
1993, http://www.wrinklybrain.com/WomanisminFilm.pdf.
Reid, Mark A. “Dialogic Modes of Representing Africa(s): Womanist Film,” Black American 
Literature Forum  25 (1991): 375–88.
———. Redefi ning Black Film . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
Th ackway, Melissa. Africa Shoots Back: Alternative Perspectives in Sub-Saharan Francophone 
African Film . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003.
Tylee, Claire M. “Womanist Propaganda, African American Great War Experience, and Cul-
tural Strategies of Harlem Renaissance Women: Plays by Alice Dunbar-Nelson and Mary 
P. Burrill,” Women’s Studies International Forum  20 (1997): 153–63.
Willis, Andre. “A Womanist Turn on the Hip-Hop Th eme: Leslie Harris’s Just Another Girl on the 
IRT.” In Language, Rhythm, and Sound: Black Popular Cultures into the Twenty-fi  rst Cen-
tury, eds. Joseph K. Adjaye and Adrianne R. Andrews. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh 
Press, 1997.
Communication and Media Studies
Hamlet, Janice D. “Assessing Womanist Th ought: Th e Rhetoric of Susan L. Taylor,” Communica-
tion Quarterly  48 (2000): 420–36.
Houston, Marsha, and Olga Idriss Davis, eds. Centering Ourselves: African American Feminist 
and Womanist Studies of Discourse . Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2002.
RT54118_C019.indd   409RT54118_C019.indd   409 8/11/06   4:30:53 PM8/11/06   4:30:53 PM


--- PAGE 467 ---
410 • Th e Womanist Reader
Smitherman, Geneva. “A Womanist Looks at the Million Man March.” In Million Man March/
Day of Absence,  ed. Haki R. Madhubuti and Maulana Karenga, 104–107. Chicago: Th  ird 
World Press, 1996.
Troutman, Denise. “ ‘We Be Strong Women’: A Womanist Analysis of Black Women’s Socio-
linguistic Behavior.” In Centering Ourselves: African American Feminist and Womanist 
Studies of Discourse,  ed. Marsha Houston and Olga Idriss Davis, 99–121. Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press, 2002.
Walker, Alice. “What Th at Day Was Like for Me: Th e Million Man March, October 16, 1995, for 
My New Brother, Haki.” In Million Man March/Day of Absence,  ed. Haki R. Madhubuti 
and Maulana Karenga, 42–43. Chicago: Th ird World Press, 1996.
Psychology
Boisnier, A.D. “Race and Women’s Identity Development: Distinguishing between Feminism 
and Womanism among Black and White Women,” Sex Roles 49 (2003): 211–18.
Carter, Robert T., and Elizabeth E. Parks. “Womanist Identity and Mental Health,” Journal of 
Counseling and Development  74 (1996): 484–89.
Constantine, Madonna G., and Sherry K. Watt. “Cultural Congruity, Womanist Identity Attitudes, 
and Life Satisfaction among African American College Women Attending Historically 
Black and Predominantly White Institutions,” Journal of College Student Development  
43 (2002): 184–94.
Letlaka-Rennert, K., P. Luswazi, J.E. Helms, and M.C. Zea. “Does the Womanist Identity Model 
Predict Aspects of Psychological Functioning in Black South African Women?” South 
African Journal of Psychology  27 (1997): 236–43.
Moradi, Bonnie, Janice D. Yoder, and Lynne L. Berendsen. “An Evaluation of the Psychometric 
Properties of the Womanist Identity Attitudes Scale,” Sex Roles 50 (2004): 253–66.
Nabors, Nina A., and Melanie F. Pettee. “Womanist Th  erapy with African American Women 
with Disabilities,” Women and Th erapy  26 (2003): 331–41.
Ossana, Shelly M., Janet E. Helms, and Mary M. Leonard. “Do ‘Womanist’ Identity Attitudes 
Infl uence College Women’s Self-Esteem and Perceptions of Environmental Bias?” Journal 
of Counseling and Development  70 (1992): 402–408.
Parks, Elizabeth E., Robert T. Carter, and George V. Gushue. “At the Crossroads: Racial and 
Womanist Identity Development in Black and White Women,” Journal of Counseling and 
Development  74 (1996): 624–31.
Poindexter-Cameron, Jan M., and Tracy L. Robinson. “Relationships Among Racial Identity Atti-
tudes, Womanist Identity Attitudes, and Self-Esteem in African American College Women,” 
Journal of College Student Development  38 (1997): 288–95.
Stephens, Dionne Patricia. “Putting Sisters in the Center: Using Womanist Th eory and Bronfen-
brenner’s Ecological Model of Human Development to Examine Young African-American 
Women’s Sexual Education Processes,” Abafazi 10 (2000): 59–71.
Vaz, Kim Marie. “Womanist Archetypal Psychology: A Model of Counseling for Black Women 
and Couples Based on Yoruba Mythology.” In Th e Womanist Reader,  ed. Layli Phillips. 
New York: Routledge, 2006.
Anthropology
Galván, Ruth Trinidad. “Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas:  W o m a n i s t  P e d a g o g i e s  o f  t h e  
Everyday, the Mundane, and the Ordinary,” Qualitative Studies in Education  15 (2001): 
603–21.
Gourdine, Angeletta K.M. “Postmodern Ethnography and the Womanist Mission: Postcolo-
nial Sensibilities in Possessing the Secret of Joy, ” African American Review  30 (1996): 
237–44.
Kerns, Virginia. Black Carib Kinship and Ritual.  2nd ed. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1997.
Rodriguez, Cheryl. “Anthropology and Womanist Th  eory: Claiming the Discourse on Gender, 
Race, and Culture,” Womanist Th eory and Research  2 (1996/1997): 3–11.
Th omas, Linda E. “Womanist Th eology, Epistemology, and a New Anthropological Paradigm,” 
Cross Currents  48 (1998/1999): 488–99.
RT54118_C019.indd   410RT54118_C019.indd   410 8/11/06   4:30:54 PM8/11/06   4:30:54 PM


--- PAGE 468 ---
Selections from the First Quarter Century • 411
Education
Beauboeuf-Lafontant, Tamara. “A Womanist Experience of Caring: Understanding the Peda-
gogy of Exemplary Black Women Teachers,” Th e Urban Review  34 (2002): 71–86.
Dlamini, Nombuso. “Literacy, Womanism and Struggle: Refl ections on the Practices of an African 
Woman,” Journal of International Women’s Studies  2 (2001): 78–93.
Garth, Phyllis Ham. “A New Knowledge: Feminism from an Africentric Perspective,” Th resholds 
in Education  20 (1994): 8–13.
Henry, Annette. Taking Back Control toward an Afrocentric Womanist Standpoint on the Educa-
tion of Black Children . Ottowa: National Library of Canada, 1993.
Ladson-Billings, Gloria. “Lift ing as We Climb: Th e Womanist Tradition in Multicultural Educa-
tion.” In Multicultural Education, Transformative Knowledge, and Action: Historical and 
Contemporary Perspectives,  ed. James A. Banks, 179–200. New York: Teachers College 
Press.
McCreary, Donald. “Speaking in Tongues: Using Womanist Sermons as Intra-cultural Rhetoric 
in the Writing Classroom,” Journal of Basic Writing  20 (2001): 53–70.
——— . “Womanist Th eology and Its Effi   cacy for the Writing Classroom,” College Composition 
and Communication  52 (2001): 521–52.
Paul, Dierdre Glenn. Life, Culture and Education on the Academic Plantation: Womanist Th ought 
and Perspective . New York: Peter Lang.
Sheared, Vanessa. “Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of Instruction—A Womanist Model,” New 
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education  61 (1994): 27–37.
Smith, Dianne. “Womanism and Me: An (Un)Caged Black Bird Sings for Freedom,” Th e High 
School Journal  79 (1996): 176–82.
Social Work
C a r l t o n - L a N e y ,  I r i s .  “ E l i z a b e t h  R o s s  H a y n e s :  A n  A f r i c a n  A m e r i c a n  R e f o r m e r  o f  W o m a n i s t  
Consciousness, 1908–1940,” Social Work 42 (1997): 573–83.
Littlefi eld, Melissa. “A Womanist Perspective for Social Work with African American Women,” 
Social Th ought: Journal of Religion in the Social Services  22 (2003): 3–18.
Peebles-Wilkins, Wilma. “Historical Perspectives on Social Welfare in the Black Community 
(1886–1939),” http://people.bu.edu/wpeebles/.
Nursing Science
Banks-Wallace, JoAnne. “Womanist Ways of Knowing: Th eoretical Considerations for Research 
with African American Women,” Advances in Nursing Science  22 (2000): 33–45.
Taylor, Janette Y. “Womanism: A Methodologic Framework for African American Women,” 
Advances in Nursing Science  21 (1998): 53–64.
Public Health
Heath, Corliss D. “A Womanist Approach to Understanding and Assessing the Relationship 
Between Spirituality and Mental Health,” Mental Health, Religion, and Culture, n.d., http://
www.taylorandfrancis.metapress.com/.
Architecture/Urban Studies
Amoo-Adare, Epifania Akosua. “Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist Positionality and the 
Spatio-temporal Construction of Black Family Life.” In La Familia en Africa y la Diaspora 
Africana: Estudio Multidisciplinar/Family in Africa and the African Diaspora: A Multidis-
ciplinary Approach,  ed. Olga Barrios and Frances Smith Foster, 63–73. Salamanca, Spain: 
Ediciones Almar, 2004.
Africana Studies
Aldridge, Delores P. “Womanist Issues in Black Studies: Towards Integrating Africana Womanism 
into African Studies.” In Out of the Revolution: Th e Development of Africana Studies,  ed. 
Delores P. Aldridge and Carlene Young, 157–66. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2002.
RT54118_C019.indd   411RT54118_C019.indd   411 8/11/06   4:30:55 PM8/11/06   4:30:55 PM


--- PAGE 469 ---
412 • Th e Womanist Reader
Beckmann, Felicia. “Th  e Portrayal of Africana Males in Achebe, Marshall, Morrison, and 
Wideman,” Journal of Black Studies  32 (2002): 405–21.
Dove, Nah. “African Womanism: An Afrocentric Th  eory,” Journal of Black Studies  28 (1998): 
515–39.
———. “De fi ning African Womanist Th eory.” In Th e Afrocentric Paradigm,  ed. Ama Mazama, 
165–84. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2003.
Hudson-Weems, Clenora. “Cultural and Agenda Confl  icts in Academia: Critical Issues for 
Africana Women’s Studies,” Western Journal of Black Studies  13 (1989): 185–89.
——— . “ Africana Womanism.” In Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves, by Clenora Hudson-
Weems, 17–32. Troy, MI: Bedford, 1993.
———. Africana Womanism: Reclaiming Ourselves . Troy, MI: Bedford, 1993.
——— . “Africana Womanism and the Critical Need for Africana Th eory and Th ought,” Western 
Journal of Black Studies  21 (1997): 79–84.
——— . “Africana Womanism.” In Sisterhood, Feminisms and Power: From Africa to the Dias-
pora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 149–62. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1998.
———. “Africana Womanism:  Th e Flip Side of a Coin,” Th e Western Journal of Black Studies  25 
(2001): 137–45.
———. “Africana Womanism: An Overview.” In Out of the Revolution: Th e Development of Africana 
Studies,  ed. Delores P. Aldridge and Carlene Young, 145–56. Lanham, MD: Lexington 
Books, 2002.
Jennings, Regina. “Africana Womanism in the Black Panther Party: A Personal Story,” Th e 
Western Journal of Black Studies  25 (2001): 146–52.
Ntiri, Daphne. “Th e WAAD Conference and Beyond: A Look at Africana Womanism.” In Sister-
hood, Feminisms and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora,  ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 461–63. 
Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1998.
——— . “Reassessing Africana Womanism: Continuity and Change,” Th e Western Journal of 
Black Studies  25 (2001): 163–76.
Reed, Pamela Yaa Asantewaa. “Africana Womanism and Africana Feminism: A Philosophical, 
Literary, and Cosmological Dialectic on Family,” Th e Western Journal of Black Studies  25 
(2001): 168–76.
Splawn, Jane. “Cross-Atlantic Womanism(s): An African American Woman’s Refl ections on the 
Women in Africa and the African Diaspora Conference, 1992.” In Sisterhood, Feminisms 
and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora,  ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 445–47. Trenton, NJ: 
Africa World Press, 1998.
Ethnic Studies
Jaimes-Guerrero, M.A. “Red Warrior Women: Exemplars of Indigenism in ‘Native Womanism,’ ” 
Asian Women 9 (1999): 1–25.
——— . “Native Womanism: Exemplars of Indigenism in Sacred Traditions of Kinship.” In Indig-
enous Religions: A Companion,  ed. Graham Harvey. London: Cassell, 2000.
——— . “ ‘Patriarchal Colonialism’ and Indigenism: Implications for Native Feminist Spirituality 
and Native Womanism,” Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy  18 (2003): 58–69.
Women’s and Gender Studies
Collins, Patricia Hill. “What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black Feminism, and Beyond,” Th e Black 
Scholar 26 (1996): 9–17.
———. Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice . Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 1998.
Delveaux, Martin. “Transcending Ecofeminism: Alice Walker, Spiritual Ecowomanism, and 
Environmental Ethics,” 2001, http://www.ecofem.org/journal.
Heilmann, Anne. Feminist Forerunners: Womanism and Feminism in the Early 20th Century.  
Kitchener, Ontario, Canada: Pandora Press, 2003.
Lemons, Gary L. “To Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’: Making Womanist Space for Black Men,” 
International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy  17 (1997): 35–61.
——— . “ ‘When and Where [We] Enter’: In Search of a Feminist Forefather—Reclaiming the 
Womanist Legacy of W .E.B. DuBois. ” In Traps: African American Men on Gender and 
Sexuality,  ed. Rudolph P. Byrd and Beverly Guy-Sheft  all, 71–89. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2001.
RT54118_C019.indd   412RT54118_C019.indd   412 8/11/06   4:30:56 PM8/11/06   4:30:56 PM


--- PAGE 470 ---
Selections from the First Quarter Century • 413
——— . “Womanism in the Name of the ‘Father’: W.E.B. DuBois and the Problematics of Race, 
Patriarchy, and Art,” Phylon 49 (2001): 185–203.
McCaskill, Barbara, and Layli Phillips. “We Are All ‘Good Woman!’: A Womanist Critique of 
the Current Feminist Confl  ict.” In “Bad Girls”/”Good Girls”: Women, Sex, and Power in 
the Nineties,  ed. Nan Bauer Maglin and Donna Perry, 106–22. Newark, NJ: Rutgers Uni-
versity Press.
Neal, Mark Anthony. “My Black Male Feminist Heroes,” February 26, 2003, http://www.
popmatters.com/features/030226-blackfeminists.shtml.
Pattel-Gray, Anne. “Th e Hard Truth: White Secrets, Black Realities,” Australian Feminist Studies  
14 (1999): 259–66.
Phillips, Layli, and Barbara McCaskill. “Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women and the Bring-
ing of the Everyday into Academe, or Why We Started Th e Womanist, ” Signs: Journal of 
Women in Culture and Society  20 (1995): 1007–18.
Sexuality Studies
Fraile-Marcos, Ana Maria. “ ‘As Purple to Lavender’: Alice Walker’s Womanist Representations of 
Lesbianism.” In Literature and Homosexuality, ed. Michael J. Meyer, 111–34. Amsterdam: 
Editions Rodopi B.V., 2000.
Lee, Wenshu. “Kuaering  Queer Th eory: My Autocritography and a Race-Conscious, Womanist, 
Transnational Turn,” Journal of Homosexuality  45 (2003): 147–70.
Critiques of Womanism
(charles), Helen. “Th e Language of Womanism: Re-thinking Diff  erence.” In British Black Femi-
nism: A Reader,  ed. Heidi Safi a Mirza, 278–97. London: Routledge, 1997.
Grewal, Inderpal, and Caren Kaplan. “ Warrior Marks:  Global Womanism’s Neo-colonial Dis-
course in a Multicultural Context.” In Keyframes: Popular Cinema and Cultural Studies,  
ed. Matthew Tinkcom and Amy Villarejo, New York: Routledge, 52–71.
Haraway, Donna. “Reading Buchi Emecheta: Contests for Women’s Experience in Women’s 
Studies,” Inscriptions: Th e Center for Cultural Studies Journal  3/4 (1988), http://humwww.
ucsc.edu/CultStudies/PUBS/Inscriptions/vol_3-4/DonnaHaraway.html.
hooks, bell. “Black Women and Feminism.” In Talking Back: Th inking Feminist, Th inking Black,  
177–82. Boston: South End Press, 1989.
Mwale, Pascal Newbourne. “Where Is the Foundation of African Gender? Th  e Case of Malawi,” 
Nordic Journal of African Studies  11 (2002): 114–37.
Walker, Alice. “Audre’s Voice.” In Anything We Love Can Be Saved, by Alice Walker, 79–82. New 
York: Random House, 1997.
Interviews
Arndt, Susan. “African Gender Trouble and African Womanism: An Interview with Chikwenye 
Ogunyemi and Wanjira Muthoni,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society  25 
(2000): 709–26.
Bradley, David. “Novelist Alice Walker: Telling the Black Woman’s Story,” New York Times 
Magazine, January 8, 1984, 22–39.
Journals
McCaskill, Barbara, and Layli Phillips, eds. Womanist Th eory and Research, 1996/97, 1998, 2000.
Phillips, Layli, and Barbara McCaskill, eds. Th e Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric Feminist 
Researchers,  1994, 1995.
Web Sites
Barnes, Sherri L. “Black American Feminisms: A Multidisciplinary Bibliography,” http://www.
library.ucsb.edu/subjects/blackfeminism/introduction.html.
Misra, Joya. “Black Feminist/Womanist Works: A Beginning List,” http://research.umbc.edu/
~korenman/wmst/womanistbib.html.
RT54118_C019.indd   413RT54118_C019.indd   413 8/11/06   4:30:57 PM8/11/06   4:30:57 PM


--- PAGE 471 ---
RT54118_C019.indd   414RT54118_C019.indd   414 8/11/06   4:30:57 PM8/11/06   4:30:57 PM


--- PAGE 472 ---
415
Name Index
A
Abimbola, Wande, 239
Abusharaf, Rogaia Mustafa, 379
Achebe, Chinua, 25
Acholonu, Catherine Obianuju, xxxiii
Acholonu, Rose, 45
Aidoo, Ama Ata, 4, 35n1
Alexander, Valentina, 363
Allen, Richard, 12
Amoo-Adare, Epifania Akosua, xlvi, 
347–357
Anderson, Madeline, 198
Anderson, Patsie K., 176
Anthony, Susan B., 46, 105
Aptheker, Bettina, 40, 41
Armah, Ayi Kwei, 29
Asad, Talal, 391
Asante, Molefi , 319
Austen, Jane, 32
Austin, Regina, 90
Avery, Byllye, 315
Awkward, Michael, xliii, 69–84, 341
B
Bâ, Mariama, 22, 31
Badeja, Diedre, 239
Baker, Ella, xxix
Baker, Houston, 71
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 204
Baldwin, James, 25, 33, 163
Banks-Wallace, JoAnne, xlv, 313–325
Baraka, Amiri, 208
Barnett, Ida Wells, see Wells Ida B.
Barrett, Janie Porter, 298
Beaubouf-Lafontant, Tamara, xlv, 
280–293
Belenky, Mary, 313
Belsey, Catherine, 195
Bontemps, Arna, 118
Boone, Joseph, 69, 74–75
Brewer, Rose, 215
Brontë, Emily, 23
Brooks, Evelyn, see Higginbotham, 
Evelyn Brooks
Brown, Elsa Barkley, xliv, 173–187
Bruce, Herbert L., 304–305
Bryan, Beverley, 370
Burnham, Linda, 188n4
Burroughs, Nannie Helen, 191n31
Butler, Johnella, 192n54
C
Cade, Toni, 57, 371
Cannon, Katie Geneva, xl, xliv, 
123, 135–137, 147, 155
Carby, Hazel, 38–39, 372
Carlton-LaNey, Iris, xlv, 297–309
Carrol, Peter, 46
Casey, Kathleen, 283
Castillo, Ana, 260–261, 263
RT54118_Index.indd   415RT54118_Index.indd   415 8/11/06   1:52:45 PM8/11/06   1:52:45 PM


--- PAGE 473 ---
416 • Name Index
Catt, Carrie Chapman, 46
Chao, Y. Antonia, 335, 344n30
(charles), Helen, xlvii, 361–376
Chen Dongyuan, 329, 330
Chesnutt, Charles, 29, 162
Childress, Alice, xxiv
Chin, Frank, 165–166
Chinweizu, 159
Chou Wah-Shan, 336
Chow, Rey, 384, 392
Clark, Mamie Phipps, xxix
Cleage, Pearl, 62, 63
Cleaver, Eldridge, 163
Clinchy, Blythe, 313
Collins, Kathleen, 198, 202–203
Collins, Marva, 281–282, 287–288
Collins, Patricia Hill, xliii, 93, 314, 340 
Conde, Maryse, 30
Confucius, 333
Cooper, Anna Julia, 105, 108, 175
Copeland, M. Shawn, xliv, 142–146, 
149–151, 155
Cox, Rebecca, see Jackson, Rebecca Cox
Cullen, Countee, 306
D
Dannett, Sylvia, 119
Davis, Angela Y., xxxix, 57, 91, 105, 208
Davis, Daniel Webster, 179
Davis, Th ulani, 101–102
Dawit, Seble, 386
Dawley, Abigail, 176
de Beauvoir, Simone, 24
Delpit, Lisa, 282
Dench, Eustace V., 305
Dill, Bonnie Th ornton, 274
Douglass, Frederick, 102, 104–106, 
108–109, 161–162
Drewal, Margaret, 239
Du Bois, W.E.B., 102, 104–106, 108–109
Dworkin, Andrea, 398n31
E
Ellison, Ralph, 25, 163
Emecheta, Buchi, 23–24, 363, 370
Equino, Olaudah, 159
F
Fabian, Johannes, 391
Fanon, Frantz, 10
Farrakhan, Louis, 103, 207–212
Fauset, Jean, 34
Fauset, Jessie, 108
Faye, Safi , 195, 198, 201–202
Fields, Mamie Garvin, 286
Forrester, William M. T., 176
Foster, Michele, 285
Foucault, Michel, xxxiii
Franklin, Clyde, 499
Freire, Paulo, 251
Friedan, Betty, 50, 142
Fuss, Diana, 365
G
Galván, Ruth Trinidad, xiv, 247–266
Gardner, Tracey A., 7–11
Garvey, Amy Jacques, 99–100
Garvey, Marcus, 99
Gasten, Karen, 29
Giddings, Paula, 105
Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend, xliv, 
93, 149, 150–153, 155
Gilman, Frances Perkins, see Perkins, 
Frances
Gleason, Judith, 238
Goldberger, Nancy, 313
Gomez, Sara, 195, 198
Gordon, Vivian, 38
Granson, Milla, 119
Grant, Jacqueline, 125
Greer, Germaine, 370
Gubar, Susan, 23
Gulette, Leon, 211
Gunning, Isabelle, 383–384
Guy-Sheft all, Beverly, lin28
H
Hamlet, Janice D., xlv, 213–230
Hansberry, Lorraine, xxiv
Harper, Frances Ellen Watkins, 105, 
108, 120
Harrison, Faye V., liiin33, 396n6
Hawkins, Corla, 282, 283, 289
RT54118_Index.indd   416RT54118_Index.indd   416 8/11/06   1:52:46 PM8/11/06   1:52:46 PM


--- PAGE 474 ---
Name Index • 417
Hayes, Diana L., xxii
Haynes, Birdye Henrietta, 298
Haynes, Elizabeth Ross, xxix, 297–309
Haynes, George Edmund, 298, 301
Head, Bessie,  
Heath, Stephen, 72–73, 106, 107
Henderson, Mae, 249
Henderson, Stephen, 28
Henson, Josiah, 162
Hernton, Calvin, 112n3
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 300
Hill, Anita, 64
hooks, bell, xliv, 42, 105, 106, 142–145 
Holloway, Cecilia, 301
Hopkins, Pauline, 34, 106
House, Callie, xxix
Hudson-Weems, Clenora, xx, xxxiii, 
xlii–xliii, 37–43
Hughes, Langston, 118, 306
Hull, Gloria T., 85
Humez, Jean McMahon, 17, 127
Hurston, Zora Neale, xxiv, 29, 34, 72, 
73, 131
Hwang, David Henry, 165, 166
I
Irele, Abiola, 195
Irigaray, Luce, 365
Irvin, Helen, 301
Isasi-Diaz, Ada Maria, xxxiii
J
Jackson, Giles, 179
Jackson, Rebecca Cox, 12–18, 127, 131, 
133, 138, 148, 151
Jackson, Samuel, 12
Jacobs, Harriet, 372
James, George G. M, 151
James, Joy, 91
Jameson, Fredric, 354
Jardine, Alice, 70, 74, 106
Jayamanne, Laleen, 381, 392
Jay, Martin, 380
Jemie, 159
Jensen, Joan, 174
Jervis, Kathe, 283
Johnson, Bess B., 124
Johnson, Clift on, 122
Johnson, E. Patrick, 338
Jones, Gayle, 100
Joseph, Gloria, 362
K
Kaplan, Karen, xlvii, 379–396
Keating, AnaLouise, xxvi
Kellner, Douglas, 356
Kenyatta, Jomo, 391
King, Deborah K., 213
King, Martin Luther, Jr, 152
Kingston, Maxine Hong, 165, 166
Kohut, Heinz, 234, 236–237, 240
L
Ladner, Joyce, 49
La Guardia, Fiorello, 307
Lantier, Jacques, 391
Larkin, Alile Sharon, 198–201
Larsen, Nella, 34
Lederer, Laura, xix
Lee, Jerena, 148
Lee, Wenshu, xlvi, 327–341
Lehman, Herbert H., 307
Lemons, Gary L., xliii, 96–112
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 381
Lewis, Jill, 362
Ling Shuhua, 328
Lipman, Beata, 24–25
Lord, Betty Bao, 166
Lorde, Audre, xxvii, 5–6, 10, 57, 94, 340, 
341, 374
Lynch, Kevin, 354
M
MacDougall, David, 381
Machel, Samora, 370
Madubuike, 159
Mailer, Norman, 163
Maldoror, Sarah, 198
Marshall, Paule, 22, 27, 34, 100
Marsh-Lockett, Carol, xxiii
Mays, Vickie M., 197
RT54118_Index.indd   417RT54118_Index.indd   417 8/11/06   1:52:46 PM8/11/06   1:52:46 PM


--- PAGE 475 ---
418 • Name Index
McCaskill, Barbara, xliii, 89–95
McDowell, Deborah, 75–76, 77, 160
McMillan, Terry, 100
Mekuria, Salem, 386
Miao, Vera, 338
Miller, R. Baxter, 94
Miller, Th omas J., 211
Mitchell, Hannah, 301–302
Mitchell, John, Jr., 184
Mobley, Mamie Till, 47
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, 380, 394
Moi, Toril, 76, 79
Momma Hawk, 282, 283, 289
Mompati, Ruth, 52, 53
Moody, Anne, 91
Moraga, Cherrie, 328
Morrison, Toni, 57, 72, 75, 100 
Mugo, Micere Githae, 386
Mulvey, Laura, 204
Murray, Pauli, 63
Myers, Linda James, 219
N
Naylor, Gloria, 72, 100
Ngugi wa Th iong’o, 25, 29
Nkrumah, Kwame, 366
Noble, David, 46
Noblit, George, 290, 292–293
Ntiri, Daphne Williams, 52, 53
Nwapa, Flora, 22, 30
Nyathi, Mangedwa, 211
O
Obiora, L. Amede, 386
Ogude, S.E., 25
Ogundipe-Leslie, Molara, xxxiii
Ogunyemi, Chikwenye Okonjo, 
xx, xxxiii, xlii, 21–35
Okonkwo, Juliet, 30
Olugbala, Taliba Sikudhani, xxvi
Omolade, Barbara, 58
Overby, Ethel Th ompson, 181
P
Paris, Peter, 138
Parkerson, Michelle, 195
Parks, Rosa, 47
Parmar, Pratibha, 371, 379–396
Payne, Lillian H., 176
Perkins, Frances, 297
Perot, Rebecca, 15, 17–18, 127
Petry, Ann, 34
Phelan, Shane, 340
Phillips, Layli, 85–89, 93–94, 405–413
Pinckney, Darryl, 76
Prout, Mary, 176
Q
Qiu Miaojing, 337
R
Rachal, Charles, 211
Rainey, Ma, 29
Reagon, Bernice Johnson, 91
Reid, Mark A., xliv, 193–203
Rich, Adrienne, 328
Rogers, Carolyn, 121
Rony, Fatimah Tobing, 381
Ross, Andrew, 70
Ross, Henry, 298
Ross, Mary, 299
Ross, Ruth, 217
Rouch, Jean, 381
Rowan, Carl, 210
Ruddick, Sara, 109, 110, 292
Russell, Michele, 85–87, 91
S
Said, Edward, 391
Sanders, Cheryl J., xliv, 126–134, 
138–140, 155–157
Sandoval, Chela, xxvii
Sappho, 18, 147
Scharf, Lois, 174
Scott, Patricia Bell, 85
Sembene, Ousmane, 201
Shakur, Assata, 91
Shange, Ntozake, 28, 34, 57, 100
Sheared, Vanessa, xlv, 269–279
Shohat, Ella, 391
RT54118_Index.indd   418RT54118_Index.indd   418 8/11/06   1:52:46 PM8/11/06   1:52:46 PM


--- PAGE 476 ---
Name Index • 419
Showalter, Elaine, 160
Smith, Amanda Berry, 18n1
Smith, Barbara, 73, 143, 338 
Smith, Paul, 77, 106
Smith, Valerie, 75, 77
Smitherman, Geneva, xlv, 207–212
Soyinka, Wole, 25
Spenser, Mary Etta, 34
Spillers, Hortense, 77–80, 200
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 391, 392
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 46, 105
Staples, Robert, 75, 100, 102
Steady, Filomena Chioma, 45–46, 
49, 52, 369, 374
Steinem, Gloria, xxii, 7, 50, 142
Stepto, Robert B., 162
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 162
T
Tan, Amy, 166–169, 171
Tarule, Jill, 313
Taylor, Susan L., 215–230
Teish, Luisah, 6–7
Terborg-Penn, Rosalyn, 173, 174, 371
Terrell, Mary Church, 108, 120, 150, 175
Th iam, Awa, 390, 393
Th omas, Clarence, 64
Th ompson, Audrey, 288
Till, Emmett Louis, 47, 54n3
Tintiangco, Allyson Goce, xxxiii
Toomer, Jean, 33
Topley, Marjorie, 330, 339
Townes, Emilie M., xliv, 138–141, 155
Trinh T. Minh-ha, 381, 392
Truth, Sojourner, 37–43, 47, 63, 108, 
120, 123, 148, 156
Tubman, Harriet, xxix, 39, 47, 119, 
120, 123, 150
V
Van Kleeck, Mary, 301, 302
Vanzant, Iyanla, 222
Vassa, Gustavus, 159
Vaz, Kim Marie, xliv, 232–245
W
Walker, Alice, 57, 72, 100
Walker, Armstead, 175
Walker, Maggie Lena, xxix, xlv, 173, 
175–187
Walker, Margaret, 22, 27, 34
Wallace, Michele, 51, 73, 100, 145, 163
Watkins, Gloria, 153n28
Watkins, Mel, 75, 102
Webster, J. J., 211
Welch, Sharon, 289
Wells, Ida B., 9, 39, 47, 105, 139–140, 298
West, Cornel, 108
West, Dorothy, 34
Wheatley, Phillis, 159
White, Deborah Gray, 177
Williams, Delores S., xliv, 117–124
Williams, Fannie Barrier, 175
Williams, Sherley Anne, xliv, 60, 65, 
74, 159–164
Woolf, Virginia, 18
Wright, Richard, 25, 163
X
X, Malcolm, 96
Xu, Wenying, xliv, 167–171
Z
Zhang Xingtai, 329–330
RT54118_Index.indd   419RT54118_Index.indd   419 8/11/06   1:52:47 PM8/11/06   1:52:47 PM


--- PAGE 477 ---
RT54118_Index.indd   420RT54118_Index.indd   420 8/11/06   1:52:47 PM8/11/06   1:52:47 PM


--- PAGE 478 ---
421
Subject Index
A
abolitionism, 39, 105, 372
abusua, 347, 355–357
Abyssinian Baptist Church, 307
academics
and Black culture, 92–93
and everyday experience, 86–89, 94
Accra, 347, 352–353, 354–356
activism
Civil Rights, xxix
gay/lesbian, 198, 336
human rights, 109
woman-, 47, 367
activist, black, 368
Adam Clayton Powell Home for the 
Aged, 307, 308
adult education, 272–278
aesthetics, 159, 160
affi  rmation, self-, 222–223
Afose, 222
Africa, depiction of in Warrior Marks, 389
Africana Womanism: Reclaiming 
Ourselves (Hudson-Weems), xx, xlii, 
xliii, 44–53
Africana Womanist Literary Th eory  
(Hudson-Weems), xliii
“African Feminism: A Worldwide 
Perspective” (Steady), 45, 49
African Methodist Episcopal church, 12, 15
Africa Wo/Man Palava: Th e Nigerian 
Novel by Women (Ogunyemi), xlii
Africentrism, feminist epistemology, 
274–278
Afrocentrism, 66
aggression, 236
Ai Bao, 332–337
Ai Fu, 333
Ai Fu Hao, 333–334
Ai Fu Hao Zi Zai Bao, 332–337
Akan, 354–356
All the Women Are White, All the Blacks 
Are Men, but Some of Us Are Brave: 
Black Women’s Studies, 85
aloneness, 243
Alpha Kappa Alpha (AKA), 306–307, 308
American Indians, 314
American Woman Suff rage 
Association, 46
amnesia, discursive, 328, 342n5
ancestry, reverence for, 223–224, see also 
foreparents
androcentrism, 69–70
dangers of, 75
in sermons, 136
animadora, 248, 266n3
anti-feminism, 101–102, 104
anti-footbinding, 329, 341
Anti-Lynching Bill, 304
antioppressionist, xxiv
arbitration, xxvii–xxviii
architecture, womanist positionality, 
348–350
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   421RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   421 8/11/06   1:53:37 PM8/11/06   1:53:37 PM


--- PAGE 479 ---
422 • Subject Index
art, polyrhythms, 270
Asante, 347, 353, 354–356
asé, 240
assertion, self-, 131
“Assessing Womanist Th ought: Th e 
Rhetoric of Susan L. Taylor” (Hamlet), 
xlv, 213–230
Assin, 355
Association Monthly, 301
autocritography, 341
Awise Awo Ni Agbaye, 239
B
babalawos, 244
babalorishas , 244
bai xiang zhi, 331
balance, 221–222
Bao Juan (Precious Volume), 331
Beloved (Morrison), 143
“Beniah’s Valour: An Address for 
Men Only” (M.L. Walker, speech), 
182–183
Bethel African Methodist Episcopal 
church, 12
Bible, as source, 122, 123, 156
Big Aiiieeeee!, Th e  (Chin), 165
Big Brothers-Big Sisters, 211
Black Boy of Atlanta, Th e  (Haynes), 307
Black English, 207–208, 319–320
“Black-Eyed Blues Connections: 
Teaching Black Women” (Russell), 
85–87
Black female intelligentsia, 104
Black Feminist Th ought: Knowledge, 
Consciousness, and the Politics of 
Empowerment (Collins), 214
Black Macho and the Myth of the 
Superwoman (Wallace), 51, 163
“Black Man’s Place in Black Feminist 
Criticism, A” (Awkward), xliii, 69–84
Blackness
diversity of, 368–372
male, 7, 103
universalist notions of, 195
Black Power Movement, 6–7, 103
phallic symbols in, 97
Black Scholar, Th e , 100, 126
Black Woman Cross-Culturally, Th e  
(Steady), 45, 52, 369
Black Womanist Ethics (Cannon), 60, 
147
“Black Women and Men: Partnership in 
the 1990s” (hooks), 108
Black Women Behind the March, 209
Black Women, Feminism and Black 
Liberation: Which Way? (Gordon), 38
“Black Women in the Academy: 
Defending Our Name, 1894-1994” 
(conference), 94
Black women’s club movement, xxiv, 
xxix
blues, infl uence on womanist novels, 
28–30
Bluest Eye, Th e  (Morrison), 22, 30
bolekaja criticism, 159
Book of Negro Folklore, Th e , 118, 119
Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black 
Intellectual Life  (hooks and West), 108
Bride Price, Th e  (Emecheta), 24
Brixton Black Women’s Group, 370, 371
Brown Girl, Brownstones  (Marshall), 27
brutality, male, 78
building, social practice of, 350
bu luo jia, 330, 331
C
Calhoun School, 306
call-and-response, 34, 276–278
Camden Black Sisters, 363
campesinas
family and community, 253–256
pedagogy, 251–253, 256–264
small savings groups, 248–249
spirituality, 256–260
well-being, 260–263
Cane (Toomer), 33
“Cantonese Nu Tong Xing Lian” 
(Chen), 327
capitalism, 96–112, 147, 348, 354
caring
ethic of, 276–278, 321–322
maternal form of, 281–285, 291–293
Catholicism, Popular, 257–260, 266n5
celibacy, 18, 127, 131, 330–331
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   422RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   422 8/11/06   1:53:38 PM8/11/06   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 480 ---
Subject Index • 423
change, and human nature, 237–238
Chi, xxix
chi (energy), 327
Chicano/a movement, 257
Chichimeca, 260
childhood, and self-structure, 237
Chosen Place, the Timeless People, Th e  
(Marshall), 22, 27
Christianity
African American, 132
ethics and, 122
spirituality and, 121–123
and womanism,  121–123, 133
Christology, 133, 140, 149
Chronicle of Higher Education, Th e  
(hooks), 375
chuan ku zi de, 336
church, see also individual church
Black, 122–123
and Afro-Christian culture, 
135–136
sexuality and, 148–149
Latin America, 256
Mexico, 256
Church of God, 155–156
cinema, see fi lm
circumcision, female, 383, 387, 
399n36
Civil Rights Movement
activism, xxix
Africana women activists, 47
Essence and, 216
class
issues, 174, 183, 187
middle-, 186, 187, 212
and ways of knowing, 314
working-, 176, 181, 314, 318
classifi cation, xxxii
clitoridectomy, 383, see also genital 
surgeries, female
symbolic, 167
cluster analysis, 218
collaboration, and womanist 
scholarship, 91–93
colonialism, 352, 384, 386–388
in fi lm, 386
and global womanism, 388–389
colorism, 60
Color Purple, Th e  (Walker), 21, 26, 32, 
33, 139
fi lm, 100
Combahee River Collective, xxix, xxxi, 
366, 374
Coming Apart (Walker), xix, 
xlii, 3–11
Common Diff erences: Confl icts in Black 
and White Feminist Perspectives  
(Joseph and Lewis), 362
commonweal, xxv–xxvi
Communist Party, 50
communitarian, xxv
community, xxv–xxvi
an ethic of caring, 276–278, 
321–322
building, 120
campesinas  and, 253–256
collective power of, 225–227, 228
convivencia , 263–266
dialogue, 319–321
and racial solidarity, 63–64
small savings groups, 248
and womanist scholarship, 91–93
work, 93, 299
Conjure Woman, Th e  (Hurston), 29
consciousness, 219
-raising, 308
Consolidated Bank and Trust 
Company, 176
Constitution of the United States 
of America
Fift eenth Amendment, 46
Nineteenth Amendment, 47, 177
consubstantiation, 220
convivencia , 263–266
cosmopolitanism, 395
Council on Colored Work, 301
Courts of Calanthe, 176
creativity, and wordplay, 335
Creator, 219
Creole, 273
Cristianismo , 261
“Critical Spatial Literacy: A Womanist 
Positionality and the Spatio-temporal 
Construction of the Black Family Life” 
(Amoo-Adare), xlvi, 347–357
critical spatial literacy, 347–357
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   423RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   423 8/11/06   1:53:38 PM8/11/06   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 481 ---
424 • Subject Index
“Cultural and Agenda Confl icts in 
Academia: Critical Issues for Africana 
Women’s Studies” (Hudson-Weems), 
xx, xlii, 37–43
culture, Black
Afro-Christian, 135–136
ancestral reverence, 223–224
ethic of caring, 276–278, 321–322
female-oriented codes, 118–119
views on knowledge production, 92–93
and womanism, xx, xxxvi–xxxvii
culture, Chinese, 165
curandera, 261
curanderismo , 262
D
dance, polyrhythms, 270
“Debate on Black Sexism, Th e” 
(Staples), 100
Decades of Discontent: Th e Women’s 
Movement, 173–174
De cierta manera  (fi lm), 195, 198
defi ance, wordplay and, 335
Demeter, 238
depression, 227
Des Fusils pour Banta  (fi  lm), 198
destiny, 237
Detroit Free Press , 210
Detroit Public School, 211
“Devil” terms, 218, 227
“Dialogic Modes of Representing 
Africa(s): Womanist Film” (Reid), xliv, 
193–203
dialoguing, xxvii, 275–276, 319–321
and knowledge, 275–276, 319–321
diaspora, 26, 369, 389
“diff erential consciousness,” xxvii
Diff erent Image, A  (fi lm), 198–201
“Discontented Black Feminists: Prelude 
and Postscript to the Passage of the 
Nineteenth Amendment” (Terborg-
Penn), 173
discourse, call-and-response, 34, 276–278
discrimination, sexual, xxxvii
“Discrimination against Afro-American 
Women in the Woman’s Movement, 
1830-1920” (Terborg-Penn), 371
dispensario , 261
divining chain, 241
divinity, within, 219–221, 228–229
do-it-yourself methods, xxviii–xxix, xl
domestic service, 303–304
domination, 110, 112, see also oppression
black male, 49, 82
intellectual, 161
male, 73, 97, 107, 136, 166, 254
racist, 47, 99
sexist, 147, 251
white male, 8, 82
Double Yoke (Emecheta), 24
E
Early Victorian Novelists  (Cecil), 23
Eastern Star, 304
“Educating Disadvantaged Adults” 
(Sheared), 276
education, see also teaching
ethic of risk, 289–291
and everyday Black women’s 
experience, 86–89, 94
King (“Black English”) court case, 
207–208
maternal image in, 281–285, 291–293
political clarity in, 285–289
special, 208
education, adult
giving voice, 273–278
womanist perspective, 272–273
educators, see also teachers
ethic of caring, 276
personal accountability of, 276–277
El Curanderismo , 262
el desaho go, 263
“Elizabeth Ross Haynes: An African 
American Reformer of Womanist 
Consciousness, 1908-1940” (Carlton-
LaNey), xlv, 297–309
Emancipation Act, 37
emasculinization, 96–97
emotion, in dialogues, 321
empathy, 321
empowerment
Black, pluralist version of, 60
individual, 280
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   424RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   424 8/11/06   1:53:38 PM8/11/06   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 482 ---
Subject Index • 425
environment, urban built, 350
epistemology
Africentric feminist, 274–278
defi ned, 21
womanist, 218, 317–325
epistle, 33
erotica, 3–11
erotics, xxvii
espiritistas , 261, 262
Essence, xlv, 215, 216–217
essentialism, 365–366, 379
Essentially Speaking  (Fuss), 365
ethics
Christian, 122
and womanist theology, 129–134
ethnicity, and womanism, xxxvi–xxxvii
ethnography
defi ned, 381
womanist, 353–356
everyday experience, and academics, 
86–89, 94
exoticization, 379
experience
as criterion of meaning, 274–275, 
318–319
and knowledge, 274–275, 318–319
expressiveness, personal, 321
F
family
matrilineal, 348, 349, 355
models, xxxii–xxxvi
nonpatriarchal structure of, 77–78
nuclear, 348, 355
role of black church, 132–133
“Family Plots: Black Women Writers 
Reclaim Th eir Past” (Davis), 101–102
Family Stone, 191
Fa Mu Lan, 166
Fante, 355
Federal Council of the Churchs of Christ 
in America, 304
female genital mutilation, see genital 
surgeries, female
feminism
African, xxxv, 45
assumed whiteness of, 49, 62–63, 65, 
193, 361
British, 23–24
Chinese, 329
and colonialism, 352, 384, 386–388
defi ned, xxxv, 62, 298
either/or approach, 186–187
etymology of, 362
Euro-American multicultural, 381
and gender, 102–103
global, 62, 380
history of, 46
imperial, 394
intra-ethnic, 368
Irish, 23–24
male, 69–73, 106–107
multicultural, 380–386
neo-, 27
post-black, 374–376
postcolonial, xxxv, 383
post-Nineteenth Amendment, 174
pro-, xxiii, 98–102, 105
and race, 102–104
raceless, 194
and spirituality, 148–149
teaching, 109–112
third world, xxxv
true, 369
Utopia, 22
white, Africana womanism and, 
37–43, 49–51
and womanism, xx–xxxi, xxxii–xxvi, 
363
feminism, Black, xxii–xxiii, 368
and Africana womanism, 44–53
challenges facing, 62–65
defi ned, xxxv, 58
interpretations of, 62–67
limitations of, 67
and religious tradition, 64–65
separatism in, 65
and womanism, xxiii–xxiv, xxxiv–
xxxv, xlvi, 280
feminism, Black male, 73–84
pro-feminist comrades, 98–102
feminism, male
androcentrism and, 69–70
motivations for, 70
suspicion of by female feminists, 72, 
73–74, 111
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   425RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   425 8/11/06   1:53:38 PM8/11/06   1:53:38 PM


--- PAGE 483 ---
426 • Subject Index
feminist
African, 50
Africentric, 271–279
Afro-Christian, 136
of color, xxiii, 252
male
distrust of, 72, 73–74, 111
perspectives of, 69–71
teaching as, 109–112
organizing, 307–309
pre-, 47
theologians, 142
vs. womanist, 373
feminist, Black, xxii–xxiii
“angry,” 101, 102
defi ned, 50, 143, 214, 229
racism and, 39–43
use of term, 63
feminist, Black male
criticism/distrust of, 72, 73–74, 111
teaching feminism, 109–112
“Feminist Focus on Men” (hooks), 108
Feminist Th eory: From Margin to Center  
(hooks), 50, 106, 110, 118, 147
feminist, white female
Black female novelists and, 21–35
and voting rights, 174
feminist, white male, 74
feminization, fear of, 96–97
Fift eenth Amendment, 46
fi lm
African, 201–203
black womanist, 194, 196–198
ethnographic, 381–382
fi lmmakers
African, 201–203
black women, 198–203
Fire Next Time, Th e  (Baldwin), 33
FGM, see genital surgeries, female
folk medicine, 260–263
footbinding, 329, 341, 387, 398n31
forefathers, 34
foremothers, 34, 140, 150, 156
fore-parents
literary roots, 159
reverence for, 223–224
freedom fi ghters, 119–121
From Behind the Veil (Stepto), 162
Fulani, 31
G
Ga, 355
Gambia, 390
garden, symbology of, 146n1
gay, see homosexuality; lesbianism
gay rights movement, 336
gender
equity, 299–300
and feminism, 102–103
and womanism, xx–xxi
and womanism/black feminism 
debate, 66–67
“Gender and Afro-Americanist Literary 
Th eory and Criticism” (Smith), 74
genital surgeries, female, 381, 383–386, 
387–388, 399n36
genocide, 121–122
Ghana, urban development in, 347, 349, 
351–353
Gift s of Power: Th e Writings of Rebecca 
Jackson, xx, xlii, 12–18, 126–127
“Giving Voice: An Inclusive Model of 
Instruction—A Womanist Perspective” 
(Sheared), xlv, 269–279
“Gnostic Gospels, the Secret Teachings 
of Christ,” 16
God
spirituality and, 219–221, 257
terms, 218
God’s Fierce Whimsy  (Johnson), 124
God Struck Me Dead  (Johnson), 122
Golden Orchid Association, 331
“Gospel According to Shug, Th e” 
(Walker), 152–153
Grand Union Housing Co-operative 
Ltd., 350
group, collective power of, 225–227, 228, 
see also community
Guanajuato, 253
guilt-awareness, 368
gui ning, 331
gumbo ya ya, 273
gynocide, 398n31
H
Hagar, 123
Hao Zi Zai, 333–334
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   426RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   426 8/11/06   1:53:39 PM8/11/06   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 484 ---
Subject Index • 427
Harlem community, 304–305, 309
Harlem renaissance, 102, 105
harmonizing and coordinating, xxvii
harmony, 221–222
healing
African-based, 242
folk medicine, 260–263
physical, xxix–xxx
health care
dialogue in, 319–320
ethic of caring, 321–322
experience and, 274–275
and healing, xxix–xxx
women’s issues, 62
Heart of Race, Th e  (Bryan), 370
hegemony, 109, 163, 198, 274
heteroglossia, 198
hijab, 387
history
African American, 223–224
women’s, defi ning, 173
homophobia, xlvi, 61, 120
homosexuality, xxxvii
and black feminism, 64
China, 327–331
Taiwan, 332–337
honorarias, 257–260
hospitality, xxviii
households
matrilineal, 348, 349, 355
nuclear family, 348, 355
hueseros, 261
humanism, 280, 366
human rights, 62, 109, 175, 257, 383, 387, 
396
I
I Am Somebody (fi lm), 198
Ibo, 52
I-Ching, 343n12
ideology, and womanism, xxv
Idu (Nwapa), 22
Ifa tradition, 234, 239, 241, 244
illiteracy, 66, 259
illness, sources of, 262
imperialism, 379, 386–387
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: 
Written by Herself (Jacobs), 372
Independent Order of Saint Luke, 173, 
175–187
In the Ditch (Emecheta), 23–24
Industrial History of the Negro Race 
of the United States, Th e  (Davis and 
Jackson), 179
infi bulation, 392, 393
In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: 
Womanist Prose (Walker), xix, xli, 48, 
58, 117, 126–128, 363
Inspiring Infl uences (Awkward), 71
“In the Spirit” (Taylor), 213–230
In the Spirit (Taylor), xlv, 217
Institute for African-American 
Studies, 94
integration, racial, 60
intellectuals, Black women
and academic culture, 92–93
and everyday Black women’s 
experience, 86–89, 94
historical feminist dialogues, 108–109
Million Man March and, 208–209
intersectionality, womanism and Black 
feminism, xxiii–xxiv
Isis, 238
Islam, 124
Itefa, 239
Iyalode, xxix
iyan ‘ifas , 244
iyaolorishas , 244
J
Jane Eyre (Brontë), 23
Jesus
and Afro-Christian tradition, 139, 140
campesina spirituality and, 257
jie mei hua, 330, 331
jin lan hui, 331, 343n12
Journal of a Crocodile  (Qiu), 337
Joy Luck Club, Th e  (Tan), 166–169, 171
Joys of Motherhood, Th e  (Emecheta), 24
Jubilee (Walker), 27, 34
justice, social, 299
K
King (“Black English”) court case, 207–208
kin terms, 285
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   427RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   427 8/11/06   1:53:39 PM8/11/06   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 485 ---
428 • Subject Index
Kitchen God, 166, 168–171
Kitchen God’s Wife, Th e  (Tan), 166, 
168–171
Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 
338
“kitchen table,” xxvii, xliv, 251
Knights of Pythias, 176
knowledge
and Black culture, 92–93
defi ned, 274, 318
and dialoguing, 275–276, 319–321
ethic of caring, 276–278, 321–322
and experience, 274–275, 318–319
and personal responsibility, 
322–324
self-, 89
Th ird World women, 252
validation process, 275–276, 
319–321
Kuaer, 337–340, 342n10
“Kuaering Queer Th eory: My 
Autocritography and a Race-
Conscious, Womanist, Transnational 
Turn” (Lee), xlvi, 327–341
Kuer, 336
L
labor market, 1920s, 302–303
land ownership, 353
language
African American, 319–320
of diff erence, 372–374
and diff erent cultures, 364
polyrhythms, 270
La Noire de (fi lm), 201
La Passante (fi lm), 195, 198, 
201–202
Latino Americanos , 262
Laubach method, of literacy, 259
lavender, purple is to, 19, 48, 59, 117, 
120, 127
lazi, 337
learning, polyrhythmic, 270–279
lesbian
black, 65, 127
closeted, 17–18
connotations of term, 132
lesbianism
association of feminism with, 64–65
China, 327–331
and defi nitions of womanism, 61, 
127–128, 132, 138
Taiwan, 332–337
Lesbos, 18, 127, 151
Lessons in Living  (Taylor), xlv, 217
lian li zhi, 330
liberation
Africana, 37, 40, 41, 42, 52, 370
Black, 96–112, 286, 366
Black women, 87, 99, 100–101
gay, 198, 337
rhetoric and, 213
womanism and, xxiv
women’s, 174, 198, 199, 280, 292, 380
limpia, 261
literacy
Laubach method of, 259
and womanism/black feminism 
debate, 66
literature
African, 21–35, 159
Afro-American, 21–35, 159, 160
black female novelists, 21–35
black feminist criticism, 160–164
Chinese, 165–171
feminist criticism, 159–160
phallocentrism in, 160, 161
white feminists, 160
liturgy, womanist theology and, 122
“livingkind,” xxvi
“living thinkers,” 91
logic
both/and, xxxii, 186–187, 272, 273
both/or, 272
either/or, xxxii, 186–187, 316
Losing Ground (fi lm), 198, 202–203
love, 224–225
agape, 151, 153
female same-sex, xxxvii, 327–341
free, 327
revolutionary, xxvii
self-, 224–225
transcendental-emotive state, xxvii
woman-bonding, 151
lynching, 8–9, 96–97
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   428RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   428 8/11/06   1:53:39 PM8/11/06   1:53:39 PM


--- PAGE 486 ---
Subject Index • 429
M
machismo, 51, 97, 375–376
madwomen, in novels, 30
mail-order houses, 302
“Male Feminism” (Heath), 72–73, 
106–107
maleness, and black male feminism, 
76–83
“Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An 
American Grammar Book” (Spiller), 
77–80
Mammywata, xxix
manhood
black, 96–98, 104
and black male feminism, 76–83
male supremacist ideas of, 111, 112
Marcus Garvey Pan-African 
Movement, 309
marriage
arranged, 327, 387
resisters, 330–331, 339
role of black church, 132–133
Marrow of Tradition, Th e  (Chesnutt), 
162
Martial Law of Taiwan, 335
Maru (Head), 22
masculinity
black, 96–98, 197
and black male feminism, 76–83
feminist threat to, 104
in fi lm, 197
male supremacist ideas of, 111, 112
patriarchal, 96–97, 111
“masses of humanity,” xxiv–xxv, 
xxxix–xl
maternalism, in teaching, 281–285, 
291–293
“maternal militarism,” 292
matrilineages, West Africa, 352
Mdw Ntr, 219
meaning, criterion of, 274–275, 
318–319
mediation, xxvii–xxviii
medicine, folk, 260–263, see also healing; 
health care
“Men: Comrades in Struggle” (hooks), 
107–108
men
Africana
role of, 37–38, 42
voting rights, 46
Black, see also manhood; masculinity
anti-feminist, 101–102
and separatism of black 
feminism, 65
and womanism, xxxvi
feminism and, 69–84, 106–107
white, 74
“Men in Feminism: Odor di Uomo or 
Compagnons de Route?” (Jardine), 
70, 72
Men in Feminism (Jardine and Smith), 
106
menstruation, 334
Meridian (Walker), 32, 117
mestizaje, 260
metaphors, 229
family, 180
fruit, 166–167
kitchen table, xxvii, xliv, 251
magnifying lens, xxxv
musical, 270
Oya as, 238
metaphysics, humanist, 380
Mexicanas , 260
Mexicanidad , 260
Mexico, rural communities, 253–256
Microdosis, 261
Million Man March, 103, 207–212
ministers, women as, 17
misogyny
and black male feminism, 98–101, 
104, 111–112
in Chinese literature, 165–166
missionaries, African-American, 388
modernity, Western, 380, 388, 391
“Momma Knows Best” (Hawkins), 282
monogamy, 86, 133, 145, 327
Moon Lady, 166–169, 171
mother
childless, xxix
community, xxix
as oracle, xxix
spiritual, xxix
mother-child relationship, 283–284
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   429RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   429 8/11/06   1:53:40 PM8/11/06   1:53:40 PM


--- PAGE 487 ---
430 • Subject Index
mother-daughter dialogues, 118, 129
motherhood, African context, xxix
mothering, 109
in teaching, 281–285, 291–293
womanist emphasis on, 121
motherwit, 213
Mouers et Coutumes des Manjas  
(Vergiat), 392
movies, pornographic, 7
mujer de rancho, 262
mujeres desjuiciadas , 249
mulata, tragic, 112n4
multiculturalism, 380–386, 394–396
“Multiple Jeopardy, Multiple 
Consciousness: Th e Context of a Black 
Feminist Ideology” (King), 213
music, polyrhythms, 270
mutual aid, xxviii–xxix
mutual benefi t societies, 176–178
mythology
Chinese, 167–171
Yoruba, 233–245
N
Nag Hammadi, 16
narcissism, 235–237, 243–244
Narrative of the Life of Frederick 
Douglass, An American Slave , 161–162
narrative method, 275, 320
National American Woman Suff rage 
Association (NAWSA), 46
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), 176, 208
National Association of Colored Women 
(NACW), 306, 308
National Association of Wage Earners 
(NAWE), 180
National Black Women’s Health Project, 
xxix, 315
nationalism, Black, 59, 60, 66, 111
National Organization of Women 
(NOW), 38, 50
National Urban League, 299
National Woman Suff rage Association, 
46
National Women’s Party, 174
Native Son (Wright), 163
nature, oneness with, 228
Negritude, defi ned, 195–196
“Negroes in Domestic Service in the 
United States” (Haynes), 304
Negro Independence Movement, 183
Negro World, 99
neo-colonialism, 381, 386, 389
neofeminism, 27
“New Directions for Black Feminist 
Th eory” (McDowell), 160
New Feminist Criticism, Th e  (Showalter), 
160
New Marcus Garvey Movement, 211
Newsweek, 209, 211
New York Times, Th e , 210
Nineteenth Amendment, 47, 177
Nommo, 219
nonideological, xxv
Northanger Abbey  (Austen), 32
novelists, see also writers
African male, 26
African women, 26
black female, 21–35
novels
Afro-American womanist, 29
epistolary form, 33
madwomen in, 30
of “passing,” 112n4
womanist, 21–35
Nuestra Virgen de Guadalupe , 259
nu nu, 328–331, 335–336
nursing, see healing; health
nurturing, womanist emphasis on, 121
nu tong xing lian, 329
nu tongzhi, 339–340
O
objectifi cation, 379
Odu, xxix, 238, 239
Odu Ifa, 237
odu (poems), 241
Oggun (river), 233
Ogun, 233–234, 236–237, 240, 242–244
“Old Sister’s Advice to Her Daughters,” 
118
Olodumare, 239–240
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   430RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   430 8/11/06   1:53:40 PM8/11/06   1:53:40 PM


--- PAGE 488 ---
Subject Index • 431
omo-orisa, 242
Omunwa, xxix
One [I]s Not a Woman, One Becomes 
(Ntiri), 52
One is Enough (Nwapa), 30
oppression
forms of, xxiv, xlixn7
race/class/gender, 66–67, 105, 109, 
280, 298, 229, 314–315, see also 
domination
and black womanist fi lms, 
193–203
and everyday Black women’s 
experience, 87–88
sexual, xxxvii
womanism and, xx–xxi, xxiv
optimal conceptual system, 
218–219
“Ordinary” Children, Extraordinary 
Teachers (M. Collins), 281
Organization of Women of Asian and 
African Descent (OWAAD), 371
organizing
grassroots, 250, 308
holistic, 309
Ori, xxix
ori, 237
Orientalism, 379
Orisa, 234, 238–240, 244
Osun, xxix, 238, 239–240
othermothering, 285
Otomi, 260
Our Lady of Guadalupe, 259
Our Sister Killjoy  (Aidoo), 22, 25–27, 30, 
33, 34
Oxford Companion to African American 
Literature, Th e , xxiii
Oya, 238–239
Oya, In Praise of an African Goddess  
(Gleason), 238
P
Paine College, 300
palm nuts, 241
pan-Africanism, 194–195, 
197, 201
pastoral social, 257–260, 266n5
patriarchy, 26
black male feminism and, 76–77, 
98–101, 104, 111–112, 197
and black male writers, 161–163
campesinas  and, 254–256, 264
in education, 283, 284
in fi lm, 197
men against, 79
Western, 238–239, 389
and white male writers, 161
white supremacist capitalist, 96–112, 
147
patrilineages, West Africa, 352
pedagogy
campesina, 251–253, 
256–264
post-modern, critical spatial theory, 
356–357
phallic symbols, and black 
masculinity, 97
phallocentrism
in fi lm, 194, 197, 201
in literature, 160, 161
PLAMAC, 248, 250, 267n9
pluralism, 60
polygamy, 23, 30, 31, 327, 329
polygyny, 31
polyrhythms, 270–279
“popular justice,” 8
pornography, 3–11
“Portraits of Mujeres Desjuiciadas : 
Womanist Pedagogies of the Everyday, 
the Mundane and the Ordinary” 
(Galván), xlv, 246–266
Possessing the Secret of Joy  (Walker), 384, 
386, 390
postcolonialism, 383, 394
postmodernity, ln21
built environments, 349, 351, 
356–357
and womanism, xxx–xxxii
post-Negritude, defi ned, 195–196
poststructuralism, xxxi, ln22
poverty
and the origins of womanism, 
xxxix–xl
and womanism/black feminism 
debate, 66
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   431RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   431 8/11/06   1:53:40 PM8/11/06   1:53:40 PM


--- PAGE 489 ---
432 • Subject Index
power
collective, 225–227
spirit, 219–221, 228–229
struggles, 242
Praisesong for the Widow  (Marshall), 
22, 34
prayers, communal, 259
“praying bands,” 15
predestination, 237
pre-feminist, 47
pro-feminism, xxiii, 98–102, 105
Profi les in Negro Womanhood  (Dannett), 
119
psychology
Afrocentric, 223
self-, 234–235, 240–245
womanist, 234–235, 238, 242–244
Puo, 337
purple, lavender to, 19, 48, 59, 117, 120, 
127
PUSH, 208
Q
Quakers, 14
Quare studies, 337–341
Question of Power, A (Head), 22, 27, 
31–32
“Quiet Subversion, A” (Teish), 6–7
quilting, 270, 273
R
race man, 184
race and racism
and black female writers, 24–26
Black feminists and, 39–43
and defi ning womanism, xx–xxi, 
xlvii
Euro-American, 26
and feminism, 102–104
and gender oppression, 66–67, 105
and sexism, 199
within feminist organizations, 62–63
women’s issues in, 173–175
in the women’s movement, 174
in women’s studies, xlvi
race uplift , 299
race woman, 297, 298–300
racialization, in ethnographic fi lm, 
382–383
rage, narcissistic, 235–237, 243–244
rancherias , 253
Reader’s Companion to U.S. Women’s 
History, Th e , xxii
“Reading: Family Matters” (McDowell), 
75
“Reconstructing Black Masculinity” 
(hooks), 96, 97
religion, see also individual religion or 
church
African, 241
and Black feminism, 64–65
rent parties, 119
reparations movement, xxix
research, womanist theory in, 317–325
responsibility, personal, 322–324
“Responsibility of Intellectuals in the 
Age of Crack, Th e” (Austin), 90
revenge, and narcissistic injury, 235–237
“revolutionary love,” xxvii
rhetoric
African American, 213
Ai Bao, 332–337
Susan L. Taylor, 215–230
Richmond Planet, 184
risk, ethic of, 289–291
“Roundtable Discussion: Christian 
Ethics and Th eology in Womanist 
Perspective,” xliv, 126–157
S
sacred
and defi ning womanism, 139–140
in womanist theology, 131–132
Sacred Heart of Jesus, 257
Saint Luke Emporium, 181–182
St. Luke Herald, 177
Saint Luke Penny Savings Bank, 176, 178
Salsa Soul Sisters, xxix
Sanctifi ed Church, 150
San Francisco Gay and Lesbian fi lm 
festival, 386
Sapphire, 217
Sappho, 18, 152
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   432RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   432 8/11/06   1:53:40 PM8/11/06   1:53:40 PM


--- PAGE 490 ---
Subject Index • 433
Sassafrass, Cypress & Indigo  (Shange), 
28, 34
scholarship
and community, 91–93
womanist, 90–94, see also Black 
women intellectuals
Second-Class Citizen  (Emecheta), 23–24
secret orders, 304
self, 234–235
Black-, 374
grandiose, 236, 240
vulnerable, 236
self-affi  rmation, 222–223
self-assertion, 131
self-destruction, 227
self-esteem, 152
self-help, xxviii–xxix, 301
self-knowledge, 89
self-love, 224–225
self-naming, 40, 47, 140
self-nurturance, xli
self-psychology, 234–235, 240–245
and human change, 237–238
self-worth, 223
Senegal, 390
separatism, 65, 160, 163–164
sexism, xxxiv–xxxv
in African studies, xlvi
black, 26
and black male feminism, 98–101, 
104, 111–112
and black women’s writing, 28
in Chinese literature, 165–166
in fi lm, 198–201
Million Man March and, 208–209
and racism, 26, 199
white feminists and, 39–40
and womanism, xx–xxi
“Sexism, Racism, and Black Women 
Writers” (Watkins), 102
sexuality, see also homosexuality; 
lesbianism
Black church and, 148–149
and defi nitions of womanist, 131–133
studies, xlv–xlvi
womanism and, xxxvii–xxxviii
Shakers, 15–16
“siddon look” tactics, xxvii–xxviii
silencing, 271
Slave Girl, Th e  (Emecheta), 24
small savings groups, 247–249
composition of, 253–256
convivencia , 263–266
social life, spatio-temporal construction 
of, 350–353
social transformation, womanist 
methods of, xxvi–xxx
social work, and womanism, 297–309
So Long a Letter  (Bâ), 31
“Some Implications of Womanist 
Th eory” (Williams), xliv, 74, 159–164
songs, of reverence, 259
Song of Solomon (Morrison), 22, 34
South Africa, 51–52
Southall Black Sisters, 371
Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference, 211
space, use of, 347
spatiality, 350–353
spectatorship, 194, 196–198, 204n1
spirituality, xxxix
campesinas ’, 256–260
and campesina well-being, 261–263
and Catholicism, 257–260
and Christian womanist theology, 
121–124
and defi ning womanism, 139–140
feminism and, 148–149
and God, 219–221, 257
“spiritualized,” xxvi
“spiritualized politics,” xxvi
spiritual realm, xxvi, xxviii
stereotypes, African American women, 
213
Storme: Th e Lady of the Jewel Box  (fi lm), 
195
storytelling, 33, 275, 320
stress, 227
students
maternal caring for, 281–285, 
291–293
personal accountability of, 
276–277
subjugation, female, 42
suff rage, racism in, 174
suff ragists, 46–47
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   433RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   433 8/11/06   1:53:41 PM8/11/06   1:53:41 PM


--- PAGE 491 ---
434 • Subject Index
Sula (Morrison), 80–82, 84n27
survival wisdom, xxix, xxxviii, xl, 118
suttee, 387
T
“T,” 337
Take Back the Night (Lederer), xix
Talented Tenth, 102
talking back, xvi, 57
talleres, 253
tan bao, 337
taxonomy, xxxii
teachers, see also educators
African-American, 283–285
Catholic, 283–284
ethic of caring, 276
Jewish, 283–284
personal accountability of, 276–277
teaching, see also education
Christian ethics, 122–123
ethic of risk, 289–291
everyday experience versus academic 
culture, 86–89, 94
maternal image in, 281–285, 291–293
political clarity in, 285–289
Ten Teaching Commandments, 282
Text & Performance Quarterly , 338
theology
black, 142–146
feminist, 142
womanist, xliv
elements of, 121–123
ethics and, 129–134
spirituality and, 123–124
Th ird Life of Grange Copeland, Th e  
(Walker), 22, 29, 32, 121
Th ird World Women’s Alliance, xxix
“Th is Is Not An Autobiography” (Chin), 
166
thought, womanist, 316–317
thug life, 212
Time, 210
“To Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’: 
Making Womanist Space for Black 
Men” (Lemon), xliii, 96–112
tomboy, 337
Tomorrow’s Tomorrow (Ladner), 49
tong xing lian, 329
Tongzhi, 336
“Towards a Black Feminist Criticism” 
(Smith), 160
tradition, vs. modernity, 391
“tragic mulatta,” 112n4
“Transnational Womanist Quare,” 337–341
travelers, women, 388
Travels in West Africa (Kingsley), 390
“Truth Th at Never Hurts: Black Lesbians 
in Fiction in the 1980s, Th e” (Smith), 61
“Two Million Negro Women at Work” 
(Haynes), 302–303
U
Underground Railroad, xxix
understanding, polyrhythmic, 270–279
unemployment, 207
United Nations Beijing Women’s 
Conference, 386
United Nations Decade for Women, 174, 
187n2
United States Employment Service, 302
universality, in Afro-Christian tradition, 
138
Unsung Heroes (Haynes), 307
Urban League, 208
urban studies, womanist positionality, 
348–350
Utopia, feminist, 22
V
veiling, 387
“vernacular,” xxiv–xxv
“View of the Natural Atmosphere” 
(Jackson), 14
vignettes, 275
Virgin of the Americas, 259
Virginia Lily-Black Republican Party, 
177
Virgin Mary, 257
voice, 215, 249
giving, 273–278
marginalized, 271
silencing of, 271
voting rights, 46, 174, 184n15
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   434RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   434 8/11/06   1:53:41 PM8/11/06   1:53:41 PM


--- PAGE 492 ---
Subject Index • 435
W
wages, inequity in, 207
Waiting to Exhale (McMillan), 100
Warrior Marks: Female Genital 
Mutilation and the Sexual Blinding of 
Women (Parmar and Walker), 380, 381
“Warrior Marks: Global Womanism’s 
Neo-colonial Discourse in a 
Multicultural Context” (Grewal and 
Kaplan), xlvii, 379–396
Warrior Marks (fi lm), 379–396
welfare, social, 301
well-being, barriers to, 314–316
West Africa
matrilineages, 352
patrilineages, 352
urban development in, 347, 351–353
Westside Preparatory School, 281
“What’s in a Name? Womanism, Black 
Feminism, and Beyond” (Collins), 
xliii, 57–67
When Rain Clouds Gather  (Head), 22, 31
White Lotus Sect, 343n15
whiteness, 368
white supremacist capitalist patriarchy, 
96–112, 147
white supremacy, xxi, 59, 62, 105, 
110–111, 200
“White Woman Listen” (Carby), 372
“Who’s Schooling Who? Black Women 
and the Bringing of the Everyday into 
Academe, or Why We Started Th e 
Womanist” (McCaskill), xliii, 85–95
wisdom
defi ned, 274, 318
survival, xxix, xxxviii, xl, 118
woman-activism, 367
womanhood, Black, xxi, xlixn2
public voice of, 57–58
womanish, 19, 59, 117, 127, 128, 131, 
146n1, 250, 363, 364–365
Womanism: Th e Dynamics of the 
Contemporary Black Female Novel in 
English (Ogunyemi), xx, xlii, 21–35
womanism
African, xx, xxxvii
Africana, xx, xxxvii, 21–35, 37–53, 316
and Africanity, xlvii
Alice Walker’s, 3–18
as an (in)suffi  cient strategy, 363–367
black female novelists and, 21–35
and Black feminism, xxii, xxiii–xxiv, 
xxxiv–xxxv, xlvi, 280
black fi lm and, 193–203
and Black male writers, xxiii
both/and, xxxii, 186–187, 272, 273
characteristics of, xxiv–xxvi
and colonialism, 388–389
contradicting interpretations of, 58–62
defi ned, xx–xxxi, xxxv–xxxvi, 
174–175, 298
and essentialist theory, 365–366
family model, xxxii–xxxvi
and feminism, xxxii–xxvi, 363
global, xxiii, xliii, 380
grassroots, xxiv–xxv
holistic/universal focus of, 193, 195, 
213–214, 270–271, 365
and lesbianism, 127–128, 132, 138
limitations of, 67
organizing principle of, 88
origins of, xix–xx, xlii–xliii
and postmodernity, xxx–xxxii
“post-Negritude,” 194–196
and psychology, 234–235, 238
and race, xlvii
and social work, 297–309
as a visionary term, 61
womanist
defi ned, 272
Alice Walker, xix–xx, xxii–xxiv, 
19, 48, 58, 96, 117–121, 126–151, 
160, 174–175, 194, 214, 250, 291, 
298, 363–367
diversity, xxiv–xxv
epistemology, 218, 317–325
identifying, xxxvi–xxxvii
inclusiveness of term, 193, 195, 
213–214, 270–271, 348, 365
methods, xxvi–xxx
origin of term, xix–xx
psychology, 234–235, 238, 242–244
scholarship, 90–94
as term of avowal, xli
thought, 316–317
vs. feminist, 373
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   435RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   435 8/11/06   1:53:41 PM8/11/06   1:53:41 PM


--- PAGE 493 ---
436 • Subject Index
Womanist: A Newsletter for Afrocentric 
Feminist Researchers, Th e , 93–94
“Womanist Archetypal Psychology: 
A Model of Counseling for Black 
Women and Couples Based on Yoruba 
Mythology” (Vaz), xliv, 233–245
“Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena 
Walker and the Independent Order of 
Saint Luke” (Brown), xliv, 173–187
“Womanist Experience of Caring: 
Understanding the Pedagogy of 
Exemplary Black Women Teachers, A” 
(Beauboeuf-Lafontant), xlv, 280–293
“Womanist Looks at the Million Man 
March, A,” 207–212
“Womanist Production of Truths: Th e 
Use of Myths in Amy Tan, A” (Xu), 
xliv, 165–171
“Womanist Th eology: Black Women’s 
Voices” (D. Williams), xliv, 117–124
“Womanist” (Walker), xlii
“Womanist Ways of Knowing: 
Th eoretical Considerations for 
Research with African American 
Women” (Banks-Wallace), xlv, 
313–325
Woman’s Suff rage Movement, 
46, 102
Woman’s Union, 177–178
women
Africana, 37–53
prefeminists, 47
African American
barriers to well-being, 314–316
commonality of experience, 
214-215 
polyvocality of voice, 215
biracial, 112n4
black
diversity of, 368–372
and the origins of womanism, 
xxxviii–xlii
pornography and, 3–11
and womanism, xxiii–xxiv
campesinas , 247–266
of color, xxxviii–xlii, xlixn2
 “D,” 209
generalizing, 361–363
human rights and, 62
Latina, 252, see also campesinas
Mexicana, 252, see also campesinas
non-black, 368
non-white, 368
political rights of, 62
as sexed subjects, 167–171, 171n9
South African, 51–52
voice of, 215, 249, 271, 273-278
voting rights, 46
white, pornography and, 3–11
Women in Africa and the African 
Diaspora (Steady), 45, 49
Women of Color Resource Center, xxix
Women in Industry Service (WIS), 298, 
301
Women Make Movies, 386
Women’s Liberation Movement, 42, 103
women’s movement
discrimination in, 173–174
1920s, 173–187
reductionist terminology, 372–374
splinter groups, 370–371
Women’s Rights Convention, 37
women’s studies
and African womanism, 40–43
defi ning, 173
Women’s Ways of Knowing: Th e 
Development of Self, Voice, and Mind  
(Belenky et al.), 313
wordplay
and creativity, 335
and defi ance, 335
homonymic, 332–335, 336
homophonic, 332
World’s Congress of Representative 
Women, 175
worldview
Afrocentric, 227–229
Afrocentric/feminist, 218–219
worth, self-, 223
writers, see also novelists
African, 26
Afro-American, 27, 29, 161–164
Asian American, 165
Black male, 160–164
heroic quest, 161–163
and womanism, xxiii
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   436RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   436 8/11/06   1:53:41 PM8/11/06   1:53:41 PM


--- PAGE 494 ---
Subject Index • 437
Black women, 21–35
forgotten, 160
and portrayal of black women by 
black male writers, 160–161
Chinese, 165
white male, patriarchal ideas, 161
white women, 25
Writing Diaspora (Chow), 384–385
Wuthering Heights (Brontë), 23
X
xiao, 343n17
Xicanisima, 266n4
Xien Tien Da Dao, 331
Y
Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural 
Politics (hooks), 108
Yemoja, 233–234, 238, 239–240, 242–244
Yoruba Ritual: Performers, Play, Agency  
(Drewal), 239
Young Women’s Christian Association 
(YWCA), 298–301, 306–307, 308
yo yi ci, 328
Yue Yo Xiao Zhi (Zhang), 329–330
Z
zi shu nu, 331
Zi Zai, 333
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   437RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   437 8/11/06   1:53:42 PM8/11/06   1:53:42 PM


--- PAGE 495 ---
RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   438RT54118_Sub_Index.indd   438 8/11/06   1:53:42 PM8/11/06   1:53:42 PM


--- PAGE 496 ---



--- PAGE 497 ---



--- PAGE 498 ---


