=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Lenard Jeffries-AFRICAN-AMERICANS-SEEKING-TRUTH-AND-KNOWLEDGE.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 51
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:20.279165
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The African Americans  
Search for Truth and Knowledge  
by 
Dr. Leonard Jeffries, Jr.   
CONTENTS  
 
1. Introduction   
2. Objectives   
3. Purpose   
4. Approach   
5. African American Response   
6. The African Americans African Heritage Revisited   
7. African Origins of Early Humanity   
8. African Continent of Light   
9. The Peoples of Africa   
10. African River Systems and Historical Eras   
11. The Nile River   
12. The African Americans Forced Migration of Africans   
13. First African Immigrants Before the Mayflower   
14. Free African American Families in America   
15. Earliest Protests and Petitions for Freedom   
16. African American Resistance   
17. The Separation Tradition of African American Response   
18. Free African American in the Revolutionary Era   
19. African Americans and the Revolutionary Era   
20. African American Church in the Revolutionary Era   
21. African American Fraternal Organizations and the American Revolution   
22. African American Exodus to Africa   
23. Thomas Peters: Symbol of the Struggle for Freedom   
24. African American Resistance   
25. African American Resistance—Acommodation Tradition   
26. African American Resistance—Rebellion Tradition Sou th Carolina Rebellion 
Against Slavery   
27. Civil War and Reconstruction   
28. Accomodation Approach to the Cyclical Pattern of African American 
Response   
29. African American Educators and Their Sacred Mission  
30. Dr. W.E.B. DuBois and the First Civil Rights Movement   
31. African American Inventors and Scientists   
32. Transformers of Industry   
33. African Americans and Urban America   
34. African America and the Urban Centers Migration Since World War II


--- PAGE 2 ---
35. African American Cultural Movements—Paul Robeson an d the Harlem 
Renaissance   
 
Next Part  
The Leonard Jeffries Virtual Museum  | The Masters Museums Directory  
FRONTal View: An Electronic Journal of African Centered Thought  
NBUF Homepage  | DuBois Learning Center Homepage


--- PAGE 3 ---
Part One: Introduction  
Basic concepts are needed to understand the world and destroy myths and misconcepts 
that have persisted down through the ages in the inherited bodies of knowledge about the 
Human Experience. These myths, misconceptions and misinformation have been 
particularly evident in the description and portrayal of Africa and African peoples. 
Unfortunately, the history that has generally been utilized to educate people around the 
world has been European centered and taught from a European American perspective and 
world view. 
This concentration on the European American World Experience has been especially 
evident in our education systems over the past two hundred years. In short, our 
educational and cultural institutions and traditions have taught and perpetuated "history" 
and not the history of the World. These myths, misconceptions and misinformation have 
been institutionalized in the learning process of the Western World and limit the ability of 
people to pursue the truth about the past and present experiences of European American 
Peoples as well as other peoples. 
The search for truth and the pursuit of knowledge should be broad-based and not limited 
to white European American ethnic group experiences. It must be global and include the 
various ethnic groups and races in Africa, Asia and Latin America. These non-European 
peoples make up nine tenths of the world's population and have had an enormous impact 
on the development of America. This work is designed to provide a truer picture of the 
interaction of African peoples in the growth of America and correct false images, 
misinformation, and errors about the history of African Americans. 
 
Part Two: Objectives  
This work is intended to shed a truer light on the history of African Americans and 
destroy many of the following concepts: 
• Myths of Africa as the Dark Continent 
• Misconceptions of African peoples as inferior to others  
• Misinformation of African impact on Europe and America  
• Erroneous facts about the Free African in America  
• Misinterpretations about the African American role in the American Revolution  
• Falsifications concerning the African American and the Civil War and Slavery  
• Distortions about the significance of African Americans in the Reconstruction and 
National Development  
• Omissions concerning then importance of African Americans to the Science and 
Technology of America  
• Lack of understanding of the role of the African American as an ethical and moral 
barometer of the American Creed  
• Faulty analyses of the place of African Americans in American society today


--- PAGE 4 ---
Part Three: Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to present the African American Experience in America from 
the perspective of Black Culture, in order to see the patterns of development and 
responses, the continuities and contradictions, as well as institutional and group 
dynamics. It will look at how ethnic communities were established to help handle 
challenges and crises facing the nation and its peoples. 
The study will attempt to clarify and correct the conflict between the ideals and realities 
of the American nation, whose political processes were compromised by the economic 
commitment to maintain slavery. A primary purpose of this search for truth is to correct 
the negative presentations or omissions about the role of African Americans in the 
struggles to develop the United States. In the 1960's the Kerner Commission Report on 
Civil Disorders , reached the conclusion that America was moving towards two societies, 
one White and one Black, separate and unequal. What are the roots of this development? 
It is a recent phenomenon? The causes of these conditions can be traced to the early 
contradictions upon which the American nation was founded. What were these 
contradictions and how have they impacted upon us over the past two hundred years? 
 
Part Four: Approach  
The method used in this presentation of Black America will help develop a systematic 
approach to understanding the inter-relationship of African Americans to the American 
System. It will present certain patterns that have developed in response to the crises and 
challenges of living in America. The major response of African Americans to the 
American experience has been a cyclical pattern of Accommodation, Separation and 
Rebellion. This pattern is very evident during periods of military struggle and their 
aftermath. The concepts of socialization, acculturation and political power will be 
highlighted. This approach will give a broader picture of the history of African 
Americans. 
In order to appreciate the value of the Cyclical Pattern on African American response to 
the European American Experience as a frame work of analysis, several case studies will 
be presented to provide the insights into the life of African Americans. These studies will 
center on the first generation in the colonial period; the Revolutionary War Era and the 
development of the Black Church and fraternal organizations; the post-Revolutionary 
War Era, and the Black Exodus to Africa after exile in Canada; the Colonization 
Movement, Free Blacks and Liberia; Frederick Douglass and Abolition Movement; the 
Slave Rebellions of Prosser, Vesey, Turner and the Haitian Revolution; Civil War and the 
Emancipation Proclamation; the First Reconstruction; and African American Political 
Participation; post-Reconstruction and African American contributions to science and 
industry; Black Rebellion and the NAACP; World War II and the Civil Rights 
Movement; The Second Reconstruction and African American Political Power; The 
African American Family and the Economic Crises.


--- PAGE 5 ---
The military experience has played an extremely important part in the development of the 
political culture of the Black Community. Its impact on the socialization process is 
enormous. This was true as far back as the Revolutionary War period, and continued to 
be so during the Civil War and the World Wars. This work will relate the military 
experience and its aftermath to the question of African American identity and 
socialization processes, to the African American Family and acculturation, to Black 
institution-building and organizational skills and to African American Community 
development. 
How has the military affected these crucial aspects of African American life? What has 
been its impact on the decision-making process among African Americans? How does the 
military experience relate to economic and political power? Clearly, slaves, Free Blacks, 
and post-Reconstruction Freed Blacks were nurtured by a Negative socialization process 
designed to create political and economic dependency on Whites. This dependency 
syndrome was crucial in maintaining control over the slave population, and imposing 
segregation and discrimination on African Americans since the Civil War up to the 
present day. 
The military experience appears to break the dependency syndrome and to create an 
inter-dependency through re-socialization which implants a new self-image, a different 
understanding of the need of teamwork, leadership and organization, and a broader view 
of the world. In short, it seems to produce a new value system, different role models and 
patterns of behavior. For the most part, military experience tends to be a politicizing 
process which makes people conscious of their rights and their power. 
 
 
 
Part Five: African American Response  
It appears that the intensity of African American political activity and the strength of the 
Black Culture are at their heights after periods of military struggle. It is during these 
times that the three major socio-political patterns of African American response to the 
American system appear to be most active. This response includes a pattern of 
Accommodation , which uses petition and protest as a primary vehicle of expression of 
discontent; a pattern of Separation , which institutionalizes some form of African 
American Nationalism to establish barriers between itself and the larger community; and 
a pattern of Rebellion , which utilizes various types of politicized violence to protest 
against injustices. This study will investigate the relationship between the process of 
African American socialization, the military experience and the patterns of response in 
the Political Culture of Black America. 
It will focus on the two-hundred-year period from 1775 to the present, which will be 
looked upon as a continuum, but will be divided into two segments. One concentration 
will be on the socialization process and the institutional framework of the Black


--- PAGE 6 ---
Community from the Revolutionary Era through the Reconstruction Period, with an 
emphasis on the impact of the slave system. The other concentration will be 
institutionalization of the struggle for freedom and the development of the African 
American Community, from the first post-Reconstruction Period through the Civil Rights 
and Black Power Movements of the 1960's. 
 
Part Six: The African American's African Heritage Revisited  
New scientific discoveries have forced the world to re-evaluate its once narrow negative 
view of Africa and African Peoples. This re-evaluation has produced a new perspective 
on Africa and its importance to world history. It has given us deep insights into the true 
role of African peoples, ancient and modern, in human history. 
The traditional view held is that both plant and animal domestication throughout Africa, 
Europe and Western Asia are derived from the original development of these techniques 
in the Near East of Fertile Crescent about 10,000 years ago. New discoveries, however, 
have revealed much earlier food producing complex and cattle rearing complex in Africa. 
More and more evidence supports the fact that food production in Africa was the result of 
indigenous innovations and not a response to external stimuli. Nile Valley Fayum food 
production now has been placed at 15.000 B.C. and not 5,000 B.C. as previously thought. 
New cattle bone finds in Kenya are dated to 13,000 B.C. 
Africa has a longer span of prehistory than any other part of the world. As a result of the 
recent archeological discoveries there is little doubt that the first man-like creatures or 
hominids first evolved on the continent. In fact, the hominid evolutionary process leading 
to modern man (Homo Sapiens) has been traced back through various fossil finds to over 
four million years ago. During most of that time Humanity is found only in Africa. 
In 1871, Charles Darwin wrote in The Descent of Man  that it is "more probable that our 
early progenitors lived on the African continent than elsewhere." Over the next fifty years 
various scientific discoveries supported his theory on the evolution of Human Family. 
These initial finds of hominid fossil evidence were discovered in Europe and Asia which 
gave the world so-called Peking Man and Java Man. Up to that time these were the 
earliest known remains of Humanity. Then in 1925 archaeologists uncovered at Taung in 
the Cape Province of South Africa the skull of a young adult (australopithecine). This 
African fossil evidence has been followed by other discoveries in East and South Africa 
over the past several decades which have uncontestably established the primacy or 
firstness of African Humanity. After 1959, the discovery in Olduvai Gorge dominated the 
attention of the world and established Africa's role at the head of the Human Family. 
The African continent is a treasure trove of ancient history. From the sands and rock 
outcroppings of the Sahara Desert in the North to the caves of South Africa, from the 
Nile River Valley to the Congo River and the lakes of Central Africa, from the Highlands 
of the Ethiopian plateau to the depths of the Olduvai Gorge in East Africa, the continent


--- PAGE 7 ---
is continuously yielding from its soil the scientific and archeological evidence of the 
evolving and unfolding drama of Human history. This historical evidence is found in the 
bits of bone and fossil remains of Humanity's ancient African ancestors. 
It can be seen in various kinds of stone tools uncovered from its soil, made by the world's 
oldest toolmakers. It is clearly recorded in the rock and cave paintings and shattered 
pottery pieces, scattered all over the Continent, by the world's first artists who captured 
early human conduct.  
This unfolding saga of the Human experience in Africa scientifically reveals and points 
to a series of startling discoveries in Olduvai Gorge in Tanganyka and Kenya that 
scientifically support the belief that early Humanity originated in East Africa millions of 
years ago and then spread with his tools and early culture to Asia and Europe. In the 
Congo River Basin and Great Lakes of Central Africa archaeologists unearthed the 
remains of the Ishongo people who lived some 8,000 years ago and used a counting 
system inscribed on bone, the earliest recorded in the world of mathematical notation. 
Fortunately, this new understanding of Africa's place in history has been supported by the 
latest scientific discoveries so that scholars and researchers are able to systematically 
destroy the persistently held view of Africa as the "Dark Continent" and Africans as 
savages who contributed nothing to Human development. 
 
Part Seven: African Origins of Early Humanity  
One of the oldest fossil finds of early man was found in Africa in 1960 by archeologist L. 
S. B. Leakey. He named his find Zinjanthropus, meaning Eastern man. It was found in 
Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanzania which is an archaeologists paradise. Many ancient 
fossils and stone tools have been found there over the years. There are five distinct layers 
of strata of the earth visible in the cliffs. The oldest was formed more than two million 
years ago. One day while climbing up the slopes Mrs. Leakey discovered two teeth 
embedded in the rock side of the gorge. After nineteen days of digging the Leakeys 
uncovered an almost complete skull and stone tools. 
The Radiation Carbon14 method of determining the age of fossil finds only allows the 
scientist to test an object that does not go back more than 50,000 years. Because, 
Zanjanthropus was much older than 50,000 years another newer method to determine the 
age of a fossil find was used. This method was called Potassium Argon and allows the 
scientist to test an object that goes back 2,000,000 years. Scientists at the University of 
California tested Zinjanthropus and believe that this early man was 1,750,000 years old. 
Over the past twenty-five years various early fossil finds have been found in Africa and 
have been scientifically dated to be millions of years old. One of the finds recently 
discovered and found to be several million years old has been named "Lucy" and is the


--- PAGE 8 ---
subject of a best-selling book. These discoveries and others have firmly established 
Africa as the Cradle of Humanity. 
Part Eight: Africa Continent of Light 
New Discoveries and Scientific Finds  
Over the past few decades new discoveries and scientific finds in Africa have destroyed 
many of the old myths and stereotypes about the so-called "Dark Continent." This new 
material has helped to clarify the historical record and establish some new truths. Myths, 
misconceptions and misunderstandings are continually being swept away. It is clear that 
Africa, far from being the continent of darkness, was a extraordinary and unique source 
of "Light" for human development and civilization. As more and more scientific evidence 
emerges, Africa takes its place historically at the head of the Human Family. 
African is a vast continent. It is second only to Asia in size. Traditionally it has been 
divided into large geographical regions and studies have focused on its diversity and 
distinctiveness. As we learn more about Africa and its peoples, it is obvious that there are 
two major themes which will help us understand the diverse continent. One is that Africa 
is not jungle; it has a diverse geographical mixture of climatic zones with different 
ecologies and environments. In the North and South there are temperate zones. The 
dominant feature of these regions, however, are the deserts, particularly the Sahara which 
affects the northern part of the continent from the Red Sea in the East to the Atlantic 
Ocean in the West. In the central and eastern regions are the Great Lakes and 
mountainous zones, featuring Mount Kenya and famous Kilimanjaro and the Ethiopian 
Highlands. The vast majority of the continent in the East, the West and the South is 
Savannah or grasslands that have facilitated the migration and movement of peoples and 
animals. The rain forest or jungle covers less than 10% of the continent and is 
concentrated in the great watershed of the Congo River basin in the heart of Africa and 
along the West Coast. 
The other theme centers around the cultural unity of Africa and its peoples. This subject 
is very important because the ethnic uniqueness of the various African groups often hides 
the cultural unity throughout the different regions of the continent. To better understand 
the many ethnic groups in Africa, it is helpful to look at the common functions of the 
most important institutions and similar practices of the folkways and custom. To more 
fully appreciate the uniqueness of the different African peoples, it is necessary to look at 
the value systems and the institutions that perpetuate these values. As a result, a more 
productive approach to understanding Africa and her peoples is to see the cultural unity 
within ethnic diversity. AFRICAN UNITY AND DIVERSITY. 
  
African Ethnic Groups


--- PAGE 9 ---
Africa has many ethnic groups and distinct societies. Some are large populations, 
representing millions of people; others are small, representing thousands. Some have 
highly structured kingdoms with kings and chiefs and councils. Others have independent 
clan structures. Some are world famous for their art work and sculpture as well as 
weaving techniques. Some are unified culturally with sister groups and have developed 
high levels of civilization, such as the Akan, the Yoruba, the Mande, the Swahili, the 
Amharic and the Hausa-Fulani. Some are famous as cattle herders and warriors such as 
the Zulus, Masai and Kikuyu. 
  
African Languages 
It is generally accepted that African has over one thousand languages among its various 
people. Most of these local languages, however, can be grouped into major African 
language families. The principle of unity and diversity is applicable in the language area 
just as it is applicable in climate, geology, food production, culture and physical type. 
Four language family classifications are: 
o Afro-Asiatic 
o Nilo-Saharan 
o Niger-Kordofanian 
o Khoisian 
 
 
 
Part Nine: The Peoples of Africa  
The people of Africa are divided into various ethnic groups. Some experts estimate that 
there are more than a thousand societies of ethnic groups on the continent. Although 
these groups differ in their distinct customs and traditions and ethnic backgrounds, they 
have many common patterns of behavior and similar value systems. For example, West 
Africa has the largest population concentrations and can be divided into many ethnic 
groups, but there is a cultural unity in the diversity. As a result, large areas can be seen as 
a unifying cultural complex of shared historical and contemporary experience. 
Consequently, West Africa can be divided into several important ethnic divisions, such as 
the Mande Civilization of the Sene-Gambia River region, Akan Civilization of Ghana 
and Ivory Coast, Yoruba Civilization of Western Nigeria and Benin, Hausa-Fulani 
Civilization of Northern Nigeria and Ibo Civilization of Southern Nigeria. There are 
many ethnic societies or groups within each cultural complex, but they have common 
values, traditions and practices. The Akan Civilization of the Republic of Ghana and 
Ivory Coast Republic has various distinguishing customs for each locality, but the 
overriding shared values are most important. They belong to the same language families


--- PAGE 10 ---
of Kwa-speaking peoples who are organized into several kingdoms. They recognize 
matrilineal descent which gives the women special status in their societies because the 
line of rule and inheritance passes through the female, not the male. They have produced 
a revered ancestor tradition that is centered around a symbolic and artistically designed 
stool concept which represents the spiritual or soul force of the leaders and ancestors. 
These sacred stools are very artistically designed, and each design communicates certain 
positive values which the group believes to be significant. Each family clan, each village, 
each chief and office has its stools and they are used in rituals and considered sacred. 
The Akan Civilization has a long-standing tradition of agricultural development as well 
as commercial trading and urban living. For each important event in an individual's and 
family's history, there are common and similar rituals: the naming ceremonies for the 
newborn child, the manhood and womanhood institutions for the young adults, the 
marriage festivals and burial practices. Each group has some form of "enstoolment" for 
its leadership of the family clan, the village, the province or the kingdom. This stooling 
ceremony is used to crown the leader and give him or her authority to rule and make 
them accountable to the memory of the ancestors. The authority of the group does not rest 
with one individual but resides in the collectivity and is expressed through various secret 
societies or, more accurately, societies of secrets. 
There are male societies and female societies, and these organizations have selected 
membership and special responsibilities. They help select the ruler or leader and make 
other crucial decisions for all of the people. The female societies have power and status 
along with the male societies. This principle of complementary male and female authority 
is a key value among the Akan and many other African ethnic groups. The decisions of 
these societies are often brought back to the adult population which meets in council to 
discuss matters. The concept of the family clan council, the village assembly of clan 
leaders and the regional assemblies are important. 
Yoruba Civilization in Southern Nigerian and Benin (formerly Dahomey), is another 
outstanding example of African cultural unity in diversity. The Yoruba are rich in the 
variety of their traditions and value and there have been major wars and rivalries among 
the various ethnic groups, but the cultural unity has remained through thousands of years. 
There are more than fifteen million Yoruba spread over several ethnic groups, such as the 
Egbas, the Ife, and the Oyo. In spite of this ethnic diversity, they share in common the 
most vital aspects of group life. For example, they have common traditions of origin. In 
fact, they believe Humanity originated in their sacred holy city, Ife-Ife, and they share a 
common religious system of various levels of deities and spirit forces. They have 
common marriage and burial practices and a highly organized kingship and chieftaincy 
structure. They share a world renowned art tradition which includes uniquely casted terra 
cotta and bronze-brass objects of individuals, heads of rulers and historical plaques. 
Much of this work has been declared comparable to any produced by any people. In fact, 
when it was first discovered by Europeans at the end of the 19 
th  century, it was so 
beautiful and skillfully worked that they thought it had been produced by other 
Europeans. As more and more discoveries were made and they were scientifically tested, 
it became clear that this extraordinarily fine art was the culmination of an artistic tradition


--- PAGE 11 ---
that spanned two thousand five hundred years and was one of the most outstanding in the 
world. 
The predominant values of these various African ethnic groups can be classified as 
centering around three primary characteristics. They are communal, cooperative and 
collective. They become clearer when applied to vital aspects of a society, such as how 
the group views the individual, the family and the land. This communal, cooperative and 
collective value system has an essential spiritual aspect. The individual is not just viewed 
from his personal perspective; he or she is seen as a spiritual extension of ancestors who 
died years ago. The Africans generally focus on the communal "we" and not the 
individualistic "I." Each person is respected as a spiritual entity and has individual worth, 
but more importantly he or she is part of a sacred spiritual continuity from revered 
ancestors. In fact, ancestral spiritual presence is kept alive in every aspect of life. When 
there is an important activity, the group always remembers the ancestors through the 
ceremonial ritual called "libation." In this ceremony, the priest or elder pours water or 
some other liquid on the ground while reciting a prayer and calling to the ancestral spirits 
to extend their blessings. 
This African Asian communal, cooperative and collective value system of Humanism and 
Spiritualism contrasts with the general European-American value system, which is 
characterized by unbridled individualism, fierce competitiveness and ruthless 
exploitation. The institutional manifestation of this African value system has three major 
aspects: the extended family clan system as an economic social unit, the divine-king 
priesthood as the ruling political unit, and the societies of secrets as the administrative 
judicial leadership unit.  
 
 
Part Ten: African River Systems and Historical Eras 
Africa contains several of the world's largest river systems—the Nile, the Niger, the 
Congo and Zambezi. Each river system has an important place in African and world 
history. The Nile River flows from the Great Lakes of central and eastern Africa more 
than four thousand miles through Uganda, the Sudan and Ethiopia, finally emptying out 
into the Mediterranean Sea at the Delta near Cairo. Before the construction of the Aswan 
High Dam, the Nile River overflowed its banks and deposited rich soil from the interior 
of Africa. This process of annual seasonal overflow produced a fertile strip along the Nile 
Valley for more than two thousand miles. The Nile River Valley has produced some of 
the earliest evidence of Human development and became the source of Ethiopian-
Nubian-Egyptian civilization. As a result, the Nile River Valley has been a Cradle of 
Humanity and Civilization.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Part Eleven: The Nile River  
The Nile River Valley has played a unique role in Human history. Because of its special 
ecology, featuring the annual overflow of rich soil from the Great Lakes regions of 
Central Africa, the banks of the Nile were able to support intensive agricultural 
development. Food surpluses and the concentration of populations migrating from parts 
of Africa and Asia laid the foundation of Nile Valley Civilization. This special 
combination of African peoples, the Sun, the fertile land and the Nile River were blended 
together to produce the greatest civilization of the Ancient World. The enormous impact 
of this High Culture of the Nile Valley on Africa, Asia, and Europe has not been fully 
appreciated. The latest scientific discoveries have helped to reveal the significance of the 
value systems, the traditions and institutions that were produced in the Nile Valley and 
spread to various parts of Africa and the world. 
Recent discoveries have established Africa as the site of the earliest domestication of 
grains and cattle, several thousand years before similar domestication took place in 
Western Asia around Mesopotamia. The African sites were Carbon 14 tested to be about 
15,000 and 18,000 years old, respectively, whereas the Asian sites have traditionally been 
dated to be about 7,000 or 8,000 years old. A University of Chicago research team in the 
1960's discovered thirty-three royal tombs in Nubia south of Egypt along the Nile River. 
Many of the thousands of objects in these tombs have been dated to be more than 5,300 
years old, making this discovery the earliest evidence of an established monarchy in the 
history of the world. This new evidence along with older finds and the existing 
monuments, temples, tombs and pyramids have firmly established Egypt-Nubia-Ethiopia 
in the Nile Valley as the Cradle of Civilization. These developments of African peoples 
of the Nile Valley became the foundation for the cultural progress of various groups in 
Africa and provide the basis for the culture unity of Africa through its traditions and 
institutions. These developments can be seen through the existence of a Communal, 
Cooperative and Collective value system throughout the continent. 
African social structure has functioned through the extended family system with a unique 
preservation of the spirit of the ancestors. It is this African value system that became the 
basis of Nile Valley Civilization and explains the monumental building of temples, 
tombs, and pyramids and the need to produce sacred writing and literature, medicine, and 
mathematics, art and architecture. All of these developments left a Golden Legacy for the 
Ancient World which not only nurtured Africa, but inspired the early Hebrews and 
Greeks who sojourned in the Nile Valley. 
The Niger River system flows more than two thousand miles through West Africa from 
the highlands of the Republic of Guinea to Mali, Niger, Benin and finally empties into 
the Atlantic Ocean along the Nigerian Coast. The river actually splits the Republic of 
Nigeria, one of Africa's most important nations, into two halves and is the source of its 
name. During the Medieval Period from 1,000 A.D. to 1,600 A.D., the Niger River 
Valley was the center of African Islamic Civilization that produced the great Empires of 
Ghana, Mali and Songhay which were famous for their gold trade across the Sahara with 
the Mediterranean world. This Sudanic Civilization with its mixture of traditional African


--- PAGE 13 ---
cultural systems and Islam was based on agricultural development combined with 
extensive commercial activity in several city-states, such as Kumbi-Kumbi, Gao, Mopti, 
Djene, Kano, Sokota, Zaire and Timbuctoo which was famous for its trading and its 
University of Sankore. Several Arab scholars visited these empires and wrote about their 
prosperity, the peace and safety throughout the land and the fairness of their systems of 
justice and administration. The Empire of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay rose to prominence 
during the period of the Middle Ages when Europe was suffering from the chaos and 
confusion of the Crusades, feudal wars and the Dark Ages. 
The Congo River system is one of the World's greatest watersheds and rivals the Amazon 
River Valley. It is the center of the great rain forest or so-called jungle that is located in 
Central Africa. During the slave trading era the Africans of the Congo River Valley and 
adjacent areas were the victims of a double attack by slave raiders. They were initially 
victimized by the Arabs raiding from the North and East and later by the Europeans 
raiding from the West and South. These events triggered continuous warfare among 
Africans. On the international scale they triggered conflicts and wars among Europeans. 
This period represents a very sad chapter in African and World history. 
The Zambezi River Valley is located in Southern Africa and has played a crucial role in 
colonial and contemporary developments. Because of the mineral wealth of the region, it 
has been subject to colonization and exploitation by European settler populations that 
have expropriated the best lands to themselves and taken over all the rich mineral 
concessions. In 1884–85 various European leaders me t in Berlin and held an historic 
conference in which they divided up Africa among themselves. The Germans were 
particularly anxious to obtain territory to challenge the British, the French, the Portuguese 
and the Spanish who were all firmly entrenched in Africa. Since World War II African 
nationalist movements have fought for independence and destroyed the colonial systems 
in most of Africa. Southern Africa, however, is still the focal point of freedom and 
independence movements. [Their independence has been won, however, since the initial 
writing of this paper.] The Zambezi River Valley and the southern Africa region are so 
rich in vital mineral deposits that are absolutely necessary for the continued development 
of high technology in the Western World and Japan, it is clear the region will continue to 
be a source of conflict in the future. 
 
 
Part Twelve: The African Americans Forced Migration of Africans  
Africans came to the Americas in chains. This shameful historical truth dominates all 
other questions relating to African Peoples and European-American Peoples. Until the 
significance of this fact is understood and appreciated, there is little hope that a 
meaningful presentation of the history of African Peoples in the Americas can be made. 
From the very beginning of the European relationship to the New World, slavery 
permeated every aspect of life in the colonies and eventually the new nations, particularly 
the United States, Brazil and the islands of the Caribbean. Ironically, the European


--- PAGE 14 ---
enslavement of Africans began at about the same time as the initial dissolution of 
serfdom in parts of northern and southern Europe. The end of feudal serf status provided 
a foundation of later European overseas migration. 
During the 1400s and the 1500s the politics and economics of racism against Africa 
peoples and the politics and economics of feudalism against the European serfs and 
masses were woven together into a grotesque fabric of European exploration, 
colonization and imperialism. The net result of these historical events was the genocide 
of Native Americans and the perpetuation of the triangular slave trade system which grew 
out of the trans-Atlantic slave trading that dominated European-American politics and 
economics for centuries. This slave trading system linked Europe, Africa and the 
Americas in the single most sustained and shameful injustice of man against man since 
the dawn of history. 
There is no justification for the European and American initiated, controlled and 
dominated trans-Atlantic slave trade. Every type of excuse has been given to justify the 
enslavement of African Peoples. Some have even said slavery was good for Africans. 
Others have proclaimed that it was part of the European "civilizing mission" of savage, 
inferior peoples. Still others have claimed that Africans were "cursed" by God and were 
divinely ordained to serve whites. Many blame the Africans for their own condition. In 
spite of all of these rationalizations to justify African enslavement, the fundamental 
reason for it was greed and racism among the leaders of European and American nations. 
Over the years scholars, political leaders and religious authorities have tried to justify 
slavery. They claimed that it was part of the Human Experience. One school of thought 
from America's prestigious universities concluded that Africans were "child-like" and 
needed to be under white domination and supervision. Even the Best American minds, 
such as Thomas Jefferson in his Notes To Virginia , attempted to find intellectual and 
moral justification for slavery. Like most of the Founding Fathers of the United States, 
George Washington and Jefferson obtained a great deal of profit and prestige from the 
slave system and they were not prepared to give up this shameful source of wealth for 
higher ideals of human freedom. As a result, the founding of the American nation was 
compromised from birth on the altar of slavery. 
The consequences of the decisions to choose profit-making from slavery over the lofty 
ideals of freedom, justice and equality can be viewed as a serious birth defect for the 
United States of America. This defect has caused permanent damage to American society 
and has been constant and continual source of difficulty for the American People. 
It is important to understand the true nature of the slave system in the Americas, 
particularly in the United States. The African was not just a captive who was later 
enslaved; he or she was property to be treated like a thing or chattel. This concept of the 
enslaved individual being separated from their human spiritual essence is particularly 
European-American and has its roots in the feudal system in Europe where the individual 
was legally and socially tied to the manor and the lord like the cattle. Arab trans-Saharan 
and East African slavery of Africans, which existed centuries before its European


--- PAGE 15 ---
counterpart, did not relegate African people to chattel property status. Similarly, 
traditional captivity of servitude in Africa itself, maintained by Africans, did not separate 
the individual from his or her human spiritual essence and reduce them to property in the 
form of chattel like the horses, the barn and the cotton. This peculiar form of European-
American racism and hypocrisy was still being justified by the Supreme Court of the 
United States as late as 1857 in the Dred Scott Decision, affirming chattel slavery. This 
tragic relationship between African Peoples and Europeans existed for more than four 
hundred and fifty years. Individuals and trading companies from practically every 
European nation were involved in the slave trade system. Even the major religious 
authorities, Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish were involved in sanctioning this traffic in 
human flesh. Just recently on a visit to Africa, the Roman Catholic Pope, John Paul II, 
apologized for the Church's official involvement in the slave trade. Slavery affected 
everything. 
Part Thirteen: First African Immigration Before the Mayflower  
African Forced Migration Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade 
American history is full of irony and contradiction. In many ways the early American 
colonies were places of refuge for oppressed European peoples. After the Virginia colony 
was founded in 1607 with a charter grant from the King of England, the Pilgrims landed 
in Massachusetts in 1620 and established a colony that became a haven for those who had 
simple Protestant Puritan religious beliefs. They drafted and adopted the "Mayflower 
Compact," which was their covenant of self-government, and charter of religious liberty. 
Several other colonies were founded and became havens of refuge for oppressed and 
persecuted religious groups from Europe. 
George Colvert, the first Lord Baltimore, received a royal proprietary charter for the 
Maryland Colony which immediately became a refuge for Catholic immigrants. Roger 
Williams organized the Rhode Island colony as a haven for religious freedom. When 
William Penn was awarded a royal proprietary charter for Pennsylvania, he established 
some of the earliest American laws, permitting freedom of conscience and religious 
worship. He was a Quaker and believed in religious tolerance. Some American colonies, 
however, were founded and organized for economic reasons like the first colony in 
Virginia. In these areas, the bulk of the immigrants were European indentured servants 
who were bound by a fixed term contract of several years of labor.  
First African Immigrants 
It is ironic that the first Africans to permanently settle in British North America were 
captives from a Dutch man-of-war or naval ship who were sold to the Jamestown, 
Virginia colony in 1619. They arrived "Before the Mayflower" and became indentured 
servants along with other white migrants from Europe. The Africans were sold into the 
contract labor system of indentured servitude like most white migrants because a 
legalized system of slavery had not yet been organized in the new British colonies. A 
similar process occurred in the new Dutch Colony of New Amsterdam on Manhattan


--- PAGE 16 ---
Island, which was founded in the 1620's by the Dutch West India Company and later 
became New York after the British victory in the Anglo-Dutch wars (1660–64). 
Part Fourteen: Free African American Families in America  
African Labor, Property Ownership and Institution Building 
A free African Community developed in the 1640's in Virginia in the Tidewater area of 
the Eastern Shore, along banks of the Pungoteaque River. It was here that the first 
community of Black property owners was established. The human drama of these 
forgotten African Families is an inspiring story. 
 In 1625 there were only 23 Africans in the Virginia Colony, by the 1650's the figure 
increased to more than 300 African Freemen and indentured servants. Between 1670 and 
1680 this African population increased from 2,000 to 3,000. During this period the legal 
status of the African population was undergoing change. Free Africans by statute law, for 
example, were prohibited from owning white servants. Other laws were passed creating a 
permanent slave system. In spite of the laws and customs restricting the African 
population, many remained free and continued to accumulate property. There were 
various ways to obtain property. Some received land under the head-rights system which 
allowed you to own forest land you cleared and made productive. Others purchased land 
outright or acquired it through wills of former masters. As a result of these events, a class 
of Free African property owners began to emerge in Virginia and other American 
Colonies and their descendants continue to play an important role in American Society. 
In the same year, 1651, another African John Johnson received a tract of 550 acres of 
land as head-rights for importing eleven white servants for help clear the land. Other free 
Africans also increased their land holdings. Sometimes disputes arose over who had 
proper title to the newly claimed lands. In 1663, for example, John Johnson, Sr. was 
involved in a court dispute with his African neighbor over the title of 450 acres. By 1670, 
the Virginia Colony assembly passed laws restricting the property ownership of Free 
African Americans. 
Laws were also passed to separate white indentured servants form African indentured 
servants and create a permanent status of slavery for Africans. In spite of the growing 
slavery system in southern colonies of America, the Free African population continued to 
increase and expand their ownership of property. For the next two centuries this Free 
African population became the base for building the institutions and traditions of today's 
African American community. 
Part Fifteen: Earliest Protests and Petitions for Freedom 
First Generation in New Amsterdam 
The African American population in New York traces it roots in the New World to the 
arrival of eleven Africa Captives who arrived in the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam in


--- PAGE 17 ---
1626. They were a welcomed addition to the struggling settlement. They became the seed 
that today has grown into an African American Community in New York of almost two 
million people. From this infamous beginning of forced migration and forced labor, 
waves of immigrants of African background have come to New York to build a future for 
themselves and their people. Their relation to America from the very beginning has been 
unique and distinctive. 
In 1623 a group of wealthy merchants in Holland organized the Dutch West Indian 
Company and sent thirty families with a shipload of one hundred and three horses and 
cattle to colonize New Amsterdam which was at the time a trading post on the Hudson 
River. In 1626 the colony was raised to the status of a province with a director-general 
sent to rule from Holland. These early European settlers came from various ethnic groups 
including the Dutch, the French Huguenot, the Belgian Walloon, the English and the 
Jews. From the beginning it was clear that no matter how difficult European migration 
had been, it could hardly compare to the hardship and horrors of African Slavery. 
The captive Africans who arrived in 1612 were sorely needed to stabilize the struggling 
settlement. They became laborers and at the end of the contract labor term, they would 
obtain their freedom and land to start a new life. Each "patron" on "lord" who imported 
fifty adult white settlers to the New Netherlands colony received enormous land grants. 
Some of these land grants became the foundation of the great fortunes of later American 
families. Like the English colony in Virginia, New Netherlands was founded on imported 
poor white indentured labor and labor grants to rich royal or merchant families. In both 
colonies a third ingredient was needed to insure the success of the settlements. This 
ingredient was the African factor. 
Because of the shortage of white indentured labor, African labor was imported and used 
to build both the English colony in Virginia and the Dutch colony along the Hudson 
River. In both colonies, the imported African immigrants were not content to remain 
semi-slave laborers. They wanted their freedom like the white indentured laborers, who 
worked with them and obtained freedom and land at the end of the contract. 
In the Winter of 1644, the undying desire to be free led the African indentured servants to 
petition the Dutch director and council for their freedom. Eighteen years after the arrival 
for the first Africans in 1626 to New Amsterdam, eleven of them presented an historic 
petition for freedom. Within a short time, the Dutch authorities responded positively by 
passing an act of freedom or manumission in February 1644 freeing eleven Africans and 
their wives because of their "long and faithful services." 
They were given freedom and land to support themselves but there were strings attached. 
There were restrictions on their freedom which did not exist for the whites. They had to 
pay an extra annual tribute of tax. If they failed their freedom was taken away. 
The land given these freed Africans to start their family homesteads and farms was 
located outside the protective wall of the colony in swamping area that eventually 
became Greenwich Village.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Part Sixteen: African American Resistance  
Resistance has been a central theme in African American history. Resistance and 
rebellion did not just burst forth during the 1960's with the Civil Rights Movement of the 
South, or the Black Power Movement of the North. It is deeply rooted in the African and 
American past. When Africans were torn from their homes in the interior and along the 
coast to be sold into slavery, they resisted and many were killed. During the Middle 
Passage across the Atlantic Ocean to the slave plantations of the New World, African 
captives resisted, often rebelled from the holds of ships. After arrival in the New World, 
the resistance took various forms but it continued and forced the slave owners to build an 
elaborate system of state and individual controls in order to maintain slavery. 
One of the most interesting aspects of the African American history is the suppressed 
story of those men and women who resisted slavery and oppression in any way possible. 
They resisted capture on the soil of Africa during the raiding for captives to carry into 
slavery in the Americas. They led the mutinies on the slave ships during the Middle 
Passage between Africa and the New World. During slavery, they ran away and became 
fugitives in the North or Maroons hiding in the hills of Caribbean Islands or Brazil. They 
organized the ultimate resistance which was to plan and execute a slave revolt and be 
willing to give one's life to obtain your liberty and that of your people. 
Fugitive-slave narratives and remembrances by the freedmen reveal the personal, family, 
and religious lives of African Americans. These accounts give vivid pictures of life under 
slavery and help explain why African Americans resisted and rebelled against slavery and 
continuously escaped to freedom. The life stories of former slaves like Frederick 
Douglass and William Wells Brown who escaped slavery are masterpieces of self-
expression and social analysis. The heroic struggles of Harriet Tubman and William Still 
of the Underground Railroad are inspiring as are the famous rebellions on board the slave 
ships, such as the one led by the African, Cinque, in the Amistad Mutiny. 
  
The Accommodation Tradition of Petition and Protest 
The eleven Africans in the Dutch Colony of New Amsterdam who protested their 
oppression under indentured servitude, and petitioned for their freedom and obtained it, 
started a tradition of protest by African Americans that continues to exist to this day. The 
major pattern of response by African Americans to the America Experience in order to 
redress their grievances and correct abuses, has been the technique of petition and protest. 
The roots of this tradition go back to the first African captives who arrived on the shores 
of North America in the Dutch Colony of New Amsterdam and the English Colony of 
Jamestown, Virginia. It has continued through the protests and petitions against slavery 
by Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman during the Abolition Movement before the 
Civil War.


--- PAGE 19 ---
It was the technique that inspired Dr. W.E.B. Du Bois and Ida B. Wells just before World 
War I to help organize the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 
which became the nation's major protest organization. It reached its height after World 
War II during the Civil Rights Movement which was centered around the protests and 
petitions of Rosa Parks and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. These events led to the social, 
political, economic and educational reforms of the second Reconstruction, featuring 
President Johnson's Great Society legislation. 
  
The Accommodation Tradition of American Response 
Just as Dr. Martin Luther King symbolized the protest of African Americans during the 
Civil Rights Movement after World War II and Rev. Richard Allen and Absolom Jones 
represented the protest after the American Revolutionary War, DuBois and Douglass 
were the symbols of their eras. DuBois led the protest before and after World War I. 
Similarly Douglass led the protests before and after the Civil War.  
All of these great leaders represent the outstanding represent the outstanding petition and 
protest tradition within the African American community which we refer to as the 
Accommodation Pattern of the Cyclical Response to the American experience. All of 
these men confronted the forces oppressing African American people and organized 
petitions and protest against these injustices and demanded a redress of legitimate 
grievances. They did not accommodate to the injustices of the system and forces 
oppressing African Americans. They accommodated to the accepted rules and regulations 
of protest within the American system. The "rules of the game" allowed them to organize 
individual and massive non-violent protests and all types of court actions as well as 
political mobilizing to satisfy just grievances against society. The Accommodation 
Pattern of protest has been the most prominent feature of the African American 
experience from colonial time. The Separation and Rebellion Patterns have nonetheless 
had significant impact on America. 
Part Seventeen: The Separation Tradition of African American Response  
One of the major responses of the Black Community to the American system has been 
characterized as a voluntary separation in some form, either leaving the country; moving 
to another region within the country; or creating a separate way of life. In the 
Revolutionary War era, this pattern was represented by the Blacks who fled the 
plantations to fight for their freedom with the British, and were forced to evacuate to 
Canada and eventually to return to Africa to establish Freetown, which became the 
Republic of Sierra Leone. This is an excellent example of the re-socialization process in 
the military, and its impact on identity, family, institutions, and the community. 
In the pre-Civil War period, the most important example of the Separation Tradition was 
the movement by thousands of African Americans to leave the United States and sail to 
Liberia in West Africa and help found a colony of freemen and women that became a


--- PAGE 20 ---
Republic in 1848. Many African Americans opposed leaving the United States because 
their forefathers had contributed so much to the development of the country in spite of 
slavery. Others felt they must leave and start a new life for themselves and their children. 
In the post-Civil War period the Separation Tradition did not involve African Americans 
emigrating to Africa because of the difficulties and the costs. Instead of migrating 
overseas, African Americans moved westward from the South to states in the Mid-west 
and West. This movement was led by men such as Pap Singleton were called the 
"Exodusers." 
Part Eighteen: Free African Americans in the Revolutionary Era  
After the American Revolutionary War there was a significant increase in the Free 
African American population. Initially, this increase occurred because those African 
American slaves who fought in the War on the American side as soldiers were granted 
freedom and land. In the years after the War, these newly freed African Americans along 
with other Free born African Americans continued to purchase the freedom of their 
relatives still in slavery. 
As a result of this "freedom to the slaves" movement, almost 20% of the African 
Americans in the new nation were free at the time of the first United States census. In the 
U.S. census of 1790, the first official counting of the American population, there were 
more than 90,000 Free African Americans among the more than 400,000 slaves. 
The story of the Free African American in the American Revolutionary Era is one of the 
most heroic untold sagas in the struggle for Human Freedom. Ironically African 
Americans fought on both sides of the Revolutionary War because both the Americans 
and the British offered them freedom from slavery. Many history books recount the story 
of an African American, Crispus Attucks, who was killed in one of the early armed 
conflicts in the Revolutionary Struggle. Other books tell about the heroics of African 
Americans such as Peter Salem, who killed a British officer before he was killed by the 
British Troops attacking the colonists. These stories are just two symbolic incidents of a 
much larger picture of African American involvement in the struggle for freedom at the 
"Birth of the Nation." 
Part Nineteen: African Americans and the Revolutionary Era  
"Give me liberty or give me death" is a cry of defiance that has been credited to Patrick 
Henry, a slave-owning American patriot from Virginia. It is a cry that affected many 
people during the Revolutionary War period. It greatly affected the American colonists 
who were rebelling against British rule and were prepared to give their lives for their 
beliefs. It also affected African Americans, those who were free as well as those who 
were slaves. 
The response of the African American to the great issues of the time had an enormous 
impact on the future of White and Black America. Two major factors were of primary


--- PAGE 21 ---
importance. The basic framework of the institutional structures of the African American 
community was established during the Revolutionary War era. At the same time the 
cyclical pattern of African American response to the American experience was 
institutionalized. Both have become permanent features of African American life. 
Out of the Revolutionary War era emerges the rudiments and foundations of the three 
major institutions within the African American community: the church, the school, and 
the fraternal order. The African American Church is the center of spirituality and 
worship, but it is also the focal point of communal activities—religious, social, cultural, 
economic and political. The African American School is the center for instruction and 
training as well as a major source for the transmission of values of the General American 
Society. In contrast, the home is the source for the transmission of African American 
values. The Fraternal Brotherhood Societies and Sisterhood Societies are the centers for 
leadership development and training where the individual learns about community 
accountability and collective responsibility. These institutions are crucial for group 
development because African Americans have systematically been kept out of the 
political, economic, social and cultural institutions of America. 
Part Twenty: African American Church in the Revolutionary Era  
The Black Church was established in the North and in the South during the Revolutionary 
War period and helped to provide a training ground for future leadership, institution 
building and communal organization. Several African American leaders of the 
Revolutionary Struggle were preachers, soldiers, teachers and political leaders. Often, 
one individual combined two or three of the different roles or all four at different times in 
his life. The churches built by these African Americans were able to survive the chaos 
and disruption of the War, and grow in the post-war period in the United States as well as 
continue to develop after transplanting in Jamaica, Canada and Africa. 
The roots of the Black Church movement go back to the 1760's and 1770's, when Blacks 
began to respond in increasing numbers to the Religious revivalism of the period. Out of 
this movement grew the independent Black Church, which has continued to remain the 
most important communal institution in the African American Community. Revivalism 
of the day centered around newly introduced Protestant sects that had spiritualist and 
evangelical tendencies and emphasized the individual and his personal relationship with 
God. They opposed the highly structured religion of the Church of England and 
Anglicanism. Methodists, Baptists, Countess of Hunting Connection and Presbyterians 
were among the most popular forms of worship. 
The Methodists Sect appeared in New York and Maryland in the 1760's and welcomed 
Blacks into the movement. In 1766, Philip Embury, an Irishman and a lay preacher who 
had been licensed by John Wesley, held the first Methodist meeting on American soil in 
his home with an audience of five, including one Black Person, Betty, a slave of Barbara 
Heck. Within a short time segregated classes for religious instruction were organized for 
both free and slave Black participation and were make distinctive so that the roots of the 
separate Black Church can be found in the earliest days of the Revivalist movement in


--- PAGE 22 ---
the American Revolutionary era. In face, Wesley Chapel, built in 1768, which became 
the First John Street Church, the seat of American Methodism, had ladder stairways to 
the slave gallery. This type of segregation was a common practice in American churches 
from the earliest days, and has remained one of the most tenacious tenets of a segregated 
society. These discriminatory practices led Richard Allen and Absalom Jones to leave the 
White Methodist Church after Racial insults motivated them in the post-Revolutionary 
period to set up their own African Society in Philadelphia in 1787 that eventually became 
the seed which produced the Black Methodist Church Movement in America. 
The history of African Americans in the Baptist Movements began on American 
plantations just before the Revolutionary War. The personal stories of three Black Church 
Leaders: George Lisle, David George and Andrew Bryan, are excellent examples of how 
and why the Baptist movement attracted African Americans and enabled them to develop 
independent Black institutions which were eventually planted in America, Canada, the 
West Indies, and Africa. 
In a letter dated December 18, 1791, George Lisle, also called George Sharp, explained 
how he became involved in the Baptist Movement. Later, he helped to spread it in 
America as well as in Jamaica after he evacuated with the British Loyalists. 
George Lisle was born in slavery and was influenced by memories of his family 
background to go into the ministry. He stated that: "I was born in Virginia, my father's 
name was Lisle and my mother's name was Nancy. I cannot ascertain much of them, as I 
went to several parts of America when young, and at length resided in New Georgia; but 
was informed both by white and Black people that my father knew the Lord…" 
Lisle was baptized by the Rev. Matthew Moore of Burke County, Georgia, around 1774, 
and continued to worship in this white church for four years until Savannah was 
evacuated by forces loyal to Britain. His master, Henry Sharp, was a deacon in Rev. 
Moore's church and just before the war, he gave George Lisle his freedom. During these 
years, Lisle felt himself called to the ministry and he began preaching to the slaves on 
plantations in the area. One of the groups he preached to was David George's newly 
gathered church near Savannah. George eventually evacuated America and continued his 
church and community leadership in Canada and later in Sierra Leone in West Africa. 
In 1782, when the British evacuated Savannah, Lisle went with the Loyalists who sailed 
to Jamaica in the West Indies. Two years after arriving, he established the first Baptist 
Church on the sugar growing island and eventually baptized over 400 free and slave 
Blacks. 
Prior to his departure for Jamaica in 1782, George Lisle came up from the Tybee River 
and baptized Andrew Bryan and his wife Hanna, who were slaves of Jonathan Bryan. 
About eight or nine months after Lisle's departure, Andrew Bryan began to preach to 
whites and African Americans that would listen. Before long, he had an organized group 
of worshippers who erected a small church on the land of Edward Davis at Yamacraw


--- PAGE 23 ---
outside of Savannah, Georgia. They were frequently interrupted by hostile whites who 
were upset that so many African Americans were fleeing to the British lines. 
When this hostility resulted in Andrew Bryan and fifty of his followers being severely 
whipped, the group moved to a farm three miles outside of town, and worshipped for two 
years at Brampton's Barn. On January 10, 1788, a white minister, Rev. Abraham 
Marshall, certified the group as the Ethiopian Church of Jesus Christ. Eventually, the 
church became identified with Bryan. Thus, the first Bryan Baptist Church was formed. 
Its successor still stands in Savanna today, one of the oldest African American 
Institutions in the United States. This African American institutional base was a 
continuous threat to the plantation society in Georgia, and fear of a slave uprising 
subjected the church leaders and worshippers to constant persecution. Over the years the 
same type of religious institutional base provided a foundation for survival and 
development for African people in America, Canada, the West Indies and finally, African 
itself. 
The History of another Black Baptist Leader, David George, provides additional 
information explaining how the Baptist Church had its beginnings on American slave 
plantations, just before the Revolutionary War. It shows how these early Blacks 
interacted with each other to reinforce their basic beliefs in the common struggle for 
freedom. George was born in Essex County, Virginia, in the early 1740's to slaves who 
had been born in Africa. At the age of 19, he fled his master's plantation and became a 
servant of an Indian Chief and eventually worked his way to Georgia. As a slave on a 
Georgia plantation, he experienced a conversion when a Baptist Cyprus revealed Christ 
to him. He soon joined an illegal Baptist congregation which slaves had secretly 
established in the woods, defying strict laws against forming their own churches. The 
loose congregational Baptist structure suited the secret slave worship groups because they 
met as small isolated unites. This loose pattern later proved suitable to the dispersed and 
decentralized African American Communities that developed in the United States. 
One of the first African American institutional bases established during the 
Revolutionary Era was formed in 1773, when the first Black Church was organized in 
Silver Bluff, South Carolina. A slave owner, George Galphin permitted the preacher, 
David George, to be ordained as the first regular pastor. George became a Christian while 
in slavery in Georgia. He displayed superior intellectual abilities and leadership by 
teaching himself to read and write with the aid of his master's children, using the Bible as 
a primer and text. It was not long before he helped organize the Silver Bluff Church, and 
watched it grow from eight members to thirty in the period just before the American 
Revolution. During the Revolutionary War, George's Loyalist master abandoned his 
plantation and his slaves. The Silver Bluff Church now had its chance to seek freedom. 
David George, with fifty of the Galphin slaves, many of whom worshipped at his church, 
went over to the British in Savannah and were freed in 1778. 
In 1782, when the British evacuated Savannah, Georgia sailed to Nova Scotia, and 
continued his preaching and organizing for the Baptist Movement. Ten years later in


--- PAGE 24 ---
1792 he joined the heroic Exodus to the Province of Freedom in Freetown, Sierra Leone 
and helped plant the Baptist religion on the West Coast of Africa. 
African American life has revolved around the Black Church, which was not only the 
center of worship, but the focal point of all communal activities—social, business, 
political, even educational. It had become the pivotal survival institution. The origins of 
the Black Church and its growth and development in the Revolutionary Era were tied into 
the new quest for freedom by the ex-slaves. The church provided the vehicle for 
individual leadership, institution-building and community organization. A look at its 
roots reveals why it was held onto by the Black Pioneers and Refugees and transplanted 
initially in Canada, and later in Africa. Insights into the church as a communal 
organization help to explain why it has remained the center of African American 
Communities in the United States. 
Part Twenty-One: African American Fraternal Organizations and the 
American Revolution  
Fraternal organizations are an essential part of the African American community. These 
institutions also have their roots in the American Revolutionary period. The oldest 
fraternal organization among African Americans is the Prince Hall Masonic Order, which 
was founded in 1787 as African Lodge No. 459. The Leader of this movement was 
named Prince Hall, who was born in 1735 in Barbados, British West Indies and worked 
his way to Boston, Massachusetts in 1765. He became a self-made man, working at 
various jobs, saving money, purchasing property and became a voter. He even educated 
himself and developed a real appreciation of the need for good schooling. In 1797 he 
petitioned the city of Boston and protested the lack of education available for African 
Americans and shortly thereafter the city officials provided schools for Free Black 
children. 
Prince Hall was involved with all three of the major institutions that emerged out of the 
American Revolutionary War era and became dominant in the African American 
Community. In 1774 he joined the Methodist Church and eventually became a minister 
and leader in the Boston African American Community. He founded the African 
American fraternal order in 1787 and later helped to establish schools for Black children 
in Boston. When the American Revolution broke out in 1776 Blacks were not allowed to 
join the Continental Army of George Washington even though several African 
Americans had already given their lives in battles leading up to the War. The most 
notable examples were Crispus Attucks who was the first to fall from British bullets at 
the Boston Massacre in 1770, and Peter Salem and Lemuel Haynes who died at Bunker 
Hill after killing the British officer General Pitcairn. Prince Hall did not let the whites-
only restrictions stop him from contributing to the war effort. He petitioned John 
Hancock of the Committee for Safety for the Colonies to allow him to join the 
Continental Army. His petition was granted and George Washington personally approved 
it.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Initially Prince Hall and fourteen other African Americans were initiated into a British 
chartered Lodge of Freemasons in Boston. This event took place in 1775 before the 
Revolutionary War. After the war, Prince Hall and his associates organized the African 
Lodge No. 459 in 1787. From this beginning they established an African Grand Lodge in 
1791 with Prince Hall as the Grand Master. They continued to expand their fraternal 
organization and in 1797 set up African Lodges in Philadelphia and Rhode Island. After 
Prince Hall died in 1807, it was decided to change the name of the organization from 
African Grand Lodge to the Prince Hall Grand Lodge. 
Part Twenty-Two: African American Exodus to Africa  
After smoke from the last gunfire of the American Revolutionary struggle had passed 
into history, a fleet of ships left the harbor of New York in August 1783 with thousands 
of British Loyalists and their families. This movement was part of the massive post-war 
evacuation of British subjects to England, the West Indies and Canada. Thousands of 
African Americans who had fought on the British side of the Revolutionary War were 
among the evacuees. Many of them sailed to Canada, where their newly won freedom 
and the promise of land offered Blacks prospects of a new life. Who were these African 
Americans who joined the exodus to freedom? Where did they come from? What was 
their significance in the Revolutionary and post-Revolutionary drama? Does their story 
have any important implications for African World Experience? How do these missing 
pages fit into the unwritten and untold story of the African American? 
On January 16, 1792, an important chapter of the dramatic story of the African Exodus 
unfolded in the rough waters of the North Atlantic when fifteen ships sailed from Halifax, 
Nova Scotia, bound for the West Coast of Africa with 1,190 men, women and children of 
African descent. This mass movement of African Americans was not part of the Atlantic 
triangular slave trade nor any type of trade. It was part of the heroic mission of people of 
African descent returning to their Motherland. It was the first large scale reverse flow of 
African humanity across the Atlantic Ocean to Africa. These unsung heroes were well 
aware of the significance of their historic voyage, and they felt they were ordained to 
plant the first successful settlement of African Americans on the West Coast of Africa. 
These two stories of evacuation to Canada and migration to Africa are part of the larger 
movement of African Americans who fought in the American Revolution. Some fought 
on the British side and sought freedom in Canada, and eventually sailed to Africa when 
the quest for real freedom was threatened. Their experiences are part of the untold epic 
saga of African American History that must be recorded, studied and analyzed for present 
and future generations.  
One of the direct results of the American Revolution and the Black Exodus to Canada in 
1783 was the permanent establishment of the British colony of Sierra Leone on the West 
Coast of Africa. This attempt to build a new colony in Africa stands out as one of the 
most important of many efforts by Black people during the Revolutionary and Post-
Revolutionary Era to establish their own identity, institutions and communities.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Other African Americans fought on the American side of the War and remained in the 
United States and helped to lay the foundations of present day Black America. One of the 
most significant results of the American Revolution and the Black efforts to support the 
rebels in the Thirteen Colonies was the permanent establishment of thriving Free African 
American communities throughout the United States. The heroic experiences of these 
Americans of African descent have been largely ignored and left out of the history books. 
Every American should be familiar with the inspiring struggle waged by these 
transplanted Africans to help build America after the forced migration from their 
homelands in Africa. Every American should know that the three basic public institutions 
that continue to dominate African American Communities in the rural and urban areas, 
the church, the school and the fraternal organizations, have their roots in the American 
Revolutionary War era. 
Various factors played a role in the success of this unique experiment in returning and 
resettling people of African descent back to Africa. They grew out of the political, social 
and economic conditions in the last quarter of the 18 
th  century that saw rapid changes in 
Europe and America. 
An analysis of this period, (1770–1800), from the p oint of view of the African American 
Experience provides unique insight into the nature, growth and development of America, 
England and Africa. The triangular relationship between these three parts of the world 
was centered on the slave trade, and was pivotal in establishing and maintaining the 
Euro-American social and economic systems. Unfortunately, this triangular relationship 
had an overall negative impact on the African world and led directly to the disintegration 
and dislocation of African social and political systems because of constant wars over 
slavery and slave raiding. 
For centuries, Europe, America and Africa were linked by the notorious triangular 
Atlantic slave trade system that moved manufactured goods to Africa from Europe. These 
goods were exchanged for human cargo of African captives that was shipped out to the 
Americas and sold to plantation owners. Their places in the holds of the ships were filled 
with raw materials destined for homeports in Europe such as Bristol, Liverpool, London, 
Nantes, Bordeaux, Hamburg, Lisbon, Amsterdam and Rotterdam. 
In 1516 systematic slave trading in the Americas was started by the Spanish. Over the 
centuries British-Dutch-French rivalry to monopolize the lucrative trade led to wars and 
destruction. Untold millions of Africans and enormous amounts of goods were 
transmitted through the slave trade triangle. Many of the captive Africans died during the 
Middle Passage across the Atlantic Ocean. Most human and material items were carefully 
accounted for in ledgers and logs by merchants and officials on both sides of the Atlantic. 
These documents are invaluable sources of information about the African Experience. 
They provide some of the data needed to show the cultural, political and economic 
connections among African People in the Slave Trade Era. During the Revolutionary 
Period, a new type of shipping record provided another source of information about 
Africans. These were the records kept of people who evacuated America after the war of 
independence.


--- PAGE 27 ---
These records reveal the reverse migration by Free Africans to set up a new life in the 
West Indies, Canada and Africa. This quest for freedom was the reason why thousands of 
African Americans sailed out to the Caribbean from Savannah and Charleston in 1782 
and to Canada from New York in 1783. Eventually, this example was followed by those 
who fought with the British in the War of 1812 and were evacuated. Other examples 
include individual ship owners and captains like Paul Cuffee who personally led Black 
families in 1815 to Africa. These events were all part of the legacy of the African Exodus 
of 1783 and 1792 by African American heroes of the American Revolution. 
An outstanding work on African Americans in the Revolutionary War has been published 
by Dr. Benjamin Quarles, who states in his Preface that: 
The Negro's role in the Revolution can best be understood by realizing 
that his major loyalty was not to place nor to his people, but to a principle. 
Whoever invoked the image of liberty, be he American or British, could 
count on a ready response from the Blacks…  
Dr. Quarles noted that the initial reluctance of White America to use Blacks in the 
military effort in the Revolution, and circumstances forcing their usage, established a 
pattern of African American enlistments in future American Wars. He stated that "From 
colonial times until the twentieth century, the Negro would be bypassed in the early 
stages of conflict." "Eventually," he continues, "Grim necessity forced the states to 
reconsider the decision to exclude Negroes from the Armies." 
Quarles assessed the African American participation in the Revolutionary War in the 
following terms: "The Negro welcomed the resort to arms. Although not very strong on 
theory, he fulfilled the pragmatic requirements of a revolutionary. He had little to lose in 
goods or lands, and he lacked a sentimental or blood tie with England." It should be 
added that because of slavery he often lacked such a tie to America, so he readily joined 
the British when offered freedom. 
Dr. Quarles, in his pioneering work, The Negro in the American Revolution , underscored 
the reality of Black fighting on both sides of the war as revolutionaries in the name of 
freedom. He detailed the supportive role of Black soldiers, pioneers, scouts, spies, 
blacksmiths and every type of labor contingent in the War effort. 
African American participation on the British side of the Revolutionary struggle began in 
the early stages of the war. In 1775, Lord Dunmore, the British Governor of the Royal 
Colony Virginia, issued a proclamation calling for slaves of the American rebels to leave 
their masters and join the British cause. Tens of thousands of African Americans 
eventually answered the call to fight the king's cause and obtain their freedom. 
Initially, both the Americans and the British considered using Black manpower in the 
war. The Americans decided against the use of African Americans, preferring to keep the 
conflict a dispute between white gentlemen. The British decided to utilize Blacks if only 
to deprive the Americans of an essential labor source. Lord Dunmore had grand ideas of


--- PAGE 28 ---
ex-slaves in an army that would cause chaos in the American ranks. Dunmore proclaimed 
that "All indentured servants, Negroes or others, free that are able and willing to bear 
arms in the King's cause." His famous proclamation was issued on November 7, 1775 at 
Kemp's Landing, Virginia—the scene of an earlier vi ctory by a detachment of British 
troops that included Black fighting men. Before the week was over, hundreds of African 
Americans flocked to the British lines, and Lord Dunmore was able to organize the 
Ethiopian regiment, made up of Freed Slaves. 
The Americans were alarmed at this attempt to disrupt the slave system. The Virginia 
Gazette  appealed to the slaves to remain loyal to their kind masters. "Be not then, ye 
Negroes, tempted by his proclamation to ruin yourself." Even Patrick Henry, who 
allegedly cried, "Give me Liberty or give me Death!" when caught up in the fervor of the 
Revolution assailed the documents as "fatal to the public safety." In spite of these 
protests, the army of ex-slaves was organized by the British into units called the 
Ethiopian Regiments. These Blacks had no particular love for the British. Their burning 
desire was to obtain freedom. In fact, they left no doubt about their sentiments because 
they fought with the words, "Liberty to Slaves," inscribed across their chests. This was 
the type of spirit that motivated thousands of African Americans who fought for freedom 
in the American Revolution.  
Companies of Black Pioneers were organized during the war wherever the British had a 
foothold, particularly in the cities they occupied. Black companies were set up in Boston, 
New York, Philadelphia, Savanna and Charleston, providing much needed labor and 
support for the war effort. Most of these men and women had fled their plantations. Run-
a-ways had always been a problem in slave society, and during the war it became a major 
crisis. 
As the war progressed, other proclamations were made by the British to solicit the 
support of the slave population. Commander General Clinton, for example, in 
Phillipsburg on June 30, 1779, promised freedom to slaves fleeing to the British. By this 
date there were few cries of outrage by the Americans charging the British Loyalists with 
fermenting slave rebellions. Many of those were already fighting in the colonial militias. 
General George Washington and his colleagues had long ago accepted the reality of 
African Americans fighting on the American side in the Continental Army, so when the 
official offer to fight to obtain freedom was made by American leaders, thousands 
answered the call. 
Part Twenty-Three: Thomas Peters—Symbol of the Stru ggle for Freedom  
As a result of this turn of events, ex-African American slaves were struggling on both 
sides of the conflict as revolutionaries and freedom fighters. One of the symbols of the 
African American presence in the Revolutionary Struggle was Thomas Peters, who has 
been described as a "Black Moses," because he helped lead his people back to Africa. His 
story stands as a testament to thousands of Blacks who fought for freedom and have been 
forgotten. His efforts reflect the strength of character and group solidarity that his 
contemporaries manifested and left as a legacy of struggle for posterity.


--- PAGE 29 ---
Peters was a slave of one William Campbell in Wilmington, North Carolina, who ran 
away to the British lines. Later, his wife-to-be, Sally, also fled her master in Charleston, 
South Carolina, and gained her freedom. His desire for freedom and his ability to lead 
men earned him the rank of Sergeant in the Companies of the Black Pioneers. After the 
war was over in 1783, he evacuated the United States with other British Loyalists and 
sailed to Nova Scotia in Canada, where he continued to use his leadership capabilities to 
help the thousands of Black Refugees carve out a new life for themselves in the barren 
wilderness, clinging to the hope and promise of land. 
Over fourteen thousand African Americans left the United States when the British armies 
evacuated. Most of them were ex-slaves who answered the call of Lord Dunmore and 
other British Commanders, such as General Clinton. Some of these African American 
Refugees went to Florida, then British territory; others to the West Indies; a few to 
England and thousands went to Nova Scotia in Canada. All of these people remained 
loyal to the British Crown, and expected to receive land and support to start a new life. 
All of them waited patiently in makeshift settlements, hoping to receive the means to 
become self-supporting. 
In most instances, the promise of land was not fulfilled and the Blacks in Canada found 
themselves neglected or exploited as a cheap labor pool for white loyalists, some of 
whom had brought their slaves with them. In this alien environment, the ties that African 
Americans had forged in the Revolutionary Struggle were reinforced as survival 
mechanisms. These ex-slaves turned soldiers continued to maintain a paramilitary 
structure to control their settlements and prevent chaos. The churches and mutual laid 
societies they had established in America during the Revolutionary era were strengthened 
so that everyone could share some of the meager resources. 
Schools were built furthering the hope of a better future for the next generation. 
During the years of their exile in Canada, the Black Refugees waited patiently for redress 
of their grievances against the royal government of the colony. When their petitions were 
not heeded, they drew up a list of grievances to present to the British Crown itself. They 
drafted one of their leaders, Thomas Peters, an ex-Sergeant of the Black Pioneers, to 
deliver the document personally to authorities in London. Peters arrived in London 
in1791, using funds raised by his community and working as a hired hand to help pay his 
passage across the Atlantic Ocean. 
When the Great English abolitionists, Grandville Sharp, William Wilberforce, and 
Thomas Clarkson heard about the petition by Peters, they agreed to support the demands 
he was making on behalf of himself and other Black Pioneers and Refugees in Nova 
Scotia, Canada. An important friendship developed between them. 
They also explained to Peters that they had initiated a project to return people of African 
descent living in England to Africa. The first group of more than three hundred had sailed 
in 1787 to Freetown, Sierra Leone on the West Coast of Africa. The experimental colony 
was floundering, however, and needed new blood.


--- PAGE 30 ---
The English Abolitionists told Thomas Peters that he could offer his people in Canada the 
prospect of going home to Africa. When Peters returned to Canada he had two offers to 
give to his people. One was granted by the King of England who declared their petition 
and grievances justified and that they were entitled to land grants in Canada. Many of the 
African Americans transplanted in Canada accepted this offer. 
In addition, Thomas Peters also had the offer made by the Abolitionists to leave Canada 
and return to Africa. The prospect of going home to the Motherland excited thousands of 
the African American refugees in Canada and many volunteered to go. In fact, many 
more wanted to go than there were places in the ships. Finally, on January 16, 1792 a 
flotilla of fifteen ships with more than one thousand one hundred ninety, African 
American men, women, and children sailed across the Atlantic Ocean to Freetown, Sierra 
Leone. 
Thomas Peters sailed with them and was one of the important leaders. Their settlement 
was successful and they kept this historical experiment alive. They were successful 
because they were already organized in churches and had already developed their schools 
and mutual aid societies and fraternal groups. They transplanted and nurtured these 
institutions on the West Coast of Africa and opened the era of modern development for 
the continent. Thomas Peters, ex-slave from Virginia who fled slavery to freedom during 
the Revolutionary War and fought to preserve his liberty, was a true symbol of freedom. 
His strength and character were representative of thousands of African Americans who 
fought on both sides of the American Revolutionary War for the principle of freedom and 
contributed to the growth of America, the Caribbean, Canada and Africa. 
Part Twenty-Four: African American Resistance 
Civil War and Reconstruction 
Not long after the birth of the nation it became clear that the United States government's 
support of slavery had become more and more an economic necessity. Cotton became 
"King" and one of the most important economic pillars of the North and South. It grew in 
importance from a million tons produced in the South in 1800 to millions of tons by 
1860. In the same period, the slave population grew from 500,000 to 4,000,000. In order 
to control this growing slave population, an enormous system of laws, restrictions, 
customs, police and military forces was employed. 
It was clear that it would take either a full-scale slave rebellion or a full-scale war to end 
such a deeply entrenched system. Several slave rebellions occurred but failed. As the 
sectional differences between the North and the South grew, war became inevitable. 
Before the Civil War began in 1861, African Americans responded to the struggle against 
slavery in various ways—some violent, some non-viol ent. All of these efforts were part 
of the heroic struggle for freedom.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Part Twenty-Five: African American Resistance—Accom modation 
Tradition 
Harriet Tubman and the Underground Railroad 
During slavery one of the best protests against the inhuman system was running away. 
All during slavery, the slave owners dreaded the run-away or fugitive slave. Countless 
thousands of African Americans escaped servitude and make their way to freedom 
following the North Star. Frederick Douglass escaped his Maryland enslavement and 
became the leading figure fighting against slavery. Harriet Tubman was the symbol of 
defiant runaways and a leading conductor on the Underground Railroad which was not a 
railway line but an escape route to freedom to the North with secret hideaways. 
Tubman made nineteen trips into the South to free over three hundred slaves. She 
escaped from the South and went to New York State and then went back to make her 
daring recruits. Later she explained how it felt to be in the North. She said: "I was free 
and I couldn't believe it. There was such a glory all around and the sun was shining 
through the trees and on the hills. I was free." Her personal freedom did not satisfy her; 
she had a mission to help free others. She was a true symbol of the Abolition Struggle. 
Harriet Tubman was born in slavery in 1823 and died free in New York in 1913. She has 
been described as "Black Moses, strong as a man, brave as a lion and cunning as a fox." 
She was a major conductor on the Underground Railroad which helped thousands of 
African Americans escape from slavery in the South to freedom in the North and in 
Canada. The Underground Railroad was never a railroad nor was it underground; it was a 
system of individuals, families and churches organized to provide safe haven and help 
African Americans escape from slavery. 
  
Frederick Douglass and the Abolitionist Movement 
Frederick Douglass was born a slave in 1817 in Maryland and escaped in 1838 to the 
North to become the symbol of African American resistance to slavery. He was 
considered a fugitive, or run-away slave, and was in fear of being caught by slave bounty 
hunters. Once he obtained his freedom in the North, he continued to fight on behalf of his 
people. He became a leading spokesman for freedom and traveled in America and Europe 
speaking against slavery. At the same time he worked with others, both Black and White, 
to organize the Anti-Slavery Abolitionist Movement. 
He worked with White abolitionists like William Lloyd Garrison, editor and publisher of 
The Liberator  magazine. Later Douglass published his own magazine called The North 
Star . 
In 1831, William Lloyd Garrison, a young White journalist who opposed slavery, 
published the first issue of his famous Liberator  magazine. In his first editorial, he wrote


--- PAGE 32 ---
indignantly: "I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. On this 
subject (slavery) I do not wish to think, to speak, or write, with moderation. No! No!" 
Two years later in 1833 Garrison and several African Americans like Samuel Cornish, 
Robert Parvis and Peter Williams organized the American Anti-Slavery Society  in 
Philadelphia. During his fight for abolition of slavery, Frederick Douglass traveled 
throughout the North and to England. When the Civil War broke out, he continually 
urged President Lincoln to make the conflict a national crusade against slavery and 
involve Black troops. Finally in 1862 and 1863 Lincoln and his advisors agreed to make 
the war a struggle over slavery and issued the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 
1863. 
Douglass rallied African Americans to the cause and was a leader in the movement to 
enroll more than 180,000 Blacks in the Army and 30,000 in the Navy. Two of his own 
sons joined units of the United States Colored Troops (USCT). These African American 
soldiers fought valiantly in the Civil War in spite of terrible conditions and were a major 
factor in the victory by the Northern Union Army. Their heroic efforts are legendary and 
units such as the Massachusetts 54 
th  Regiment were singled out for special citations. 
These unsung heroes made a tremendous contribution to the struggle to keep the Nation 
united. 
Part Twenty-Six: African American Resistance—Rebell ion Tradition 
South Carolina Rebellion Against Slavery 
Denmark Vesey (1767–1822) 
Denmark Vesey was born into slavery in 1767 as the property of Captain Vesey. He 
traveled as a slave with his master for twenty years, visiting the Virgin Islands and Haiti, 
which was an independent nation ruled by people of African descent. These trips to Haiti 
were destined to play an important part in his life. Both the trips to Haiti and his 
experiences under slavery helped shape his mission in life. Although he was lucky 
enough to win a lottery of $1,500 and purchased his own freedom for $600, he was not 
able to purchase his children after various attempts. These injustices increased his resolve 
to fight against slavery. 
To prepare himself for the struggle against slavery, he became a Methodist Minister. This 
position allowed him to travel freely and meet many people. Most important of all, he 
was able to use his home as a regular meeting place. An elaborate plan was developed for 
more than a year involving many people. Arms were collected and made by a blacksmith 
so that they would be ready when it was time to strike. It is believed that hundreds, if not 
thousands, of slaves as well as free men were part of the plan. The objective was to burn 
Charleston, free the slaves in the area, take control of ships and then sail to freedom in 
Haiti. The plan was betrayed by one of the slaves and Denmark Vesey and others were 
executed.


--- PAGE 33 ---
Although his very elaborate slave rebellion failed, the very fact that it was conceived and 
planned and participated in by hundreds of slave and free African Americans was a shock 
to slave owners throughout the land. It was also a signal that rebellion against slavery was 
gaining momentum. As a result, those who controlled the slave system began to tighten 
the already oppressive machinery that had been built to keep in bondage millions of 
people of African descent. The response of the leaders of the oppressed African 
Americans, slave and free, was to increase the efforts to abolish slavery and struggle 
harder to obtain true freedom and equality. 
  
Reverend Henry Highland Garnet and the Abolition Movement 
A symbol of African American resistance and rebellion before the Civil War was the 
Presbyterian minister, the Reverend Henry Highland Garnet. He was born in slavery 
December 23, 1815 in Maryland but his father escaped to the North with his family when 
young Garnet was nine years old. The Garnets made their way to New York City where 
Henry was educated in the African Free Schools. He was fortunate to have as classmates 
Ira Aldridge who became famous as a Shakespearean actor in Europe and America, and 
Alexander Cromwell who became a renowned Episcopalian church leader and missionary 
to Liberia and West Africa. 
In 1843 at the Negro Convention that met in Buffalo, N.Y., Reverend Henry Highland 
Garnet gave an arousing speech that called on the slaves to rise up and resist their 
oppression. He called for a slave general strike and massive resistance which inspired the 
delegates who came from ten states. One of the seventy delegates was Frederick 
Douglass who urged the convention to adopt a policy of moderation and passive 
resistance. (At that time he was under the influence of white abolitionists, such as 
William Lloyd Garrison who opposed radical action by the slaves themselves. Later in 
his career, he disagreed with them and also called for radical action.) Reverend Garnet 
almost won convention support. He missed endorsements by one vote. His speech is a 
classic example of struggle. He spoke directly to the slaves. He was following the 
Rebellion tradition of David Walker in 1829 and Nat Turner in 1831. 
Part Twenty-Seven: Civil War and Reconstruction 
From Slavery to Public Service 
African American leaders emerged from the Civil War and Reconstruction Period as a 
major force in American political history. The pre-war struggle against slavery and years 
of actual fighting helped to forge African American leaders who had a sense of mission 
to improve the lot of their people as well as a commitment to use public service to help 
change the South for the benefit of all. Their personal strengths and abilities helped them 
to make substantial contributions to the Reconstruction of the nation in spite of the 
enormous obstacles they faced individually and collectively. For the most part these


--- PAGE 34 ---
African American leaders symbolized the heroic story of their people's movement from 
slavery to public service. 
One of the unexpected heroes of this period was a slave named Robert Smalls from 
Beaufort, South Carolina. He became a heroic figure in the Civil War when he struck a 
spectacular blow for freedom in May 1862 by piloting a Confederate ship, The Planter , 
over to the Union fleet which was blockading Charleston harbor. Smalls had been the 
pilot of The Planter , a cotton steamer converted to transport ship by the confederate 
Navy. His owner had sold the ship to the Confederate forces and Robert Smalls remained 
as its pilot because he knew the waterways of the area so well. He trained himself by 
studying and became an expert seaman and great manager of boats. 
Few men knew the South Carolina and Georgia coastline and waterways as well as 
Smalls. He used these skills to earn extra money to but his wife and child out of slavery 
even though he was still a slave. As the Civil War progressed he waited for his chance to 
strike a blow against slavery and win his own freedom and that of his family. On May 13, 
1862 he was ready for his spectacular feat. Under the cover of darkness, his courageous 
plan was carried out with the help of his fellow slave crew members. During the night, 
Smalls had smuggled his wife and child on board. The plan worked and the news spread 
throughout the country. It required courage and love of freedom as well as careful 
planning and brilliant execution. 
Smalls continued to fight in the Civil War as a member of the United States Coloured 
Troops (U.S.C.T.) and served as pilot on another ship, The Crusader as well as The 
Planter  and participated with distinction in more than a dozen engagements during the 
war. He helped recruuit Blacks into the Union Army as part of the First Carolina 
Volunteers. His daring exploits gained him national fame. 
From a slave born in Beaufort, South Carolina on April 5, 1839, he was destined to 
become a national African American leader. After the war gy began a distinguished 
career as political leader and public servant. He was a delegate to the historic South 
Carolina Constitutional Convention in 1866 and served in the South Carolina House of 
Representatives and Senate from 1870 to 1874. During the Constitutional Convention, 
Smalls introduced a resolution on education calling for a free compulsory state-supported 
system. This was a very significant legislature act in South Carolina because in the Old 
South during slavery it was against the law to educate the slave population. 
In 1874 Robert Smalls was elected to represent South Carolina in the United States 
House of Representatives. This ex-slave served in Congress for twelve years from 1875 
to 1886 and was a brilliant and eloquent spokesman for his people. His rise from slavery 
to public service was similar to many other African Americans during this period. 
Robert Smalls was representative of the courageous leadership that emerged from the 
Civil War and Abolition struggle. This African American leadership was evident at all 
levels of government and politics in the south and made a substantial contribution to the 
rebuilding of the region and establishment of a foundation under the newly free slave


--- PAGE 35 ---
population. In spite of the obstacles placed in the way of African American development 
this leadership helped to rewrite state n constitutions and local laws as well as establish 
institutions and organizations designed to uplift the newly freed African Americans as 
well as the oppressed free Black. 
The Civil War and Reconstruction were extraordinary periods of African American 
political and cultural activities. On the national level there were twenty-two African 
Americans who served in the United States Senate and House of Representatives during 
the period from 1870 to 1901. Unfortunately, segregationalists regained control of 
southern statehouses and legislatures and virtually eliminated Black elected officials. In 
view of the obstacles faced by African American leaders during the Post-Reconstruction 
period, there accomplishments were remarkable. They were exceptional and dedicated 
men and women. 
This leadership came from all walks of life. They were ministers, teachers, lawyers, 
farmers, bricklayers, and barbers. Some were born free, others fought their way to 
freedom by running away or purchasing themselves and their families. Some of these 
leaders educated themselves, while others attended outstanding colleges in America and 
Europe. 
Part Twenty-Eight: Accommodation Approach to the cy clical Pattern of 
African American Response  
African American Leaders and the First Reconstruction Period 
One of those interesting coincidences of American history occurred in 1895. In that year 
Frederick Douglass, a crusading abolitionist against slavery and great leader of Africa 
Americans died and Booker T. Washington rose to national prominence. With his famous 
"compromise" speech at the Atlanta Deposition, Washington stated that "in all things that 
are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers yet one as the hand in all things 
essential to human progress." With the death of Douglass, the way was clear for 
Washington to become an undisputed national leader of African Americans from his base 
at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. 
The same year, however, also marked the rise of W.E.B. DuBois as a leader in the next 
century. In 1895 he received the first Ph.D. degree ever awarded to an African American 
by Harvard University, one of the most prestigious American institutions of higher 
education. It was not long before he challenged the national leadership of Booker T. 
Washington and became the most prominent leader of his time. DuBois was one of the 
organizers of the Niagara Movement in 1905. From this protest movement of more 
militant African Americans, DuBois helped to found and organized the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). 
All three of these great men became outstanding leaders and symbolized the struggle for 
freedom of African Americans. Each leader had his own peculiar style and 
Accommodation Approach to the Cyclical Pattern of African American struggle, but each


--- PAGE 36 ---
had an undying sense of mission to uplift the race. All of them represent the 
accommodation approach to the Cyclical Pattern of African American response to the 
American experienced using petition and protest as their method of fighting oppression, 
discrimination and racism in American society. 
  
Booker T. Washington and the Tuskegee Institute Model 
With other avenues blocked, education became a special concern of African Americans 
after 1900 just as it had been right after the Civil War. Some leaders, such as Booker T. 
Washington argued that the rural masses in the South were primarily in need of industrial 
education and practical skills similar to his training at Hampton Institute in Virginia. He 
founded his own version of the industrial school model in Alabama in 1881 and it 
became the famous Tuskegee Institute. Graduates from the Institute spread all over the 
South, utilizing the special scientific techniques and systematic training that had been 
instilled through the Booker T. Washington method. Some of the graduates started their 
own schools and institutes of industrial education. These individuals were inspired by Mr. 
Washington's efforts and, like Ms. Elizabeth Evelyn Wright, attempted to follow his 
example. She struggled many years to build a school in South Carolina and finally 
achieved her dream. Today her institution is called Voorhees College and services 
hundreds of students. During this same period of time another outstanding educator, 
Mary McLeod Bethune followed the mode. She became a symbol of the struggle for 
education and the ability of African Americans to build institutions with little or no 
resources. Her school was initially called the Dayton Normal and Industrial School for 
Girls. It began as an elementary school founded in 1904. This endeavor was nurtured by 
Mrs. Bethune and eventually it became Bethune-Cookman College in Daytona Beach, 
Florida, which has serviced thousands of students in the south. Mrs. Bethune became a 
legend with a mission and a vision. 
Other African American leaders believed that while industrial education for the masses 
served a practical purpose, it was too limited and restricted. They favored a more well-
rounded classical education that was designed to prepare students to challenge society 
and compete as political and social equals. Dr. W.E.B. DuBois favored this educational 
approach which reflected his own elite background and schooling at Fisk University, 
University of Berlin and Harvard University. He believed a "talented tenth" was needed 
to lead the race. Educators, such as John Hope, who became President of Morehouse 
College in Atlanta, supported DuBois. 
Part Twenty-Nine: African American Educators and Their Sacred Mission  
Little-known Elizabeth Evelyn Wright was born in a small Georgia town in 1872, just 
after the Civil War. Although she only lived thirty-four years, she left her mark on the 
education of rural African Americans. Her dreams of educational opportunity for the poor 
were realized when she founded Voorhees College in 1897. She was a disciple of Booker 
T. Washington, the founder of Tuskegee Institute in Alabama, and established her school


--- PAGE 37 ---
on the principles of industrial and agricultural education. Although she was frail and 
physically sick most of her life, and only possessed the rudiments of a high school 
education, she became a pioneer in Black education and social reform. Like many others 
before and after her, she possessed such a sense of mission and commitment to social 
justice and to the elevation of her people that she was able to prevail over enormous 
obstacles and leave a remarkable legacy. 
At the age of sixteen she enrolled in Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute in 
Alabama, where she came under the dynamic influence of Booker T. Washington. She 
remarked about this influence when she stated that: "I was at Tuskegee only a short time 
before I made up my mind to try to be the same type of woman as Mr. Washington was 
of a man." She said she learned from Washington "to try to help my fellow men to help 
themselves, and if a way was not opened to me, I must open it myself." 
Her experiences in the rural South helped her to develop an understanding of the 
desperate conditions of poverty, illiteracy and exploitation of rural African Americans. 
Many of these rural farmers and tenants had lost their crops, livestock and farms to 
unsympathetic banks, planters and merchants who manipulated the credit, lien and 
mortgage system. Most rural African Americans in the South were reduced to abject 
poverty and virtual slavery at the hands of the tenant farming and sharecropping systems. 
Eventually, these conditions would help force African Americans to migrate out of the 
South during the World War I period. Elizabeth Evelyn Wright's contribution to helping 
to improve the lot of her people was industrial and agricultural education. Her courage 
and persistence in nurturing a young educational enterprise reflects the strength and 
capability of African American women at the turn of the century when there was great 
opposition to educating her people. She withstood the threats and attacks of the Ku Klux 
Klan and other anti-African American groups that burned her initial school building. 
Finally she moved to Denmark, South Carolina in a less hostile atmosphere and in 1897 
opened her school. This persistent educational endeavor grew into a well-established 
institution which is one of the more than one hundred predominantly Black colleges that 
emerged out of the ashes of the Civil War and Reconstruction Periods. 
Elizabeth Evelyn Wright was greatly influenced by Mrs. Booker T. Washington who 
worked closely with the female students at Tuskegee Institute. Unfortunately Mrs. 
Washington died at a young age, 35 years old. She was particularly concerned that the 
women develop a sense of dignity, pride and mission. Mrs. Washington inspired 
Elizabeth Evelyn Wright and others with comments such as: 
"We cannot too seriously consider this question of the moral uplifting of 
our women for it is of national importance to us. It is with our women that 
the purity and safety of our families rest, and what families are the race 
will be." 
Emphasis on education has remained a major career objective for the African American 
leadership. In a study conducted in 1900 of 2,500 Black college graduates more than 53% 
of these graduates were teachers, presidents of institutions, heads of teachers colleges,


--- PAGE 38 ---
principles of city school systems, etc. 17% were clergy, another 17% were in the 
professions, primarily physicians. Over 6% were merchants, farmers and artisans and 4% 
were in government service. Today a similar study would show a much broader range of 
career choices even though teaching and the clergy would be prominent. 
The role of the more than one hundred predominantly Black Colleges and Universities in 
shaping the African American community has been enormous. They are still important in 
preparing leadership even though in 1980 more than one half million African American 
youth were students in predominantly white institutions. 
Part Thirty: Dr. W.E.B. DuBois and the First Civil Rights Movement  
The life of W.E.B. DuBois spanned over 95 productive and creative years. He was born 
five years after the Emancipation Proclamation or February 23, 1868 and died August 22, 
1963, the day before the famous March on Washington which featured the address by Dr. 
Martin Luther King. DuBois represented for the twentieth century what Frederick 
Douglass represented for the nineteenth century. Both men symbolize the undying 
struggle of African Americans against oppression. Both men lived long and productive 
lives. Both men devoted their lives to struggle on behalf of their race and the oppressed 
of the world. Douglass was self-taught and born in slavery while DuBois received his 
education at the most outstanding universities in America and Europe and was born into 
an integrated middle class environment in New England. In spite of these differences in 
background both men symbolize the famous statement by Douglass: 
"If there is no struggle, there is no progress. Those who profess to favor 
freedom yet deprecate agitation are men who want the crops without 
plowing up the ground. They want the rain without the thunder and 
lighting. They want the ocean without the roar of its mighty waters.  
…Power concedes nothing without a demand. It never did and it never 
will." 
Douglass provided new vigor and moral fervor to the Abolition Movement against 
slavery in the Nineteenth century while DuBois became the center of the Civil Rights 
Movement against discrimination and segregation in the twentieth century. The 
institutional vehicle for W.E.B. DuBois was the National Association for the 
Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) which he helped establish in 1909 and for 
many years was one of its outstanding leaders. To get his message across and that of the 
new Association, he organized and edited the Crisis  magazine which became the 
mouthpiece of the NAACP. The institutional vehicle for Douglass was the Anti-Slavery 
Society, and his newspaper, The North Star , which helped him get his message to the 
public. Douglass was one of the most outstanding African American activist-organizers 
while DuBois stands out as one of the greatest scholar-activists in American history. 
Both DuBois and Douglass expanded their world views beyond America. Douglass 
traveled to England to inspire the anti-slavery movement in London and other cities. He


--- PAGE 39 ---
later transferred this international interest to the diplomatic field when he became the 
United States Minister to Haiti near the end of his career. Dr. DuBois studied in Europe at 
the University of Berlin and developed an international perspective that later involved 
him in progressive and liberal causes around the world. During the peak of his career, 
however, he became a leading advocate of Pan-Africanism and helped organize a series 
of conferences calling for an end to racism and colonialism. He moved to the Republic of 
Ghana at the end of his life and died there in 1963. 
Frederick Douglass and W.E.B. DuBois left the world extraordinary legacies. Their lives 
are testimonies to the undying desire of the human spirit to struggle for freedom and 
justice. Their personal lives and public lives are inspirations for all peoples. Fortunately, 
they were both prolific writers so that future generations will be able to read in their own 
words their thoughts and convictions about the great issues of their time. 
  
Economics, Politics and White Racism 
By 1900 the strategy of white supremacy was successful throughout much of the South 
and gains made by African Americans after the Civil War were systematically attacked 
and often erased. This was particularly true in the political and economic fields. The 
strategy of White Supremacy was designed to keep African Americans poor, ignorant and 
politically powerless. Most of the gains made in the political arena were reversed. The 
vote was systematically taken from Black voters through fraud, electoral gimmicks, 
grandfather clauses, all-white primaries and when necessary, violence.  
By 1901 the last African American Congressman of the Reconstruction and Post-
Reconstruction era, George H. White from North Carolina, made his farewell address 
before the House of Representatives and deplored the sad turn of events. It signaled the 
triumph of white racism and intensified the struggle of African Americans to fight against 
racism in America. Another Black did not win election to Congress until 1928 when 
Oscar De Priest used the growing population of African Americans in Chicago as his 
electoral base.  
Since that time more than twenty men and women have been elected to Congress. They 
have established the Congressional Black Caucus which coordinates their activities. Most 
of these Congresspersons have come from electoral districts in the East, Mid-West and 
West, reflecting the population shifts out of the rural South into the urban north since 
World War II.  
In the South, African Americans were eliminated from all state and local political offices 
by every conceivable means including murder. The property and farmlands of Blacks 
were often unscrupulously taken by Whites for fraudulent tax claims or questionable 
indebtedness. Most African Americans were denied equal opportunity in the job market 
as well as those finance resources necessary to establish an economic base. Since 1900


--- PAGE 40 ---
African Americans have waged an intense struggle against racism. Even education was 
denied African Americans because it opened up political and economic opportunities. 
In 1903 Dr. W.E.B. DuBois wrote,  
"Despite compromise, war, and struggle, the Negro is not free… In well-
nigh the whole rural South, the Black farmers are peons, bound by law and 
custom to an economic slavery, from which the only escape is death or the 
penitentiary."  
Another scholar noted that:  
"Peonage exists in South Carolina because of the uncurbed, selfish 
greediness of many of the small town merchants who, through this credit 
system, manage to keep the vast majority of Negro farmers in debt 
permanently without any prospect of ever getting ahead financially. The 
small town merchants are really the backbone of the peonage system in 
this state and in other southern states." 
Because of these conditions, men and women such as Dr. W.E.B. DuBois and Ida B. 
Wells helped organize the NAACP in 1909 and in 1910 the National Urban League. 
Part Thirty-One: African American Inventors and Scientists  
After the Civil War and Reconstruction Period, the United States entered and era of rapid 
industrial and technological development. The foundations of great national economic 
growth were established between 1870 and 1900. 
African Americans played an important part in this development. The history of these 
inventors and scientists is one of the untold heroic stories of achievements against the 
odds. Who were these unsung heroes of American economic and industrial greatness? 
What were their backgrounds? What impact did their inventions have on America and the 
world? 
Many Americans are familiar with the scientific work of George Washington Carver, the 
Wizard of Tuskegee Institute, whose discoveries of various uses of the peanut and sweet 
potato led to 300 by-products of several industries. 
  
George Washington Carver (1864–1943) 
All Americans owe an enormous debt to an extraordinary African American scientist 
George Washington Carver, who was born a slave in Diamond Grove, Missouri. He 
survived a very difficult childhood. His father was accidentally killed and his mother was 
abducted by slave raiders. When he was a young boy, George was once traded for a


--- PAGE 41 ---
horse. In spite of these hardships, George Washington Carver overcame these obstacles 
and obtained a good education at Simpson College in Iowa where he was the first African 
American student. He completed his undergraduate college education at Iowa State 
College and obtained a Masters of Science degree in Agriculture and Botany 
concentrating on biology, chemistry, geometry and zoology. 
After George Washington Carver completed his studies, he devoted his life to teaching at 
Tuskegee Institute in Alabama and to research projects designed to improve southern 
agriculture. In fact, his research on the peanut, sweet potato and soybean helped to 
revolutionize the economy of the South and liberate it from excessive dependence on 
cotton planting. His devotion to research and helping others was legendary. His 
commitment to selflessly aiding humanity was so real he rarely patented any of his many 
discoveries. He believed his abilities were a gift of God. He said, "God gave them to me, 
how can I sell them to someone else?" 
  
Granville T. Woods (1856–1910) 
Other African American inventors and scientists were not as well known as George 
Washington Carver but their contributions were nevertheless important and a benefit to 
all Americans. 
One great inventor was Granville T. Woods who was described in 1886 as "The equal, if 
not superior, to any inventor in the country." He was born April 23, 1856, in Columbus, 
Ohio, and called the "Black Edison." 
He was a contemporary of Alexander Graham Bell (1847–1922) and Thomas Edison 
(1847–1931) who are household words in America. His  name has been forgotten but his 
genius unlocked many secrets of nature and helped to make electricity a better servant of 
humankind. 
Granville T. Woods' inventions have had an enormous impact on our modern life. At the 
age of ten Granville became an apprentice in a combination blacksmith and machine shop 
in Columbus, Ohio. When he was 16 years old he went to work on the railroads and 
traveled west. His interest in energy sources for the railroads must have been furthered by 
this experience because trains in those days were run by steam engines. 
His later inventions would help develop the transportation industry with his automatic 
electric air brake and electric controls for the elevated railroad in Manhattan. His 
multiplex telegraph or induction telegraph improved railroad safety and communications 
and reduced accidents. 
After working in a Springfield, Illinois steel mill in 1874 he finally traveled to New York 
to further his schooling and work experience. While in New York, Granville Woods had 
the opportunity to set sail and travel around the world including Australia in a British


--- PAGE 42 ---
steamliner, the Ironside . He worked in the engine room where he had a chance to 
observe, study and repair another machine. With this experience under his belt, Woods 
was prepared to start his own business enterprise. In 1880 he opened a machine shop in 
Cincinnati, Ohio with his brother Lyates. 
After four years of struggle to keep a Black-owned and operated machine shop open, 
Granville Woods' hard work and faith paid off when he was granted his first United 
States patent on January 3, 1884 for an improved steam boiler furnace. This was the first 
of many U.S. patents he received. He patented over 60 inventions. Many of them were 
purchased by companies such as Westinghouse. Thomas Edison offered Granville Woods 
a partnership but he turned it down because he preferred to remain independent. In 1901 
he sold his "third rail" invention for subway systems to the General Electric Company. 
This "hidden contributor" was truly an unsung genius. 
Many of the African American achievers and contributors not only reflect their own 
personal integrity and strength, they also reveal the capabilities and strong ties evident in 
the Black family. Too often the strength of the slave and free African American family 
has been overlooked because of the nature of slavery and racism. Frequently, the impact 
of the family is not fully appreciated because of the focus on the nuclear biological 
family as opposed to the extended communal family. This extended communal family 
tradition has its roots in the African value system as it adjusted to the cultural context of 
America. It is the source of African American institution-building and individual 
achievement. 
  
Lewis Latimer (1848–1928) 
One excellent example of the African American achievers in science is Lewis Latimer. 
His father, George, was as ex-slave who escaped slavery in 1831 and fled to Boston. 
Eleven years later in 1842, his former owner appeared and tried to take him back into 
slavery but many members of the Boston community rallied on his behalf and raised the 
$400 necessary to buy his freedom. Black abolitionists and Whites, such as Lloyd 
Garrison raised the moral consciousness of the public. 
The son, Lewis, settled in Chelsea near Boston but when the Civil War broke out he 
joined the navy. His brother fought in the Army. After the war, Lewis Latimer became a 
draftsman and handled the telephone patent for Alexander Graham Bell. His first patent 
was granted in 1873 when he invented a water closet for railroad cars. In 1880 he worked 
for the inventor and industrialist Hiram Maxim in the U.S. Electric Lighting Company 
and the following year he received patents for an improved carbon filament which 
eventually aided Thomas Edison in his work on the incandescent light bulb. Latimer 
joined Edison and used his expertise to write one of the first books on lighting cities in 
America and England. He also helped Edison win several crucial legal battles over 
patents. Later he became a founding member of the Edison Pioneers.


--- PAGE 43 ---
Jan Matzeliger (1852–1889) 
Another Black inventor who had a permanent impact on American industrial 
development was Jan Matzeliger. He invented the shoe lasting machine that 
revolutionized the American shoe industry. His lasting machine solved the problem of 
mechanizing shoe production and a complex corporate structure grew around his 
invention. His family had its roots in South American and migrated to the United States 
and settled in Boston and eventually moved to Lynn, Massachusetts. Many others before 
him had failed to produce an effective machine. Finally in 1883 Matzeliger built a lasting 
machine that could duplicate all of the complex operations previously carried out by 
skilled craftsmen. 
Lasting is the process of attaching the upper leather portion of the shoe to the inner sole. 
Not only did Jan Matzeliger's lasting machine work, it transformed the shoe industry in 
the United States and the World. Eventually through merges of companies, the financial 
backers of Matzeliger built a giant corporate structure reorganized into the United Shoe 
Machinery Company that became the largest in the world. The invention of this young 
Black emigrant from South America helped America develop a monopoly in this industry 
for 50 years. 
  
Dr. Daniel Hale Williams (1859-1931) 
An African American named Dr. Daniel Hale Williams was a pioneer in open heart 
surgery. He was born in Holisburg, Pennsylvania in 1856. Although his father died when 
young Daniel was only eleven years old, he constantly remembered what he often said: 
"We colored people must cultivate the mind." He worked hard and became an apprentice 
in the office of a medical doctor. After two years of practical training, he became aware 
of the problems of discrimination faced by African American nurses and doctors who 
could not practice at all-white hospitals. His solution to this problem of discrimination 
was to organize and establish his own hospital and training school open to all citizens. 
As a result of appeals to the African American community, he was able to open the first 
interracial hospital in the United States. The new institution was opened in January 1891 
in Chicago and was called Provident Hospital. It started as a small 12-bed hospital and 
grew into a medical facility with more than 65 beds. 
In 1893, Dr. Daniel Hale Williams again made history when he performed the first 
successful open-heart surgery at Provident Hospital. It was a daring operation because it 
was the first time a surgeon had successfully entered the chest cavity and operated on the 
heart. The patient, James Cornish, recovered and showed no signs of infection. He lived 
for another fifty years and died in 1943, twelve years after the death of Dr. Williams. His


--- PAGE 44 ---
precedent setting heart operation was even more remarkable when one considers that he 
did not have the advantages of modern medical facilities. 
During 1894, Dr. Williams was appointed chief surgeon at Freedmen's hospital in 
Washington D.C. This famous hospital was established after the Civil War and had 200 
beds. Dr. Williams helped reorganize this medical center and contributed to its 
importance in African American history. He developed a national reputation as an 
excellent surgeon and medical administrator. 
Today open-heart surgery has become routine. In 1893, this type of complicated surgery 
was too difficult to attempt and bound to fail because of the problem of infection. Dr. 
Daniel Hale Williams used the latest methods of sterilizing to control infection and with 
his skill as a medical doctor became a pioneer in the field of medicine and one of 
America's greatest surgeons. 
  
African American Inventors and Scientists 
By World War I, African Americans had left a permanent mark on the scientific, 
technological and industrial development of the United States. While the masses of 
African Americans were part of the hardworking labor forces in agriculture and industry, 
members of the "talented tenth" were hard at work creating inventions that helped 
transform America into an industrial giant. Not enough is known about these creative and 
ingenious individuals who achieved their success against enormous obstacles. 
The symbol of this African American achievement in science and technology is Dr. 
George Washington Carver, whose work in agricultural science revolutionized farming in 
the South and rescued the region from its dependency on one crop—cotton. But Dr. 
Carver was not alone; there were many others who made major scientific contributions to 
this nation's technological development. During slavery, Norbert Rillieux invented a 
vacuum evaporator for turning cane juice into white sugar crystals and revolutionized the 
processing of sugar cane in the United States, the Caribbean and Latin America. The 
history of their lives and what they achieved is an inspiration to all America. They were 
part of a talented growing group of African Americans who had received as many as one 
thousand patents for their inventions by World War I. These patents are officially 
registered with the United States Patent Office in Washington D.C. and represent 
inventions in almost every field of industry. Some of the inventions of these African 
American scientists and engineers have had such tremendous impact on American 
development that they have transformed whole industries. 
Part Thirty-Two: Transformers of Industry 
Black Brainpower and Muscle Power Helped Build America


--- PAGE 45 ---
Just as Norbert Rillieux's invention of the evaporator-pan improved sugar cane refining 
and transformed the sugar industry in the United States, the Caribbean Islands and Latin 
America in the pre-Civil War period, several African American inventors transformed 
key industries in the United States in the post Civil War period. Most of these great men 
are unknown to us. They are the "Hidden Contributors" to the greatness of America.  
The crisis of the Civil War and the rebuilding during Reconstruction helped to lay the 
foundations of industrial and technological growth in the United States. Out of this period 
came individuals whose skills and ambition and good fortune led them to become so-
called "captains of industry" and corporate giants. Some of these men are legends and 
their corporate empires still exert great influence in the nation's and world's development. 
The symbol of these individuals was John D. Rockefeller who organized Standard Oil in 
1868 and became a prototype of ruthless corporate competition. Other "captains of 
industry" and corporate giants included J.P. Morgan and Jay Gould who controlled 
banking and manufacturing interests in interlocking directories and integrated corporate 
systems. These men were able to dominate and control whole industries and integrate 
various industries into corporate empires. Other individuals dominated their fields and 
built giant corporate structures.  
One of the most famous of these men was Thomas Alva Edison whose inventions grew 
into the General Electric Corporation. Another inventor whose name became a household 
word was Alexander Graham Bell whose discovery of the telephone laid the foundation 
for the new communications industry. Hiram Maxim was not as famous as Alexander 
Graham Bell, yet his influence in the several fields of industry was very significant—
including electricity and munitions. 
Very few people realize the role African Americans played in assisting these famous 
corporate giants and captains of industry. The untold story of the "Hidden African 
American Contributors" is a tribute to the genius of these men and the undying human 
spirit to achieve even against enormous obstacles. It is also a sad story because it reveals 
the constant patterns and practices of discrimination and racism that limited and 
destroyed individuals and groups. As a result of the limitations of racism in the United 
States, none of the outstanding African American contributors to America's greatness was 
able to truly benefit and enrich himself and his people. Their ingenious inventions and 
discoveries were either stolen, bought off or legally maneuvered from them by industrial 
wars and patent fights. They did not have the opportunity to turn their inventions into 
corporate enterprises that would have permanent impact on America. They had to work 
for others, or if they had their own business, they were bought out or squeezed out. 
African Americans were systematically eliminated from America's industrial 
development and were not allowed to get a substantial economic foundation in American 
society.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Part Thirty-Three: African Americans and Urban America 
African American and Politics 
Since World War II this tradition of leadership on the national level has re-emerged after 
the election of Oscar DePriest in Chicago and Adam Clayton Powell, jr. in New York. 
Today the African Americans in Congress and those that are mayors and state legislators 
represent the greatest Black level of full participation in American society. The 
Presidential Campaign of Jessie Jackson in 1984 demonstrated this newly won position of 
strength.  
  
African American Mayors and Congressmen 
There is a special relationship between African Americans and some of the leading 
American cities. Often this relationship goes back to the founding of the cities as frontier 
trading posts or farming settlements in swamps. Four of the most important American 
cities are Washington, the capital of the nation; New York, the financial center and 
largest city; Chicago, the hub of the nation and second largest city; and Los Angeles, the 
Mecca of the west and third largest city. All of these great cities have special historical 
links to the African American population from the earliest colonial period to the founding 
of the nation in 1786 and its rise as an industrial power in the 19 
th  and 20 th  centuries. Like 
many of America's leading cities today, Washington, New York, Chicago and Los 
Angeles are examples of historical African American ties to America's early development 
as well as the growing political power emerging from the concentration of Americans of 
African descent in the urban areas. New York has the largest and most diverse population 
of African Americans. Over the past decade Black mayors have been elected in 
Washington, Chicago and Los Angeles. 
  
Internal Migration 
Many of the largest cities in America have received waves of new migrants from within 
the United States. These newcomers have often crowded into already crowded inner city 
neighborhoods in the industrial centers of the East, the Midwest and the West. As a 
result, cities such as New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, Detroit, Cleveland, Baltimore, St. 
Louis, Newark, Los Angeles and Oakland have large African American populations. 
Although most of these cities have had African American residents for centuries, there 
has been a rapid increase over the last twenty-five or thirty years. Since World War II, 
there has been an enormous movement from rural areas to the cities by all Americans but 
this is especially true of African Americans. In contrast, white Americans have moved 
from the city center to the suburbs since the 1950's. This has created an ethnic mix in 
urban America that has often established a Black center city and white suburbs. As a 
result of this urban population shift over the last twenty-five years, there has also been a


--- PAGE 47 ---
decisive change in political power. Since 1967, when Carl Stokes became the first Black 
Mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, there has been a steady increase in African Americans who 
have been elected mayors of the largest American cities. 
Today there are hundreds of African Americans who have been elected to run American 
cities and towns. Besides the four cities cited above, African Americans have been 
elected to the office of mayor in other large cities such as Philadelphia, Detroit, Atlanta, 
New Orleans, Oakland, Newark, Hartford, Gary, Birmingham, Cleveland, Berkeley, and 
Kansas City. This urban concentration of African Americans has also helped to increase 
the number of Black men and women elected to Congress. They have formed the Black 
Congressional Caucus and act in concert to protect the rights of African Americans and 
promote their general welfare. There are more than twenty African American 
congressmen and congresswomen. This represents the largest number of Black elected 
members of Congress since the First Reconstruction Period after the Civil War. In fact, 
more than 3,000 African Americans are elected officials throughout America. They are 
the results of the Second Reconstruction Period that grew out of the struggles in the 
1960s over Civil and Human Rights. Even after the Civil War and Reconstruction, the 
rural concentration of African Americans continued. There was no great migration North 
until around World War I. By 1900, 90% of Africa Americans still lived in the South. 
During the Great Migration of African Americans from the South into northern cities 
between 1910 and 1930. European immigration came to a standstill. African American 
migration was affected by the "push and pull" factors. The push out of the South came 
from natural and unnatural forces. 
An important natural force was the destruction of the cotton crop by the Boll Weevil 
forcing farmers, sharecroppers and tenants off the land. A crucial unnatural force was the 
rise of the Ku Klux Klan gangs, which terrorized and intimidated African Americans. 
The pull in the North came from the labor needs of expanding industries stimulated by 
World War I. This lure to the northern industrial cities was accelerated by labor recruiters 
who went into the South and signed up workers. Curing this period a quarter of the 
African American population moved into the cities of the North. 
Although the flow of African American migrants into the cities slowed to a trickle in the 
1930s because of the Great Depression, World War II rekindled the flame of migration. 
New Immigrants crowded into already crowded cities. Racial and ethnic conflicts 
increased in the struggle over living space and jobs. By the 1960s over one half of the 
African American population now resided in the large cities, particularly in the North. 
  
The Great Migration 1910–1930 
From the earliest days of the American nation until World War I, the Africa American 
population was concentrated in the rural areas of the South because of slavery. In


--- PAGE 48 ---
contrast, the Free African American population in the North and the South was 
concentrated in the urban areas, where they depended upon domestic work, unskilled 
labor or craftsmen jobs. After the Civil War, Africa Americans continued to be 
concentrated in the South. Several factors combined to cause the Great Migration to the 
cities around the World War I period. The leading international factor was the expanding 
war effort that created the need for labor in northern industrial centers. At the same time, 
the war conflict halted the flow of European immigrants that had come to American by 
the millions between 1890 and 1910. 
The first large-scale in-migration of African Americans to many northern cities occurred 
between 1910 and 1930 in the World War I and Post-World War I era. During this 
period, large racially homogeneous areas of African Americans developed in places such 
as Harlem in New York and the Southside of Chicago. 
During the 1940s, World War II restrictions on housing construction increased 
segregation and further limited the ability of African Americans to obtain housing. The 
war effort and post-World War I recovery stimulated increased migration to the cities, but 
housing supplies were limited, forcing more segregation and deterioration of the housing 
stock. After the 1950s the opening up of the suburbs with federally subsidized housing 
development expanded residential patterns, but kept the basic framework of white 
suburbs and Black inner cities. 
A high degree of racial residential segregation is universal in American cities. Whether a 
city is a metropolitan center or a suburb; whether it is in the North or the South; whether 
the African American population is large or small; in almost every case, white American 
and African American households are highly segregated. These patterns of discrimination 
and restrictions have had negative effects on America's urban development. 
In the 1968 Kerner Report  on racial disturbance in the cities of the United States, it was 
pointed out that America was moving toward two societies, one white, one Black, 
separate and unequal. What are causes of this development? What are the implications of 
these segregate patterns? 
A century ago, the majority of the population of the United States lived on farms and 
depended on agriculture for a livelihood. Cities contained only 20% of the total national 
population in 1860. At that time there were 4,500,000 African Americans in the United 
States and more than 85% were slaves. Over 90% of this African American population 
lived in the South and in the rural areas. 
Today the vast majority of African Americans live in the urban areas and this shift has 
had significant implications for the cities and the nation.


--- PAGE 49 ---
By Dr. Leonard Jeffries, Jr.  
 
Part Thirty-Four: African Americans and the Urban Centers Migration 
Since World War II  
The internal migration of African Americans and Hispanics is changing the face of 
American cities, especially impacting on large urban centers. The out-migration of whites 
has also occurred at a time when northern and mid-western cities were losing factory and 
industrial jobs. Many of the industries which have traditionally supported the working 
classes of American cities have relocated in the Sun Belt. This combination of losing 
property-owning middle classes and tax-paying industries has weakened the financial 
base of American urban centers and heightened the dilemmas for the cities. The middle 
class and working populations are increasingly leaving the center cities and the 
replacements are inevitably the young, the poor and the jobless. They are often African 
American and Hispanic families that are looking for opportunities to get a stake in 
American prosperity but the urban resources and dynamics that nurtured previous 
immigrant groups are no longer available. Or they exist in only a limited way. Many 
African American and Hispanic families have taken advantage of existing opportunities 
and are rapidly becoming part of the growing working and middle classes. Others, 
however, are restricted to welfare and dead-end jobs and are trapped in a style of poverty 
leading to an underclass. 
During the 1960s, urban explosions rocked city after city across America as African 
Americans demanded Civil Rights and an end to segregation in the South and Human 
Rights and jobs in the North. Rebellions and riots by youth in the inner cities of great 
urban centers, such as New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Detroit and 
Newark, revealed the extent of the urban crisis in the United States. Studies of these 
"Civil Disorders," especially the McCune Report  on Watts, Los Angeles and the Kerner 
Report  on national disturbances, point out longstanding problems of the neglect of inner 
city communities with their lack of services and urban housing blight that had been 
allowed to grow over the decades. They centered on joblessness that greatly affected the 
male population and the youth. 
Short-term solutions to these urban problems involved increased riot control and police 
training for the inner cities and crash community development projects. More long-term 
solutions included projects and programs supported by local, state and federal 
government agencies and private sector assistance through organizations like the urban 
coalitions that united businesses, churches and foundations. Unfortunately, these efforts 
were limited and did not have significant impact on the problems. A more permanent 
result of this urban crisis with its rebellions and riots by Black youth was an increase in 
white flight to the suburbs and expanded blight of the inner cities' Africa American 
communities. These enormous urban problems remain a major challenge for American 
society.


--- PAGE 50 ---
An immediate result of accelerated white out-migration to the suburbs has been the 
expansion of African American communities in the urban centers. Since the urban 
explosions of the 1960s, these communities have continued to receive in-migration from 
the rural areas of the South and an increasing immigration from the Caribbean by people 
of African descent as well as Hispanics. As a result of these changes America is faced 
with what has been called "Metropolitan Segregation" and "the white suburban noose 
around the cities." Metropolitan segregation is the product of northern style 
discriminatory housing patterns. This type of discrimination is sometimes overt and 
visible as whites protest and rally against African American families moving into new 
neighborhoods. It is often covert and invisible like the practice called "redlining" which is 
a conspiracy of white bankers, real estate agents and homeowners, organized to prevent 
African Americans from moving into communities of their choice. 
  
Special African American Ties to Urban America 
The founding of the Nation's Capital, Washington, D.C. is linked to an unheralded 
African American inventor and surveyor Benjamin Banneker. When President George 
Washington and Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson were discouraged and believed that 
their plans for a new capital on the Potomac River were doomed, a young African 
American, Benjamin Banneker, saved the day by using his talents as a surveyor to lay out 
the plans for the City of Washington. Banneker had worked as a surveyor with the 
Frenchman, L'Enfant who was commissioned to draw up plans for the new capital. When 
he left in disgust with the plans, the whole project was in jeopardy until Banneker came 
to the rescue, recalled the original designs he had worked on and laid out the City on land 
that earlier had been no more than a swamp. 
  
Benjamin Banneker and Washington D.C 
The story of Benjamin Banneker and his little known contribution to the nation is very 
revealing. Banneker was born on a farm outside Baltimore, Maryland, in 1731. He was a 
freeborn African American like his mother but his father was a slave. Fortunately, a 
Quaker school was opened near his parents' farm and he was able to enroll in the school 
in spite of white objections and became the only African American to attend. He was 
fascinated by mathematics. He made great progress and his teacher gave him a book on 
geometry and Isaac Newton's Principia  on the laws of motion. This interest led to a 
fascination with clocks and mathematical calculations. In 1753 he created a sensation 
when he built the first clock ever made in the Americas. It kept perfect time and 
functioned for forty years. In 1792 he prepared an Almanac which was widely read and 
sent a copy to Thomas Jefferson with a twelve-page letter defending the mental 
capabilities of African Americans. It is ironic that his mental abilities later helped 
Jefferson and Washington realized the dream of a new Capital.


--- PAGE 51 ---
When President George Washington decided to move the capital of the new nation from 
Philadelphia to a new site along the Potomac River, he appointed a three-man team to 
carry out the work of laying out the city. A young French army officer, named Major 
Pierre Charles L'Enfant, who served in the American Continental Army in the Corps of 
Engineers, was put in charge of building the new city. 
President Washington also appointed Major Andrew Ellicott to the team as Chief 
Surveyor. In 1772 the Ellicott family built a mill and settled in Maryland near Benjamin 
Banneker's farm. The Ellicotts and Bannekers became lifelong friends. At the suggestion 
of Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Banneker was appointed the third member of the team. 
The stage was set for Banneker to play a crucial role in the establishment of the nation's 
capital. 
Other leading American cities have had special ties to African Americans. Chicago, for 
example, has roots that can be traced to the trading post in Lake Michigan that was 
established by Jean Baptist Pointe Du Sable. Tradition gives him a place in history as 
Chicago's earliest settler and acknowledges his African ancestry. Families of African 
descent were among the first Spanish settlers of Los Angeles. In New York, an African 
community was established early in the Dutch colonial period when it was called New 
Amsterdam. African roots are deep in some of the nation's major cities. 
Part Thirty-Five: African American Cultural Movements—Paul Robeson 
and Harlem Renaissance  
The African American cultural movement of the 1920s and 1930s is often referred to as 
the Harlem Renaissance. One of the most important figures of this cultural movement 
was Paul Leroy Robeson, who became a legend in his own time. He was truly an African 
Renaissance Man. Paul Robeson was not only a multi-talented artist who had a 
commanding presence on the stage as an actor, he was also an outstanding singer who 
enthralled audiences around the world. In college he was a great athlete and All-
American football star as well as an excellent student. He graduated from Rutgers 
University with honors and was elected Phi Beta Kappa. He went on to become a lawyer 
but his heart was in the theater. 
The Paul Robeson story is not the story of an individual achiever who contributed to the 
Harlem Renaissance and the African American Awakening of that period. It is the story 
of an extraordinary family that for generations achieved success against formidable 
obstacles. The Robeson Family tradition is distinctive but it is reflective of the 
achievement of many American Americans. The strength and courage of a Paul Robeson 
cannot be separated from his family background because it was the parents and 
grandparents and the community that helped instill a sense of mission and purpose. He 
had a positive African American socialization and was committed to the struggle to uplift 
his race and help the poor and oppressed around the world.

