=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Lepage_Hitler-Youth 1922-1945_0786439351.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 185
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:52.556017
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Hitler Youth, 
1922–1945


--- PAGE 3 ---
ALSO BY JEAN-DENIS G.G. LEPAGE
AND FROM MCFARLAND
Aircraft of the Luftwaffe, 1935–1945: 
An Illustrated Guide (2009)
The French Foreign Legion: An Illustrated History (2008)
German Military Vehicles of World War II: 
An Illustrated Guide to Cars, Trucks, Half-Tracks, 
Motorcycles, Amphibious Vehicles and Others (2007)
The Fortiﬁcations of Paris: An Illustrated History (2006)
Medieval Armies and Weapons in Western Europe: 
An Illustrated History (2005)
Castles and Fortiﬁed Cities of Medieval Europe: 
An Illustrated History (2002)


--- PAGE 4 ---
Hitler Youth, 
1922–1945
An Illustrated History
JEAN -DENIS G.G. L EPAGE
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Jefferson, North Carolina, and London


--- PAGE 5 ---
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUING -IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Lepage, Jean-Denis.
[Hitler Jugend. English]
Hitler Youth, 1922–1945 : an illustrated history / 
Jean-Denis Lepage.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-7864-3935-5
(softcover: 50# alkaline paper)
1. Hitler—Jugend—History. 2. National socialism and youth.
3. Germany—Politics and government— 1918–1933. 4. Germany—
Politics and government— 1933–1945. I. Title.
DD253.5.L46 13 2009
943.086083' 5—dc22 2008048788
British Library cataloguing data are available
©2009 Jean-Denis G.G. Lepage. All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying 
or recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Cover image ©2008 Photos.com
Manufactured in the United States of America
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Box 6¡¡, Je›erson, North Carolina 28640
www.mcfarlandpub.com


--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface 1
Introduction 3
1. Beginnings to 1 923 9
2. The Road to Power 1924–1933 19
3. Prelude to War, 1933–1939 27
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 123
Appendix 1: Chronology 163
Appendix 2: Song of the Hitler Jugend 166
Bibliography 168
Index 169
v
Table of Contents


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
Few historical subjects are so emotional
as the Nazi Third Reich, few have stimu-
lated so much general interest, and few have
been subjected to such close scrutiny. Adolf
Hitler continues to fascinate and to horrify,
and his barbaric regime still deﬁes imagina-
tion. The Nazi regime is fortunately dead
and buried, but the questions raised by its
terrible history continue to demand explana-
tions. Countless books have been written on
the Nazi period, including many about the
Hitler Youth, some of which have now be-
come classics of their kind. In 1979, the his-
torian James P . O’Donnell remarked that the
British Library and the Library of Congress
listed over 55,000 items on Hitler and World
War II. Even the superﬁcial student of that
period of history is aware of why Hitler at-
tached so much importance to the German
youth, and the process of indoctrination
leading to full-scale militarization is now
well known. Conscious of sailing in the wake
of many renowned historians and aware that
my book would not make waves in the his-
tory of the now well-known Hitler Jugend,
I’ve endeavored to approach this topic with
a mind toward accessibility.
Everything relevant in the past has its
message for the future, and to that extent the
past is never quite dead. Vigorous selection
has been required to keep the book within a
reasonable length, but I hope that all major
aspects are covered. Inevitably, my own at-
tempt to present the Hitler Youth will re-
veal subjective preferences and areas of in-
terest, and I have not shrunk from exercising
value judgments where these seemed war-
ranted. I am, of course, fully responsible for
whatever errors of fact or interpretation ap-
pear here. This book is not a specialized
full-length academic work, nor does it pre-
tend to scholarship. Its aim is both simple
and ambitious: to bring some light to one
aspect of the Third Reich and to give a gen-
eral overview of the Hitler Youth for the
professional and amateur historian, teacher
and student, and the intelligent general
reader. I would like to thank Jeannette and
Jan à Stuling, Véronique Janty, Anne Chau-
vel, Michèle Clermont, and Monique Brinks
for their support, as well as Eltjo de Lang
and Ben Marcato for their computer skills.
Jean-Denis G.G. Lepage • Groningen
1
Preface


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
In the 1920s, after the horrors of World
War I, many people believed that the twen-
tieth century was realizing the idea of
progress. These people were soon in for a
great disappointment. After a period of il-
lusory political stability and apparent eco-
nomic recovery between 1924 and 1929, the
Great Depression ushered in the nightmare
of the early 1930s. People began to fear that
progress was a phantom. Everywhere the
demand was for security. Many nations tried
to live in autarky, a state of economic self-
sufﬁciency, by regulating, controlling, guid-
ing, and rescuing their own economic systems.
In countries where democratic institutions
were strongly established, this trend ad-
vanced the principle of the welfare state and
social democracy to protect individuals
against unemployment and the price ﬂuctu-
ation in the unpredictable and uncontrolled
world market. In nations where the democ-
racy was not established, the same economic
trend became one aspect of the totalitarian-
ism which spread alarmingly in the 1930s.
The cry was for a leader, a strong man who
would act, assume responsibilities, make de-
cisions and get results. This opened the way
for dictators, unscrupulous and ambitious
political adventurers whose purposes and
ﬁnal solution to all problems—economic,
political and social—was war. By 1939 only
ten of twenty-seven European states re-
mained democratic. They were Great Brit-
ain, France, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland,
Czechoslovakia, Finland, Denmark, Nor-
way, and Sweden. Totalitarian regimes had
been established in Italy, Germany, the So-
viet Union, Poland, Spain, Hungary, Greece
and Portugal.
Totalitarianism, as distinct from dicta-
torship, was an outgrowth of a long develop-
ment in the past. The state was an institu-
tion that had continuously acquired new
power ever since the Middle Ages. Step by
step it had assumed jurisdiction over courts of
law and men at arms, imposed taxes, regu-
lated churches, guided economic policy, op-
erated school systems and devised schemes of
public welfare. The twentieth-century total-
itarian states, more particularly Hitler’s Ger-
many, went even further. National Socialism
was the most evil manifestation of megaloma-
nia in history. It claimed an absolute domina-
tion over every department of daily life and
carried the development of state sovereignty
and raison d’état to a new extreme. From cra-
dle to grave, a German man or woman would
be part of a Nazi-controlled organization.
3
Introduction


--- PAGE 11 ---
Nazism was not merely anticlerical but
explicitly anti–Christian, offering, or rather
imposing, a total—if vague and contradic-
tory—philosophy of life. Churches, both
Catholic and Protestant, were “coordinated”;
their clergy were forbidden to criticize the
state, international ties were discountenanced,
and efforts were made to keep children out
of religious schools. The government en-
couraged anti–Christian pagan, Teutonic
and Germanic movements.
The Nazi ideology drew heavily upon
a historic nationalism which it greatly ex-
aggerated. It derived in part from the or-
ganic theory of society, which held that the
nation was a kind of living organism within
which the individual person was but a sin-
gle cell. The individual had no independ-
ent existence, but received life itself and all
ideas from the culture of the nation into
which he was born and by which he was
nurtured. He was meaningless outside the
collective body. Hitler claimed to represent
the absolute sovereignty of the German
people; he was presented as a kind of mod-
ern messiah and was the object of popular
worship. The new order was thought of as
being absolutely solid, like one huge mono-
lith in which no particle had any separate
structure. Given such a theory, it made no
sense to speak of individual freedom, to allow
individuals to have their own opinions or to
count up individual opinions to obtain a
merely numerical majority. In Nazi Ger-
many, all political parties except the Na-
tional Socialist were forbidden and destroyed.
Valid ideas were those of the cultural and
racial group as a whole, of the nation as a
solid block. The Nazi Party was itself vio-
lently purged on the night of June 30, 1934,
when many of the SA brown-shirt leaders—
representing the more “social-revolution-
ary” wing of the movement—were accused
of plotting against Hitler and were summar-
ily shot.
Even science was the product of the so-
ciety: there was thus a Nazi science which
was bound to differ in its conclusions from
democratic, bourgeois, western, capitalist,
communist and “Jewish” science. Art—in-
cluding music, painting, poetry, ﬁction, and
architecture—was good insofar as it ex-
pressed the society in which it grew. The
avowed philosophy of Nazism was basically
subjective. Whether an idea was good or
true depended on whose idea it was. Truth,
beauty and right only corresponded to the
inner nature, interest, or point of view of the
Nazi Party. Law itself was deﬁned as the
“will of the German people,” in fact solely
operating in the interests of the Nazi state.
Propaganda and repression were the princi-
pal branches of government. The Nazis de-
manded total faith in their view of life, they
manipulated opinion, duped the country,
rewrote history and forged “scientiﬁc” proofs.
The very idea of truth evaporated. Barred
from independent sources of information,
having no means by which any ofﬁcial alle-
gation could be tested, no one could escape
the omnipresent state doctrine, the politi-
cal expediency, the wishes and self-interests
of the men in power. Endlessly repeated,
the most extravagant statements came to be
accepted, even contradictions, lies and rub-
bish were believed—at least overtly—by the
German people. A secret political police,
the Gestapo, and a system of permanent
concentration camps in which thousands
were detained without trial or sentence, sup-
pressed all ideas at variance with the Führer.
The severe repression thwarted the efforts
of a few dedicated people to develop a broad
resistance movement.
Racism was a further exaggeration or
degradation of older ideas of nationalism
and national solidarity. It deﬁned Germany
in a tribal sense as a biological entity, as a
group of chosen people having the same an-
cestry, similar physical characteristics and a
common blood. A latent hostility to Jews
had always been present in the Christian
world, but it arose nowhere more brutal than
in Nazi Germany. Jews were considered
4 Introduction


--- PAGE 12 ---
un–German, and presented as unfair com-
petitors in professions and business but also
as decaying and parasitical elements putting
the pure German race and culture in danger.
The Nuremberg laws of 1935 deprived Jews
of all citizenship rights and forbade inter-
marriage between Jews and “Aryans.”
The term “Aryan”—closely related to
Nazism—will be frequently used in this book,
and therefore needs a bit of explanation. The
term was coined by the German philologist
and Sanskrit scholar Friedrich Max Müller
(1823–1900) to replace the earlier term
“Indo-European” that described people who
had migrated from India to northwestern
Europe around 1 000 
B.C. Müller’s interest
was principally linguistic; he denied any
Aryan racial existence and warned against
misuse of the term. By “Aryans” he simply
meant those who spoke an Aryan/Indo-Eu-
ropean language.
The accepted nature and extent of the
“Aryan race” was difﬁcult to assess, and it
was impossible to scientiﬁcally prove. The
French writer on racial theory, the charlatan
Arthur Gobineau (1 816–1882), developed
the thesis that human races were unequal
and that the Nordic Aryans were superior
to all. His theories received widespread ac-
ceptance in Germany and were used to sup-
port the hazy Nazi ideology. Of course
Gobineau believed the French to be Aryan.
Hitler included the British and the northern
Italians. By the end of the war, the ultra-
racist SS, desperate for recruits, included
Croatians under the leaking umbrella. The
same theory with similar result was also de-
veloped by an Austrian writer named Guido
von List. No easy boundaries could be as-
cribed to the Aryan world, but for the Nazis
the heartland was clearly Nordic lands (e.g.,
Scandinavia and, of course, Germany).
Without scientiﬁc proofs, historical facts
and rational evidence, Hitler and the Nazi
ideologists believed in German racial supe-
riority, and asserted that the real Aryans
were those taking up the struggle against
Jews and Slavs in the “Aryan” kingdom of
the Third Reich.
An entire nation was forced to accept
the intuitions of a badly educated politician
whose theories on racial matters belonged
in a theater of the absurd. Jews were beaten,
hounded, driven from public ofﬁce, ruined
in private business, ﬁned, allowed to ﬂee the
country only after being stripped of all their
possessions, and later, after 1942, systemat-
ically put to death in extermination camps.
Anti-Semitism was inﬂamed by Nazi propa-
gandists who wished people to feel their
supposed racial purity more keenly and to
forget the deeper problems of Germany, such
as poverty, unemployment and social in-
equality. The Nazi ideology pretended that
differences between rich and poor were of
minor importance. It pointed alarmingly to
the dark menace of Bolshevism (a radical
doctrine based on Karl Marx’s communism,
deﬁned by Lenin in 1903), and declared that
all social classes stood shoulder to shoulder
in slab-like solidarity behind the Führer.
The Nazis blamed the grave troubles of the
time on forces outside the country. They ac-
cused dissatisﬁed persons of conspiring with
foreigners—with being the tools of western
imperialism, of communist and international
Jewry. They transformed the inner conﬂicts
between rich and poor into a struggle be-
tween nations and gave the impression that
war was the only solution for social ills.
Violence—its use, acceptance and glori-
ﬁcation—was one of the most distinguish-
ing characteristics of the totalitarian state. In
Nazi ethics, war was noble, the love of peace
a sign of decadence. As early as the late
1920s, the Nazis had private, uniformed
gangs, the Sturm Abteilung (SA—storm
troopers), who mistreated, abused and even
killed other German citizens with impunity.
For the ﬁrst time in centuries, in one of the
most “civilized” parts of Europe, torture was
ofﬁcially reintroduced. The mind decayed
and the body-cult ﬂourished. The ideal was
to turn the German people into a race of
Introduction 5


--- PAGE 13 ---
splendid, disciplined animals. Contrarily,
euthanasia was adopted for the insane and
was even proposed for the aged. Camps were
created for “asocials,” political opponents
and nonconformists. During World War II,
when Germany ruled over a large part of
Europe, the anti–Semitism of the fanatical
SS descended to positive bestiality, the
Nazis destroyed millions of human beings
using infamous scientiﬁc and industrial
methods.
The application of Nazi ideology de-
pended on two types of force directed against
individuals and social groups. The ﬁrst was
coercion and terror organized by the SS for
security, political policing and elimination
(and later genocide) of real and supposed
enemies of the regime; this was organized
on illegal bases by the Reichsführer SS,
Heinrich Himmler. The other side of the
coin was the control of the German people
through indoctrination and propaganda;
this was organized within the regular insti-
tutions of the Nazi state by the minister of
propaganda, Josef Goebbels. Himmler and
Goebbels—using different methods—aimed
to implement Hitler’s ideas and give struc-
ture to them.
No single target of naziﬁcation took
higher priority than Germany’s young peo-
ple. In order for the Nazi regime to survive
for a “thousand years,” there had to be sup-
port fostered for in future generations.
Hitler was well aware of this and made plans
for it. The Nazi regime indoctrinated the
rising generation in schools and universities.
It instituted a youth movement, the Hitler
Jugend (HJ—Hitler Youth). This appealed to
a kind of juvenile idealism. Young men were
taught to value their body but not their
minds; young women were taught to breed
large families and to look with awe upon
their virile mates. In the view of Hitler, the
nation’s adults had been exposed to too
many dangerous ideas over the years and
had become accustomed to thinking and
acting independently. German children
were malleable, they could be separated from
the old ideas and inculcated with the new
Nazi precepts. “I begin with the young,”
Hitler said in a private talk with Hermann
Rauschning. “We older ones are used up.
We are rotten to the marrow. We are cow-
ardly and sentimental. We are bearing the
burden of a humiliating past, and have in
our blood the dull recollection of serfdom
and servility. But my magniﬁcent young-
sters! Are there any ﬁner ones in the world?
Look at these young men and boys! What
material! With them, I can make a new
world. This is the heroic stage of youth. Out
of it will come the creative man, the man-
god.” The Führer went on: “When an oppo-
nent says to me, “‘I will not come over to
your side,’” I reply calmly, “‘Your child be-
longs to us already... What are you? You will
pass on. Your descendants, however, now
stand in the new camp. In a short time they
will know nothing but this new commu-
nity.’”
Before 1933, Germany’s educational
system, from kindergarten to the university,
had been admired throughout the world for
its comprehensiveness. After the Nazi take-
over, the system underwent an immediate
and chilling change. During the ﬁrst few
months of Hitler’s rule, Jewish and politically
unreliable teachers were dismissed, while fe-
male teachers were conﬁned to domestic
tasks. Not content with having persuasive
control of the school system, the Nazis in-
truded even further into the lives of stu-
dents, teachers and parents through the
Hitler Jugend movement. A 1 936 law con-
ﬁrmed the existence of an institution which
had been in place since the creation of the
Nazi Party and the establishment of the
Third Reich. The Hitler Jugend was Hitler’s
tool to ensure that the younger generations
would be totally loyal to the Nazi regime
and willing to ﬁght in the upcoming war.
Hitler believed that the youth were the only
ones that he could trust without reservation.
The Hitler Jugend was an important vehicle
6 Introduction


--- PAGE 14 ---
for propaganda. The organization’s boys
were paramilitarily organized, deeply and
fanatically indoctrinated in Nazi racist ide-
ology. The Hitler Youth—and its female
counterpart, the Bund deutscher Mädel
(League of German Girls) (BdM)—carried
widespread appeal, initially appearing as a
challenge to more conservative forms of au-
thority and giving youth a sense of collective
power. But gradually the organization was
used to enforce the Nazi ideology and it be-
came merely a nursery for military mobi-
lization. Appealing to passion more than to
reason, the Nazi system could easily exploit
the conformism, enthusiasm, commitment
and sacriﬁce of the German youth. A whole
generation of children were fooled by the
state. The constant psychological indoctri-
nation and the hard physical training to
which German youth were submitted had
declared aims: to brainwash the nation’s
youth to think German and act German,
and to ﬁll the ranks of the army, the SS and
the regimented labor force. From cradle to
grave, a German man or woman would be
part of a Nazi-controlled organization.
“They will never be free,” Hitler said, “for
the rest of their lives.”
Introduction 7
A note on the orthography maintained in this book: All German words and names are given in their exact
German spelling with the sole exception that -ß- has been rendered -ss-.


--- PAGE 15 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Nazi Party
The Nazi movement originated in Mu-
nich as the Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (DAP—
German Worker’s Party), one of a number of
radical nationalist groups founded right
after the First World War. The DAP was
created by a toolmaker named Anton Drex-
ler and a journalist, Dietrich Eckart. In Sep-
tember 1919, Adolf Hitler (1889–1945)—the
son of a petty Austrian customs ofﬁcial,
Gefreiter (corporal) of World War I, home-
less laborer, failed artist, and Munich beer-
house activist—became a member of the
DAP . In April 1920, the name of the party
was changed to Nationalsozialistische Deutsche
Arbeiterpartei (NSDAP—National Social-
ist German Worker Party). A convenient
acronym, “Nazi,” was formed from how the
word “national” is pronounced in German
(na-tsi-o-nal ). In July 1921, Anton Drexler
was kicked upstairs as honorary president
and Hitler took command of the party.
Drexler became a background ﬁgure in the
Nazi Party and died, forgotten, in Munich
in 1942. The new leader extended the
NSDAP activities into the media with the
acquisition of a newspaper, the Völkischer
Beobachter (the Popular Observer) and into
paramilitary activism with the formation of
the Sturm Abteilung (SA).
Hitler’s anticapitalist, anti–Semitic,
extreme nationalist ideology was expressed
in a 25-point program drawn up in Febru-
ary 1920 and reafﬁrmed after 1926. The
main points were these:
• the rejection of the Versailles Treaty of
1919, and formation of a strong national
army
• the union of all Germans in a greater
Germany
• the demand for additional territories for
food production and settlement of ex-
cess German population (Lebensraum—
living space)
• the determination of citizenship by race
(no Jew was allowed to be a German
citizen; the crude Nazi race theory des-
perately sought scapegoats for
post–World War I Germany’s political,
social and economic crisis)
• the demand that all citizens work for the
general good
• the conﬁscation of all income not earned
by work (an anticapitalist clause never
applied)
• the nationalization of all large business
9
1
Beginnings to 1923


--- PAGE 17 ---
trusts had to be nationalized, and
strengthening of small business
• a thorough reconstruction of the educa-
tion system.
The Nazi program was constantly modi-
ﬁed according to circumstances, and never
offered the voter well-deﬁned politics and
economics. Vagueness was a deliberate basis
of Hitler’s ideology. Hitler achieved un-
precedented personal power by systemati-
cally promising anything to anyone, while
making secret deals with anyone who could
be of some use to him, no matter how much
difference there was between secret promises
and public ofﬁcial oratory. What the Nazis
proposed and promised was not particularly
new. The ideology was simple, even sim-
plistic, and often contradictory, with the
emphasis on anti–Semitism, ultra-national-
ism, the concept of Aryan racial supremacy,
contempt for liberal democracy, and the
principle of unique leadership. Greatly inﬂu-
enced by Mussolini’s Fascism, the Nazi pro-
gram was designed to appeal to everyone
with a grievance of some kind. More than an
intellectually constructed doctrine, it was a
ﬂexible movement aiming at aggressive ac-
tion, a kind of religion leaning on blind faith,
on irrationality, and on exploitation of sub-
conscious fears and basic instincts. The ide-
10 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
NSDAP duty overcoat, Bereichsleiter. The Nazi
Party did not appeal to reason but to passion,
and this was evident in its regalia and uniforms.
Hitler was perfectly aware of the impact of re-
galia, and one is struck by the extraordinary and
elaborate minutiae of Nazi uniforms, emblems,
insignia, armbands, daggers, swords, ﬂags, ban-
ners and the like. Hitler had a good sense for
symbols and knew something of colors, having
in his early days of scratching for a living in Vi-
enna painted aquarelles and posters for shop-
keepers. Hitler took such matters as the design
of regalia and uniforms very seriously for he be-
lieved that the success of his nascent movement
depended to a considerable extent on the use of
strong symbols immediately comprehensible.


--- PAGE 18 ---
ology was a jumble of vague generalizations,
prejudiced ideas and a hodge-podge of var-
ious misappropriated philosophical princi-
ples lent from such theorists, writers, and
artists as Charles Darwin, Johann Gottlieb
Fichte, Jakob Grimm, E. M. Arndt, H. S.
Chamberlain, Paul de Lagarde, Richard
Wagner, Heinrich von Treitschke, Adolf
Stöcker, Adam Muller, Rühle von Lilien-
stern, G. W. F. Hegel, Friedrich Nietzsche,
and Hans F. K. Günther. In addition, his-
torical falsiﬁcations were created and “sci-
entiﬁc facts” were forged by Nazi “philoso-
phers” (notably Walther Darré and Alfred
Rosenberg), and used to excuse brutality,
ruthlessness, megalomania, and a complete
disregard for democracy and individual rights,
the only goal being the absolute power of
Hitler toward the absolute hegemony of
Germany. A vital component of Nazism was
the “Führer principle,” the cult of the leader
whose ideas were crucial in deﬁning the na-
ture of Nazi eclecticism. Indeed, from the
start, the ambitious Hitler thought big and
wanted to turn the tiny local Bavarian group
into a national movement. The early con-
ception of the NSDAP was revolutionary.
Encouraged by the success of Mussolini’s
march on Rome in 1922, Hitler made a bid
for power by force. On November 9, 1923,
Hitler and a group of followers tried to seize
power in Munich with the intention of
sparking the takeover throughout Bavaria
and Germany. The ill-prepared coup, known
as Marsch auf die Feldherrnhalle or the Mu-
nich Beer Hall putsch, was bloodily repressed
by the Munich police. Sixteen Nazi mem-
bers were killed, the party was oulawed, and
Hitler was arrested, tried for conspiracy, and
sentenced to ﬁve years prison. Apparently
his political career was broken and ﬁnished.
While the leader was in prison, the Nazi
Party fell into disarray.
Early German Youth 
Associations
A multitude of organizations
The Hitler Youth—Hitler Jugend (HJ,
for short)—was ofﬁcially formed at the sec-
ond Reichsparteitag (Reich Party Day) on
July 4, 1 926. Although the Hitler Jugend
(hereinafter not italicized) would become
the only youth organization of Germany
shortly after the NSDAP came to power in
1933, it was certainly not the ﬁrst attempt to
formally organize German youth along po-
litical, social, or religious lines. It was also
not the only youth organization in existence
at the time of its formation. German youth
had been a major focus of numerous groups
during the early 1 900s including both left-
and right-wing political parties, as well as
groups generally benign in nature. German
youth had always been highly organized, but
the phenomenon of youth organizations in
the beginning of the twentieth century was
not limited to Germany—they were found
in nearly all parts of the world. The Boy
Scout movement, still active today, was
founded in the United States in 1910, and
ofﬁcally chartered by Congress in 1 916. In
fascist Italy, paramilitary Ballilas (uniformed
groups of children aged 8 to 12) were organ-
ized by Mussolini and very popular in the
1920s. In communist Soviet Union from
1922 to 1990, children aged 1 0–15 were in-
doctrinated in the so-called Komsomol or
Communist Union of Youth.
In the years after 1 919 and during the
time of the Weimar Republic, the number
of youth groups in Germany exploded. Some
were political groups but many others were
not political at all. Referred to as Bünde
(leagues), those included the Adler und
Falken, Deutsche Falkenschaft, Geusen, Scharn-
horst Jugend, Hindenburg Jugend, Bismarck
Jugend, Jugendbund Graf von Wartenburg,
Jungwolf, Jungdeutscher Orden, Freischar junger
Nation, Freischar Schill, Deutsche Freischar ,
1. Beginnings to 1923 11


--- PAGE 19 ---
Jugend-Internationale, Jugendverbande, Tan-
nenbergbund, Jungstrom Kolberg, Deutsche
Kolberg, Deutsche Pfadﬁnderbund, and many
more. To generalize about these groups is
not possible, for they included a wide scale
of attitudes and philosophies; some were
comparatively large and open to all, others
small and restricted to an “elite” member-
ship. Many groups emerged spontaneously,
not as the result of intellectual reﬂection.
Some of them were basically apolitical
forms of opposition to a society that had lit-
tle to offer the young generation, a protest
against the lack of vitality, warmth, emo-
tions, and ideals. Some of these groups
wanted to develop sincerit y, decency, and
open-mindedness, to free members from
petty egoism and careerism, to oppose to
artiﬁcial conventions, snobbery, and affecta-
tion, by hiking together, participating in
common activities, and forming lasting
friendships. Other groups were overtly patri-
otic, with the focus on nationalism, tradi-
tion, and occasionally chauvinism and
racism. Others were against blind industri-
alization, materialist consumerism, and soul-
less society, and stressed the need to return
to nature, to a simpler and healthier life.
Some groups were individualistic, composed
of young people who had no other motive
than to live their own lives, and who had no
clear aims, and no program; but other groups
had deﬁned goals, hierarchy, written mani-
festos and conventions, ofﬁcial ideology,
political aims, and relations with political
parties. Some had books and periodicals
commenting on and announcing ideals and
activities.
Germany had traditionally been a coun-
try marked by a quest for the unconditional
and absolute, the unwillingness to accept re-
ality, to compromise and live with imper-
fection, which has been at the root of most
of its highest achievements and the cause of
many of its greatest disasters. Against this
romantic background youth organizations
developed, which were always the move-
ments of a minority. Accurate ﬁgures do not
exist, but it seemed likely that the German
Bünde, from 1890 till 1933, never exceeded
60,000. It was on the whole bourgeois in its
social composition. Members of the youth
movements were as a rule between 12 and
19 years of age.
The history of youth movements from
the end of the nineteenth and the begining
of the twentieth centuries until 1933 is very
complex, and even the limited scope of those
that existed exclusively in Germany is nearly
impossible to fully document. But as com-
plex as the subject may be, no study would
be complete without a mention of some of
them, as they were direct or indirect fore-
runners to the Hitler Youth.
Wandervogel
The Wandervogel (roughly, bird of pas-
sage or migratory bird) was a small move-
ment created by a certain Karl Fischer (1881–
1941) in 1896, in Steglitz, a suburb of Berlin.
Its focus was youth-led nature hikes and ex-
cursions. The concept of youth-oriented na-
ture hikes was by no means unique, but
what was new was that they were now being
led by other youth and not adults. The Wan-
dervogel was in its truest form a movement
against the values of the time (the Wil-
helmine period) and an attempt to reevalu-
ate the social situation with the idea of cre-
ating a better human condition. This was a
noble and lofty goal indeed, but one in di-
rect response to the conditions experienced
by many lower- and middle-class youth.
The Wandervogel movement was at ﬁrst a
romantic and rather innocent protest against
a society in which young people were super-
ﬂuous. It was also a very limited and com-
pletely unofﬁcial affair. It consisted of teen-
agers meeting to discuss ways to break free
of the seemingly repressive system of values
dominant in Germany at the time. It is
often said that the countercultural hippie
movement of the 1960s ﬁnds its historical
12 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 20 ---
predecent in the early idealistic German
Wandervogel. Anyway, the “migratory birds”
were annoyed by the fact that many Ger-
mans had emigrated from the countryside
to the big cities, and they decided to reverse
the process. They organized treks to explore
the vast German countryside in attempts to
both free themselves of parental control and
to gain a better sense of values through the
experience of friendship, hardship and raw
nature. They were disgusted with the mate-
rialism and—protesting against the bur-
geoning industrial life—they communed with
nature in mountains and the woods. Their
goal was to revive romantic Teutonic ideal-
ism, and there was a focus on traditional
German folk stories, folk songs, and national
heroes. In the early days the movement was
neutral on political, religious and racial mat-
ters, but gradually anti-establishment na-
tionalism and anti–Semitism were empha-
sized. After 1913 the Wandervogel accepted
no longer Slavs and Jews in its ranks. As a
result, the Zionist Jewish youth created its
own movement, called Blau Weiss (Blue-
White).
In November 1901 the Wandervogel
formally became an association, even though
it had informally existed for nearly ﬁve years.
It was ofﬁcially called Wandervogel, Ausschuss
für Schülerfahrten (Committee for School-
boys’ Rambles). The name “ Wandervogel ”
was proposed at the November 1901 meet-
ing by a young man named Wolf Meyen.
The term seems to have ﬁrst appeared in a
poem by Joseph Freiherr Von Eichendorff
published in 1837 , and was ﬁrst used with a
wider meaning, referring to human beings,
in a poem by Otto Roquette in the 1 850s.
The writer Heinrich Sohnrey ( 1859–1948)
was elected president of the association, and
together with leader Karl Fischer drew up a
constitution to give the committee a proper
legal façade. The Wandervogel movement,
not unlike many other youth movements
that would soon follow, adopted a speciﬁc
style of dress, a ranking system, and even a
system of addressing fellow members. All
the youth groups were selective, with stan-
dards and criteria that varied greatly from
group to group and at different places and
times, but nobody became a full member at
once. Newcomers to the group started with
the rank of Scholar, and gradually—after
more or less elaborate tests and complicated
achievements—became Bursche (student)
and later Bachant (fellow). The authority of
the leader Oberbachant (senior fellow) was
unquestionable, but there was an Eufrat
(Parents and Friends Advisory Council)
which helped to “rule” the movement. Their
greeting was “Heil! ”—later adopted by the
Nazis. The movement was divided into units:
a Gruppe or Horde totaled between eight and
twenty members. Each group had a Heim
(nest or home), a meeting room decorated
with the emblem of the movement, possibly
a small library and other collective property
including ﬂags and banners, trumpets, pipes
and drums, as the soldier gradually sup-
planted the strolling scholar as the ideal
type. Several groups were united in an Orts-
gruppe (local branch), and all local branches
in a given province had a central organiza-
tion called a Gau.
In the early days everybody turned up
in different garb—often wearing short pants
and ﬂamboyant hats with feathers. In the
1920s the wearing of a uniform became
obligatory: this included short trousers; blue,
white, brown, green or gray shirts; heavy
marching shoes; and neckties, as well as
badges as marks of identiﬁcation and pins
for distinction and achievements. The swas-
tika was frequently used by both the Wan-
dervogel and the extreme anti–Semite Right
after 1918.
At ﬁrst the movement consisted exclu-
sively of boys, but after 1 907 girls were al-
lowed. Questions of sexual morality and
homosexuality preoccupied the youth move-
ment for years. As the leadership thought
females would be a distracting and disrup-
tive element, girls were only tolerated, and
1. Beginnings to 1923 13


--- PAGE 21 ---
the sexes were never integrated. In fact the
organization chose to ignore sexual prob-
lems. Half-baked ideas prevailed on the
subject. It was argued that in mixed groups
boys would become effeminate, and the
girls would tend to become wild. The
meeting of the sexes was generally delayed
beyond the age of seventeen. Before that
girls were tolerated at some of the boys’
meetings and festivals, though never on
their trips and hikes. In accordance with
the strict moral code of the day, the ofﬁcial
line was to create separate exclusive boys’
and girls’ groups, who had to sublimate
their juvenile libidos until marriage. This
attempt was, of course, doomed to fail-
ure and, in individual cases, could cause or
aggravate sexual maladjustments later on.
Before World War I some leaders and
members advocated a much freer rela-
tionship between sexes, to the scandal of
Wilhelmian society.
Homosexuality had already been out-
lawed in Germany under the Penal Code
of 1871, but in the liberal climate of Wei-
mar Germany after 1 918, and especially
in Berlin with its café life, bars, cabarets
and night clubs, there had been propos-
als for repeal. Earlier in January 1914, a
speaker of the Catholic Center Party had
denounced the Wandervogel as a “club of
homosexuals” and a den of free love. The
movement spread rapidly and became
more conformist. About 25,000 members
met in October 1913 at the Hohe Meiss-
ner mountain south of Cassel. The his-
torical meeting saw the ﬁrst crack in the
movement and a crisis dividing the lead-
ership into “conservative” Right and “pro-
gressive” Left. At the beginning of the
First World War (1914–1918), an immense
wave of patriotic and national enthusiasm
rose within certain circles of the youth or-
ganization. But gradually as the conﬂict
dragged on, it caused disappointment and
even rejection. The war gravely affected
the fortunes of the movement. Many of its
14 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Member of the Wandervogel movement


--- PAGE 22 ---
leaders and members—some of whom did
not regard military training as part of their
ideology—were mobilized, while activities
were narrowly circumscribed and greatly
disrupted. Things had turned out very dif-
ferently from what the enthusiasts had
expected. The war destroyed an entire gen-
eration of German youth, and many Wan-
dervogel were killed. About 14,000 members
saw military service, most in front-line duty;
of these, one in four never returned from the
trenches.
Youth leagues
BÜNDE
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, some
of the Wandervogel—those who were happy
just to have survived four years of World
War I butchery—remained politically neu-
tral and uninterested after the postwar cri-
sis had passed, but for others, the youth
movement had taken on a political colora-
tion. The Wandervogel had been a move-
ment of reform and protest, but the society
it hoped to reform and against which it
protested—that of Prussian Wilhelmian
Germany—had been swept away by World
War I. Romanticism, songs and hikes—the
very spirit of the early days—were totally out
of place in 1919 Germany, so some thought.
The Wandervogel had been critical of soci-
ety, but it had never assumed that its mission
was to change the world. The immediate
postwar years caused a radicalization both on
the Left and on the Right, and the Wander-
vogel could not maintain its unity. The most
active and determined members were di-
vided by political questions about how to
change the world. The individualistic civil-
ian period, during which youth was led by
youth, drew to a close. Elements of the for-
mer Wandervogel continued after the First
World War, in numerous more or less disci-
plined and organized Bünde (leagues), with
new political ideas, new collective and para-
military activities, and—most notably—led
by adults. The word “Führer” (leader; here-
inafter not italicized) began to appear with
its connotation of domination and blind
obedience. To children whose fathers had
been killed in World War I, the leaders of
these groups became surrogates; to teenagers
disturbed by a fragmented society, they of-
fered solidity; to students who knew that
nothing awaited them upon graduation from
college, they offered immersion in the group;
to alienated youth drifting into dreary, un-
friendly cities, they offered companionship;
to those thirsting for absolute meanings,
they provided absolute answers. The word
“Bund,” with its mysterious undertone of
conspiracy, was linked with adventure and
excitement as though it hid a deep secret.
At the same time, the Bund often offered a
convenient, dreamy haven of refuge from
the pressing problems of the day. The lyric
romanticism of the early Wandervogeltended
to be replaced by duty,  service, obedience,
the servile subordination of the mind under
the yoke of an ideology, and sacriﬁce for a
cause. A small but vocal and inﬂuential mi-
nority joined the communists and socialists.
A considerably larger group joined right-wing
extremist groups. The story of these small
rightist leagues—between 1 919 and 1933—
is an uninterrupted chain of unions, quarrels,
splits, exclusions, rivalry, mutual recrimina-
tions and reunions. The great number of nu-
merically small organizations—some short-
lived—and the number of leaders involved
makes it impossible to trace in detail all of
their complex developments. In such groups
there generally was much sympathy for Hit-
ler, but no or little inclination to join the
Hitler Jugend, whose rowdyism, narrow-
mindedness, and low cultural level were fre-
quently deplored; moreover they refused—on
the whole—to identify themselves with any
particular political party.
The earlier movement divided into sev-
eral different streams. Many former Wan-
dervogel found their way directly from the
German Army into the Freikorps (unofﬁcial
1. Beginnings to 1923 15


--- PAGE 23 ---
armed militias) a part of which would later
become Hitler’s Sturm Abteilung. Youngsters
such as the league of Knappenschaft (Young
Novitiates) and Freischar (free groups) took
part in street brawls to ﬁght out the politi-
cal issues of the day. The Schilljugend was
an Austrian youth nationalist movement
created in Salzburg in spring 1924, headed
by the former Freikorpsführer Oberleutnant
Gerhard Rossbach. The Schilljugend had
many similarities with various Nazi Jugend-
bünde and held close contacts with Hitler’s
NSDAP .
The Jungstahlhelm (Young Steel Hel-
met) was the youth organization of the
Stahlhelm . The Stahlhelm (Steel Helmet)
was an organization formed in December
1918 by nationalist ex-servicemen. It played
a prominent role in politics in the 1920s and
early 1930s. In the presidential elections of
March 1932, the association supported
Hitler. Once in political power, the Nazis
wanted no opposition of any kind, and the
veterans association was closely controlled
and renamed National-Socialist League of
Ex-Servicemen. In July 1933, the youth
movement Jungstahlhelm was incorporated
into the Hitler Jugend. In 1951 the veterans’
organization Stahlhelm was revived in more
modest and apolitical form, with headquar-
ters at Cologne.
The Jungdeutscher Orden (also known
as Jungdo) was founded by ex– Wandervogel
lieutenant Arthur Mahraun in 1919 . It was
an extreme-right antirevolutionary youth
group with somewhat confusing ideology.
They wanted a strictly disciplined nation
but rejected dictatorship; they were strongly
nationalist but advocated a rapprochement
with France; they rejected racial supremacy
but nevertheless excluded Jews from their
ranks. Mahraun spent the twelve-year Hit-
ler era breeding sheep in central Germany
and died in 1950, a man forgotten by all but
the small community of the faithful.
Some Bünde also changed course—the
Oberland Bund, for example. Oberland was a
small Munich paramilitary group originat-
ing from a right-wing Freikorps; its leader—
Friedrich Weber, a local veterinarian and
another former Wandervogel—was ideolog-
ically close to the Nazis, and marched with
them in the failed Munich Beer Hall putsch
of November 1923. Later, however, radical
socialist demands were put forward, and a
part of Oberland moved for a while toward
Bolshevism and some of its leaders became
communists.
The Jungnationale Bund (known as
Junabu, League of Young Nationalists) had
been created by a certain Heinz Dähnhardt.
Staunchly nationalist, the Junabu was one
of the most effective leagues and remarkably
free fro
m the cultural narrow-mindedness
that was prevalent in German right-wing
circles. Its leadership had strong reservations
about National Socialism, sarcastically crit-
icizing Hitler’s evasions of clear stands on
socio-economic questions. Toward the end
of the 1920s, however, with the aggravation
of the political crisis, the Junabu’s modera-
tion failed to attract or hold the younger
generation; several former leaders of the
Junabu were brought to trial in Essen in
1937 and sentenced to penal servitude.
ARTAMAN LEAGUE
The Bund der Artamenen (Artaman
League) was another youth group that inﬂu-
enced the future HJ. The name came from
the ancient Indo-German word “Artam”
that was supposed to mean “revival through
forces of the origin.” The Bund der Artame-
nen was a tiny organization of young ultra-
nationalists created in the early 1920s by a
young man by the name of August Georg
Kenstler. Participants were devoted to the
concept of soil and to the idea of German
race. The idealist members of the back-to-
the-land league wished to escape decadent
and corrupt urban life through farming.
They preferred to work on farms in lieu of
military service. The Artamans were strongly
chauvinist, anti–Slav and urged that Polish
16 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 24 ---
farmers living in Germany be returned to
their own country. Sympathizing with the
Nazis, they had a ﬂag displaying a swastika
and a motto: “We want to march to the
East!” Their device was “Blood, Soil and the
Sword”—a slogan which was to become a
basic principle of the SS. Many Artamans
journeyed to farms in eastern Germany to
defend the fatherland against the Slavs. The
movement intended to mobilize hundreds
of thousands of young Germans, but never
succeeded in enlisting more than 2,000. It
was not a success because the leaders quar-
reled, and also the idealism of these young
people from the cities appeared insufﬁcient
to pass the severe test of agricultural labor.
It was easier to rhapsodize about blood and
soil than to buckle down to a working day of
ten hours. The Artamans were also preoc-
cupied with occultism and mysticism; they
held that by communing with the ghostly
spirits present in nature, mysterious veils of
the past would be lifted. Their rituals tried
to recreate that primordial kinship with na-
ture which they supposed ancient Germans
to have had. They abhorred science and rea-
son as enemies of the life of the soul. Many
of them became vegetarians and teetotalers,
a few observed abstinence from sex, as they
believed that the puriﬁcation of the physical
body would help the soul to see “reality.”
They threw over orthodox medicine for spir-
itual and herbal healing, which were some-
how felt to be closer to the primal source.
They were thus open to the theory of the
Nazi “philosopher” Richard Walther Darré
(1895–1953), who preached selective breed-
ing, the agrarian philosophy of Blut und
Bodem (blood and soil) and the protection
of the peasantry as the “life source of the
Nordic race.” More and more the movement
took on the character of an anti–Semitic so-
ciety seeing the Jews as the exemplar of the
bourgeoisie, and the urban bourgeoisie as
the source of all misery. As the situation de-
teriorated in the late 1920s, some of the Ar-
tamans were drawn deeper into politics, and
engaged in a holy war against their enemies:
liberals, democrats, Free-Masons and Jews.
Eventually many members of the Artaman
League turned to National Socialism.
Among the Artaman leaders in 1 924 were
two men destined to infamy in the Third
Reich: Heinrich Himmler, who would later
become Reichsführer SS, and Rudolf Hoess,
later the commander of extermination camp
Auschwitz. The small league was dismantled
and incorporated into the Hitler Jugend in
October 1934 as the Nazi youth movement
gained strength.
EBERHARD “TUSK” KÖBEL
Among the leaders of the pre– 1933
German youth movements there was one
who became a legend in his own lifetime.
Eberhard Köbel—better known as “Tusk”—
was born in Stuttgart in 1 907 , the son of a
senior government ofﬁcial. Köbel joined a
Wandervogel group as a boy, then became a
member of the Freischar and leader of the
Wurttemberg region of that group in 1928.
In 1929, Tusk founded his own movement
known as DJ 1–11 (Deutsche Jungenschaft —
German Youth Movement of November 1).
He revolutionized the youth press, radically
changing newspapers’ layout, making them
simpler, livelier and more attractive by using
catchy illustrations and photographs. He
introduced a new form of tent (the kohte
from Lapland) which became very popular
throughout the youth movement. The ec-
centric Tusk also introduced the banjo and
balalaika; new songs and dancing styles were
imported from Northern Europe. There was
fanaticism and even ecstasy apparent in his
speech and behavior. He was a visionary who
thought in terms of a community for life,
with all-embracing demands upon the in-
dividuals. Finding even the Prussian tradi-
tion too mild, Tusk introduced extreme mil-
itaristic practices and held up the ideal of
the ancient Japanese warrior caste known as
samurai. His dream was to forge German
youth into one great army of followers who
1. Beginnings to 1923 17


--- PAGE 25 ---
were to become models of intrepidity, an elite
of radiant physique and character, free from
all bonds. Tusk’s Jungenschaftwas a school of
character. It became popular—other groups
envied his boys’ verve and élan, and often
imitated their innovations, including attire
and songs. He also met with jealousy and
derision, and many rival leaders ridiculed
his artiﬁcial pathos and tendency to swank.
Tusk was a German nationalist but not an
extreme one. As all right-wing leaders, he
denounced the iniquities of the Treaty of
Versailles, and attacked democrats, Marx-
ists and Jews, but he never gave intelligible
purpose to his feverish activities. His atti-
tude in 1933 was more and more inconsis-
tent. For a while he joined the Communist
Party, and displayed much interest in Zen
Buddhism. He advised members of his
Deutsche Jungenschaft 1 –11 to join Hitler’s
youth and try to gain positions of command
in order to subvert the Hitler Jugend from
within. It seemed that Tusk nursed illusions
of being appointed head of the Hitler Ju-
gend. This was unthinkable and in January
1934 he was arrested by the Gestapo. Re-
leased in June 1934, he left Germany for
Sweden and England where he stayed until
the end of World War II, making a living
as photographer and studying Far Eastern
languages. In August 1944, Tusk, trying to
make up for his own past political mistakes,
expressed the hope that his former follow-
ers would ﬁght as partisans against Hitler
in the ﬁnal phase of the war. The charis-
matic, legendary and eccentric Eberhard
“Tusk” Köbel—regarded as both a genius
and a charlatan—died in East Berlin in
1955, a sick, lonely and forgotten man.
As illustrated by the few examples above,
it is impossible to generalize about the Bünde.
Some pursued deﬁned purposes of a politi-
cal, social, or religious character. Others as-
pired to be free of any tie to the world of
adults. Others considered their league to be
an end in itself. Some wanted, like Jean-
Jacques Rousseau, to return to nature.
As Nazism grew, many former Wan-
dervogel and Bünde turned to National So-
cialism, and many leagues were merged into
Hitler’s youth movement. Wandervogel and
Bünde provided fertile ground in which early
Nazi ideas might grow. The Hitler Jugend
would take on the notion of “youth led by
youth” and incorporate it into its core of
ideals, while the unique style of dress pio-
neered in the Wandervogel would continue
on in many forms among the new organiza-
tion.
Hitler’s National Socialism came to
power as the party of youth; its cult of youth
was pronounced and Hitler never lost op-
portunities to declare that his movement
was a revolt of the coming generations against
all that was old, senile and rotten with decay.
From the beginning, the Nazi movement
was anxious to win control over the extreme-
right-wing leagues originating from the
Wandervogel and Bünde, a goal in which it
was highly successful.
18 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Kampfzeit (Time of 
Struggle)
Paradoxically, Hitler’s failed coup of
November 1923 turned into a triumph since
it helped him build up a national reputa-
tion. Hitler only served a year of a prison
sentence (from 11November 1923 to 20 De-
cember 1924), enjoying an easy and com-
fortable detention. When he started anew
in February 1 925, Hitler had learned a few
things and henceforth decided to observe
“legal” principles for political success: unity
under his unique leadership, vigorous op-
portunistic propaganda, gaining the army’s
support, and making maximum use of the
democratic means that were available. After
leaving prison, however, Hitler was forbid-
den to speak in public, and the road to power
was long and difﬁcult.
The years between 1925 and 1933 were
called by the Nazis the Kampfzeit, the
“heroic” time of struggle, a period of intense
effort and sacriﬁce against overwhelming
odds. It was part of the carefully created
Nazi mythology, and the idea of the highly
idealized Kampfzeit was taught, after 1933,
as part of the school curriculum.
During the period 1925–29, the Wei-
mar Republic was stabilized, the economy
was partly restored, and social agitation was
controlled. The insigniﬁcant NSDAP was
threatened by disunion. Hitler succeeded in
winning over the deviating northern con-
tingents of the NSDAP led by Gregor
Strasser. With difﬁculty the stubborn Hitler
eliminated all opposition and ﬁnally ob-
tained unlimited power within the party. He
established his authority through a series of
loyal party ofﬁcials known as Gauleiters(dis-
trict leaders). By the end of the 1920s, it
seemed like Hitler’s party had no political
future, but the international crisis of 1929
worked as a detonator. Beginning in the
United States, the economic crisis was fol-
lowed by a huge depression which rapidly
affected the whole world, and particularly
the fragile German economy, with currency
collapse, bankruptcies and large-scale un-
employment.
After 1930 the Nazi Party, cunningly
using the framework of the democratic con-
stitution, made tremendous progress com-
bining the vote of disillusioned workers and
ruined middle classes, and working back-
stairs intrigues with ﬁnancial and industrial
magnates fearing the triumph of the commu-
nist opposition. Encouraged by the apparent
19
2
The Road to Power, 1924–1933


--- PAGE 27 ---
success of his strategy, Hitler played a dou-
ble game. Below the surface, the SA militia
terrorized and victimized its opponents.
Ofﬁcially, however, Hitler sought power
through election to Germany’s highest ofﬁce.
After complicated and tortuous political
moves in 1931 and 1932, Hitler did not seize
power. He was jobbed into ofﬁce by in-
trigues and political bargain. The growth
and the triumph of the Nazi Party were not
fortuitous. Despite the large support he had
won, Hitler came to power not as the result
of any irresistible revolutionary movement 
or a popular victory at the poll, but as part
of a shoddy political deal, due to the bad
judgment of his temporary supporters and
because of the division of his political oppo-
nents. January 30, 1933, was a landmark for
Germany and the world when President
Hindenburg appointed Hitler chancellor
(corresponding to prime minister). Hitler
never abandoned the cloak of legitimacy, 
instead he turned the law inside out and
made illegality legal. Within a few months,
after having arbitrarily crushed all opposi-
tion, the cunning Hitler established a dic-
tate. He was proclaimed Führer of Ger-
many, which became a one-party state by
the act of 1 4 July 1933. The Nazi Party had
some 27 ,000 dues-paying members in 1925;
49,000 in 1 926; 108,000 in 1 928; and
178,000 by the end of 1929 . The NSDAP
had 210,000 members in March 1930 and
850,000 in January 1933. By September
1939 this had increased to more than 4 mil-
lion, with 150,000 ofﬁcials. By January 1943
the NSDAP numbered 6.5 million, and
they party peaked with 8.5 million in 1945.
20 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
One of the six million German unemployed in
1932. The sign reads: “I am looking for a job, no
matter what!”


--- PAGE 28 ---
Creation of the Hitler Youth
Jugendbund der NSDAP
The ﬁrst NSDAP-related organization
of German youth was the Jugendbund der
NSDAP (League of the Youth of the Na-
tional-Socialist Party), which was formed
by a fanatical young Nazi supporter named
Gustav Lenk. It seemed that Gustav Adolf
Lenk (born in October 1903 in Munich,
thus aged only 17) could not join the party.
Instead of waiting, he decided to create a
Nazi youth branch and started recruiting
members in late 1921. The Nazi youth or-
ganization headed by Lenk was announced
in March 1922 in the Völkischer Beobachter .
An article was published inviting “all na-
tional-socialist-minded youth,aged between
14 and 1 8, regardless of their social class,
whose heart suffered under the pitiful con-
ditions of Germany, who wanted to ﬁght
the Jewish enemy, shame and suffering, and
who wished to serve the cause of the Fa-
therlands” to join the Nazi Youth League.
On Sunday, 13 May 1922, Lenk’s Nazi youth
group was ofﬁcially created during a meet-
ing at the Bürgerbräukeller beer hall in Mu-
nich. The youth organization was divided
into the Jungmannschaften (boys 14–16) and
the Jungsturm Adolf Hitler (16–18 years old).
As the youth league needed some sort of
backing, it was decided to organize and place
it under the command of the Sturm Abteilung
(SA storm troopers) headed by Lieutenant
Johann Ulrich Klintzsch, and the 300 youth
members wore uniforms similar to those of
the SA. The SA, as already mentioned, were
the early private militia of the Nazi Party. It
was intended originally to protect the party
mass meetings and oppose rival political
parties by force. The SA men were young
roughnecks brought in largely from the
Freikorps (Free Corps), the post–World War
I nationalistic freebooters.
The ﬁrst public appearance of the Ju-
gendbund was in the “Battle of Coburg” on
14–15 October 1 922, when elements of it
took part along with some 800 SA mem-
bers. In early 1 923 the Jugendbund held its
ﬁrst national congress, having expanded be-
yond the boundaries of Bavaria. Owing to
Lenk’s energy, small Nazi youth groups were
created in Nuremberg, Dresden, Hanau and
Dortmund, and contacts were made with
Nazi-minded and extreme-right groups in
Austria and Sudetenland. In spite of local
successes, the development of the Nazi youth
movement was limited. Lenk tried to launch
his own newspaper, Nationale Jungsturm, but
as there were too few subscribers, the paper
ﬂopped. Another attempt to launch a Nazi
youth newspaper, this time called Nation-
alsozialistische Jugend, also failed. Temporar-
ily the Nazi youth movement would have to
be content with a published enclosure in the
existing Nazi Party paper Völkischer Beo-
bachter. This was indeed a formidable chal-
lenge, because in the early 1920s, the Nazi
Party, its SA and youth movement were
small groups of penniless activists without
signiﬁcant inﬂuence, deprived of important
means and facing rival ultra-right, national-
ist and anti–Semitic political formations.
After the failed Munich putsch of No-
vember 1923, Hitler was sentenced to ﬁve-
year imprisonment and the NSDAP , the SA
and the Nazi Party youth movement were
declared illegal. None of these disappeared,
however, but continued to exist under cover.
During the time the NSDAP was outlawed,
Lenk was brieﬂy imprisoned. When he was
released he made two attempts to resurrect
the Jugendbund, ﬁrst as the V aterländische
Jugendverband Grossdeutschlands (Patriotic
Youth League of Greater Germany) and
later as the Grossdeutsche Jugendbewegung
(GDJB; Youth Movement of Greater Ger-
many), but both attempts ended with his ar-
rest. Another young Nazi, Kurt Gruber,
who had been leader of the Jugendbund in
Saxony, also made an attempt to resurrect
it; he too used the name Grossdeutsche Ju-
gendbewegung (GDJB). His attempt was
2. The Road to Power, 1924–1933 21


--- PAGE 29 ---
more successful, both because the authori-
ties in Saxony did not ban his GDJB and he
because he cooperated with other organiza-
tions of the far right. Gruber’s GDJB was
renamed Frontjugend (Front Youth) when it
became the youth branch of the Frontbann
(Front squad, a cover name used by the SA),
but later changed its name back to GDJB.
Another large Nazi youth organization dur-
ing this time was the Schilljugend, formed
by Gerhard Rossbach in Austria and led in
Germany by SA Gruppenführer Edmund
Heines.
Kurt Gruber
When Hitler started anew in February
1925, he relaunched party and the SA. Si-
multaneously the youth organization was
also reorganized. Hitler did not immedi-
ately decide on who should lead the new
ofﬁcial youth movement of the NSDAP .
Gustav Adolf Lenk had shown little talent
to lead the youth movement, had expressed
deviating ideas, and was charged with em-
bezzlement. Accused of being a traitor, he
was forced to resign and soon faded out of
the picture. Following the refusal of Ross-
bach to accept Hitler as the leader, the task
was handed in May 1925 to Kurt Gruber
(born in October 1 904). An interregnum
followed, in which the Schilljugend, a right-
wing extremist Bund, became for a time the
ofﬁcial youth movement of the Nazi party
NSDAP . Gruber soon showed great orga-
nizational talent. He succeeded in uniting
the various pro–Hitler youth groups, and in
April 1926 the very descriptive name Hitler
Jugend appeared for the ﬁrst time, reveal-
ing the personality cult devoted to Adolf
Hitler. The named Hitler Jugend is said to
have been coined by Julius Streicher, the ed-
itor of the Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer.
From the start, the name Hitler Jugend had
two meanings: the ﬁrst applied to the en-
tire German youth movement, including the
organizations for girls; the second designated
the group of male members aged fourteen to
eighteen.
On 3–4 July 1926, at the Reichsparteitag
(Reich Party day) held in Weimar, the Hitler
Youth was formally established by Hitler,
and Kurt Gruber was appointed Reichsführer
der Hitler Jugend(leader of the Hitler Youth).
Gruber did not move his headquarters to
Munich, but chose to keep it at Plauen. By
that time there was no question of inde-
pendence for the youth movement; appar-
ently Hitler did not feel conﬁdent of inde-
pendent success in this ﬁeld; the HJ remained
a part of the SA. The ﬁrst national HJ rally
was held in August 1927 with 600 boys pres-
ent, and a year later 2,500 boys took part in
the party rally in Nuremberg.
Gruber did good organizational work.
He divided the Nazi youth movement into
the same units as the Nazi Party. He intro-
duced the concept of “youth led by youth,”
and issued a youth uniform based on that of
the SA, composed of a brown shirt, black
shorts, and red armband with swastika. He
introduced strong symbolic ﬂags, insignia
and emblems such as the S-Rune. He also
deﬁned the main activities of the move-
ment—including culture, education and
propaganda, and encouraged the practice of
sport, camping, marching and music. Gru-
ber created the Jungvolk, the junior branch
for boys aged 1 0 to 1 4, and founded two
newspapers, Die Junge Front and Hitlerju-
gend Zeitung. The achievements of Gruber
were far from neglible but—despite close
contacts between Gruber and other right-
wing Bünde—the Nazi youth organization
did not make much headway. Moreover,
there was rivalry and jealousy at the top of
the Nazi leadership. Gruber, in spite of his
talent, was heavily criticized. Prominent
members of the Nazi Party were critical of
the human material collected by the HJ. Re-
peated complaints were made of indisci-
pline, and even drinking orgies among the
Hitler Youth. The ﬁrst leader of the Arta-
man League, H. Holfelder, wrote a letter to
22 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 30 ---
Hitler in 1 925, urging that local
Nazi leaders should be instructed to
refuse membership to former mem-
bers of the Artaman who were
wanted by the police for robbery, or
living on the earnings of prostitutes.
This throws a revealing light not
only upon Hitler’s party but also on
the more elitist Artamans. In 1929
a certain Baldur von Schirach, a
successful leader of Nazi students,
who was something of a poet in his
spare time, reported to the Führer
that the Hitler Jugend was “badly
led and its discipline indifferent.”
Moreover, the HJ had not
signiﬁcantly increased its member-
ship. This, of course, did not please
Hitler. In 1 926 the organization
counted 700 members; a number
that rose to 13,000 in 1929 . In spite
of Gruber’s effort, the Hitler Youth
remained a negligible force. In 1931,
Hitler ordered the HJ headquarters
to be moved to Munich, and Kurt
Gruber was soon forced to leave his
post. Like Gustav Lenk before
him, he soon disappeared from the
leadership and sank into oblivion.
Baldur von Schirach
The new post of Reichsjugend-
führer was created to head the youth
movements of the NSDAP , includ-
ing the HJ, the National-Sozialis-
tische Schülerbund (NSS—Nazi
school league), and the National-
sozialistischen Deutschen Studenten-
bund (NSDStB—National Social-
ist German Students’ League). A
young man named Baldur von
Schirach was appointed to the po-
sition in October 1931. Von Schi-
rach was also head of the NSDStB
and Adrian von Renteln was made
head of the HJ and NSS.
2. The Road to Power, 1924–1933 23
Early SA man with Nazi ﬂag (c. 1 921)


--- PAGE 31 ---
Baldur Benedikt von Schirach was
born in Berlin on 9 May 1907 to a wealthy
family. His father was an ofﬁcer and later 
a theater director. His mother was Ameri-
can, and his grandfather had lost a leg at the
battle of Bull Run in 1861. Baldur grew up
in a milieu of music and literature, and
showed talent for poetry. A romantic and
sentimental child, he longed for adventure
and action. He joined the Young German
League at the age of ten. As a student he
became anti–Semitic, anti–Christian, full
of contempt for Germany’s ruling class, and
was regarded as a renegade by his peers.
During 1924–27 he studied history and
Germanic folklore in Munich where he got
acquainted with the Nazi movement. In
March 1925, at age 1 8, he joined the
NSDAP as member number 17 ,251and be-
came a member of the SA. He attracted
Hitler’s attention with his lyrical, ﬂattering
poetry and became one of his henchmen.
Von Schirach had published a book of lyric
poetry in Munich in 1929 untitled Die Feier
der neuen Front (The Feast of the New
Front). In 1929 von Schirach was appointed
head of the National Socialist German Stu-
dents’ League (NSDStB), with the task of
promoting Nazism in the universities. In
October 1931, Hitler made him Reich Youth
Leader of the NSDAP , a post in which he
proved himself to be a master organizer in
the prewar period. Von Schirach was also
promoted to the rank of SA Gruppenführer
(General) and rapidly moved into Hitler’s
inner circle. On 31 March 1932, his link
with the Führer was reinforced when he
married Henriette Hoffmann, the daughter
of Hitler’s private photographer Heinrich
Hoffmann. Hitler and SA chief Ernst
Röhm were his groomsmen at the wedding.
In the meantime, Adrian von Renteln re-
signed in 1932, having done much to rid the
HJ of many incompetent or otherwise un-
suitable leaders, most of their replacements
coming from the middle- and upper-class-
dominated NSS and NSDStB. Von Schi-
24 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
SA man 1933.


--- PAGE 32 ---
rach took over his posts and the NSS was
soon merged with the HJ.
The Hitler Jugend and Kampfzeit
By the beginning of the 1930s, the HJ
was one youth organization among many
and by no means the biggest. Von Schirach
had to be patient in his battle against the
other youth organizations, and conﬁned the
HJ to a propaganda role. The Hitler Jugend
and SA participated in the Kampfzeit re-
sulting in the seizure of power by the Nazis
in January 1 933. They propagated the ide-
ology by passing out leaﬂets, spreading
pamphlets and placards, chanting slogans,
marching in impressive rallies and mass pa-
rades, and holding prestigious meetings.
The essential purpose of such manifesta-
tions was to display strength and physical
force, to create a sense of power and a feel-
ing of unity, and to show to all that the suc-
cess of the Nazis was irresistible. On 17–18
October 1931, a token mobilization of Nazi
forces took place in the town of Brunswick
with a large number of uniformed partici-
pants. This impressive display of strength
alarmed the Weimar authorities. In Decem-
ber 1931 a national ban was imposed on all
political uniformed militia, including the
communist ﬁghting squads, but also the
Nazi SA, SS and Hitler Jugend. This pro-
scription remained in force until June 1932
but proved to have little practical effect, as
street violence, disrupting of rival meetings
and political hooliganism did not diminish.
Illegality also seemed to have acted as a
stimulus and the Nazis gained new sympa-
thizers and adherents. The HJ was made in-
dependent from the SA on 1 3 May 1 932,
not least to prevent it from being banned
along with the SA by the Weimar authori-
ties, however it was banned along with its
parent organization from 13 April to 17 June
1932.
2. The Road to Power, 1924–1933 25
SA Gruppenführer 1 933.


--- PAGE 33 ---
There were indeed many ﬁghts and
skirmishes against parties and youth groups
opposed to Nazism. Between 1931 and 1933,
twenty-one boys and one girl of the Hitler
Youth were killed in violent action. Semi-
qualiﬁed doctors, dentists, physicians and
pharmacists (students of the HJ in their
ﬁnal years) could be helpful within the San-
itäts-SA, the medical corps of the storm-
troops. With violence frequently accompa-
nying SA activism and hooliganism since
the beginning of the Kampfzeit, it was essen-
tial to have medically qualiﬁed personnel at
hand.
In 1931, after calculated hooliganism
in theaters, the Nazis forced the government
to ban the further showing of Lewis Mile-
stone’s ﬁlm All Quiet on the Western Front .
The ﬁlm had been adapted from the Ger-
man novel by Erich Maria Remarque. Made
in 1930, the ﬁlm was bold, interesting, and
strongly anti-militaristic. It was the story of
a youth brought up to believe in the value of
patriotism, militarism and glorious death,
who came to ﬁnd that war colored things
differently. The youth returned on leave to
his school where the master—who had
taught him the values that he now de-
spised—greeted him ecstatically. As a
ﬁghter he was treated with great respect, and
the eager young children waited to be stirred
by thrilling tales. He had none. There was
no heroism, no glory. The atrocious reality
was different from the ofﬁcial myth. The
ﬁlm was totally committed to showing the
pointlessness and evil of war. It gave war its
true face, a face of degradation and bestial-
ity that applied not only to World War I
which was portrayed, but to all war. This
was obviously in total opposition to Nazi
ideology. Propaganda master Josef Goebbels
distributed to members of the SA and Hit-
ler Youth a number of tickets for the the-
aters where the ﬁlm was playing in Berlin.
The Nazis (in civilian dress) crowded into
the places and during the shows released
mice, set off stink-bombs, and created other
agitation. The police were called, but could
trace no obvious culprits as all present
merely stated that they wanted to see the
ﬁlm in the following days, the press was full
of the story of the so-called “spontaneous”
eruption of popular anger and the govern-
ment banned the ﬁlm as likely to be the
cause of more disturbing the public order.
The Nazis were jubilant to know that terror
on the streets could dictate the government’s
actions.
From the start, von Schirach sought to
reeducate the German youth in the spirit of
National Socialism. As youth leader, von
Schirach’s efforts were concentrated on
building up the Hitler Youth as quickly as
possible. However, all through the twen-
ties, the Nazi youth movement remained a
negligible force. The following ﬁgures give
the approximative prewar membership:
1923—1,200
1924—2,400
1925—5,000
1926—6,000
1927—8,000
1928—10,000
1929—13,000
1930—26,000
1931—63,700
1932—99,586
26 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 34 ---
Growth of the Hitler Youth
Gleichschaltung
In January 1933 the Nazis seized power,
and in the eventful spring that followed a
truncated and terrorized Reichstag voted to
give Hitler unlimited power. Then broke
out the time of Gleichschaltung began, the
complete coordination of all activities by the
regime, the fusion of every element of Ger-
man life into a functioning Nazi political
and social machine. Through a series of laws,
the government system was changed. Trade
unions were forbidden and replaced by a sin-
gle body known as the German Labor Front
(DAF). The ﬁrst concentration camps were
established for opponents, and the ﬁrst steps
taken which would lead later toward the sys-
tematic extermination of Jews. Goebbels was
made minister of propaganda and all polit-
ical parties except Hitler’s NSDAP were
forbidden and dissolved. The state was re-
modeled upon a totalitarian plan, a state in
which there could be room for only one
youth organization. Baldur von Schirach
was—in Hitler’s own words—the ideal man
for the leadership of the Nazi youth. Schi-
rach, who had already distinguished himself
among his fellow students, undoubtedly de-
served credit for having founded a solid or-
ganization. Under his dynamic leadership,
the growth of the Hitler Jugend rocketed.
Following the seizure of power, by the end
of 1933 there were 812,038 of the 7.5 million
German boys and girls in the fourteen-to-
eighteen age group belonging to the HJ. By
the end of 1934 the ﬁgure was 1.25 million.
The reasons for this rapid growth in mem-
bership were various. In 1933, the Hitler
Youth seemed to be the great wave of the
future. Many young people joined because of
their enthusiasm for the Führer, and in the
hope that their free time would be purpose-
fully and rewardingly occupied; these peo-
ple had been in general sympathy with
Nazism for some time, and for them joining
the movement was simply the logical thing
to do. Others, whose approval had been more
reserved, were swept into the movement by
the huge tidal wave of nationalist emotion.
Others joined as a result of pressure exerted
both by the HJ organization and the Nazi
Party upon their parents, teachers or em-
ployers, or because of anxieties about their
future careers or places in higher education.
Parents also argued that their own jobs would
be more secure through their children’s con-
27
3
Prelude to War, 1933–1939


--- PAGE 35 ---
tribution within the Hitler Jugend. Among
these opportunists or reluctant converts, the
motives varied, as did their subsequent be-
havior. It must be remembered that the early
1930s was a period of disarray and despera-
tion. The middle classes were hardly less se-
riously hit by unemployment than the work-
ing class. Everything seemed undermined
by the general economic decline, and the
specter of poverty was becoming a grim re-
ality. Choosing Hitler was often not a con-
scious political decision, nor the afﬁrmation
of a known program or ideology. For many
who were hopeless it was simply a desperate
acceptance in the absence of an alternative,
an omission rather than a commission, or an
act of faith. Some were willing to surrender
their own critical judgment, with varying
degrees of reluctance, to abdicate all respon-
sibility, to abandon democracy and freedom,
and to trust Hitler, who they thought would
know best what to do. In 1 933 who knew
where it was all leading? Only a few people
in Germany or elsewhere understood and
foresaw that Nazism was heading inevitably
toward barbarism, a new world war and
genocide.
In addition, during Gleichschaltung ,
many youth organizations were dissolved
and merged with the HJ, increasing the
number of involuntary members. Baldur von
Schirach succeeded in bringing all youth
movements under his control, even includ-
ing the religious organizations.
Absorption of non–Nazi 
youth associations
In 1933 there were about four hundred
youth organizations, leagues and associa-
tions in Germany which had nothing to do
with the Nazi Party. The ﬁrst casualties of
the rise of the Nazis to power were the youth
organizations of the left-wing German po-
litical parties. Soon membership in other
youth organizations was ofﬁcially discour-
aged and these disintegrated under pressure.
Following the seizure of power, parties and
working-class youth organizations were for-
bidden and suppressed, including the pow-
erful, highly popular and rival Communist
Youth Association (KJVD), the Social-De-
mocrat Socialist Youth (SAJ) and the Ger-
man Socialist Youth Association (SAP).
The HJ soon endeavored to coordinate
youth organizations of the bourgeois and
right-wing parties as well, which were seen
as ambiguous competitors. Indeed—as al-
ready said—many of these Bünde also sub-
mitted to a vehement nationalism and anti-
Semitism, worshipped war and violence,
condemned democracy, and called for a new
Greater German Reich under the leadership
of a powerful and authoritarian Führer. But
many of these “elite,” well-mannered mid-
dle-class groups looked upon the Hitler Youth
as a collection of uncouth upstarts. Their
leadership did not want to take sides, and
in the end their perplexed, temporizing at-
titudes were no protection against the Nazi
storm. Hitler himself had no use for such
movements; he had contempt for them. For
him, “Wandervogel ” was a term of derision.
The Hitler Jugend wished to realize its to-
talitarian aspirations even with regard to
youth associations whose political temper
approximated their own. One could only be
a National Socialist and not a National-
Socialist and something else besides. One
could be a National-Socialist youth exclu-
sively within the Hitler Jugend. The youth
organizations of the right-wing parties (such
as the Jungstahlhelm, Scharnhorst Jugend, and
many others) were submitted to hard pres-
sures. The order of the day was this: join or
dissolve. They were denounced by spokes-
men of the HJ as “nationalist philistines,”
attacked as “unteachable sentimentalists in-
dulging in moonlight ro manticism,” “aris-
tocrats who would never soil their hands to
support the proletariat in its struggle,” “in-
different to the suffering of the working
class,” and so forth. Such anticapitalist,
quasi-revolutionary language played a great
28 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 36 ---
part in HJ propaganda. This was found nec-
essary during the early 1930s, a period of
acute economic crisis, when the HJ tried to
attract the working-class youth. The nation-
alist groups and associations were on the de-
fensive, and many leaders who had been in
close contact with Hitler’s party for many
years could not bear to accept von Schirach’s
authority. Those who attempted to resist the
rising ﬂood were easy prey for the fanatical,
savage and one-sided Nazis. Some groups
were attacked by the Hitler Youth in their
camps, on excursions, or in their town cen-
ters. They were soon swept away, and if
some of the former periodicals published by
the right-wing youth movements were per-
mitted to exist, it was a concession for which
they had to pay a high price in conformity.
Gleichschaltung triumphed and the youth or-
ganizations of the right-wing parties more
or less voluntarily dissolved themselves and
merged with the HJ. Many of their leaders
endeavored, with almost indecent haste, to
secure seats on the bandwagon. Most of
them capitulated ignominiously to get po-
sitions, responsibilities and ranks in the HJ.
By the end of 1 933 all such groups were
made part of the HJ, which took over some
of their nebulous ideas—for instance, the
concept of youth led by youth, the rejection
of the bourgeois society, and the exaltation
of comradeship, but there was serious resist-
ance too. Vice Admiral Adolf Trotha and
conservative youth groups (e.g., the Frei-
schar and Geusen) made a last-minute effort
to save the Bünde from extinction and in-
corporation. In March 1 933 they set up an
alternative youth group to the HJ, called the
Grossdeutsche Jugendbund (Greater German
Youth League). Although marching under
the banner of the swastika, the Greater Ger-
man Youth League wanted to enter the new
emerging Nazi Reich in accordance with
their own bündischtraditions. This of course
could not be tolerated, and the Hitler Ju-
gend attacked them as “Communist.” After
several acts of violence, the leaders of the
Grossdeutsche Jugendbund began to despair
of their chance of survival as a separate en-
tity. On Whit Monday 1933, police, SA and
HJ detachments surrounded a camp where
the Jugendbund held a rally, and its 15,000
participants were sent home. The league was
forced to disband and merged with the HJ
on 17 June 1933. Three year later von Trotha
was compensated with the award of a cere-
monial post: commander-in-chief of the
Marine HJ, an honorary rank he received
from von Schirach as an assurance that the
ban had been directed against the Jugend-
bund, not against him personally. He then
became one of von Schirach’s most faithful
collaborators.
The extreme, “elitist,” völkisch and
anti–Semitic Artaman League was also sub-
mitted to a combination of threats and blan-
dishments. Friendly declarations produced
among them a mistaken impression; their
“beautiful romanticism” was to be replaced
by a new “creative romanticism of steel.”
The League had done a good job in the
1920s, but it was time now to recognize that
a savior had arisen in the person of Adolf
Hitler. Soon the leadership, under increas-
ing pressure, announced their intention of
joining the HJ. The Bund der Artamenen
merged with the Nazi Youth and became
Landjahr der HJ in 1934.
The process of absorption affected also
the youth groups independent of political
parties, which, in the tradition of the Wan-
dervogel and the Boy Scouts, took their
members on hikes in order to experience na-
ture and comradeship. The Nazis tried to
justify the ban by saying that “more and
more individuals hostile to the National So-
cialist State and their youth movements
have become in effect a haven for opponents
who dispute the Hitler Jugend’s monopoly
as the guiding force of young Germany.”
The process of Gleichschaltung inex-
orably continued. Soon the Hitler Youth
took over the running of the network of Ju-
gendherbergen (German Youth Hostels), en-
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 29


--- PAGE 37 ---
abling them to determine who could or could
not spend the night in one.
In 1934, it was decreed that every teen-
ager who wanted to join a sporting associa-
tion or to win sports certiﬁcates had to be a
member of the HJ. In this way Baldur von
Schirach usurped the leadership of these or-
ganizations and young athletes and sport-
ing associations were effectively incorpo-
rated into the Hitler Jugend. By that time
most surviving youth associations had been
incorporated into the Hitler Jugend by deals,
coercion and voluntary joining.
Absorption of religious 
youth movements
Von Schirach had almost achieved his
goal. All that remained outside his author-
ity were Roman Catholic and Protestant
youth organizations. The Protestant youth
groups were strongly inﬂuenced by the Wan-
dervogel and the 1920s Bünde, and were fre-
quently indistinguishable from them, except
for the stress they put on religious motives
and their cultural activities. Numerically
they were strong. With the rise of Nazism
whole groups of Protestant youth went over
to Hitler. This was not altogether surprising,
because the German Protestant Church had
never felt at ease in the democratic Weimar
Republic; it still wanted an all–German em-
pire in which throne and altar were one. It
put a strong emphasis on Teutonic tradi-
tions, opposed the disruptive ideas of the
1789 French Revolution, and inveighed
against an “international Jewish-capitalist-
atheist conspiracy” aiming to destroy the
“true” Germany. Ludwig Müller ( 1883–
1946) was a former armed forces chaplain
and an outspokenly nationalist anti–Semite;
with Nazi support he had been elected
Reich Bishop of the German Protestant
Church in early 1933. There was, however,
a strong resistance movement in the Ger-
man Protestant Church declaring that
Christianity was not compatible with
Nazism; the Pfarrer Notbund (Emergency
League of Pastors) had been founded by
Protestant bishops and other outspoken
men like pastor Martin Niemöller (1 892–
1984) to defend the traditional Lutheran
Church. But in spite of protest and the op-
position of the Emergency League, an
agreement between von Schirach and Reich
Bishop Müller on the organization of
Protestant Youth brought 800,000 young
people into the HJ in December 1933.
However, there were limits to von Schirach’s
expansion plan, at least temporarily.
The struggle with Roman Catholic
Church youth organizations was more pro-
tracted, because their existence had been
formally guaranteed by a concordat with the
Vatican. Hitler’s concordat, signed in July
1933 with Pope Pius XI (Achille Ratti, born
in 1857 , pope from 1922 until his death in
1939) prevented him from getting the
Catholic youth organizations within his
grasp. In the agreement, Hitler assured that
German citizens could profess and practice
religion, guaranteed the right of the Church
to administer itself and maintain a role in
education, and agreed to tolerate Catholic
organizations. In return the Church de-
clared that German Catholics should take
no part in politics and nor be expected to
put themselves without reservation at the
service of the new National-Socialist regime.
However, regardless of the binding charac-
ter of the concordat, the status quo was not
respected, and the activities of the Catholic
Church youth were gradually circumscribed.
In 1935, a decree forbade the Catholic youth
associations to wear uniforms or insignia, to
parade, hike or encamp in large groups, to ﬂy
banners, ﬂags and pennants, or to practice or
receive instruction in sports. Harassment
and threats followed, and the precarious bal-
ance was lost in February 1936 after the
violent occupation of the central headquar-
ters of the Roman Catholic youth organi-
zations in Düsseldorf. The premises were
closed and ﬁfty-seven leaders and priests
30 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 38 ---
were arrested. In April 1 936, the German
Catholic episcopate effectively ordered the
dissolution of the Catholic youth organiza-
tions, associations and leagues. In March
1937 , Pope Pius XI issued the extraordinary
encyclical Mit brennender Sorge (In Deep
Concern) in which he expressed the Vati-
can’s dissatisfaction with the Nazi applica-
tion of the terms of the 1933 concordat. The
pope reminded Hitler that humans possess
rights that must be preserved and which
cannot be denied, suppressed or hindered;
the same week he condemned atheistic com-
munism in a letter titled Divini Redemp-
toris. The Holy See’s concerns were totally
ignored by the Nazis, and Catholic resist-
ance was doomed to be crushed. It should be
noted, however, that some of the ofﬁcial
Catholic historians writing since 1 945 have
exaggerated the extent of Catholic resist-
ance. Some Catholics went very far in their
efforts to accommodate Catholicism and
National Socialism.
By 1936, Baldur von Schirach had
reached his goal and claimed to have—and
apparently did have total control over the
education and indoctrination of German
youth. An entire generation of young Ger-
mans was forced to follow the route mapped
out by Hitler.
An independent branch 
of the NSDAP
In the early phase of the dictatorship,
in 1933, von Schirach repeatedly underlined
the socialist revolutionary mission of the or-
ganization. He stayed, however, at a care-
ful distance from the SA, although the
Hitler Jugend had been since the start
ofﬁcially a sub-branch of the SA, and de-
spite the fact that he was himself an SA
Obergruppenführer (general), immediately
subordinate to SA Stabschef Ernst Röhm.
The Sturm Abteilung were since 1 921 the
paramilitary militia of Hitler’s party, com-
posed of patriots and nationalists, but also
street bullies, hooligans and gangsters who
played an important role in Hitler’s rise to
political power. Once power had been
gained, there was little left for them to do.
The cumbersome SA battalions were an
embarrassment for Hitler and his party and
endangered the Führer’s position. A bitter
struggle was engaged in between Hitler and
Röhm, resulting in the physical elimination
of the SA leadership on 30 June 1934 (the
so-called Night of Long Knives). Von Schi-
rach, who prudently had chosen Hitler’s
camp, survived the assassination of the SA.
After the purge, the Hitler Youth be-
came fully independent of the SA and good
contacts were made with Himmler’s SS.
Baldur von Schirach’s position was further
strengthened by that time, but it was en-
tirely based on Hitler’s goodwill. By 1 936,
Baldur von Schirach was a very popular and
honored personality of the Third Reich.
Ranking near the top of the hierarchy, he
was presented by propaganda as a sort of
demigod who embodied all that was ﬁne
and noble in German youth. His pictures
were second only to Hitler’s throughout
Germany. However von Schirach was not
popular within the Nazi top circle. Because
of his early commitment to Nazi activism, he
had not been able to graduate from school,
and he felt rejected by the academics. At the
same time he was not a “tough guy”—the
type cherished by the Hitler Youth. His
naïve sentimentality, lyrical poetry, effem-
inate behavior, baby face and plump appear-
ance were ridiculed. Jealous rivals did not
want to take him seriously; his enemies
spread the rumor that he was homosexual
and that his pretty wife Henriette had been
at one time Hitler’s mistress. Von Schirach
was never quite able to live up to his own
ideal type of the hard, rough, quick Hitler
youth.
Von Schirach’s ambition was fueled by
two basic ideas: young people had to be led
by young leaders and the HJ should be au-
tonomous. Moreover he demanded—under
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 31


--- PAGE 39 ---
his direction—the unity of education, a fu-
sion of the school system and Hitler Jugend,
encompassing all spheres of life for young
Germans. He attempted to create an inde-
pendent copy of the Nazi state within the
Hitler Jugend, answerable to Hitler alone.
This meant in part warding off or channel-
ing the inﬂuence of the NSDAP and the
state, while at the same time usurping greater
and greater areas of education. Cooperation
with the party, army, SS, SA, ministry of
education and other Nazi organizations was
regulated by contracts, which were always
designed to guarantee the sovereignty of the
Hitler Jugend. Cooperation with any one
organization immediately brought the other
competitors into a fray, since they feared los-
ing inﬂuence and new recruits. The alter-
nating attempts of the Wehrmacht and the
SA, and later the SS, too, to take in hand
the pre-military training of the HJ and von
Schirach’s efforts to extricate himself are all
impressive testimony to this. After the
seizure of power, von Schirach was respon-
sible ﬁrst to the minister of the interior,
Wilhelm Frick, and then to the education
minister, Wilhelm Bernhard Rust.
In spite of all his efforts, von Schirach
did not achieve his aim, the Hitler Jugend
did not become the autonomous state youth
organization he was dreaming of, but re-
mained a Gliederung (a limb or a branch) of
the NSDAP . After 1933, when the HJ be-
came part of the Nazi state apparatus, it
began to lose whatever spontaneity and in-
dependence it may ever have had.
From voluntary to 
compulsory membership
In the beginning, membership in the
HJ was supposedly voluntary, but the stu-
dent who demurred encountered a combina-
tion of blandishments and pressure that only
the hardiest could resist. Hitler knew what
he was doing when he got the HJ together.
If he were able to capture the minds of young
children and persuade them to become ded-
icated to his cause, to accept his theories on
what was right and what was wrong, he
would then be able to hold the whole coun-
try captive and he would gain complete con-
trol. At ﬁrst the Nazis offered different in-
centives to the children, things that would
fascinate and attract them to their cause,
such as uniforms, knives, drums and bugles.
The next step was the peer pressure on those
who still had not joined. Remarks like “your
friends are members, why aren’t you?” indi-
cated that if they did not join they might
lose their friends. And a friend would rather
join friends with reservations than lose those
people they hold close to their heart. Such
a remark as “you should belong to our group
and have fun like we do, be a member!” also
pointed toward friends and enjoyment. As
all people want to enjoy themselves, and as
children hate to be isolated, this kind of
pressure would really get to the children,
and it got many children to join in to help
Hitler’s rule.
The development of the Hitler Youth
organization did not keep pace with the
rapid increase in membership. Leaders,
premises and money were in short supply.
Compulsory membership was decided 
by law in 1 939 . That year was a milestone 
in the history of the Hitler Youth. In 
March the female Bund deutscher Mädel
(BdM) and the male HJ membership be-
came compulsory by law for all youth be-
tween 10 and 18 years old. The Hitler Youth
was declared a form of honorary service to
the German nation. Parents who objected
were submitted to various pressures and
even heavy ﬁnes. The large-scale naziﬁ-
cation of the German youth was achieved
and the preparation for war was well under-
way. In 1933 the HJ counted 2,292,041
members. In 1 934 the number grew to
3,577 ,565. In subsequent years the member-
ship grew to 3,942,303 (1 935), 5,437 ,602
(1936), 5,879,955 (1 937), 7 ,031,226 (1938)
and 7 ,287 ,470 (1939).
32 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 40 ---
The Nazi hold on youth
The Hitler Jugend accepted youngsters
from the age of 1 0 to 1 8. At 18, the young
man was graduated from the youth organi-
zation. Then he was called for six months
into the Reichsarbeitdienst (RAD—the state
labor service) in which he was subjected to
manual labor and strict discipline. After
this, he went into the Wehrmacht, the na-
tional armed forces, for two years of mili-
tary service. In this way the Nazi state never
relinquished its hold on German youth from
age 10 to 21 . During the twelve years of
Hitler’s regime from 1933 to 1 945, three
separate groups passed through adolescence,
the years between the fourteenth and eigh-
teenth birthdays. Each group had its own
experience of Nazism. The ﬁrst group, those
whose teen years fell in the period 1933–36,
had its formative experience before the Na-
tional Socialists came to power. They had
experienced the crisis of the early 1930s and
were on the whole receptive to the beneﬁts
offered by the new regime, such as reduc-
tion of unemployment in the rearmament
program of 1 935–36. The promises of the
restoration of national greatness might also
have had a certain appeal. The second
group, the young people of the years 1 936–
39 had no such memories. They all had
gone to schools that bore the stamp of
Hitler’s regime. For them the Hitler Youth
was taken for granted. There was no alter-
native, and group comradeship, uniforms
and exciting leisure activities had a consid-
erable impact, even though occasional irri-
tations in the form of brutality, intolerance,
drills and demagogy could have discouraged
some of them. The third group were those
teenagers whose adolescence occurred dur-
ing the war in the period 1939–45; their ex-
perience was characterized by coercion, drill
and active participation to the war. To this
“war generation,” the grip of Nazism was at
its most far-reaching and increasingly re-
pellent.
Organization
No one in the HJ was paid, apart from
the seniors ofﬁcers; but there was a profes-
sional service responsible for the ﬁnance, ad-
ministration and training of the Hitler Ju-
gend, called Reichsjugendamt (Reich Youth
Ofﬁce). At the top of the organization was
the Reichsjugendführer (Leader of the Reich
Youth), Baldur von Schirach—and later Ar-
thur Axmann. Schirach’s close collaborators
were a team of young men including Hart-
mann Lauterbacher, Karl Nabersberg,
Werner Altendorf, Erich Jahn, Günther
Blum, Horst Krutchinna, Alfred Loose, and
Georg Usadel. The average age of the lead-
ership was between 24 and 30. The youth
organization was ﬁnanced by the NSDAP ,
the Nazi Party, through a complicated and
bureaucratic channel of treasurers. The
Ministry of Interior ﬁnanced the local struc-
tures such as the construction and mainte-
nance of homes, meeting halls, clubs, youth
hostels and sport installations.
The Hitler Youth Ofﬁce was a large
national organization. At the top it admin-
istered various services, including these:
• Service L: physical education and sport
• Service KE: shooting, aviation, naviga-
tion, and driving
• Service HBA: installations, buildings
and materials
• Service O: general organization
• Service S: social affairs
• Service G: health and hygiene
• Service Pr: press, radio and propaganda
• Service WS: political formation and
education
• Service K: culture
• Service A: relations with German youth
living abroad
• Service GV: foreign politics
• Service JHF: travels, hiking and youth
hostels
• Service V: administration
• Service P: personnel
In April 1933, the Hitler Youth was
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 33


--- PAGE 41 ---
ofﬁcially reorganized into two main groups.
For boys there was the Hitler Jugend for
teenagers aged 14 to 18. The HJ had a sub-
branch for boys aged 10 to 14: the Deutsches
Jungvolk in der Hitler Jugend (DJ—German
Young People in the Hitler Youth). For girls
there was the Bund deutscher Mädel in der
Hitler Jugend (BdM—German Girls League
in the Hitler Youth), for girls aged 14 to 18.
The BdM had a sub-branch for young girls
aged 10 to 14: the Jungmädel im Bund deutscher
Mädel in der Hitler Jugend ( JM—League of
Young Girls). Units of the four organiza-
tions of the HJ had a military structure and
ranks were copied from those of the SA.
Deutsches Jungvolk
The sub-branch of the HJ for boys
aged 10 to 14 was created in December 1928
by Kurt Gruber. Originally called Jung-
mannschaften (youth teams), then Deutsche
Knabenschaft (German young boys), the
sub-organization was formally established
and renamed Deutsches Jungvolk in der Hitler
Jugend (DJ—German Young People in the
Hitler Youth) on 27 March 1931.
After 1936, the education of German
youth was carefully regulated. At ﬁrst came
the preliminary steps. By March 15 of the
year in which he would celebrate his tenth
birthday, every German boy had to register
with the Reich youth headquarters. After a
thorough investigation of the boy’s record
and that of his family, with special atten-
tion to his “racial purity,” he was admitted
into the Deutsches Jungvolk. An initiation
ceremony was held on Hitler’s birthday
(April 20) in the presence of NSDAP and
HJ functionaries. The failure of any chil-
dren to join the HJ was regarded as a viola-
tion of civic responsibility.
From 10 to 1 4, Jungvolk boys were
called Pimpfen (cubs, or little ones). Ten boys
formed a group called Jugenschaft, headed
by leaders (the equivalent of NCOs who
were a few years older than the boys them-
selves) called Hordenführer , Oberhorden-
führer, Jungschaftführer and Oberjungschaft-
führer. Four Jugendschaften(about 40 Pimpfen)
formed a squad called Jungzug, headed by
leading members titled Jungzugführer and
Oberjungzugführer . Four Jungzüge formed a
Fähnlein (a squadron of 1 60 Pimpfen),
headed by ofﬁcers called Fähnleinführer ,
Oberfähnleinführer and Hauptfähnleinführer.
Three or ﬁve Fähnlein formed a Stamm
(company) commanded by young adult
ofﬁcers called Jungstammführer and Ober-
jungstammführer; each company was divided
into four groups: group 4, boys aged 10;
group 3, boys aged 11; group 2, boys aged
12; and group 1, boy
 s aged 1 3. Four or six
Stämme formed a Jungbann (battalion),
commanded by young adult leaders carry-
ing the titles of Jungbannführer, Oberjung-
bannführer and Hauptjungbannführer.
Kern Hitler Jugend
From 14 to 18 years old, members were
Hitlerjunge (Hitler’s boys) belonging to the
34 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Sew-on patch worn by members of the DJ. The
emblem—also used by the SS—displayed the
Sieg rune, symbolic of victory.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Kern Hitler Jugend (Hitler Youth proper).
Prior to the establishment of a paramilitary
rank system, the Hitler Youth maintained a
simple hierarchical system with only three
ranks: Reichsjugendführer (National Youth
Leader), Hitlerjugendführer (Hitler Youth
Leader), and Hitlerjunge(Hitler Youth mem-
ber). When the HJ organization grew in
number, more elaborate units and ranks were
developed, based on the SA model.
Ten to ﬁfteen HJ boys formed the
smallest unit, a group called Kameradschaft
(literally “comradeship”) commanded by
leaders called Kameradschaftführer (Com-
rade Unit Leader) and Oberkameradschaft-
führer (Senior Comrade Unit Leader). Three
or four Kameradschaften formed a squad of
ﬁfty to sixty HJ boys called a Schar, headed
by a staff of Scharführer (Squad Leader) and
Oberscharführer(Senior Squad Leader). Three
or four Scharen formed a Gefolgschaft, com-
manded by Gefolgschaftführer (Cadre Unit
Leader), Obergefolgschaftführer(Senior Cadre
Unit Leader) and Hauptgefolgschaftführer
(Head Cadre Unit Leader). Each Gefolg-
schaft, roughly the size of a military com-
pany totaling 150–190, had its own ﬂag and
was the primary unit with which each Hitler
Youth boy identiﬁed himself. Each company
was divided into four groups: group 4, boys
aged 14; group 3, boys aged 1 5; group 2,
boys aged 1 6; and group 1, boys aged 1 7.
Three or ﬁve Gefolgschaften , totaling 600–
800; formed an Unterbann (a kind of bat-
talion), headed by Stammführer (Battalion
Leader or Major) and Oberstammführer(Se-
nior Battalion Leader). Four or six Unter-
banne formed a Bann (a regiment), totaling
about 3,000, commanded by a Bannführer
(a kind of Colonel). An Oberbann (division)
consisted of ﬁve Banne totaling 15,000,
commanded by ofﬁcers called Oberbann-
führer (Division Leader) and Hauptbann-
führer (Senior Division Leader, equivalent
to a gen er
al). Twenty Deutsches Jungvolk
Jungbanne and twenty Hitler Jugend Banne
formed a Gebiet (district) headed by a
Gebietsführer (District Leader), with each
Gebiet totaling about 75,000. There were 42
Gebiete which constituted six Obergebiete
(regions), with each Obergebiet totaling
about 375,000 boys.
At the national level, there were HJ-
Gruppen (groups). In 1931, these included:
1. HJ-Gruppe Ostland: East-Prussia and
Danzig
2. HJ-Gruppe Ost: Brandenburg, Ost-
markt and Mecklenburg
3. HJ-Gau Berlin
4. HJ-Gruppe Nord: Hannover (south and
east), Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg
and Weser-Ems
5. HJ-Gruppe Nordwest: Westphalia
(north and south), Düsseldorf, Essen,
Cologne and Achen
6. HJ-Gruppe West: Hessen-Nassau
(north and south), Hessen-Darmstadt
and Cologne-Trier
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 35
Identiﬁcation badge worn on left upper sleeve. Left: South Baden (in existence before 1933, this dis-
trict was distinguished by a yellow braided bar). Right: West Cologne–Achen. The cloth triangles were
black with their lettering and edging machine-woven in white thread.


--- PAGE 43 ---
36 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Member of the Hitler Jugend with ﬂag.


--- PAGE 44 ---
7. HJ-Gruppe Südwest: Württemberg,
Baden, Palatinate and Saar
8. HJ-Gruppe Süd: Bavaria (Upper and
Lower), Swabia, Upper-Palatinate and
Franconia
9 . HJ-Gau Munich
10. HJ-Gruppe Mitte: Saxony, Thüringen,
Halle-Merseburg and Magdeburg
11. HJ-Gruppe Silesia
12. HJ-Gruppe Austria
Female organizations
Girls were also accepted in the Hitler
Jugend. They could join the HJ in two sub-
organizations created in December 1928 by
the leader Karl Gruber: the Jungmädelbund
( JMB—League of Young Girls, aged 10 to
14) and the Bund deutscher Mädel (BdM—
German Girls League, aged 14 to 18). Orig-
inally called Schwesternschaften der Hitler Ju-
gend (Nurse teams), the sub-organization
was later renamed Bund deutscher Mädel in
July 1930. Another organization for girls,
the National-Sozialistische Schülerinnenbund
(NSS—Nazi League for Schoolgirls) also
existed but it was merged with the BdM in
July 1932. Altogether the BdM had 125,000
leaders, who were train ed in thirty-ﬁve
provincial schools, most of them on a part-
time basis. But, like the whole of the Hitler
Youth, the BdM always suffered from short-
age of suitable leaders. Both BdM and JMB
sub-groups aimed at providing an outdoor
life that would keep young girls healthy, at
the same time as it developed their under-
standing of National Socialism and made
then them feel part of the German völkisch
community. The essential purpose of the
BdM and JM movement was deﬁned by
Jutta Rüdiger, one of the BdM’s national
leaders; the organization would bring out in
the girls “character, and the ability to per-
form, not useless knowledge, but an all-
round education, and an exemplary bearing.”
The female organizat ions were intended to
give girls and young women a sense of pride
and self-worth, and produce political and
racial conformity in the young so that they
would go on as adults to have unquestionable
loyalty and faith to the Führer, Adolf Hitler.
For this purpose the girls’ sub-branches were
organized along the strict military HJ lines.
The Mädelschaft (squad) was the small-
est BdM unit, with 10 to 15 Mädel and Jung-
mädel (girls) under command of a Mädel-
schaftsführerin . The Mädelschar (platoon)
consisted of three or four Mädelschaften to-
taling 50 to 60, under command of a
Mädelscharfürerin . The Mädelgruppe (com-
pany) headed by a Mädelgruppenführerin
consisted of three or four Mädelscharen, to-
taling 150–190. The Mädelring (battalion),
commanded by Mädelringführerin, had four
to six Mädelgruppen, totaling 600–800. The
Untergau (regiment), under command of a
Untergauführerin , was composed of ﬁve or
six Mädelringe totaling 3,000. The Gau (dis-
trict), headed by a Hauptmädelführerin ,
comprised ﬁve Untergaue total
 ing 15,000.
The Obergau (region), under command of
an Obergauführerin , consisted of ﬁve Gaue
totaling 75,000, and the Gauerband brought
ﬁve Obergaue together, totaling 375,000.
The Deutsche Jungmädel ranks (girls 
age 10 to 1 4), from the lowest to highest, 
were Scharführerin, Gruppenführerin, Ring-
führerin , and Untergauführerin . The BdM
top leaders, Jutta Rüdiger and Melitta
Maschmann, had the title of Reichsrefer-
entin. The top leadership of the HJ women
was formed at three institutes situated at
Potsdam, Godesberg and Boydent. The
middle ranks were formed in 44 schools,
and the lowest ranks by weekly training 
at local clubs and homes, but at all levels 
of the HJ there were a lack of good lead-
ers.
BdM girls enthusiastically participated
in the ﬁrm establishment of Nazi rule in
Germany, even though they were assigned to
duties in keeping with the Nazi viewpoint
on the role of females. Hitler thought that
men were superior to women. The primary
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 37


--- PAGE 45 ---
role of the female, he believed, was to give
birth to healthy, racially pure “Aryan” baby
boys. All girls’ and women’s organizations
were thus regarded as auxiliaries below their
male counterparts. All girls of the BdM and
JM were constantly reminded that the great
task of their lives was motherhood.
The girls’ sections of the Hitler Youth
were organized along different lines. Al-
though the ranks and units of the JM and
BdM girls were similar to those of the boys,
the physical requirements were scaled down.
A ten-year-old girl had to sprint 60 meters
in 14 seconds, long jump two meters, throw
a softball 12 meters, jump in cold water from
a height of three meters and also perform
two somersaults forward and two backward.
She had then passed the Jungmädel test and
was entitled to wear the neckerchief and
special neckerchief ring. While a greater
emphasis was placed on the mastery of do-
mestic tasks, in keeping with the Nazi doc-
trine on the subordinate, home-making role
of the woman, girls received physical train-
ing and ideological indoctrination that
ranged from tumbling to memorizing names
of Nazi martyrs. BdM girls were
taught the three “Ks” ruling their fu-
ture life: Kinder, Kirche, Küche(chil-
dren, church, kitchen). BdM girls
also worked in nurseries and hospi-
tals, and on farms. To a certain ex-
tent, the BdM association proved to
be a modernizing force in many
practical day-to-day respects and
could provide emancipatory open-
ings. The organization allowed girls
to travel beyond the narrow conﬁnes
of home, bringing them in contact
with youth from other regions. Girls
could pursue activities which were
otherwise reserved for boys. Those
working as functionaries for the or-
ganization could escape from the fe-
male role model centered around
family and children, and they might
even approach the classic “mascu-
line” type of the political organizer who was
never at home. Such opportunities remained
very limited, however, and were withdrawn
increasingly, owing to the Nazis’ general
discrimination against women. The man in
the street had nicknames for the function of
the girls’ organization, lacking reverence but
clear and relevant. Bald deutsche Mütter
(German mothers-to-be), Bund deutscher
Milchkühe (League of German Milk-cows),
Bedarfsartikel deutscher Männer (Requisites
for German Males), and Brauch deutsches
Mädchen (Make Use of German Girls) were
some of many mocking interpretations of
the initials “BdM.”
Women in the Third Reich
Faith and Beauty 
(Glaube und Schönheit)
BdM service ended at 18 but 21was the
proscribed age for admission to the ofﬁcial
NS Frauenschaft(NSF), the National Social-
ist Women’s Association. In January 1938,
38 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
BdM badge worn on the left breast of tunic


--- PAGE 46 ---
the transitory organization Glaube und
Schönheit (Faith and Beauty) was created to
ﬁll the gap. The new organization’s
pompous name was typical of the Nazi
regime. The organization housed girls be-
tween 18 and 21 in what could be compared
to homes for ascetic beguines or dwellings of
Roman vestal virgins and the wise women of
Germanic antiquity, where they were of-
fered means to personal development. The
whole “Faith and Beauty” venture was in-
tended to further an ideal of the perfect
Nazi woman, known as “ Hohe Frau” (Ex-
alted Woman). The ﬂower of young “Aryan”
womanhood was cultivated with an eye to-
ward perfection. The organization was open
to a select circle of blonde and blue-eyed fe-
males who, apart from their staunch devo-
tion to the Nazi ideology, were blessed with
“superior intellectual gifts and grace of mind
and body.” After a probation period of three
months they could become full members
and were grouped in small communities of
10 to 15 young women, strictly overseen by
the Youth National Department. The “Ex-
alted Women” wore the same uniform as the
younger BdM girls and had to submit to the
same rules and engaged in the same activi-
ties, including sport, collective gymnastics,
folk dance, music and singing, manual and
domestic work, and political indoctrination.
In addition the women’s curriculum included
riding, swimming, car driving, and pistol
shooting. The organization Glaube und
Schönheit had a high membership cost which
had to be paid by parents. It was intended to
teach domestic handiness and foster home-
spun feminine charm. It also aimed at devel-
oping the social, spiritual and physical graces
by dancing, riding, tennis playing, and sun-
bathing. The girls were encouraged to be
creative and free to specialize in their own
spheres of interest within limits: sports/
training of the body; gymnastics/natural
movement; hygiene/knowledge of the human
body; and baby care. Nazi indoctrination
was, of course, continued, and girls also re-
ceived advanced training in fashion design,
domestic science, cookery, housekeeping
and preparation for marriage. Groups of
dancers were formed which performed at
special functions like Nazi Party rallies.
Some especially pretty girls became prize
exhibits for the National Socialist concep-
tion of the ideal woman. Their job was to
meet the demand for wives among the prae-
torian guard of the National Socialist regime.
They were expected to choose a racially
worthy spouse from the leadership corps of
the NSDAP and the SS.
During the war, the purpose of the or-
ganization shifted and adapted to the grim
situation. Dancing, singing, and frivolity
were discarded and replaced by domestic ac-
tivities, administrative duties and nursing
in overcrowded hospitals full of wounded
soldiers.
Women Association
There were two other ways of main-
taining party tutelage over young women
who had outgrown the BdM and the organ-
ization Faith and Beauty: the Reichsarbeits-
dienst der weibliche Jugend(RAD/wJ—Reich
Labor Service for Young Women) which
will be described later, and the National-
sozialistische-Frauenschaft(NSF—National So-
cialist Women’sAssociation).
Women formed a distinct social group,
forced into compliance with Hitler’s regime.
Nazism was very much a male movement
in tone and character; it emphasized physi-
cal struggle, toughness, and military-style
camaraderie, leaving very little place, if any,
for feminine values. From the start, women’s
position in society was inferior and the
NSDAP had barred females from member-
ship. According to the anti-feminist ideol-
ogy, women could not think logically or rea-
son objectively, since they were ruled only
by emotion. One of the few women ofﬁcially
involved in Nazi activities was the self-
assured Leni Riefenstahl, who directed
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 39


--- PAGE 47 ---
mountaineering and skiing movies as well
as important heroic propaganda ﬁlms such
as Victory of Faith , Triumph of the Will and
Olympics 1936. The other woman to have
some status in Nazi Germany was Anna Re-
itsch (1912–1979), a champion glider and a
test pilot who was awarded the Iron Cross.
The Luftwaffe was the only German arm
massively employing females in uniform
(Helferinnen, about 100,000 in 1944), serving
as auxiliaries in air warning, telephone and
teletype departments. On the whole women
were repressed and had little ofﬁcial inﬂu-
ence. From 1933 to 1 937 , women were ex-
pelled from work, had their rights of inher-
itance curtailed, were refused entrance to
higher education, and were barred from sen-
ior professional posts. The removal of women
from many sectors of employment caused
resentment. However, during 1938–1945,
the Nazi regime launched a wide-
scale rearmament program, and dur-
ing the war the majority of males
were drafted into t he armed forces.
This created a large labor shortage
and Nazi ofﬁcials found themselves
in the contradictory position of hav-
ing to encourage, even demand that
women work. Increasingly, women
opted for better-paying jobs in heavy
industry and weapons plants in the
larger towns, leaving behind house-
work and nursing, servant’s work
and the hard life on the farm.
Nazism had a certain appeal
among women, resulting from a se-
ries of legislative measures that
sought to encourage marriage and
raise the birthrate in the Third
Reich. The creation of new roles
within party and public organiza-
tions—such as the NSF—made
possible the active involvement of
many women in the Third Reich.
The NSF was a Gliederung (seg-
ment) of the NSDAP . It was cre-
ated in October 1 931 and led by
Elsbeth Zander. The NS Frauenschaft was
reorganized after the Nazi seizure of power
in 1933. It was the overall body coordinat-
ing all existing women’s groups and associ-
ations; these included the Frauenwerk(Fed-
eral Organization of Women), the Women’s
League of the Red Cross, the Women’s
League of the Deutsche Arbeitsfront (the
German Labor Front), and the Women’s
Labor Service. The purpose was to keep
German women ﬁrmly under the control of
the exclusively male NSDAP party.
The NSF was placed under the lead-
ership of Gertrud Bäumer and then under
Gertrud Scholtz-Klink. A blonde, blue-
eyed, slender little woman with classic fea-
tures and fresh complexion, Gertrud Scholtz-
Klink was married to a postal clerk and bore
him six children. Active in various Nazi or-
ganizations, she was promoted to Reichs-
40 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Emblem of the Nationalsozialistische-Frauenschaft
(Nazi Women League). The emblem bore the initials of the
German words for Faith, Hope and Charity.


--- PAGE 48 ---
frauenführerin (leader) of the NSF and other
women’s organizations in 1934. Despite the
imposing title she possessed, her leadership
was more token than actual, and her views
on a woman’s role closely mirrored those of
the male-dominated Nazi Party and state.
She was the prototype of the militant Nazi
woman, expected to tread softly, avoid difﬁ-
cult issues and teach all German women
how to organize their households according
to the policies of the party, consistently
praising the “sacred character” of Nazi con-
quest and struggle. Although it tolerated a
small but vocal faction of women, the NSF
ﬁrmly encouraged them to pay deference to
male supremacy, to embrace their second-
ary role, to emphasize the joys of labor and
childbearing, to raise their children as pa-
triots, to support the ideas and beliefs of
Nazism, and to see that all commands of the
party were unconditionally carried out in
daily life. NSF members gave aid and com-
fort to fatigued mothers, they instructed
adolescent girls, they dealt with cases in-
volving children, they offered enlightenment
on such subjects as cooking leftovers, dress-
making with good German cloth, and rais-
ing babies. The NSF brought further op-
portunities to be involved in political
activism, especially to women who had few
formal qualiﬁcations. Not all of the NSF’s
activities were benevolent, though. The
leadership of the organization, mirroring
Hitler’s view, regarded any kind of feminism
or women’s liberation as anathema. Some of
its members became guards in concentra-
tion and work camps for Je wish and “devi-
ating” women. During the last year of World
War II, women of the NS Frauenschaft pro-
vided rear-echelon support to the Volkssturm
(Home Guard). After March 1945 some of
them were issued ﬁrearms and Panzerfaust
(portable anti-tank weapons).
By 1935 about eleven million out of the
country’s thirty-ﬁve million females be-
longed to the NS Frauenschaft. Their ofﬁcial
uniform consisted of a dark blue-black suit,
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 41
NS Frauenschaft female work leader in dress
uniform


--- PAGE 49 ---
including a jacket, a skirt and a fedora. On
the upper left sleeve of the jacket was sewn
a silver-gray national emblem (with eagle
and swastika). The wearer’s district afﬁlia-
tion was indicated by a silver-gray cuff band,
often worn on the lower left sleeve. An
enamel organization badge was usually worn
on the lapel of the jacket.
Nursing and motherhood
The Weimar Republic had granted the
vote to women in 1 919 . As a comparison,
French women were not given that right
until 1945. Of course, the Nazis—beginning
with Hitler himself—were well aware of the
beneﬁt they could get from controlling this
bloc of voters. On the whole, the changes
brought about by Nazism were far from lib-
erating for women. In fact, demands on them
increased, as women were forced to combine
the roles of mother, housewife, Nazi propa-
gandist and industrial worker subjected to
military discipline. Wrapped up in mock-
heroic verbiage, the NSF was only a loose
framework designed to contain outbursts of
excessive zeal, and its functions were mostly
restricted to trivial welfare work and prop-
aganda. 
Conﬁned to their role as breeding ma-
chines and beasts of burden, German women
contributed their fair share to the war effort,
and certainly suffered alongside their men-
folk. The Allied air war brought the horrors
of the front line to every German town, and
women suffered appallingly when they fell
into the hands of the vengeful Russians in
1945.
Hitler was always very ﬁrm in his con-
tention that women were to perform their
most important task by administering their
homes, taking care of their husbands, and
producing future leaders and soldiers. 
The idea that a “woman’s place was in
the home” was not new, but Hitler’s regime
put it into practice. All Germany was famil-
iar with the follow ing slogans which were
42 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Staff member, NS Frauenschaft


--- PAGE 50 ---
taken seriously, without a trace of irony:
“Women are the eternal mothers of the na-
tion”; “Women are the eternal companion
of men in work and battle”; “The tri-
umphant task of women is to bear and tend
babies”; “Men are willing to ﬁght, but when
they are wounded, women must be there to
nurse them.”
Hitler simply did not accept women as
equals. He wanted them to embrace moth-
erhood as an ideal and regarded any kind of
feminism or women’s liberation movement
as a “Jewish idea” deliberately designed to
weaken society. Rather than attend to their
rights, women had to concern themselves
with “the duties that Nature had laid upon
them in the interests of communal survival.”
Gertrud Scholtz-Klink and the NSF had
little impact on Nazi policymakers, who ex-
cluded her from meetings at which issues
affecting women were discussed. When ap-
pearing in public before a female audience,
Hitler never forgot to extol the outstanding
importance of women but he also constantly
reminded them that the highest aim for the
German girls and women was—and must
remain—home, health and marriage. Mar-
riage of course was not an end in itself but
had to serve the multiplication and preser-
vation of the “Aryan race.” Families were
encouraged to have at least four children.
The family and sexual relations were
no longer altogether a private matter, but a
supreme duty to the German community.
Their ultimate aim was the maximum prop-
agation of the species. Elitist, mystic fanat-
ics like Heinrich Himmler and Walther
Darré wanted quality, but a brutal realist
like Hitler was only concerned with quantity
of human material, as a rising birthrate gave
promise of more future troops which could
be hurled into the international fray. What
the Führer needed was a disciplined human
mass dedicated to Nazi faith, blind obedi-
ence and service.
Social measures included allowances
and beneﬁts encouraging maternity, includ-
ing prizes and ﬁnancial privileges for large
families, and gifts to newborn infants. Should
the husband of a barren wife form an extra-
marital liaison which produced a child, he
was not to be legally charged with adultery
but merely obliged to pay maintenance.
Kindertagesstätte (nursery schools) were cre-
ated for children of preschool age. Marriage
loans were provided to help married couples
in setting up housekeeping. Between 1933
and 1936, the Nazi regime ﬁnanced 694,367
marriages. Similar measures included a heav-
ier tax on bachelors and childless couples
who were considered as “deserters on the
home battleﬁeld.” Added to the ﬁnancial in-
ducements was a strong propaganda cam-
paign based on emotion. Bearing children
was celebrated to the point of adulation.
“Kindersegen” (blessed with children) was an
emotional term constantly used by Nazi
leaders to promote the birthrate. During the
ﬁrst three years of World War II, because of
this social policy, there was no drastic mo-
bilization of German women for war work.
In late 1 943 and early 1 944, however, the
crisis became so acute that women had to
take the place of the men called to the colors.
The term “family” was limited to house-
holds with four children or more. There
were special honors for mothers who con-
tributed children to the regime. A medal
was instituted in December 1938. The
Ehrenzeichen der deutschen Mutter (Cross of
Honor of the German Mother), also known
as the Mutterkreuz (Mother Cross), was an
elegant blue and white enamel cross worn
on a narrow blue and white ribbon. It was
awarded to the mothers of large families, in
three classes: bronze for four or ﬁve children,
silver for six or seven children, gold for eight
or more children. The crosses were awarded
to the proliﬁc mothers on Mothering Sun-
day (the second Sunday of May) or on 12
August (the birthday of Hitler’s mother) at
a public ceremony. The Mother Cross was
regarded as a prestigious distinction of the
highest order. Its wearer would be saluted
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 43


--- PAGE 51 ---
by sentries, enjoy unrestricted access to Hit-
ler (in theory), and occupy a supreme place
of honor in the German state.
Hitler’s gamble on women’s emotional-
ity, capacity for devotion and desire for
domination was a huge success. A common
feature in many Nazi homes was a “Hitler
Corner” composed of a portrait of the Führer
and ﬂowers. These altars were regarded as
good-luck charms. During the war it was
claimed that walls adorned with a portrait
of Hitler would withstand a bomb blast. As
for the bachelor and childless Führer him-
self—“the saviour of the Nation”—he could
not be considered a “deserter on the home
battleﬁeld.” Goebbels’ propaganda had cre-
ated the sacred image of an asexual man
who had renounced marriage and children,
whose bride was the German people to
whom he devoted his entire life and sac-
riﬁced himself in the service of the commu-
nity. Practically nobody in Germany knew
that Hitler had a girlfriend named Eva
Braun.
The Nazis had no sense of humor at
all. Making jokes about the Führer was se-
verely repressed. A woman who entertained
colleagues with the following lampoon was
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment in
1943:
He who rules in the Russian manner
And imitates Napoleon
Was born in Austria
Trims his moustache English-fashion
Salutes like an Italian
Asks our wives for lots of children
But can’t produce any himself.
He is the leader of Germany.
The ideal German woman
Beauty was whatever pleased the Führer,
his paladins and cultural administrators.
Owing to the female youth organizations,
the Nazi regime was rather successful at al-
tering the appearance and habits of women.
The NSDAP regarded such things as fash-
ionable clothing, makeup, and pants on
women as evidence of “Weimar and Jewish
decadence.” Maintaining a slim ﬁgure, drink-
ing alcohol and smoking were branded as
detrimental to health and fertility, and thus
un–German. The Führer’s aversion to meat,
liquor and tobacco was ﬁrm and categori-
cal. His dream was to convert the German
people to a vegetarian diet. The fanatical
abstainer sometimes said that meat-eating
paved the way for drinking and smoking.
Hitler’s attitude, being well known, was grist
for the mill of crusading health faddists and
hidebound fanatics of decorum alike. Alco-
hol was regarded as a source of mental de-
bility and criminality, sexual impairment
and hereditary degeneration. Germany had
44 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Ehrenzeichen der deutschen Mutter (Cross
of Honor of the German Mother)


--- PAGE 52 ---
the world’s strongest anti-smoking move-
ment in the 1930s and 1940s, supported by
Nazi medical leaders worried that tobacco
might prove a hazard to the race. German
epidemiology was the most advanced. Doc-
tors Franz Muller, Eberhard Schairer and
Erich Schoniger were the ﬁrst to research
and document lung cancer, coronary dis-
ease, heart attack, and other serious illnesses
caused by the use of tobacco. In the press,
nicotine was denounced as a cause of pre-
mature senility, a nerve and gland poison.
Popular educators went so far as to assert
that smokers became frigid, impotent and
ultimately infertile. Women smokers were
threatened with particularly dire conse-
quences: atrophy of the ovaries, poisoning
of the breast-fed infant, and loss of personal
freshness, beauty and youthfulness. There-
fore the Nazis launched a campaign against
drinking and smoking by women. In many
restaurants and public places hung conspic-
uous signs reading Die deutsche Frau raucht
nicht (the German woman does not smoke),
and owners of cafés were barred from selling
tobacco to female customers. The success of
such campaigns was probably minimal, but
they did result in some harassment of women
who dared to smoke in public. Smoking was
banned in many workplaces, government
and public buildings, public transport (train,
bus, tramway), air raid shelters, hospitals
and rest homes. One of Hitler’s plans was
to mark cigarette packages with warnings in
big red letters, such as “Tobacco kills” and
“Smoking will damage your health.” This
order was never implemented but it has been
adopted in the European Community today.
In spite of the anti-tobacco campaign, which
culminated between 1939 and 1941, smok-
ing rates rose dramatically in the years of
Nazi rule: German per capita tobacco use
between 1932 and 1 939 rose from 570 to
900 cigarettes a year. This rise has some-
times been explained as representing a form
of cultural resistance.
In addition, German women were en-
couraged not to “paint their faces” and not
to “wear fashionable fripperies.” Although
Hitler favored women with elegant and slim
ﬁgures, the ofﬁcial image of the ideal woman
was of a plump, broad-hipped and full ﬁgure
suggestive of fertility. The regime promoted
a rustic looking, fresh-faced, primly gowned,
unadorned peasant girl with simple folk
dresses, blond hair pulled into a bun or
coiled braid: a female cliché suggesting fer-
tility more than sensuality. Those who de-
liberately deﬁed this stereotype were ha-
rassed, might be disciplined by the NSF and
publicly denounced as “trouser-wenches
with Indian warpaint,” and in the worst
cases were ﬁred from their jobs.
In art, Hitler condemned modern paint-
ing but approved of female nudes, so long as
they exhibited what he considered as ideal
Nordic racial traits and a virginal whole-
someness. The result was technically accom-
plished painting and sculptures, but since
there were executed according to the stereo-
types of Aryan manliness and female virtue,
Nazi art was ultimately dull, cold and pre-
dictable.
Sexuality
Given that the German nation aimed
to combat the declining birthrate, it is not
surprising that contraception and abortion
were forbidden and severely repressed. Ho-
mosexuality also merited no mercy, more
for a simple piece of arithmetic than moral-
ity. In terms of population policy, homosex-
uals were seen as zeros who failed in their
duty of racial preservation by producing no
children: in a Third Reich obsessed with the
birthrate, this was an unpardonable crime.
Homosexuality had been outlawed in Ger-
many since 1871, but in the liberal climate
of Weimar Germany, and especially Berlin
with its café life, bars, cabarets and night
clubs, there had been proposals for repeal.
Persecution of homosexuals varied in inten-
sity throughout the period of Hitler’s Third
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 45


--- PAGE 53 ---
Reich. After the Reichstag ﬁre of February
1933, decrees were issued against public in-
decency, homosexual bars were closed, and
gay magazines were banned. While many
members of the performing arts and polit-
ical leaders (notably the SA leadership)
enjoyed an unofﬁcial immunity, police su-
pervision, castration, imprisonment in con-
centration camps, and even the death
penalty were included in the range of pun-
ishment applied to others. Lesbianism, too,
was forbidden, but it presented no practical
reproductive problems; a lesbian could, after
all, bear children.
Rules governing sex education were
strict. The problem of adolescent sexuality
had to be solved by self-restraint; by show-
ing self-control one showed one’s sense of
duty to the community. According to the
Nazis, the neglect of physical education and
an excessive emphasis upon intellectual de-
velopment led to unhealthy sexual imagin-
ings and libertine tendencies. The giving in
to such pleasures was seen as being espe-
cially dangerous because this could lead
young men to consort with prostitutes, and
hence to run the risk of contracting vene-
real diseases. It was thought essential that
through sport and gymnastics boys should
be “hardened like iron” to prevent them
from succumbing to the urges of their li-
bidos. Self-discipline, however, was not to be
confused with the “pettifogging morality of
yore,” with the religious appeals for self-de-
nial made by bourgeois Christian society.
Besides, one of the Nazis’ major preoccupa-
tions was the question of how to produce
more male children to make up for those
who were going to be killed in the war. De-
parting from Lutheran Puritanism and
Catholic prudishness, the Nazis urged that
the mating of vigorous young males with
healthy females was so important to the fu-
ture of the white Aryan race that procre-
ation was no longer a private matter, but a
duty to the state. As a budding soldier, the
young HJ male should joyfully acknowledge
his sound instincts and practice self-control
from “a sense of duty to the German com-
munity,” rather than from ethical, religious
or moral considerations.
The ofﬁcial call for ascetism was thus
not taken too literally, and somewhat more
liberal standards were applied to the young
people. Hitler himself admitted that sex and
war went together well. A rigorous upbring-
ing, one that alone could produce the type
of warrior he needed, was impracticable un-
less it had the safety-valve known as “whole-
some delight in existence.” Sound instincts
make sound humans. Baldur von Schirach
applied this educational formula regarding
sex to the Hitler Jugend. His policy was to
establish “harmless contacts” between boys
and girls, and given the ofﬁcial Nazi birth-
rate policy, this was more of an invitation
than a limitation. Before yielding to homo-
sexual blandishments, the adolescent boy
would do better to practice a little sexual in-
discipline in female company. Irresponsible
youths were encouraged to produce children
out of wedlock, and unwed mothers were
elevated to hitherto undreamed-of heights.
Children—even “illegitimate” children—
were always welcome, provided they were
healthy and “Aryan.”
Von Schirach felt that he had cured the
Hitler Youth of the homosexual and pedo-
phile symptoms so often attributed to it.
How efﬁcient his methods were and how
well founded was his conﬁdence is difﬁcult
to estimate, as many cases of suspected or
proven homosexual and pedophilic relations
were secretly reported and these cases were
probably only the tip of an iceberg. Pedo-
philia and homosexuality among Hitler
Youth were ofﬁcially blamed on the old
youth-group past of many members and
leaders, when a homoerotic ideal had been
fostered. It is indicative that both von
Schirach for the HJ and Himmler for the
SS attached such importance to the dangers
of homosexual liaisons that inevitably arose
in all-male communities.
46 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 54 ---
Lebensborn
The obsession with increasing the birth-
rate in Germany resulted in the creation of
sinister, ofﬁcial Nazi eugenic institutions.
For the purpose of transforming the Ger-
man nation into a “super race” through se-
lective breeding, Himmler organized a pro-
gram called Lebensborn eingetragener Verein
(Fountain of Life Society) and took a per-
sonal interest in all minutiae, from condi-
tions for admission to nutrition. Created in
December 1935, the Lebensborn society was
directed by the SS Standartenführer(Colonel)
Dr. Gregor Ebner who was placed directly
under Himmler’s personal headquarter,
headed by Karl Wolff. The organizational
part was in the hands of the Rasse-und Sied-
lungshauptamt (RuSHA—the SS Race and
Settlement Main Ofﬁce). The society’s ob-
ject was the mating of vigorous males with
healthy females, with the aim of maximal
propagation of high quality “Aryan” chil-
dren. The Lebensborn stressed the duty of
German women to bear racially sound chil-
dren, and took care of wives and girlfriends
of police and SS members. Special nonproﬁt
maternity homes were established in order
to encourage a higher birthrate even for un-
married women. Homes were established at
Steinhöringen, Polzin, Klosterheide, Ho-
hehörst, and Vienna. Later more hospitals,
children’ homes and sanatoriums were
added from former Jewish properties. Dur-
ing the war, new establishments were cre-
ated at Bromberg, and in Holland and Bel-
gium. Fantastic rumors surrounded the
secret Lebensborn homes, supposed to be a
cross between SS brothels, maternities, and
stud farms. The truth was far simpler and
less lurid. In fact Lebensborn was a rather
bourgeois institution and the homes, far
from being brothels, were obstetrical clinics
founded in conformity with a conservative
sexual code, serving to keep up an appear-
ance of middle-class respectability, and care-
fully managed in accordance with an almost
monastic set of regulations, looking after
unwed mothers and their babies. Most un-
married girls using the homes belonged to
the Bund deutscher Mädel. The selected girls
(only forty out of a hundred applications
were considered) were taught that their duty
was to make children for the Third Reich,
and encouraged to be pregnant by racially
sound SS men who, married or not, were
relieved of any responsibility for the chil-
dren. Every SS ofﬁcer supported the pro-
gram with his dues, 5 to 8 percent of his
salary, and encouraged to be a member or a
“conception assistant.” Himmler encouraged
them to overcome their bourgeois qualms
about fathering children out of wedlock, as,
in his own words, “Lebensborn was the basis
for a new advance of the Germanic race .”
Genetically valuable mothers were compelled
to swear an oath of secrecy. After careful in-
vestigations of their “Aryan racial purity,”
they were supervised by selected matrons,
received wholesome meals and an allowance
of 400 marks, and could attend maternity
courses. Single women acquired a certiﬁcate
of racial suitability and later could legally
marry SS men. The homes had their own
facilities for registering births in a way
which satisﬁed legal requirements but pre-
cluded public scrutiny. The system was
however strongly eugenic and racist. Only
healthy and sound children were kept alive.
Children born with a physical or mental
handicap were killed in a “euthanasia” pro-
gram. Himmler must have been disappointed
with the total output of new beings from
Lebensborn. In 1938, two years after the pro-
gram ofﬁcially started, the homes accepted
only 653 mothers, 40 percent of the appli-
cants who had applied. In 1 945, after nine
operational years, the ofﬁcial ﬁgure for
Lebensborn births was recorded as 12,000, of
which half were “illegitimate,” some raised
by their own mothers, others adopted by se-
lected “racially sound” foster parents.
During World War II, the Lebensborn/
RuSHA program also included a guarantee
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 47


--- PAGE 55 ---
for the health and survival of German moth-
ers and babies living abroad. Of course, the
most stringent measures were taken against
abortion. Abortion among foreign women
was encouraged unless they were pregnant
by a German male. In occupied Europe, the
Lebensborn society and the RuSHA took an
even more sinister aspect: the wholesale kid-
napping and importation of Aryan-looking
foreign children. The sole purpose of this
inhumane and predatory scheme was to add
to the breeding stock of the Third Reich.
The selected children were given German
names, placed by the society with reliable,
racially trustworthy and suitable German
families, and they were raised in special Nazi
schools. The project never became fully op-
erational and the number of children in-
volved in this particularly heinous part of
the Lebensborn program has never been
clearly established. Estimations are difﬁcult
to make, as the traces were obliterated after
the abduction and renaming of the victims.
Probably some 340,000 children were kid-
napped from Russia, Poland, Yugoslavia,
France, Norway, Denmark, Holland and
other occupied European lands.
The SS Lebensborn program was only a
beginning. Hitler, Himmler, Reinhard Hey-
drich and Martin Bormann had many plans
for the future when the war would be over
and won. In 1943 they had prepared a proj-
ect for a fundamental reform of the marriage
laws, including the legalization of bigamy—
not universally though, but as a mark of dis-
tinction, rewarding war heroes. These priv-
ileged members of the “master race” would be
given farms in the conquered eastern territo-
ries, exempted from taxation, and allowed
two wives in order to produce more children.
Nazi People’s 
Welfare Organization
There was rival organization, placed
under the auspice of the Nazi Party: the
NSV . The Nationalsozialistische Volkswohl-
fahrt (NSV—the Nazi People’s Welfare Or-
ganization). Like the DAF (the German
Labor Front directed by Robert Ley), the
NSV was the “social arm” of the Nazi party.
The NSV was devoted to the welfare of
party members and their families, especially
mothers and juveniles. The NSV was founded
in September 1931 by a Nazi municipal
councilor, Erich Hilgenfeldt, in the district
of Wilmersdorf in Berlin. Originally its
function was modest. The NSV was de-
signed as an emergency aid group provid-
ing relief for party members during the de-
pression of 1 929–1932. Soon its activities
encompassed the whole city of Berlin, with
the support of Josef Goebbels and the pa-
tronage of Hitler. After the seizure of power
in January 1933, the NSV grew in inﬂuence
and stature, as Erich Hilgenfeldt received
Hitler’s mandate for all matters of charity
and the people’s welfare in May 1933. Hil-
genfeldt soon usurped the place of both pri-
vate and public welfare agencies, effectively
subordinating organizations like the Ger-
man Red Cross. The NSV became the sec-
ond largest party organization, with some
sixteen million members in 1942. The struc-
ture of the NSV was copied after the organ-
48 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Emblem NSV Nationalsozialistische V olks-
wohlfahrt (Nazi People’s Welfare Organization)


--- PAGE 56 ---
ization of the Nazi Party itself, and was di-
vided into Block(a various number of homes),
Zelle (an urban neighborhood or a village),
Ortsgruppe (a town or several villages form-
ing a district), Kreis(region) and Gau(prov-
ince). The NSV had several sub-agencies,
including the WHW (Winter Relief ), Tu-
berculosis Relief, Dental Relief, Mother and
Child Relief, and several others. The
Nazi welfare organization constituted
a large empire within Germany, dis-
posing of millions of Reichsmarks
raised by millions of “voluntary” dues-
paying members, state funds, collec-
tions and donations. “Voluntary” con-
tributions were docked from salaries
and wages, while failure to give spon-
taneously and generously was reported
to higher authorities and police. Like
the DAF, the NSV was corrupted but
it enjoyed a relatively high reputation
among the German population. There
were rumors of large-scale corruption,
with the claim “There goes the Win-
ter Relief!” accompanying the passage
of Nazi Party cars in the streets. Dur-
ing the war, the NSV’s ofﬁcial task
was to, feed, house and comfort Ger-
man civilians who were injured or who
had lost everything because of Allied
mass air raids. But there was more.
Apparently an innocuous organiza-
tion, the NSV—as with other branches
of the Nazi Party—had an inhumane
vocation: the implementation of Hit-
ler’s racial policy. In fact the NSV was
not solely or primarily a welfare and
charitable organization. It was de-
signed to strengthen the collective, bi-
ologically and politically—not to feed
the hungry, give water to the thirsty
or clothe the naked. Instead of merely
pursuing social policies and assisting
needy individuals, the NSV partici-
pated in political indoctrination, the
“puriﬁcation” and strengthening of the
body of the nation in accordance with
strict racial lines. The items of clothing and
money collected under the aegis of Winter
Relief were not made universally available
to the needy. From the start, Jews, Gypsies,
“asocial” persons, the “hereditary ill” and
other “enemies of the regime” were excluded
and disqualiﬁed from the beneﬁts of the or-
ganization. Racial objectives were also pur-
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 49
NSV auxiliary. The volunteer of the Nazi Women’s Or-
ganization wears a dark blue suit with jacket and skirt.
On the upper left sleeve of the jacket is displayed a sil-
ver-gray national emblem, and on the lower left sleeve
a dark-blue cuff band with silver-gray lettering indi-
cating the wearer’s district afﬁliation. On the lapel of
the jacket is worn an enamel organization badge of tri-
angular shape.


--- PAGE 57 ---
sued by the NSV’s Mother and Child Relief.
Only the “biologically valuable parts of the
German nation” received support. Women
who were allegedly “hereditarily ill and in-
ferior” or of an “asocial disposition” were
disbarred from postnatal care. Women, ba-
bies and young children were categorized
according to whether they were worthy of
help, hereditarily healthy, or of lesser value.
From 1935, the NSV became involved in the
ﬁeld of adoption with racial-political objec-
tives, and by 1937 a new sub-agency was
created, the NSV Reich Adoption Service,
providing for only “healthy and racially pure”
children. During the war, the NSV’s at-
tempts to appropriate the ﬁeld of adoption
led to conﬂicts with the SS’s Lebensborn
agency. Questions of respective competence,
in fact the institutionalizing of barbarism,
were settled in a spirit of compromise. In
the occupied Netherlands, for example, the
NSV was responsible for the care of chil-
dren born to German soldiers by Dutch
mothers. In occupied Norway, the SS Lebens-
born agency secured a monopoly on german-
izing mothers and children in their care.
Both the NSV and the Lebensborn were in-
volved in kidnapping of “Aryan” children in
occupied Europe. Orphans of “German
blood” were taken from homes or from their
foster-parents, or were simply abducted from
kindergarten, schools, or off the streets.
They were placed in NSV homes, given new
names and educated along Nazi lines in the
Hitler Jugend in military and racial fashion.
HJ Uniforms and Regalia
Regalia, in its strictest sense, means the
insignia of royalty—crown, orb, scepter and
other appurtenances of a sovereign. But like
many another word it has come to be used
where it ﬁts conveniently. It has been bor-
rowed by church, civic, military, political
and masonic groups to describe the uni-
forms and ornaments that make them recog-
nizable to outsiders and, within their own
fraternities, to display their degrees of au-
thority and achievement. Regalia and uni-
forms, the heraldy of war, have always been
an inducement to men to take up arms. They
make a distinction between civilian and mil-
itary, confer glamour on their wearers, dem-
onstrate national unity, and give a sense of
identity with country, common cause, and
comrades. They provide a link between the
purely functional need for immediate identi-
ﬁcation and the need of humans to dress
themselves for the occasion of war. Flam-
boyant, colorful uniforms typical of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were
adapted to the demands of twentieth-cen-
tury modern warfare. During World War I,
uniforms became drab and functional. For
concealment and camouﬂage, they were
khaki, green or brown in order to merge as
much as possible into smoky, bracken and
wooden backgrounds.
The Hitler Youth adopted many of the
outward trappings of the German youth
movements which had been absorbed, no-
tably their uniform and organizational struc-
ture. The HJ was a kind of juvenile broth-
erhood with sectarian rules and rituals. The
children had insignia, ﬂags, banners, badges
and a device: Blut und Ehre! (Blood and
Honor). The primary concern was not the
education of individual character, but train-
ing future members of the Nazi Party, the
army and the SS. Therefore the compulsory
uniform was stylized evidence of a National
Socialist uniformity of outlook transcending
all class barriers, and exempliﬁed the total-
itarian trend toward complete regimenta-
tion of all citizens—children and adolescents
included. Although it aroused a measure of
indulgent ridicule and anxiety abroad, the
pageantry of Nazi Germany was a decisive
element in pulling Germans together be-
hind Hitler in the early and mid– 1930s.
Nazi uniforms and regalia were de-
signed, manufactured, controlled and sold
by the Reichszeugmeisterei (RZM—central
50 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 58 ---
ordnance ofﬁce of the NSDAP). The Reichs-
zeugmeisterei, literally the National Mater-
ial Control Ofﬁce, can be thought of as a
government procurement ofﬁce. The Reichs-
zeugmeisterei was established at almost the
moment that Hitler took over the govern-
ment of Germany. By July 1934, the RZM
was in place with a director, staff and ofﬁces
in Munich at Tegernseer Landstrasse 2 10.
Ofﬁcially, it had the solitary purpose of se-
lecting suppliers and sellers of certain
NSDAP uniform-related products. The
RZM made certain that standardized mer-
chandise in sufﬁcient quantities could be re-
ceived from a variety of suppliers at stipu-
lated prices. It had exclusive legal authority
to design and control quality and costs of
uniforms, badges, medals and other regalia.
Since its mission was on behalf of the Nazi
Party (the RZM was a branch of the Trea-
sury Department) its jurisdiction included
material for use by both the Gliederungen
der NSDAP (Nazi party organizations) and
Angeschlossende Verbände (associated units).
Secondarily, the RZM was charged with
making sure that the production of all that
they ordered was carried out in “Aryan” man-
ufacturing plants, with materials of German
origin whenever possible. Producers author-
ized by the RZM were not allowed to em-
ploy “non–Aryan” workers, and had to give
preference to Nazi Party members when
promoting workers and dealers. The basic
products under RZM control were wearing
apparel (shirts, trousers, tunics, overcoats,
and caps), and other accessories, such as belts,
buckles, belt straps, ﬂags, crash helmets, dag-
gers, knives, standards, buttons, insignia, arm
bands, car pennants, neckties, drum eagles
and meeting badges. Each ﬁrm authorized to
produce or sell RZM material was issued an
RZM registration number and it was re-
quired that the number appear on all ﬁnished
products they made or sold. The RGBI I-
1269 law promulgated on 20 December 1934
punished by imprisonment or forced labor
the illegal manufacture, wearing of Nazi uni-
forms and bearing of regalia. The ofﬁcial
RZM shops for retailing Nazi Party badges
and equipment were shown by a white metal
sign with the inevitable swastika/eagle em-
blem and the words, “Zum Verkauf parteiamt-
licher Gegenstände zugelassen NSDAP Reichs-
zeugmeisterei ” (sale of ofﬁcial party items
authorized by the National Quartermaster
Department of the German National-So-
cialist Workers’ Party). The RGBI I-844 law
from 26 June 1 935 punished by imprison-
ment any person who insulted, despised, or
mocked Nazi regalia, uniforms and ﬂags.
The RZM system applied to Nazi Party
equipment and insignia only. The control
did not extend to non-party organizations,
like the Heer (army), Kriegsmarine (navy)
and Luftwaffe (air force).
Boys’ uniforms
The wearing of a uniform was intended
to erase social differences. It was also in-
tended to give a strong and united image of
youth. Far from being evidence of a new so-
cial order, however, the uniform merely ex-
empliﬁed the totalitarian trend toward com-
plete regimentation of all German citizens,
children and adolescents included. Uni-
forms of all branches of the HJ were rather
expensive and often a ﬁnancial burden for
large families. Parents of slender means had
no choice but to obey the ofﬁcial call for
uniforms “transcending all class barriers.”
The early HJ uniform was civilian
dress, including ski caps, leather shorts and
various shirts and tunics—in the country-
side, sometimes in traditional folkloric fash-
ion. The brown SA shirt (worn with black
shorts) was authorized for the young Nazis
as early as 1 926, which caused some mem-
bers to be killed because they were mistaken
for SA activists. This prompted the design
of a unique, practical and durable HJ uni-
form. In 1933, several standardized HJ uni-
forms were offered for sale through strictly
licensed Nazi RZM “brown shops.”
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 51


--- PAGE 59 ---
52 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Hitler Jugend’s early dress
 Hitler Jugend Scharführer


--- PAGE 60 ---
HJ Rottenführer (left) and HJ Stammführer (right)


--- PAGE 61 ---
54 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Hitler Jugend Stabsführer
HJ Gebietsführer in winter-duty overcoat


--- PAGE 62 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 55
Pimpf, Deutsches Jungvolk (junior Hitler Ju-
gend) HJ dark-blue winter uniform


--- PAGE 63 ---
56 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
HJ winter blouse
HJ belt buckle


--- PAGE 64 ---
Junior HJ members wore a uniform
composed of a khaki forage cap, a khaki
shirt, a black neckerchief (held in place by a
brown leather toggle), a four-pocketed tunic,
an armband with swastika, black corduroy
shorts, a waist belt, a shoulder belt, white
or gray stockings and Bundschuhe (heavy
marching shoes). In 1934, a dark-blue ski
suit was introduced as a winter uniform.
This included a black ski cap with the HJ
diamond badge at the front and a dark-blue,
two-pocketed, pullover blouse. The latter
had shoulder straps piped red for the general
HJ branch, with Bann (regiment) number.
On the left upper sleeve there was a black
triangular badge indicating the Obergebiet
(corps district) and the Gebiet (divisional
district). Under the badge on the left sleeve
there was the HJ red-and-white armband
with black swastika. The short, dark-blue
winter jacket existed also in a double-breasted
variant with large collar and two front pock-
ets. There was a black leather waist belt with
buckle, and an HJ knife in a sheath. Long
trousers were tucked into white socks, and
heavy marching shoes were worn. Hair was
always short in a military cut.
Adult leaders wore a single-breasted,
four-pocket khaki tunic with black trousers
and a peaked cap with the political eagle
above the HJ diamond-shaped swastika in-
signia. They also wore the black “region” tri-
angle on their left sleeves, and black shoul-
der straps indicated the rank. The waist belt
worn by leaders and troops was decorated
by a buckle displaying an eagle holding in its
claws the triangular HJ swastika and the
motto Blut und Ehre!
Girls’ uniforms
Members of the League of German
Girls were at ﬁrst issued a simple brown cos-
tume. Hitler—who wished the girls to look
pretty and attractive—found the uniforms
“old sacks” and ordered them to be rede-
signed. In 1936 a group of Berlin designers
created a stylish new costume. In summer,
the girls of the BdM wore a white (often
short-sleeved) blouse, a black scarf or a black
neckerchief with an interwoven leather slip-
knot, and a light-brown short-waisted jacket,
or a white poplin blouse with long sleeves,
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 57
HJ forage cap
HJ cap


--- PAGE 65 ---
58 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
BdM uniform 
(and four-pocketed warm tunic)


--- PAGE 66 ---
four-button-front fastening, and two breast
pockets. A general feature was a navy-blue
or black pleated skirt with belt loops around
the waist, and two internal front pockets.
Black or white ankle socks, and various foot-
wear including marching and civilian shoes
were worn. In addition, for cold weather,
there was a warm four-pocket, single-breasted
climbing jacket; this had ﬁve front buttons,
and was made in light-brown imitation-
suede material. The Hitler Youth patch was
worn on the upper left sleeve. Below this
patch was worn the red-white diamond-
shaped Hitler Youth insignia with swastika
in the center.
The uniform for the permanent senior
BdM leaders included a dark-blue, single-
breasted tunic with pockets, a matching dark-
blue skirt, a white blouse and high-heeled
shoes. A shield-shaped cloth patch with
embroidered eagle, swastika and unit num-
ber was worn on the left breast. Rank was in-
dicated by silver and gold-colored cord edg-
ing and badges embroidered in matching
wire, as follows:
• Gruppenführerin : no patch edging
• Ringfühererin: narrow, silver-cord edging
• Untergauführerin : double-narrow edging
• Gauführerin: one thick and one narrow
edging
• Obergauführerin: double-narrow gold
edging
• Reichsführerin : gold oak-leaf border.
Insignia
Sleeve triangles were worn by all mem-
bers of the Hitler Youth on the upper left
arm. HJ and DJ members had black cloth
triangles with lettering and edging machine-
woven in bright yellow or white-silver thread.
Girls of the BdM wore black cloth triangles
with their lettering and edging machine
woven in white thread. The lettering was
usually in two lines. The upper line showed
the wearer’s Obergebiet(region) and the lower
line showed the individual Gebiet (district).
HJ or BdM units that had been in existence
before 1933, known as “Tradition Units,”
had a gold braided bar (HJ) or silver bar
(BdM) sewn along the bottom of the trian-
gle.
The racial doctrine of the Nazis held
that Auslandsdeutsche (Germans in foreign
lands) retained their afﬁliation with the
homeland. There were also foreign Nazi
parties such as the German-American Bund
founded in the United States in 1 935 by
Fritz Kuhm. There were several special
agencies of the Nazi Party responsible for
spreading Nazism abroad and to make con-
tact with and supervise Germans in foreign
lands. Children of Auslandsdeutsche and for-
eign German Nazis were encouraged to be-
long to the Hitler Youth and—where per-
mitted—wore their uniforms to ofﬁcial
functions or on their return to Germany.
They were distinguished by foreign trian-
gular badges bearing the name of their land
of origin (e.g., the United States, Kap-Stadt,
and China).
Members of the HJ and BdM who vol-
untarily served a year working on the land
wore a green triangle. The lower left sleeve
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 59
BdM-HJ variant dark-blue winter blouse


--- PAGE 67 ---
60 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Hitler Jugend sleeve badge. The HJ diamond
was also worn on headgear.
Opposite: Kern-HJ shoulder straps. The ranks, from the lowest to highest: 1. Hitlerjunge, 2. Rot-
tenführer, 3. Oberrottenführer, 4. Kameradschaftsführer , 5. Oberkameradschaftsführer , 
6. Scharführer , 7. Oberscharführer, 8. Gefolgschaftsführer , 9. Obergefolgschaftsführer , 
10. Hauptgefolgschaftsführer , 11. Stammführer, 12. Oberstammführer, 13. Bannführer, 
14. Oberbannführer, 15. Hauptbannführer, 16. Gebietsführer, 17. Obergebietsführer, 
18. Stabführer. From 1 to 15 stripes, stars and oak leaves were silver. From 16 to 1 8, they were
gilded.
Hitler Jugend armband. The swastika was
black in a white square. The middle stripe
was white and both edge stripes were red.


--- PAGE 68 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 61


--- PAGE 69 ---
could also carry badges indicating skills that
the young wearer might have acquired. The
Armelbinde (armband) was worn by all HJ
boys and leaders on the upper left arm. It
consisted of a black swastika in a white
square; the middle stripe was white and the
edges were red. A sew-on patch was worn by
members of the DJ instead of the arm band.
The color denoted the Oberbann (region) to
which the wearer belonged. Members of DJ
wore a single shoulder strap on their right
shoulder, without piping. Their unit num-
ber was shown lengthwise as opposed to
HJ’s across. Members of the BdM did not
wear shoulder straps as part of their uni-
form. Schulterklappen (shoulder straps) were
very complicated before 1938. The system
was simpliﬁed from 1938 to 1 945. All HJ
shoulder straps were black (navy-blue for
Marine-HJ). The colored piping represented
the Oberbann and the number indicated the
wearer’s Gefolgschaft (unit). Rank was indi-
cated on the shoulder strap by means of a
series of pips, stripes, squares and oak leaves.
The girls did not wear armbands. In-
stead they wore a Hitler Youth diamond
patch sewn to their left sleeve under the tri-
angle badge. BdM sew-on badges indicating
rank were worn on the left breast of the
tunic. Cuff titles were not worn by the HJ.
There were, however, three exceptions. The
Landdienst der Hitler Jugend(agriculture ser-
vice) insignia was worn by members who
volunteered to work on the land for a year.
The cuff title HJ Streifendienst was worn by
members of the Hitler Youth Patrol Service.
A cuff band with the inscription Kinderland-
verschickung (KLV) was worn by girls in-
volved in the wartime evacuation of children.
Flags and banners
All units of the Hitler Youth had ﬂags,
banners and pennants. Nazi ﬂags played an
important role. At the same time dramatic
and menacing, waving in the wind, proudly
paraded by standard bearers in the streets,
draped about buildings, they added a touch
of color to the austere parades and rallies,
and their numbers were often impressive.
They were regarded as holy. It was on their
unit’s ﬂag that HJ boys and girls swore an
oath of allegiance. When left unattended,
ﬂags and banners had to be stood erect, and
on no account was the cloth to touch the
ground, as this was symbol of defeat. It was
also forbidden to lean them against a tree, a
building or the like, as this was a sign of
neglect.
The ﬂag of the Hitler Youth Organiza-
tion proper (Hitler Jugend Organisations-
fahne) was a red-white-red striped ﬂag (the
white stripe being slightly narrower). In the
center there was a white square standing on
its point, with a black swastika. The width-
length ratio was 29:50.
The ﬂag of a company-size
unit of the (main) Hitler Youth
(Gefolgschaftsfahne ) was the same
design, with a white square in the
upper left, with the numerals of
the company and battalion. The
Hitler Youth regimental ﬂag
(Bannfahne) was a red-white-red
striped ﬂag (as described above).
In the center there was a black
Prussian-type regimental eagle
(the type of eagle used on Prus-
sian regimental ﬂags since the
eighteenth century) with a white
62 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
HJ sleeve badge of the Obergau South Swabia


--- PAGE 70 ---
sword and hammer in its claws. Above the
head there was a white scroll with the regi-
mental letter. The width-length ratio was
29:50. The “Trumpet” ﬂag of the Hitler
Youth (Fanfarentuch) was the same design
but the white stripe was placed vertically.
The Deutsche Jungvolk, the organiza-
tion for boys between 10 and 14, had its own
ﬂags. The ﬂag of the German Youth Orga-
nization (Deutsche Jungvolk Organisations-
fahne) was a black ﬂag with a white sieg rune
(the runic letter S). Its width-length ratio
was 4:5 or 1 0:11. It was in use until 1 934.
The “Trumpet” ﬂag of the German Youth
(Fanfarentuch der deutsche Jungvolk) was the
same ﬂag but square. The ﬂag of a company-
size unit of the German Youth (Deutsche Ju-
gend Fahnleinfahne) was the same, with a
white square placed in the upper left side
indicating the number of company. The
German Youth Regimental Flag ( Deutsche
Jungvolk Jungbannfahne) was different in de-
sign. Instead of a rune sign the ﬂag featured
a white eagle decorated with a black swastika,
holding a white hammer and a sword in its
claws on a black ﬁeld. Its width-length ratio
was 8:11. It was in use from 1934 onward.
The ﬂags of the Bund deutscher Mädel
included the following. The pennant for a
district of the German Girls League ( Bund
deutscher Mädel Untergauwimpel) was a red-
white-red striped pennant with a black
spread-wing eagle (a little like the one on
old Prussian ﬂags) with white swastika on
its breast. Above the head in black was the
unit number. The width-length ratio was
2:3. The pennant for a group of League of
German Girls (Bund deutscher Mädel Grup-
penwimpel ) had a black swastika in a black
square and indication of the company num-
ber in the upper left.
The Jungmädel, the organization for
girls between 1 0 and 1 4, had several ﬂags,
too. The pennant for a district of the Young
Girls ( Jungmädel-Untergauwimpel ) was a
black triangle with an eagle carrying a swas-
tika, surmounted by the number of the dis-
trict. The ﬂag of a group of young girls
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 63
Hitler Jugend Organisationsfahne (Hitler Youth Organization ﬂag )


--- PAGE 71 ---
64 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Hitler Jugend Bannfahne (regimental ﬂag )
Bannfahne des deutschen Jungvolks (DJ regimental ﬂag )


--- PAGE 72 ---
Flag of a group of 1 60 HJ boys between ages 10 and 14 
( Deutsche Jungvolk in der Hitler Jugend )
Bund deutscher Mädel Gruppenwimpel (BdM group ﬂag )


--- PAGE 73 ---
66 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Jungmädel-Gruppenwimpel (JM group ﬂag )
Jungmädel-Untergauwimpel (JM district ﬂag )


--- PAGE 74 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 67
BdM girl with Gruppenwimpel (squad ﬂag )


--- PAGE 75 ---
(Jungmadel-Gruppenwimpel) included a swas-
tika and two diamonds and gr oup number
indicated by digits placed on the upper left
of the ﬂag.
Medals
Special medals were created for the
Hitler Jugend. Some were intended to com-
memorate rallies, party meetings, holiday
trips and other Nazi events; they were sold
to those who participated. These commem-
orative medals were an obligatory purchase
which made a source of income for the Nazi
treasury, and had the effect of making the
event seem important and bonding the par-
ticipants into a united front. Other medals
were personally awarded for years of mem-
bership, special individual achievements and
great deeds in sport, training, or skill spe-
cialization, as well as tests of knowledge of
Nazi arcana, such as the Hitler Jugend
Ehrenabzeichen (Hitler Youth Badge of
Honor) or the Proﬁciency Award. There were
also badges for riding and handling horses
and horse-drawn vehicles, for both adults
and young people. The HJ also instituted
shooting awards like the Schiessauszeichnung
(HJ shooting medal) which came in the
three classes: marksman, sharpshooter and
expert sniper. Girls of the JM and BdM had
discreet honor badges and brooches. For the
party faithful there were even clips, rings,
and necklaces, with black, white, and red
68 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Junior Hitler Youth proﬁciency award for boys
age 10 to 14
Hitler Jugend proﬁciency award (age 15–18)
“Für Leistung in der Hitler Jugend ” (for
achievement in the Hitler Youth)


--- PAGE 76 ---
the usual colors and swastikas the dominant
theme. Medals and awards for both boys
and girls were worn with pride, sewn on
breast pockets.
Knives
Knives, daggers and cleavers were an
important part of the Nazi regalia. Intro-
duced in December 1 933, a sixteenth-cen-
tury, “Holbein,” Swiss-styled Dolch (dag-
ger) was suspended by a chain to the waist
belts of high NSDAP functionaries, and SA
and SS senior ofﬁcers. Other Nazi agencies
and organizations were quick to follow, and
before long uniform-conscious civil servants
were clamoring for daggers of their own.
Hitler, keenly interested in regalia and eager
to support the world-renowned German
blade makers’ cartel in Solingen, approved
many of the designs himself. The designs
were created by students and masters at state
trade schools. Once a pattern had been se-
lected, it was submitted to the Reichszeug-
meisterei (RZM) for ﬁnal approval. Only
then could organization members purchase
and display their new sidearms. There was
a profusion of gleaming blades. The late-
medieval-styled SS dagger had a black
wooden grip, bearing various decorations,
such as SS runes, standard eagle and swas-
tika, and motto (“My honor is loyalty”) etched
into the blade. The Reich Labor Service’s
sidearm was a hewing knife carrying the slo-
gan “Arbeit Adelt” (“work ennobles”). That
of the Hitler Jugend was a Fahrtenmesser
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 69
Hitler Jugend knife with leather scabbard. The blade carries
the words “Blood and Honor!”
Dagger HJ leadership


--- PAGE 77 ---
(traveling knife) with the device of the or-
ganization carved into the blade: Blut und
Ehre! (Blood and Honor). The HJ knife was
carried in a metal sheath worn from the
waist belt.
Hitler Jugend knives were awarded to
qualiﬁed members who had participated in
war games, sport, or a day-and-a-half-long
march, who had achieved a set of minimum
standards on the playing ﬁeld, and passed
tests of knowledge of Nazi arcana, including
the words of the anthem, the “Horst Wes-
sel Song.” The Hitler Youth knife was an
important part of the uniform and being al-
lowed to carry it was a serious and presti-
gious matter in a boy’s life in the Third
Reich. The sidearm was purchased but not
considered personal property, so when a
holder was expelled or had to leave for any
reason, the knife had to be handed back. Of
all the edged weapons produced during the
Nazi regime, the HJ knife was the most pro-
liﬁc. Between 1934 and 1945, over 20,000,000
were manufactured and well after the end
of the war the makers continued production
with the Boy Scout trefoil substituted for
the Nazi decoration.
For daily use, the HJ also issued pocket
knives (with hinged blades) decorated with
the inevitable eagle/swastika design and a
portrait of Adolf Hitler.
The German salute
All members of the HJ—as all mem-
bers of the other NSDAP organizations—
were taught to revere the Führer and greeted
each other with the Deutscher Gruss (Ger-
man salute). This was an adaptation of the
ancient Roman salute and similar to Mus-
solini’s Fascist salute. One stood at atten-
tion, left hand on the belt buckle, then the
right arm was raised a little higher than the
shoulder and one said enthusiastically, with
clear and loud voice, “Heil Hitler! ” with
clicking heels. The salute expressed both a
respectful and virile greeting, and wishing
health and long life to Hitler. But, with the
rigidly upraised arm it was more an aggres-
sive gesture than a peaceful one. For the
happy few who might meet Hitler person-
ally, the salute was the same, but one said
“Heil, mein Führer!” (Hail, my leader!). It is
said that the salute was ﬁrst used in Decem-
ber 1924 when Hitler was released from
prison. It became common practice after
1925. After the Nazis came to power in 1933,
the Hitler greeting was intended to replace
the common and friendly “Gutentag” (good
day) and the more religious “Gruss Gott”
(God bless you). It was compulsory in all
parades, meetings, and ofﬁcial and public
events, and strongly advised in daily life, in-
cluding at schools, ofﬁces, and so on. Every-
one was expected to use the Hitler greeting
throughout the day. It was an obligation for
all citizens on every possible occasion, and
Germany became a vast camp of Hitler
saluters. Boys and girls of the HJ were en-
couraged to denounce everyone—even their
own parents—for failure to use it or for re-
ducing the salute to an inﬁnitesimal move-
ment of the arm accompanied by an inar-
ticulate mumble.
Members of the Nazi Party addressed
each other as Kamerad(comrade). The phrase
“Sieg Heil! ” (To Victory!) became not only
the greeting and farewell of the Nazi Party
followers but a chant to be reiterated end-
lessly on all public occasions. These melo-
dramatic trappings helped to make and se-
cure the lifeline that held Hitler to his
public.
Training and Activities
The Hitler Jugend built upon many
practices of the youth organizations of the
Weimar and pre–World War I periods. It
offered a wide range of leisure activities and,
at lower levels (which in the everyday run-
ning of things were the most important) was
70 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 78 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 71
The Hitler salute


--- PAGE 79 ---
led not infrequently by people who had
talent and previous experience in other, older,
defunct youth organizations. In the German
provinces, the arrival of the Hitler Youth
after 1933 often meant the ﬁrst access to
leisure activities, the impetus to build a youth
club, a swimming pool, a sport ﬁeld, or the
opportunity to go on weekend or holiday
trips away from one’s narrow home environ-
ment. For many young people, the HJ made
life meaningful and exciting, developed com-
radeship and self-consciousness, and gave
the illusion of equality, the feeling of be-
longing to the racially pure Volksgemeinschaft,
the great, elite, classless German commu-
nity. The organization had something for
everyone: arts, crafts, sports, model planes,
journalism, singing, music, traveling, and
more. The romantic façade of tents and
open-air cooking, ﬁeld sports and campﬁres,
snappy uniforms, impressive parades, and
solemn vows of loyalty to the Führer were
heady stuff for young people. All politics
aside, for a large part of the German popu-
lation the image of Nazism was charac-
terized not by terror, mass murder, racist
persecution and war but by reduction of un-
employment, economic boom, guaranteed
pay, attractive leisure activities organized by
the KdF (Nazi free-time organization), tran-
quility and order. The period from 1933 to
1939 was for many Germans a good time.
Every year a new theme was developed at
the national level for the Hitler Youth. And
so 1934 was the “Year of Training,” 1935 the
“Year of Apprenticeship,” 1936 the “Year of
the Junior HJ,” 1937 the “Year of National
Restoration,” 1938 the “Year of National
Reconciliation,” 1939 the “Year of Hygienic
Duty,” 1940 the “Year of Ordeal of Capac-
ity,” 1941 “Living for the Führer,” 1 942 the
“Year of Colonization and Rural Service,”
1943 the “Year of War and Involvement of
the Youth,” and 1944 the “Year of the Vol-
unteers.” In all HJ activities lay also a strong
competitive element intended to activate ri-
valry, instill a “winning spirit,” and develop
strength and courage. The principles of lead-
ership and the emphasis on physical force
in many cases helped to establish the dom-
ination not necessarily of the best but that of
the strongest.
Sport
Sport reﬂected the Nazi value of ﬁt-
ness, health, and domination of the strong-
est. Sport and training were intended to cre-
ate a race of splendid, disciplined, strong
animals. The ideal was to eradicate the tra-
ditional German Bierbauch (beer belly), pipe
smoking, the eating of greasy sausages and
drinking beer without moderation. The em-
phasis was thus on virile outdoor activities,
sports, competition and physical training.
HJ candidates had to satisfy certain mini-
mum requirements in the sphere of athlet-
ics, including running 60 meters in 1 2 sec-
onds, long jumping 2.75 meters, swimming
300 meters in less than 1 0 minutes, throw-
ing the softball 25 meters, and taking part in
a 36-hour hike. HJ members practiced gym-
nastics, collective sports, sailing, diving, and
swimming, but also such dangerous Mut-
probe (tests of courage) as diving into a river
from a bridge or leaping over a bonﬁre. Box-
ing was also introduced and practiced in
order to develop aggression and overcome
the fear of being hurt. In Hitler’s own words,
boxing was a sport which developed the
“spirit of aggression,” required “lightning
decisions,” and trained the body in “steely
dexterity.” Boxing became the favorite sport
of the Third Reich. When Max Schmeling
defeated Joe Louis in New York in 1936, he
was greeted by Hitler himself. He became a
national hero overnight, and became a cen-
tral ﬁgure in racialist Nazi propaganda
claiming the superiority of the white Nordic
race over black athletes. In the return bout
in 1938 for the heavyweight championship,
Joe Louis’s determination to win was clear.
Schmeling went down in the ﬁrst round and
he was counted out two minute and four
72 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 80 ---
seconds after the start of the ﬁght. In Ger-
many his defeat was felt as a national disas-
ter and a personal snub for Hitler. During
World War II Schmeling enlisted in the
German paratrooper corps and fought on
the island of Crete.
Skiing instruction and mountain climb-
ing were also very popular and part of the
training given by various organizations, no-
tably the SA Gebirgsjäger (Storm-trooper
mountain units) drawn from professional
German and Austrian alpinists, hunters,
foresters and skiers. The Nazis were quick to
realize that diving, ﬂying and gliding, driv-
ing, skiing and other exciting activities were
skills of the future, and they sponsored and
promoted them both to enhance the image
of a modern nation and to attract youth.
Sports events were organized everywhere in
Germany, and these were more manifesta-
tions of strength, power and collective con-
sciousness than skilled performances.
The Olympic Games of 1936 were held
in Berlin in August. Staged according to
Goebbels’ propaganda, the harsh persecu-
tion against the Catholic Church and the
Jewish community was temporarily silenced,
and the Games gave a large number of for-
eign athletes, reporters and visitors the
façade of a modern, peaceful and dynamic
German nation.
One amazing feature of Nazi Germany
was how far short of athletic “Aryan” per-
fection most of its leaders fell. The men who
claimed a providential destiny as saviors of
the Aryan race, and who caused the horri-
ble deaths of millions of innocent victims
for their “racial inferiority” did not all have
the appearance of the ideal, heroic, fair-
haired, blue-eyed, athletic, tall Germanic
Übermensch. Hitler’s own ancestry was quite
unclear. His presumed grandfather seemed
to have been a wanderer, and his name was
possibly of Czech origin. His stature was
relatively short, his hair was dark, and his
physical appearance was more Slavic than
Germanic. He never practiced sports or even
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 73
Hitler Jugend sport kit. The HJ sport kit was
the same for boys and girls. It consisted of a white
singlet bearing the HJ emblem, brown or black
shorts, and black light-weight shoes, usually
worn without socks.


--- PAGE 81 ---
physical exercise; he was lazy and moody,
shy and awkward, distrustful and contemp-
tuous, and there was something essentially
ridiculous about him, as Charlie Chaplin
brilliantly captured in his ﬁlm, The Great
Dictator in 1940. Hermann Göring, num-
ber two in the Nazi hierarchy after Hitler,
had been a handsome man and a glamorous
pilot in World War I, but later became a fat
man addicted to drugs and luxury. Reichs-
führer SS Heinrich Himmler was a dull,
short-sighted bureaucrat with a bullet head
and poor health. Propaganda Minister Josef
Goebbels was short, thin, dark-haired and
physically disabled, with a club foot which
left him with a pronounced limp and an in-
feriority complex. SA Chief Ernst Röhm
was an ugly, short, fat homosexual. Hitler’s
deputy, Martin Bormann, was a short fat
man with limited intelligence. The chief of
the Labor Front, Robert Ley, was a fat
drunkard with a psychologically labile and
socially insecure personality. The extrava-
gant Rudolf Hess (Hitler’s deputy before his
mysterious ﬂight to England) was so mad
that even his fellow Nazi leaders noticed.
The ruthless Gauleiter Julius Streicher (pub-
lisher of the Nazi newspaper Der Sturmer)
was mentally deranged and a pornographer,
but apparently that was not a handicap in
the Nazi movement. Had the times not
been so unstable in Germany, these men
would have remained a bunch of emotion-
ally crippled misﬁts, impotently acting out
their delusions on the fringe of politics.
Hiking
Sports and physical training reﬂected
the Nazi emphasis on ﬁtness. German youths
also had to be capable of marching long dis-
tances. Hiking was intended to harden the
youths, it was a preparation for a war in
which infantry legwork would be decisive.
Hiking in the HJ was not an afternoon of
pleasure in loose groups of friends strolling
about and having fun, it was marching in
disciplined, military-like columns in close
ranks. And hiking was more than physical
training. It was intended to create a feeling
of togetherness and to enhance the image
of a new nation marching as one toward its
glorious future. It was regarded as a national
duty, as a mystical exercise to discover and
love Germany, and as a mental preparation
to defend her and—if need be—to die for
the nation. It was rhythmic, with songs, ﬁfes
and drums, and ﬂag waving ahead in the
wind. In all weather, throughout the years,
large columns of HJ/DJ boys and JM/BdM
girls roamed everywhere in the land. March-
ing was not aimless though. The young peo-
ple went on excursions, camping and hik-
ing trips, and to “holiday” camps which
were actually Wehrertüchtigungslagern (mil-
itary training camps). These camps were de-
signed, built and administered by the youths
themselves. Always located amid pleasant
countryside scenery, they could accommo-
date hundreds of youths. They invariably
included a gatehouse with sentries, ofﬁces,
rows of tents (or wooden dormitory huts),
and barracks for the leaders, all placed in an
orderly fashion along alleys leading to a cen-
tral meeting square, site of the inevitable na-
tional and HJ ﬂags. In addition each camp
included athletic ﬁelds, training and march-
ing grounds, and sometimes even a swim-
ming pool. Of course these included collec-
tive facilities: kitchen, supply stores, refectory,
showers and toilets. All this was maintained,
tidied, and cleaned by the members them-
selves. Martial music was played from loud-
speakers. Flowers, nicely mowed lawns,
bushes and trees were planted inside the
camp to make the environment a little eas-
ier on the eyes. The whole design radiated
a sense of order, cleanliness and military
strictness, which was intended to impress
the youth. With everyone eating the same
food, doing the same activities, and endur-
ing the same disciplined hardship, life at the
camps was also intended to reduce the sense
of social class, and to develop equality, com-
74 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 82 ---
radeship and team spirit. The activities at
the camp were dedicated not to fun, relax-
ation and leisure, however, but to instruc-
tion, indoctrination and training. One did
not idle away one’s time. A typical day in
the camp looked like this:
6:45 a.m.—Reveille
7:00 a.m.—Hoisting the colors
7:00–8:30 a.m.—Ideological and political
instruction
8:30–9:00 a.m.—Breakfast
9:00–9:30 a.m.—Sports
9:30–10:30 a.m.—Medical and hygiene
training
10:30–11:45 a.m.—Camp administration
(cleaning, tiding up, etc.)
Noon–2:00 p.m.—Lunch, followed by a
rest period
2:00–3:30 p.m.—Assembly activities
3:30–5:30 p.m.—Field work, marching or
hiking
5:30–6:30 p.m.—Free time
6:30 p.m.—Evening parade and lowering
the colors
7:00 p.m.—Supper
7:30–9:00 p.m.—Campﬁre with songs
9:30 p.m.—Lights out
Under close supervision, the youth were
shown the great achievements of the Aryan
culture and those of the Nazi regime. They
were taken to what the state considered his-
torical places. Members of the HJ visited
weapons factories, for example, and were
taken on to a “pilgrimage” to such Nazi holy
places as the village where Hitler was born
(Braunau, Austria) on 20 April 1889 and the
prison at Landsberg where he was imprisoned
after the failed putsch of November 1923.
Another Nazi shrine was the Feldherrnhalle
(Hall of Heroes), the building in Munich
in front of which the bloody confrontation
between the Nazis and Bavarian police took
place on 9 November 1923. After the Nazis
came to power, the Feldherrnhalle embod-
ied a shrine to the sixteen fallen Nazi mar-
tyrs who were killed during the failed putsch.
After 1935, Hitler Jugend members
were submitted to the so-called Adolf-Hitler-
Marsch: during a week, all HJ units had to
march in disciplined and uniformed ranks
to Nuremberg to participate in the Reichs-
parteitag (Reich Party Day) held in Septem-
ber.
To shelter hikers and marchers a net-
work of Jugendherbergen (youth hostels) was
developed in 1933. Youth hostels had long
existed in Germany, but they were now
ofﬁcially taken over by the Nazi state. At
rest camps and youth hostels hiking mem-
bers of the HJ could rest in exchange for a
modest payment. By 1934 some ﬁve million
youngsters had taken advantage of the Ju-
gendherbergen.
Hiking and outdoor activities, love of
the German countryside, and a distaste for
the ugliness of industrialization, inherited
from the Wandervogel, built a strong “green”
feeling in the Hitler Jugend.
Rallies and celebrations
The members of the Hitler Jugend at-
tended public demonstrations in uniform,
they organized and participated in Nazi Party
meetings, mass rallies, torchlight marches,
presentations, festivals, parades, reviews,
games, exhibitions, commemorations, pagan
rites (such as the consecration of ﬂags),
speeches and celebrations, all with a theatri-
cal and festive air. These spectacular cere-
monies—using every art, subterfuge and con-
trivance for mass persuasion—adapted the
techniques of soap opera, drama and cinema.
Their purpose was to keep the faithful in
close and constant touch with the activities
of the regime and to normalize the vicious
message of National Socialism. They were
displays of ruthless intimidation, of threat-
ening force, and one of the more evil man-
ifestations of megalomania known to his-
tory. They necessitated a huge organization
and strict discipline for the marshaling, equip-
ping, feeding and then dispersal—in the
case of the annual Nuremberg rallies—of
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 75


--- PAGE 83 ---
hundreds of thousands of men, women and
children. They were astounding spectacles
intended to impress both participants and
spectators and to sanctify the new regime.
They were expected to serve as substitutes
for traditional religious high holy days.
January 24, the day commemorating
the murder of the HJ “hero” Herbert Nor-
kus, included a slow torchlight parade with
solemn songs.
January 30 was the anniversary of the
Machtergreifung (seizure of power) when
Hitler had assumed the chancellorship in
1933. On that day each year the German
nation was presented with a lengthy account
of what Hitler had taken over and what he
had done with the power entrusted to him.
The day ended with a public ceremony,
broadcast by radio from every street corner
in the land, and torchlight processions.
Eighteen-year-old members of the HJ who
had proved their qualities were sworn in as
full members of the Nazi Party.
February 24 was the “annunciation
day” on which the National Socialist Party
had been founded and its twenty-ﬁve-point
program published in 1920. Year after year
until 1943, Hitler liked to look back on the
beginning of his career. The Führer pre-
sented himself as the “truest executor of the
NSDAP’s sacred heritage,” recalled the
movement’s modest start and the great op-
position it had overcome, and emphasized
its achievements and successes which guar-
anteed Germany’s victorious future.
March 16 was the National Day of
Mourning, or Heroes’ Remembrance Day,
for the victims of World War I and Nazi
martyrs. This was celebrated in the Kroll
Opera House with a performance of the sec-
ond movement of Beethoven’s Third Sym-
phony, a solemn “cultural” occasion attended
by all foreign diplomats before World War
II.
April 20 was Hitler’s birthday ( 1889),
celebrated with extravagant rituals. On that
day delegations from all over the country
brought presents, including pieces of art;
these were passed on to the museum of Linz
which Hitler hoped to turn into the great-
est art gallery in Europe after the war. Rep-
resentatives of the youth organizations
solemnly pledged their allegiance to the
Führer. April 20 was a signiﬁcant day for
boys aged 1 4 as they ofﬁcially entered the
HJ proper. The day culminated in a parade
of the Wehrmacht (armed forces) through 
the Brandenburger Tor at Berlin before
Hitler in his capacity of army supreme com-
mander.
May 1 was National Labor Day—taken
over from the socialist tradition—with pop-
ular feasts emphasizing the Nazi Party’s sol-
idarity with the workers (its “socialist” com-
ponent) and Hitler’s role in the creation of
the welfare state.
The second Sunday in May was Moth-
ering Day (originally invented by the ﬂower
trade to boost its turnover), during which
proliﬁc mothers were rewarded with medals,
and young girls reminded of their duty to-
ward the regime: to make children.
Strenuous efforts were made to intro-
duce a romantic pagan feast on June 21 (sum-
mer solstice) dedicated to NSDAP martyrs
and war heroes, with stirring speeches, night
parades, public demonstrations and blazing
bonﬁres.
The pièce de résistance of the annual
Nazi cycle was the ﬁrst week of September:
the grandiose Party rally was held in Nur-
emberg from 1 927 to 1 938 in a climate of
mystical ecstasy, sacred delirium, and na-
tionalist exultation. For a full week the
regime displayed its immense talent in jubi-
lant colors, lights, music and festivities for
its own self-gloriﬁcation in the presence of
thousands of participants. Homilies, slogans
and speeches were addressed to pilgrims and
faithful, providing displays of Hitler’s rhet-
oric. Mass performances and mass demon-
strations were held, including parades of sol-
diers with ﬁxed bayonets in rows of twelve,
SS and SA men with colorful spread-eagle
76 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 84 ---
standards, and Luftwaffe ﬂying shows. Old
Nazi ﬁghters, representing the glorious past
of the movement, marched ahead of the
young generations: RAD (Labor Service)
uniformed battalions presenting gleaming
shovels, disciplined boys and girls of the
Hitler Jugend, and dancing young women
from the “Faith and Beauty” association.
Women, veterans, farmers and workers, rep-
resenting organizations overtly related to
the Nazi Party as well as state agencies and
services, paraded in an expression of the
ideal of the national “racially pure” commu-
nity and the self-dramatization of Hitler’s
messianic mission. Each year had a different
theme. In 1933 it was the “Rally of Victory,”
in 1934 “Rally for Unity and Strength,”
1935 was the “Rally of Freedom,” 1 936 the
“Rally for Honor and Freedom,” 1 937 the
“Rally in Honor of Work,” and 1 938 the
“Rally of Greater Germany.” The Party
Week of September 1939 would have been
devoted to peace, but it was canceled, and
the hundreds of trains prepared for it were
used for the mobilization of the army for
World War II.
In autumn, the Harvest Thanksgiving
Day on 1 October was a tribute to the Ger-
man farmers, emphasizing the racist myth of
Blubo (blood and soil), with an impressive
celebrations, romantic ceremonies and pa-
rades in ancient folk costumes.
November 4 was the Totengedenktag ,
the Day of Homage to the Dead.
On 9 November somber pageantry lent
mythical status to the “blood baptism,” the
commemoration of the anniversary of the
abortive 1923 Beer-Hall Putsch in Munich.
The march to the Feldherrnhalle was re-
peated in the precise order of 1923, along a
route ﬂanked by pylons of burning torches,
with funeral music, tolling bells, and the
slow recital of the names of the sixteen mar-
tyrs of the party who were honored for their
self-sacriﬁce for the Nazi cause. This had a
symbolic signiﬁcance too: commemoration
of the past with an eye on the future. The
solemn, kitschy commemoration was broad-
cast over the whole country.
December 21 (Yule, winter solstice) was
a celebration designed to replace the Chris-
tian festivals. In spite of the Nazis’ efforts,
it did not, however, supplant the traditional
Christmas (with ﬁr tree and offering of pres-
ents) and Sylvester Eve (New Year). As
Christian holidays were too deeply ingrained,
summer and winter solstices were treated
with little reverence.
The Nazis also revived the Althing, an
old Germanic institution, as a support for
their ideology. The Viking Althingwas orig-
inally a tribal assembly of free men, both a
kind of parliament and a court of justice.
Under the Nazis the custom was replaced
by a powerful mixture of pagan romanti-
cism, militarism and naïve patriotism to
build up recruits for Hitler’s war machine.
The Althing became merely a theatrical show
held in rudimentary natural theaters, incor-
porating hilly slopes and ancient ruins. The
shows included music and songs, martyrs’
commemoration, military tattoos, pagan or-
atorios, exhibitions of sport and horseman-
ship, circus acts and reconstructed battle
scenes. Even the Germanic-oriented SS
treated these ridiculous and showy occasions
with irreverence.
Music
Music had always been (and still is) very
vivid in Germany, and her contribution in
the past had won the admiration of the whole
world. However music in Germany under-
went almost a total eclipse when the Third
Reich was established. Hitler, the failed
Austrian painter and architect manqué, was
ﬁnally able to dictate German culture. The
Nazis applied their policy of Gleichschaltung
(coordination) to music and the ofﬁcial Nazi
line was expressed through the medium of
the Reich Chamber of Music. The glitter-
ing, ﬂourishing and experimental music of
the Weimar period was replaced by music
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 77


--- PAGE 85 ---
inspired by tradition and folklore. American
jazz (scornfully regarded as “Negro music”),
experimental, modern and atonal music were
banned, and German composers of Jewish
origin—considered “degenerate” (such as
Gustav Mahler)—were forbidden. In an ef-
fort to create a distinguished National So-
cialist style for the youth, a German Song
Week was instituted in May 1934 and a
Music School was created in Berlin in 1936.
This was followed by another school founded
at Weimar in 1 937 and another at Graz in
1939 . Music pupils studied not only German
classical and traditional music by ofﬁcially
“Aryan” composers, but also popular the-
ater, singing, mime, instrumental music,
and conducting. Of course these studies were
augmented by sports, political education
and National Socialist ideology. In 1937 , the
music schools had turned out some 60,000
musicians. Graduates became musicians and
bandmasters in the HJ Musikeinheiten(music
units). A Spielmannzug (marching band)
was usually composed of twenty-four musi-
cians wearing a traditional form of detach-
able shoulder ornamentation known as
Schwalbennester (swallows’ nests). Musi-
cians—directed by a Musikführer(bandmas-
ter)—played martial and “heroic” tunes with
ﬁfe, drum and trumpet to give rhythm and
bolster courage when the troops were march-
ing. The Hitler Jugend had choirs singing
patriotic, sentimental and political songs
characterized by heavy tunes and bellicose
lyrics. Songs were popular at party and
ofﬁcial meetings, as well as throughout daily
life. The organization had also more elabo-
rate orchestras performing live concerts in
public squares and theaters. In 1943, there
were 1,200 HJ bands and orchestras totaling
some 36,000 young musicians. Concerts in-
side Germany were well attended, but the
listeners had to be content with an excess of
Wagner (Hitler’s favorite composer), and
the absence of “degenerate” swing and jazz,
which particularly in France and Holland
became symbolic resistance music.
Publications
The Hitler Jugend had several monthly
and weekly publications, including the
Sturmjugend (Storm Youth), Hitler-Jugend-
Zeitung (Hitler Youth Newspaper), Junge
Front (Young Front), Deutschen Jugendnach-
richten (News of the German Youth), Der
Pimpf (for the junior DJ members, age 10 to
14), Das deutsche Mädel (a paper for BdM
girls), Junge Welt(Young World, for the jun-
ior girls), Wille und Macht (Will and Power,
for the HJ leadership), Das Junge Deutschland
78 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Junior HJ drummer boy


--- PAGE 86 ---
(Young Germany, a publication of the so-
cial service of the HJ specializing in labor)
and Junge Dorfgemeinschaft(Young Villagers,
intended for young peasants). In 1930, Kurt
Gruber created his own publishing com-
pany, the Jungfront Verlag, which published
numerous newspapers, weekly magazines,
various Nazi literary works, and countless
Handbücher (manuals and handbooks) in-
tended for youths, parents and educators.
Von Schirach himself wrote a book, Die
Hitler Jugend: Idee und Gestalt (The Hitler
Youth: Idea and Form) published in Berlin
in 1934. The book was not a success and was
described by his press agent Günther Kauf-
mann in 1941 as being entirely “outdated in
all sections.” Schirach himself was not in-
terested in a new edition, because in his own
words, “various fundamental questions con-
cerning education will have to be thoroughly
looked into after the end of the war.”
Keenly aware of radio’s propaganda po-
tential, the Nazis broadcast programs espe-
cially intended for youth every Wednesday
at 8:15 
P.M. For this purpose a Reichsfunk-
schule (a school for the training of HJ broad-
cast personnel) was created in December
1934 in Göttingen. The radio program con-
sisted of martial music, news for young peo-
ple, and plays based on Germany’s past, with
the aim of instilling love of heroism and
contempt for weakness.
Health and hygiene
The HJ training also included an al-
most obsessive emphasis on health, vigor
and hygiene. Ten commandments were is-
sued by the Reich physician to the HJ in
1939, the “Year of Hygienic Duty”:
1. Your body belongs to your nation, to
which you owe your existence, and you
are responsible for your body.
2. Always keep yourself clean and exercise
your body. Light, air and water can help
you in this.
3. Look after your teeth. Strong and healthy
teeth are a source of pride.
4. Eat plenty of raw fruit, uncooked greens
and vegetables, ﬁrst washing them thor-
oughly in clean water. Fruit contains
valuable nutrients which cooking elim-
inates.
5. Drink fruit juice. Leave coffee to the
coffee addicts. You do not need it.
6. Shun alcohol and nicotine. They are
poisons which impair your development
and capacity to work.
7. Take physical exercise. It will make you
healthy and hardy.
8. Sleep at least nine hours every night.
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 79
Front page of Der Aufmarsch (Marching For-
ward) newspaper for German youths. The Auf-
marsch was a monthly paper published by the
Association of the German National-Socialist
Schoolboys founded in November 1929 in Ham-
burg by Adrian von Renteln.


--- PAGE 87 ---
9 . Practice ﬁrst aid for use in accidents. It
can help you save your comrades’ lives.
10. All your activities are governed by this
slogan: Your duty is to be healthy!
These injunctions doubtless applied
with special force to girls. Particularly the
ninth commandment indicated a sphere of
activity admirably suited—according to Nazi
ideology—to the “natural” feminine dispo-
sition. The Hitler Youth trained 40,000
budding ﬁeld surgeons and 35,000 girl med-
ical orderlies. Seventeen-year-old BdM girls
had to do twelve two-hour classes in nurs-
ing and hygiene, after which the best of
them could join the Health Service Troop
and were entitled to wear, in addition to
their uniform, a white kerchief and a white
apron adorned with the symbolic Leben rune
(rune of life).
Youth exchanges
Before 1933 many German youth freely
traveled abroad—to Scandinavia, France
and Britain, for example—the only limita-
tion being personal budget. After the seizure
of power by the Nazis, voyages abroad were
forbidden. Hitler wanted German young
people isolated, as travel and unsupervised
tourism could expose them to what he re-
garded as bad inﬂuences. The only foreign
countries where visits were allowed were
other dictatorships, like Mussolini’s Fascist
Italy and Franco’s Spain. Relations with Eu-
ropean democratic countries were carefully
supervised by several Nazi agencies which
made contact and organized cultural and
political exchanges with foreign “friends.”
Delegations of young foreign pro–Nazi
guests—including adult artists and intellec-
tuals—were invited to Germany and shown
the achievements of the new regime. Super-
vision of cultural exchanges with France, for
example, were done by a young enthusiastic,
francophile and French-speaking art teacher,
named Otto Abetz ( 1903–1958). After the
defeat of France in 1940, Abetz became
German ambassador in occupied French
territories.
Winter Relief and Agricultural
Service
Winterhilfswerk
Before and during the war, the Hitler
Jugend was an important component of
Winterhilfswerk. Winterhilfswerk(WHW—
Winter Help) was the ofﬁcial German win-
ter relief organization. Its socialistic aspect
struck a chord among many of the poorer
Germans who were recipients of the charity
campaign. The WHW, launched in the
winter of 1 933-34—was organized on an
annual basis by the Nationalsozialistische
Volkswohlfahrt (NSV—Nazi People’s Wel-
fare Organization). As already described
above, the NSV—headed by SS Gruppen-
führer Erich Hilgenfeldt—was devoted to
the welfare of party members and their fam-
ilies, especially mothers and juveniles. Win-
terhilfswerk was supported by members of
the NSDAP , Hitler Jugend and DAF, as well
as by prominent artists, functionaries, and
athletes, with the aim of collecting money,
food, shoes, blankets, warm clothing and
other items for the poorest Germans. With
the help of voluntary contributions, the Nazis
provided hot meals, warm clothes and com-
fort for the needy. The Jews and “asocials”
were excluded from the beneﬁts of this or-
ganization. In winter 1 935-36, the WHW
collected some 31 million Reichsmarks. In
1937 , helping Winterhilfswerk was made
compulsory. Every worker had to pay a spe-
cial winter tax ( 10 to 1 5 percent of one’s
salary) from October to March. During the
war, the Kriegs-winterhilfswerk (KWHW—
wartime winter relief organization) contin-
ued the activities, and collected donations
for soldiers at the front, widows, civilian vic-
80 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 88 ---
tims, and those made homeless by Allied air
bombardments.
Landdienst
The Nazis had a strong desire that urban
youth would commune with the rural folk.
Popular slogans were “Back to the country-
side!” and “Nature never lies!” In addition
to their other activities, Hitler Jugend mem-
bers were required to help with the harvest
each year. Combining the ideologically de-
sirable and the economically useful, this was
intended to reduce urban youth unemploy-
ment, to harden them, and to ease the rural
labor shortage. Some students who had
completed their elementary education were
encouraged to volunteer for a nine-month
stretch in the Landdienst (agricultural serv-
ice), living in camps, working in the morn-
ing, and receiving lessons in Nazi ideology
in the afternoon. In peacetime this program
was concerned with helping to slow the drift
of population away from the country into
the large, industrialized cities. The agricul-
tural service was based on the theories de-
veloped by the Bund der Artamenen (Arta-
man League). As already described, these
were a group of young fanatics who believed
in the back-to-the-soil movement and the
creation of a “racially pure” Germanic peas-
ant class. Members of the Landdienst were
submitted to a frugal and spartan vegetarian
life. They had to abstain from alcohol and
tobacco and face up to strict discipline and
hard work. It was no easy life. The farm
camps were usually military-style barracks
with primitive washing and toilet facilities,
and the work could be unremittingly hard.
A typical day might have looked like this:
5:30—rise
6:00—work in the ﬁelds
8:00—breakfast
8:30—work in the ﬁelds
Noon—lunch
1:00—political lecture
2:00—sports drill
4:00—political class
5:00—household work
6:00—break
6:30—recreation
7:30—political instruction
8:30—supper
9:00—evening singing with bonﬁre
9:30—lights out
The youngsters at these camps were al-
lowed no vacations, no leave, no parental
visits and no religious services. Originally
the Landdienst was a small branch of the HJ.
In 1935 it totaled only 500 members. In
1936 it involved 6,600 teenagers. In Sep-
tember 1939, there were 11,750 boys and
14,000 girls working for the Landdienst. The
subjection to authoritarian rule and the ex-
ploitation of cheap youth labor were justiﬁed
by the National Socialist leadership with the
claim that everyone’s welfare was at stake.
Concern with individual needs was regarded
as synonymous with irresponsibility. The
Landdienst was also an important Nazi
means of penetration into the peasant world
and a way to propagate their ideology in the
countryside. At ﬁrst the German peasantry
reacted coolly to the massive arrival of un-
skilled youth over the land, but their reluc-
tance quickly faded away as they realized
the beneﬁt they could get out of the free
labor offered by the Nazi state. Volunteers of
the Landdienst also learned trades, planted
trees and ﬂowers in national parks, main-
tained trails in forests and mountains, and
removed snow in winter.
During the war, the Landdienst was
tasked with the “Germanization” of con-
quered territories in the East, in Poland and
Russia. It was intended to recruit “racially
suitable” Germans to colonize wide areas.
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 81
Cuff-title of the HJ Landdienst (Agricultural Service)


--- PAGE 89 ---
The Slavic populations were to be enslaved.
This ambitious and inhumane project—
which meant death and slavery for millions
of people—was taken seriously and widely
supported by Heinrich Himmler’s SS. The
aim was to create an area of “Aryan” farm-
ers, working the land and also providing a
defensive buffer zone between Germany and
the East.
Conﬂicts at Home
Some parents harbored doubts about
the way their children were treated in the
Hitler Jugend. Far from promoting univer-
sal health and happiness, the rigorous ac-
tivities performed by HJ members damaged
their health and interfered with their educa-
tion. Excessive hard work and discipline
caused an increase in physical and psycho-
logical ailments among the young. Com-
plaints ranged from anxiety brought on by
ceaseless bullying to disorders of the feet
caused by carrying burdens that were too
heavy on marches that were too long.
Generational conﬂicts did not always
produce open resistance, because people were
caught in an ideological trap, but a child’s
participation in the HJ could create tension
at home. Clashes between parents and chil-
dren were—and still are—normal phenom-
ena linked with personality development,
but in Nazi Germany they were often ag-
gravated by the “youth leads youth” princi-
ple of the HJ. The millions of Germans who
had experienced World War I, revolution,
inﬂation, misery, and social confusion, and
who had supported Hitler—in whom they
hoped to ﬁnd a solution—were in for a grim
surprise. A large majority, attracted like a
magnet to the Führer, recognized that
achievements had been made with regular
pay, reduction of inﬂation and employment,
and a Heimat (fatherland) that was again
strong, prosperous, respected and inﬂuential.
Beyond the rapture, however, lay the reality
of the Nazi order—a sweeping social revolu-
tion that used terror to impose rigid stan-
dards of behavior, not only in schools, work-
places and churches but also within the home.
From the start, Hitler made it quite clear
that no one had any further claim to a pri-
vate life. The citizens of the Third Reich
soon found themselves living in an eerie
world of watchers and watched. Neighbors
were set against neighbors, wives against
husbands, children against parents. Until
the end of the Nazi regime in 1 945, count-
less victims of denunciation—merely on sus-
picion of having committed crimes, offenses
or indecencies against the regime, and with-
out ever being brought to trial—were taken
into custody, where ofﬁcials had the right
under the law to extract confessions by intim-
idation, psychological pressure, blackmail,
beating and torture. The terriﬁed prisoner
could then be carted off to a concentration
camp and never be seen again, in accordance
with the Nazis’ prophylactic methods of re-
pression.
For millions of children, the enthusiasm
for the Hitler Youth movement canceled out
all other interests. Even when church groups
or parents pleaded to them to keep away,
they were captured by the uniforms, the
songs, the ﬁfe and drums, and the example
of their peers. The Hitler Youth members
lived more and more with their comrades,
and they were gradually weaned from their
families. In fact the Nazis planned to incor-
porate all boys and girls by the age of six in
children’s groups afﬁliated with the Women’s
Association. The peaceful phase of the Third
Reich proved too short to allow this plan to
be put into effect. In the long term, the
Nazis intended to reduce the role of parents
to their unavoidable biological function.
Relegated to the background, parents had
often trouble keeping their brown-shirted
sons and daughters in line. Some parents
who opposed or were not committed to the
regime tried to discourage their youngsters
from joining the organization, and the gen-
82 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 90 ---
eration gap became a battleground in some
families. It was difﬁcult—and sometimes
dangerous—to forbid a child to do what
many children were doing, or to refuse a
child the uniform that others so gladly wore.
Dissident parents could not safely ignore
their youngsters’ idolatrous demands to be
good Nazis. Conﬂicts at home were aggra-
vated by the emphasis on authority which
the Nazi totalitarian state delegated to the
youth. HJ members were systematically
turned against their parents. They were en-
couraged to criticize the conventions of their
parents’ generation and think of themselves
as the hope of the future. “Youth must be
led by youth” and “Youth is always right”
were slogans frequently used. The Nazis’ ap-
peal to youth led to generation problems, as
new National Socialist structures replaced
values based around the family. Boys and
girls of the HJ carried their new conﬁdence
and belief into the home and challenged tra-
ditional notions of parental control. This
could result in conﬂicts within the household
as loyalty to the Führer clashed with the tra-
ditional structures of the older generation.
Many families were still marked with love,
affection and respect, but in many homes
the trust between parents and children was
severely disrupted. The new creed was ac-
cepted with passive resignation and silent
anger. For many fathers and mothers, cau-
tion and silence replaced candor and guid-
ance. Parents no longer ventured to speak
openly in front of their children. The track-
ing down of subversives and the maintenance
of the Nazis’ iron grip on the population un-
leashed a series of forces which sucked chil-
dren into the most odious deed. Denuncia-
tion of parents by their own children to the
authorities became one of Nazism’s most
shocking by-products.
Indoctrination and Discipline
Hitler believed that the survival of his
Third Reich for a thousand years depended
upon the education and indoctrination of the
youth. As we have seen, all non–Nazi youth
organizations had ceased to exist. Rival groups
had been eliminated by force, fear, and law,
but the triumph of the Hitler Jugend left
the Führer unsatisﬁed. German youths had
to be radically transformed ideologically by
strict indoctrination and discipline.
The main purpose of the HJ was to in-
culcate discipline and good order in general
and to submit young people to strict Na-
tional Socialist schooling. Liberalism was a
thing of the past and so were the days when
all could do as they pleased. The order of
the day was this: “Believe! Obey! Fight!” In-
doctrination, as a long-term process, could
be most effectively applied to Germany’s
youth. Children are, on the whole, vulnera-
ble, malleable and naïve. They are easily
fooled, conformist, committed, enthusias-
tic, spontaneous, and eager to participate in
something heroic, great and exciting. Ap-
pealing to passion more than to reason, the
Nazi system could easily exploit these youth-
ful qualities. As already pointed out, young
people who became teenagers after 1936 had
no memories of the pre–Nazi days and went
through a schooling process steeped in Na-
tional Socialism. Those who came to ado-
lescence during World War II experienced
the most extreme and brutal form of Nazism:
conscription and war. Their minds were led
step by step through an intensive drill to ac-
cept Nazi principles with the aim of turning
them into future soldiers and party tech-
nocrats. A whole generation of children were
fooled by the state and deceived by indoctri-
nation.
During the Third Reich period, the
household lost its dominant role in the rear-
ing and training of children. The school be-
came an instrument for the dissemination
of racist propaganda, helped to win young
minds for Nazism and made children recep-
tive to militaristic practices. Indoctrination
through a revised school curriculum was
complemented and reinforced by mobiliza-
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 83


--- PAGE 91 ---
tion through the Hitler Youth movement.
The organization conveyed ideals that ex-
tended beyond the terms of reference of the
traditional upbringing. The HJ was a main-
stay of the Nazi regime and its inﬂuence be-
came all-persuasive in Germany. It was an
alternative center of authority, a serious rival
to the traditional home, church and school.
The HJ was intended to serve as a counter-
authoritarian sanctuary; involvement in its
activities offered the promise of making a
name for oneself, but also growing pressure
toward uniformity. This latter feature grew
stronger as the Hitler Jugend became more
bureaucratic, as its leadership corps grew
older, and as the use of coercion to draw re-
maining young people into the organization
increased.
The HJ was a huge organization com-
prising almost 60 percent of German youth.
Discipline, hierarchy, physical training and
indoctrination were strictly observed and
conducted by Hitler Jugend staff who were
trained in a school created for this purpose
in Potsdam. By the end of 1 933 there were
twenty-two schools forming the leadership
cadre of the youth organization. In 1 935,
this had increased to thirty training centers.
A young man who desired become a Gebi-
etsführer (district leader) had to go through
a three-week training. Of the 170 hours of
the course, 1 05 were devoted to körperliche
Ertüchtigung (physical training, sport, exer-
cises and shooting), and 65 to weltan-
schaulichen Schulung (racial, cultural and
Germanic indoctrination).
More than the rest of the German cit-
izens, the boys and girls of the Hitler Youth
were subject to a constant ﬂow of indoctri-
nation from the propaganda ministry di-
rected by Josef Goebbels and from the Nazi
Party through their ofﬁcers. Leaders of the
HJ totally endorsed the political and ideo-
logical aspects of Nazism. HJ-DJ boys and
BdM-JM girls had to attend Heimabende, a
meeting every Wednesday evening for polit-
ical, racial and ideological indoctrination—
and singing. They were politically pro-
grammed with distorted theories of Ger-
manic civilization and Lebensraum; taught
to obey orders blindly, to cultivate soldierly
virtues and the love of heroism; instilled
with the love of toughness, silence, loyalty
and sacriﬁce; and exhorted to be proud of
their remote ancestors’ heritage. Great em-
phasis was put on rituals, racist and anti–Se-
mitic theories, biological notions of vital-
ity, hero worship, the hard-headed dogma of
raison d’état, the need for the unscrupulous
use of force, and the obligation to be brutal
and contemptuous of weakness. Great stress
was put on the danger of Bolshevism and
the rottenness of capitalist, plutocratic
democracies and how they wished to keep
Germany down. The Hitler Youth taught a
whole generation of Germans to defy dan-
ger and to glory in the idea of dying hero-
ically in battle. War was seen as normal,
violence was legitimated. Hitler’s foreign-
policy achievements from 1936 to 1939 had
accustomed the Germans to regard the com-
bination of violent posturing, risk-taking,
and assertion of their “legal right” to wipe
out the “shame of Versailles” as a recipe for
success. Part of this psychological condi-
tioning was imposed at the huge annual ral-
lies at Nuremberg where tens of thousands
marched with banners and music in review
before Hitler himself. The spirit of sacriﬁce
was fostered during nighttime neo-pagan
ceremonies, verses celebrating death in com-
bat, patriotic songs, and even mock funerals
for future “fallen comrades.” All morality
and intelligence were propagandized out.
Few young people had read Hitler’s
book, Mein Kampf. Some quoted from the
book, but easy mottos and simple slogans
were constantly repeated. For the boys these
included: “Live faithfully, ﬁght bravely, and
die laughing,” “We were born to die for
Germany,” “You are nothing, your folk is
everything,” and “God is struggle and strug-
gle is our blood, and this is why we were
born.” The popular slogan “Heute Deutsch-
84 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 92 ---
land, morgen die Welt” (today Germany, to-
morrow the world) illustrated the Nazi drive
for political power and world domination.
As for the young girls they were always told,
“Be faithful, be pure, be German!”
Violence was not an accidental accom-
paniment to Nazism, it was central to it.
National Socialism was presented as an un-
ceasing struggle, a combat against Ger-
many’s enemies both internal and external.
It was essentially organized hatred, it drew
its power and inspiration from the desire to
destroy. Hitler was a man at war, a man of
hate; his language was the language of con-
ﬂict. Everything was refracted through the
prism of his warlike and racist way of think-
ing. Members of the Hitler Jugend were
therefore exhorted over and over to uphold
Nazi Germany’s “honor”—as deﬁned by
Hitler. Ideological lectures were intended
to increase motivation so that boys and girls
would know for whom, what and why they
were ﬁghting. Young men and women, vul-
nerable to indoctrination, were encouraged
not only to be aggressive, strong and decisive
but also to repress all human feeling, to re-
gard Jews and Slavs as Untermenschen (sub-
humans), to feel hatred and to show no pity
toward those unworthy enemies.
As young as ten years old, all boys and
girls had to swear a pledge of allegiance
which was taken very seriously: “ Ich ver-
spreche, in der Hitler-Jugend allezeit meine
Pﬂicht zu tun in Liebe und Treue zum Führer
und zu unserer Fahne. So wahr mir Gott helfe.”
(I swear, in the Hitler Youth, always to do
my duty with love and loyalty, for the Führer
and our ﬂag. So help me God.) There was
also an oath which went as follows: “In the
presence of this blood banner which repre-
sents our Führer, I swear to devote all my
energies and my strength to the savior of our
country, Adolf Hitler. I am willing and
ready to give up my life for him, so help me
God.” This was the revival of the ancient
Fahneneid, the medieval soldier’s traditional
oath, passed down from the knights, which
bound warriors to the German emperor. The
oath was repeated by HJ members with their
right hands raised and their left hands placed
on the unit ﬂag. The oath, sworn not to Ger-
many but personally to the Führer, illus-
trated the pitilessness of the demands upon
themselves and others, duty-bound to spare
neither their own blood nor that of others.
The heavy HJ training and indoctrina-
tion produced a new type of children. From
the same mold they emerged as unquestion-
ing automata, physically ﬁt sponges for the
ofﬁcial ideology. The HJ boys and girls re-
garded mothers’ darlings and “losers” as
poor specimens. They were brainwashed to
feel superior, deprived of criticism, made al-
ways to obey and never ask questions. The
evil Nazi indoctrination implanted new
norms of behavior into the young Germans.
Teenagers of the HJ were encouraged to de-
nounce their parents or neighbors who lis-
tened to enemy broadcasts or spoke against
the regime, for example. The indoctrination
robbed them of their moral powers of judg-
ment and replaced them with coldhearted-
ness, cruelty, impatience and an excessive,
narrow, group egoism. Training and indoc-
trination contributed in no small measure
to the loyal and exclusive comradeship but
also to phenomenal cruelty, scorn of enemy
lives, and acceptance of one’s own sacriﬁce.
As a result there was a feeling of strong and
proud esprit de corps, along with the arrogant
sense of superiority. The children of the
Hitler Youth lived in a world far removed
from reality. They were always under a strict
code of behavior which forbade them any
overbearing and inﬂammatory attitudes to-
ward their leaders but which allowed the
worst ruthlessness toward their “enemies.”
They were instilled with a special arrogance.
Repeatedly told that they were the best of
the best and upholders of Germany’s future,
they felt themselves members of a top-class
warrior caste or Sippe (tribe). They were
aware of their worth, with conﬁdence and
soaring self-esteem. They often tended to
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 85


--- PAGE 93 ---
ignore non-members, saw other “common”
children as people of no consequence, and
even looked down on priests, foremen, teach-
ers and their own parents. Being a member
of the organization often provided the chance
to engage, sometimes quite aggressively, in
conﬂict with these traditional ﬁgures of au-
thority.
The Führer’s purpose was to create a
violently active, dominating, brutal youth
intended to be indifferent to pain, merciless
and without weakness. “Knowledge would
spoil my young people,” Hitler said. “I pre-
fer that they learn only what they pick up
by following their own play instinct. But
they must learn self-control. I will have
them master the fear of death through the
most difﬁcult trials. That is the heroic stage
of youth. Out of it will grow the stage of the
free man, a human being who is the meas-
ure and center of the world.” And further:
“The German youth must learn to do with-
out, to endure criticism and injustice, to be
reliable, discreet, decent, and loyal.”
The system of indoctrination was per-
fect: the brainwashing actually started in the
cradle. From childhood onward, HJ mem-
bers were drilled in toughness and blind
obedience. The Hitler Youth movement was
based on aggressive rivalry between mem-
bers but discipline was severe. It was meted
out by leaders little older than the members.
A common spectacle was a twelve-year-old
leader bawling out ten-year-old cubs and
driving them all over the school playground
and meadows. The slightest signs of recal-
citrance, any attitude of rational criticism,
the slightest faults with the uniform, the
slightest lateness on parade, all were pun-
ished with extra pointless drills or the inter-
diction of wearing medals and uniform, or a
ban on participating in activities, for exam-
ple. One of the heaviest penalties, so it was
thought, was permanent expulsion from the
group.
Discipline and “honor” were only one
side of the coin. In many cases HJ members
regarded each other as rivals and competi-
tors. The emphasis was on winning at any
cost, to be the best physically, the strongest
and the most determined. In this context of
aggressive competition, members behaved
even more drastically in order to show how
good and dedicated to Hitler’s cause they
were. The stricter or meaner the leaders
were, the worse the Hitler Youth groups be-
haved. It was much like a “follow the leader”
type of organization. The very name of the
Hitler Youth suggests that they existed to
follow in Hitler’s footsteps and to carry out
his ideas as well as his commands.
Thus from the age of ten the young
German was subjected to a continual obses-
sive barrage of Nazi propaganda and ideol-
ogy. From this tender age, when the person-
ality is easy to mold, the Führerprinzip was
implanted in young brains as absolute dog-
ma. Indoctrination allowed a human being
to be reduced to a state of total subordina-
tion, and dehumanization provided an excel-
lent grounding in the Hitlerian creed. In
order that a handful of professional murder-
ers might reign over a whole nation and im-
pose its will upon it, children had to be per-
verted from infancy. Most of the rank and
ﬁle of the SS, people who were to make all
of Europe tremble and who caused the suf-
fering and death of millions, were between
6 and 14 at the time Hitler came to power.
All had been subjected to Nazi education
from early youth and no one had given them
a chance to question the values of these
teachings.
Führer worship
The Nazi propaganda created a larger-
than-life image of the Führer, both as an
idol endowed with superhuman qualities
with revolutionary plans, and as a moderate
man upholding traditional virtues and guar-
anteeing peace—at least until 1939 . The per-
sonality cult was designed deliberately to
appeal to the diseased side of the human
86 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 94 ---
psyche, above all to the capacity for resent-
ment. It struck a chord with people’s wide-
spread disillusionment with the institutions,
parties and leaders of the Weimar Republic,
and the chameleon Hitler seemed to offer
something different to each class of society
and pulled them all together with the unique-
ness of his own vision for the future. A clus-
ter of myths was created around the leader.
Hitler was depicted to his people as a teeto-
taler, vegetarian, nonsmoker, and asexual
bachelor, as a man without human ties of
love and friendship, a man with a divine
mission using all his energy and skills for
the good of Germany. This was intended to
appeal to the German people’s yearning for
greatness.
Joseph Goebbels, minister for public
enlightenment and propaganda, led the cam-
paign of national devotion, declaring, “We
are witnessing the greatest miracle in history.
A genius is building a new world!” And: “He
alone is never mistaken. He is always right.
He is always like a great star above us.”
Other high-ranking Nazi leaders praised
their Führer. The deranged Rudolf Hess
spoke of his master in biblical terms, ap-
proaching hysteria: “And then unto us was
born a child in Braunau.... Whatever he
does is necessary ... whatever he does is suc-
cessful. Clearly the Führer has divine bless-
ing!”
Robert Ley, head of the State Labor
Service, claimed: “The Lord God has sent
us Adolf Hitler!”
Special efforts were made to win the
attention of children who were encouraged
to worship the Führer. To the HJ, Hitler
was presented as the supreme father, an idol,
a kind of god. There were Hitler Youth prayers
modeled after church prayers:
Adolf Hitler, you are our great Führer.
Thy name makes the enemy tremble.
Thy Third Reich comes, thy will alone is
law upon the earth.
Let us hear daily thy voice and order us by
thy leadership, for we will obey to the end
and even with our lives.
We praise thee! Heil Hitler!
Führer, my Führer, given me by God,
protect and preserve my life for long.
You saved Germany in time of need.
I thank you for my daily bread.
Be with me for a long time, do not leave me,
Führer, my Führer, my faith, my light,
Hail to my Führer!
The leader Baldur von Schirach had
sayings of praise which were constantly re-
peated:
We do not need intellectual leaders who
create new ideas, because the superimpos-
ing leader of all desires of youth is Adolf
Hitler.
Your name, my Führer, is the happiness
of youth, your name, my Führer, is for us
everlasting life.
He who serves Adolf Hitler, the Führer,
serves Germany, and whoever serves Ger-
many, serves God.
World War II added a new dimension
to the Hitler worship. Goebbels extolled the
Führer as the greatest and most genius strate-
gist of all time. “ Hitler ist der Sieg!” (Hitler
is victory) was a popular slogan. In this at-
mosphere of adulation, the most banal
clichés, the most ridiculous platitudes, and
the most grotesque errors of judgment, if
uttered by Adolf Hitler, were accepted as
the words of inspired genius.
The impact of indoctrination and Hit-
ler worship is very difﬁcult to evaluate. There
were great believers in order, authority, the
Führer principle, and a great Germany. There
was racial hatred, but Hitler’s regime was
certainly no sudden break in the continuity
of German history, nor was anti-Semitism
thinkable without the different kind of anti-
Semitism that preceded it. The sources of
Nazism were deeply rooted, and could be
traced far back in German history. There
were convinced Nazis in the Hitler Youth,
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 87


--- PAGE 95 ---
but were all members passionate and fanat-
ical? Since by deﬁnition, young people are
inexperienced, naive and easily manipulated,
may we admit that their responsibility was
limited by pressure, immaturity and igno-
rance? Perhaps a majority of the HJ mem-
bers—like the German people in general—
muddled along somewhere midway between
the devil and the deep waters. Probably a
fair number of them supported Hitler as long
as the going was good. They were jubilant
during the time of the great victories of the
Wehrmacht; they became uneasy and de-
spondent when the tide turned; and by 1944
many thought it was senseless to prolong
the war, though they obeyed orders as me-
chanically as ever. Within those limits there
was a vast variety of attitudes, and within
these attitudes doubtless as many nuances
as individuals. In absence of statistics these
questions must be left open to discussion.
Herbert Norkus and 
Hitlerjunge Quex
Before the seizure of power by the Nazis
in 1933, the principal task of the HJ (and
that of the SA) was to impress the public by
ostentatious parades through the streets of
big cities, but the youth movement also fre-
quently engaged in street ﬁghts in which
weapons were used. Opponents were at-
tacked and sometimes killed in these brawls,
which occasioned some casualties among the
Hitler Jugend themselves. The cult of death
was part of the Nazi ideology and was in-
stilled in the youth. This cult was illustrated
by several shrines. One of these was a street
in Berlin where a 1 5-year-old member of
the HJ, Herbert Norkus, had been stabbed
to death on 24 January 1932. Norkus was a
member of the HJ in Wedding, a suburb of
Berlin held by communists, and while post-
ing Nazi placards he was killed by them.
Amid memorial wreaths and torches, the
Reich youth leader Baldur von Schirach de-
livered a radio address at Norkus’s funeral.
Herbert Norkus became a hero of the Nazi
cause, an example for other members, and
his tragic fate was the inspiration for the
propaganda ﬁlm Hitlerjunge Quex , one of
the ﬁrst Nazi ﬁlms. There were many at-
tempts at making an idealized portrait of
Nazi youth, and between 1 933 and 1 939
about forty ﬁlms especially intended for a
youth audience were produced. Hitlerjunge
Quex was a novel written by Karl Alois
Schenzinger, which was serialized in the
Nazi newspaper Völkischer Beobachter. A ﬁlm
with the same title, based on the book, was
directed by Hans Steinhoff, with the young
actor Jürghen Ohlsen in the main role. Both
novel and ﬁlm were based on the story of
Herbert Norkus, with the aim being to glo-
rify young people’s spirit of sacriﬁce for Nazi
ideals. The ﬁlm, made at a time when the
Nazi dictatorship was not yet ﬁrmly consol-
idated in 1933, is interesting as a document
of the prevailing mood of the time, showing
Nazi readiness to integrate communists into
the national community. 
Hitlerjunge Quex was the story of a
blond, blue-eyed boy, Heini, who was drawn
by his father into Young Communist activ-
ities. What he saw of them (drunkenness,
disorderliness, boorishness) disgusted him,
and Heini wished to enter the clean and
healthy ranks of the Hitler Youth. By con-
trast they were sympathetic, friendly, strong,
determined, and forward-looking. Heini
was rejected from membership, however,
because the Nazis suspected him of being a
communist inﬁltrator. The rejection tor-
mented him as it would any “good” Nazi.
Meanwhile, his mother, totally unable to
cope in the confusion and hardship of the
Weimar Republic, has committed suicide.
Heini is ﬁnally accepted in the Hitler Ju-
gend where he earns the nickname Quex
(quicksilver) for his readiness to undertake
the most dangerous missions. He goes to
distribute pamphlets in a communist-dom-
inated part of the city, is attacked and badly
88 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 96 ---
wounded by the Reds. Found by his com-
rades, Heini dies a martyr of the Nazi cause,
whispering the ﬁrst words of the Nazi Youth
song: “Our ﬂag is ﬂuttering before us.” Quex
dies while seeing a vision of the future—
thousands marching in endless procession.
His ﬁnal apotheosis became a Nazi ﬁlm
cliché, with his ﬁgure superimposed upon
swastika ﬂags and a marching song booming
across the soundtrack:
For Hitler we march through night and
dread
With the ﬂag of youth for freedom and bread
And the ﬂag leads us into eternity.
Yes, the ﬂag means more than being dead!
In Hitlerjunge Quex—and all other vi-
brant, passionate, emotional, lyrical, and
kitsch Nazi propaganda ﬁlms—the message
was clear: “Wir sind opferbereit” (we are ready
for sacriﬁce). Death was a small price to pay
for the love of Hitler. One had, at all times,
to be ready to sacriﬁce everything, including
parents, relatives, friends and oneself, for the
Nazi movement.
Book Burning and Kristallnacht
Not surprisingly, the Hitler Youth par-
ticipated in Bücherverbrennung (public book
burning). A few months after the seizure of
power, a campaign of Säuberung (“cleans-
ing”) of libraries, bookshops and universities
was launched, by making lists of writers
whose works were considered by the Nazis
as “immoral” or “Jewish” or not in line with
Nazi ideology. In fact, the eclectic assort-
ment of forbidden writers had in common
only their belief in the dignity of the free
human spirit. About 12,400 books were for-
bidden. The interdiction was followed by
public book burning on 1 0 May 1933 in
Berlin and other cities of Germany. The
books destroyed by ﬁre included works by
some of Germany’s greatest authors and
thinkers, such as Albert Einstein, Sigmund
Freud, Ricarda Huch, Thomas and Hein-
rich Mann, Carl Zuckmayer, Anna Seghers,
Stefan Zweig, and Alfred Kerr, to mention
just a few. Foreign authors’ books were also
publicly burned, including works by Henri
Barbusse, John Galsworthy, André Gide,
Ernest Hemingway, Jack London, Marcel
Proust and Emile Zola, again to mention
only a few. These actions were organized by
the ministry of propaganda, the National-
sozialistischen deutschen Studentenbund
(League of German Students) and the
Kampfbund für deutsche Kultur (Combat
League for the German Culture). They were
carried out by students; HJ, SA, and SS
members; and other Nazi sympathizers as a
kind of public ceremony, with violent
speeches denouncing “cultural decadence.”
The burning ceremonies were sanctioned by
the presence of Joseph Goebbels who lauded
the arsonists for destroying intellectualism
and other “unworthy ﬁlth.” Goebbels de-
clared: “Today’s ceremony is a symbolic act.
It will teach the world that the basic moral-
ity of the November 1918 Republic has been
destroyed forever. From this pile of ashes
will rise the phoenix of a new spirit.”
On November 7 , 1938, in Paris, a young
Jewish-Polish refugee murdered the secre-
tary of the German Embassy. As retaliation,
the Nazis ordered a night of terror in Ger-
many, the so-called Kristallnacht (Night of
Broken Glass) on 9 November 1938. Initi-
ated and coordinated by propaganda min-
ister Goebbels, Kristallnacht was a large-
scale, anti–Semitic pogrom throughout
Germany and Austria. With unrecorded
savagery, the Nazis (including members of
the HJ) sacked Jewish shops, looted Jewish
homes, and set hundreds of synagogues on
ﬁre. Some hundred Jews were killed, 20,000
were carted off to concentration camps, and
a large ﬁne was imposed on the German
Jewish community as indemniﬁcation.
Kristallnacht was a ﬁrst step on the road that
would lead to the extermination camps and
gas chambers of the “Final Solution.”
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 89


--- PAGE 97 ---
Education in the Third Reich
Schools
As the Hitler Youth grew, its power
and inﬂuence increased. It was a propaganda
machine and its inculcation was now taking
place also in schools. The education system
had been naziﬁed by the process of Gleich-
schaltung, applied after the seizure of power
in January 1933. Since writing Mein Kampf,
Hitler had never tired of stressing the evils
of intellectual instruction and how vital it
was to abolish he called “universal education.”
Certainly inﬂuenced by his own academic
failure, the Führer of Germany had views
on education which permeated all echelons
of the Nazi hierarchy. All learning had to
be subject to continuous supervision and se-
lection, as—according to Hitler—knowl-
edge was only an aid to life, not its central
purpose. The role of school was reduced to
basics—instruction in the alphabet and mul-
tiplication tables. Each stratum of society
needed to learn what was necessary for its
particular purposes, and nothing more. All
education was to be under constant surveil-
lance, with the broad mass of the lowest class
receiving the “blessings of illiteracy.” In each
classroom in every school there was a picture
of Hitler in the front, and the Nazi ﬂag with
swastika was also omnipresent.
Hitler was contemptuous of teachers,
academicians, scholars, scientists and intel-
lectuals whom he regarded as dangerous ob-
stacles to the kind of compliant society he
intended to build. After the Nazi takeover,
the education system underwent an imme-
diate and chilling change. The Führer wanted
the youth of the Nazi state to be more virile
and strong than intellectually developed.
From April 1934 until the end of the
war in May 1945, the school system was
headed by Wilhelm Bernhard Rust ( 1883–
1945). After studying philosophy and clas-
sical philology, Rust became teacher and
provincial Oberlehrer (schoolmaster). He had
been an infantry lieutenant in World War
I, during which he was severely wounded
and granted the Iron Cross First Class. He
joined the Nazi Party in 1922, was appointed
Gauleiter(upper leader) of district Hannover-
Braunschweig, and—for his steadfast loy-
alty to Hitler—promoted to Reich minister
for science, art education and culture. The
mentally disturbed Rust committed suicide
in May 1945, but while alive he presided over
the sabotage of Germany’s intellectual life in
the name of racial “purity.” Schools and uni-
versities were reformed and purged of Jew-
ish and democrat teachers, depriving Ger-
many of famous scientists, Nobel Prize
winners, and many other distinguished
chemists, mathematicians, engineers and ju-
rists. Teachers were encouraged to join the
Nazi Party and all of them had to be mem-
bers of the Nationalsozialistische Lehrerbund
(NSLB—Nazi teacher league). The mono-
lithic NSLB, formed in November 1935, re-
jected the democratic heritage of the Weimar
regime, and subjected all teachers to strict
Nazi Party control. It had a newspaper, Der
deutsche Erzieher (German Educator) and
took charge of services to the teaching pro-
fession. After 1938, teachers were indoctri-
nated at a special, compulsory, one-month
training course of drills and lectures where
they learned what knowledge to pass on the
pupils. By 1939 the forty-one NSLB train-
ing camps had prepared 2 15,000 members
for their educational tasks—these being spirit
of militarism, paganism, anti–Semitism,
and the cult of the perfect “Aryan” racial
type—by means of ideological instruction,
propaganda courses, conferences, group
travel, paramilitary physical training and
ﬁeld sports. There was also the Reichslehrer-
bund (RLB—Reich Teachers’ League), an
organization of teachers devoted to the
ideals of Nazism, carefully watched by high
Nazi ofﬁcials.
Nazi education was based on the sense
of race and emphasized two essential ideas:
the preparation to war for the boys and
90 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 98 ---
motherhood for the girls. The school cur-
riculum for girls was based on the under-
standing that few of them would go on to
university. Crafts and skills that would make
girls good homemakers were encouraged:
the course of study for girls was limited to
German, history, singing, race study, do-
mestic science, ideology, eugenics and health.
The heavy emphasis on race and ideology
points to the use of the schools as a major
means of inculcating Nazi racial theory.
In Hitler’s own words, HJ boys were
required to be “ﬂink wie die Windhund, zähe
wie Leder, und hard wie Kruppstahl ” (swift
as greyhounds, tough as leather, and hard as
Krupp steel). It was no accident that none of
these adjectives referred to mental capacity.
The rearing of healthy bodies was regarded
as more important than gaining knowledge.
Reﬂecting the regime’s commitment to war,
the time allotted to physical training was
more than doubled. Sport received unprece-
dented attention from the elementary grades
to the high schools. The number of weekly
physical education classes was raised to three,
then ﬁve. Boxing and ﬁeld sports helped to
vary the program. School reports attached
more and more weight to athletic prowess.
Sport was intended to instill team spirit and
corporal vigor. It also had an ideological and
selective function. Pupils with low perform-
ances and those with physical disabilities
were barred from admission to centers of
higher education.
Internally, school life was also subject
to transformation. Corporal punishment was
reintroduced; parent and pupil participation
was abolished; the introduction of the Führer
principle at all levels bolstered the power of
head teachers at the expense of the rest; and
much time was wasted with a politicized
morning assembly and in observing the
regime’s self-celebratory calendar. For school-
children of “non–Aryan” origin ( Jewish, Sinti
and Roma people), attendance became a liv-
ing nightmare; they were insulted and ha-
rassed by teachers and pupils, and subjected
to malevolent injustices. Finally they were
forbidden to attend German schools. Schools
for backward and handicapped children were
subject to particularly disgraceful treatment
in the context of Nazi racial policy. They
were submitted to funding cuts on the
grounds of “false notions of humanity,” and
gradually abolished.
Education in the Third Reich was com-
pletely revised to meet the standard of dic-
tatorship. Fewer hours were devoted to for-
eign history and literature, and the study of
foreign languages was curtailed. Religious
instruction was sharply reduced or simply
abolished, school prayer was made optional
or curtailed, and Christian symbols and im-
ages were banned from the classroom. All
subjects were completely altered and infused
with an extreme anti–Semitism, national-
ist, ethnocentric and anti-democratic spirit.
Some subjects were upgraded and converted
for political purposes, and used to sublimi-
nally implant the racial-social values and
goals of the Nazi regime in the minds of the
young. Students, both male and female, were
expected to know about their own history, as
revised, however, by the Nazi system: this
was generally reduced to a study of the Jews
trying to undermine the great achievement
of the Germans, World War I, the glory of
the Kampfzeit (including the Munich Beer-
Hall Putsch of 1923), the martyr Horst
Wessel, the evils of the Weimar Republic,
and the central role assigned to the Führer
who had saved the nation from peril and
servitude. Thin pamphlets recounting Hit-
ler’s life or other edifying tales replaced
bulky expositions of history and literature.
Biology emphasized Hitler’s views on race,
breeding, selection and heredity. This sub-
ject afforded the best opportunity to preach
the supposed distinctions between human
races, the German Nordic “superman,” and
the ignoble and hated Untermenschen (Slavs
and Jews). Special anti–Semitic primers—
such as The Poisonous Mushroom and Trust
No Fox—were issued in order to instill an
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 91


--- PAGE 99 ---
illogical but passionate hatred of Jews in the
very young. The racial theory was simple,
not based on science but repetition: Aryans
= good; Jews = bad. This was backed in the
eugenics classes by models which showed
that, as in nature, harmful germs could cor-
rupt the whole body, so, in society, the Jews
damaged the whole people. Members of the
Jungvolkwere issued the Schwertworte(sword
words), a highly compressed synopsis of Nazi
dogma designed to cultivate German aware-
ness and the militant approach. This had to
be memorized and constantly repeated by
the young boys and girls. In geography, ide-
ological indoctrination continued by way of
geopolitical and racial theories which justi-
ﬁed Hitler’s aggressive expansion policy. The
Deutschkunde, the vague study of a suppos-
edly speciﬁc superior German culture, was
a required subject in all schools. It stressed
Teutonic greatness, the culture-producing
northern Herrenvolk (master race) opposed
to the culture-destroying Jew. It urged famil-
iarization with folk culture including music,
literature, customs, heroic Nordic sagas and
runes, and it encouraged respect for Aryan
heritage and love for the fatherland.
As war was regarded as the most glo-
rious and valiant demonstration of the na-
tion’s purpose, mathematics put the empha-
sis on conditioning for war service with
questions revolving around weaponry, ar-
tillery trajectories or bomb dropping. A typ-
ical question from a lower-grade test: “An
airplane ﬂies at a rate of 240 km/h to a place
at a distance of 21 0 km in order to drop a
bomb; when may it be expected to return if
the dropping of bombs takes 7.5 minutes?”
Ofﬁcial math textbooks also contained ide-
ological references such as calculations of
the cost to produce lunatic asylums as op-
posed to workers’ housing. On such matters
a school manual entitled Mathematik im
Dienst der national-politischen Erziehung
(Mathematics at the Service of National Po-
litical Education) was written in 1936 by
Adolf Dorner. The Study Group for German
History Books and Educational Material
was created in 1934, headed by Philip Bouh-
ler (1899–1945) the same Bouhler who was
also the chief of the notorious euthanasia
program intended to murder the mentally ill.
Curricula of this type were, however,
hard to devise, because the outlines of the
Nazi ideology were vague and often contra-
dictory. “Race,” “blood,” and supernatural
92 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Runes. The runic alphabet was used by ancient German and Scandinavian tribes. Their literature
was not very important but runes were carved on gravestones. The alphabet had 24 signs which
were used from left to right. The characters also had a magic power and were used for divination and
mystical practices. “Rûn” or “runar,” in pre–Christian ancient Norwegian, means “mysterious or
secret script.” The Tyr-rune or Teiwaz (far left) was the battle rune symbolizing the pagan god of
war, Tyr. The Leben rune or Algiz—letter Z (middle left), the symbol of life, was used as emblem for
the SS Lebensborn Society; it was also used on SS documents and graves to indicate date of birth.
The Toten rune—upside-down letter Z (middle right) was the symbol of death, used on SS docu-
ments and graves to indicate date of death. The Sig rune or Sowelu (right), symbolic of victory, was
the emblem used by the junior boys of the Hitler Jugend. Two Sig runes were the emblem of the
Schutz-Staffeln (SS).


--- PAGE 100 ---
forces were far too indistinct, but a few
things were clear: the rejection of liberal-
ism, materialism, scientiﬁc objectivity and
intellectualism. The aim, too, was clear: the
creation of ﬁghting spirit and physical efﬁ-
ciency. Every individual had to regard himself
or herself ﬁrst and foremost as a component
of the community. Passing the once-dreaded
examinations became a matter of regurgi-
tating Nazi biological theories, myths about
the country’s recent history, and other non-
sense. The naziﬁcation of the school system
was pursued beyond the classroom in the
Hitler Jugend.
Universities
Universities, too, were purged of Jew-
ish, liberal, and social-democrat personnel
after 1933. These were harassed, dismissed,
forced into exile and retirement, and even
imprisoned. They were replaced by inexpe-
rienced and unqualiﬁed but reliable Nazi
professors. This was a terrible loss for Ger-
many which had held a position of world
leadership in science. On the other hand,
the purge was a gain for the free world as
many scientists, such as Albert Einstein,
were more or less forced into exile. Univer-
sity teachers were controlled by the Nation-
alsozialistische-Dozentenbund(NSDB—Nazi
Lecturers League), a professional associa-
tion of university lecturers designed to keep
them in line with Nazi ideology. Students
had to be members of the Nationalsozialis-
tischen deutschen Studentenbund (NSDStB—
Nazi Student League). The NSDStB, headed
from 1928 to 1933 by Baldur von Schirach,
was devoted to the furtherance of the Nazi
way of life among students and indoctrina-
tion with National Socialist philosophy, and
included physical training and military drills.
The new curriculum emphasized the basic
elements of Nazi ideology: racism, nation-
alism, Germanic culture, duty, loyalty to the
Führer, soldierly spirit, obedience and dis-
cipline. Students were often required to put
aside their books and spend months in mil-
itary training and labor camps. With contin-
ual rounds of marches, rallies and other party
activities, the desperate professors had to
ease their requirements drastically in order
to graduate sufﬁcient numbers.
The educational reforms instituted by
the Nazi regime had catastrophic results.
The traditional German humanism was re-
placed with politico-racial institutions ded-
icated to militarism, racial hatred and ag-
gressive expansionism. Many young people
began to question the value of obtaining the
once-prestigious Abitur—the graduation
certiﬁcate needed to enter a university. By
the late 1930s, many students were dropping
out of school to work as craft apprentices or
industrial trainees. Education—from ele-
mentary schools to the universities—became
merely an appendage of the Propaganda
Ministry, intellectual standards declined
precipitously and a whole generation was
the victim of odious indoctrination.
However, contradictions arose in what
appeared at ﬁrst to be a uniformed program
of assimilation. Education experienced over-
lapping between administrative and party
organs. Conﬂicts arose between Rust, von
Schirach and Ley, and those were never fully
resolved, with unfortunate side effects. The
ideological content of Nazism remained too
vague to function as a self-sufﬁcient objec-
tive. It was indeed so vague that notions of
racial and national arrogance were mixed up
with traditional pedagogic humanism. The
content of the curriculum was diluted by
more traditional inﬂuences, the model of the
front-line soldier-hero got mixed up with
the idea of racial superiority, and profound
agrarian German culture and backward-look-
ing romanticism and tradition were mixed
up with enthusiasm for modern high tech-
nology. Because of the confusion within the
schools themselves, many teachers were un-
satisﬁed. Many were probably more con-
fused than deliberately uncooperative.
The Hitler Jugend encouraged chal-
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 93


--- PAGE 101 ---
lenges to more conservative forms of author-
ity, and gave youths a sense of collective
power. The youth movement, the family, and
the educational system tended to diverge.
This precipitated the disintegration of the
home as a place of education, and the decline
in the quality of education and school disci-
pline, to an alarming extent. Teachers found
themselves confronted with classrooms full
of boys and girls who were more and more
disobedient and reluctant to do what they
were told, and who seemingly regarded in-
telligence itself as unimportant. Teachers had
to subordinate themselves to the Hitler
Youth, as it became dangerous for them to
maintain discipline in the classroom, give or-
ders or inﬂict punishment. Activities took
precedence over any kind of formal educa-
tion. Young HJ members were increasingly
given time off regular schooling for meetings
or attendance at party rallies. Every free mo-
ment was monopolized by the HJ. As there
were important and exciting things to do out-
side the classrooms, students—treated as
“chaps” instead of children—often missed
class to take part in HJ activities. There was
a widespread lack of any commitment and
keenness, and an increasing of unmannerly
behavior and laziness at school. As one stu-
dent HJ leader said: “We have no respect for
the clever monks in their quiet cells!” Things
went so badly wrong, and clashes between
arrogant HJ members and teachers became
so widespread, that the Nazi state created the
Jugendschutzkammer (Youth Protection
Chamber), an ofﬁcial body responsible for
adjudicating the rights of the young people of
the HJ. The chamber handled such cases as
teachers accused of face slapping as a discipli-
nary measure, for example. Teachers dared
not object to the Nazi demand for conform-
ity and its regime of terror. Even a benign
objection or remark might be regarded as a
crime against the regime. Hitler, who had
never got over his poor showing at school,
grabbed the opportunity to avenge himself
on the teaching profession as a whole.
Special Nazi Schools
Hitler found his administrative, polit-
ical and military leaders in the existing
structures that he had taken over. But un-
doubtedly this situation was only transi-
tional, as Hitler’s Reich was intended to last
for a thousand years. After a generation at
most, the old leadership would have to be
replaced by a new one. Whoever had the
children, had the future. From the start,
Nazi ofﬁcials sensed that classical military
academies, public schools and universities
might not be the best training grounds for
the future elite of the Third Reich. The
Nazi regime needed military ofﬁcers, police,
civil servants, administrators, and political
leaders who were both competent and un-
contaminated by subversive ideas. Those
qualities could best be inculcated in special
schools. In the chaotic fashion of the new
order, several agencies—the Reich Ministry
of Education, the Nazi Party, the Hitler Ju-
gend, the SA and the SS—vied for the honor
of ﬁlling the bill. Rust, von Schirach and
Himmler found themselves on opposing
sides in the struggle to monopolize Nazi
“elite” education. The result was two types
of rival grammar schools and a romantic
university outside the normal education sys-
tem. These schools were exclusively reserved
for boys and young men, as the Nazi Party
did not accept women into its top leader-
ship. These new types of schools created by
the regime failed on the whole to achieve
their aims; in the end—due to wartime con-
ditions—they represented a poor alternative
to the traditional education system. The boy
who wanted to become a leader in the Nazi
system no longer had to worry about his fu-
ture. He knew that he could rise to the top
of an elitist cult. His family usually did not
object, out of fear, ambition, or ignorance.
Many did not realize until it was too late
that a dreadful Pied Piper had taken their
boys away from them.
94 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 102 ---
Napola
The ﬁrst new kind of school was the
so-called Nationalpolitischen Erziehungsan-
stalten (national political institutes), known
as NPEA or “Napola.” Created in April
1933, these boarding schools were a birthday
present to Hitler from Education Minister
Rust. They were established for the purpose
of training a Nazi elite for future high posts
in the Third Reich. In addition Napolas
were intended to restore the type of mili-
tary education formerly given in the old
Prussian academies. The Napolas were
roughly equivalent to the Gymnasien (high
schools), but the academic standards were
far below those of the average grammar
schools. Athletic prowess and tests of cour-
age weighed more heavily than academic
knowledge. The Napolas were ofﬁcially open
to all qualiﬁed youngsters regardless of so-
cial origin, but in practice priority was given
to the sons of the families of loyal Nazis,
members of the Hitler Jugend, sons of war
dead, and sons of old-line Army ofﬁcers.
Other candidates came from the rural and
working-class elements of the population.
All Jungmannen (cadets) had to be physi-
cally ﬁt, intellectually able and—most im-
portant—of “untainted” German blood.
Preliminary tests and a one-week trial were
held to examine candidates’ character, phy-
sique and intelligence, in that order. Though
depending on the Ministry of Education,
Napolas were gradually placed under SS
tutelage. Himmler gained control insidi-
ously, ﬁrst offering to supply clothing and
equipment, then scholarship and funding.
His efforts were rewarded in 1936 when SS
Obergruppenführer August Heissmeyer was
appointed as inspector general. Himmler
then pushed for all school staff to be en-
rolled in the SS. By 1 940 the Black Corps
had taken full control, introducing SS style
uniforms and ranks. Candidates were nom-
inated by high SS functionaries responsible
only to Himmler and Hitler. The teaching
was greatly inﬂuenced by the Nazi ideology,
with a strong emphasis on developing sol-
dierly spirit, physical courage, a sense of duty,
simplicity, austere conduct, self-discipline,
physical ﬁtness, a sense of community, and
readiness for service and self-sacriﬁce, fo-
cusing on forming a Nazi personality rather
than intellectual development. The curricu-
lum was designed accordingly. Five subjects
were obligatory: German, history, geogra-
phy, ethnology and biology—precisely the
subjects predestined for ideological indoctri-
nation. In addition, engineers and ofﬁcers
were available to instruct pupils in technical
and military subjects. Morning classes were
interspersed with gymnastics, athletics, swim-
ming, ball games, rowing, riding, fencing,
boxing and ﬁeld sports. The boys also went
sailing and gliding, activities important to
the navy and the air force respectively. Mil-
itary training included ﬁeld exercises, ma-
neuvers, route marches with compass and
target shooting with various weapons. There
were also ceremonies designed to make a ro-
mantic impact on youthful participants, held
on the Führer’s birthday, at solstice and har-
vesttime, and many other occasions. Teach-
ers and pupils were militarily organized,
wore uniforms and were submitted to strict,
spartan discipline. The uniform consisted of
an earth-gray suit, including a four-pocket
tunic and trousers. The shirt was khaki with
black tie and brown facings on the tunic col-
lar. This color was repeated in the band of
the peaked cap. An SS style eagle was worn
on the left sleeve. The shoulder straps were
black and bore the initials “NPEA.” Stu-
dents retained their HJ knifes but ofﬁcers
carried a distinctive dagger with an eagle
and swastika on the grip; on the blade was
displayed the motto “ mehr sein als scheinen”
(be more than you appear to be). To help
integrate the pupils in German society, they
were employed on farms in the summer.
Originally Napolas were established 
at the former Prussian cadet schools at 
Potsdam, Plön and Köslin. There were 1 5
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 95


--- PAGE 103 ---
Napolas in 1935 and 21 by 1938, including
four in Austria and one in the annexed Sude-
ten area of Czechoslovakia. This number
grew to 39 in 1943, though the original plan
envisaged a hundred of t hem by 1945. De-
spite the importance placed in the Napolas by
Himmler, only a tiny proportion of Ger-
many’s young people ever passed through
these schools, and thus their inﬂuence on
German life was minimal.
Graduates were free to choose their
own career. Some opted for civil engineer-
ing, teaching and medicine, but many went
into the German armed forces and the SS
corps, which suited their sense of elitism,
and most served during the war. Early in
1944, SS Obergruppenführer Heissmeyer
praised the heroism of Napola graduates of
whom 1,226 had already been killed in ac-
tion.
Adolf-Hitler-Schulen
The second type of new school was the
so-called Adolf-Hitler-Schulen(AHS—Adolf
Hitler schools). The ﬁrst school was opened
in April 1937 at Krössinsee—once again, on
Hitler’s birthday—by the party’s director of
organization, Robert Ley, and by Hitler
Youth leader Baldur von Schirach. From the
start there was a ferocious rivalry about who
was to control and direct the new AH schools.
Having long sought to gain control of Min-
istry of Education Rust’s Napolas—vainly, as
Rust favored the SS—Robert Ley proceeded
to open his own elite academies with Hitler’s
blessing. Ley gleefully, rudely rejected Rust’s
attempt to trespass on his new preserve, and
appointed his colleague Kurt Petter as in-
spector-general. The Adolf-Hitler-Schulewere
secondary boarding schools expressly de-
signed to train the future NSDAP and Hit-
ler Youth leaderships. Each Gau (region)
was supposed to have its own Adolf Hitler
School, but the expense proved too big a
drain on party funds and the NSDAP treas-
urer Franz Xaver Schwarz stopped short.
There was also a shortage of teaching staff.
Only ten of the schools existed in 1939, and
eleven by 1942. The AH schools were free
of charge and intended for the brightest of
the 12-year-old Hitler Jugend boys. Candi-
dates were sons of petit-bourgeois and provin-
cial, lower-middle-class tradesmen, shop-
keepers and white-collar workers. During
their second year in the Jungvolk—the jun-
ior branch of the HJ—potential candidates
for the AHS were examined for their racial
background and then sent to a youth camp
for two weeks for ﬁnal selection. A main cri-
terion of selection was a good record during
the ﬁrst two years of membership in the HJ,
plus physical appearance: any fair-haired,
blue-eyed boy had a better chance to be se-
lected. With a curriculum lasting six years,
the AH schools were established to create
a new generation of Nazi followers, and
meant to turn out a technically and ideo-
logically trained elite. The inspiration was
ancient Sparta, the British public schools
and the Jesuit education system. Here again
the emphasis was on the ﬁve ideological
subjects including history—which was dis-
torted in a way ser ving Nazi aims—and bi-
ology, which included “scientiﬁc” proofs in-
tended to develop racism. The stress, too as
usual, was the forming of Nazi cadres by
physical training, not intellectual develop-
ment, and with pre-military training and
service within the community. There were
ﬁve periods of physical training each week
and one half period of study. Pupils wore
uniforms and were structured into military
units. Teachers watc hed their charges at
every moment, even overseeing bedmaking,
deportment, and personal hygiene. Squads
competed with one another and were judged
collectively instead of by individual exami-
nation. Students were graduated at the age
of 18 and then, after military service in the
Wehrmacht, were considered qualiﬁed for
entrance to a university or to one of the Or-
densburgen (see below). Because of their iso-
lated and specialized education, young peo-
96 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 104 ---
ple in the AHS knew nothing about practi-
cal life, while, on the other hand, their ar-
rogance and conceit about their own abili-
ties were boundless. It is signiﬁcant that
most of the high NSDAP functionaries did
not send their own children to such schools.
Graduates with favorable political reports
formed cadres of parvenus and careerists of
varying respectability and effectiveness in
the NSDAP structure. The best graduates
could also attend two other schools: the Su-
perior School of the NSDAP (established
at Chiemsee), and the National School of
the NSDAP (established at Feldaﬁng). Both
schools provided high-ranking Nazi leaders
for the future.
Ordensburgen
The third institution intended to form
future reliable and fanatical Nazi genera-
tions—was the Ordensburgen (literally “cas-
tles of knightly order”). These were the
ﬁnishing schools, the highest residential
academies for the training of the future Nazi
elite. United in narcissism, mysticism and
fanaticism, those chosen formed a kind of
NSDAP university, an institutional core of
Nazi brothers, the best of the SS elite. Hit-
ler once declared:
My teaching is hard. Weakness has to be
knocked out of them. In my Ordensburgena
youth will grow up before which the world
will shrink back. A violently active, domi-
nating, intrepid, brutal youth—that is what
I am after. Youth must be all those things.
It must be indifferent to pain. There must
be no weakness or tenderness in it. I want to
see once more in its eyes the gleam of pride
and independence of the beast of prey. In
this way I shall eradicate the thousands of
years of human domestication. Then I shall
have in front of me the pure and noble nat-
ural material. With that I can create the
New Order.
The Ordensburgen received their name
from the medieval fortresses built by the
Teutonic Knights, and they attempted to re-
create a medieval order of chivalry. Four cas-
tles were established in out-of-the-way,
romantic, scenic settings, at Krössinsee
(Pomerania), Sonthofen (Upper Bavaria),
Vogelsang (Eifel), and Marienburg (East
Prussia). Each castle accommodated about
1,000 students called “Junkers.” Supervision
was in the hands of no fewer than 500 in-
structors, administrative staff, cooks, porters,
orderlies, athletic and military trainers, ide-
ology teachers, grooms and other personnel.
Each school was carefully separated from
the outside world. It had its dormitories, re-
fectories, classrooms, chapel, meditation
cloister, athletic accommodations, private
cemetery, and a library comprising all the
literature connected to Nazism. The execu-
tive ofﬁcial was Robert Ley, head of the
Deutsche Arbeitsfront(DAF—German Labor
Front), who set its standards. The Ordens-
burgen were, however, gradually placed under
control of Himmler’s SS. Entrants were
chosen from among those who had spent six
years, from age 12 to 18, at the Adolf-Hitler-
Schools or Napolas, two and a half years in
the Reichsarbeitsdienst(RAD—the state labor
service), and another four years in full-time
party activity. The candidates were thus in
their mid-twenties when chosen for the order
castles. The selection of candidates was con-
trolled by high party and SS functionaries.
Most candidates were of humble origin,
sons of party provincial ofﬁcials, farmers and
artisans. Those who were chosen were usu-
ally of limited intelligence but regarded it
as a distinct honor. As might be expected,
intellectual standards were very low and at-
tendance to the Ordensburg did little to fos-
ter education. Students went to each of the
four castles for a year at a time. At the acad-
emy at Krössinsee, the ﬁrst year, the stress
was on the study of racial science, athletics,
boxing and gliding. Great attention was
given to horse riding because that gave the
Junkers the feeling of being able to domi-
nate a living creature. The second year, at
Sonthofen, the emphasis was on athletics,
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 97


--- PAGE 105 ---
parachute jumping, mountain climbing and
skiing. The third year, at Vogelsang, the stu-
dents received political and military instruc-
tion, and physical training. One of the tests
that year was the Tierkampf, combat with
bare hands against wild dogs. The fourth
year, at the prestigious Teutonic castle
Marienburg, the Junkers were expected to
obtain their ﬁnal military formation, and
political and racial indoctrination.
All through their education and train-
ing, the Junkers were subjected to a rigorous
discipline and expected to be obedient and
respectful. The ﬁner points of social eti-
quette were also cultivated assiduously. The
slightest infractions were severely punished.
Live ammunition was used in war training.
Graduates entered the highest echelons of
the Nazi Party, the SS corps and the Ger-
man army as well-drilled functionaries and
docile executives but most of them had not
acquired the many qualities of a good leader.
In contrast with the Napolas, the castles
were not linked with German military tra-
ditions, and the system failed miserably. The
Ordensburgen never attracted a full comple-
ment of students despite the ﬁnancial in-
ducement and the prestige of attendance.
According to some estimates, half the avail-
able places remained vacant. Even in the
most fanatical NSDAP circles, the product
of the Ordensburgen were occasionally con-
sidered too ruthless and arrogant.
During World War II, the Ordensbur-
gen were characterized by a further empha-
sis on the military. They were then placed
under tutelage of the SS. They became a
part of the Amt XI (branch 11) of the SS
Führungs-Hauptamt (SSFHa—the head-
quarters of the Waffen SS) created in August
1940 and headed by SS Gruppenführer Jütt-
ner. The Amt XIwas charged with the train-
ing of Waffen SS senior ofﬁcers; the
Ordensburgen were used for this purpose.
98 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
NSDAP Gemeinschaftsleiter (Ordensburgen
teacher)


--- PAGE 106 ---
The Amt XI had two other schools/training
places at Bad-Tölz (Bavaria) and Braunsch-
weig (Brunswick in Lower Saxony). The SS
ensured that those marked for high ofﬁce by
attendance at the SS school at Bad-Tölz had
bloodied their hands during a practical pe-
riod in the Dachau concentration camp.
The Junkers were then “solid chaps”—part
of the SS apparatus of terror.
The Junkers’ original uniform was de-
signed after the SA and NSDAP model. It
included a khaki tunic and trousers with a
brown belt. The cap had a brown peak and
band, and a sleeve displayed the name of the
attended Ordensburg. Later during the war,
when the institutions were taken over by the
SS, the uniform was strongly inﬂuenced by
the new leaders, with black suit, military
dress and SS insignia.
SA school
An SA school for boys was situated in
Feldaﬁng on the Starnbergersee south of
Munich, NS Deutsche Oberschule Starnberg-
ersee (National-Socialist German High
School Starnbergersee). This school, opened
in April 1933, was intended to train future
SA leaders. The selected pupils were mostly
sons of SA veterans, and known as SA Jung-
mannen (Young Men of the Storm-troops).
The main educational aims went without
saying: ideological reliability and physical
ﬁtness. The standard of education was piti-
able. It never proved difﬁcult to ﬁnd enough
pupils. The ﬁnal examination consisted of
essays on optional subjects and an oral test
by members of the teaching staff. Gradu-
ates could enter the SA corps with the rank
of Truppführer (staff sergeant). In February
1936 control of the school passed from the
SA to Nazi Party hands, although the head-
master remained an SA ofﬁcer: Obergrup-
penführer (Lieutenant-General) Julius Gör-
litz. In 1941 all connection with the SA was
severed. Pupils were enrolled in the Hitler
Jugend, and the staff in the NSDAP .
Special Units (Sondereinheiten )
To the casual observer, the Hitler Youth
seemed like the scouting movement that
ﬂourished in other countries—tanned boys
hiking, camping and lifting their voices in
song. But the HJ was not an innocent youth
movement at all. In fact the Hitler Youth
was providing the Nazi Party with a new
generation of believers and with cannon
fodder for the war. It was a government-
dominated organization dedicated to mak-
ing fervent Nazis, producing obedient citi-
zens, and molding savage warriors for the
Third Reich. Everything in the HJ stressed
the martial and physical. There was a strict
discipline reﬂected by oath, rituals, regalia,
uniforms and ranks. The training’s overrid-
ing purpose was to ﬁll the ranks of the reg-
imented labor force, the national Wehrmacht,
and Hitler’s private army, the Waffen SS.
After the bloody purge of 30 June 1934
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 99
Schiessauszeichnung (Hitler Youth shooting
award for proﬁciency in ﬁring small-bore
weapons). The highest level of marksmanship
was considered to be 90 percent accuracy hitting
the target from 50 meters with half the shots
made in the prone position.


--- PAGE 107 ---
the SA did not disappear, but
their size was drastically shrunk,
and they were completely de-
prived of political power, rele-
gated to a backseat role, assigned
mundane tasks and turned into
a veterans’ association. Until the
end of the war in 1945, the SA—
headed by the loyal and colorless
SA Obergruppenführer Viktor
Lutze—continued to exist as Nazi
propagandists, fund collectors, a
sporting organization, and as
pre-military training units to the
SA Reserve and the boys of the
Hitler Jugend. For this training
purpose, SA Wehrmannschaften
(defense teams) were created in
January 1939 . During the war,
the SA Wehrmannschaften func-
tioned as home-front auxiliaries for civil de-
fense and police work. The pre-military
training of the Hitler Jugend was increas-
ingly taken over by the SS administration.
As the threat of war came closer, HJ
activities were even less focused on fun and
leisure, while militarization was drastically
increased. Under SA (later SS and army) su-
pervision, the Kern HJ members, age 14–
18, attended camps for one month where
they were engaged in physical exercises,
parading, war-gaming, close-order drills and
maneuvers. The training included running,
swimming, and other athletic pursuits, camp-
ﬁres, cookouts, and adventurous ﬁeld trips.
To these were added navigation training with
map and compass, the use of camouﬂage,
and arms drills, as well as learning and prac-
ticing semaphore, and the operation of com-
munications apparatus and cryptography
devices. Young men were accustomed to
wearing steel helmets and gas masks, famil-
iarized in the use of hand grenades, and
trained with pistols, carbines, riﬂes and ma-
chine guns in order to acquire sharp eyes
and steady hands. In 1938 the HJ possessed
over 15,000 small riﬂes, and a Schiessauszeich-
nung (sharpshooter’s badge) was awarded
for accurate shooting and precision sniping.
In 1939 alone, some 51,500 of these badges
were granted to HJ members.
Children who became proﬁcient at
such tasks were given rewards such as a cer-
emonial sharp knife and prestigious medals
which were worn with immense pride. For
the purpose of training future ofﬁcers, the
Hitler Jugend opened two training schools
in Obermassfeld (Thuringe province) and
Middelburg (Mecklenburg province). Ofﬁ-
cers and NCOs of the German army also
participated in the training of the Hitler
Youth. One of them—in 1 937—was none
other than Oberstleutnant Erwin Rommel,
who later became the legendary “Desert
Fox,” head of the famous Afrika Korps and
Generalfeldmarschall of the Reich.
In addition, the Hitler Youth had sev-
eral Sondereinheiten (special units) which
were for direct preparation for war, provid-
ing needed military skills and useful quali-
ﬁcations. The special units were more at-
tractive to older boys than was monotonous
service in the general Hitler Youth. Indeed,
signs of boredom could be observed among
100 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Training with pistol ﬁring


--- PAGE 108 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 101
Training with hand grenade


--- PAGE 109 ---
older members of the HJ. Devotion to duty
crumbled under the onset of teenage prob-
lems and outside interests. The special para-
military units were meant to maintain the
interest of the teenagers by putting the em-
phasis on adventure and modern technol-
ogy which had a great appeal to the youth.
The courses were also of great interest to
the armed forces and Waffen SS, who gladly
supported the training of potential recruits
and aided by supplying equipment and in-
structors.
Marine-Hitler-Jugend
The Marine-Hitler-Jugend (Navy Hit-
ler Youth) was created in 1935. This special
branch of the youth organization was very
popular. It had 50,000 members in 1938 and
62,000 in 1939, mainly in the northern re-
gions close to the North Sea and Baltic Sea,
around the towns of Kiel and Hamburg, but
also inland, as Germany has many lakes,
canals and rivers. The Marine-HJ had two
Reichsseesportschulen (schools for sea sport)
in Prieros (province Brandenburg), and in
Seemoos near Bodensee Lake. Both schools
were originally created for and managed by
the special navy branch of the storm troops
(Marine-SA, formed in 1934), for training
in physical exercises, swimming, rowing,
navigation, navy armament, signaling and
other communication. After their intensive
training the members of the Marine-HJ were
sent on practice cruises in small boats in the
North and Baltic seas. Every year there was
a national championship meeting held at
Kiel where the best teams paraded and prac-
ticed. The highlight of the naval training
was a cruise in the Baltic Sea aboard the
prestigious Kriegsmarine’s training ships
Horst Wessel and Georg Fock. In 1 940, as a
display of skill in inland navigation, a Ma-
rine-HJ party sailed from Passau in Lower
Bavaria to Vienna and Budapest.
Members of the Marine-HJ wore the
rather expensive traditional uniform of the
102 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Training with light carbine


--- PAGE 110 ---
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 103
HJ Marine uniform


--- PAGE 111 ---
German navy. There was a double-breasted
jacket with navy-blue trousers and a peaked
cap. During seagoing exercises, they wore a
white moleskin smock and trousers, and a
navy-blue forage cap. The Waffenfarbe (arm
of service color) of the Marine-HJ was blue
and displayed in the form of piping on the
shoulder straps and hats. After 1936, Vice-
Admiral ausser Dienst (retired) von Trotha
was Ehrenführer (honorary leader) of the
Marine-HJ. Many of the members became
sailors of the Kriegsmarine (German navy)
during the war.
Flieger-Hitler-Jugend
Members of the HJ could also be se-
duced by the exciting Flieger-Hitler-Jugend
(Hitler Youth Flying Association). Accord-
ing to the stipulations of the Treaty of Ver-
sailles in 1 919, Germany had no right to
possess a military air force, but no clause
forbade gliding. In the late 1920s and early
1930s, gliding was a national German sport
which was encouraged by the Nazi Party as
a patriotic activity. Germany had been a pi-
oneer in gliding; the inventor and aeronaut
Otto Lilienthal (1848–1896) was the ﬁrst to
establish gliding as a science. He made over
2,000 ﬂights before being killed in a glider
accident, and left a valuable book on glider
techniques. Model airplanes and gliders were
thus very popular among the German youth.
The purpose of the Flieger-HJ was to learn
the basics of ﬂying, the ﬁrst step to training
pilots for the Luftwaffe. Members spent
their ﬁrst two years building model gliders
and learning the theory of ﬂight. Simple
winch-launched gliders gave youthful pilots
their ﬁrst experience of ﬂight and produced
a powerful propaganda image of a modern
nation taking to the skies. Glider proﬁciency
badges were issued in the form of seagull.
There were three classes: third class, with
one seagull; second, with two; and ﬁrst, with
three. The Waffenfarbe(arm of service color)
was light blue. Then they would attempt to
earn their glider certiﬁcation. Training was
also provided in radio signaling, anti-aircraft
activity and air-raid operations.
The Youth Flying Association had close
contact with the Flieger-SA, the ﬂying branch
of the storm troops created in 1930, and the
Nationalsozialistische Flieger-Korps(NSFK—
Nazi Flyers Corps). The NSFK organization
was founded in 1932 under future chief of air
force Hermann Göring; it was headed by a
certain Ziegler who had been Göring’s col-
league during World War I. The NSFK
corps was intended to promote interest in
and development of air sports, notably glid-
ing and ballooning. The NSFK managed to
rally World War I–veteran pilots for prop-
aganda aims. Heroes such as Bruno Lörzer
and Ernst Udet joined and played a signiﬁ-
cant role in the creation of the Luftwaffe in
1935. The Corps was semi-civilian but mil-
itarily organized. As with every other Nazi
organization, members of the NSFK wore a
uniform. Service dress was Luftwaffe gray
with a pale blue shirt, black tie and SA-type
kepi. The right sleeve had a striking motif,
a winged man above a swastika. Ranks were
similar to those of the SA, and displayed on
collar patches. The summer uniform in-
cluded a khaki shirt, black tie, swastika arm-
band, black leather belt, and gray trousers.
The mission of the Flieger-HJand the NSFK
was to channel energy, to exploit youth en-
thusiasm, to train potential pilots for the
Luftwaffe, to continue post-military training
of reservists and to further consciousness of
aviation among the German population at
large. For the latter pur pose there was also
the Luftsportverband (LSV—League for
Aeronautic Sport), a consortium of aviation
clubs and associations devoted to civilian
ﬂying and gliding. The Luftwaffe supported
close relationships with these highly popu-
lar organizations as they developed future
combat pilots for ﬁghters and bombers, as
well as ground personnel for technical and
administrative duties. Members of the
Flieger-HJ were taken to visit aircraft man-
104 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 112 ---
ufacturers, and Luftwaffe airﬁelds, where
they had the opportunity to have a close
look on the air force’s newest airplanes. A
few of them even had the honor and pleas-
ure of ﬂying as passengers in transport and
bomber aircraft. In addition, the Flieger-HJ
and the other ﬂying associations provided
future Fallschirmjäger (paratroopers, includ-
ing glider-borne troops) and Flakhelfer (anti-
aircraft gunners and searchlight personnel).
The Flieger-HJ was one of the largest of the
special units. In 1938 it had about 78,000
members, of which 1 5,000 had graduated,
gaining a gliding brevet. Teenagers of the
Flieger-HJ who showed promise were made
future Fähnrich (ofﬁcer cadet) in the Luft-
waffe. This was to ensure that when the boys
became old enough for military service, no
other branch could take them.
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 105
Stamer Lippisch SG 38 glider. The SG 38 training glider, designed by engineer Alexander Lippisch,
was the standard for the basic instruction of the Luftwaffe student pilots. It had a total length of
6.28 m (20.604 ft), a wingspan of 10.41 m (34.1 54 ft), and an empty weight of 110 kg (242 lbs).
Maximum speed was 115 km/h (7 1 mph).
HJ glider proﬁciency badges


--- PAGE 113 ---
106 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
German pilot Unterfeldwebel 1939


--- PAGE 114 ---
Paratrooper. Developed by General Kurt Student, the German Fallschirmjäger (paratroopers)
were a part of the Luftwaffe . They were a small elite force that played a noteworthy role during
World War II. Using both gliders and parachutes, the carefully selected and highly-trained German
airborne units achieved remarkable successes in Belgium and Holland in 1940. The casualties suf-
fered by the landing in Crete the following year, though leading to the capture of the Greek island,
were judged too costly by Hitler for him to permit a repetition. Paradoxically, as the likelihood of
another large-scale airborne operation receded, the parachute forces expanded, earning a reputa-
tion as formidable ﬁghters as they attracted a steady ﬂow of young volunteers of the highest caliber
from throughout the German air force, army and Hitler Youth.


--- PAGE 115 ---
Motor-Hitler-Jugend
Young men interested in mechanics
and driving trucks, motorcycles and cars
could join the highly popular Motor-Hitler-
Jugend. When a boy reached sixteen, the age
at which a driver’s license could be procured,
he could petition for entrance. The Motor-
HJ had a close connection with the Nation-
alsozialistische Kraftfahrer-Korps (NSKK—
National-Socialist Driver Corps). The
NSKK originated from the Nationalsozial-
istischen Automobil Korps (NSAK—National
Socialist Automobile Corps) that was
founded in 1930. The NSAK included
wealthy car owners who sympathized with
the Nazis and put themselves at the party’s
disposal in their free time, and formed a
group of mechanics and drivers to transport
Nazi Party leaders. The Sturm Abteilung(SA)
had its own transport service, called the
Motor Sturm Abteilung (MSA). Both MSA
and NSAK were inspired by Mussolini’s
Squadristi and played a signiﬁcant role dur-
ing the Kampfzeit, the troubled period be-
fore the Nazis took over power in Germany.
After the purge of the SA in June 1934, the
Motor-SA was disbanded and its members
were transferred to the NSAK which was
then reorganized and renamed National-
sozialistische Kraftfahrer-Korps (NSKK) in
November 1934. The Nazi Party gave a great
deal of attention to modern means of trans-
port. Hitler was keen on cars and planes.
After the seizure of power in January 1933,
a wide Autobahn (motorway) network was
launched and the Führer ordered engineer
Ferdinand Porsche to design a cheap popu-
lar car, the future Volkswagen. Until the end
of the Nazi regime, the NS Driver Corps
was an important ofﬁcial Gliederung der
NSDAP (Nazi Party organization) directly
placed under Hitler’s authority. The NSKK—
counting 500,000 members, headed by Major
Adolf Hühnlein in 1938—was progressively
more militarily organized and divided into
structured units with ranks similar to those
108 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Haupttruppführer Motor SA 1933


--- PAGE 116 ---
of the SA. The members of the NSKK had
not only a logistical role, driving and main-
taining vehicles, they were also high-tech-
nology specialists in military matters, hav-
ing close contacts with the army, notably
with the armored forces headed by Heinz
Guderian. They gave mechanical advice and
driving lessons to lorry and tank driver can-
didates in Wehrmacht Fahrschulen (driving
schools). The technical efﬁciency of the
motor corps was a major trump card, consid-
ering the formation of tank crews and the
development of Blitzkrieg (lightning war)
which gave Germany tremendous victories
in 1939–41. Closely connected to the Nazi
Party, Motor-HJ and NSKK members were
often politically active. They participated
in party rallies and ceremonies, dispensed
Nazi ideology via lectures, and organized
visits to factories for propaganda purposes.
It was no coincidence that Adolf Hühnlein
was both NSKK-Führer (chief of the mo-
torized corps) and Ehrenführer (honorary
leader) of the Motor-HJ. In late 1 937 the
association opened a Reichsmotorschule (driv-
ing school) at Bad Gandersheim, north of
Göttingen, where members learned all the
requirements of driving and maintaining ve-
hicles. Members of the Motor-HJ had to
log their driving hours like pilots. Eighty
hours of driving a year were required for
continued membership. They also had to
know international road signs and have at
least 105 hours of workshop mechanic ex-
perience. The Motor-HJ special unit’s Waf-
fenfarbe was pink, the same as the armored
force. The corps was very popular and
counted 18,000 members in 1 935. By 1938
this had increased to 90,000 members. In
1937 , 10,000 driving licenses were obtained
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 109
NSKK arm eagle cloth badge
Member of the Motor-HJ. The young man’s
head is protected by a leather motorcycle crash
helmet. On the left sleeve of his shirt he sports
the triangular badge of his district, the white/red
HJ diamond with black swastika, and the round
driving badge.


--- PAGE 117 ---
110 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
NSKK Truppführer (sergeant) 1939


--- PAGE 118 ---
by Motor-HJ members; in 1938 that num-
ber was up to 28,000. Drivers and mechan-
ics were later incorporated in the NSKK, in
army transport units, and in the army and
Waffen SS motorized combat formations.
Nachrichten-Hitler-Jugend
Members of the HJ who were interested
in modern communication technology could
join the Nachrichten-HJ signal unit whose
Waffenfarbe (color of service) was yellow.
The Germans were quick to see the full po-
tential of radio communication. As early as
1935, Heinz Guderian (chief of armed forces)
encouraged the development of simple and
reliable radio for modern warfare. The HJ
transmission units beneﬁted of the experi-
ence of the Nachrichten-SA, the signal units
of the storm troops, formed in 1930. There
was also a high-tech school in Berlin that
trained selected young men in the use, main-
tenance and repair of signal lamps, Morse
code and telegraph devices, ﬁeld telephones,
teleprinters and teletypewriters, and wire-
less telegraphy. 
Radio in the late 1930s was still largely
an affair of bulky devices, clumsy accumula-
tors, complex tuning systems, tinny loud-
speakers, headphones, crystal rectiﬁers and
short receiving ranges, and so more tradi-
tional means of communication were also
used, such as messengers on foot, bike or
horseback, as well as pigeon and Meldehunde
(messenger dogs). During World War II,
radio communications—in spite of limited
technology—revolutionized how armies
fought on the battleﬁeld. They played an
important role in the development and suc-
cess of the German “lightning war” in the
period of victory, 1 939–41.
Reiter-Hitler-Jugend
Although ill-suited for modern war-
fare, the military horse did not disappear
during World War II. Throughout the war,
the mobility of the German army as a whole
largely depended on horses. The animals
demanded specialized troops. Created in
1938, the Reiter-HJ (Hitler Youth cavalry)
was in the beginning a relatively small unit
with a snobbish, elitist character, with
wealthy members of riding clubs providing
their own mounts. With the rearmament
program and the preparation for war in the
late 1930s, the Reiter-HJ was greatly ex-
panded to agricultural communities and no
longer relied upon private horse ownership.
Its purpose was preparation for service in
the army cavalry. Its participants fed, wa-
tered, cleaned and exercised horses and
maintained harnesses and other equipment.
Cavalry personnel of the HJ were generally
formed by the Reiter-SA, the equestrian corps
of the storm-troops, created in 1930.
HJ health service
In addition to all the other branches
described above, the HJ had its own health
service. In 1939 there were 36 regional units
and 608 regimental health units employing
some 4,000 doctors, 800 dentists and 500
pharmacists, supported by 40,000 auxiliary
workers and 35,000 sanitary orderlies re-
cruited from the girls of the BdM, all of
whom were trained to move on into nurs-
ing, providing basic medical assistance and
emergency help.
The German Labor Front and
the Labor Service 
Deutsche Arbeitsfront
The Deutsche Arbeitsfront(DAF—Ger-
man Labor Front) was a Nazi organization
of professional associations and guilds di-
rected by Robert Ley (1890–1945). Workers’
rights and trade unions were abolished in
June 1933 and replaced by the Deutsche Ar-
beitsfront. Membership in the DAF was vol-
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 111


--- PAGE 119 ---
untary, but any person who was an employer
or an employee in any area of German indus-
try or commerce was more or less a member
by default. The concept of the DAF was
that it conciliate rather than advance work-
ers’ demands, in order to ensure political
stability and smooth operation of all Ger-
man industry, business and commerce.
The DAF was a major political player
during the Third Reich, challenging both
government ministries and industry, striving
to become a kind of Nazi superagency. It was
a gigantic bureaucratic ediﬁce composed of
several sub-branches, such as the Kraft durch
Freude (KdF—Strength Through Joy). This
sub-organization was tasked with providing
activities such as trips, cruises, concerts, and
cultural activities for German workers. These
events were speciﬁcally directed toward the
working class. It was through the KdF that
the NSDAP hoped to bring to the “common
man” the pleasures once reserved only for
the rich. By opening the door for the work-
ing class to afford more leisure activities, it
was hoped that workers could be lulled into
being more ﬂexible and productive.
Reichsarbeitsdienst
Another important sub-branch of the
DAF was the Reichsarbeitsdienst (RAD—
German Labor Service), headed by Kon-
stantin Hierl. The Reichsarbeitsdienst, with
the motto “Arbeit adelt” (work enobles), was
formed in June 1935 as the ofﬁcial state and
party labor organization. Service in the RAD
was compulsory for all Germans between
the ages 18 and 25. It was divided into two
sections. The Reichsarbeitsdienst Manner
(RAD/M) was set up for men, and the
Reichsarbeitsdienst der weibliche Jugend
(RAD/wJ) for females. The initiation of this
young-labor corps was born of economic ne-
cessity, and the service had far-reaching
economic beneﬁts. The young people of the
RAD learned devotion to German ideals
and formed at the same time a huge labor
resource which did not need paying. The or-
ganization was construed as a form of “hon-
orary service” to the national community,
its object being to train young people in a
“true approach to work.” The reward, sup-
posedly, was the health of community life,
the betterment of the fatherland, and the
right (at later rallies) to march in mass for-
mations with spades glinting like riﬂes. The
RAD had a huge number of unpaid workers,
conscripted young men and women who
were organized in uniformed, disciplined
battalions. RAD workers were housed in
tent camps, temporary buildings and hastily
erected huts. Their life was grim, strictly su-
pervised, with bed-making, locker and kit
inspection, camp discipline and indoctrina-
tion classes. Work was the focal point of Nazi
life and it was supposed to be done joyfully.
Propaganda materials showed nothing but
smiling faces, radiant expressions, and youth-
ful, sun-tanned, joyous vigor. Shouldering
their shovels like weapons, with a lot of
marching and singing, RAD workers were
taken to various projects demanding hard
physical labor, making them very ﬁt. Their
workday could be as long as nine hours, fre-
quently even longer, and they were expected
112 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Emblem of the Reichsarbeitsdienst (RAD—
German Labor Service), badge for men. The
emblem of the RAD was a spade blade sur-
rounded by two corn ears.


--- PAGE 120 ---
to work efﬁciently. RAD women were
often employed as auxiliary farm-
workers, nurses, maidservants and
other occupations deemed feminine.
The RAD male units were used for
such labor projects as harvests, recla-
mation of marshland for cultivation,
and construction of canals, bridges,
dykes and roads, as well as drainage
improvement work, vast tree removal
operations, and the reclamation of fal-
low or inundated land. They were also
involved in military projects, such as
the construction of the Westwall (a
fortiﬁcation line built along the west-
ern German border between 1938 and
1940).
During the war the DAF and the
RAD supported the army. Individual
Reichsarbeitsdienst units were trans-
ferred in full as auxiliaries to the Wehr-
macht, to form the basis of the new
Bautruppen (construction troops). The
construction troops would go on to
build roads, clear obstacles, dig
trenches, create fortiﬁcations and air-
ﬁelds, and take part in all manner of
military construction duties. As the
war proceeded, some RAD Abteilun-
gen (battalions) were incorporated di-
rectly to the Heer (German ground
force). With the addition of older, un-
trained army reservists, they were
formed into a series of regiment-sized
units. They helped repair damaged
roads, built and repaired airstrips, con-
structed coastal fortiﬁcations, loaded
and unloaded supplies and ammuni-
tion, laid mineﬁelds, and even manned
fortiﬁcations.
Throughout World War II, the
RAD continued to serve its originally
established duty of training Hitler Ju-
gend young men prior to their service
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 113
RAD Obervormann (conscript, private
ﬁrst class)


--- PAGE 121 ---
in the Wehrmacht by providing construction
and agricultural work for the nation. But
also throughout World War II, the RAD
increasingly took part in more militarized
roles in supporting the troops by helping to
ensure that supplies continued to reach the
front over clear roadways. After 1942, many
RAD units were forced into frontline com-
bat, while other units were drafted directly
into military service on the spot. Security
operations and police work also became an
increasingly common duty of the RAD
units. On the eastern front, RAD units took
up arms to ﬁght off Soviet partisan forces.
Service was not limited to the multitude of
combat-support roles listed above. Hun-
dreds of RAD units were trained and later
used as anti-aircraft gunners under the con-
trol of the Luftwaffe. In October of 1944, at
least 60,000 RAD troops are known to have
served in Luftwaffe Flak batteries.
Youth Opposition
Dissidence and resistance
With the consolidation of the Hitler
Jugend as a large-scale bureaucratic organi-
zation, with the gradual aging of its leader-
ship cadres in the course of the 1930s, and
with several purges in response to allegedly
“anti–German” behavior, the movement’s
attraction to young people began to decline.
Not every child thrived under the indoctri-
nation program. The more intelligent and
individualistic must have found it unbearable
to be watched like prisoners, and laughable
to hear the crude lies fabricated by the
Nazis. These young persons who did not
succumb to the brainwashing had to be ex-
tremely cautious, however. Innocuous con-
versations were recorded by eavesdroppers,
and they had to be careful to whom they
said what they really thought.
Deviant behavior among German youth
during the Third Reich was much more com-
114 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
RAD ofﬁcer with dagger


--- PAGE 122 ---
mon than once thought. The belief that the
HJ successfully mobilized all young Ger-
man people is faulty. The growing political
and ideological inﬂuence of the Hitler Ju-
gend was accompanied by a clear diminu-
tion of its attraction to many young people.
It was a mass organization but it was not to-
tally homogeneous. The HJ had absorbed
many non–Nazi youth associations, and the
originality and particularities of these
groups had not been eradicated overnight.
The leaders of these former youth associa-
tions were not all convinced Nazis, and
when they had remained in charge, they felt
like immigrants in a new and unknown con-
tinent. They tended to ﬂock together within
the Nazi order. Some tried to create under-
cover islands of resistance, or at least pre-
serve and infuse the HJ with something of
their own spirit and tradition. No doubt this
was a hopeless struggle against the effectual
Gleichschaltung that ironed out all independ-
ence. Deviations from Nazi norms were
soon detected, disciplinary measures taken
to eradicate “bad” inﬂuences, and many
would-be reformers were arrested, expelled
or transferred to positions of no conse-
quence. There could be no reforming of the
HJ from within.
Although there are no means of verify-
ing this phenomenon, there is good reason
to believe that a fairly high proportion of
upper- and middle-class young people, and
also youth from former religious associations
were not completely naziﬁed. The youth
who had been induced to join the HJ, un-
doubtedly had not always had the aspira-
tions of the ideal fanatical Nazi type. To this
must be added that Germany had never been
a united nation until 1871, and even till 1933
it was a federation of states, large and small,
with several independent Hansa cities, orig-
inating from a medieval trade league. The
people of East Prussia were quite different
from those living along the Rhine river in
the West. The Protestant Germans of Ham-
burg in the north had little in common with
the southern Catholic Bavarians. Regional
and local particularisms (e.g., religion, accents
and dialects, attire, traditions, and other cul-
tural markers) were still very strong and dif-
ferent. Behind a façade of uniformity, the
HJ was a patchwork which mirrored the va-
riety of the ancestral and traditional Ger-
manies.
The conduct of some of the younger
people illustrated how the Nazi code of be-
havior could disintegrate. The more the
Hitler Jugend arrogated state powers to it-
self, the more obvious became the examples
of deviant behavior among teenagers, but
the records of resistance to Hitler’s regime
present complex problems to historians.
There is a very wide deﬁnition of resistance.
A German resisted Hitler by continuing to
buy from a Jewish shop despite a boycott or-
ganized by the Nazi Party or by giving bread
to one of the millions of starving slave la-
borers brought to Germany from all over
Europe during the Second World War. Re-
sistance might entail the refusal to join a
Nazi organization. A variety of courses of
action were open to a German who was op-
posed to the Third Reich and who wanted
to do something about it, but how many of
these really amounted to resistance? One
could distinguish dissidence (the sponta-
neous voicing of anti–Nazi opinions) and
opposition (actions only directed against
limited characteristics of the Hitler state)
from full-scale resistance. The latter might
be deﬁned as the “active participation in or-
ganized attempts to work against the regime
with the conscious aim of undermining it or
planning for the moment of its demise.” Ac-
cording to this view, resistance was about
action not words. It entailed organization
and planning, not spontaneity. It meant the
rejection of everything Hitler stood for, not
just part of it. Resistance was nothing less
than a meaningful contribution to the de-
struction of the Third Reich. But how many
ordinary Germans could ever have hoped to
destroy a whole modern state? Some tried
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 115


--- PAGE 123 ---
to do so. While no small number of Germans
at some time or other made signs of deﬁance
toward the Third Reich as they went about
their daily round, others were ﬁlled with
such a passionate desire to oppose Hitler
that resistance became the whole purpose
of their lives.
Given the nature both of resistance/
opposition and of the police state, it is
doubtful whether it will ever be possible to
know the full scope of German struggle
against Nazism. Not everyone who was ar-
rested for interrogation by the Gestapo was
a committed enemy of Hitler’s dictatorship.
Roughly speaking, three types of resisters
can be identiﬁed: those who had become
disillusioned with the Third Reich; those
who acted out of necessity (Gypsies and ho-
mosexuals, persecuted with more and more
savagery, and particularly German Jews);
and a few people who could have conformed
but courageously resisted because of politi-
cal, religious or moral principles.
The decision for a German to become
a true resister often was neither easy nor
straightforward. This was shown clearly in
the cases of a number of teenagers. From
1934 on, reports compiled by the police in
the Ruhr and Rhineland described the exis-
tence of groups of largely working-class
youths who dressed distinctively (often in
cheesecloth shirts and leather shorts), who
went on outings together and who were at
loggerheads with the Hitler Jugend. These
groups, which will be discussed further, were
called Kittelbach Pirates, Navajos and, most
famously, Edelweiss Pirates. According to
historian A. Kenkmann, most of the teen-
agers involved here originally had been happy
to join the Nazi youth movement. They only
became “pirates” when the Hitler Jugend
proved unable to meet their needs. Often
there were very personal reasons for this. For
instance, some teenagers had had arguments
with their leaders, others had been refused
promotion within the organization, others
again belonged to families which quietly had
political reservations about Nazism. The ex-
ample of Hans Steinbrück is particularly in-
teresting. He was a member of an Edelweiss
Pirate group during the Second World War,
and as a result was hanged in November
1944. Originally, however, he had been a
leader in the Hitler Jugend and in due course
tried to join the secret political police in
Düsseldorf. Stupidly he started passing him-
self off as a secret policeman before his ap-
plication had been approved and as a result
he was not only rejected, but put in prison
for a short while. Only after his release did
Hans begin a career of resistance to the
Third Reich. It culminated in his leading
attacks by armed gangs on government
buildings in war-torn Cologne. In summa-
tion, Steinbrück rejected the Hitler state
only after it had ﬁrst rejected him.
Compulsion and the requirement of
absolute obedience were found unpleasant
by some young people. As the years went
by, the whole structure of the Hitler Youth
became more bureaucratized and less imag-
inative. Some of the earlier attractions began
to wear off. The HJ came to be seen increas-
ingly as part of the establishment rather
than rival to it. The initial wave of enthusi-
asm for the Nazi cause at certain schools and
university campuses gave way to apathy and
outright rejection. On some occasions, at-
tendance at party meetings and rallies lagged.
The involvement of the youth ceased to be
on a voluntary basis, particularly after 1936,
but was rather the consequence of a stream
of ordinances. Many young people became
disillusioned, recalcitrant and rebellious, and
they reacted to the onset of compulsion in
various ways. Young people, who, according
to the ofﬁcial doctrine, were supposed to
satisfy their needs by joining the national
youth organization, the Hitler Youth and its
numerous afﬁliates, were forming groups of
their own. Young people had a patent urge
to associate independently, not only outside
the organizations prescribed and controlled
by the system, but in opposition to them.
116 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 124 ---
And so alternative, even oppositional, cul-
tures and groups developed among the Ger-
man youth. Ofﬁcially recorded cases of ju-
venile delinquency were more than twice as
numerous in 1941 as they were in the peace-
time year of 1 937. By the late 1930s, a few
rebels began to defy authority openly. Youth
rebelliousness was multiform as we have
seen, but—to oversimplify for the sake of
clearness and brevity—there were two major
groups of young people more or less opposed
to the Nazi system, the Swing Jugend and
“pirate” gangs.
Swing youth
Within the upper-middle-class youth
developed the so-called Swing Jugend(Swing
youth) developed, a group whose values and
focus helped them defy cultural indoctrina-
tion. These boys and girls were predomi-
nately adolescents with enough schooling
to be able to use the English language, large
homes to organize parties when their elders
were out and enough money to have a gram-
ophone, go out in clubs and buy English-
looking fashionable clothes. Remarkably
similar in dress and look to the American
zoot-suiters and the French zazous of the
1940s, the young German “swing” men wore
jackets that came down to the middle of
their thighs and pants that were narrow,
with cuffs that gripped the ankle. Their shoes
were large and heavy, with thick, crepe soles,
and deliberately unpolished. The round col-
lars of their shirts were held together by
straight stickpins under linen or wool neck-
ties or showy scarves. Their full, bushy hair
shone, not from pomade—which had long
disappeared from the counters—but from
salad oil. Like the boys, the girls wore their
hair below the collar, but theirs was in large
curls. They wore turtleneck sweaters under
fur coats, regardless of the weather, and
striped stockings, ﬂat shoes, and very short,
pleated skirts. They carried large umbrellas,
which remained resolutely closed even in the
rain. Their eyebrows were penciled, they
wore lipstick and their nails were polished.
Where in the midst of the severe clothing
shortages did they ﬁnd the Swing dress style
they insisted on? At a time when the average
housewife was ﬁnding it extremely difﬁcult,
if not impossible, to ﬁnd a pair of cheap
black stockings, even if she had the coupons,
and when men were turning their suits in-
side out and having them recut, the Swing
youth were able to obtain their exaggerated
long jackets and narrow pegged trousers.
The money undoubtedly came from doting
parents, and signiﬁcant chunks of that ob-
tained from black-market operations.
These groups of extravagantly dressed
teenagers proceeded to display their con-
tempt for the conventions and the hypocrisy
of their elders, but on the whole they had
no political beliefs and no real orthodoxy
other than jazz, the fabulous syncopated
music of Benny Goodman, Tommy Dorsey,
Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong and other
giants of the golden age of American swing.
These malcontents rejected the Hitler Youth
and took every opportunity to avoid völ-
kische German culture and music. They used
humor as a tonic for coping with everyday
frustrations, and poking fun at ranking
Nazis became a popular, if dangerous, pas-
time. Malicious gossip, puns, lampoons and
jokes were told, such as these “Mottoes of a
True German”:
Be proliﬁc like Hitler
Simple like Göring
Loyal like Hess
Silent like Goebbels
Sober like Ley
And beautiful like Scholtz-Klink!
The Swing youth adopted British and
especially American inﬂuences. They lis-
tened to the BBC (more for the music than
for information and news), but this was none-
theless a capital crime. A relaxed regime in
their parents’ home, or lack of nighttime su-
pervision, offered ample opportunity for
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 117


--- PAGE 125 ---
going out, drinking and gaining sexual ex-
perience. These young men and women had
a more liberal attitude to pornography, sex-
uality and homosexuality than the Nazi state
liked. (Unrestrained sexual pleasure was de-
nounced by the Nazis as moral degenera-
tion). The Swing youth gathered at urban
clubs to ﬂaunt their long hair, spoke English
and French, smoked cigarettes, and danced
to the highly syncopated American swing
music. This was particularly provocative to
the authorities, as American jazz and swing
were denounced and banned by Nazi pro-
pagandists as “Negro” culture, and regarded
as un–German “degenerate” music. Diamet-
rically in conﬂict with what was expected in
the BdM, Swing girls used make-up, af-
fected an air of sophistication and displayed
their physical charms with nonchalance. The
Swing youth had no taste for military serv-
ice, were opposed to war and doubted the
veracity of glowing military communiqués.
They mumbled a vague “Gut’n tag” (Mornin’)
instead of greeting anyone with a crisp Heil
Hitler! The latter was often replaced by a
mockery: Drei Liter! (Three liters!). Swing
youth had fun and accepted Jews into their
groups—another outrage for the Nazis.
Public jazz concerts were banned and the
Swing movement shifted to informal group-
ings, illegal clubs and private parties where
hard liquor ﬂowed freely in the largest cities
such as Hamburg, Kiel, Berlin, Stuttgart,
Frankfurt, Dresden, Halle and Karlsruhe.
The Swing youth were not anti-fascist
in a political sense. Their behavior was em-
phatically nonpolitical. What they wanted
was simply to be left in peace, particularly by
the HJ with its boring organized events.
They laughed at patriotism, and believed
only in themselves, dancing, and the good
life—now. They were, on the whole, indi-
vidualistic and elegant “dandies” refusing
Nazi uniformity. They sought their own
counter-identity, and were to be found along
the borderline between passive insubordi-
nation and active effrontery. Their “unpa-
triotic, degenerate and reactionary behav-
ior” carried, however, an inherent rejection
of the system’s regimentation and unifor-
mity. Playing and dancing to the enemy’s
music was an act of open rebellion, an af-
front to the regimented Germanic folk music
favored by the regime. The Swing youth
were an abomination to the Nazi Party and
the Hitler Youth, who denounced them vi-
ciously. They clearly deviated from Nazi so-
cial acceptability and were a deadly insult
to Hitler’s order. To be overtly a Swing
youth was thus not without danger. On nu-
merous occasions, the Hitler Youth and po-
lice swept through the bars and dances
where the Swing youth amused themselves,
provoking ﬁghts. The Swing youth were
threatened, if caught, to have their hair cut
short as a public branding, and to be beaten
up. After World War II began, punishments
became draconian, with punitive drills and
even prison or forced labor in concentration
camps. Despite repression, the oppositional
Swing youth movement was attractive to
many adolescents, especially after the mem-
bership in the HJ had been made compul-
sory.
Only a small fringe of the Swing youth
had any interest in politics, made contact
with opposition circles, or engaged in po-
litical activity.
Some of the middle-class dissident
groups were to a certain extent a revival of
the old Wandervogel movement. Indeed
some former members of the now forbidden
non–Nazi youth movement had kept to-
gether in groups, large or small. Some did so
at neutral meeting grounds, such as sports
clubs, mixed choirs, or literary societies.
Some of them continued their excursions,
arranged lectures, and went together to the-
aters and concerts. They carefully refrained
from any public demonstrations, but meet-
ings and correspondence took place between
such groups of friends. The ban on non-
Nazi youth groups from the 1934 Gleich-
schaltung had to be ofﬁcially repeated in
118 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 126 ---
February 1936, May 1937 and again in July
1939, showing repeatedly that sections of
the German youth did not conform.
Edelweiss Pirates
Social deviance was most apparent
among younger Germans, especially from
the working class, and pointed to the deﬁ-
ciencies of the Hitler Jugend as a channel of
indoctrination. Working-class youngsters
spontaneously formed gangs that roamed
the streets and brawled with Hitler Youth
detachments. Less cultural and more mili-
tant than the Swing Youth in their empha-
sis were various urban youth groups such as
the Navaros, centered largely in Cologne,
the Kittelbach Pirates from Oberhausen and
Düsseldorf, and the Dudes from Essen.
These were more or less sub-groups within
the larger Edelweiss Pirates, although a co-
ordinated central movement never emerged.
The Edelweiss Pirates , mainly originating
from the urban areas of the Rhineland and
the industrial Ruhrgebiet, arose spontane-
ously in late 1 942. Other gangs were the
Buschwölfe and Charliblase from Munich,
the Bärenbande from Kassel, the Klub der
Goldenen Horde, Schlangenklub and Sham-
beko Bande from Düsseldorf, the Goldene
Vierzehn and the Schreckensteiner from
Hamburg, and the Blauer Dunst from Wis-
mar.
The Pirates were composed mainly of
students and working-class youth. They did
not meet in clubs but gathered in bars, cin-
emas, parks and street corners, outsides the
conﬁnes of the home yet within a neighbor-
hood territory. They belonged together be-
cause they lived or worked together. Some
rebellious gangs had the characteristics of
illegal, secret sects, evolving their own rules,
electing leaders and treasurers, adopting
badges and code names. These deviants often
developed a rebellious sort of humor and a
remarkable knack for rewriting song lyrics
and used them as protest. Aged between 14
and 18, members of gangs (called Clique,
Klub, Horde, Meute or Schar) typically con-
sisted of about a dozen boys and a few girls.
The presence of girls at evening get-togeth-
ers and on weekend trips gave them a rela-
tively unrestricted opportunity for sexual ex-
perience. As with the middle class Swing
youth, the working-class Pirates were an-
tagonistic to authority, hierarchy and mili-
tarism, they tried to get as much space as
possible between themselves and their every-
day conditions. They tried to avoid the ed-
ucative incursion of adults, and tried to
withdraw from the pressure of the Nazi so-
ciety. They displayed behavior that deviated
from the social norms imposed by Hitler’s
National Socialism. The younger genera-
tion entered a sort of vacuum, especially
during the war years, and binding standards
of behavior ceased to exist. The result was
that many youths kicked over the traces in
a manner which cast doubt on all the max-
ims and claimed successes of Hitler’s total-
itarian system. Young people had a patent
urge to associate independently, not only
outside the youth organizations prescribed
and controlled by the regime but in opposi-
tion to them. Their recalcitrance was only
random, took the form of juvenile delin-
quency, and brought an increasing number
of clashes between them and the authori-
ties. The offenses were of moral nature, and
latent in these eruptions of adolescent in-
stinct was protest, not only against rules in
general, but also against the speciﬁc con-
straints of the Nazi system. There were also
youthful acts of violence and offenses com-
mitted for proﬁt—muggings, theft, black
market sales, burglary, and prostitution.
Alarming reports ﬂooded in from all over
the country in such numbers as to suggest
that the National Socialist educational sys-
tem was at risk. Visible cracks appeared in
the laboriously cultivated image of public
morality, as the organization of power struc-
tures was outpaced by the spread of wartime
disorganization. In many cases, families were
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 119


--- PAGE 127 ---
disrupted; fathers and uncles were at the
front, younger brothers and sisters were
evacuated, and mothers were overburdened
with work and material difﬁculties. As the
war dragged on, there was a decrease of pa-
rental control, and this reduction of super-
vision of juveniles led to some moral disso-
lution, a collapse of “normal” social
behavior, and increasing criminality. More
and more the youth movement became op-
posed to Nazism. One of the slogans was:
“Eternal War to the Hitler Jugend!” Pru-
dently calculating their own strength, they
either sought to avoid the HJ, or they am-
bushed HJ members and beat them up.
They deﬁed war restrictions on movement
by undertaking weekend hikes. The com-
munist and socialist youth organizations
were the earliest to be banned. There is, of
course, a difference between interdiction
and eradication, and local groups continued
to carry on various clandestine anti–Nazi
activities. Collaborating with Catholic and
Protestant opposition, the most determined
fringe gradually got involved in active anti–
Nazi resistance work by writing grafﬁti, ed-
iting and passing out ﬂyers and leaﬂets, and
distributing pamphlets denouncing the Nazi
regime. Some supported the Allies by hid-
ing downed airmen, feeding prisoners, and
offering help to German army deserters, po-
litical dissidents, and escapees from camps
and prisons. One noteworthy case study is
the White Rose, a group of students at Mu-
nich University in 1942–43. Its nucleus con-
sisted of Sophie and Hans Scholl, Willi Graf,
Christoph Probst, Alexander Schmorell,
and professor Kurt Huber, who used pam-
phlets to arouse a university movement
against the regime. They were denounced
in February 1943, summarily tried, and ex-
ecuted.
Repression
The activities of the Swing movement,
Pirate gangs and other deviants were seen
as a serious risk—the criminal, moral and
political subversion youth. In all cases the
Nazi authorities were puzzled and seriously
concerned, but frequently did not know what
to do. Some state functionaries regarded the
offenses as childish pranks, a result of the
degeneration of youth and stress caused by
the war. Other high-ranking Nazis sensed a
large-scale, Jewish-Bolshevik conspiracy,
and looked for secret organizations, project-
ing their own morbid obsessions and sick
fears onto a movement they did not under-
stand. The only response was repression,
ranging from individual warnings to raids
with beatings, arrests, and shaven heads,
corrective education, and referral to labor
camps. Juvenile delinquency was regarded
as “criminal biology” and a police agency
(Disciplinary Company of the HJ) was cre-
ated as early as July 1 934 to deal with it. In
July 1935, Gestapo branches throughout
Germany were advised to prepare lists of all
persons formerly active in the forbidden
bündisch youth movements to check their
inﬁltration of the HJ and to prevent sepa-
ratist, illegal and subversive activities.
Himmler placed the Disciplinary Company
of the HJ under the authority of the SS po-
lice in 1 938, and a special Jugendstraﬂager
(punishment camp) was established at
Moringen, near Göttingen, for rebels under
the age of 20. The camp was headed by the
SS doctor Robert Ritter, director of the
Criminal-Biological Institute of the RSHA
(the SS Main Ofﬁce of Security of the Reich).
There, on the basis of highly dubious pseu-
doscientiﬁc criteria, deviant youth were di-
vided into groups of “community aliens” ac-
cording to their alleged socio-biological
characters and perceived reformability. Some
were regarded as reeducable and later given
a chance to prove themselves through the
Reichsarbeitsdienst and military service in
disciplinary battalions. Others were consid-
ered nuisances, “persistent failures” or “inca-
pable,” compulsorily sterilized and sent to
“adult” concentration camps on their eigh-
120 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 128 ---
teenth birthday. Similarly a youth custody
camp for females was established in the im-
mediate vicinity of the women’s concentra-
tion camp at Ravensbrück. A further camp
exclusively for young Polish “criminals” was
established at Lodz. From 1939 to 1943, it
is estimated that about 700,000 youth were
“reeducated” by the SS. In March 1 940 a
curfew decree was issued, forbidding youths
under the age of 18 to be on the street after
9:00 
P.M. Two laws introduced by the Min-
istry of Justice in October 1939 and Novem-
ber 1943 reduced the age at which a death
sentence might be received to 14; a sentence
depended on a judge’s assessments of an of-
fender’s “criminal attitude of mind” and on
the speciﬁcally “antisocial” nature of the of-
fense, if any. In reality the judges were po-
litically inﬂuenced, in the simple sense of
supporting the interests of their boss, the
state (i.e., Hitler), and were forced into a
position where they allowed police (i.e.,
Himmler) to predetermine their verdicts.
In 1944, another concentration camp
especially intended to detain young deviants
was established at Neuwied-am-Rhein. Like
other concentration camps, these youth
penitentiaries were managed by the Amt IV
of the SS Central security ofﬁce (RSHA).
Himmler’s vicious reaction to juvenile of-
fenders culminated in November 1944, when
13 members of the Edelweiss Pirates from
Cologne were arrested and—without trial—
publicly hanged by the Gestapo as an ex-
ample to other youth. One boy was sen-
tenced to death and executed for trying to
build an illegal short-wave radio transmit-
ter.
Measures taken by the state against
anti–Nazi youth did not eradicate rebel-
liousness. On the contrary, the persecution,
savagery and harshness provoked further
protest and resistance. Juvenile crime statis-
tics continued to increase, although it was
the Nazis, of course, who decided what was
criminal in the ﬁrst place. The activities of
the deviant youth groups lacked the politi-
cal organization to be anything more than an
embarrassment to the regime. The isolation
of these groups and individuals, their total
lack of support from the majority from their
compatriots ensured that social youth de-
viance would never amount to serious po-
litical opposition. The plain fact is that too
many people in Germany were unable or
unwilling to differentiate between right and
wrong. The acts of resistance by the youth
were for the most part aimed with utopian
and illusory expectations, and very often
were merely spontaneous hopeless gestures,
lacking unifying leadership to guide or co-
ordinate them. When the Catholic student
conspirators of the White Rose, Hans and
Sophie Scholl, were arrested and executed,
this was followed by a demonstration of
3,000 students eager to express their loyalty
to the regime.
However, subcultures such as White
Rose demonstrated that the Nazis—even
after years in power—still did not have a
complete grip on German society. Nazism—
offering only military discipline, an anach-
ronistic and criminal ideology and a stiﬂing
bureaucracy—unintentionally paved the way
for later manifestations of modern youth
culture in the late 1940s and 1 950s. Youth
opposed to Hitler should perhaps be regarded
as precursors of the “teddy boys” from the
1940s who rebelled against military drills
and other compulsory activities.
Those opposed to Hitler—whatever
their motivation and no matter how modest
their actions—deserve remembrance, under-
standing and the utmost respect. They were
a few bright lights in the darkest period of
German history.
3. Prelude to War, 1 933–1939 121


--- PAGE 129 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 130 ---
Hitler Jugend at War
Arthur Axmann
On 1 December 1936 Jugenddienst-
pﬂicht (youth conscription) was decreed but
it was not until 25 March 1939 that HJ serv-
ice was made compulsory (only for 17-year-
old boys) and not until 1 2 September 1 941
that it was made compulsory for boys and
girls from the age of 10. In 1936, Baldur von
Schirach’s enemies had started a campaign of
viliﬁcation against him. Jokes about his ef-
feminate behavior and his allegedly white
bedroom furnished in a girlish fashion, the
cult of his personality, and his plump ap-
pearance became a national pastime. His
position was undermined by the intrigues of
Martin Bormann and other rivals and ene-
mies, and von Schirach’s popularity de-
clined. When World War II started in 1939,
the control of the HJ was increasingly slip-
ping out of his grasp. Many HJ leaders had
entered the army, and the supervision of the
HJ passed in practice to the Nazi Party. At
the beginning of 1940, von Schirach himself
enlisted in the German army, serving in
France for a few months as an infantry ofﬁcer
and receiving the Iron Cross First Class. Af-
terward, Hitler did not want him any longer
as Reichsjungendführer der NSDAP . Hitler’s
reasons remain unclear. Maybe he thought
von Schirach was no longer the right man
for the job, or maybe he feared that von
Schirach would become too popular and too
powerful. Whatever the reason, in mid–
1940, Baldur von Schirach was dismissed,
and appointed Gauleiter and Reich plenipo-
tentiary in Vienna, a much less important
post. He was replaced as head of the HJ by
one of his deputies, Arthur Axmann, a man
who had a long history with the organiza-
tion.
Arthur Axmann (1913–1996) had stud-
ied law, became a Nazi in 1928, and founded
the ﬁrst Hitler Youth group in Westphalia.
A convinced and determined Nazi with real
organizational skills, he was promoted rap-
idly and in 1 932 was called to carry out a
reorganization of the HJ. A year later he be-
came chief of the Social Ofﬁce of the Reich
Youth Leadership, and one of von Schirach’s
close collaborators. In 1939 and 1 940, Ax-
mann fought in Poland and France. Later
the new head of the HJ returned to the army
to take part in the invasion of Russia where
he remained until he lost his right arm below
the elbow in December 1941. Until the end
123
4
Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945


--- PAGE 131 ---
of the war Arthur Axmann remained Reichs-
jungendführer der NSDAP .
Behind a façade of health, ﬁtness and
comradeship, there were more sinister pur-
poses to the Hitler Jugend. Even before the
outbreak of the Second World War, discipli-
nary and surveillance measures to enforce
youth service concentrated increasingly on
war preparation and pre–military drills.
When the war broke out, several laws were
passed for the Kriegseinsatz(mobilization) of
the Hitler Jugend, and new tasks were de-
ﬁned and given priority by Arthur Axmann.
HJ boys and BdM girls had to uphold the
Nazi spirit on the home front. They went
from door to door to collect metal scraps for
industry, and bones, bottles and paper which
were recycled for the war effort. They col-
lected furs, blankets and warm clothes for
troops at the front. Gradually, they were
committed to keeping the war economy go-
ing. As many peasants and workers were
drafted, HJ members had to ﬁll the vacan-
cies. Eight million HJ boys and girls were
available to replace the mobilized soldiers.
HJ boys and BdM girls then became auxil-
iaries in all branches of social life—from in-
dustry and agriculture to public transport
and administration. During the war, three
million girls and women worked in the
weapons factories as much as 60 hours per
week. Some BdM girls were employed in
the mail service, and others assigned to help
care for wounded soldiers in hospitals. They
also helped in kindergarten as well as assist-
ing in households of large families. They
worked in refugee camps, and stood on rail-
way platforms, offering encouragement and
refreshments to army troops departing for
the front.
Following Allied bombing raids, HJ
members assisted in neighborhood clean-
up. They helped locate bombed-out civilians.
They knocked on doors, looking for unused
rooms in undamaged houses or apartments.
Occupants refusing to let in new tenants
were reported to local police, and they most
likely would receive a visit from the dreaded
Gestapo. HJ members were also used to
carry messages. Every free hour of theirs
was monopolized for the NSDAP and the
war effort, children scarcely had a moment
for themselves and their families. During
the last two years of the war, the average
German family was dislocated. Fathers, elder
brothers and uncles were drafted, taken
prisoner, dead or missing, mothers were
more and more involved in war production
in bombed factories, and younger brothers
and sisters had been evacuated safely to the
countryside.
Kinderlandverschickung (KLV)
In September 1940, the Nazi regime
decided announced the “ Kinderlandver-
schickung” (KLV—“sending of children to
the land”), the evacuation to the country-
side of children from the cities at greatest
risk of bombing. Initially the evacuation was
to apply only to children of school age from
Berlin and Hamburg who lived in suburbs
and parts of the cities which did not have
sufﬁcient air-raid shelters. The project soon
became more extensive as the Allies stepped
up their bombing campaign. In April 1942,
there were already 850,000 evacuated boys
and girls. The KLV was a large program
carried out by the Nationalsozialistische
Volkswohlfahrt (NSV—Nazi welfare organ-
ization) and many girls of the BdM became
involved in the care of children. Evacuated
children were housed in homes, youth
hostels, farms, monasteries, holiday camps,
pensions, and special camps. These camps,
approximately 5,000 of them, were located
mainly in the rural regions of East Prussia,
the Warthegau section of Poland, and Upper
Silesia, as well as Slovakia. The camps var-
ied in size, anywhere from 1 8 children to
over 1,200. Each camp was run by Nazi-ap-
proved teachers and a Hitler Youth leader.
These camps began replacing many urban
grammar schools, most of which had been
124 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 132 ---
closed due to all the bombings. The opera-
tion was supervised by the HJ and the Nazi
Party. The KVL policy also served the pur-
pose of removing children from their fam-
ily environment which made it possible, to
some extent, to implement indoctrination
and militarization. The KLV camps prepared
German teenage boys for deadly encounters
with Allied soldiers in the rubble and ruins
of Hitler’s Germany. Parents were reluctant
to send their children away to the camps,
but those who refused to give their children
permission to leave were denounced as un-
patriotic. Parents were discouraged from
visiting the KVL camps and homes in order
not to intensify homesickness and also to
avoid a strain on the public transportation
system. From 1940 to 1945, over 2.8 million
German children were sent to the KLV
camps.
Military auxiliary forces
After Germany’s invasion of Eastern
Europe, Hitler decided to send young men
and women of the HJ to the occupied terri-
tories of Poland and Western Ukraine to
ease the shortage of teachers. Between 1941
and 1943, about 30,000 HJ members were
sent out after three months training. The
improvised teachers often found that they
were teaching “Germans” who hardly spoke
any German at all.
The HJ was doomed to get more and
more involved in military activities. By the
end of 1940, the National Youth Directorate
required target practice and terrain maneu-
vers for boys aged 10 and older. Soon Ax-
mann declared that one million boys were
practicing with live weapons and that 31,000
of them were ﬁrst-class marksmen. The
shortage of bodies meant that the Hitler
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 125
Girl of BdM/KLV . This teenage Bund
deutscher Mädel member was serving as a
child-care auxiliary of the KLV , as indicated by
the black cuff title.


--- PAGE 133 ---
HJ Flakhelfer , 1944. The anti-aircraft crew helper (left) wears the Luftwaffe blue-gray uniform
consisting of a Fliegerbluse (a short battle-dress-style blouse) and long, blue-gray trousers gath-
ered at the ankles. A blue-gray greatcoat (right) and an M 1935 steel helmet were part of this uni-
form.


--- PAGE 134 ---
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 127
Luftwaffe Helfer badge, Heimatﬂak (worn
on the right breast)
HJ volunteer in ﬁre brigade, 1 943. Special
ﬁre-ﬁghting squads were organized in those
German towns and cities that had large num-
bers of industrial concerns and which were
being increasingly bombed by the Allies as the
war progressed. These squads, which supple-
mented the regular ﬁre brigades, were often
made up of volunteers from the Hitler Youth
who were age 15 and over. They were distin-
guished by a special diamond-shaped badge
worn on the lower left cuff of their tunic,
which incorporated t he German police em-
blem (swastika and eagle in a wreath) set
against a background of carmine red ﬂames.
They wore various uniforms, including khaki
or brown jacket, HJ dark-blue tunic, or air
force Fliegerbluse, a short, double-breasted,
blue-gray tunic, often with HJ armband.
Headgear included a black side cap on which
was displayed a police-eagle cap emblem, as
well as army or Schutzluft (Civil Defense)
steel helmet.


--- PAGE 135 ---
Youth were also called on when the Allied
bombardments began to strike Germany. HJ
boys became a military auxiliary force. They
were issued army uniforms and equipment,
trained to serve in the Feuerwehren (ﬁre bri-
gades), and the Feuerschutzpolizei and Luft-
schutzpolizei (emergency rescue squads  and
air-raid police units). German youths were
encouraged to enlist in the NSKK (trans-
port squads) and the Technische Nothilfe
(TeNo—Technical Emergency Service), the
latter created in 1919 . As the war progressed,
the youthful loyalty of the HJ members was
ruthlessly exploited. By mid– 1943, a new
Luftwaffe ﬂak artillery branch was created,
called Heimatﬂak (homeland anti-aircraft
artillery). The Hitler Jugend was drafted to
serve in it as Luftwaffe-Helfern (air-force
auxiliaries) for anti-aircraft duties, to oper-
ate search-light batteries, and to carry am-
munition supplies, and dispatches.
The Hitler Jugend members were also
encouraged to volunteer for the Streifen-
dienst, a patrol/police auxiliary service staffed,
trained and equipped by the SS. Created in
1938 by an agreement between Baldur von
Schirach and Heinrich Himmler, the
Streifendienst was originally responsible for
policing youth meeting and rallies, so the
128 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Hitler Youth in Streifendienst1943. The Hitler
Jugend Streifendienst was a special patrol
service consisting of older members of the Hitler
Youth. It was set up for the purpose of policing
the Hitler Youth, but during the latter stages of
the war years it became an armed body of fanat-
ical youth members who assisted the police and
the SS in hunting down escaped prisoners of
war, allied aircrews who had bailed out of their
aircraft and anyone else that was suspected of
evading the authorities or were considered as
enemy agents working against the Nazi regime.
They wore the standard-pattern HJ dark-blue
uniforms with HJ armband. They wore a cuff-
band with the label Streifendienst and—when
on patrol service—a special Streifendienst gor-
get. They were trained to use small arms and
riﬂes, and carried riﬂes when on duty.


--- PAGE 136 ---
HJ was not only “led by the youth” but
also repressed by it. The members
were trained to the age of 18 by
ofﬁcers of the SS. During the war the
patrol service was employed to see that
curfews and black-outs were observed.
They were used as raiding squads and
informers. They also formed pursuit
detachments intended to hunt escapees
from prisons and camps, and capture
Allied airmen shot down above Ger-
many. The claim of legal power and
the ruthlessness shown by the unscru-
pulous HJ patrols provoked some in-
dignation among the population.
Heavily indoctrinated in Nazi values,
anti–Semitic, elitist, and already ac-
customed to repression and SS prac-
tices, many of these HJ members had
eventual membership in the SS in
mind. In fact the Hitler Jugend as a
whole—but more particularly the
Streifendienst—was regarded as a pre-
requisite for entrance into the SS.
Waffen SS
The Waffen SS were combat for-
mations from the Schutz-Staffeln(SS).
Originating from a tiny group of
highly selected and loyal bodyguards
intended to protect Adolf Hitler, the
SS became a huge organization within
the Nazi Party, a private army within
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 129
Private of the TeNo. The T echnische
Nothilfe (TeNo—Technical Emergency
Service) was a corps of specialized troops
for rescue and repair, created in 1919. Its
original purpose was to make sure that
vital services such as electricity, gas and
communication would continue to func-
tion in the event of strikes. The potential
value of the TeNo was fully recognized by
the Nazis. The service was continued
after 1933 and became a part of the Ord-
nungspolizei.


--- PAGE 137 ---
the Wehrmacht and a state within the state.
Headed by Reichsführer Heinrich Himmler,
the Schutz-Staffeln ’s tasks were numerous:
maintenance of the Nazi order, control of
the German population, intelligence, and
physical elimination of enemies of the
Reich, and the removal of people to con-
centration and extermination camps, just to
name a few.
The SS had its own permanent armed
branch which was organized after 1935. The
military SS were highly selected, militarily
trained and organized, wore uniforms and
lived in barracks. Originally called the Ver-
fügungstruppen (SS VT—reserve or task
troops), the elite corps grew to a huge force
during World War II. Himmler was deter-
mined that the SS military branch should
become the nucleus of a postwar German
national police and army service. In July
1940, the Verfügungstruppen—reinforced with
Totenkopfverbände (Death’s Head concen-
tration camp guards) and members of the
police who were drafted—were renamed
Waffen SS(armed SS). By exploiting the law
to suit himself, ruthlessly conﬁscating Jew-
ish property, and recruiting Germanic for-
eigners, Himmler built and equipped his
private armed forces. Although the regular
army watched the SS with dislike and dis-
trust, and although the generals tried to ob-
struct him, Reichsführer Heinrich Himmler
managed to constitute a formidable force
which had grown to 38 divisions at the end
of the war.
The Waffen SS is still a controversial
unit today. It built up a reputation as hard-
ﬁghting soldiers, but these were not ordi-
nary combatants, nor were they merely a
fourth service of the Wehrmacht. They were,
on the whole, ultra–Nazi, fanatical SS troops
who committed numerous atrocities and war
crimes, both on and off the battleﬁeld. The
Waffen SSwas declared a criminal organiza-
tion by the tribunal at Nuremberg in 1946.
The corps was organized by Verfügungstrup-
pen General-Inspector Paul Hausser and di-
vided into units similar in strength to those
of the German ground army. The private
Nazi Party SS army was militarily com-
manded by Hitler himself and administered
by Himmler who carried the ofﬁcial title of
Reichsführer der SS und Chef der deutschen
Polizei.
After 1940, the Waffen SS was opened
to Volksdeutsche. These “racial” Germans from
northern European Germanic lands (Den-
mark, Holland, Flanders, and other) were
considered people of “similar blood.” Where
power was at stake, even a perfectionist like
Himmler could abandon racial quality for
quantity. After 1 942, the Waffen SS was
open to “unpure” volunteers from western
and eastern Europe (France, Wallonia and
other lands). Even Russian mercenaries and
Muslims from the Balkans were welcome.
The Waffen SS was virtually a private army
with its own staff (SS Führungs Hauptamt);
it was organized separately from the regular
Heer and had its own badges, ranks and em-
blems. The SS and the HJ had tight rela-
tionship, and Himmler and Axmann a fruit-
ful collaboration. The Waffen SS was very
popular among the HJ, and many young
men were attracted—some fascinated—by
the new corps. Many of those who enlisted
were already indoctrinated in National-
Socialist values, brainwashed, militarized
and over-disciplined by their time in the 
Hitler Jugend and in the compulsory Reichs-
arbeitsdienst. For many youth, the step from
Hitler Jugend to Waffen SS was a normal
and inevitable procedure.
The ﬁnal move toward complete mili-
tarization of the Hitler Jugend was made in
1943. Arthur Axmann encouraged HJ mem-
bers to join in the 9th Waffen SS Panzerdivi-
sion Hohenstaufen and in the 10th Waffen SS
Panzerdivision Frundsberg, both formed early
that year. In spite of protest from the church
and parents who had no wish to see their
sons killed in battle, Himmler allowed the
creation of a special Waffen SS unit com-
posed of volunteering HJ boys born in 1926.
130 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 138 ---
The 12th Waffen SS Division
Hitlerjugend
Creation of the division
As the war progressed and military
losses necessitated more soldiers, the age for
military service was lowered, and more and
more youths volunteered for the Waffen SS.
In January 1943, Allied leaders met at Casa-
blanca and made several agreements, one a
far-reaching decision: they declared their
determination to ﬁght Germany into un-
conditional surrender, excluding any polit-
ical or diplomatic end to the war. This gal-
vanized German youth who believed that
the war now had to be won no matter how.
A recruitment campaign was launched by
the SS, notably by SS Gruppenführer Gott-
lob Berger, who was chief of the Waffen SS
Recruiting Ofﬁce. The response from the
Hitler Youth was tremendous, and thousands
volunteered. Many of the boys had not yet
turned seventeen. From the start it was in-
tended to form a truly elite unit, and only the
best candidates (about 20,000 boys) in top
physical condition and with a sufﬁcient de-
gree of Nazi fervor and unswerving loyalty
to the Führer were accepted. One of the pro-
visions was to call for the RAD (Work Ser-
vice) to release candidates. For infantry duty,
candidates had to have a height of at least
1.70 m (5 ft. 7 in.); for the other branches of
the division a minimum of 1.68 m (5 ft. 6 in.)
was required. The Hitlerjugend Waffen SS
unit was ofﬁcially created on 23 June 1 943.
Then at Antwerp (Belgium) on 20 July 1943,
the SS Panzergrenadier Division Hitlerjugend
was formed, a motorized infantry division.
This was redesignated on 30 October 1943
as 12th SS Panzer Grenadier Division Hitler-
jugend and it became an armored division
equipped with tanks. The elite character was
accentuated by the cadre of the 12th Divi-
sion Hitler Youth, ofﬁcers who were drawn
from the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler
(LSSAH—Hitler’s personal bodyguards).
About 1,000 experienced ofﬁcers and NCOs
were transferred from the LSSAH, includ-
ing such top soldiers as Fritz Witt, Max
Wünsche, Kurt Meyer, Wilhelm Mohnke,
and Gerhart Bremer. The patronizing of the
12th Division by the prestigious First Leib-
standarte SS Adolf Hitler gave the unit both
political, ideological zeal and excellent mil-
itary training, and this was further enhanced
by the choice of the emblem. The 12th
Division’s insignia was composed of the
Leibstandarte pass key (“ Dietrich,” in Ger-
man, which was the name of the LSSAH
commander—Jozef “Sepp” Dietrich) and
the Hitler Jugend emblem: the Sieg rune
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 131
Emblem of the 1st Division Leibstandarte (left) and 12th Division Hitler Jugend (right)


--- PAGE 139 ---
(letter S), symbolizing victory. The 12th Di-
vision’s motto was that inscribed on the HJ
ceremonial dagger: Blut und Ehre! (Blood
and Honor). Of all the Waffen SS units, the
1st SS Division Leibstandarte Adolf Hitlerwas
the most prestigious. The Leibstandarteorig-
inated from a tiny group of highly selected
body-guards which became a ceremonial
unit. Soon after Hitler seized power in Jan-
uary 1933, the guard unit was upgraded into
a ﬁghting regiment called Leibstandarte
Schutz-Staffeln Adolf Hitler (LSSAH) and
later upgraded to an armored division. The
LSSAH was entirely composed of selected
“untainted” Germans, the ﬁttest and the
toughest, strictly disciplined and highly
trained, the cream of the Waffen SS volun-
teers. The LSSAH had a remarkable com-
bat record, taking part in all the major bat-
tles of the Third Reich on all fronts after
1940: Poland, France, Greece, Ukraine and
Italy.
Training
Each Waffen SSdivision had an admin-
istrative training home depot called Ausbil-
dungs- und Ersatzbataillon , followed by the
name of the division. This was a Kazerne
(barracks) in a German town (e.g., “Ausbil-
dungs- und Ersatzbataillon Klagenfurt” for
the 5th division Wiking) where recruits were
formed, equipped and trained. That of the
12th Division Hitlerjugend was Ausbildungs-
und Ersatzbataillon Kaiserlautern, situated
in the province Palatinate. During the war,
lightly wounded men were returned after
hospitalization to the divisional Ausbildungs
depot where they were trained anew to form
fresh ﬁghting units. The personnel of the
12th SS HJ division were trained for a whole
year, partly in Kaiserlautern, but also in
Mailly (France), in Hasselt and in Beverloo
(Belgium). Though they were very young
and most of them not fully grown, mem-
bers of the 1 2th Division were treated ex-
actly like the other soldiers of the Waffen SS,
with one exception: all boys under 18 re-
ceived a sweet ration in lieu of the usual cig-
arette ration for older soldiers. Nazi indoc-
trination of the HJ continued within the
12th Division, with the emphasis on courage,
loyalty and self-sacriﬁce. The boys were
compared to the heroes of German history:
Siegfried, who killed the dragon; Arminius,
who defeated the Roman Legions; Kaiser
Barbarossa, who conquered the Holy Land;
Hermann von Salza and the Teutonic
Knights who expanded the Germanic world
to the lands of the pagan Slavs. The intense
training and indoctrination were intended
to form warriors. The HJ-SS boy soldiers
had to kill without hesitation and die with-
out fear. They acquired military rigidity to-
gether with a desperate seriousness, and their
self-assured, grown-up manner alternated
with childish behavior. Allied soldiers ob-
served that when HJ-SS young wounded
were captured, many refused blood transfu-
sions if they could not be certain of the donor’s
racial purity, preferring to die instead. Waf-
fen SS troops were intended to be rapid,
mechanized, storm infantry, small but deter-
mined assault troops of tough, ruthless, reck-
lessly brave, and self-disciplined young men.
Armed to the teeth, they were for leading
swift penetration of enemy lines and mak-
ing cunning outﬂanking moves with speed
and aggressive attack. The aim was to
produce a homogeneous whole that would
work together as a team as no other army
had ever done before. Great emphasis laid
on esprit de corps, comradeship and physi-
cal ﬁtness. All Waffen SS men had to com-
plete the same, comprehensive, extremely
rigorous and physically challenging train-
ing program. Regardless of the candidate’s
class background and upbringing, NCOs
and ofﬁcers had to work their way up through
the hierarchy, to serve two years in the ranks
before proceeding to ofﬁcer-training schools.
No SS leader was to ask his men to do any-
thing that he would not willingly do himself.
As with the Hitler Jugend, ofﬁcers had to
132 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 140 ---
submit themselves to the same demanding
and ruthless training as their men. Knowing
that their leaders had been through the same
conditions created a feeling of reliance, trust,
and respect among the ranks. The SS com-
mand realistically believed that a respected
ofﬁcer would be blindly obeyed. In many SS
formations—and particularly in the 1 2th
Division—the leader was both a trusted
commander and a respected friend for whom
his boys were ready to suffer, risk their lives
and die. They were also to obey without ar-
guing over the sense or suitability of orders.
This fostering of Bruderschaft (brotherhood
or camaraderie) between ranks was the re-
sult of training in the HJ; it was probably
the most distinguishing feature of the 12th
Division Hitler Jugend. The Waffen SS au-
thorities paid little attention to the recruits’
educational background, arguing that it was
training, bravery and merit which made a
good ﬁghter, not necessarily a good educa-
tion. A gallant Waffen SSprivate could quickly
rise to the rank of NCO. A meritorious and
competent subaltern ofﬁcer could be made a
colonel, even a general. The NCOs were the
backbone of the SS army. Many of them
were young, and the main principle of the
HJ—“youth must be led by youth”—was
continued in the 1 2th Division. As a rule,
SS middle-ranking and senior ofﬁcers shared
the hardships and meager rations endured
by the men, lived in trenches and engaged
in combat with them. Ofﬁcer casualties were
therefore very high, due to this tendency to
lead from the front. Fritz Witt (the 12th Di-
vision’s commander) and Erich Olböter and
Karl-Heinz Prinz (two main senior ofﬁcers)
were killed in action in Normandy. Other
prominent senior ofﬁcers of the 12th Divi-
sion were killed in combat in the last months
of the war: Hans Waldmüller, Arnold Jür-
gensen and Bernhard Krausse.
Sports played an important role in the
very tough training. This included strenuous
physical exercise, cross-country runs, and
aggressive Wehrsport (contact sport, such as
boxing and fencing) to increase speed and
ferocity in combat, as well as to test aggres-
sion and overcome the fear of being hurt.
The HJ-SS teenagers learned how to ﬁre,
strip, clean and reassemble all kind of weap-
onry, they were taught all aspects of tactics
and taken into the ﬁeld to put theoretical
teaching into practice. The tough battle
training reached a high degree of realism in
order to create determined soldiers, super-ﬁt,
athletic young men well muscled and with
iron nerves. In all weather, by day or night,
on the most difﬁcult terrain, Waffen SSyoung
men were repeatedly submitted to grueling
contests, route marches with heavy loads,
and military obstacle races to develop en-
durance. They had to march for miles, with
full pack, to move swiftly and efﬁciently, to
dig foxholes, crawl, run, charge with ﬁxed
bayonet, clear mines, assault infantry posi-
tions, attack armored vehicles with various
techniques and all sort of weapons. Instead
of learning the parade “goose step,” they
were taught to kill as wolves. Of course, a
lot of attention was paid to shooting, target
practice with all kind of ﬁrearms. Training
with live rounds and real artillery was com-
mon. This was intended to familiarize the
HJ-SS teenagers with the sight, sound and
dangerous conditions of a real battle. Casu-
alties and fatalities were not unknown, but
the efﬁciency of this method prepared Hit-
ler’s boy soldiers for battle like no other
training program could, and probably saved
many lives on the battleﬁeld. Individual
training continued but increasingly gave way
to unit training at the squad level and grad-
ually broadening into the company, battal-
ion and regimental levels to create a team
spirit. Each Waffen SSsoldier was trained to
take over for his immediate superior if that
person was wounded or killed, to assume his
mantle and carry on with fulﬁlling the mis-
sion.
The Waffen SS always had priority for
supplies and weapons. They were issued
plenty of good weapons, camouﬂaged uni-
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 133


--- PAGE 141 ---
134 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
SS sport kit. As in the Hitler Youth, sports played
a central role in the training of the Waffen SS .
Each young man was therefore issued a sport kit.
The SS sport kit was the same as the HJ one. It con-
sisted of a white singlet bearing the SS emblem,
black shorts, and black shoes worn without socks.


--- PAGE 142 ---
forms, armored troop carriers and the best
tanks. However, the build-up of the 12th
Division went much more slowly than Fritz
Witt wished. This was due to the lack of
training personnel, the difﬁculty in obtain-
ing equipment, uniforms, arms and ammu-
nition, and the shortage of artillery, tanks,
half-tracks and trucks. By 1 944, the Ger-
man military economy was strained, disor-
ganized and exhausted by four years of war
effort, and gasoline was in short supply. In
many ways, the organization of the 12th Di-
vision had an improvised character. For ex-
ample, during the training period at Mailly,
the armored unit of the 1 2th Division had
only eight tanks, including four SdKfz 171
Panthers and four SdKfz 1 61 PzKfw IV
(Mark IV), tanks which were illegally “bor-
rowed” from other German armored forma-
tions. A shortage of uniforms required some
of the boys to train in their Hitler Youth
uniforms, and some tank crewmen wore
black leather navy U-boat uniforms instead
of the regular Panzer suit. There was also
carelessness at the top administrative level
and bureaucratic clumsiness at the SS head-
quarters, which infuriated Fritz Witt and
his staff. When it was garrisoned in France,
right before D-Day (6 June 1944), the 12th
Division was submitted to a triple hierar-
chy. Tactically, it depended on General von
Salmuth, the commander of the 15th Army
which was a part of Army Group B headed
by Field Marshall Erwin Rommel. At the
instructional, training level, it depended on
the Panzergruppe West (Armored Group
West) headed by General Geyr von Schwep-
penburg. Administratively the unit was
placed under control of the SS Führungs-
Hauptamt (SSFHa—the SS military head-
quarters). In March 1944, the 12th Division
conducted a training exercise, observed by
Generalfeldmarschall Gerd von Rundstedt
(Commander-in-Chief West), and SS Ober-
gruppenführer Sepp Dietrich (then Com-
mander of 1 st SS Panzer Corps). Despite
critical shortages, the division earned praise
for their combat skills and state of prepared-
ness.
Composition, units and ranks
In spite of many organizational difﬁ-
culties and material shortages, the 12th SS
Panzerdivision was a remarkable force when
it was engaged on the western front in June
1944. Totaling some 20,000 boy soldiers, it
was composed of four combat Standarten
(regiments) and various support units. The
SS Panzer Regiment 12 was an armored reg-
iment divided into two armored Abteilungen
(battalions): the SS Panzer AbteilungI and SS
Panzer Abteilung II. The armored personnel
of the 1 2th Division had been trained in a
camp at Mailly, situated near Reims. Both
Panzer Abteilungen were equipped with
modern tanks, mainly Panthers and Mark
IVs.
The 12th Division had two infantry
regiments: the SS Panzer Grenadier Regi-
ment 25 Hitlerjugend and the SS Panzer
Grenadier Regiment 26 Hitlerjugend. Each
regiment had three Sturmbanne(battalions);
each battalion had four combat Stürme (com-
panies); each company included three Scharen
(platoons); and each Schar was divided into
three Rotte (squads). Both infantry regiments
25 and 26 were motorized. The soldiers
were transported by armored half-tracks,
troop carriers, and trucks—mostly captured
from the Italian army and prone to break-
down, often making them useless.
The 12th Division had a powerful ar-
tillery. The SS Panzer Artillerie Regiment 12
had three battalions ( SS Panzer Artillerie
Abteilungen I, II and III, armed with ﬁeld
guns, howitzers and SPGs Wespe and
Hummel). It included the SS Flak Artillerie
Abteilung 12 (anti-aircraft), the SS Nebel-
werfer Abteilung 12 (rocket launchers), and
the SS Panzerjäger Abteilung 1 2 (self-pro-
pelled anti-tank guns). Additional combat
units were the SS Panzer Aufklärungs
Abteilung 12 (reconnaissance), divided into
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 135


--- PAGE 143 ---
two companies, one for each infantry regi-
ment, and equipped with armored cars; and
the SS Panzer Pionier Bataillon 12 (engineers).
Logistic services included the SS Panzer
Nachrichten Abteilung 1 2 (signal battalion)
and the SS Versorgungs Einheit 1 2 (medical
unit). In addition there was a motorized
transport unit carrying ammunition, sup-
plies and fuel, and a ﬁeld workshop for ve-
hicle recovery, maintenance and repair. There
was also a small unit of Propagandakompanie
(PK—war reporters) and a unit of Waffen SS
Feldgendarmerie (military police) for main-
tenance of discipline, trafﬁc regulation, and
escort services for the headquarters.
The 12th Division was commanded by
SS BrigadeführerFritz Witt and—after Witt’s
death on 16 June 1944—by Standartenführer
Kurt “Panzer” Meyer. Both commanders
originated from the 1st Division Leibstan-
darte.
The units of the Waffen SSwere copied
from those of the regular German army. The
following table shows the Waffen SS units
from the smallest to the largest, with U.S.
equivalent and composition.
136 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Waffen SS Units from Smallest to Largest, with U.S. Equivalent and Composition*
Rotte squad ten soldiers
Schar platoon 3 or 4 Rotten
Sturm company 3 or 4 Scharen
Sturmbann battalion 3 or 4 Stürme
Standarte regiment several battalions
Kampfgruppe combat group various units
Division division several regiments
Panzerdivision armored division several armored units
Panzerkorps armored corps several divisions
*The units of the Waffen SS were copied from those of the regular German army. 
Waffen SS U.S. Army
Anwärter Candidate
NONCOMMISSIONED RANKS
Schütze or SS Mann Private or riﬂeman
Grenadier (Gren) Private or riﬂeman
Sturmmann (Strmm) Private ﬁrst class
Obergrenadier (Ob. Gren) Private ﬁrst class
Rottenführer (Rttf ) Corporal
NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICERS
Unterscharführer (Uscha) Sergeant
Scharführer (Scha) Staff Sergeant
Oberscharführer (Oscha) Technical Sergeant
Hauptscharführer (Hscha) Master Sergeant
Stabsscharführer First Sergeant
Sturmscharführer (Stuscha) Sergeant Major
Junker der Waffen SS ( Ju.d.SS) Candidate ofﬁcer
Waffen SS Ranking System, Abbreviations, and Equivalent in the U.S. Army*


--- PAGE 144 ---
Insignia
The Hoheitszeichen (Nazi ofﬁcial na-
tional emblem) was composed of an eagle
holding a swastika. It was worn on the left
upper arm in the Waffen SS instead of on the
right breast pocket as in the army.
The Waffen SS had its own badges of
ranks and emblems. The notorious Sieg-
runen, double SS victory rune, commonly
described as the “double lightning ﬂash,”
was worn on the right collar patch. The left
collar patch carried the rank, indicated by
stars, bars and oak leaves. In mid–1 942, SS
units (and all other units issued camouﬂage
suits, such as paratroopers) were issued a
more distinctive system of rank insignia used
for NCOs and ofﬁcers. These were intended
for wear on special combat clothing, camou-
ﬂage gear, anoraks, wind jackets, denim over-
alls, winter suits and other clothing without
collars and shoulder straps on which ranks
were usually displayed. These new Dienst-
graden (badges of rank), with relatively low
visibility, were simple patches (10 cm wide)
with bars and stylized oak leaves, worn below
the left shoulder seam; they were printed in
green (yellow for senior ofﬁcers) on black
cloth backing.
The Totenkopf (Death’s Head) was worn
on headgear in miniaturized form by the
regular army tank troops, by the SS and by
the Waffen SS.
Specialist badges were worn by Un-
terofﬁzieren (NCOs) who were trained to a
speciﬁc task. These were indicated by an
embroidered yellow symbol (or gothic letter)
on a dark-green, round cloth background.
The badge was generally worn on the lower
right sleeve of the tunic. For instance, a
gothic letter S indicated a Schirrmeister
(motor maintenance sergeant, or harness
sergeant if horse outﬁt), a gothic letter F in-
dicated a Feuerwerker (a pyrotechnician,
dealing with explosives). Many Waffen SS
units were allowed to wear a thin black
Armelstreifen (cuff-band) on the left lower
sleeve of the tunic, indicating regimental or
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 137
Standarte-Junker (Std.Ju) Candidate ofﬁcer
Standarten-Oberjunker (Std.Ob.Ju) Candidate ofﬁcer
SUBALTERN OFFICERS
Untersturmführer (Ustuf ) Second Lieutenant
Obersturmführer (Ostuf ) First Lieutenant
Hauptsturmführer (Hstuf ) Captain
MIDDLE-RANKING OFFICERS
Sturmbannführer (Stubaf ) Major
Obersturmbannführer (Ostubaf ) Lieutenant Colonel
Standartenführer (Staf ) Colonel
SENIOR OFFICERS
Oberführer (Obf ) Brigadier General
Brigadeführer (Brigf ) Major General
Gruppenführer (Gruf ) Lieutenant General
Obergruppenführer (Ogruf ) General
Oberstgruppenführer (Orstgruf ) General of Army
Reichsführer der SS (RfSS) no equivalent (Himmler’s rank)
*Ranks in the Waffen SS were taken over from the SA and SS, which preferred the term Führer(leader) to Ofﬁzier
(ofﬁcer) as is shown in the SS rank terminology.


--- PAGE 145 ---
divisional title, written in silver Gothic let-
tering. That of the 12th Division carried the
designation “Hitlerjugend.”
The prestigious insignia, SS runes on
collar patches, badges, divisional names,
emblems and cuff-titles created a strong
emotional bond between the men and their
units. The regalia emphasized their pride,
loyalty, professionalism and involvement.
Uniforms
All Waffen SS uniforms were designed
and controlled by the Reichszeugmeisterei
(RZM—central ordnance ofﬁce of the
NSDAP) and by the Amt VII, the logistic
department of the SS Führungs-Hauptamt
(SSFHa). Uniforms and accoutrements were
issued through the SS Wirtschafts und Ver-
waltungs Hauptamt (Main Ofﬁce for Econ-
omy and Administration), and production
was carried out by SS factories using slave
labor and prisoners in SS concentration
camps, notably at Dachau and Buchenwald,
where Jewish tailors, seamstresses and cob-
blers were ruthlessly put to work. The uni-
form worn by the Waffen SS comprised a
Feldanzug (ﬁeld/combat uniform) exactly
like that worn by the army. It included a
shirt, a four-pocketed Dienstrock (tunic)
with turned-back collar, and fairly baggy
Hose (trousers) held up by a belt or braces.
The tunic and trouser color was Feldgrau
(gray-green) but there were some variations
in its actual shade depending on its age and
amount of cleaning.
The Mantel (overcoat) was a standard
pattern throughout the German army. It
was worn by NSDAP members, SS men,
Waffen SSsoldiers, army soldiers, NCOs and
others with only detail differences to ac-
count for rank and insignia. In style the
Mantel was a very long double-breasted gar-
ment reaching to the wearer’s calves. Mostly
ﬁeld-gray in color, it had two rows of six
gray metal buttons (gilded for generals), deep
turned back cuffs and two slash side pock-
ets. The Mantel had to be buttoned up to
the neck and the collar could be worn turned
up around the wearer’s neck in cold weather.
Holders of a cross were allowed to fold the
lapels back in order to show the neck deco-
ration attached to the tunic. There was also
a thicker, lined version especially intended
and issued for sentry duty in the ﬁeld.
Although the Waffen SS never saw ac-
tion in northern Africa, the Tropenanzug
(tropical service uniform) was greatly appre-
ciated in the summer campaigns. The trop-
ical uniform, originally designed for the
Afrika Korps, was composed of an olive-
green ﬁeld tunic with khaki shirt, drill shorts,
knee-length stockings and canvas-topped
lace-up boots. There were also alternative
long trousers in khaki drill which were worn
full length, gathered in at the ankle into
normal army boots. Colors tended to vary
quite considerably as the bleaching effect of
the sun was severe. After some period of
service, they faded to lighter shades of brown
and green; in many cases they ended up the
color of the natural fabric. Headgear in-
cluded various items. The Stahlhelm M35
was standard issue for all ﬁghting units of
the Third Reich (with the exception of the
airborne troops, who had a lighter version).
Very well designed, offering good protec-
tion to face, ears and neck, the German hel-
met was pressed in one piece of steel. Its
markings were a swastika on the left side
and a white shield with the black SS runes
on the right side. These insignia were often
missing after 1943 until the end of the war.
The helmet could be camouﬂaged with a
canvas cover with patterns of various shades
of green and brown. Ofﬁcers and NCOs
wore a wool or canvas service cap (stiff or
soft) called Schirmmütze; this had a ﬁeld-gray
top, a dark blue-green band, and a shiny
patent black peak. Its front included a chin-
strap carrying Waffenfarbe (arm of service)
pipings, a metal or embroidered Totenkopf
(death’s head badge) and the eagle/swastika
emblem. All SS ranks wore the very popular
138 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 146 ---
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 139
Waffen SS Unterscharführer .
The SS soldier wears the stan-
dard German army uniform
with the distinctive SS collar
patches, eagle/swastika on the
upper left arm, and HJ cuff title.
He is armed with a Mauser K 98
riﬂe, with ammunition pouches
on the service belt.


--- PAGE 147 ---
service Feldmütze (forage cap). This was a
peakless garrison cap made of gray material,
designed so that it could be worn under the
steel helmet. It existed in various styles and
qualities. Some were designed to allow the
sides to be pulled down and buttoned around
the wearer’s ears. In June 1943, a new peaked
ﬁeld cap was introduced, called Einheitsfeld-
mütze. This was based closely on the style of
peaked cap worn by mountain troops and
Afrika Korps soldiers. It was very convenient
and popular; subsequently it became the
most widely worn type of headgear in ac-
tive service. The Einheitsfeldmütze had a
semi-stiff peak, and was made of canvas for
warm climates and wool for cold lands.
Footwear included three-quarter-length,
strong black Marschstiefel(leather jackboots)
with hob nails, hoof irons, toe plates and
studded soles. Their ﬁnish was either peb-
bled or smooth. After 1943, leather became
scarce and marching boots were gradually
replaced by heavy shoes usually worn with
old-fashioned puttees, canvas or leather leg-
gings, anklets or gaiters fastened by
buckles.
The main distinct feature of the
Waffen SSwas the addition of various
camouﬂage smocks. The typical Waf-
fen SS Tarnjacke (camouﬂage tunic)
was a collarless, pullover smock made
of closely woven spun waterproof
rayon/cotton duck. It was reversible
in order to adapt not only to different
types of countryside but also to sea-
sonal changes. The smock had an ir-
regular, mottled pattern of red/brown/
pink/gray/yellow/tan on one side for
autumn wear, and a similar pattern
featuring mainly green and brown on
the other side for spring and summer
wear. A similar reversible helmet cover
in matching patterns was issued with
the smock. The Tarnjacke was elasti-
cized at the wrist and waist in order
to give protection from wind; it was
generously cut for ease of movement
and had a baggy appearance. The col-
larless neck opening was secured with
a lace strung through ten eyelets; the
ﬁeld tunic—worn under the Tarn-
jacke—had its collar generally worn
outside the smock, proudly showing
the double SS runes. Earlier patterns
had no pockets but only two vertical
slits with button ﬂaps to gain access to
the uniform underneath. As the war
progressed, modiﬁcations were made
to the smock and the camouﬂage pat-
140 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Waffen SSearly pattern camouﬂage smock, worn here by
a Hauptscharführer


--- PAGE 148 ---
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 141
Waffen SS machine gunner


--- PAGE 149 ---
142 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Waffen SSone-piece camouﬂage suit, 1943–44,
for tank and SPG crew; rank patch of an SS
HauptsturmführerWaffen SS Scharführer 1944


--- PAGE 150 ---
terns and colors. A more comfortable
version was issued with a longer “skirt”;
two proper side pockets with button
ﬂaps were added; buttons replaced the
neck draw-string; and thin loops and
strips of material were sewn on the
upper arms and shoulders so that
leaves, foliage and twigs could be in-
serted for additional camouﬂage in the
ﬁeld. The smock was worn over the
ﬁeld uniform and in cold weather it
was sometimes worn over the great-
coat. As the German-made Tarnjacke
always seemed to be in short supply,
captured Italian camouﬂaged shelters
were used to make a variety of jackets,
trousers and overalls. The introduction
of the new camouﬂage ﬁeld blouses in
1943–44 saw an end to the production
of the Tarnjacke but wartime photo-
graphs show the smock being worn
right up to the end of the war. In 1944,
a complete camouﬂage suit, including
cap, jacket and trousers—called getarnte
Drillichanzug M44—was introduced
for the Waffen SS and became widely
worn in the last year of the war. As a
rule no insignia was worn on camou-
ﬂaged smocks but in practice rank in-
signia and Hohenzeichen were often
sewn on the left upper sleeve.
Field equipment
All personal equipment issued to
the Waffen SS were exactly the same
as the army’s. Each SS infantryman
carried with him combat, survival and
personal equipment to make himself
a single unit. This included a waist
belt and an adjustable accoutrement
made of leather or canvas straps and
suspenders ﬁtted with metal hooks in-
tended to carry various items. Ammu-
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 143
Getarnte Drillichanzug M44 (camou-
ﬂage suit, model 1944)


--- PAGE 151 ---
nition pouches for the riﬂe were attached to
the belt, those for a submachine gun or as-
sault riﬂe were hooked on the suspenders.
The aluminum Feldfasche (drinking bottle),
holding 0.8 liters, was oval, with one at-
tached cup. There was a Kochgeschirr (a mess
kit) and a canvas Brotbeutel (bread bag) for
rations, provisions and any other oddments.
Each man was issued a Schanzzeug (en-
trenching tool); this was a short-handled
shovel with a square steel blade riveted to a
hardwood handle with a pronounced ball
end. The bayonet in a scabbard was gener-
ally attached to the waist belt and ﬁxed on
the entrenching tool. Each soldier was is-
sued a wooden-handled ﬁghting Messer
(knife); the knife scabbard was furnished
with a spring-loaded hook to ﬁt onto any
part of the equipment. All German soldiers
on duty always had a gray, ﬂuted, cylindri-
cal tin canister containing a Gasmaske (gas
mask); this container was not attached to
the webbing but hung on a shoulder belt
across the small of the back or was slung
around the neck when riding a motorcycle.
As gas was not widely used in World War II
warfare, the gas-mask canister was a con-
venient container for various personal items
or additional ammunition. Also part of the
individual equipment was the Tarnkappe,
also called Zeltbahn. Universally issued
throughout the German army and Waffen
SS, this was a green-and-brown pattern,
camouﬂaged triangular cape, being 203 ×
203 × 240 cm in size. It was manufactured
from tightly woven, water-repellent cotton
144 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Accoutrements: front and back


--- PAGE 152 ---
drill. In its center it had an opening which
could be pulled over the wearer’s head and
thus it could be used as a poncho for pro-
tection from wind, cold and rain. Four or
more of these capes could be attached to-
gether to form a small tent for bivouac. The
cape could also be used as a stretcher to
evacuate a wounded man or as shroud for
burying a dead soldier.
The use of Schutzbrillen (sunglasses
and protective goggles) was widespread for
drivers, motorcyclists, and gunners, but also
for all infantrymen in the open. Ofﬁcers and
NCOs were equipped with such additional
items as a Stoppuhr (stopwatch), Feldstecher
(binoculars with leather case and straps,
usually hung around the neck), Karten (maps
contained in a leather map case, generally
hung from the waist belt), Kompass (com-
pass), and Pfeife (whistle).
Weapons
All individual and collective weapons,
ammunition, artillery, and vehicles issued
to the Waffen SS were the same as the
army’s.
The German riﬂes of World War II
were largely conﬁned to the Mauser, origi-
nating from the 1 890s and in service since
1904. The standard German infantry riﬂe
was the traditional Mauser Modell 1898 (Kar
98), manually operated and using bolt ac-
tion, facilitating rapid loading and ejection
of spent cartridges. It could ﬁre about ten
shots per minute. A breakthrough in weap-
onry was the lightweight, self-loading, 7.92
mm automatic assault riﬂe Maschinen Kara-
biner 43 (MK 43), also called Maschinenpis-
tole 43 (MP 43) . Designed and manufac-
tured by the Erfurter Maschinefabrik Haenel
und Suhl (Erma), the MK 43 was an all-
metal riﬂe (except for a wooden butt). It
weighed 5.1 kg and the detachable maga-
zine contained 30 rounds. In 1 944 the MK
43 was slightly improved and renamed
Sturmgewehr (StG) 44 or MPi 44. This
proved an excellent assault weapon.
The German did not produce revolvers,
preferring the automatic pistol’s advantages.
There were many types spread among the
whole German army, with three predomi-
nating models: the Parabellum M08 Luger,
Mauser C96 and Walther P38.
The German forces used various mod-
els of submachine guns, such as the pre–
World War II Maschinenpistole MPi 28/II
and the Danish-designed Bergmann
Maschinenpistole MPi 34. The most used
submachine gun was the formidable Erma
Maschinenpistole MPi 38, designed and man-
ufactured by Erma, ﬁring about 500 rounds
per minute. The MPi 38 was slightly modi-
ﬁed in 1940 by the German weapon designer
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 145
Gewehr 24 Mauser (7.92 mm)


--- PAGE 153 ---
Hugo Schmeisser, who made it easier and
cheaper to produce. The result was the
Maschinenpistole MPi 40.
Designed in 1915 but used until 1 945,
the German Stielhandgranate (stick grenade
or “potato masher”) was one of the most
characteristic items of weaponry associated
with the World War II German soldier.
Several types were used for various effects:
smoke or tear gas, offensive (giving a strong
blast), or defensive (exploding in a hail of
lethal fragments within a range of up to 20
meters from the burst). There was also an
anti-tank grenade, known as Panzerwurf-
mine (L), with a hollow-charge warhead
ﬁtted with a ﬁnned tail for stabilization and
guidance. Weighing 1.35 kg (2.98 lb), the
grenade was a difﬁcult and dangerous weapon,
requiring some skill for use in an effective
manner. Its range largely depended on the
strength of the thrower (maximum 30 m—
32.8 yards), but it could knock out even the
heaviest Allied tanks. These grenades were
not a general-issue item but mainly issued to
specialist, close-in tank-killer squads.
During World War II, the Germans
did not produce separate heavy or light ma-
chine guns but used the dual-purpose, air-
cooled MG 34 and MG 42 that one man
could carry and operate. The Maschi-
nengewehr MG 34 weighed 12 kg and shot
about 800 rounds per minute. Though a
complicated weapon, demanding a lot of ef-
fort to make, and sensitive to mud, dust and
snow, production of the MG 34 continued
until 1945, concurrent with the later, heav-
ier MG 42. The Maschinengewehr MG 42
was probably the most famous machine gun
of World War II. Intended to be produced
in wartime, the MG 42 used the fewest pos-
sible machining processes and made the
greatest possible use of stamping and press-
ing, resulting in its very different ﬁnish from
the MG 34. It was a rough weapon, much
more resistant to dirt and ill-treatment than
the MG 34, and earned a good reputation in
reliability even in the worst combat condi-
tions. The MG 42 weighted 11.5 kg and it
could ﬁre automatically up to 1,300 rounds
per minute.
The German infantry and the Waffen
SS were also equipped with various mortars.
The standard light mortar was the 5-cm
Granatwerfer 36. This was trigger-ﬁred, had
a crew of three, a maximum range of about
500 m, weighed about 15 kg, and broke into
two parts (barrel and baseplate) for carry-
ing. The standard medium-infantry mortar
was the 8-cm Granatwerfer GrW 34 which
had a maximum range of 1.8 km. The GrW
34 broke in three parts for transportation
146 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Erma Maschinenpistole 43 
(MP 43)
German hand grenade


--- PAGE 154 ---
(barrel, bipod and baseplate). Another Ger-
man bomb-launcher was the heavy Granat-
werfer GrW 42 (ranging up to 6 km).
The Flammenwerfer (portable ﬂame-
thrower) began to see active service in World
War I. Carried by a single operator, it was
composed of a canister ﬁlled with a ﬂuid fuel
(thickened gasoline), with a tank of pressur-
ized nitrogen to propel the liquid which was
ignited as it left the launcher. The World
War II German Flammenwerfer had a lim-
ited range (about 30 to 40 meters) which
made the operator quite vulnerable, but it
had a terrifying effect as well as a formida-
ble physical effect.
The Panzerfaust (“armor ﬁst”), de-
signed by Dr. Heinrich Langweiler, was a
genuine breakthrough in hollow-charge
weaponry and anti-tank warfare. A one-man,
disposable missile launcher, it was compact,
light and effective at a short distance.
The German anti-tank 8.8-cm Panzer-
büchse 43 Panzerschreck (literally “tank ter-
ror,” but also known as the “Stovepipe”) was
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 147
Erma MPi 40 and ammunition pouches
Machinengewehr MG 42


--- PAGE 155 ---
a 5-foot-long, smooth-bore barrel ﬁring a
3-kg-charge projectile powered by rocket
propellant. It was in effect a direct copy of
the American “bazooka,” a specimen of
which was captured in the desert in 1943.
The Panzerschreck was a two-crew weapon.
The shooter aimed and ﬁred from over the
shoulder and the loader put the projectile in
the back of the tube. Both Panzerfaust and
Panzerschreck were effective at short range,
with devastating effect on armored ﬁghting
vehicles. They required nerves of steel to
operate, but were ideal weapons in defen-
sive ambush and urban warfare which the
Germans found themselves in during the
last two years of the war.
The Waffen SS also had large stocks of
anti-tank and anti-personnel mines, such as
the AT Riegel Mine 43, the Tellermine 35
(containing 5.4 kg TNT), and the Tellermine
42. Mines were slightly buried underground,
and violently exploded when vehicles drove
on them or when a man on foot stepped on
one. They could also be used as boobytraps.
By the end of the war, the Germans were
employing new types of mines. These were
mounted in wooden or glass containers, and
could not be located by the electronic metal
detectors then in use. To locate these mines
the Allies had to resort to the hazardous ex-
pedient of prodding for them with long-
hafted pitchforks.
The Campaigns of the 1 2th
Division
Battle of Normandy
In June 1944 came the move which sig-
naled the impending end of the Third Reich.
Since the summer of 1942, the Germans had
been preparing to meet and defeat an inva-
sion across the English Channel, and the
European coasts had been fortiﬁed (with the
so-called Atlantic Wall). Yet the arrival of
D-Day found them with no clear campaign
plan, for the difference of opinion between
148 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Panzerfaust


--- PAGE 156 ---
Marshall Rommel (Commander of Army
Group B deployed in Bretagne, Normandy
and Northern France), Marshall von Rund-
stedt (Commander-in-Chief West) and
General Geyr von Schweppenburg (head of
armored forces) regarding the employment
of the armored reserves was still unsettled.
By April 1944, the 1 2th Division was
regarded as ready for combat operation, and
the regiments were transferred to Normandy
by train for their appointment with destiny.
In May, the 12th Division HJ was stationed
in the south of Rouen, and east of Paris as
Hitler’s counterinvasion strategic reserve. It
was part of the 1st SS Panzerkorps (with the
1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarteand the
army’s crack Panzer Lehr Division). The 12th
Division was garrisoned at Evreux, Bernay,
Vimoutiers and Argentan. According to
Marshall Rommel, it had 1 77 tanks and 28
motorized assault guns, but this striking
force had strict orders not to be committed
to battle without the sanction of Hitler him-
self. When the Allies landed in Normandy
on 6 June 1944, the German high command
was totally surprised and unprepared, as
Hitler thought the Normandy landings were
a diversion for a real invasion in northern
France near Calais. However Normandy
proved to be the real thing and in the re-
sulting confusion the 12th Division HJ was
issued contradictory orders of march and
counter-march to Lisieux, resulting in waste
of precious time. Finally, at 3:00 
P.M., the
order was given for a counterattack north-
west of Caen for the next day.
For the 1 2th Division, the Battle of
Normandy was beginning. Kurt Meyer was
bursting with conﬁdence. His troops, the
pick of the Hitler Youth, would soon throw
the Allies back into the sea. But Allied air
superiority hampered all movement on the
ground, and by the time they reached
Lisieux, they had already suffered 83 casu-
alties. On 7 June the Canadian forces
launched an attack in the direction of the
airﬁeld of Carpiquet. Regiment 25 of the
12th Division counter attacked near the Ar-
dennes Abbey. From the start, the 12th Di-
vision was nicknamed the “Baby Division”
by the Allies. The blond-haired, pink-faced,
hate-ﬁlled “babies” fought very well, endur-
ing like men the thousand bomber attacks,
the powerful shells, and the tide of tanks
that were always replaced no matter how
many they managed to destroy. In their in-
nocence they had been apprenticed to evil
and now fought till they dropped in the dis-
integrating European fortress their Führer
had built. The Nazi order was crumbling
but the “babies” were ferocious. During the
combat, a group of Hitler Jugend/Waffen SS
young men committed the unsoldierly and
ugly murder of Canadian prisoners on the
battleﬁeld at the Ardennes Abbey. These
atrocities were not merely caused by battle
stress on untried young soldiers but the re-
sult of years of indoctrination. Held respon-
sible for this massacre, the commander of
the 12th SS Division, Brigadeführer Kurt
Meyer, was condemned to death after the
war. Pardoned in 1954, Meyer died in 1965.
He was ultimately more fortunate than most
of his boys who died during the battle.
On 8 June 1944, the Allies broadened
the beachheads and took Bayeux, the ﬁrst
French city to be liberated, while the 12th
Division was deployed west of Caen for a
counter-offensive to Bretteville. This took
place during the night of 8–9 June, but the
12th Division was repulsed, resulting in many
casualties and a withdrawal to the village of
La Mue. By 9 June, the Allies had won the
battle on the beaches and mastered the coast
of Normandy between the river Orne and
river Vire. On 10 June, the Americans took
Isigny-sur-Mer and met up with the U.S.
paratroopers dropped on Sainte-Mère-Eglise
four days before. The German high command
ordered a wide-scale counter-offensive with
three armored divisions, including the Hitler-
jugend; but the ﬁeld command post of the
12th Division was destroyed by a bombard-
ment, with some ofﬁcers killed. Through
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 149


--- PAGE 157 ---
confusion and disorganization, the counter-
attack was postponed. In the meantime, in
southwest France, the 2nd SS division Das
Reich butchered the entire village of Ora-
dour-sur-Glane allegedly in retaliation for a
maquisard ambush.
On 12 June, the city of Carentan was
captured by the Americans, the 12th Divi-
sion took defensive positions, and the ﬁrst
V1s (ﬂying bombs) fell on London. On 13
June, the British—marching from Balleroy
and Caumont—attempted a wide encircling
movement in the south of Caen. At Villers-
Bocage, the 501st SS Panzer battalion inter-
cepted a British armored column and de-
stroyed it completely.
On 15 June, General De Gaulle visited
Bayeux. The Allies had by then a half mil-
lion soldiers on French soil. On 16 June,
Brigadeführer Fritz Witt was killed in ac-
tion. He was replaced at the head of the 12th
Division Hitlerjugend by Standartenführer
Kurt Meyer who established his command
post at Verson. On 17 June, the Americans
reached Barneville, and marched in the di-
rection of the port of Cherbourg. The 12th
Division was engaged in skirmishes near
Tilly-sur-Seulles. On 18 June, British forces
conquered the village of Tilly-sur-Seulles,
while the Canadians concentrated their at-
tack on Fontenay-le-Pesnel, held by the
Regiment 26 headed by Wilhelm Mohnke,
belonging to the 12th SS Division HJ. Com-
bats was particularly furious in the park of
Boislonde, continuing until 2 1 June, when
the Americans took Valognes. Between 22
and 25 June, Fontenay was evacuated and
the front held by the 12th Division remained
rather stable. This was to change on 26 June
when the British and the Canadians, sup-
ported by 600 tanks, launched an offensive
south of Caen. Meyer and Wünsche estab-
lished their headquarters at Vernon, while
the advanced elements of the 12th Division
were engaged in terrible ﬁghts at Rauzay.
On 27 June the Americans managed to neu-
tralize the Fort du Roule defending Cher-
bourg. The Canadians established a bridge-
head on the river Odon, the 1 2th Division
withdrew and Meyer installed his headquar-
ters at Caen. On 28 June the Allies accen-
tuated their movement on the Odon River.
Violent ﬁghts took place at hill 112 south-
west of Caen which dominated the main
road from Caen to Falaise. The 1 2th Divi-
sion was reinforced by the 1 st Panzerdivi-
sion Leibstandarte and the 2nd SS armored
corps, including the elite SS divisions Ho-
henstaufen and Frundsberg. On 29 June, the
Allies conquered hill 112, and managed to
repulse a counter-attack launched by the SS.
On 30 June, the Germans recaptured hill
112. On 1 July Montgomery increased the
offensive around Caen. Hitler declared:
“Caen will be defended until the last Ger-
man soldier!” and the 1 2th Division was
ofﬁcially charged to hold the town.
By 2 July, the Allies had landed nearly
one million men in Normandy. From 3 to 8
July the battalion commanded by Krausse
(150 soldiers from the 12th Division) man-
aged to hold the airﬁeld of Carpiquet. After
heavy air bombing and a general offensive,
the pivotal Caen fell to the Allies on 9 July.
The units of the 12th Division, having paid
a heavy price (20 percent killed and 40 per-
cent wounded), withdrew to defensive posi-
tions on the river Orne. On 12 July what re-
mained of the SS HJ Division was relieved
by other Wehrmacht units. The Hitlerjug
 end
Division was then divided into two Kampf-
gruppen (combat groups) headed by Krausse
and Waldmüller, with the headquarters es-
tablished at Potigny, north of Falaise. On
15 July, American forces had conquered the
Cotentin peninsula and launched an offen-
sive to the south at La-Haye-du-Puits. On
17 July, Marshall Erwin Rommel was se-
verely wounded in an air strike and evacu-
ated to Germany, while the remnants of the
12th HJ Division were placed in a defensive
position. On 20 July, Hitler was lightly
wounded at Rastenburg in a failed assassi-
nation attempt directed by several senior
150 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 158 ---
German ofﬁcers. From 25 July to 6 August
the Allies launched an offensive in a south-
ern direction and to Bretagne. This was
marked by the capture of Coutances, Gran-
ville, Avranches, Pontaubault, Dol, Dinan,
Rennes, Thury-Harcourt, Vannes, Redon,
Vitré and Laval. On 8 August, the Canadi-
ans moved in the direction of Falaise; the
Kampfgruppe Waldmüllerwas charged to hold
the front at Cintheaux. On 9 August the
Americans conquered Quimper and Le
Mans. The whole province of Bretagne was
liberated and the front was turned by the
south of Normandy. On 12 August, the Free
French (headed by General Leclerc) took
Alençon, while the Americans reached
Nantes and Saint-Malo. On 15 August the
Canadians attacked hill 159, while the Poles
put the pressure on the villages of Jort and
Perrières to cross the river Dives. By that
time the combatants of the 1 2th Division
did not number more than 500 soldiers, and
they were put in defensive positions on the
river Ante, north of Falaise. On 17 August
the Americans had reached Dreux, Chartres
and Orléans. On that day Marshall von
Kluge committed suicide and was replaced
by Marshall Model as head of the German
troops on the western front. The town of
Falaise, defended by a handful of SS, was
assaulted by the Canadians. On 18 August,
the survivors of the 12th SS Division estab-
lished a defensive position south of Falaise
between the river Dives and the village of
Nécy.
On 19 August the liberation of Paris
began while Leclerc’s Free French 2nd Ar-
mored Division moved to the capital of
France. The Americans took Argentan and
Trun. Patton reached the river Seine at
Mantes and Vernon. By that time, the Ger-
mans were pocketed around Falaise, and the
only escape was through a narrow gap at
Chambois where they were bombed and
systematically picked off. On 20 August the
survivors of both Kampfgruppe Krause and
Waldmüller managed to break through be-
tween the villages of Saint-Lambert and
Chambois. Max Wünsche was taken pris-
oner and the 12th Division had no tanks left.
On 23 August the Allies reached Evreux,
Meaux and Sens. On 25 August the Ger-
man garrison of Paris surrendered: the cap-
ital of France was liberated and General De
Gaulle established the provisory govern-
ment of the French Republic. On 26 Au-
gust Brigadeführer Kurt Meyer received the
Iron Cross with Swords. The survivors of
the 12th Division could only offer token ac-
tivity and fought one last battle in the for-
est of Londe before withdrawing over the
river Seine. Eventually a few Waffen SS/HJ
young men managed to break away, but the
others died or were taken prisoner, and all
heavy equipment and weapons were lost. On
the 29 August, the Battle of Normandy was
over. The ill-fated Mortain counter-offen-
sive and the Falaise pocket brought the
greatest disaster to the Wehrmachtsince Stal-
ingrad. The Germans had 240,000 killed
and wounded, 21 0,000 taken prisoner, and
1,800 tanks destroyed. By that time the de-
bris of the 12th Division regrouped at Beau-
vais, then retreated to Hirson, and ﬁnally
moved to the Ardennes mountains. Field
Marshall von Rundstedt said: “It is a pity
that this faithful youth is sacriﬁced on a
hopeless situation.”
Battle of the Bulge
In September 1944, the remnants of
the 12th SS Panzerdivision Hitlerjugend re-
treated to the River Maas in Belgium. The
unit was then sent for rest in Sauerland and
reﬁt in Germany (Bremen) in autumn 1944.
New equipment and weapons were issued,
ofﬁcers were drawn from the Luftwaffe and
even from the Kriegsmarine, a new com-
mander was appointed (Standartenführer
Hugo Krass, aged 33), and twenty thousand
new HJ boys replaced those fallen in Nor-
mandy. As the new generation of HJ boys
volunteering for the 12th Division Hitlerju-
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 151


--- PAGE 159 ---
gend were hastily trained, the unit could never
make up those lost. They swore their oath of
loyalty to Hitler in November 1944 at the
Ausbildungs- und Ersatzbataillon (home
depot) in Kaiserlautern in the presence of
Himmler and Axmann. The last German
success was the battle of Arnhem in south
Netherlands. In September 1944 the over-
stretched Allies attempted to secure a Rhine
bridgehead by taking Dutch bridges on the
rivers Waal, Maas and Rhine by parachute
assault at Arnhem, in order to advance in
North Germany before winter. They were
held up by German troops reacting decisively
and the liberators’ momentum was halted.
The failure of Operation Market Garden
marked the end of Allied hopes for victory
over Nazi Germany before the end of 1944.
The new 1 2th SS Division HJ was
placed in reserve in the sector west of
Cologne before participating in the ill-fated
Ardennes offensive (the Battle of the Bulge)
in the winter of 1 944-45. The Ardennes (a
wooded, hilly region in southern Belgium)
was chosen by Hitler as the location of a
last-ditch offensive. In the lull in ﬁghting
which followed Montgomery’s abortive drive
to the Rhine and the failure at Arnhem,
Hitler exploited the opportunity to launch
an ambitious counter-offensive which he
believed might snatch back the iniative on
the western front. Hitler’s intention was to
split the British from the American armies
and to capture the port of Antwerp, thereby
cutting the Allies’ main supply port. His
aim was to gain time and to force a separate
peace on the British and Americans, after
which he would turn his forces against Rus-
sia and win the war. Hitler lived in a world
of dreams, and when the dreams faded he
looked around for scapegoats.
The offensive begun on 1 6 December
1944. Army Group B, comprising 25 Ger-
man divisions, commanded by Field Mar-
shall Walther Model, struck the unsuspect-
ing American forces. Amid a spell of bad
weather that kept the Allies’ awesome air
force at bay, the Germans overran their
lines. The 12th Division, placed in the north-
ern sector of the battleﬁeld, had as its imme-
diate task to drive through the Bütgenbach
Gap to Malmédy and Stavelot. The troops
animated by a strong spirit of vengeance and
patriotism, fell upon their unsuspecting op-
ponents as dawn was breaking from a leaden
sky. The unit met tremendous difﬁculties
moving forward west of the village of Krin-
kelt because of bad weather. By 20 Decem-
ber, the 26th regiment of the 12th Division
had managed to seize the villages of Büllin-
gen and Bütgenbach. However two major
road junctions remained held by the Amer-
icans, at Saint-Vith and Bastogne. Stubborn
and heroic U.S. resistance and swift rein-
forcement by both American and British
troops, as well as a fuel shortage and bad
weather, halted the German advance south
of the river Meuse on 26 December. Two
days later, the HJ-SS unit launched an attack
in the sector of Sambrée, but Hitler’s boy
soldiers were repulsed. By 31 December, the
12th Division had lost three-quarters of its
establishment in furious battle at hill 5 10,
north of Bastogne. In early January 1945,
the Allies counter-attacked, and Hitler’s last
gamble turned into a general withdrawal.
The massacre of American prisoners at
Malmédy by SS Obersturmbannführer
Joachim Peiper’s Kampfgruppe further tar-
nished the reputation of the Waffen SS .
Some 160 American soldiers had been taken
prisoner and, as they were an “embarrass-
ment” to Joachim Peiper’s SS men, they
were lined up and machine-gunned. At least
142 were killed. The rest, after feigning
death, escaped by night to tell the grim story
of the “Malmédy Massacre.” Incensed by
this outrage, the American forces entered
the ﬁght thirsting for revenge. The short-
lived Ardennes offensive had cost the Ger-
mans 100,000 casualties, 1,000 airplanes and
large quantities of weapons and equipment
which the Reich was unable to replace. Only
a few remnants of the 12th Division, as badly
152 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 160 ---
decimated as during the Battle of Normandy
managed to withdraw to Cologne after 1 0
January 1945. The German army and the
Waffen SS were now reduced to a piecemeal
collection of variously equipped units, all far
under regular strength.
The end of the 1 2th Division
The new year 1 945 saw mighty Rus-
sian offensives, with decisive advances into
Silesia, East Prussia and Hungary. Mean-
while the western Allies had crossed the
Rhine and pushed across Germany. In early
February 1945, the 12th Division, still under
command of Hugo Krass (now promoted to
the rank of SS Brigadeführer), was reﬁt again
at Cologne with new HJ volunteers aged 15
and 16. Part of the VIth Panzer Army,
headed by Sepp Dietrich, the 12th Division
was engaged in the region of the Plattenzee
(the Balaton Lake) in Hungary, with the
objective of recapturing Budapest. Fighting
against heavy Russian resistance and the
spring thaw, the offensive ground to a halt.
After hard and hopeless battles in Köbölkut,
Muzla, Puszta and Stuhlweissenburg, the
12th Division was forced to withdraw to
Dudar and Zirc. By 31March 1945, the unit
was encircled in Raab. After a costly escape
from the pocket, the decimated unit re-
treated to the region of Hirtenberg in Aus-
tria. In the beginning of April 1945, the di-
vision was only the shadow of its former self,
still ﬁghting hopeless rear-guard battles
while retreating to Tradigist. Finally after a
long forced march to escape capture and cer-
tain death at the hands of the Soviets, the
455 survivors of the once proud, dreaded
and powerful 12th SS Panzerdivision Hitler-
jugend (totaling 23,244 men in December
1944) crossed the River Enns in Austria and
surrendered to the U.S. Seventh Army on 8
May 1945 after a last parade and inspection
by SS Brigadeführer Hugo Krass. As a ﬁnal
token of arrogance, no white ﬂag was
hoisted by Hitler’s last ﬁghters when they
surrendered.
V olkssturm
During the last months of the war, the
Hitler Jugend became an important part of
the Volkssturm and during the Battle of
Berlin many teenagers were committed to
the front line on which few survived. The
Deutscher Volkssturm (popular army) were
home defense units created in September
1944. The idea originated from plans made
by General Heusinger from the Oberkom-
mando des Heeres (OKH—Germany’s Army
High Command) to raise a territorial army
in East Prussia. The plan was ﬁrst put into
action in summer 1 944 by Gauleiter Koch
who raised all able men to form a small army
called Ostpreussen Volkssturm, ﬁghting with
some success in Goldap and Gumbinen.
With the military situation worsening and
the ﬁghting getting perilously close to Ger-
man soil, and pushed by Goebbels, who saw
a propaganda opportunity, Hitler decided
to develop the Volkssturmon a national scale.
All able-bodied men between 16 and 60
were drafted for the defense of the Heimat
(homeland) in four levies of men born be-
tween 1884 and 1928, intended to total six
million. Authority over the Volkssturm was
mixed; it was equipped and armed by Himm-
ler’s SS, but it was recruited, organized, po-
litically led and commanded by the Nazi
Party under Martin Bormann’s authority.
The Volksturm was actually intended to be
Bormann’s private army, and it escaped
Himmler’s control. The members of the
Volkssturm were poorly trained, however.
They were not issued regular uniforms, but
used a great variety of gear. The only stan-
dard identiﬁable item was an armband indi-
cating “Deutscher Volkssturm Wehrmacht.”
Weapons and ammunition too, consisted of
whatever could be found in army stores.
The recruits of the Volkssturm were
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 153


--- PAGE 161 ---
either very young or old enough to be vet-
erans of the World War I. Kids and grand-
fathers found themselves on the front line
of the war. It goes without saying that the
Volkssturmrepresented an ill-prepared, poorly
armed, heterogeneous body composed of old
civilian men and young boys with little de-
sire to ﬁght. Not only were they far too
young or too old, but they had little train-
ing and no experience with the few weapons
left for these improvised soldiers to protect
themselves with. The Volkssturm also in-
cluded girls of the BdM and women from
the NS Frauenschaft (Nazi Women League)
who provided rear-echelon support such as
logistics and medical care. In March 1 945,
some girls and women were issued weapons
and participated actively in the hopeless de-
fense of their towns, facing Allied armies
that were determined to win the war regard-
less of the lives that it might cost. It was
very tough on the Volkssturm troops. The
glamour of being a member was gone, many
units were never even formed and the few
that were involved in combat were destroyed
on the front lines. The Volkssturm showed
Hitler’s determination to ﬁght to the last
person. It was a ﬁnal crime, the expression
of complete despair, the “Götterdämmerung”
of legend, the total collapse of the Third
Reich that had sent to death so many Ger-
man people. Hitler remained true to his
original program, “Weltmacht oder Nieder-
gang” (world domination or downfall), and
considered that if Germany lost the war,
that would mean that the nation had not
passed the test of strength and in that case
it deserved no better than to be destroyed.
The Volkssturm was deployed to the
front line in early 1945 and the hour of the
Hitler Jugend’s ﬁnal sacriﬁce was at hand.
As the HJ members had been receiving mil-
itary training for ten years, they were the
backbone of the Volkssturm. Anti-tank bat-
talions (Panzerschreckabteilungen) were formed
in late March 1945 from HJ personnel. Each
special tank-hunter team consisted of nine
boys, six trained and armed with anti-tank
weapons (e.g., Panzerfaust) and three provid-
ing covering ﬁre with automatic weapons.
As many ofﬁcers and older HJ leaders were
dead or captured, younger boys were pro-
moted fast. It was not uncommon for a 16-
year-old Gefolgschaftsführer to have com-
mand over a group of 800 boys. Girls
operated anti-aircraft guns, and youths shot
with Panzerfäuste on barricades, while chil-
dren, women and old people were drafted
to dig anti-tank ditches and erect other ob-
stacles. The Hitler Youth members contin-
ued to take an active part in the defense of
their cities as the Allies swept over Ger-
many. Children fought until killed rather
than surrender. The HJ fought fanatically
because they believed Goebbels’ propaganda
that the Russians would kill them all anyway.
The total number of casualties is not pre-
cisely known. About 175,000 members of the
Volkssturm were listed as missing in action
after the war.
In Berlin in April 1945, a detachment
of about 600 HJ teenagers—aged 1 5 and
16—was desperately holding the Wannsee
bridgehead on the river Havel awaiting the
arrival of General Wenck’s 1 2th Army, by
that time a decimated force. Wenck’s troops
were ﬁghting a pointless rear-guard struggle
on the river Elbe southwest of Berlin and
never reached the besieged capital of the
dying Third Reich, Hitler’s ﬁnal obsessive
hope as he shut himself away in the deep
concrete bunker under the Chancellery
building where he committed suicide. The
sacriﬁced HJ unit was commanded by Ax-
mann who had established his command
post at 86 Kaiserdamm until 26 April, and
from then until 30 April in the cellar of the
Nazi Party Chancellery at 64 Wilhemstrasse.
Hitler’s last public appearance, on 20 April
1945 (his 56th birthday) on the grounds of
the ruined Reich Chancellery, was to deco-
rate HJ members, the youngest only twelve,
with the Iron Cross. By then even ten-year-
old junior Deutsches Jungvolk were serving
154 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945


--- PAGE 162 ---
at the collapsing front. Children were being
thrown into the cauldron all over Germany
to ﬁght in a meaningless war of annihila-
tion.
In the last months of the war, Hitler
Youth members were also intended to crew
the new jet-propelled He-1 62 A-2 Sala-
mander, also known as Volksjäger (people’s
ﬁghter). This airplane, one of Hitler’s last
hopes, had a wingspan of 7.05 m (23 ft 7∂
in), a length of 8.90 m (29 ft 8 in), a weight
of 3,000 kg (5,480 lb) and a top speed of
940 km/h (522 mph). It had a crew of one
and was armed with two 20-mm cannons. In
the ﬁeld of jet aircraft, the Germans were
years ahead of the Allies, but the high com-
mand, and Hitler ﬁrst of all, were slow to
realize the potential of revolutionary de-
signs. The old story of “too little, too late”
applied to all German jet aircraft produc-
tion—the He-1 62 was never used opera-
tionally.
Hitler committed suicide on 30 April
1945 in his bunker under the Chancellery
in Berlin. His body and that of his wife Eva
Braun were burned in the garden of the
Chancellery by Hitler’s SS adjutant Otto
Günsche. Hugh Trevor-Roper, who carried
out a thorough investigation of the circum-
stances surrounding Hitler’s death, inclines
to the view that the Führer’s ashes were col-
lected into a box and handed over to Arthur
Axmann, the leader of the HJ. It would have
been a logical act to pass on the “sacred
relics” to the next generation. This is not
true, however. Hitler’s ashes were captured
by the Russians and dispersed.
Werewolves
When Germany was on the verge of
defeat in the closing days of World War II,
a number of HJ were drafted into the so-
called Werwolven(Werewolves). The Were-
wolves—secretly set up under the authority
of Himmler’s SS—were intended to be
guerrilla units that would put up a last-ditch
armed resistance to the Allies in all parts of
Germany, but notably in the Alps. The Wer-
wolfen would have been garrisoned at the
Alpenfestung (Alpine Redoubt), the area on
the Obersalzberg in the sacred hills of Nazi
mythology, mountains charged with the leg-
end of the Middle Ages emperor Barbarossa
and sanctiﬁed by Hitler’s residence. They
were also expected to sally out from the
Alpine bastion as trained commando units to
create havoc among the Allied forces by
sniping and ambushing, by sabotage and
disruption of trafﬁc, and by poisoning water
and food supplies. The Werewolves regarded
themselves as a resistance movement simi-
lar to the underground armies that had
fought against the Germans in Poland,
France, Italy, Russia and the Balkans. They
were designed as a paramilitary formation,
an auxiliary force to assist the German army;
they expected to ﬁght in uniform and, if
captured, to claim the right of prisoners of
war. They issued crude pamphlets threaten-
ing revenge on those who refused to sup-
port them. At the time of German surren-
der, the leader of the organization was SS
Obergruppenführer Hans Prützmann. In
early 1945, the threat was taken seriously by
the Allied forces, as the SS and HJ’s oath
meant that they were willing and ready to
sacriﬁce their lives for the Führer. Fanatic
teenagers only knew one god—Adolf Hit-
ler—and had been saturated from childhood
with the aims and ideology of National So-
cialism. Most of them were so dedicated
and convinced of ultimate victory that their
mental attitude deﬁed comprehension. Their
fanaticism was so strong that it sometimes
seemed to have penetrated the subconscious.
They expected a heroic last stand, inspired
by the myth of Hagen and the sinister last
battle of the Nibelungen. Did not the bat-
tle song of the Hitler Jugend say that they
would go marching on after everything was
in ruins? (“Wir werden weiter marschieren
wenn alles in Scherben fällt! ”)
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 155


--- PAGE 163 ---
156 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
HJ boy in the V olkssturm, Berlin, 1945. This V olkssturmHJ private wears the HJ dark-blue win-
ter uniform with M1933 black ski-cap with HJ diamond cap badge, M1938 dark-blue trousers, and
full insignia, including HJ and V olkssturmarmbands on the left arm. On the right upper sleeve he
wears two silver Panzervernichtungsabzeichen (tank destruction badge, instituted in March
1942) for his single-handed destruction of two Soviet tanks without the use of an anti-tank weapon.
He is armed with the latest Sturmgewehr StG 44 (assault riﬂe model 1944) with ammunition mag-
azine pouches ﬁxed on the waist belt.


--- PAGE 164 ---
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 157
Civilian drafted into the V olkssturm1945


--- PAGE 165 ---
A secret propagandistic Werewolf
broadcast was created by Goebbels which
contributed to many misconceptions about
the units. The propaganda was responsible
for intoxication about the Werewolves’ aims,
achievements and real capacity. The Were-
wolves never materialized, however, never
became an effective ﬁghting force, as Hitler
abandoned the idea of a ﬁnal struggle
against the Allies in the Bavarian Alps. In-
stead, the Führer decided to stay and die in
Berlin. After his suicide on 30 April, his ap-
pointed successor—Admiral Karl Dönitz,
the navy commander—ordered all members
of the embryonic organization to cease op-
erations. The order was obeyed, and the few
Werwolfen stopped all resistance. A very
small number of these few refused to sur-
render and tried to prolong the ﬁghting,
sacriﬁcing themselves in a vain attempt to
stem the Allied advance. They were rapidly
captured and sentenced to restriction in
their hometowns or to hard labor, includ-
ing the exhumation of mass graves. A few
hold-outs made isolated pockets of resist-
ance and some of them were executed by the
Allies. All the Werewolves achieved was a
more suspicious and hostile Allied attitude
toward the conquered German civilians.
Denaziﬁcation and the
Nuremberg Process
The war ended in May 1945 and mem-
bers of the Hitler Youth went back to being
regular civilians. It was a hard adjustment
for many to go from being the elite of the
German nation, high-ranking ofﬁcers in the
HJ, to normal schoolboys and students.
After all they had been through, the idea of
going back to school seemed for many ex-
members preposterous. What could they
possibly learn after the excitement and the
horrors of war?
The members of the HJ and other
Nazis were required to be denaziﬁed. After
the fall of Hitler’s regime, the process of
Entnaziﬁzierung (denaziﬁcation) was in-
tended to eradicate Nazism. It was an im-
mensely complicated task for the Allies. All
persons involved in Nazism were removed
from public positions and by 1 946 the pro-
cess became more systematic. The Allied
158 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
Heinkel He-162 Salamander


--- PAGE 166 ---
Control Council had deﬁned ﬁve categories
of persons in relation to Hitler’s regime:
1. Hauptschuldige: major offender who was
sentenced to death or life imprisonment;
2. Belastete: activist, militarist, involved in
war crimes and proﬁteering;
3. Minderbelastete: lesser offender, not known
to have committed crimes;
4. Mitlaufer: fellow-traveler, one who joined
the Nazis to demonstrate allegiance;
5. Enlastete: exonerated individual, inno-
cent, or proven anti–Nazi.
Cadres of the HJ were, on the whole,
deﬁned as category 3, lesser offenders de-
serving leniency, who were to be placed on
probation for two or three years. Common
members generally fell under categories 4
and 5. All, however, were “denaziﬁed.” For-
mer HJ members were shown the evil of
Hitler’s regime. For example, they had to look
at footage from the death camps, and many
could not believe that the ﬁlms were real.
Many of them were so fanatic and indoctri-
nated that it took years for them to feel a
sense of guilt for the Holocaust, the geno-
cide of the Jews.
Denaziﬁcation proceeded slowly and—
with the establishment of the Cold War—
in some cases those deserving punishment
were able to escape. A number of former
Waffen SSwere allowed to enlist in the French
Foreign Legion. Certain former Nazi po-
licemen were engaged by both the West and
the East in various intelligence services (e.g.,
Klaus Barbie, the “Butcher of Lyon”). Nazi
scientists were engaged to develop new weap-
ons and rocket programs, the most famous
being Wernher von Braun (father of the V2
rocket) whose work was decisive in the 1969
NASA moon landing.
In 1947 , the Allied occupation author-
ities proclaimed a general amnesty for all
persons of both sexes born before 1 January
1919, provided they were not guilty of war
crimes. The leaders of the Hitler Youth had
to stand trial. After being relieved of his
post as leader of the Youth in August 1940,
Baldur von Schirach had been appointed
Gauleiter (governor) of Austria. This Ger-
man-speaking neighbor of Germany, with
whom it had strong historical ties, had been
forcibly annexed to Hitler’s German Reich
in 1938 under a thin cloak of legality. Re-
named Ostmark, Austria was absorbed into
the German economic and military system
and placed until 1945 under the leadership
of a Nazi appointed Gauleiter, ﬁrst Arthur
Seyss-Inquart, then Odilo Globocnik, and
ultimately von Schirach. The unorthodox
cultural policies of the new Gauleiter in Vi-
enna had aroused Hitler’s distrust. After von
Schirach’s visit to Hitler’s home at Berghof
in 1943, where von Schirach and his wife
pleaded for a moderate treatment of eastern
peoples and criticized the conditions of Jews,
he lost all real political inﬂuence. Neverthe-
less von Schirach’s administration of foreign
workers, and the fact that he allowed the
deportation of 185,000 Jews from Vienna to
the extermination camps in Poland during
his tenure as governor were major items in
the indictment against him at his Nurem-
berg trial. The tribunal conceded that he did
not originate the criminal extermination
policy, but said that he had participated in
the deportation. Von Schirach admitted that
he had approved the “resettlement,” but de-
nied all knowledge of genocide. The court
found him guilty of crimes against human-
ity, and sentenced him to twenty years’ im-
prisonment. His wife Henriette appealed to
the court for clemency on the grounds that
“our children love America.” Von Schirach
was released in September 1966 and after-
ward lived a secluded life in southwest Ger-
many. He wrote his memoirs, and a book
titled Ich Glaube an Hitler (I Believed in
Hitler) was published in Hamburg in 1967.
Schirach’s book should be read with consid-
erable reservation, as the author attempts to
take refuge in the role of an innocent young
man, fatally seduced and fascinated by Hit-
ler, who had misled German youth, but only
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 159


--- PAGE 167 ---
160 Hitler Youth, 1922–1945
The ﬁnal act: death or surrender


--- PAGE 168 ---
learned of the Nazi crimes when it was too
late. Von Schirach died in Kröv on 8 August
1974.
Arthur Axmann, von Schirach’s suc-
cessor as leader of the Hitler Youth, was ar-
rested in December 1945 when a Nazi un-
derground network was uncovered which he
had been organizing. A denaziﬁcation court
sentenced him in May 1949 to a prison sen-
tence of three years as major offender, con-
cluding that he had been a Nazi from inner
conviction rather than base motives. After
serving his sentence, Axmann subsequently
worked as a sales representative in Gelsen-
kirchen and Berlin. On 19 August 1958, his
case was reopened. A West Berlin court
ﬁned the former leader of the Hitler Jugend
35,000 marks, ﬁnding him guilty of indoc-
trinating German youth with Nazi values,
but not guilty of having committed any
crimes during Hitler’s era. Axmann died in
Berlin in 1996.
During the postwar years, former HJ
boys and girls realized that they were espe-
cially tainted citizens of the most despised
nation on the face of the earth. They devel-
oped harsh resentment toward their elders,
especially educators who had robbed them
of their youth, who had delivered them into
the cruel power of the Nazis, who had nearly
destroyed an entire generation of German
children. It was not an easy task to be a
grown-up, a father or a mother in the
post–World War II years. Even today many
German grandfathers and grandmothers are
reluctant to speak about their youth during
the Third Reich.
4. Hitler’s Boy Soldiers, 1939–1945 161


--- PAGE 169 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 170 ---
April 20, 1889—Adolf Hitler born in Austria.
November 9, 1918—Weimar Republic proclaimed in Germany.
November 11, 1918—World War I ended, Germany defeated.
June 28, 1919—Germany signs the Treaty of Versailles.
September 1919—Hitler joins the German Workers’ Party.
April 1, 1920—Hitler renames the German Workers’ Party the “National Socialist
German Workers’ Party” (Nazi Party—NSDAP).
March 1922—Hitler announces the ﬁrst Nazi Party youth group.
November 8, 1923—Hitler’s Beer-Hall Putsch ends in failure (Hitler is afterward sent to
prison).
December 20, 1924—Hitler is released from prison and begins rebuilding the Nazi Party.
Late 1925—Hitler’s book Mein Kampf is ﬁrst published.
July 1926—The Hitler Youth is formally established, with Kurt Gruber as its leader.
August 19–20, 1927—Gruber leads 300 Hitler Youth members in a march at a Nuremberg
rally, earning a tribute from Hitler.
April 1929—The Hitler Youth is declared the only ofﬁcial youth group of the Nazi Party.
July 1930—The Bund deutscher Mädel, the League of German Girls, is founded.
October 30, 1931—Baldur von Schirach is appointed Nazi youth leader.
April 13, 1932—The SA and the Hitler Youth are temporarily banned by the Weimar
government.
January 30, 1933—Hitler is named chancellor of Germany.
February 27 , 1933—The Reichstag building burns.
March 23, 1933—The Enabling Act grants Hitler dictatorial powers.
April 1, 1933—Nazis start boycott of Jewish shops.
163
Appendix 1
Chronology


--- PAGE 171 ---
May 10, 1933—Nazis and college students burn books.
June 1933—Baldur von Schirach named youth leader of the German Reich.
August 2, 1934—Hitler becomes Führer.
October 7 , 1934—The Reich Land Service is introduced, sending city youths to work on
farms.
September 15, 1935—The Nuremberg laws against Jews are proclaimed.
March 7 , 1936—German troops reoccupy the demilitarized Rhineland.
December 1936—The Hitler Youth Law makes membership compulsory for youths aged
10 to 18.
March 13, 1938—Hitler annexes Austria.
November 9, 1938—Kristalnacht (Nazis attack Jews on the “Night of Broken Glass”).
March 1939—Hitler annexes Czechoslovakia.
March 25, 1939—A new, tougher law concerning compulsory Hitler Youth membership
conscripts all German boys aged 10 into the Hitler Youth.
September 1, 1939—Germany invades Poland, beginning World War II.
October 7 , 1939—Nazis begin forcing Polish farmers off their land.
April 9, 1940—Germany invades Denmark and Norway.
May 10, 1940—Germany invades Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
June 14, 1940—Paris occupied by Nazis.
August 1940—Artur Axmann succeeds Schirach as Hitler Youth leader.
Fall 1940—The National Youth Directorate requires target practice and terrain maneuvers
for boys 10 and older.
June 22, 1941—Germany invades the Soviet Union.
January 20, 1942—Wannsee Conference held during which Nazis formalize plans for the
“Final Solution of the Jewish Problem.”
March 13, 1942—Hitler orders new military training camps to provide three weeks of
mandatory training for all boys aged 16 to 18.
Januar
y 28, 1943—Heimatﬂak anti-aircraft batteries are ofﬁcially manned solely by Hitler
Youth boys.
January 31, 1943—The German Sixth Army surrenders at Stalingrad.
May 1943—The last German strongholds in North Africa fall to the Allies.
June 24, 1943—The 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend was created.
June 6, 1944—D-Day; Allies land at Normandy in northern France. The Hitler Jugend
tank division is sent to the Normandy front.
July 20, 1944—Assassination attempt on Hitler fails.
September 25, 1944—Hitler creates the Volkssturm (People’s Storm) to defend Germany to
the end.
February 1945—The Werewolf project begins training children in guerrilla warfare and
sabotage.
April 20, 1945—On his 56th birthday, Hitler pins medals on Hitler Youth boys outside
his bunker in Berlin.
164 Appendix 1: Chronology


--- PAGE 172 ---
April 30, 1945—Hitler commits suicide.
May 7 , 1945—Germany surrenders unconditionally.
May 8, 1945—The 12th Hitlerjugend armored division surrenders to U.S. 7th Army.
October 1, 1946—At the Nuremberg Trials, von Schirach is sentenced to 20 years’
imprisonment for crimes against humanity.
Appendix 1: Chronology 165


--- PAGE 173 ---
166
“V orwärts! V orwärts!”
Verse 1
Forward! Forward!
The clear marching bands sound
Forward! Forward!
The youth ignores danger.
Germany will shine on,
Even if we have to disappear.
Forward! Forward!
The youth ignores danger.
Even if the aim is high
The youth will reach it.
Chorus
Our ﬂag waves before us.
We march to the future, man after man.
We march for Hitler through night and dis-
tress
With the ﬂag of youth for liberty and bread.
Our ﬂag is the new time.
It leads us to eternity.
Yes, the ﬂag is beyond death!
Verse 2
Youth! Youth!
We are the soldiers of the future.
Youth! Youth!
We carry future prowess.
Führer, we belong to you.
We are comrades with you!
Appendix 2
Song of the Hitler Jugend


--- PAGE 174 ---
V orwärts! V orwärts!


--- PAGE 175 ---
168
Ayçoberry, P . La Société Allemande sous le IIIe
Reich. Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1998.
Brandenburg, H. C. Die Geschichte der Hilter
Jugend. Cologne: Verlag Wissenschaft und
Politik, 1968.
Heck, A. A Child of Hitler.Frederick, CO: Re-
naissance House, 1985.
Kamer, H., and E. Bartsch. Jugendlexikon Na-
tional-Sozialismus. Hamburg: Rowohlt Tas-
chenbuch Verlag, 1982.
Klose, Werner. Generation im Gleichschritt: Ein
Dokumentarbericht.Hamburg: Gerhard Stal-
ling Verlag, 1964.
Koch, H. W. The Hitler Youth. New York:
Stein and Day, 1975.
Mabire, J. Les Jeunes Fauves du Führer. Paris:
Fayard, 1976.
Mann, Erika. Zehn Millionen Kinder: Die
Erziehung der Jugend im Dritten Reich. Mu-
nich: Verlag H. Ellermann, 1986.
Peukert, D. J. K. Inside Nazi Germany. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1 987.
Rempel, G. Hitler’s Children. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1975.
Stoffel, G. La Dictature du Fascisme Allemand.
Paris: Editions Internationales, 1 936.
Bibliography


--- PAGE 176 ---
Abetz, Otto 80
Abitur (graduation certiﬁcate) 93
Adler und Falken 11
Adolf-Hitler-Marsch 75
Adolf Hitler schools (AHS; Adolf-Hitler-
Schulen) 96–97
Adolf-Hitler-Schulen (AHS; Adolf Hitler
schools) 96–97
Afrika Korps 138, 140
Agricultural service 81
All Quiet on the Western Front (ﬁlm) 26
Alpine Redoubt 155
Altendorf, Werner 33
Althing 77
Amt IV 121
Amt VII 138
Amt XI 98–99
Anti-intellectualism 89, 90
Anti-Semitism 5, 6, 1 0, 17,  21, 24, 28, 29, 87 , 89,
91
Armbands 62
Armelbinde (armbands) 62
Armelstreifen (cuff-bands) 137
Armstrong, Louis 117
Arndt, E.M. 11
Artaman League (Bund der Artamenen) 16–17,
22, 23, 29, 81
Aryans 5, 10, 38, 39, 43, 45, 46, 47 , 50, 51, 73, 78,
82, 91, 92
AT Riegel Mine 43 148
Ausbildungs- und Ersatzbataillon 152
Auschwitz (extermination camp) 17
Auslandsdeutsche (Germans in foreign lands)
59
Autarky 3
Autobahn 108
Axmann, Arthur 33, 108, 123–125, 130, 152, 154–
155, 161
Baby Division 149
Bachant (Wandervogel fellow) 13
Ballilas 11
Banners 62
Barbie, Klaus 159
Barbusse, Henri 89
Bastogne 152
Battle of Coburg
21
Battle of Normandy 148–151
Battle of the Bulge 151–153
Bäumer, Gertrud 40
Bautruppen (construction troops) 113
“Believe! Obey! Fight!” 83
Bereichsleiter 10
Berger, Gottlob 131
Binoculars (Feldstecher) 145
Birth rate 45, 47
Bismarck Jugend 11
Blau Weiss (Blue-White) 13
Blitzkrieg 109
“Blood, Soil and the Sword” (SS slogan) 17
Blue-White (Blau Weiss) 13
Blum, Günther 33
Blut und Bodem (blood and soil) 17
Bolshevism 5
Book burning 89
Bormann, Martin 48, 74, 1 23, 153
Bouhler, Philip 92
Boxing 72, 133
Boy Scouts 11, 29, 70
Braun, Eva 44, 155
Braun, Wernher von 159
Bremer, Gerhart 131
169
Index


--- PAGE 177 ---
Bruderschaft (brotherhood or camaraderie) 133
Bücherverbrennung (public book burning)
Bund der Artamenen (Artaman League) 16–17,
29, 81
Bund deutscher Mädel (BdM; League of German
Girls) 7 , 32, 34, 37–39, 47 , 57 , 59, 62, 63, 67–
68, 74, 80, 84, 111, 118, 124, 125, 154
Bursche (Wandervogel rank) 13
Camouﬂage 140–143
Catholic Church 30, 120
Celebrations 75–77
Chamberlain, H.S. 11
Chaplin, Charlie 74
“Children, church, kitchen” 38
Cold War 159
Combat League for the German Culture (Kampf-
bund für deutsche Kultur) 89
Committee for Schoolboys’ Rambles (Wandervo-
gel, Ausschuss für Schülerfahrten) 12–18
Communist Union of Youth (Komsomol) 11
Communist Youth Association (KJVD) 28
Compass (Kompass) 145
Concentration camps 4, 1 7 , 82, 99, 121
Criminal-Biological Institute of the RSHA 120
Czechoslovakia 3
Dachau (concentration camp) 99
Daggers 69
Dähnhardt, Heinz 16
Darré, Walther 11, 17,  4 3
Darwin, Charles 11
Day of Homage to the Dead (Totengedenktag) 77
Death head guards 130
de Gaulle, Gen. Charles 149, 151
de Lagarde, Paul 11
Denaziﬁcation (Entnaziﬁzierung) 158
Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (DAP; German Worker’s
Party) 9
Deutsche Arbeitsfront (German Labor Front) 44,
48, 80, 97 , 111–112
Der deutsche Erzieher (German educator) 90
Deutsche Falkenschaft 11
Deutsche Freischar 11
Deutsche Jungenschaft (DJ 1 –11; German Youth
Mo
vement of November 1) 17–18
Deutsche Jungvolk Organisationsfahne (German
Youth organization) 63
Deutsche Knabenschaft 34
Deutsche Kolberg 12
Das deutsche Mädel (publication for BdM girls) 78
Deutsche Pfadﬁnderbund 12
Deutschen Jugendnachrichten (News of the German
Youth)7 8
Deutscher Gruss (German salute) 70
Deutscher Volkssturm (popular army) 153–157
Deutsches Jungvolk in der Hitler Jugend (DJ;
German Young People in the Hitler Youth) 22,
34, 59, 74, 84, 92, 96, 154
Deutschkunde 92
Dienstgraden (badges of rank) 137
Dienstrock (tunic) 138
Dietrich, Jozef “Sepp” 131, 135
Disciplinary Company of the HJ 120
Divini Redemptoris (letter) 31
Dolch (dagger) 69
Dönitz, Adm. Karl 158
Dorner, Adolf 92
Dorsey, Tommy 117
Drexler, Anton 9
Drinking bottle (Feldfasche) 144
Ebner, Dr. Gregor 47
Eckart, Dietrich 9
Edelweiss pirates 119–121
Ehrenzeichen der deutschen Mutter (Cross of
Honor of the German Mother) 43, 44
Eichendorff, Joseph Freiherr von 13
Einheitsfeldmütze (ﬁeld cap) 140
Einstein, Albert 89
Ellington, Duke 117
Emergency technical rescue 128–129
Entnaziﬁzierung (denaziﬁcation) 158
Erfurter Maschinefabrik Haenel und Suhl (Erma)
145, 146
Erma Maschinenpistole MPi 38 145
Eufrat (Wandervogel Parents and Friends Advi-
sory Council) 13
Euthanasia 6
Evacuation of children 124
Fahrsc
hulen (driving schools) 109
Fahrtenmesser (traveling knife) 69
Faith and Beauty 38
Fallschirmjäger (paratroopers) 105, 107
Fascism 10, 70, 80
Federal Organization of Women (Frauenwerk) 40
Die Feier der neuen Front (The Feast of the New
Front) 24
Feldanzug (ﬁeld/combat uniform) 138
Feldfasche (drinking bottle) 144
Feldherrnhalle (Hall of Heroes) 75
Feldmütze (forage cap) 140
Feldstecher (binoculars) 145
Female organizations 37–38
Feuerschutzpolizei (emergency rescue squads)
128
Feuerwehren (ﬁre brigades) 128
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 11
Field equipment 143–145
Fire brigades 127 , 128
Fischer, Karl 12, 13
Flags 62–68
Flak artillery 114, 128
Flakhelfer (anti-aircraft gunners and searchlight
personnel) 105
Flamethrowers 146
Flammenwerfer (portable ﬂamethrower) 147
170 Index


--- PAGE 178 ---
Flieger-Hitler-Jugend (Hitler Youth Flying Asso-
ciation) 104–105
Flieger-SA 104
Franco, Francisco 80
Frauenwerk (Federal Organization of Women) 40
Freikorps (Free Corps) 15–16, 21
Freischar (free groups) 16, 17,  2 9
Freischar junger Nation 11
Freischar Schill 11
Freud, Sigmund 89
Frick, Wilhelm 32
Front Youth (Frontjugend) 22
Frontjugend (Front Youth) 22
Führerprinzip 86
Führungs-Hauptamt (SSFHa; SS military head-
quarters) 98, 135, 138
Galsworthy, John 89
Gas mask (gasmaske) 144
Gasmaske (gas mask) 144
Gau Berlin 35
Gau Munich 37
Gauleiters (district leaders) 19
Gebirgsjäger (Storm-trooper mountain units) 73
Gefreiter 9
Generational conﬂicts 82
Georg Fock 102
German-American Bund 59
German diversity 115
German Girls League in the Hitler Youth (BdM;
Bund deutscher Mädel in der Hitler Jugend) 7 ,
32, 34, 37–39, 47 , 57 , 59, 62, 63, 67–68, 74, 80,
84, 111, 118, 124, 125, 154
German Labor Front (DAF; Deutsche Arbeits-
front) 27 , 44, 48, 80, 97 , 111–112
German Labor Service (RAD; Reichsarbeitsdi-
enst) 33, 77 , 87 , 97 , 112–114, 120, 130, 131
German navy (Kriegsmarine) 104
German Protestant Church 30
German salute 70
German Socialist Youth Association (SAP) 28
German Song Week 78
German Worker’s Party (DAP; Deutsche Arbeit-
erpartei) 9
German Young People in the Hitler Youth (DJ;
Deutsches Jungvolk in der Hitler Jugend) 34,
59, 74, 84, 154
German Youth Movement of November 1 (DJ
1–11; Deutsche Jungenschaft) 17–18
German Youth Organization (Deutsche Jungvolk
Organisationsfahne) 63
Gestapo 4, 116, 121, 124
Getarnte Dr
illichanzug M44 (camouﬂage suit) 143
Geusen 11, 29
Gide, André 89
Glaube und Schönheit (Faith and Beauty) 39
Gleichschaltung 27–29, 77 , 115, 118
Gliederung der NSDAP (Nazi Party organiza-
tion) 108
Globocnik, Odilo 159
Gobineau, Arthur 5
Goebbels, Josef 6, 26, 27 , 44, 48, 73, 74, 84, 87 ,
89, 117,  153, 158
Goodman, Benny 117
Göring, Hermann 74, 104, 117
Görlitz, Julius 99
Graf, Willi 120
Granatwerfer GrW 34 146
Granatwerfer GrW 42 147
Granatwerfer 36 146
The Great Dictator (ﬁlm) 74
Greater German Youth League (Grossdeutsche
Jugendbund) 29
Grimm, Jakob 11
Grossdeutsche Jugendbewegung (GDJB; Youth
Movement of Greater Germany) 21
Grossdeutsche Jugendbund (Greater German
Youth League) 29
Gruber, Kurt 21 –23, 34, 37 , 79
Gruppe Austria 37
Gruppe Mitte 37
Gruppe Nord 35
Gruppe Nordwest 35
Gruppe Ost 35
Gruppe Ostland 35
Gruppe Silesia 37
Gruppe Süd 37
Gruppe Südwest 37
Gruppe West 35
Guderian, Heinz 109, 111
Günsche, Otto 155
Günther, Hans F.K. 11
Hand grenades 146
Harvest Thanksgiving Day 77
Hausser, Paul 130
Heer (German ground force) 113, 130
Hegel, G.W.F. 11
Heimabende (indoctrination meetings) 84
Heimat (homeland) 153
Heimatﬂak (homeland anti-aircraft artillery) 128
Heines, Edmund 22
Heissmeyer, August 95–96
Hemingway, Ernest 89
Heroes’ Remembrance Day (National Day of
Mourning) 76
Herrenvolk (master race) 92
Hess, Rudolf 74, 87 , 117
Heusinger, Gen. Adolf 153
Hey
drich, Reinhard 48
Hierl, Konstantin 112
Hiking 74, 75
Hilgenfeldt, Erich 48, 80
Himmler, Heinrich 6, 17 , 43, 47 , 48, 74, 82, 95,
96, 120–121, 128, 130, 152, 153, 155
Hindenburg, Paul von 20
Hindenburg Jugend 11
Hitler, Adolf 3–7 , 9–11, 16, 18, 19–24, 27–34, 37 ,
Index 171


--- PAGE 179 ---
42–46, 48–51, 69–70, 72, 73, 75–77 , 82–91, 95,
96, 107 , 108, 115–117,  119, 121, 123, 125, 130,
149, 150, 152, 153–155, 158–161
Hitler Jugend Ehrenabzeichen (Hitler Youth
Badge of Honor) 68
Die Hitler Jugend: Idee und Gestalt (The Hitler
Youth: Idea and Form; book) 79
Hitler Jugend Organisationsfahne (Hitler Youth
Organization) 62
Hitler-Jugend-Zeitung (Hitler Youth newspaper)
78
Hitler Youth Driving Association 108
Hitler Youth Flying Association (Flieger-Hitler-
Jugend) 104–105
Hitler Youth Organization (Hitler Jugend Organ-
isationsfahne) 62
Hitler Youth Patrol Service (Hitlerjugend Streifen-
dienst) 62
Hitlerjugend Streifendienst (Hitler Youth patrol
service) 62, 128–129
Hitlerjugend Waffen SS 131
Hitlerjugend Zeitung (newspaper) 22
Hitlerjugendführer (Hitler Youth leader) 35
Hitlerjunge (Hitler Youth member) 34–35
Hitlerjunge Quex (ﬁlm) 88, 89
Hoess, Rudolf 17
Hoffmann, Heinrich 24
Hoffmann, Henriette 24
Hoheitszeichen (Nazi ofﬁcial national emblem)137
Holfelder, H. 22
Home Guard (Volkssturm) 41 , 153–155
Homosexuality 14, 31, 45, 46
Horst Wessel 102
“Horst Wessel Song” (anthem) 70
Huber, K
urt 120
Huch, Ricarda 89
Hühnlein, Adolf 108–109
Hygiene 79–80
Ich Glaube an Hitler (I Believed in Hitler; book) 159
Insignia 59–62
Jahn, Erich 33
Jugend-Internationale 12
Jugendbund der NSDAP (League of the Youth of
the National-Socialist Party) 2 1
Jugendbund Graf von Wartenburg 11
Jugendbünde 16
Jugenddienstpﬂicht (youth conscription) 123
Jugendherbergen (German Youth Hostels) 29, 75
Jugendschutzkammer (Youth Protection Cham-
ber) 94
Jugendstraﬂager (punishment camp) 120
Jugendverbande 12
Junabu ( Jungnationale Bund; League of Young
Nationalists) 16
Jungdeutscher Orden ( Jungdo) 11, 16
Jungdo ( Jungdeutscher Orden) 16
Das Junge Deutschland (Young Germany, publica-
tion of the social service of the HJ specializing
in labor) 78–79
Junge Dorfgemeinschaft (Young Villagers; publica-
tion for young peasants) 79
Die Junge Front (newspaper) 22, 78
Junge Welt (Young World; publication for junior
girls) 78
Jungfront Verlag (publishing company) 79
Jungmädel im Bund deutscher Mädel in der
Hitler Jugend ( JM; League of Young Girls)
34, 63, 74
Jungmädelbund ( JMB; League of Young Girls) 37
Jungmannen (Young Men of the Storm-troops)
99
Jungmannschaften (youth teams) 2 1, 34
Jungnationale Bund ( Junabu; League of Young
Nationalists) 16
Jungstahlhelm (Young Steel Helmet) 16, 28
Jungstrom Kolberg 12
Jungsturm Adolf Hitler 2 1
Jungvolk ( junior branch of Hitler Youth) 22, 34,
59, 74, 84, 92, 96, 154
Jungwolf 11
Jürgensen, Arnold 133
Jüttner 98
Kampf bund für deutsche Kultur (Combat League
for the German Culture) 89
Kampfgruppen (combat groups) 150
Kampfz
eit (Time of Struggle) 19–20, 25–26, 91,
108
Karten (maps) 145
Kaufmann, Günther 79
KdF (Nazi free-time organization) 72, 112
Kenkmann, A. 116
Kenstler, August Georg 16
Kern 100
Kern Hitler Jugend (Hitler Youth proper) 34–35
Kerr, Alfred 89
“Kinder, Kirche, Küche” 38
Kinderlandverschickung (KLV; evacuation of
children) 62, 124, 125
“Kindersegen” (blessed with children) 43
Kindertagesstätte (nursery schools) 43
Klintzsch, Lieutenant Johann Ulrich 2 1
Knappenschaft (Young Novitiates) 16
Knives 69–70, 144
Köbel, Eberhard “Tusk” 17–18
Kochgeschirr (mess kit) 144
Kompass (compass) 145
Komsomol (Communist Union of Youth) 11
Kraft durch Freude (KdF; Strength Through Joy)
72, 112
Krass, Hugo 151, 153
Krausse, Bernhard 133, 150
Kriegs-winterhilfswerk (KWHW; wartime winter
relief organization) 80
Kriegseinsatz (mobilization) 124
Kriegsmarine (German navy) 104
172 Index


--- PAGE 180 ---
Kristallnacht (Night of Broken Glass) 89
Kroll Opera House 76
Krutchinna, Horst 33
Kuhm, Fritz 59
Landdienst (agricultural service) 8 1
Landdienst der Hitler Jugend (agriculture service)
62
Landjahr der HJ 29
Langweiler, Heinrich 147
Lauterbacher, Hartmann 33
League for Aeronautic Sport (LSV; Luftsportver-
band) 104
League of German Girls (BdM; Bund deutscher
Mädel) 7 , 32, 34, 37–39, 47 , 57 , 59, 62, 63,
67–68, 74, 80, 84, 111, 118, 124, 125, 154
League of German Students (Nationalsozialistis-
chen deutschen Studentenbunde) 89
League of the Youth of the National-Socialist
Party ( Jugendbund der NSDAP) 2 1
League of Young Girls ( JM; Jungmädel im Bund
deutscher Mädel in der Hitler Jugend) 34, 74
League of Young Girls ( JMB; Jungmädelbund) 37
League of Young Nationalists ( Jungnationale
Bund; Junabu) 16
Leben rune (rune of life) 80
Lebensborn eingetragener Verein (Fountain of
Life Society) 47 , 50
Lebensraum (living space) 9, 84
Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler (LSSAH; Hitler’s
personal bodyguards) 131, 132, 136, 150
Lenin, Vladimir 5
Lenk, Gustav Adolf 2 1, 22, 23
Ley, Robert 48, 74, 87 , 93, 96, 97 , 111, 117
Lilienstern, Rühle von 11
Lilienthal, Otto 104
Lippisch, Alexander 105
London, Jack 89
Loose, Alfred 33
Lörzer, Bruno 104
Louis, Joe 73
Luftschutzpolizei (air-raid police units) 128
Luftsportverband (LSV; League for Aeronautic
Sport) 104
Luftwaffe 40, 77 , 104–105, 107 , 114, 126
Luftwaffe-Helfern (air-force auxiliaries) 128
Lutze, Viktor 100
Machine guns 146
Machtergreifung (seizure of power) 76
Mahler, Gustav 78
Mahraun, Arthur 16
Make-up 45
“Malmédy Massacre” 152
Mann, Heinr
ich 89
Mann, Thomas 89
Mantel (overcoat) 138
Maps (Karten) 145
Marine-Hitler-Jugend (Navy Hitler Youth) 102
Marine-SA 102
Marsch auf die Feldherrnhalle (Munich Beer
Hall) 11
Marschstiefel (leather jackboots) 140
Marx, Karl 5
Maschinen Karabiner 43 (MK 43, also called
Maschinenpistole 43 or MP 43) 145, 146
Maschinengewehr MG 42 146, 147
Maschinenpistole MPi 28/II 145
Maschinenpistole MPi 34 145, 146
Maschinenpistole MPi 40 146, 147
Maschmann, Melitta 37
Mathematik im Dienst der national-politischen
Erziehung (Mathematics at the Service of Na-
tional Political Education) 92
Mauser Modell 1898 (Kar 98) 145
Medals 68–69
Mein Kampf (book) 84, 90
Mess kit (Kochgeschirr) 144
Messer (knife) 144
Meyen, Wolf 13
Meyer, Kurt 131, 136, 149–151
Milestone, Lewis 26
Military police (Waffen SS Feldgendarmerie)
136
Military training camps (Wehrertüchtigungs-
lagern) 74
Mines 148
Mit brennender Sorge (In Deep Concern)3 1
Model, Walther 152
Mohnke, Wilhelm 131, 150
Mortar 146
Mother Cross 43, 44
Mothering Day 76
Motor-Hitler-Jugend 108–111
Motor S
turm Abteilung (MSA) 108
Muller, Adam 11
Muller, Franz 45
Müller, Friedrich Max 5
Müller, Ludwig 30
Munich Beer Hall (Marsch auf die Feldherrn-
halle) 9, 11, 16, 21, 77 , 91
Music 77–78
Musikeinheiten (music units) 78
Mussolini, Benito 10, 11, 70, 80, 108
Mutprobe (tests of courage) 72
Mutterkreuz (Mother Cross) 43
Nabersberg, Karl 33
Nachrichten-Hitler-Jugend 111
Nachrichten-SA 111
Napola (Nationalpolitischen Erziehungsanstal-
ten; national political institutes) 95–98
National Day of Mourning (Heroes’ Remem-
brance Day) 76
National Labor Day 76
National material control ofﬁce 5 1
National Socialism 3, 4, 16–18, 26, 28, 31, 33, 37 ,
50, 75, 76, 78, 83, 85, 119, 155
Index 173


--- PAGE 181 ---
National-Socialist Automobile Corps (NSAK;
Nationalsozialistischen Automobil Korps) 108
National-Socialist Driver Corps (NSKK; Nation-
alsozialistische Kraftfahrer-Korps) 108–111,
128
National Socialist German Students’ League
(NSDStB; Nationalsozialistischen Deutschen
Studentenbund) 23–24, 89, 93
National Socialist German Worker Party
(NSDAP; Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Ar-
beiterpartei) 9, 10, 11, 16, 19–24, 27 , 31–34,
39–41, 44–45, 69, 70, 76, 96–99, 112, 124
National-Socialist League of Ex-Servicemen 16
National Socialist Women’s Association (NSF;
Nationalsozialistische-Frauenschaft) 38–43
National-Sozialistische Schülerbund (NSS; Nazi
school league) 23–24
National-Sozialistische Schülerinnenbund (NSS;
Nazi League for Schoolgirls) 37
National-Sozialistische Volkswohlfahrte (NSV;
Nazi People’s Welfare Organization) 80
National Youth Directorate 125
Nationale Jungsturm (newspaper) 21
Nationalpolitischen Erziehungsanstalten (na-
tional political institutes) 95–96
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei
(NSDAP; National Socialist German Worker
Party) 9, 10, 11, 16, 19–24, 27 , 31–34, 39–41,
44–45, 69, 70, 76, 96–99, 112, 124
Nationalsozialistische-Dozentenbund (NSDB;
Nazi Lecturers League) 93
Nationalsozialistische Flieger-Korps (NSFK;
Nazi Flyers Corps) 104
Nationalsozialistische-Frauenschaft (NSF; Na-
tional Socialist Women’s Association) 38, 39
Nationalsozialistische Jugend (newspaper) 21
Nationalsozialistische Kraftfahrer-Korps (NSKK;
National-Socialist Driver Corps) 108–111, 
128
Nationalsozialistische Lehrerbund (NSLB; Nazi
teacher league) 90
Nationalsozialistische Volkswohlfahrt (NSV;
Nazi People’s Welfare Organization) 48–50,
80, 124
Nationalsozialistischen Automobil Korps
(NSAK; National Socialist Automobile Corps)
108
Nationalsozialistischen Deutschen Studenten-
bund (NSDStB; National Socialist German
Students’ League) 23–24, 89, 93
Navy Hitler Y
outh (Marine-Hitler-Jugend) 102
Nazi Drivers’ Corps 108, 109
Nazi Flyers Corps (NSFK; Nationalsozialistische
Flieger-Korps) 104
Nazi League for Schoolgirls (NSS; National-
Sozialistische Schülerinnenbund) 37
Nazi Lecturers League (NSDB; Nationalsozialis-
tische-Dozentenbund) 93
Nazi Party program 9
Nazi People’s Welfare Organization (NSV; Na-
tionalsozialistische Volkswohlfahrt) 48–50, 80,
124
Nazi pilgrimages 75
Nazi school league (NSS; National-Sozialistische
Schülerbund) 23–24
Nazi teacher league (NSLB; Nationalsozialistis-
che Lehrerbund) 90
Nazi Women League (NS Frauenschaft) 154
Niemöller, Martin 30
Nietzsche, Friedrich 11
Night of Broken Glass (Kristallnacht) 89
Night of Long Knives 3 1
Norkus, Herbert 76, 88–89
NS Deutsche Oberschule Starnbergersee (Na-
tional-Socialist German High School Starn-
bergersee) 99
NS Frauenschaft (Nazi Women League) 154
NSV Reich Adoption Service 50
Nuremberg laws 5
Nuremberg process 158
Nuremberg rallies 22, 75, 76
Oaths 85, 155
Oberbachant (Wandervogel senior fellow) 13
Oberkommando des Heeres (OKH; Germany’s
Army High Command) 153
Oberland (small Munich paramilitary group) 16
Ohlsen, Jürghen 88
Olböter, Erich 133
Olympic Games of 1936 73
Olympics 1936 (ﬁlm) 40
Ordensburgen (ﬁnishing schools) 96–99
Ordnungspolizei 129
Ostpreussen Volkssturm 153
Panzer Artillerie Regiment 12 135
Panzer Aufklärungs Abteilung 12 135
Panzer Grenadier Regiment 25 Hitlerjugend 135
Panzer Grenadier Regiment 26 Hitlerjugend 135
Panzer Nachrichten Abteilung 12 136
Panzer Pionier Bataillon 12 135
Panzerbüchse 43 Panzerschreck 147 , 148
Panzerdivision Hitlerjugend 151
Panz
erfaust (portable anti-tank weapons) 4 1, 147 ,
148, 154
Panzergrenadier Division Hitlerjugend 131
Panzerschreckabteilungen (anti-tank battalions)
154
Panzervernichtungsabzeichen (tank destruction
badge) 156
Panzerwurfmine (tank grenade) 146
Paratroopers 107
Patriotic Youth League of Greater Germany
(Vaterländische Jugendverband Grossdeutsch-
lands) 21
Patrol service 128
Peiper, Joachim 152
Penal Code of 18711 4
174 Index


--- PAGE 182 ---
Pennants 62
People’s Fighter (He-162) 155, 158
Pfarrer Notbund (Emergency League of Pastors)
30
Pfeife (whistle) 145
Der Pimpf (publication for junior DJ members)
78
Pirates 116, 119
Pistols 145
Pius XI, Pope 30, 3 1
The Poisonous Mushroom (anti–Semitic primer) 91
Porsche, Ferdinand 108
Prinz, Karl-Heinz 133
Probst, Christoph 120
Proﬁciency award 68
Propaganda Ministry 93
Propagandakompanie (PK; war reporters) 136
Protestant Church 30, 120
Proust, Marcel 89
Prützmann, Hans 155
Race and Settlement Main Ofﬁce (RuSHA;
Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt) 47 , 48
Rähm, Ernst 3 1, 74
Rallies 75–77
“Rally for Honor and Freedom” 77
“Rally for Unity and Strength” 77
“Rally in Honor of Work” 77
“Rally of Freedom” 77
“Rally of Greater Germany” 77
“Rally of Victory” 77
Rasse-und Siedlungshauptamt (RuSHA; SS Race
and Settlement Main Ofﬁce) 47 , 48
Ratti, Achille see Pius XI, Pope
Rauschning, Hermann 6
Regalia 50–59
Reich Labor Service for Young Women (RAD/wJ;
Reichsarbeitdienst der weibliche Jugend) 39,
112
Reich Party Day (Reichsparteitag) 11
Reich Teachers’ League (RLB; Reichslehrerbund)
90
Reichsarbeitsdienst (RAD; German Labor Ser-
vice) 33, 77 , 87 , 97 , 112–114, 120, 130, 131
Reichsarbeitsdienst der weibliche Jugend
(RAD/wJ; Reich Labor Service for Young
Women) 39, 112
Reichsarbeitsdienst Manner (RAD/M) 112
Reichsfunkschule (school for the training of HJ
broadcast personnel) 79
Reichsjugendamt (Reich Youth Ofﬁce) 33
Reichsjugendführer (National Youth Leader) 23,
35
Reichslehrerbund (RLB; Reich Teachers’ League)
90
Reichsmotorschule (driving school) 109
Reichsparteitag (Reich Party Day) 11, 22, 75
Reichsseesportschulen (schools for sea sport) 102
Reichstag 27
Reichszeugmeisterei (RZM; central ordnance
ofﬁce of the NSDAP) 50–5 1, 69, 
 138
Reiter-Hitler-Jugend (Hitler Youth cavalry) 111
Reiter-SA (equestrian corps of the storm-troops)
111
Reitsch, Anna 40
Remarque, Erich Maria 26
Renteln, Adrian von 23
Repression of dissidents 120, 121
Reserve troops (SS-VT) 130
Resistance 115, 121
Riefenstahl, Leni 39
Ritter, Robert 120
Röhm, Ernst 24
Rommel, Erwin 100, 135, 149, 150
Roquette, Otto 13
Rosenberg, Alfred 11
Rossbach, Gerhard 16, 22
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 18
Rüdiner, Jutta 37
Rundstedt, Gerd von 135
Rundstedt, Marshall von 149, 151
Runes 22, 92, 1 37
Rust, Wilhelm Bernhard 32, 90, 93, 95, 96
Salmuth, Gen. Hans von 135
Salutes 70
Samurai 17
Sanitäts-SA (medical corps of the stormtroops)
26
Schairer, Eberhard 45
Schanzzeug (entrenching tool) 144
Scharnhorst Jugend 11, 28
Schenzinger, Karl Alois 88
Schiessauszeichnung (HJ shooting medal) 68,
99–100
Schilljugend (Austrian youth nationalist move-
ment) 16, 22
Schirach, Baldur von 23–33, 46, 79, 87 , 88, 93,
96, 123, 128, 159, 161
Schirach, Henriette von 31 , 159
Schirmmütze (service cap) 138
Schmeisser, Hugo 146
Schmeling
, Max 72, 73
Schmorell, Alexander 120
Scholl, Hans 120–121
Scholl, Sophie 120–121
Scholtz-Klink, Gertrud 40, 43, 117
Schoniger, Erich 45
Schools 90–99
Schulterklappen (shoulder straps) 62
Schutzbrillen (sunglasses) 145
Schutzluft (Civil Defense) 127
Schwarz, Franz Xaver 96
Schweppenburg, Gen. Geyr von 135, 149
Schwertworte (sword words) 92
Seghers, Anna 89
Sexuality 17 , 45, 46
Seyss-Inquart, Arthur 159
Index 175


--- PAGE 183 ---
Shooting awards 99
Shoulder straps 62
Shovel (Schanzzeug) 144
Social-Democrat Socialist Youth (SAJ) 28
Social Ofﬁce of the Reich Youth Leadership 123
Sohnrey, Heinrich 13
Sondereinheiten (special units) 100
Spielmannzug (marching band) 78
Squadristi 108
Stahlhelm (steel helmet) 16, 138
State labor service (RAD; Reichsarbeitsdienst)
33, 77 , 87 , 97 , 112–114, 120, 130, 131
Steinbrück, Hans 116
Steinhoff, Hans 88
Stielhandgranate (stick grenade) 146
Stöcker, Adolf 11
Stoppuhr (stopwatch) 145
Stopwatch (Stoppuhr) 145
Storm troopers (SA; Sturm Abteilung) 5, 9, 16,
21, 26, 31, 32, 46, 51, 69, 89, 94, 99–100, 104,
108
Strasser, Gregor 19
Streicher, Gauleiter Julius 22, 74
Streifendienst (patrol/police auxiliary service) 62,
128–129
Strength Though Joy 112
Student, Kurt 107
Study Group for German History Books and Ed-
ucational Material 92
Sturm Abteilung (SA; storm troopers) 5, 9, 16,
20, 21, 26, 31, 32, 46, 51, 69, 89, 94, 99–100,
104, 108
Der Stürmer (newspaper) 22, 74
Sturmgewehr (StG; also MPi 44) 44 (assault
weapon) 145
Sturmjugend (Storm Y
outh)7 8
Submachine guns 145, 146
Sunglasses (Schutzbrillen) 145
Swing Jugend (Swing youth) 117–118
Tannenbergbund 12
Tarnkappe (also called Zeltbahn; camouﬂage
cape) 144
Technical Emergency Service (TeNo; Technische
Nothilfe) 128–129
Technische Nothilfe (TeNo; Technical Emer-
gency Service) 128–129
Teddy boys 121
Tellermine 35 148
Tellermine 42 148
Tierkampf 98
Tobacco 45
Totalitarianism 3
Totengedenktag (Day of Homage to the Dead)
77
Totenkopf (death’s head badge) 137
Totenkopfverbände (death’s head concentration
camp guards) 130
Treaty of Versailles 9, 1 8, 104
Treitschke, Heinrich von 11
Trevor-Roper, Hugh 155
Triumph of the Will (ﬁlm) 40
Tropenanzug (tropical service uniform ) 138
Trotha, Adolf von 29, 104
Trust No Fox (anti–Semitic primer) 91
Udet, Ernst 104
Uniforms 50–59
Unterofﬁzieren (NCOs) 137
Usadel, Georg 33
V-1 ﬂying bomb 150
Vaterländische Jugendverband Grossdeutschlands
(Patriotic Youth League of Greater Germany)
21
Verfügungstruppen (SS VT; reserve or task
troops) 130
Versorgungs Einheit 12 136
Victor
y of Faith (ﬁlm) 40
Völkischer Beobachter (The Popular Observer ; news-
paper) 9, 2 1, 88
Volksdeutsche 130
Volksgemeinschaft 72
Volksjäger (people’s ﬁghter) 155
Volkssturm (Home Guard) 41 , 153–155
Volkswagen 108
Waffen SS 98–99, 102, 111, 129–134, 136–146,
148–149, 152, 159
Waffen SS Feldgendarmerie (military police) 136
Waffen SS Tarnjacke (camouﬂage tunic) 140, 
143
Waffenfarbe (color of service) 111
Wagner, Richard 11, 78
Waldmüller, Hans 133, 150
Wandervogel, Ausschuss für Schülerfahrten
(Committee for Schoolboys’ Rambles) 12–18,
28–30, 75, 118
War reporters (PK; Propagandakompanie) 136
Wartime winter relief organization (KWHW;
Kriegs-winterhilfswerk) 80
Weapons 145–148
Weber, Friedrich 16
Wehrertüchtigungslagern (military training
camps) 74
Wehrmacht (national armed forces) 33, 76, 88,
96, 99, 109, 113, 114, 130, 150, 151
Wehrmannschaf
ten (defense teams) 100
Wehrsport (contact sport) 133
Weimar Republic 11, 19, 32, 42, 70, 77 , 91
“Weltmacht oder Niedergang” (World Domina-
tion or Downfall) 154
Werewolves (Werwolven) 155–158
Werwolven (Werewolves) 155–158
Wessel, Horst 91
Westwall (fortiﬁcation line) 113
Whistle (Pfeife) 145
White Rose 121
176 Index


--- PAGE 184 ---
Wilhelmine period 12
Wille und Macht (Will and Power; publication for
HJ leadership) 78
Winter Help (WHW; Winterhilfswerk) 80
Winterhilfswerk (WHW; Winter Help) 80
Wirtschafts und Verwaltungshauptamt (Main
Ofﬁce for Economy and Administration) 138
Witt, Fritz 131, 133, 135, 136, 149, 150
Wolff, Karl 47
World War I 3, 9, 14, 15, 26, 50, 70, 74, 90, 1 04,
147 , 154
World War II 6, 4 1, 47 , 73, 76, 77 , 83, 87 , 98, 107 ,
111, 113, 114, 116, 123, 130, 145, 146, 155, 161
Wünsche, Max 131, 150, 151
Young Novitiates (Knappenschaft) 16
Young Steel Helmet ( Jungstahlhelm) 16
Youth Movement of Greater Germany (GDJB;
Grossdeutsche Jugendbewegung) 2 1
Yule (winter solstice) 77
Zander, Elsbeth 40
Zazous 117
Zeltbahn (also called Tarnkappe; camouﬂage
cape) 144
Zola, Emile 89
Zoot-suiters 117
Zuckmayer, Carl 89
Zweig, Stefan 89
Index 177


--- PAGE 185 ---
This page intentionally left blank

