=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Lerone Bennet before-the-mayflower.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 99
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:16.116203
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
BEFORE
1MH^HH
AHistoryofBlackAmericat!
4*
«r
WeBsM
SIXTHREVISEDEDITIONmmLERONEBENNETT,JR


--- PAGE 2 ---
PENGUIN BOOKS
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
Lerone Bennett Jr. is a social historian and the author of nine books 
on the life and history of black Americans. A graduate of Morehouse 
College, he was visiting professor of history at Northwestern Uni­
versity in 1968— 69 and Senior Fellow of the Institute of the Black 
World in 1969. He was named senior editor of Ebony in 1958 and 
executive editor in 1987. His articles have earned him an enviable 
reputation as one of the most eloquent, scholarly, and readable of 
American writers. In 1978 he received the Literature Award of the 
American Academy of Arts and Letters. Mr. Bennett has served 
as advisor and consultant to several national organizations and 
commissions, including the National Advisory Commission on Civil 
Disorders. His poems, short stories, and articles have been trans­
lated into French, German, Japanese, Swedish, and Arabic. Mr. 
Bennett is the author of The Shaping of Black America , also avail­
able in Penguin Books.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Before the
MAYFLOWER
AMSTORY
OF
BUCK
AMERICA
SIXTH EDITION
Lerone Bennett J r .
PENGUIN BOOKS


--- PAGE 4 ---
PENGUIN BOOKS 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Books USA Inc., 375 Hudson Street, 
New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. 
Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, 
London W8 5TZ, England 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, 
Victoria, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2 
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, 
Auckland 10, New Zealand
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 
Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England
First published in the United States of America by 
Johnson Publishing Co., Inc., 1962 
Second revised printing published 1963 
Revised edition published 1964 
Published in Pelican Books 1966 
Third revised edition published by 
Johnson Publishing Co., Inc., 1966 
Fourth revised edition published 1969 
Fifth revised edition published 1982 
Published in Penguin Books 1984 
Sixth revised edition published by 
Johnson Publishing Co., Inc., 1987 
This volume with an updated “Landmarks and Milestones” 
section published in Penguin Books 1993
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Copyright © Johnson Publishing Co., 1961, 1969, 1988
All rights reserved
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS GIVEN THE FOLLOWING CATALOG CARD NO. TO THE HARDCOVER: 82-082391
ISBN 0-87485-029-0 (he.) 
ISBN 0 14 01.7822 8 (pbk.)
Printed in the United States of America 
Set in Bodoni Book
The lines from “Heritage” are reprinted from Countee Cullen’s Color, copyright 1925 by Harper & Row, by 
permission of the publishers, Harper & Row; the lines from “Fifty Years” are reprinted from James Weldon 
Johnson’s Saint Peter Relates an Incident,  copyright 1917, 1935 by James Weldon Johnson, by permission of 
the Viking Press, Inc.; the lines from “If We Must Die” are reprinted from Claude McKay’s Harlem Shadows,  
copyright 1922 by Harcourt, Brace and Company, by permission of Twayne Publishers, Incorporated. Appreciation 
is also due the following persons, institutions, and corporations for permission to reproduce photographs: Met­
ropolitan Museum of Art, page 9; Chicago Historical Society, pages 63 , 73; Schoenfeld Collection, Three Lions, 
Inc., pages 92-93, 100, 118, 132, 151, 159, 220-221, 238-239; Carl Van Vechten, photograph of Bessie 
Smith, page 288; Magnum Photos, Inc., page 289; Wide World Photos, Inc., pages 373 and 427; United Press 
International, pages 221, 351, 372, 380, 427; Associated Press, Watts photo, page 396; Volunteers of America, 
page 414; McAdams Photo, page 414.
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 
trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in 
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including 
this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.


--- PAGE 5 ---
For the Black Woman
For my Grandmother, Mother and 
Wife
Lucy Reed, Alma Love and Gloria S. Bennett
i


--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface
To The Sixth Edition
H
ISTORIANS and history books are historical. 
They are products of history. They are bom at a 
certain time, and they bind time and express 
time and their times. More to the point, they participate in the 
“callings and responses” of succeeding generations which Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty considered the very essence of history.
In this limited sense, Before the Mayflower , which was bom 
twenty-five years ago at a historic turning of worlds, has participated 
in a historical dialogue that was started by the “Black and unknown 
bards of slavery” and carried to new heights by George Washington 
Williams, Carter G. Woodson, W. E. B. Du Bois, Charles Wesley, 
John Hope Franklin, Benjamin Quarles and Vincent Harding, 
among others.
I said twenty-five years ago that I hoped this book would make the 
seminal insights of scholars available to a larger audience and 
restore the human and dramatic dimensions of our history. In 
subsequent editions, I have tried to participate in contemporary 
efforts to redefine the time-line of the African-American odyssey.
I am indebted to Publisher John H. Johnson and Norman L. 
Hunter, Basil Phillips, Carmel Tinkchell, Beverly Coppage and 
Pamela Cash Menzies of the Johnson Publishing Company family. I 
am also indebted to the tens of thousands of readers who have been 
generous enough to say that they have found in these pages some 
echo of their own history and hope.
LERONE BENNETT JR.
Chicago, 1987.


--- PAGE 7 ---
P R FFA PF
To The Fifth Edition
T
HIS is the first major revision of Before the  
Mayflower  since its publication twenty years 
ago. Instead of following the traditional method 
of adding a new chapter to cover developments since 1962, I have 
revised the entire book, taking great pains to retain the flavor and 
style of the original. I have also incorporated some of the insights of 
Confrontation: Black and White,  which was originally published as 
a companion volume to Before the Mayflower.  Since that volume, 
which detailed the black struggle for freedom, is now out of print, I 
have adapted here some of its basic concepts and analyses. I have 
also incorporated the latest insights of modem scholarship.
In a number of books published since 1962, I argued, along 
with others, for a complete rethinking of the concept of black 
time. I have followed my own advice here, detaching epochal 
black events—the Founding of Black America, for example— 
from the white shell and reinserting them into a black time-line 
extending from the African past to the transformation of Black 
America in the twentieth century.
In preparing the fifth revised edition, I have been assisted and 
supported by the Johnson Publishing Company staff. I am espe­
cially indebted to Publisher John H. Johnson, Basil Phillips, 
Carmel Tinkchell, Beverly J. Coppage and my wife, Gloria S. 
Bennett. The new book was redesigned by Norman L. Hunter,


--- PAGE 8 ---
who created the original book jacket. Pamela Cash of the Johnson 
Publishing Company Special Library was very helpful in check­
ing elusive dates. I am also indebted to Sharon Scott of the Harsh 
Collection of the Carter G. Woodson Regional Library and the 
staff of the Newberry Library.
I am convinced today, more than ever, that the story outlined 
on the following pages is central to an understanding of American 
reality. Since the publication of the first edition of Mayflower , 
there has been a new appreciation of the centrality of this adven­
ture. But despite the gains, there is still a regrettable tendency in 
some circles to regard black history as an intellectual ghetto. 
Worse yet, some people regard it as a minor-league pastime in­
volving the recitation of dates and the names of black greats. But 
black history, read right, is a much more fateful encounter than 
that. Read right, within the context of social forces struggling for 
dominance, the history detailed on these pages raises total ques­
tion about the destiny of America and the orientation of our lives. 
It is on this deep level, and within this context, that we are invited 
to understand an extremely perceptive remark by Ralph Ellison, 
who said once, in another connection, that “the end is in the 
beginning, and lies far ahead.”
X LERONE BENNETT JR.
Chicago, 1982.


--- PAGE 9 ---
PREFACE 
To Second Impression
S
INCE publication of the first edition of Before 
the Mayflower , there has been a small revolu­
tion in the role of the Afro-American and in the 
perception of the Afro-American’s role. In this, the fourth edition of 
the book, I have revised the terminology and added new material on 
the new developments. I have not found it necessary, however, to 
change the central concepts and conclusions of the first edition. In 
addition to the persons named in the preface to the first edition, I am 
indebted to Beverly Adams, Carmel Tinkchell, and Brenda Biram.
Today, as in 1962, there is a critical need for a deeper under­
standing of the role of the Afro-American in American history and 
culture. For it is becoming increasingly evident that Santayana 
was right when he said that men who cannot remember the past 
are condemned to repeat it.
LERONE BENNETT JR.
Chicago, 1968.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface
To First Edition
T
HIS BOOK grew out of a series of articles which 
were published originally in Ebony  magazine. 
The book, like the series, deals with the trials 
and triumphs of a group of Americans whose roots in the American 
soil are deeper than the roots of the Puritans who arrived on the 
celebrated Mayflower  a year after a “Dutch man of war” deposited 
twenty Negroes at Jamestown.
This is a history of “the other Americans” and how they came 
to North America and what happened to them when they got 
here. The story begins in Africa with the great empires of the 
Sudan and Nile Valley and ends with the Second Reconstruction 
which Martin Luther King, Jr., and the “sit-in” generation are 
fashioning in the North and South. The story deals with the rise 
and growth of slavery and segregation and the continuing efforts 
of Negro Americans to answer the question of the Jewish poet of 
captivity: “How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land?” 
This history is founded on the work of scholars and specialists 
and is designed for the average reader. It is not, strictly speaking, 
a book for scholars; but it is as scholarly as fourteen months of 
research could make it. Readers who would like to follow the 
story in greater detail are urged to read each chapter in connec­
tion with the outline of Negro history in the appendix.
Without the help and encouragement of many people, this book


--- PAGE 11 ---
would not have been possible. John H. Johnson, president of 
Johnson Publishing Company, conceived the idea for the series 
and made it possible for me to spend fourteen months researching 
and writing it. The editors of Johnson Publishing Company were 
also helpful with suggestions and criticisms. I am especially in­
debted to the managing editors of Ebony , Herbert Nipson and 
Era Bell Thompson, and Doris Saunders, Lucille Phinnie, Basil 
Phillips, Norman L. Hunter, Ariel Strong, Herbert Temple, 
Lacey Crawford and Robert E. Johnson. I should like to express 
my appreciation to the personnel of the University of Chicago 
Library, the Johnson Publishing Company Library, the Hall 
Branch of the Chicago Public Library, and the Chicago Historical 
Society. My wife, Gloria, also has my thanks for her suggestions 
and understanding. Whatever virtues this book has are due to the 
help and encouragement of other people. The errors are my own.
When this material appeared in Ebony  magazine in an abridged 
form, a great many readers— Negroes and whites—were surprised 
by the depth of involvement of Negroes in the American experience. 
They were surprised, for example, to discover that Negroes were at 
Lexington and Concord and that they stood with Andrew Jackson at 
the Battle of New Orleans and with William Lloyd Garrison in the 
battle against slavery. The reader, I believe, will be astonished by 
the richness of the Negro’s heritage. He will also perceive, I hope, 
that this story is relevant to the struggle of all people and that it is a 
moving chapter in the human drama.
LERONE BENNETT JR.
Chicago, 1962.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Contents
1. THE AFRICAN PAST . 3
2. BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 28
3. THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 55
4. BEHIND THE COTTON CURTAIN 86
5. BLOOD ON THE LEAVES:
REVOLTS AND CONSPIRACIES 112
6. THE GENERATION OF CRISIS 140
7. THE JUBILEE WAR:
WITNESSES AND WARRIORS 187
8. BLACK POWER IN THE OLD SOUTH 214
9. THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JIM CROW 255
10. RED, WHITE AND BLACK:
RACE AND SEX 297
11. FROM BOOKER T. WASHINGTON TO
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. 326
12. THE TIME OF THE WHALE 386
LANDMARKS AND MILESTONES 443
BLACK FIRSTS 645
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 675
INDEX 695


--- PAGE 13 ---
Illustrations
Procession from tomb at Thebes 8
Queen Nefertari 9
West African warrior 14
Map of ancient Sudan empires 15
Timbuktu 15
Ruins of Ethiopian temple 20
Bronze head from Ife 21
Mask from the Congo 21
Boston Massacre 62
Crispus Attucks 62
Battle of Bunker Hill 63
Richard Allen 72
Black patriot at Delaware Crossing 73
Phillis Wheatley 73
Prince Hall 73
Slave coffle 92
Slaves working in cotton field 92
Invoice of slave sale 93
Fugitive slaves at home of Levi Coffin 100
Religious ceremony in the woods 101
Execution of slave conspirator 118
Toussaint L’Ouverture 118
Skirmish at Christiana, Pennsylvania 119
Nat Turner planning revolt at secret meeting 132
Capture of Nat Turner 132
Map of Nat Turner insurrection 133
John B. Russwurm 150
Henry Highland Garnet 150
The return of Anthony Bums 151
William Lloyd Garrison 158
Frederick Douglass 158
The burning of Pennsylvania Hall 159
Henry (“Box”) Brown 164
Harriet Tubman 165
Sojourner Truth 165


--- PAGE 14 ---
William H. Carney 194
John H. Lawson 194
The Fort Wagner Charge 195
Black sailors on the Monitor  202
Black soldiers in Union artillery unit 203
The Fort Pillow Massacre 208
Lincoln’s triumphant ride through Richmond 209
Primary school for freedmen 220
Thaddeus Stevens 221
The first Reconstruction elections 221
Ku Klux Klan members 228
Robert Brown Elliott 228
Blanche K. Bruce 229
P. B. S. Pinchback 229
Premature congratulations for a congressman 238
Southern whites recovering power 239
Bessie Smith 288
George H. White 288
“Separate-but-equal” water fountain 289
Bishop James A. Healy 310
James P. Beckwourth 310
Mary McLeod Bethune 334
Daisy Bates 334
Booker T. Washington 334
W. E. B. Du Bois 335
Thurgood Marshall 335
The arrest of Marcus Garvey 350
Federals troops at Little Rock high school 351
Martin Luther King Jr. and wife with Nehru 372
James H. Meredith 373
The arrest of students in Albany, Georgia 380
Roy Wilkins, M. L. King Jr., A. Philip Randolph 381
Birmingham demonstration 394
March on Washington 394
President Johnson signs Civil Rights Bill 395
March to Montgomery, Alabama 396
The Watts Rebellion 396
The National Guard in Cleveland, Ohio 397
Robert C. Weaver 414
Malcolm X 414
Edward Brooke 414
Student protest at Howard University 415
Detroit Rebellion 426
Washington, D.C., after the King assassination 427
Martin Luther King Jr. memorial service 430
The funeral of Martin Luther King Jr. 431
Black leaders and President Carter 434
Congressional Black Caucus 434
Andrew Young 434
Patricia R. Harris and William T. Coleman 435
Roy Wilkins and Benjamin L. Hooks 435
Jesse Jackson and Joseph E. Lowery 435


--- PAGE 15 ---
Before the 
MAYFLOWER
A HISTORY 
OF
BLACK
AMERICA


--- PAGE 16 ---
In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings,  
in fastings;
By pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the  
Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,
By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of  
righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report; as  
deceivers, and  yet true;
As unknown, and  yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live;
as chastened, and not killed;
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many  
rich; as having nothing, and  yet possessing all things .
II CORINTHIANS 6:5-10


--- PAGE 17 ---
1
The African Past
What is Africa to me:
Copper sun or scarlet sea,
Jungle star or jungle track,
Strong bronzed men, or regal black  
Women from whose loins I sprang  
When the birds of Eden sang?
COUNTEE CULLEN
I
 SPEAK of Africa and golden joys.”
We know now that Shakespeare spoke truth. 
For an academic breakthrough, which is as 
challenging on its own level as the political renaissance of col­
ored peoples, has yielded a new perspective on African and world 
history. Africa, long considered the “Dark Continent,” is now 
regarded as the place where mankind first received light. An­
cient Africans, long considered “primitive,” are now revealed as 
creative contributors to Egyptian civilization and builders of 
powerful states in the Sudan.
From Olduvai Gorge in East Africa, from caves in the Sahara 
and excavations in the Nile Valley come bits of bone and husks of 
grain which speak more eloquently than words of the trials and 
triumphs of the African ancestors of American blacks. The evi­


--- PAGE 18 ---
4 THE AFRICAN PAST
dence from these and other areas can be summarized briefly 
under four headings:
Olduvai Gorge: A series of astonishing discoveries in this Tan­
zanian canyon suggest that the most important and fascinating 
developments in human history occurred in Africa. Discoveries 
by Dr. L. S. B. Leakey and other archeologists indicate that the 
human race was born in Africa. A growing body of research from 
this and other African sites indicates further that toolmaking 
began in Africa and that this seminal invention spread to Europe 
and Asia.
The Nile Valley: Important finds in the Sudan and the Nile 
Valley prove that people of a Negroid type were influential con­
tributors to that cradle of civilization—ancient Egypt. Dis­
coveries at excavations near Khartoum in the Sudan and at El 
Badari on the Nile indicate that Stone Age Negroes laid the foun­
dation for much of the civilization of the Nile Valley and manufac­
tured pottery before pottery was made in the world’s earliest 
known city.
Central and South America: American and African-American 
scholars, working primarily in the United States and Mexico, 
unearth new archeological evidence, including carbon 14-dated 
sculpture, which suggests that African mariners explored the 
New World before Columbus. This evidence and corroborative 
data from the diaries and letters of explorers, Arabic charts and 
maps and the recorded tales of African griots indicate that there 
was extensive pre-Columbian contact between ancient Africa and 
the Americas.
“An overwhelming body of new evidence,” says Professor Ivan 
Van Sertima (They Came Before Columbus ), “is now emerging 
from several disciplines, evidence that could not be verified and 
interpreted before, in the light of the infancy of archaeology and 
the great age of racial and intellectual prejudice. The most re­
markable examples of this evidence are the realistic portraitures 
of Negro-Africans in clay, gold and stone unearthed in pre­
Columbian strata in Central and South America.”
The Sahara: French explorer Henri Lhote discovers rock paint­
ings which suggest to author Basil Davidson that “peoples of a 
Negro type were painting men and women with a beautiful and 
sensitive realism before 3000 B.C. and were, perhaps, the 
originators of naturalistic human portraiture.”


--- PAGE 19 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 5
The implications of all this are extensive, as W. M. Whitelaw 
pointed out in a general summary of the evidence. “Later dis­
coveries,” he wrote, “all the way from Kenya to Transvaal not 
only of early human remains but also of advanced anthropoid 
types have brought the historical anthropologists to a state of 
confused expectancy. Considerably more evidence will have to be 
brought to light, however, before even the main outlines of man’s 
early history in Africa can be drawn. It is already reasonable, 
however, to believe that such evidence may be forthcoming as 
will require a radical change of perspective on African history, if 
not on history itself.”
It is already reasonable, in fact, to believe that the African 
ancestors of American blacks were among the major benefactors 
of the human race. Such evidence as survives clearly shows that 
Africans were on the scene and acting when the human drama 
opened.
For'a long time, in fact, the only people on the scene were 
Africans. For some 600,000 years Africa and Africans led the 
world. Were these people who gave the world fire and tools and 
cultivated grain—were they Negroes? The ancient bones are 
silent. It is possible, indeed probable, that they were dark­
skinned. More than that cannot be said at this time.
Civilization started in the great river valleys of Africa and Asia, 
in the Fertile Crescent in the Near East and along the narrow 
ribbon of the Nile in Africa. In the Nile Valley that beginning was 
an African as well as an Asian achievement. Blacks, or people 
who would be considered blacks today, were among the first 
people to use tools, paint pictures, plant seeds and worship gods.
In the beginning, then, and for a long time afterwards, black 
people marched in the front ranks of the emerging human proces­
sion. They founded empires and states. They extended the boun­
daries of the possible. They made some of the critical discoveries 
and contributions that led to the modern world.
Looking back on that age from our own, one is struck by what 
seems to be an absence of color consciousness. Back there, in the 
beginning, blackness did not seem to be an occasion for obloquy. 
In fact, the reverse seems to have been true, for whites were 
sometimes ridiculed for “the unnatural whiteness of their skin.” 
During this critical period in the evolution of man, blacks were 
known and honored throughout the ancient world. Ancient


--- PAGE 20 ---
6 THE AFRICAN PAST
Ethiopia, a vaguely defined territory somewhere to the south of 
Egypt, was hailed as a place fit for the vacation of the gods. 
Homer praised Memnon, king of Ethiopia, and black Eurybates:
O f visage solemn, sad, but sable hue,
Short, wooly curls, o’erfleeced his bending head ----
Eurybates, in whose large soul alone,
Ulysses viewed an image of his own.
Homer, Herodotus, Pliny, Diodorus and other classical writers 
repeatedly praised the Ethiopians. “The annals of all the great 
early nations of Asia Minor are full of them,” Flora Louisa Lugard 
wrote. “The Mosaic records allude to them frequently; but while 
they are described as the most powerful, the most just, and the 
most beautiful of the human race, they are constantly spoken of 
as black, and there seems to be no other conclusion to be drawn, 
than that at that remote period of history the leading race of the 
Western world was a black race.” The Ethiopians claimed to be 
the spiritual fathers of Egyptian civilization. Diodorus Siculus, 
the Greek historian who wrote in the first century B.C., said that 
“the Ethiopians conceived themselves to be of greater antiquity 
than any other nation; and it is probable that, born under the 
sun’s path, its warmth may have ripened them earlier than other 
men. They supposed themselves to be the inventors of worship, 
of festivals, of solemn assemblies, of sacrifices, and every reli­
gious practice.”
Whatever may have been the spiritual influence of the ancient 
Ethiopians, it is established beyond doubt that blacks from some­
where were an important element among the peoples who fa­
thered Egyptian civilization. Badarian culture proves that blacks 
camped on the banks of the Nile thousands of years before the 
Egypt of the Pharaohs. Bodies were excavated at El Badari amid 
artifacts suggesting a date of about eight thousand B.C. In the 
intestines of these bodies were husks of barley which indicated 
that the dark-skinned Badarians had learned to cultivate cereals. 
The beautifully fashioned Badarian pottery was never surpassed, 
not even in Egypt’s days of greatest glory.
Still more evidence comes from the testimony of bones. Schol­
ars who examined some eight hundred skulls of the predynastic 
Egyptians found that at least one-third were definitely Negroid. 
“The more we learn of Nubia and the Sudan,” Dr. David


--- PAGE 21 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 7
Randall-Maclver said, “the more evident does it appear that what 
was most characteristic in the predynastic culture of Egypt is due 
to intercourse with the interior of Africa and the immediate influ­
ence of that permanent Negro element which has been present in 
the population of Southern Egypt from the remotest times to our 
own day.”
If black people were a major element among the peoples who 
fathered Egyptian civilization, who were the Egyptians? The 
question bristles with thorns. The only thing that can be said with 
assurance is that they probably were not Caucasians. The evi­
dence suggests that they were a black-, brown-, and yellow­
skinned people who sprang from a mixture of Negro, Semitic and 
Caucasian stocks.
How did the Egyptians see themselves?
They painted themselves in three colors: black, reddish-brown, 
yellow. The color white  was available to them, but they used it to 
portray blue-eyed, white-skinned foreigners. One of the clearest 
examples of this is the great mural of a procession from a tomb of 
Thebes in the time of Thotmes III. The Egyptians and Ethiopians 
in the procession are painted in the usual brown and black colors, 
but thirty-seven whites in the procession are rendered in white 
tones. Who were they? G. A. Hoskins said they were probably 
“white slaves of the king of Ethiopia sent to the Egyptian king as 
the most acceptable present.”
Great black scholars, such as W. E. B. Du Bois, Carter G. 
Woodson and William Leo Hansberry, have insisted that the an­
cient Egyptians, from Menes to Cleopatra, were a mixed race 
which presented the same physical types and color ranges as 
American blacks—a people, in short, who would have been 
forced in the forties to sit on the back seats of the buses in 
Mississippi. “If the Egyptians and the majority of the tribes of 
Northern Africa were not Negroes,” Carter Woodson said, “then, 
there are no Negroes in the United States.” There is supporting 
testimony on this point from Africanist William Leo Hansberry, 
who said that the evidence seems to indicate that “the Egyptians 
were a mixed group consisting of Negroids, non-Negroids and an 
Intermediate Group which represented, for the most part, mixed 
bloods.” Summarizing the evidence of scientists who made a sys­
tematic examination of the skeletal remains of the ancient Egyp­
tians, he said that “Negroids were particularly well represented


--- PAGE 22 ---
Mural from an Egyptian tomb illustrates the color 
ranges of the Ethiopians and Egyptians. Whites in 
the procession, G. A. Hoskins said, were probably 
slaves the Ethiopian king sent to the Egyptian 
king as a present.


--- PAGE 23 ---
Black Egyptian queen, 
Nefertari, “one of the most 
venerated figures” of 
Egyptian history, is pictured 
in this painting from an 
ancient tomb with her 
husband, Aahmes I.


--- PAGE 24 ---
10 THE AFRICAN PAST
in the pre-dynastic period. At one phase of the pre-dynastic 
period . . . the Negroid element amounted to 42 per cent. In the 
Old Kingdom, however, the Negroid percentage shows a substan­
tial decline, although the mixed bloods totaled approximately 30 
per cent. During the Middle Kingdom period, the Negroid ele­
ment is again exceptionally strong, rising to 40 per cent in the 
11th, 12th, and 13th dynasties. It again declines during the period 
of the 18th Dynasty of the New Empire but rises again toward the 
end of the period, particularly in the 20th Dynasty when Negroids 
and mixed bloods composed 40 per cent of the total population.” 
It is scarcely surprising, given the biases of Western scholar­
ship, that this point is hotly disputed by various white scholars. 
But the dissenting scholars are contradicted by an eyewitness. 
Herodotus, the Greek historian, visited the country some five 
hundred years before Bethlehem. The Egyptians, he said, were 
“black and curly-haired.”
Racial identity and racial origins apart, there is overwhelming 
evidence that Negroes or Negro types played a major role in 
the development of Egyptian civilization. Many, perhaps most, of 
the soldiers were black. Blacks toiled on the pyramids, offered 
prayers to the sun-god and served with distinction in the state 
bureaucracy. “Ancient Egypt knew him [the Negro],” Alexander 
Chamberlain said, “both bond and free, and his blood flowed in 
the veins of not a few of the mighty Pharaohs.”
Ra Nehesi and several other Pharaohs have been identified as 
blacks by eminent scholars. So has Queen Nefertari, “the most 
venerated figure,” Sir Flinders Petrie said, “of Egyptian history.” 
Nefertari, the wife of Aahmes I, Egypt’s great imperial leader, 
was cofounder of the famous Eighteenth Dynasty. She has been 
described as a “Negress [sic] of great beauty, strong personality, 
and remarkable administrative ability.”
There was long and intimate contact between the dark-skinned 
Egyptians arid the dark-skinned Ethiopians. For fifty centuries or 
more they fought, traded and intermarried. During the Middle 
Empire Ethiopia was a tribute-paying dependency of Egypt. 
Then, in the middle of the eighth century B.C., the Ethiopians 
turned the tables and conquered Egypt. Kashta, a bold Ethiopian 
monarch, began the conquest which was completed by his son, 
Piankhy. When Piankhy returned to his capital at Napata, he had 
subdued sixteen princes and was master of both Egypt and


--- PAGE 25 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 11
Ethiopia. The legs of his enemies, he said, trembled “like those 
of women.” Piankhy was keenly aware of the value of good public 
relations. The celebrated stela in which he recounted his deeds of 
valor is one of the gems of Egyptology. A modern scholar, Sir Alan 
Gardiner, said it is “one of the most illuminating documents that 
Egyptian history has to show, and displays a vivacity of mind, 
feeling, and expression such as the homeland could no longer 
produce.”
For more than a century Ethiopian kings occupied the divine 
office of the Pharaohs. Shabaka, who succeeded Piankhy, at­
tempted to restore the dwindling fortunes of Egypt. He sponsored 
a cultural revival, built a chapel at Karnak and restored a temple 
at Thebes. Diodorus Siculus said he “went beyond all his pre­
decessors in his worship of the gods and his kindness to his 
subjects.” Herodotus said he abolished capital punishment in 
Egypt.
Taharka, the greatest of the Ethiopian Pharaohs, ascended the 
throne about 690 B.C. at the age of forty-two. He was, by all 
accounts, a remarkable leader who improved the economic and 
cultural life of his realm. Sir E. A. Wallis Budge said Taharka (the 
Tirhakah of the Bible) was “a capable and energetic king, and 
under his able rule the country, notwithstanding his wars with the 
Assyrians, enjoyed a period of prosperity for about twenty-five 
years.” This resourceful leader left inscriptions which indicate 
that he conquered the Hittites and the Assyrians — claims most 
Egyptologists discount. So complete was his sway and so absolute 
was his power that he dubbed himself “Emperor of the World.” A 
famous Egyptologist called his reign that “astonishing epoch of 
nigger [sic] domination.” Dr. Randall-Maclver said, “It seems 
amazing that an African Negro should have been able with any 
sort of justification to style himself Emperor of the World.”
When, in 667 B.C., Taharka was defeated by the Assyrians, he 
retired to Napata, where Ethiopians continued to rule for several 
centuries. The capital was later moved farther south to Meroe, 
where strong-willed queens called Candaces ruled. One of these 
queens, a one-eyed woman “with masculine characteristics,” led 
the Ethiopians in unsuccessful forays against the Romans.
The connection between this civilization and modern Ethiopia 
is far from clear. Some scholars call ancient Ethiopia “Kush” and 
begin the history of modern Ethiopia with the rise of the Axumite


--- PAGE 26 ---
12 THE AFRICAN PAST
kingdom in what is now Eritrea and northern Abyssinia. What­
ever the true origins of modern Ethiopia, there is no exaggeration 
in saying that it is one of the oldest countries in the world. The 
African kingdom, which traces its lineage back to the famous 
visit the legendary Queen of Sheba (“black but comely”) paid 
Solomon some one thousand years before Christ, reached the 
height of its power in the fifth century, when Christianity became 
the official religion. With the rise of Islam, the Ethiopians of 
Axum were isolated and slept, historian Edward Gibbon wrote, 
“for nearly a thousand years, forgetful of the world by whom they 
were forgotten.”
During the early Christian era, blacks were scattered to the four 
corners of the world. For many centuries black merchants traded 
with India, China and Europe. Other blacks were sold as slaves in 
Europe and Asia. By the beginning of the Islamic era, blacks—as 
merchants and merchandise—had integrated Europe,~Asia and 
the Far East. By that time blacks were well known in Venice in 
Europe and in the deserts of Arabia. Perhaps the best known of 
the Arabic blacks was Antar, the impassioned lover-warrior-poet. 
The son of an attractive slave woman and an Arab nobleman, 
Antar became a famous poet and was immortalized after his 
death as the “Achilles of the Arabian Iliad.” Fearless, impetuous, 
ready to fight, sing a lyric or drink wine, Antar won fame in the 
poetic contests which were common in pre-Islamic days. His 
fame spread and he was hailed as the greatest poet of his time. 
Like most poets, Antar had an eye for ladies and love.
’Twas then her beauties first enslaved my heart —
Those glittering pearls and ruby lips, whose kiss
Was sweeter far than honey to the taste.
Antar died about A.D. 615 and his deeds were recorded in liter­
ary form as The Romance o f Antar.  This book, Edward E. Holden 
wrote, “has been the delight of all Arabians for many centu­
ries. . . . The unanimous opinion of the East has always placed 
The Romance of Antar  at the summit of such literature. As one of 
their authors well says: ‘ The Thousand and One Nights  is for the 
amusement of women and children; Antar  is a book for men.’ ”
As a religious ethic, Islam seems to have been unusually effec­
tive in cutting across racial lines. All Moslems, whatever their


--- PAGE 27 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 13
color, were brothers in the faith. “If a Negro slave is appointed to 
rule you,” Mohammed said, “hear and obey him, though his head 
be like a dried grape.”
In this climate a man could be a slave today and a prime minis­
ter tomorrow. It is not at all surprising, therefore, that many 
blacks played heroic roles in the rise and spread of Islam—men 
like Mohammed Ahmad, the Sudanese black who claimed to be 
the Messiah; Abu’l Hasan Ali, the black sultan of Morocco, and 
Bilal, the friend of Mohammed. There were also numerous black 
generals, administrators and poets. When, in the eighth century, 
the Arabs exploded and carried Islam across North Africa and 
into Spain, blacks went with them. Among the black personalities 
at the court of Almansur in Seville, for example, was a “learned 
and celebrated poet, a black of the Sudan, Abu Ishak Ibrahamin 
A1 Kenemi.”
In the same period three powerful states—Ghana, Mali, and 
Songhay—emerged in the western Sudan, a broad belt of open 
country, sandwiched between the Sahara in the north and the 
rain forests of the Guinea Coast on the south. At one time the 
peoples and rulers of these countries were classified out of 
the Negro race. It is now known that they were blacks, some of 
whom were converted to Islam in the eleventh century. The ex­
tent of Moslem influence is debatable, but it seems probable that 
the upper classes and leaders, especially in the large cities, were 
black Moslems.
As political entities, Ghana, Mali and Songhay do not suffer in 
comparison with their European contemporaries. In several 
areas, in fact, the Sudanese empires were clearly superior. “It 
would be interesting to know,” Basil Davidson wrote, “what the 
Normans might have thought of Ghana. Anglo-Saxon England 
could easily have seemed a poor and lowly place beside it.”
The economic life of these states revolved around agriculture, 
manufacturing and international trade. Rulers wielded power 
through provincial governors and viceroys and maintained large 
standing armies. Chain-mailed cavalry, armed with shields, 
swords and lances, formed the shock troops of the armies. Ibn- 
Batuta, an Arab traveler who visited Mali in the fourteenth cen­
tury, was impressed by the flow of life in these states. “Of all 
people,” he said, “the blacks are those who most detest injustice. 
Their Sultan never forgives anyone who has been guilty of it.”


--- PAGE 28 ---
Ancient Sudan empires reached the 
peak of their power in the Middle 
Ages. Ghana dominated the Sudan 
for almost three centuries. Mali rose 
in the thirteenth century. Songhay 
was a Sudan power in the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries.
West African warriors fought 
for the medieval African 
empire of Kanem-Bornu. 
Chain-mailed cavalry were 
shock troops of the powerful 
black states of the western 
Sudan.


--- PAGE 29 ---
Timbuktu was one of the world’s greatest cities in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries. The intellectual center of the black empire of 
Songhay, Timbuktu was famed for its scholars and its social life.


--- PAGE 30 ---
16 THE AFRICAN PAST
Proud, a little haughty perhaps, the Sudanese were a formid­
able people. When the monarch of one state was overthrown, the 
women committed suicide because “they were too proud to allow 
themselves to fall into the hands of white men.” Ibn-Batuta was 
astonished by the servile behavior of the whites in Mali. The 
black viceroy who received the merchants of the caravan with 
which Batuta was traveling remained seated while the whites 
stood before him. He spoke to the whites through an interpreter, 
although he understood their language. He did this, Ibn-Batuta 
said, “solely to indicate his disdain for them.”
Trade and commerce flourished in the great cities that sprang 
up in the Sudanese savannah, and the intellectual life was brisk 
and stimulating. Jenne and Timbuktu were known throughout the 
Moslem world as centers of culture and learning. Ibn-Batuta said 
the black woman of these cities were “of surpassing beauty.” 
They were neither downtrodden nor meek, these women. Ibn- 
Batuta said they were “shown more respect than the men,” add­
ing: “Their men show no signs of jealousy whatever” and the 
women “show no bashfulness before men and do not veil them­
selves.”
The power and wealth of Ghana, Mali and Songhay stemmed 
from the trans-Saharan trade, which exerted a profound influence 
on Sudanese civilization. The basis of this trade was gold. From 
the north came caravans of twelve thousand or more camels, 
laden with wheat, sugar, fruit, salt and textiles, which were ex­
changed in the Sudan for gold and other products. In the power 
politics of that day, the country that controlled this trade con­
trolled the Sudan.
Ghana, which was old when the Arabs first mentioned it in A.D.  
800, dominated the Sudan for amost three hundred years, flour­
ishing in the ninth and tenth centuries and reaching the peak of 
its power in the early part of the eleventh century. The rulers of 
Ghana, which was one of the main suppliers of gold for North 
Africa and Europe, were fabulously wealthy. Al-Bakri, an Arab 
geographer who wrote in 1067, said the king owned a nugget of 
gold so large that he could tether his horse to it.
Tenkamenin, who ruled Ghana in the middle of the eleventh 
century, had an army of two hundred thousand men and lived in a 
castle decorated with sculpture and painted windows. “When he 
gives audience to his people,” Al-Bakri said, “to listen to their 
complaints ... he sits in a pavilion around which stand his


--- PAGE 31 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 17
horses caparisoned in cloth of gold; behind him stand ten pages 
holding shields and gold-mounted swords; and on his right hand 
are the sons of the princes of his empire, splendidly clad and with 
gold plaited into their hair. The governor of the city is seated on 
the ground in front of the king, and all around him are his vizirs in 
the same position. The gate of the chamber is guarded by dogs of 
an excellent breed, who never leave the king’s seat, they wear 
collars of gold and silver.”
In the eleventh century Ghana fell to a band of Moslem zealots, 
and the torch of Sudanese civilization passed to Mali, which 
began as a small Mandingo state on the left bank of the upper 
Niger River. Although the history of this country goes back to the 
seventh century, it owes its fame to two men—Sundiata Keita 
and Mansa Musa. Keita transformed the small state into a great 
empire. Musa, the most celebrated ruler of the ancient Sudan, 
came to power in 1307 and put together one of the greatest coun­
tries of the medieval world. Musa is best known for a pilgrimage 
he made to Mecca in 1324. He went in regal splendor with an 
entourage of sixty thousand persons, including twelve thousand 
servants. Five hundred servants, each of whom carried a staff of 
pure gold weighing some six pounds, marched on before him. 
Eighty camels bore twenty-four thousand pounds of gold, which 
the black monarch distributed as alms and gifts. Musa returned 
to his kingdom with an architect who designed imposing buildings 
in Timbuktu and other cities of the Sudan.
Mali declined in importance in the fifteenth century and its 
place was taken by Songhay, whose greatest king was Askia 
Mohammed. Askia, a general who had served as prime minister, 
seized power in 1493, a year after the European discovery of 
America. He reigned for nineteen years and built the largest and 
most powerful of the Sudan states. His realm was larger than all 
Europe and included most of West Africa. “He was obeyed,” a 
Sudanese writer said, “with as much docility on the farther limits 
of the empire as he was in his own palace, and there reigned 
everywhere great plenty and absolute peace.”
A brilliant administrator and an enlightened legislator, Askia 
reorganized the army, improved the banking and credit systems 
and made Gao, Walata, Timbuktu and Jenne intellectual centers. 
Certain scholars, Alexander Chamberlain in particular, believe 
he was one of the greatest monarchs of this period. “In personal 
character, in administrative ability, in devotion to the welfare of


--- PAGE 32 ---
18 THE AFRICAN PAST
his subjects, in open mindedness towards foreign influences, and 
in wisdom in the adoption of non-Negro ideas and institutions,” 
Chamberlain said, “King Askia . . . was certainly the equal of 
the average European monarch of the time and superior to many 
of them.”
Timbuktu, during Askia’s reign, was a city of some one 
hundred thousand people, filled with gold and dazzling women. 
One of the most fabled and exotic cities in the medieval world, 
the Sudanese metropolis was celebrated for its luxury and gaiety. 
The towering minarets of two great mosques dominated the face 
of the city. From the Great Mosque, flat-roofed houses (of wood 
and plaster) radiated in all directions. The older Sankore Mosque, 
to which was attached the University of Sankore, was the center 
of intellectual life. The mosque and the university were of cut 
stone and lime. Other buildings fronted the narrow streets: 
factories and shops where one could buy exotic goods from 
North Africa and faraway Europe. Leo Africanus, a Christianized 
Moor who visited the city in the sixteenth century, said it 
“is a wonder to see what plentie of Merchandize is daily brought 
hither and how costly and sumptious all things be. . . . Here are 
many shops of . . . merchants and especially of such as weave 
linnen.”
In the narrow streets of this Sudanese metropolis, scholars 
mingled with rich black merchants and young boys sat in the 
shade, reciting the Koran. Visiting Arab businessmen wandered 
the streets, looking, no doubt, for the excitement for which the 
city was famed. Youths from all over the Moslem world came to 
Timbuktu to study law and surgery at the University of Sankore; 
scholars came from North Africa and Europe to confer with the 
learned historians and writers of the black empire. Es Sadi, a 
Timbuktu intellectual who wrote a history of the Sudan, said his 
brother came from Jenne for a successful cataract operation at 
the hands of a distinguished surgeon. Es Sadi, incidentally, had a 
private library of sixteen hundred volumes.
If we can credit contemporary reports, Timbuktu, during the 
reign of Askia the Great, was an intellectuars paradise. A Su­
danese literature developed and Es-Sadi, Ahmed Baba and other 
intellectuals wrote books.
“In Timbuktu,” Leo Africanus said, “there are numerous 
judges, doctors, and clerics, all receiving good salaries from the


--- PAGE 33 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 19
king. He pays great respect to men of learning. There is a big 
demand for books in manuscript, imported from Barbary. More 
profit is made from the book trade than from any other line of 
business.” Since man first learned to write, few cities have been 
able to make such a claim.
The University of Sankore and other intellectual centers in 
Timbuktu had large and valuable collections of manuscripts in 
several languages, and scholars came from faraway places to 
check their Greek and Latin manuscripts. The seeds scattered 
here put down deep roots. Hundreds of years later Heinrich Barth 
met an old blind man in the Sudan. “This,” he reported, “was the 
first conversation I had with this man. . . .  I could scarcely have 
expected to find in this out of the way place a man not only versed 
in all the branches of Arabic literature, but who had even read, 
nay, possessed a manuscript of those portions of Aristotle and 
Plato which had been translated into Arabic.”
How did the people of Timbuktu amuse themselves? If the 
writers of Songhay can be believed, Timbuktu was Paris, Chicago 
and New York blended into an African setting. Shocked Songhay 
historians said most of the people amused themselves with par­
ties, love and the pleasures of the cup. Music was the rage (or­
chestras with both male and female singers were preferred) and 
midnight revels were common. The dress of the women was ex­
travagantly luxurious. Men and women were fond of jewels, and 
the women dressed their hair with bands of gold.
Dramatic displays, including dancing, fencing, gymnastics and 
poetic recitations, were popular. So was chess. The story is told 
of a Songhay general who bungled a military campaign and ex­
plained that he became so engrossed in a chess game that he paid 
no attention to the reports of his scouts. Askia—a liberal man 
who had several wives and one hundred sons, the last of whom 
was born when he was ninety—was disturbed by the free and 
easy life of Timbuktu and attempted, apparently without too 
much success, to curb the social excesses.
Timbuktu and the civilization of which it was a flower declined 
in the seventeenth century and the reign of the great West Afri­
can states came to an end. Why did Sudanese civilization col­
lapse? W. E. B. Du Bois says it fell before the triphammer blows 
of two of the world’s great religions, Islam and Christianity. Other 
students cite the difficulties of defense in the open Sudanese


--- PAGE 34 ---
Sandstone column is part of the 
ruins of an Ethiopian temple. 
There are monuments in 
Ancient Ethiopia which rival the 
ancient treasures of Egypt in 
grandeur and beauty.


--- PAGE 35 ---
Naturalistic bronze head from  
Ife, West Coast art center,  
and abstract rendering of  
human face in mask (below)  
show the great variety and  
strength of African sculpture.


--- PAGE 36 ---
22 THE AFRICAN PAST
savannah and the corrupting influence of the slave trade. Es-Sadi, 
who wrote the Tarikh al-Sudan  in the dying days of the Songhay 
empire, advanced another reason—social dissolution. The 
people, he said, had grown fat and soft on luxury and good living. 
“At this moment,” he said, “faith was exchanged for infidelity; 
there was nothing forbidden by God which was not openly 
done. . . . Because of these abominations, the Almighty in his 
vengeance drew upon the Songhai the victorious army of the 
Moors.”
The age of the great Sudan empires ended, but several states to 
the east and south, notably Mossi, Hausa, Kanem-Bornu and 
Ashanti, retained political identities down to the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries. Great Zimbabwe and other stone cities in 
Southern Africa suggest that strong states flourished inland. Vig­
orous centers of culture also existed on the East Coast, where 
black and Arab merchants traded with India and China.
European penetration and the slave trade debased much that was 
vital in African culture. The popular myth depicts the conquering 
European carrying the blessing of civilization to naked “savages” 
who sat under trees, filed their teeth and waited for fruit to drop 
into their hands. The truth is less flattering to the European ego. 
On the West Coast of Africa, from whence came most of the 
ancestors of American blacks, there were complex institutions 
ranging from extended family groupings to village states and ter­
ritorial empires. Most of these units had all the appurtenances of 
the modern state—armies, courts, and internal revenue depart­
ments. Indeed, more than one scholar has paid tribute to “the 
legal genius of the African.” Anthropologist Melville J. Her- 
skovits said that “of the areas inhabited by non-literate peoples, 
Africa exhibits the greatest incidence of complex governmental 
structures. Not even the kingdoms of Peru and Mexico could 
mobilize resources and concentrate power more effectively than 
could some of these African monarchies, which are more to be 
compared with Europe of the Middle Ages than referred to the 
common conception of the ‘primitive’ state.”
Agriculture was the basis of the economic life of these states, 
although herding and artisanship were important. Specialization 
was advanced, with one nation, for example, concentrating on 
metallurgy and bartering with another nation which specialized in


--- PAGE 37 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 23
weaving or farming. A money system based on the cowrie shell 
was in use before European penetration. Contemptuous of the 
concept of private property, West Africans believed that the land 
belonged to the community and could not be alienated.
Iron was known and used from the Atlantic Ocean to Ethiopia. 
With simple bellows and charcoal fires, the Africans smelted iron 
and manufactured beautiful implements. “It seems likely,” Franz 
Boas said, “that at a time when the European was still satisfied 
with rude stone tools, the African had invented or adopted the art 
of smelting iron. . . .  It seems not unlikely that the people who 
made the marvelous discovery of reducing iron ores by smelting 
were the African Negroes. Neither ancient Europe, nor ancient 
western Asia, nor ancient China knew iron, and everything points 
to its introduction from Africa.”
The core of West African society was the family which was 
organized in some tribes on a matrilineal basis—that is, descent 
was traced through the mother. Polygamy was common, al­
though, in practice, the poor, like poor people everywhere, con­
tented themselves with monogamy. Social life was well or­
ganized. The old, the sick, the infirm were cared for. Spinsters 
were rare; prostitution was unknown. Some nations, incidentally, 
were acquainted with the allegedly modern practice of birth con­
trol. Bantu people said it was not good for a woman to give birth to 
more than one child in a three-year period. Some nations vacci­
nated for smallpox and said there was a cause and effect relation­
ship between the mosquito and malaria. A European traveler in 
Abyssinia reported that “the Natives hereabouts say that Malaria 
is caused by the bite of the mosquito, but, of course, we know 
better—it is caused by the miasmas of the swamps!”
The West Africans were a bewildering mixture of various 
stocks. Centuries of contact and interbreeding had already pro­
duced different types. Some of the West Africans were short and 
broad-nosed. Some were tall with straight hair and aquiline 
noses. They were of all colors: chocolate, asphalt, cafe au lait, 
persimmon, cream.
Although West Africans spoke many tongues, there was a 
common substratum. Only four African languages were reduced 
to writing before the coming of the white man: Egyptian, Ethio­
pian, a variety of Berber and an invention of the Vai people of 
Liberia. Though not reduced to writing, African languages were


--- PAGE 38 ---
24 THE AFRICAN PAST
far from simple. There is no better summary of the flavor of these 
languages than Mario Pei’s analysis of Swahili, which, he said, 
“is a complete refutation of the rather general belief that lan­
guages of ‘primitive’ peoples are necessarily primitive, and con­
sist largely of grunts, groans and mixed-up ideas. Swahili has a 
euphony that is comparable to Italian, with clear, distinct sounds, 
vowel endings, and a most pleasing arrangement of syllables that 
consist for the most part of consonant-plus-vowel. It is capable of 
such absolute precision that the Swahili version of the Pen­
tateuch contains fewer words than the Hebrew original, without 
the slightest loss or distortion of meaning. Its grammatical and 
syntactical structure is logical, almost to the point of being 
philosophical.”
Of whatever tongue, of whatever color, Africans were a deeply 
religious people. For a long time their religion was written off as a 
form of animism. We know now that it was a great deal more 
complicated than that. Like advanced peoples everywhere, the 
Africans wrestled with the big questions. What is man? What 
happens to him after death? Is life a gigantic hoax or has it pur­
pose and meaning?
The answers Africans gave to these questions determined the 
form of their religion. There was, to begin with, a supreme God 
who created the earth. There was also a pantheon of lesser gods, 
identified sometimes with terrestrial objects. Intertwined with 
these concepts were the cults of fate and ancestor worship. Un- 
dergirding all was the basic concept of “life forces.” The life 
force of the Creator was thought to be present in all things, ani­
mate and inanimate. This force, “a kind of individualized frag­
ment of the Supreme Being itself,” continued to exist, even after 
the death of the individual. It continued, the African said, in a 
pure and perfect state which could influence the lives of living 
things.
This sophisticated concept bears a striking resemblance to 
Henri Bergson’s elan vital  and other modern philosophies and 
theories. Bernard Fagg, an expert on these matters, found some 
parallels between African philosophy and modern subatomic 
physics. “African thought,” he said, “is conditioned by their on­
tology, that is, their theory of the nature of being; for them being 
is a process and not a mere state, and the nature of things is 
thought of in terms of force or energy rather than matter; the 
forces of the spirit, human, animal, vegetable and mineral worlds


--- PAGE 39 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 25
are all constantly influencing each other, and by a proper knowl­
edge and use of them a man may influence his own life and that of 
others.”
Religion, to the African, was life. Every event was charged with 
religious significance, and the climax of life was death. The Afri­
can’s attitude toward death, anthropologists say, survived the 
Atlantic crossing and took root in the soil of black American life. 
Another religious root, spirit possession, thrives, they say, in the 
shouting and ecstasy complex of some black American churches.
Art, like religion, was a life expression. There were no art 
museums or opera houses in pre-white man Africa. Art and 
aesthetic expression were collective experiences in which all the 
people participated. Art, in short, was not for art’s sake, but for 
life’s sake.
The different faces of beauty—line, color, sound, rhythm— 
fascinated the African ancestors of American blacks. And their 
plastic art—embodied in cubistic masks, terra-cotta pieces, gold 
figurines, three-dimensional objects and naturalistic representa­
tions of the human body—is one of the great flights of the human 
spirit. Fascinated by the abstract geometry of African art, 
Picasso and other modernists turned their backs on the Greco- 
Roman and Renaissance visions and adopted the vocabulary of 
Benin, Ife and other West African art centers. In 1907 Picasso 
altered the faces of his huge canvas. Les Demoiselles d’Avignon,  
to resemble African masks. This was the beginning of a cubism, a 
turning point in Western art.
Before the coming of the European, music and rhythm were 
everyday things in Africa. Music was everywhere and it was 
grounded in two techniques which survived in the New World: 
polyrhythmic percussive technique and the call-and-response 
pattern (leader and chorus alternating). The poetry of tom-toms, 
the symphonies of synchronized bodies: these ebbed and flowed 
with the rhythm of life. Men and women danced because dancing 
had a social and religious meaning and because dancing was 
meaning, was life itself. This attitude came to America, too. The 
Afro-American dances from Afro-Cuba and the Afro-American 
dances from Afro-Harlem are rooted in an African mystique.  It is 
of more than casual significance that films made in an African 
village contained a perfect example of the Charleston.
There was much, to be sure, that was mean and base in African 
life: slavery, for example, although it was a thousand times more


--- PAGE 40 ---
26 THE AFRICAN PAST
moderate than American slavery and, of course, the use of hu­
mans by humans. Humans used other humans in Africa, as they 
did in Greece and Rome. The only thing that can be said for 
human exploitation in Africa is that it was as well organized as it 
was in “more advanced” cultures.
The individuals who emerged from this African chrysalis were 
courageous and creative. They were not soft; they were hard. 
They had fought the tsetse fly and hundreds of nameless insects, 
and they had survived. They had wrested from the hungry jungle 
gaps of land and they had found time to think beautiful thoughts 
and to make beautiful things. They were used to hard work and 
they were accustomed to an elaborate social code. If they were 
aristocrats or rich merchants or priests — if, in short, they 
belonged to the upper classes, as did some who came to America 
in chains, they were used to political responsibility, to giving 
orders and taking them, to making and altering rules, to govern­
ing. In fine, as Stanley M. Elkins said, in an otherwise question­
able essay, they were “the product of . . . cultural traditions 
essentially heroic in nature.”
Was this rich cultural heritage transplanted and preserved in 
the American environment?
Some scholars find little in African-American life that can be 
traced to the African past. Others, like Melville J. Herskovits, 
find Africanisms (survivals of African cultural patterns) in the 
family life, motor habits, religious practices and music of black 
Americans. Lorenzo Turner found a large number of survivals in 
the syntax, word-formations and intonations of black Americans. 
Among the words he found “in fairly general use... especially in 
the South” were goober (peanut), gumbo (okra), ninny (female 
breast), tote (to carry), yam (sweet potato). Turner also found 
“several hundred” African names among Americans on the South 
Side of Chicago, including the following:
Bobo, one who cannot talk (Vai)
Geeji, a language and tribe in Liberia 
Agona, a country in Ghana (Twi)
Ola, that which saves (Yoruba)
Zola, to love (Congo)
It is obvious from this — from the evidence of the names and 
habits, religious practices and music of African-Americans—


--- PAGE 41 ---
THE AFRICAN PAST 27
that Africa’s golden past is crucial to an understanding of black 
America. What is equally true and equally important is that 
Africa’s past is critical to an understanding of white America. For 
it is impossible to understand white America, it is impossible to 
understand Thomas Jefferson or George Washington or the U.S. 
Constitution, without some understanding of Africa’s gift to the 
New World. And what that means, on the level of history and on 
the level of reality, is that America, contrary to the generally 
accepted view, is an African as well as a European invention.
One three centuries removed  
From the scenes his fathers loved ,
Spicy grove , cinnamon tree ,
What is Africa to me?


--- PAGE 42 ---
Before the Mayflower
Your country? How came it yours? Before the Pil­
grims landed we were here. Here we have brought  
our three gifts and mingled them with yours: a gift  
of story and song  — soft, stirring melody in an  
ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the gift of  
sweat and brawn to beat back the wilderness, con­
quer the soil, and lay the foundations of this vast  
economic empire two hundred years earlier than  
your weak hands could have done it; the third, a  
gift of the Spirit.
W.E.B. DU BOIS
S
HE CAME out of a violent storm with a story no 
one believed, a name no one recorded and a 
past no one investigated. She was manned by 
pirates and thieves. Her captain was a mystery man named Jope, 
her pilot an Englishman named Marmaduke, her cargo an assort­
ment of Africans with sonorous Spanish names — Antoney, 
Isabella, Pedro.
A year before the arrival of the celebrated Mayflower , 113 
years before the birth of George Washington, 244 years before the 
signing of the Emancipation Proclamation, this ship sailed into 
the harbor at Jamestown, Virginia, and dropped anchor into the 
muddy waters of history. It was clear to the men who received


--- PAGE 43 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 29
this “Dutch man of War” that she was no ordinary vessel. What 
seems unusual today is that no one sensed how extraordinary she 
really was. For few ships, before or since, have unloaded a more 
momentous cargo.
From whence did this ship come?
From somewhere on the high seas where she robbed a Spanish 
vessel of a cargo of Africans bound for the West Indies.
Why did she stop at Jamestown, the first permanent English 
settlement in America?
No one knows for sure. The captain “ptended,” John Rolfe 
noted, that he was in great need of food and offered to exchange 
his human cargo for “victualle.” The deal was arranged. 
Antoney, Isabella, Pedro and seventeen other Africans stepped 
ashore in August, 1619. The history of Black America began.
It began, in a way, with Antoney. And it began with a love 
story. Antoney, who had no surname, fell in love with Isabella 
and married her. In 1623 or 1624 Isabella gave birth to the first 
black child born in English America. The child, a boy named 
William, was baptized in the Church of England.
There were other ships, other Williams, other Antoneys and 
other Isabellas—millions after millions. This is a story about 
those millions and the way they came to the Americas. This is a 
story about the merchandising and marketing of human beings. 
This is a story about the “greatest migration in recorded history.”
The story of Antoney and Isabella is only one act in a larger 
drama—the European slave trade—which began in 1444 and 
continued for more than four hundred years. During this period 
Africa lost an estimated forty million people. Some twenty million 
of these men and women came to the New World. Millions more 
died in Africa during and after their capture or on the ships and 
plantations.
These figures, though instructive, do not say anything mean­
ingful about the people involved. The slave trade was not a statis­
tic, however astronomical. The slave trade was people living, 
lying, stealing, murdering, dying. The slave trade was a black 
man who stepped out of his house for a breath of fresh air and 
ended up, ten months later, in Georgia with bruises on his back 
and a brand on his chest.
The slave trade was a black mother suffocating her newborn 
baby because she didn’t want him to grow up a slave.


--- PAGE 44 ---
30 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
The slave trade was a “kind” captain forcing his suicide- 
minded passengers to eat by breaking their teeth, though, as he 
said, he was “naturally compassionate.”
The slave trade was a bishop sitting on an ivory chair on a 
wharf in the Congo and extending his fat hand in wholesale bap­
tism of slaves who were rowed beneath him, going in chains to the 
slave ships.
The slave trade was a greedy king raiding his own villages to 
get slaves to buy brandy.
The slave trade was a pious captain holding prayer services 
twice a day on his slave ship and writing later the famous hymn, 
“How Sweet the Name of Jesus Sounds.”
The slave trade was deserted villages, bleached bones on slave 
trails and people with no last names. It was Caesar negro, Angelo 
negro and Negro Mary. Above all, it was Captain Tomba, who 
came to America, and Nealee, who didn’t.
Nealee started out but she couldn’t or wouldn’t make it. She 
was being driven to the West African coast for sale when she 
became ill and refused to walk another step. Mungo Park, who 
was one of the last persons to see Nealee, said she was put on an 
ass “but the ass was so very unruly, that no sort of treatment 
could induce him to proceed with his load; and as Nealee made no 
exertion to prevent herself from falling, she was quickly thrown 
off, and had one of her legs much bruised. Every attempt to carry 
her forward being thus found ineffectual, the general cry of the 
coffle [slave caravan] was, kang-tegi , kang-tegi , ‘cut her throat, 
cut her throat’; an operation I did not wish to see performed, and 
therefore marched onwards with the foremost of the coffle. I had 
not walked above a mile when one of Karfa’s [the leader] domes­
tic slaves came up to me, with poor Nealee’s garment upon the 
end of his bow and exclaimed, ‘Nealee affeeleeta .’ (Nealee is 
lost.) I asked him whether the Slattees had given him the garment 
as a reward for cutting her throat; he replied that Karfa and the 
schoolmaster would not consent to that measure, but had left her 
on the road; where undoubtedly she soon perished, and was 
probably devoured by wild beasts.”
Captain Tomba, who came to America, was first seen in a slave 
pen in Sierra Leone. John Atkins, a surgeon who saw him there, 
said he was a handsome man “who scorned looking at us, refus­
ing to rise or stretch out his Limbs, as the Master Commanded.”


--- PAGE 45 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 31
A few days later Captain Tomba and a companion led a revolt on 
a slave ship and killed three sailors before they were subdued.
What happened to Captain Tomba?
“Why,” John Atkins wrote, “Captain Harding weighing the 
Stoutness and Worth of the two slaves [Captain Tomba and a 
companion] did, as in other Countries they do by Rogues of Dig­
nity, whip and scarify them only; while three others, Abettors, 
but not Actors, nor of Strength for it, he sentenced to cruel 
Deaths; making them first eat the Heart and Liver of one of them 
killed. The Woman he hoisted up by the Thumbs, whipp’d, and 
slashed her with Knives, before the other Slaves till she died.”
Captain Tomba living, Nealee dying, John Newton praying, the 
King of Barsally stealing, the fat bishop baptizing, Captain Hard­
ing torturing—these people and millions like them made the slave 
trade one of the cruellest chapters in the history of man.
This chapter started in the fifteenth century, but it cannot be 
understood if it is not placed in the flow of history from which 
vantage point it will appear that slavery is not a disgrace peculiar 
to blacks but a universal phenomenon that has been practiced in 
almost all countries. Slavery was old when Moses was young. In 
Plato’s Athens and Caesar’s Rome, humans— white, black and 
brown — were bought and sold. Slavery existed in the Middle 
Ages in Christian Europe and in Africa. In the ancient world 
almost anyone might become a slave. Slavery was so prevalent, in 
fact, that Plato said every person has slaves among his ancestors.
There was a crucial difference, however, between ancient slav­
ery and modern slavery. Ancient slavery, which had little or noth­
ing to do with race, was justified primarily by the rules of war. 
Christians and Moslems added a new dimension to this ancient 
institution, capturing and enslaving one another for religious 
reasons. The same rationale served both groups when economic 
interests and improved technology focused world attention on 
Africa.
The Moslems got there first. For several decades before the 
opening of the European trade, Moslem merchants dragged dark 
captives across the hot Sahara sands. Then, in the fifteenth cen­
tury, Portugal diverted this trade to the Atlantic. The prime 
mover in this development was a devout and covetous prince 
named Henry the Navigator. Excited by stories of the great 
wealth of Africa and Asia, he ordered his ships to explore the


--- PAGE 46 ---
32 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
coast of Africa. There, on a fateful day in 1444, Henry’s men 
came upon the first large group of Africans. They tiptoed through 
the high grass and crept to the edge of the village and then, said a 
contemporary, “they looked towards the settlement and saw that 
the Moors, with their women and children, were already coming 
as quickly as they could out of their dwellings, because they had 
caught sight of their enemies. But they, shouting out ‘St. James,’ 
‘St. George,’ ‘Portugal,’ attacked them, killing and taking all they 
could.”
The pious Portuguese captured seventy more Africans, includ­
ing a girl they found sleeping in a deserted village, and sailed 
home, where they baptized the captives and enslaved them. 
Within ten years Portugal was importing one thousand Africans a 
year. A century later blacks outnumbered whites in some sec­
tions of Portugal, where there was a big demand for black domes­
tics, stevedores and agricultural laborers, especially in the south­
ern section. “By the middle of the sixteenth century,” Mary Wil- 
helmina Williams commented, “the inhabitants of the Algarve 
were largely Ethiopians, and even as far north as Lisbon blacks 
outnumbered whites. There was no marked color line, and the 
blood of the two races mingled freely, resulting eventually in 
Negroid physical characteristics in the Portuguese nation."
This phase of the slave trade was relatively unimportant. There 
was no widespread demand for slaves in Europe, and the number 
of Africans captured was relatively small. As a consequence, the 
European monologue quickly became an African-European dia­
logue based on a trade in humans and  goods and ideas.
Africa just then was in a state of highly unstable equilibrium. 
The continent had emerged from the Golden Age of the Great 
Empires with a number of critical problems, including climatic 
changes which pushed the Sahara south, triggering massive mi­
grations and isolating large sections from the dominant currents 
of the age. No less obvious and ominous was the absence of 
modern firepower, a fact that would prove decisive in the coming 
confrontation with Europe. Despite these problems, life in some 
African states compared favorably with life in some European 
states. (Europe’s eminence, one must remember, came in large 
part after  the fall of Africa and as a direct result of that fall.) In 
fact, in some areas, Africans were a step or two ahead. The 
Sudanese empire, with its showplace of Timbuktu, had passed its


--- PAGE 47 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 33
peak, but the ancient continent could still show Europe a thing or 
two. There were large empires and populous cities—some as 
large as all but the largest European cities—along the coasts, and 
Benin and other African centers were thriving inland. In the six­
teenth century, when the whole of America was a howling wilder­
ness and large sections of the European peasantry had been re­
duced to beggary, Benin City was a dazzling place, twenty-five 
miles wide, with imposing boulevards and intersecting streets, 
flanked by substantial houses with balustrades and verandas.
Impressed by these and other evidences of African power, the 
first European emissaries greeted Africans as allies and partners 
in trade. The letters and diaries of traders show that down to the 
eighteenth century they had no conception of Africans as racial 
pariahs. On the contrary, many of these traders said Africans 
were their equals and superior to many of their countrymen back 
home.
Africans were of substantially the same mind. They did not 
consider themselves inferior to Europeans. If anything, they con­
sidered themselves superior to the odd-looking men with pale 
skins. We are told that the king of Dahomey seldom shook hands 
with white men and that when he did it was a “very uncommon 
mark of royal condescension.” A French trader complained in 
1660 that the Fanti were “so proud and haughty that a European 
trader there must stand bare to them.”
Standing up to one another, as equals and partners in trade and 
commerce, both Africans and Europeans profited. Plenipoten­
tiaries were exchanged, and bright young men of the ruling 
stratum went to Lisbon and Rome to study and observe. Black and 
white kings exchanged letters filled with terms of royal endear­
ment (“my fellow brother and my fellow queen”). They also 
exchanged gifts and mistresses of various hues and dispositions. 
On May 15, 1518, one hundred years before the Jamestown 
landing, Henry of the Congo led a mission to the Vatican, formal­
ly addressed the Pope in Latin and was appointed bishop of the 
Congo. In Rome, Lisbon and other European centers, Africans 
rose to high positions in church and state.
In the fervor of worldwide exploration and the commingling of 
peoples from different lands and cultures, new vistas opened up 
for both Africans and Europeans. It seemed for a spell that Chris­
tianity would have the same fertilizing influence in Africa in the


--- PAGE 48 ---
34 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
sixteenth century that Islam had had in the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries. But it was not to be. While the bright young black men 
were feasting in the courts of Lisbon, while the eager black 
priests were genuflecting in the courts of the Vatican, events 
were happening in the outer world that would destroy the dream 
and change Europe and Africa forever.
The most important of these events was the European discovery 
of America and the opening of the New World. It is a point of 
paradoxical interest that descendants of the first black cap­
tives—black Christians born in Spain and Portugal—were with 
the first European explorers and settlers. Black explorers — 
servants, slaves, and free men— accompanied Spanish and Por­
tuguese explorers in their expeditions in North and South 
America. They were with Pizarro in Peru, Cortes in Mexico 
and Menendez in Florida. Thirty blacks were with Balboa when 
he discovered the Pacific Ocean. Typical of the early black ex­
plorers in America was Estevanico, who opened up New Mexico 
and Arizona for the Spaniards. Other blacks, W. E. B. Du Bois 
said, “accompanied DeSoto and one of them stayed among the 
Indians in Alabama and became the first settler from the Old 
World.”
Spaniards, who took the lead in the exploration, attempted at 
first to enslave Indians. But they died so fast that Bishop Bar- 
tolome Las Casas, a famous missionary, recommended in 1517 
the importation of Africans, a recommendation he lived to re­
gret. The development of large-scale sugar planting created a 
demand for men that casual kidnapping couldn’t supply. In the 
wake of that development, the vision of European monarchs 
shifted, and the African-European dialogue became a monologue 
focused almost exclusively on a trade in men. Within a few years 
hundreds of thousands of blacks were crossing the Atlantic each 
year, and the soil of Africa and America was drenched with their 
blood. “Strange,” said Eric Williams, “that an article like sugar, 
so sweet and necessary to human existence, should have oc­
casioned such crimes and bloodshed!”
An estimated million of these slaves found their way to the land 
that became the United States of America. But the first black 
immigrants (Antoney, Isabella, and the Jamestown group) were 
not slaves. This is a fact of critical importance in the history of


--- PAGE 49 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 35
Black America. They came, these first blacks, the same way that 
most of the first white immigrants came — under duress and 
pressure. They found a system (indentured servitude) which 
enabled poor whites to come to America and sell their services for 
a stipulated number of years to planters. Under this system 
thousands of whites—paupers, ne’er-do-wells, religious dissent­
ers, waifs, prisoners and prostitutes—were shipped to the colon­
ies and sold to the highest bidder. Many were sold, as the first 
blacks were sold, by the captains of ships. Some were kidnapped 
on the streets of London and Bristol, as the first blacks were 
kidnapped in the villages of Africa.
In Virginia, then, as in other colonies, the first black settlers 
fell into a well-established socioeconomic groove which carried 
with it no implications of racial inferiority. That came later. But in 
the interim, a period of forty years or more, the first black settlers 
accumulated land, voted, testified in court and mingled with 
whites on a basis of equality. They owned other black servants, 
and certain blacks imported and paid for white servants whom 
they apparently held in servitude.
During these fateful forty years, the black population of the 
Virginia colony grew by natural additions and importations. In 
1621 the James  arrived from England with a number of immi­
grants, including a black man named Antonio. In 1623 the Swan  
arrived with still another black from England, a man named John 
Pedro. In 1623 or 1624, as we have seen, Isabella, the wife of 
Antoney, gave birth to what was probably the first black child 
born in America. The new American, the first of a long black line 
that would swell to millions, was christened William in the 
Church of England, and a new account was opened in the ledger 
book of history. At that juncture, according to the first detailed 
census of 1624-25, blacks constituted about 2 per cent of the total 
population of 1,227. The twenty-three black pioneers—eleven 
males, ten females, and two children—lived in six of the twenty- 
three settlements in Virginia.
We can only imagine the feelings of these seminal African- 
Americans. The record burns with their presence but is strangely 
silent on their reactions. The black founding fathers and mothers 
enter history thus: faceless men and women uprooted from Africa 
and flung into a maelstrom of history. Nothing in the record 
indicates that the cultural shock was great for either the blacks or


--- PAGE 50 ---
36 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
whites. There were skilled farmers and artisans among the first 
group of African-Americans, and there are indications in the rec­
ord that they were responsible for various innovations later cred­
ited to English immigrants. An early example of this was reported 
in Virginia, where the governor ordered rice planted in 1648 on 
the advice of “our Negroes,” who told the whites that conditions 
in Virginia were as favorable to the production of the crop as 
“in their Country.”
There is furthermore the testimony of Washington Irving, who 
made the following observation in a contemporary satirical skit: 
“These Negroes, like the monks of the Dark Ages, engross all the 
Knowledge of the place, and being infinitely more adventurous 
and more knowing than their masters, carry on all the foreign 
trade; making frequent voyages in canoes, loaded with oysters, 
buttermilk and cabbages. They are great astrologers predicting 
the different changes of weather almost as accurately as an 
almanac.”
A large proportion of the first generation of African-Americans 
entered America with Spanish names. For reasons that are not 
readily apparent, many black males were called Antonio, a name 
that quickly became Antoney or Anthony. Other popular names of 
the period included Michaela, Couchaxello, Mingo, Pedro, Fran­
cisco, Jibina, Maria, Wortello, Tomora, Angola, and Tony Kongo. 
Shortly after their arrival in America, many blacks discarded 
African and Spanish names and adopted English titles. Thus 
within the span of a generation the black soul moved from Africa 
to England to Spain to America — from the X of the severed 
African family tree to Antonio and the William X or the William ? 
of the first native American black, who apparently had no sur­
name at the time of his christening.
During the next forty-odd years, hundreds of Africans made 
that extraordinary cultural leap. In 1625 Brase, another victim of 
piracy, was brought into the colony. Four years later, in 1629, 
there was a substantial increase in the black population when the 
first ship from Africa arrived at Port Comfort, bringing blacks 
captured from a Portuguese ship off the coast of Africa. In the 
1630s and 1640s approximately 160 blacks were imported. By 
1649 colonial officials were able to report that “there are in Vir­
ginia  about fifteene thousand English, and of Negroes  brought 
thither, three hundred good servants.”


--- PAGE 51 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 37
The “good servants” came from different backgrounds with 
different experiences. Quite a few, as we have noted, came from 
England, where blacks had lived since the middle of the six­
teenth century. Many came from Spain, Portugal and the West 
Indies. Significantly, many were Christians, baptized either in 
Spain or Portugal or on the high seas. In 1624 John Phillip 
testified in a Jamestown court and his testimony against a white 
man was admitted because he had been “christened in England 
twelve years since. . ..”
In a limited but nonetheless significant sense, then, the James­
town experience was an open experience which provided un­
usual opportunities for individual blacks. This comes out most 
clearly in the life and times of Anthony Johnson, who came to 
America in 1621 or thereabouts from England. Like many other 
blacks of the period, Johnson quickly worked out his term of 
indenture and started accumulating property. In 1651, according 
to official records, he imported and paid for five servants, some of 
whom were white, and was granted 250 acres of land on the basis 
of the headright system, which permitted planters to claim fifty 
acres of land for each individual brought to the colony.
The abstract of the deed reads as follows:
ANTHONY JOHNSON, 250 acs. Northampton Co., 24 July 
1651, ....  At great Naswattock Cr., being a neck of land 
bounded on the S.W. by the maine Cr. & on S.E. & N.W. by 
two small branches issueing out of the mayne Cr. Trans, of 5 
pers: Tho. Bemrose, Peter Bughby, Antho. Cripps, Jno, 
Gesorroro, Richard Johnson.
In the years that followed, Johnson and his relatives estab­
lished one of America’s first black communities on the banks of 
the Pungoteague River. In 1652 John Johnson, who was probably 
Anthony Johnson’s son, imported eleven persons, most of them 
white males and females, and received headrights for 550 acres 
adjacent to Anthony Johnson. Two years later Richard Johnson 
imported two white indentured servants and received one hun­
dred acres. Here are the records of the deeds:
JOHN JOHNSON, 550 acs. Northampton Co., 10 May 
1652 ... At great Naswattocks Cr., adj. 200 acs. granted to 
Anthony Johnson. Trans, of 11 pers: John Edward, Wm. 
Routh, Tho. Yowell, Fra. Maland, William Price, John


--- PAGE 52 ---
38 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
Owen, Dorothy Rily, Richard Hemstead, Law. Barnes, Row. 
Rith, Mary Johnson.
RICH. Jnoson (Johnson—also given as John), Negro, 100 
acs. Northampton Co., 21 Nov. 1654, . . . On S. Side of 
Pongoteague Riv., Ely. upon Pocomock Nly. upon land of 
John Jnoson., Negro, Wly. upon Anto. Jnoson., Negro, & 
Sly. upon Nich. Waddilow. Trans, of 2 pers: Wm. Ames, 
Wm. Vincent.
The Johnson settlement at its height included only a handful of 
blacks with large holdings. Other blacks lived in integrated 
communities in other areas of the colony. In 1656, for instance, 
Benjamin Doyle received a patent for three hundred acres in 
Surry County. In 1668 John Harris bought fifty acres in New Kent 
County; and Phillip Morgan, reflecting the optimism of the age, 
leased two hundred acres in York County for ninety-nine years.
One can hardly doubt, in the face of this clear evidence, that 
the first generation of blacks had, as J. H. Russell noted, “about 
the same industrial or economic opportunities as the free white 
servant.” Additional evidence of the relatively high status of the 
first American blacks is to be found in colonial documents which 
indicate that they voted and participated in public life. It was not 
until 1723, in fact, that blacks were denied the right to vote in 
Virginia. According to Albert E. McKinley, blacks voted in South 
Carolina until 1701, in North Carolina until 1715, and in Georgia 
until 1754. Not only did pioneer blacks vote, but they also held 
public office. There was a black surety in York County, Virginia, 
in the first decades of the seventeenth century, and a black 
beadle in Lancaster County, Virginia.
Nor was this sort of thing confined to Virginia. The first blacks 
in Massachusetts—they arrived in 1638 on the Desire, America’s 
first slave ship — were apparently assigned the status of in­
dentured servants. In his classic work, The Negro in Colonial  
New England,  Lorenzo J. Greene said that “until almost the end 
of the seventeenth century the records refer to the Negroes as 
‘servants’ not as ‘slaves.’ For some time no definite status could 
be assigned to incoming Negroes. Some were sold for a period of 
time only, and like the white indentured servants became free 
after their indenture.”


--- PAGE 53 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 39
The available evidence suggests that most of the first genera­
tion of African-Americans worked out their terms of servitude 
and were freed. A very interesting and instructive case in point is 
that of Richard Johnson, a black carpenter who came to Virginia 
in 1651 as a free man and signed a contract of indenture. Within 
two years Johnson was a free man. Within three years he was 
acquiring pounds and property and servants.
In addition to Johnson and other blacks who were freed as a 
matter of course, the record lists other cases in which colonial 
courts freed black servants. Such a case was that of Andrew 
Moore, who migrated to Virginia and bound himself out for a term 
of five years. In October, 1673, the General Court “ordered that 
the Said Moore bee free from his said master, and that the Said 
Mr. Light pay him Corne and Clothes according to the Custome of 
the Country and four hundred pounds tobac and Caske for his 
service done him Since he was free, and pay costs. ”
Looking back on that age from our own, one is struck by what 
can only be called equality of oppression. Not the least among the 
things that startle us in this period is that the colony’s power 
structure made little or no distinction between black and white 
servants, who were assigned the same tasks and were held in 
equal contempt. This has caused no end of trouble for latter-day 
white historians, who have tried to explain away a record that is 
understandably astonishing in view of the later practices of some 
whites. It is interesting, for example, to observe that many white 
historians deny that white women worked in the fields. But 
contemporary witnesses tell us in no uncertain terms that white 
women not only worked in the fields but were also flogged at 
colonial whipping posts. There are also court records in which 
white women asked the courts to relieve them of this burden. 
Historian Philip A. Bruce conceded this point and commented 
with disapproval: “The class of white women who were required 
to work in the fields belonged to the lowest rank in point of 
character; not having been born in Virginia and not having thus 
acquired from birth a repugnance to associations with Africans 
upon a footing of social equality, they yielded to the temptations 
of the situations in which they were placed.”
There is contradictory testimony which indicates that charac­
ter, Bruce to the contrary notwithstanding, had little or nothing to


--- PAGE 54 ---
40 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
do with the status of white servants. “They became in the eyes of 
the law,” J. B. McMaster said, “a slave and in both the civil and 
criminal codes were classed with the Negro and the Indian. They 
were worked hard, were dressed in the cast off clothes of their 
owners, and might be flogged as often as the master and mistress 
thought necessary.” There is also the testimony of T. J. Werten- 
baker, who said that “the indentured servants.. .were practically 
slaves, being bound to the soil and forced to obey implicitly those 
whom they served.”
Working together in the same fields, sharing the same huts, the 
same situation, and the same grievances, the first black and 
white Americans, aristocrats excepted, developed strong bonds 
of sympathy and mutuality. They ran away together, played to­
gether and revolted together. They mated and married, siring a 
sizeable mixed population. In the process the black and white 
servants—the majority of the colonial population—created a ra­
cial wonderland that seems somehow un-American in its lack of 
obsession about race and color. There was, to be sure, prejudice 
then, but it was largely English class prejudice which was distrib­
uted without regard to race, creed or color. There were also, 
needless to say, prejudiced individuals  in the colony, but—and 
this is the fundamental difference between prejudice and 
racism—their personal quirks and obsessions were not focused 
and directed by the organized will of a community. The basic 
division at that juncture was between servants and free people, 
and there were whites and blacks on both sides of the line.
Of all the improbable aspects of this situation, the oddest—to 
modern blacks and whites—is that white people did not seem to 
know that they were white. It appears from surviving evidence 
that the first white colonists had no concept of themselves as 
white  people. The legal documents identified whites as Eng­
lishmen and/or Christians. The word white , with its burden of 
arrogance and biological pride, developed late in the century, as a 
direct result of slavery and the organized debasement of blacks. 
The same point can be made from the other side of the line. For a 
long time in colonial America, there was no legal name to focus 
white anxiety. The first blacks were called Blackamoors, Moors, 
Negers and Negars. The word Negro , a Spanish and Portuguese 
term for black, did not come into general use in Virginia until the 
latter part of the century.


--- PAGE 55 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 41
A similar course of development was roughly characteristic of 
New York, where the black settlement preceded the English and 
the name New York.  There are records from 1626 identifying 
eleven blacks—about 5 per cent of the non-Indian population— 
who were servants of the Dutch West Indian Company. The 
eleven black pioneers were males. Responding to the pleas of 
these males, the Dutch imported three women, identified as 
“Angolans,” in 1628.
In 1644, some eighteen years after their arrival, the “Dutch 
Negroes,” as they were called, filed a petition for freedom, the 
first black legal protest in America. The petition was granted by 
the Council of New Netherlands, which freed the blacks because 
they had “served the Company seventeen or eighteen years” and 
had been “long since promised their freedom on the same footing 
as other free people in New Netherlands.” The eleven blacks 
cited in the petition were Paul d’Angola, Big Manuel, Little Man­
uel, Manuel de Gerrit de Rens, Simon Congo, Anthony Por­
tuguese, Gracia, Peter Santome, John Francisco, Little Anthony 
and John Fort Orange. All received parcels of land in what is now 
Greenwich Village.
What is essential to grasp about the first blacks in New York is 
that they stood on the same footing as white indentured servants 
from the very beginning. “They had almost full freedom of motion 
and assembly,” James Weldon Johnson wrote in Black Man­
hattan.  “They were allowed to marry; wives and daughters had 
legal protection against the lechery of masters, and they had the 
right to acquire and hold property.”
What has been outlined above with reference to New York and 
Virginia holds good also—though with minor variations—for 
other colonies, including Pennsylvania, where the system of 
black indentured servitude was so deeply rooted that black ser­
vants outnumbered black slaves at the time of the Revolution.
There are no accurate figures on the number of blacks who came 
to America in this period. In 1715, according to one estimate, 
there were 2,000 blacks and 96,000 whites in Massachusetts, 
4,000 blacks and 27,000 whites in New York, 2,500 blacks and 
45,800 whites in Pennsylvania, 9,500 blacks and 40,700 whites in 
Maryland, 23,000 blacks and 72,000 whites in Virginia, and 
10,500 blacks and 6,250 whites in South Carolina.


--- PAGE 56 ---
42 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
Who were these blacks?
The answer is simple. They were Africans. This fact, as I said 
in The Shaping o f Black America , is so big and obvious that it is 
easily overlooked or assumed without question. And yet it is the 
key to an understanding of the first and  the tenth generation of 
African-Americans. They were Africans:  that’s the first fact. They 
were former citizens of states and principalities on the West 
Coast of Africa.
It is scarcely possible to understand the history of African- 
America unless we make at the least an effort to understand that 
fact and the further fact that the Africans brought their mind and 
ethos to America with them. The important point here is that the 
first generation of African-Americans were carriers of an African 
world view. They had ideas about social organization and the 
nature of the forces that controlled the universe. They also had 
technical skills, especially in the area of agriculture, which was 
well developed in Africa.
Although the black immigrants came from the same historical 
space and shared certain cultural and philosophical presupposi­
tions, they were far from homogenous. Some came by way of 
Europe or the West Indies, and others came from different sec­
tions of Africa. Not only did they come from different countries 
and different kinship groups but they also spoke different lan­
guages. Most apparently were ordinary citizens, but some were 
warriors and some were from the highest ranks of African society. 
This fact was noted by a number of contemporary witnesses, 
including Hugh Jones, who said that Africans “that have been 
kings and great men [in their countries] are generally lazy, 
haughty, and obstinate.” Discounting the obvious bias in that 
statement, it appears from this and other testimony that not a few 
“great men” were among the founding fathers of Black America. 
There is corroborative evidence on this point from John Josselyn, 
an English traveler who visited Samuel Maverick of Mas­
sachusetts in 1639 and made this observation:
The second of October, about 9 of the clock in the morning, 
Mr. Mavericks Negro woman came to my chamber window, 
and in her own Countrey language and tune sang her very 
loud and shrill, going out to her, she used a great deal of 
respect towards me, and willingly would have expressed her 
grief in English; but I apprehended it by her countenance


--- PAGE 57 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 43
and deportment, whereupon I repaired to my host, to learn of  
him the cause, and intreat him in her behalf, for that I under­
stood before, that she had been a Queen in her own Coun­
trey, and observed a very humble and dutiful garb used  
towards her by another Negro* who was her maid. Mr.  
Maverick was desirous to have a breed of Negroes, and  
therefore seeing she would not yield by persuasions to com­
pany with a Negro young man he had in his use, he com­
manded him, wil’d she nill’d she, to go to bed with her, which  
was no sooner done, but she kicked him out again, this she  
took in high disdain beyond her slavery and this was the  
cause of her grief.
In this anonymous queen from an unnamed country, we catch a 
glimpse of the many people of differing ranks who were forced by 
history to sing their “own Countrey language and tune” in a 
strange land.
The dominant note in that tune from the seventeenth century to 
the end of slavery was resistance to white oppression. An English 
traveler named Edward Kimber said it was extremely difficult to 
break the will and spirit of new black immigrants. “To be sure,” 
he said, “a new Negro , if he must be broke, either from Obsti­
nacy, or, which I am more apt to suppose, from Greatness of 
Soul, will require more hard Discipline than a young Spaniel; You 
would really be surpriz’d at their Perseverance; let an hundred 
Men shew him how to hoe, or drive a Wheelbarrow, he’ll still take 
the one by the Bottom, and the other by the Wheel; and they often 
die before they can be conquer’d.”
It was no less difficult to destroy the cultural heritage of Afri­
cans. This was manifested most notably in the widely reported 
“feasts and burials” of colonial blacks. In 1680 the Virginia As­
sembly said that “the frequent meetings of considerable numbers 
of Negroe slaves under pretence of feasts and burials is judged of 
dangerous consequence.” One of these funerals was witnessed 
by Henry Knight, who said it was customary in that day for black 
Virginians to “sing and dance and drink the dead to his new 
home, which some believe to be in old Guinea.”
Though the evidence is not as firm as one could wish, there are 
indications that Africans hoped for more than a century that a 
miracle would enable them to return to Africa. As the years went 
by, with no sign of the intervention of African gods, many aban-


--- PAGE 58 ---
44 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
doned hope and began the long process of adapting themselves to 
a new situation.
The adaptation was made with a facility that gives point to 
Kenneth Stampp’s observation that the first generation of blacks 
were as prepared for freedom as the tenth generation. In addition 
to the Virginia cases already cited, we might add the case of the 
black woman who became a member of a Dorchester, Mas­
sachusetts, church three years after her arrival on the Desire. By 
that time, 1641, there were at least forty black members of 
Bouweire Chapel in New Amsterdam. In the same year two 
Africans—Antony van Angola and Lucie d’Angola—were mar­
ried in the Dutch church in New Amsterdam. These cases are 
instructive—as are several others—for the light they shed on the 
activities of the first generation of blacks, who were slowly and 
painfully shaping the foundations of the black family.
Not all blacks welcomed the newfangled rites. Large numbers, 
especially in the South, wooed and wed in feasts and weddings 
which synthesized African and European forms. An early instance 
of an improvised African-American wedding in North Carolina was 
reported by Thomas Brickell, who said, with some bias, that “their 
marriages are generally performed among themselves, there being 
very little ceremony used upon that Head; for the Man makes the 
Woman a Present, such as a Brass Ring or some other Toy, which 
she accepts of, becomes his wife....”
Such was the system called into life by the establishment of 
European and African fragments on the American mainland. For 
at least forty years—until the 1660s—this system contained the 
seeds of at least four alternatives. Indentured servitude could 
have been continued for black and white servants or both groups 
could have been reduced to slavery. Other options were Indian 
slavery and a free labor system for blacks and whites, Indians and 
immigrants. Socioeconomic forces—a worldwide demand for 
sugar and tobacco and the development of capitalist planting 
techniques based on the use of gang labor—tilted the structure in 
the direction of black slavery.
To understand this fact in its fullness, we have to notice first 
that the rulers of the colonies were not overly scrupulous about 
the color or national origin of the work force. They tried Indian 
slavery, and they also tried to enslave white men and women.


--- PAGE 59 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 45
When these attempts failed, the spotlight fell on Africans, who 
were tried and found not wanting. How explain this? The explana­
tion is to be found in the situations that defined Africans and 
Europeans and Indians. Whites, to begin with, were under the 
protection of recognized governments: they could appeal to a 
monarch or to white public opinion. Whites, moreoever, were 
white: they could escape and blend into the crowd. Indians, too, 
could escape: they knew the country and their brothers were only 
a hill or a forest away. The white rulers of the colonies also said 
and apparently believed that Indians tended to sicken and die 
under conditions of slavery.
Africans—from the standpoint of the colonial ruling class—did 
not have these disadvantages. They were strong: one African, the 
Spanish said, was worth four Indians. They were inexpensive: the 
same money that would buy an Irish or English servant for seven 
years would buy an African for life. They were visible: they could 
run, but they could not blend into the white crowd. Above all else, 
they were unprotected. And the supply, unlike the supply of 
Irishmen and Englishmen, seemed to be inexhaustible. The rul­
ers of the colonies fell to thinking. Why not?
In the fateful sixties of the seventeenth century, the men who 
ran the colonies, egged on by the slave-trading royalists of Lon­
don, made a decision that would lead, step by step, to the fateful 
sixties of the nineteenth century and the fateful sixties of the 
twentieth. Heedless of the consequences, these men decided to 
base the American economic system on human slavery organized 
around the distribution of melanin in human skin. Virginia and 
Maryland led the way, enacting laws in the 1660s that forbade 
intermarriage and made blacks slaves for life. Under the new 
dispensation, which was adopted with minor modifications by 
other colonies, children born of African women were ruled bond 
or free, according to the status of the mother.
Thus, white America and black America crossed a great di­
vide. And white America, finding itself on the other side of 
that divide, found it necessary almost immediately to take two 
additional steps. The first was the creation of an ideology of rac­
ism that justified the subordination of blacks. The second, flow­
ing with and out of the first, was the destruction of the bonds of 
community between black and white servants, who constituted 
the majority of the population.


--- PAGE 60 ---
46 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
Who was responsible for this policy?
The planters, the aristocrats, the parsons, the lawyers, the 
founding fathers — the good people : they sowed the seeds of the 
bitter harvest in a painful and protracted separation movement 
which continued for more than a century.
Astonishingly enough, the first rationalization for this policy 
was religion. Africans, it was said, were good material for slavery 
because they were “heathens.” The limitations of this ideology 
were obvious to almost everyone. It was not permanent: people 
could become Christians. Since many black immigrants were al­
ready Christians, and since many more became Christians in the 
colonies, planters and planter ideologists set about to find a more 
enduring mark, something that could not be changed. But before 
this step could be taken, it was necessary to clear up certain 
theological difficulties. Was it not a sin to baptize slaves? This 
question was debated with passion, and the Scriptures were 
searched for supporting and dissenting opinions. Finally, to the 
surprise of almost no one, it was decided that it was a Christian 
duty to bring heathens into the fold of Christian civilization so 
their souls could be cleansed and whitened. Thus, in the end, 
God and profits were reconciled, as Virginia noted in its law of 
1667: “The conferring of baptisme doth not alter the condition of 
the person as to his bondage or freedom.” After that it was easy. 
A series of laws stripped black slaves of all rights of personality 
and made color a badge of servitude. The black population, which 
had grown slowly during the twilight interim of freedom, now 
lunged forward. In 1710 the number was fifty thousand. When the 
Declaration of Independence was signed, there were a half­
million. When the Civil War opened, the twenty black seeds of 
Jamestown had become four million.
Where did these people come from?
How did they come?
Why did they come?
Most of the slaves came from an area bordering a 3,000-mile 
stretch on the West Coast of Africa. They came, chained two by 
two, left leg to right leg, from a thousand villages and towns. They 
came from many racial stocks and many tribes, from the spirited 
Hausas, the gentle Mandingos, the creative Yorubas, from the 
Ibos, Efiks and Krus, from the proud Fantins, the courageous 
Ashantis, the shrewd Dahomeans, the Binis and Sengalese. Some


--- PAGE 61 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 47
of these slaves were captured in African wars and sold to slave 
merchants, who sold them to Europeans. Many were kidnapped 
by Europeans and Africans. Some were sold into slavery for 
infractions of African laws.
Certain captives made forced marches of five hundred miles to 
the coast, where they were examined like cattle and packed into 
the holds of ships. They came, on these forced marches, across 
rivers and over mountains, barefooted and naked to their ene­
mies, with chains on their ankles, burdens on their heads and 
fear in their hearts.
Were they — these people who gave to the world the black 
American—were they the dregs of society? No. The strong came 
and the weak, too. Priests, princes, warriors, merchants and 
nobles came. Slave traders said that it was not at all unusual for 
an African to sell an African today and to be captured and sold 
tomorrow. The story is told of a major slave merchant who sold a 
parcel of slaves and unwisely accepted a social drink to seal the 
transaction. One drink led to another—and to America. The slave 
merchant woke up the next morning with a hangover and a brand 
on his chest. He was in the hold of a slave ship with his victims 
and over him stood the captain, laughing to beat the band.
This story underlines a rather obvious fact: Africans as well as 
Europeans were involved in the slave trade. There has been a 
systematic attempt, however, to overemphasize the degree of Af­
rican involvement. The picture of a whole continent of Africans 
kidnapping and selling one another for rum, guns and gewgaws is 
wide of the mark. It is true that some Africans, corrupted by 
Europe’s insatiable desire for human flesh, sold their country­
men. But many Africans, like King Almammy and Captain 
Tomba, loathed the whole business and forbade their subjects to 
take part in it. Thus, to cite only one example, Mani-Congo, the 
ruler of a Congo state, tried to end the trade in 1526. In a strong 
letter to John III of Portugal, he said “we need from [your] king­
doms no other than priests and people to teach in schools, and no 
other goods but wine and flour for the holy sacrament: that is why 
we beg of Your Highness to help and assist us in this matter, 
commanding the factors that they should send here neither mer­
chants nor wares, because it is our will that in these kingdoms [of 
the Congo] there should not be any trade in slaves or markets for 
slaves.” This would be a different world if Mani-Congo’s plea for


--- PAGE 62 ---
48 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
“Point IV aid” had been heeded in the sixteenth century. But 
Europe was impervious to such pleas. She was only interested in 
the gold of black bodies, and she forced that obsession on 
Africa—to the undoing of both Europe and Africa.
European nations fought each other for the privilege of managing 
this trade. Portugal, which ran the first leg, was ousted by Hol­
land which in turn surrendered supremacy on the African coast to 
France and England. Portugal, one trader said, “served for set­
ting dogs to spring the game.” Once the game was sprung, all 
Europe rushed to the playing field. Spain, barred from Africa by a 
papal bull which gave her most of the New World, made money 
by giving other powers a contract to supply her colonies with 
slaves. This contract, the infamous asiento, was the national 
status symbol of the day, indicating commercial and political 
supremacy. In the eighteenth century, when England held the 
asiento, the slave trade was the basis of European commerce, the 
cause of most of her wars and the prize politicians competed for.
An intricate set of trading arrangements existed on the Guinea 
Coast (the West Coast of Africa) for processing Africans bought 
and stolen. Europeans—French, Swedish, Danish, Portuguese, 
Dutch, English and Prussian traders—dotted the coast with a 
series of forts and factories. Each fort and factory had a dungeon 
or “Negroe House,” where the slaves were confined until ship­
ment. Into these factories Europeans poured a steady stream of 
goods—colorful cloth, trinkets, rum and “other strong water,” 
blankets, old sheets—which were converted into human beings. 
Europeans, operating as representatives of powerful companies 
or as private entrepreneurs, bartered these goods for men and 
women. A woman might change hands for a gallon of brandy and 
six beads. A man might bring eight guns, a wicker bottle, two 
cases of whiskey and twenty-eight old sheets.
Slaves were purchased from brokers at the forts and factories 
or in open markets. An appalling report on conditions in these 
open markets has come down to us. “As the slaves come down to 
Fida from the inland country,” trader John Barbot said, “they are 
put into a booth, or prison, built for that purpose, near the beach, 
all of them together; and when the Europeans are to receive 
them, they are brought out into a large plain, where the surgeons 
examine every part of every one of them, to the smallest member,


--- PAGE 63 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 49
men and women being all stark naked. Such as are allowed good 
and sound are set on one side, and the others by themselves; 
which slaves so rejected are there called Mackrons, being above 
thirty-five years of age, or defective in their limbs, eyes or teeth; 
or grown grey, or that have the venereal disease, or any other 
imperfection. These being so set aside, each of the others, which 
have passed as good, is marked on the breast, with a red-hot iron, 
imprinting the mark of the French, English or Dutch compa­
nies. . . .  In this particular, care is taken that the women, as 
tenderest, be not burnt too hard.”
The newly purchased slaves, properly branded and chained, 
were then rowed out to the slave ships for the dreaded Middle 
Passage across the Atlantic. They were packed like books on 
shelves into holds, which in some instances were no higher than 
eighteen inches. “They had not so much room,” one captain said, 
“as a man in his coffin, either in length of breadth. It was impos­
sible for them to turn or shift with any degree of ease.” Here, for 
the six to ten weeks of the voyage, the slaves lived like animals. 
Under the best conditions, the trip was intolerable. When 
epidemics of dysentery or smallpox swept the ships, the trip was 
beyond endurance.
“On many of these ships,” a contemporary said, “the sense of 
misery and suffocation was so terrible in the ’tween-decks— 
where the height sometimes was only eighteen inches, so that the 
unfortunate slaves could not turn round, were wedged immov­
ably, in fact, and chained to the deck by the neck and legs—that 
the slaves not infrequently would go mad before dying or suffocat­
ing. In their frenzy some killed others in the hope of procuring 
more room to breathe. Men strangled those next to them, and 
women drove nails into each other’s brains.” It was common, 
John Newton said, to find a dead slave and a living slave chained 
together. So many dead people were thrown overboard on slavers 
that it was said that sharks picked up ships off the coast of Africa 
and followed them to America.
Not all blacks came this way. There was a trickle of free im­
migrants from the West Indies, and some blacks got on boats in 
Africa and paid their way to America. In 1772, for instance, the 
governor of Georgia issued a certificate to Fenda Lawrence, “a 
free black woman and heretofore a considerable trader in the 
river Gambia on the coast of Africa [who] hath voluntarily come to


--- PAGE 64 ---
50
\
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
be and remain for some time in this province.” The certificate 
gave Miss Lawrence permission to “pass and repass unmolested 
within the said province on her lawful and necessary occasions.” 
Fenda Lawrence, of course, was an exception. Most blacks came 
in chains, followed by wise and greedy sharks.
The survivors of this gruelling ordeal were sold either on the 
ships or in slave markets in American ports. In New England, 
where there was a large “retail” demand, slaves were sold in 
taverns, stores and warehouses. They were also “shown,” as the 
ads put in, in the homes of merchants. It was common for 
merchants to sell blacks and whites, liquor and clothing. A 
typical advertisement of the times indicates the general tenden­
cy: “Several Irish Maid Servants time/most of them for Five Years 
one/Irish Man Servant—one who is a good/Barber and Wiggmak- 
er/also Four or Five Likely Negro Boys.”
The price of men, like the price of butter, fluctuated. In 1754 
George Washington bought a male slave for $260. But when he 
went to the market ten years later, he had to pay $285. Slaves 
were sold for small downpayments and “on reasonable terms.” 
An advertisement of 1726 noted that “the Buyer shall have 3, 6, 9 
or 12 months Credit.” There was also a mail-order business. One 
New Englander made the following entry in his diary: “I wrote 
Mr. Salmon of Barbadoes to send me a negro.”
The human factories in Africa struggled to keep up with the 
demand. In the eighteenth century between fifty thousand and 
one hundred thousand slaves crossed the Atlantic each year. The 
greatest number, by far, went to the West Indies and Brazil. At 
least two million were shipped to the West Indies. Joao Pandia 
Calogeras, the Brazilian historian, said at least eighteen million 
were shipped to Brazil. Arthur Ramos, another Brazilian, thinks 
this figure is too high. Five million, he says, is a more accurate 
figure.
Large blocks of slaves were dropped off in Spanish colonies in 
the Caribbean and in Central and South America. As early as 
1553 there were twenty thousand blacks in Mexico. Some two 
hundred thousand slaves were imported before slavery was 
abolished in Mexico in the first quarter of the nineteenth century.
Hundreds of thousands of slaves were scattered over the areas 
of present-day Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, Chile, Peru, and 
Venezuela. In 1810 Venezuela had some 500,000 blacks in a total


--- PAGE 65 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 51
population of 900,000. In 1847 there were 496,000 blacks and only 
418,000 whites in Cuba. In the same year there were 4,400,000 
blacks in Brazil’s population of 7,360,000. More than 1,000,000 of 
the Brazilian blacks were free.
Because of widespread amalgamation and unreliable census 
data, it is difficult to assess the impact of these millions on South 
American life. But in some South American countries people with 
“Negro blood” still comprise a considerable proportion of the 
population. What Gilberto Freyre, the Brazilian sociologist and 
philosopher, said of Brazil is true for large areas of the New 
World: “Every Brazilian, even if he is light skinned and has fair 
hair, bears in his soul . . . the shadow or the mark of the native or 
the Negro. . . . The influence of the African is direct or vague 
and remote. In our way of expressing tenderness, in our excessive 
mimicry, in our Catholicism which is a delight of the senses, in 
our way of walking and talking, in the songs which cradled our 
childhood, in short in all the sincere expressions of our life, the 
Negro influence is patent.”
For the human beings involved, the slave trade was a stupendous 
roulette wheel. The boats fanned out from Africa and scattered 
human freight over the Western Hemisphere. Around and around 
the wheel went, stopping here and there, sealing, wherever it 
stopped, the fate of mothers and fathers and their children to the 
nth generation.
It made a great deal of difference to the slaves where the dice 
of fate fell—whether they landed, for example, in a country 
where the word was the Spanish yo or the French je or the English
I. Slavery, to be sure, was a form of hell wherever it existed. But 
there were gradations of hell, Dantesque circles, as it were, 
within circles. By all accounts, the British-Protestant colonies 
were the deepest pit. The French and Spanish could be cruel, and 
often were. But they did not seem to be driven by the same 
demons that pursued the Puritans. For this reason, among others, 
African religious practices and other elements of African culture 
were not as vigorously opposed in Roman Catholic colonies as 
they were in the Protestant colonies. The Protestant colonies, 
with an instinct for the jugular vein, rode herd on tom-toms and 
joyful noises unto the Lord. The difference this made in social 
cohesion is roughly the difference between the successful Haitian


--- PAGE 66 ---
52 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
Revolution and the abortive Nat Turner insurrection. The final 
meeting of the Haitian Revolution was held at a voodoo ceremony 
and the signal went out by tom-toms. Another difference, minor 
perhaps, but important to the people involved, was the texture of 
the different societies. The Catholic colonies were gay and color­
ful; the Protestant colonies, by comparison, were a dull shade of 
gray.
One of the dominant characteristics of the Roman Catholic 
colonies was the relative absence of color prejudice. One result 
was that the life of a slave in these colonies was less hopeless and 
unhappy than the life of a slave in, say, South Carolina. There 
were other differences— differences of style and structure— to 
add to this underlying difference of racial orientation. In Brazil, 
for example, there was a state officer, a protector of slaves, who 
looked after the welfare of the disadvantaged.
Manumission was easier in Brazil and Spanish America, and a 
manumitted slave inherited the rights and privileges of citizens. 
There were several ways in which a slave could win freedom in 
these colonies. If he earned his purchase price, he could walk up 
to his master and hand him the money—and the master had to 
accept it. Another means of salvation was childbearing. If slave 
parents had ten children in Hispanic America, the whole family 
was freed.
The difference between Hispanic America and Protestant 
America reduces itself, as so many racial problems do, to the 
problem of sex. The Spanish and Portuguese were willing to 
marry blacks. In America, white men drew the line—at marriage, 
that is.
Surface differences apart, slavery was a dirty business in both 
Hispanic and Protestant America. In both areas slaves were 
given a new conception of themselves—according to the different 
lights of their captors. This process, whether it took place in 
liberal Brazil or harsh South Carolina, was a painful, mind- 
reversing operation in which two or three out of every ten died. In 
one form or another, every slave from Africa went through this 
“breaking-in” period. During this period, which varied from one 
to three years, the slave was taught pidgin English or French or 
Spanish. He got a new name and began to look at himself and 
others in a different manner. Yahweh took the place of Olorum; 
Legba became St. Peter; the Mass or hymnal replaced African


--- PAGE 67 ---
BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER 53
rituals* The strain was too much for tens of thousands, who died 
of old and new diseases and the shock of psychic mutilation. But 
millions of others, testifying to physical and spiritual strength that 
transcended the heroic, survived. And, surviving, they insured 
the survival—and prosperity—of America, which fashioned out 
of their misery the takeoff capital that made American capitalism 
possible. Many of the first great American fortunes, in fact, were 
founded on the slave trade and its allied industries. By the 
American Revolution, as Dr. Lorenzo J. Greene has shown, the 
slave trade “formed the very basis of the economic life of New 
England; about it revolved, and on it depended, most of her other 
industries. ”
The same situation obtained in England, France, Holland, 
Spain and Portugal. In these countries, as in New England, the 
slave trade provided direct returns to financiers and investors 
and stimulated the growth of ancillary industries, such as ship­
building and distilleries.
“This contribution of the Negro,” Eric Williams wrote, “has 
failed to receive adequate recognition. . . . England and France, 
Holland, Spain and Denmark, not to mention the United States, 
Brazil and other parts of South America are all indebted to Negro 
labor.”
Africans helped build Liverpool, Nantes and Newport. They 
helped finance the Industrial Revolution. They helped clear the 
forest in America. They made these enormous contributions, but 
the price—to them and to American and European whites—was 
frightfully high, and it was not paid without protest. Protests 
began in Africa, where mutinies on ships were common, and 
continued in America, where revolts were common. “The 
Negroes,” Captain Thomas Phillips said, “are so willful and loth 
to leave their own country, that they have often leap’d out of the 
canoes, boat and ship, into the sea, and kept under water till they 
were drowned, to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats,
*Melville J. Herskovits and other students have analyzed the process by  
which African slaves blended African and Western religious figures. In some  
cases Western saints and rituals were identified with African gods and rituals.  
Legba, the African trickster-god, was sometimes identified with St. Peter.  
Damballah, the snake god, was sometimes identified with St. Patrick. In some  
cases an African deity was given the name of a Roman Catholic saint as well as  
an African name.


--- PAGE 68 ---
54 BEFORE THE MAYFLOWER
which pursued them; they having a more dreadful apprehension 
of Barbadoes than we can have of hell, tho’ in reality they live 
much better there than in their own country; but home is home, 
etc.”
Home being home, etc., many slaves revolted, brained the cap­
tain and crew and escaped to the shore. Rebellions on ships were 
so common that a new form of insurance, insurrection insurance, 
was introduced.
Many slaves refused to eat when well and refused to take 
medicine when ill. One man, for instance, attempted to cut his 
throat. After the wound was sewed up, he ripped out the sutures 
with his fingernails. He was patched up again but refused to eat 
and died ten days later of starvation.
This resistance—desperate, doomed, definitive—continued 
throughout the slaving period. A long series of conspiracies and 
revolts culminated in the great Haitian Revolution, which played 
an important part in the abolition of the trade. Pushed by fear of 
the unmanageable slaves and pulled by humanitarian motives 
stemming from the American and French revolutions, politicians 
abolished the trade in the first decades of the nineteenth century. 
It continued surreptitiously, however, until the abolition of slav­
ery in the United States.
The slave trade left a bloodstained legacy. During the four 
centuries the trade was pursued, it wrecked the social and eco­
nomic life of Africa, set nation against nation and village against 
village. The trade was no less disastrous in Europe and America 
where it left a legacy of ill will and guilt and a potentially explo­
sive racial problem.
“Raphael painted,” W. E. B. Du Bois said, “Luther preached, 
Corneille wrote, and Milton sang; and through it all, for four 
hundred years, the dark captives wound to the sea amid the 
bleaching bones of the dead; for four hundred years the sharks 
followed the scurrying ships; for four hundred years America was 
strewn with the living and dying millions of a transplanted race; 
for four hundred years Ethiopia stretched forth her hands unto 
God.”


--- PAGE 69 ---
3
The Founding of  
Black America
The petition of A Great Number of B laches detained  
in a State of slavery in the Bowels of a free &  
Christian Country Humbly sheweth that your  
Petitioners apprehend that they have in Common  
with all other men a Natural and Unaliable Right  
to that freedom which the Great Parent of the  
[Universe] hath Bestowed equalley on all menkind  
and which they have Never forfeited by any Com­
pact or agreement whatever. ... They cannot but  
express their Astonishment that It has [Never Been  
Considered] that Every Principle from  which  
Amarica has Acted in the Cours of their unhappy  
Dificulties with Great Briton Pleads Stronger than A  
thousand arguments in favours of your petitioners.
MASSACHUSETTS SLAVE PETITION, 1777
T
HE DAY was Thursday, April 12, 1787.
On that day — one month before the first 
session of the U.S. Constitutional Convention 
and two years before the election of George Washington— eight 
men sat down in a room in Philadelphia and created a black social 
compact. The compact, called the Free African Society, was a


--- PAGE 70 ---
56 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
prophetic step that marked a turning in the road that is critical to 
the history of Black America.
“How great a step this was,” W. E. B. Du Bois wrote later, “we 
of to-day scarcely realize; we must remind ourselves that it was 
the first wavering step of a people toward organized social life.”
The founding of this seminal organization was only one wave in 
a tide of institution-building that rolled over the North in the 
1780s and 1790s. At the crest of that tide similar societies were 
formed in Boston, New York and Newport, Rhode Island. The 
flowing waves of these efforts were followed by an independent 
church movement, an independent lodge movement and the 
founding of black schools and cultural organizations.
The organizing energies of this effort flowed in concurrent 
waves, propelled by two powerful currents — one negative, the 
other positive. The positive current was a new sense of identity 
and peoplehood that rejected black subordination and exclusion. 
The negative current, flowing with and out of the white founding, 
was a campaign to exclude black Americans from the national 
social contract.
Outraged by this campaign and spurred on by a new image of 
black being, the founding fathers of Black America organized a 
movement of self-creation and self-definition that continued for 
more than forty years. There were no precedents and no models 
for what they were trying to do, and the pressure from all sides 
was almost overwhelming. Despite or perhaps because of these 
pressures, the movement continued; and by the turn of the cen­
tury a new black polity was rooting in and expanding in the midst 
of the emerging white polity.
The founding of the black polity, which was a new thing, never 
before seen in the world, grew out of and reflected the ambigui­
ties of the white founding. More than that, it was a direct result of 
the failures of the white founding fathers. To grasp its true 
significance, we must draw back for a moment and view it against 
the background of the American Revolution, which simul­
taneously and paradoxically produced a new nation and black 
and white fragments wedded to each other and to conflict by the 
terms of their common birth—terms that involved a contradiction 
between affirmation (equality) and reality (inequality). It was in 
the struggle surrounding the Revolution that the founders of 
Black America defined themselves and re-positioned themselves.


--- PAGE 71 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 57
It was the failure of that Revolution— it was the realization that 
the makers of the Revolution didn’t believe what they said—that 
forced Black America to create itself. In assessing that 
momentous event, it is important to keep in mind that the black 
creation accompanied the white creation but was not contained 
by it or defined by it. Like the countermelody in a great sym­
phony, the black founding effort moved in the same time frame as 
the white melody, which it oftentimes contradicted and always 
challenged. This effort unfolded in roughly four stages.
The first stage began with the first act of the Revolution. When 
the white colonists, with incredible audacity, on July 4, 1776, 
issued a Declaration of Independence, blandly observing that all 
men were entitled to liberty, the slaves poured out their feelings 
in vehement protestation. Seemingly oblivious to the fact that the 
Declaration condemned them first of all and most of all, the 
colonists—slaveowner Thomas Jefferson foremost among them 
—scattered four revolutionary seeds to the four corners of the 
earth, saying:
1. That all men are created equal and are endowed by their 
Creator with natural and inalienable rights no man or government 
can bestow or take away.
2. That to secure these rights men create civil communities 
and civil authorities, who derive their just power from the consent 
of the governed.
3. That members of the community are colleagues and not 
subjects and that legitimate government consists in the dominion 
of equal laws applied equally—in the dominion, in short, of 
people over themselves and not in the dominion of communities 
over communities or groups over groups.
4. That when governments are destructive of these ends as 
evidenced by bad faith (“a long train of abuses and usurpations 
pursuing invariably the same object”) it is the duty of citizens to 
alter or abolish these governments.
The crystallization of these ideas in the Declaration of Inde­
pendence enclosed the white colonists in a net of their own mak­
ing and made black freedom an inevitable corollary of white free­
dom. This became clear almost immediately to colonists like 
Thomas Paine and James Otis, who denounced both English 
tyranny and slaveowner tyranny. Paine said slavery was no less 
immoral than “murder, robbery, lewdness and barbarity” and


--- PAGE 72 ---
58 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
urged Americans to “discontinue and renounce it, with grief and 
abhorrence.” Rhetoric apart, this was substantially the same po­
sition of Abigail Adams, who told her husband, John, that “it 
always appeared a most iniquitous scheme to me to fight our­
selves for what we are daily robbing and plundering from those 
who have as good a right to freedom as we have.”
So it appeared also to blacks, who sprang into action, organiz­
ing the first phase of the black struggle for freedom. This phase 
began in the pre-Revolutionary War period and was pressed by 
slaves who brilliantly exploited the contradictions between co­
lonial practice and colonial pretensions, calling for a declaration 
of independence in America. In the course of this struggle, which 
raged in Northern cities and on Southern plantations, the black 
soul expanded and made its first major probes into white terri­
tory. During this period of struggle and hope, blacks developed a 
concept of themselves as deprived citizens and dishonored native 
sons. Proceeding from this new self-concept, they invented tech­
niques for demanding their rights within the bounds of the state, 
using the state, in fact, as a point of leverage. Their first tech­
nique, one that would reach full flower 188 years later, was legal 
contention. As early as 1766, Boston blacks filed a test case 
against slavery. The legal movement spread later to Connecticut 
and other colonies. Under the leadership of men whose names 
were not recorded, blacks collected money, hired lawyers and 
filed suits, asking for freedom and damages for unlawful deten­
tion in America.
Black patriots also experimented with mass pressure, holding 
meetings, circulating petitions and bombarding legislatures with 
pleas. Ingenious blacks found other ways to turn the revolution­
ary turmoil to their advantage. Certain blacks appropriated 
American slogans and assumed leadership roles in the agitation 
that forced an open break with England. Black patriots, for in­
stance, were prominent in the tumultuous Stamp Act riots. One 
encounter—in 1765—was noted by author John Miller who said 
“the tension continued to increase, until, on the night of August 
28, boys and Negroes began to build bonfires in King Street and 
blow the dreaded whistle and horn that sent the Boston mob 
swarming out of taverns, houses and garrets. A large crowd im­
mediately gathered around the bonfires, bawling for ‘Liberty and 
Property.’ ”


--- PAGE 73 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 59
When, in 1768, British troops were dispatched to Boston to awe 
the population, they were repulsed by black and white patriots. 
Shortly after their arrival in September, 1768, the red-coated 
British troops fought a pitched battle with a largely black group 
on the Commons. The Boston Journal of the Times  reported the 
incident, saying that the soldiers were “severely whipped,” and 
adding: “To behold Britons scourged by Negro drummers was a 
new and very disagreeable spectacle.”
The struggle between the British troops and black and white 
patriots continued almost uninterruptedly for the next year and 
reached a peak in Boston in the winter of 1770. During this strug­
gle there were provocations on both sides and innumerable tavern 
fights and street brawls. One such incident involved three sol­
diers who got into a scrape with the ropemakers on Friday, March
2, 1770. The soldiers were driven off and returned with rein­
forcements, including a tall black man who apparently sided with 
the Redcoats. This infuriated a white Bostonian, who shouted: 
“You black rascal, what have you to do with white people’s quar­
rels?” The black man replied, “I suppose I may look on.” He 
looked on—and threw a few punches. Despite his help, the sol­
diers were forced to give ground. Battered and bruised, they 
stalked away, shouting curses and threats.
In the hours that followed, rumors and predictions of disaster 
swept the town. By Sunday night, March 4, Boston was boiling.
Monday morning dawned cold and grey. There was a film of ice 
on the ground. Toward evening the sky cleared and a young moon 
bobbled up over Beacon Hill. Lights and eerie shadows played 
over the streets, which were filled now with boys and men spoil­
ing for a fight.
A little after eight, soldiers, armed with cudgels and tongs, 
emerged from Murray’s Barracks near the center of town. To the 
surprise of almost no one, a crowd—composed largely, a hos­
tile witness said, “of saucy boys, Negroes and mulattoes, Irish 
Teagues and outlandish Jack Tars”—gathered and traded insults 
with the soldiers. In the center of this crowd stood an imposing 
man who was no stranger to “white people’s quarrels.” His name 
was Crispus Attucks, and he was a Massachusetts native who had 
escaped from slavery and sailed the seas. Tall, brawny, with a 
look that “was enough to terrify any person,” Attucks was well


--- PAGE 74 ---
60 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
known around the docks in lower Boston. Needless to say, he was 
not a proper Bostonian, a fact that has pained innumerable histor­
ians. He was instead a proper rebel, a drifter, a man who loved 
freedom and knew what it was worth. He was about forty-seven 
on this memorable night, and he had that undefinable quality 
called presence. When he spoke, men listened. Where he com­
manded, men acted.
By a paradoxical act of poetic justice, it was this American—an 
oppressed American, born in slavery with, it is said, African and 
Indian genes—who carried the American standard in the pro­
logue that laid the foundation of American freedom. It was At­
tucks, according to eyewitnesses, who shaped and dominated the 
action on the night of the event known to history as the Boston 
Massacre. When the Bostonians faltered, it was Attucks, accord­
ing to almost all contemporary reports, who rallied them and 
urged them to stand their ground. The people, responding to his 
leadership, stood firm; so did the soldiers. The two sides ex­
changed insults, and a fight flared. Attucks, who seems to have 
been everywhere on this night, led a group of citizens who drove 
the soldiers back to the gate of the barracks. The soldiers rallied 
and drove the Boston crowd back. In the middle of this row, 
someone ran to the Old Brick Meeting House and rang the fire 
bell, filling the streets with frightened and excited people.
At this precise moment an incident occurred that probably 
changed the course of events. A barber’s apprentice ran through 
the crowd holding his head and screaming, “Murder! Murder!” 
He told the people that the sentry in front of the customhouse had 
struck him across the head with a musket. The report angered the 
crowd, which moved now, in three groups, to the customhouse. 
The largest group, holding clubs over their heads, huzzaing and 
whistling, followed the lead of Crispus Attucks. John Adams, 
who later served as defense counsel for the British soldiers, told 
the court that a witness “saw the mulatto [Attucks] seven or eight 
minutes before the firing, at the head of twenty or thirty sailors in 
Cornhill, and he had a large cord-wood stick.” Adams added:
“So that this Attucks, by this testimony of Bailey compared 
with that of Andrew and some others, appears to have undertaken 
to be the hero of the night; and to lead the army with banners, to 
form them in the first place in Dock Square, and march them up 
King Street with their clubs.”


--- PAGE 75 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 61
Regardless of what conservatives said about Attucks, it is a 
fact that the crowd followed him up King Street and gathered 
before the sentry in the square facing the customhouse. The 
barber’s apprentice came up and said, “This is the soldier who 
knocked me down.”
Someone said, “Kill him! Knock his head off!”
Another voice said, “Burn the sentry box. Tear it up.” 
Backing off, the frightened sentry climbed the steps of the 
customhouse and called for help. Down King (now State) Street 
came seven soldiers, clearing the way before them with bayonet 
thrusts. The soldiers made a half-circle around the sentry box and 
were joined by Captain Thomas Preston.
“Don’t be afraid,” Attucks and his group cried. “They dare not 
fire.”
The people took up the cry.
“Fire! Fire and be damned!”
Attucks and the men following him gave three cheers and 
moved to the front of the crowd. A stick sailed over their heads 
and struck Pvt. Hugh Montgomery who fell back, lifted his mus­
ket and fired. The bullet hit Attucks, who pitched forward in the 
gutter. Samuel Gray made a step toward Attucks and another 
soldier fired, mortally wounding Gray. When the smoke cleared, 
several persons lay bleeding in the snow.
The die was cast.
“From that moment,” Daniel Webster said later, “we may date 
the severance of the British Empire.”
“On that night,” John Adams said, “the foundation of Ameri­
can independence was laid.”
One hundred and eighteen years later, in 1888, a handsome 
monument was erected to the five victims. Poet John Boyle 
O’Reilly contributed a spirited poem to the occasion:
And honor to Crispus Attucks, who was leader and voice  
that day:
The first to defy, and the first to die, with Maverick, Carr  
and Gray.
Call it riot or revolution, or mob or crowd as you may,
Such deaths have been seeds of nations, such lives shall be  
honored for ay.
Author Samuel A. Green saw the hand of fate in this. “Attucks


--- PAGE 76 ---
Black patriots were conspicuous in the fighting at the 
Battle of Bunker Hill. Two blacks, Peter Salem and 
Salem Poor, were outstanding soldiers in the battle.
Poor was later commended for his valor.
The Boston Massacre was one of the events 
which led to Revolutionary War. Several 
blacks were in the group which fought British 
soldiers on the night of March 5, 1770. 
Crispus Attucks (below, right) was the first 
martyr of the Revolution.


--- PAGE 77 ---



--- PAGE 78 ---
64 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
little thought,” he wrote, “that in future generations a monument 
of granite and bronze on a public site would be erected in honor of 
himself and his comrades for the part they took in the State Street 
fight; and that his own name, cut in stone, would lead the list of 
those who fell on that eventful evening.” Green added:
“ ‘Thus the whirligig of Time brings in his revenges,’ and veri­
fies the Gospel saying: ‘But many that are first shall be last; and 
the last shall be first.’ ”
Having played a major role in precipitating the conflict, black 
patriots pushed to the front lines of the armed struggle, creating 
the second great wedge of the black offensive. In the forefront of 
this offensive were men with different perceptions and motiva­
tions. Some volunteered for service because they believed the 
Declaration meanf what it said. Others, more cynical perhaps, 
certainly more realistic, entered American lines with the limited 
hope that the conflict would change their status and the status of 
their brothers and sisters. Individual motives apart, the im­
mediate result of the second phase of the struggle was an in­
tensification of the contradictions in the American effort and an 
enormous extension of the white debt to Black America.
This phase began with the shot heard around the world. When 
Paul Revere galloped through the Massachusetts countryside, he 
alerted black and white patriots. Black Minutemen, most notably 
Lemuel Haynes, Peter Salem and Pomp Blackman, were at 
Lexington and the bridge at Concord. Lemuel Haynes was also at 
Ticonderoga when Ethan Allen invoked Jehovah and the Conti­
nental Congress. So were Primas Black and Epheram Blackman, 
two members of the famous Green Mountain Boys.
When British troops stormed up Breed’s Hill in the battle mis­
takenly called Bunker Hill, they were repulsed by black and 
white patriots. One of the heroes of that hot June afternoon was 
Peter Salem, who shot Major Pitcairn when he popped up and 
announced, a trifle prematurely, “The days is ours.” Among the 
black soldiers who fought at the Battle of Bunker Hill were Pomp 
Fisk, Cuff Hayes, Caesar Dickerson, Caesar Weatherbee and 
Salem Poor. The two Salems—Peter Salem and Salem Poor— 
were among the great heroes of the war. Poor was later com­
mended by fourteen officers who said he “behaved like an ex­
perienced officer, as well as an excellent soldier. To set forth


--- PAGE 79 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 65
particulars of his conduct would be tedious. . . .  In the person of 
this said Negro centres a brave and gallant soldier.”
The Battle of Bunker Hill was fought in June. In July George 
Washington took command of the American troops, and an order 
went out from his headquarters forbidding the enlistment of black 
patriots. Back of this order were two moving causes, one growing 
out of the air men breathed, the other flowing with the paradox 
that defined the white American position. The first, of course, 
was the racism that made high-ranking American officers doubt 
the fighting ability of slaves. The second, which contradicted 
the first, was a deep-seated fear of black involvement. One di­
mension of this all-pervading fear was the idea that it was danger­
ous to use black troops. If America used blacks, some officers 
reasoned, so would England.
The argument over this issue continued throughout the fall of 
1775. The question was debated in Congress and in coffeehouses 
and manors. In October General Washington convened a high- 
level conference on the subject. It was decided finally to bar all 
blacks, slave and free. Washington issued an order to that effect 
on November 12, 1775.
By that time one important fact had changed the situation. 
Seven days before the Washington order, Lord Dunmore, the 
deposed royal governor of Virginia, had issued a proclamation 
offering freedom to all slaves who were willing and able to bear 
arms for England. The slave response was swift and instructive. 
To the consternation of American patriots, thousands of slaves, 
including some bondsmen of General Washington, left the planta­
tions to fight for their freedom. What this meant militarily was 
spelled out at an encounter at Kemp’s Landing in Virginia, where 
a band of former slaves proved their mettle by defeating a group 
of white Virginians. When the whites broke ranks and retreated 
into the swamps, the former slaves gave chase. There then oc­
curred one of those little vignettes that illuminate a whole era. 
One Colonel Hutchings, a proper Virginian, was cornered by a 
black man he recognized as one of his escaped slaves. The indig­
nant colonel fired at the former slave, but the bullet missed. The 
black rebel closed in and whacked his former master across the 
face with a saber. Then, in the greatest humiliation of all, Colonel 
Hutchings was led into the British lines by his own former slave.
Alarmed by the impact of the Dunmore proclamation, Virgin­


--- PAGE 80 ---
66 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
ians attempted to pacify their slaves. One newspaper ran a long 
editorial under the heading: “CAUTION TO NEGROES.” Another 
newspaper, the Virginia Gazette , said: “Be not then, ye Negroes, 
tempted by this proclamation to ruin yourselves. . . . Whether 
we suffer or not, if you desert us, you most certainly will.”
It quickly became apparent that this rhetoric was worse than 
useless, and General Washington reversed himself and permitted 
the enlistment of free blacks who had fought in the early battles. 
Congress approved this order but again refused to countenance 
the enlistment of slaves. Circumstances, however, made this a 
moot point. For one thing, it was very difficult to coax white men 
into the Continental Line. Although there were some one million 
men of fighting age in the colonies, the Continental Line never 
exceeded fifty thousand soldiers. Bounties of land and money 
were offered to volunteers. Some states even offered bounties of 
slaves. Nothing, however, flushed the colonial backsliders. 
“Such a dearth of public spirit,” Washington said, “and want of 
virtue, such stock-jobbing and fertility in all the low arts to obtain 
advantage of one kind or another . . .  I never saw before, and I 
pray God I may never be a witness to again. Such a dirty merce­
nary Spirit pervades the whole that I should not be at all surprised 
at any disaster that may happen.” Washington went into the 
ordeal of Valley Forge in December, 1777, with some nine 
thousand men. By March of 1778 more than three thousand 
American soldiers had deserted.
After Valley Forge every able-bodied man, black or white, 
slave or free, was welcome in the Continental Army. Washington 
sent an officer from Valley Forge in 1778 to ask the Rhode Island 
Assembly to authorize the enlistment of slaves. In February the 
Assembly took this precedent-shattering step. Two months later 
Massachusetts followed suit. By the end of the war some five 
thousand blacks, slaves and free men, had shouldered arms in 
defense of American liberty. There were black soldiers from all of 
the original thirteen states, including South Carolina and Geor­
gia. Most of these soldiers served in integrated units, although 
there were some all-black units. A black soldier named Colonel 
Middleton commanded a company of black volunteers from 
Massachusetts.
Several witnesses remarked on the integrated character of the


--- PAGE 81 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 67
American army. In the first months of the war, British writers 
taunted Americans with this jingle:
The rebel clowns , oh! what a sight  
Too awkward was their figure  
‘Twas yonder stood a pious wight  
And here and there a nigger.
A Southern soldier serving in the army around Boston wrote in 
a letter of September, 1775: “Such Sermons, such Negroes, such 
Colonels, such Boys and such Great Great Grandfathers.” Two 
years later a Hessian officer noted that “the Negro can take the 
field instead of the master; and therefore, no regiment is to be 
seen in which there are not Negroes in abundance, and among 
them there are able bodied, strong and brave fellows.” Black 
soldiers also served as drummers and fifers in several Revolu­
tionary War units, although this fact is ignored in the widely 
disseminated pictures of the Spirit of ’76.
Black soldiers fought in practically all of the big battles of the 
war. They were at Monmouth, Red Bank, Saratoga, Savannah, 
Princeton and Yorktown. Two blacks, Prince Whipple and Oliver 
Cromwell, made the famous Delaware Crossing. Another black 
participated in the capture of General Prescott in Rhode Island.
By almost all accounts, black soldiers were among the most 
valiant defenders of the Revolution. One of the most memorable 
tableaux of the war came from the bloody battlefield at Eutaw, 
South Carolina, where a black soldier and a British soldier were 
found dead, each impaled on the bayonet of the other. At the 
Battle of Rhode Island, a regiment of black soldiers repulsed the 
vaunted Hessians three times.
“Had they been unfaithful,” one soldier said, “or even given 
away before the enemy all would have been lost.”
The story was very much the same at Fort Griswold in Con­
necticut. When the British officer, Maj. William Montgomery, 
was lifted over the walls, Jordan Freeman ran him through with a 
pike. When Col. William Ledyard was killed with his own sword, 
Lambert Latham immediately avenged his death by slaying the 
British officer. The Redcoats pounced on Latham, who fell dead, 
pierced by thirty-three bayonet wounds.
Black patriots also distinguished themselves in the American 
navy. Caesar Terront piloted the Virginia vessel, the Patriot ,


--- PAGE 82 ---
68 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
and was cited for his gallantry in action. Captain Mark Starlin, 
the first black naval captain in Virginia’s history, made daring 
night raids on British vessels in Hampton Roads. After the war 
Starlin was reclaimed by his master and died in slavery.
American forces also used black spies and undercover agents. 
A slave named Pompey was largely responsible for Anthony 
Wayne’s capture of the Stony Point, New York, fort in 1779. 
Feigning ignorance, he obtained the British password and helped 
a detachment of Americans overpower the British lookout. 
Pompey was one individualist; a very different one was James 
Armistead, who helped trap Gen. Charles Cornwallis. Gen. 
Marcus de Lafayette told Armistead to infiltrate Cornwallis’s 
camp and learn his strength and battle plans. Armistead was so 
successful that Gen. Cornwallis asked him to spy on Lafayette. 
The black spy shuttled between the British and American camps, 
carrying false information to the Cornwallis camp and bona fide 
information to Lafayette.
Every schoolboy knows that Lafayette and Kosciusko answered 
America’s call for help. Not so well known is the fact that blacks 
from Haiti came to America to fight. The Haitians, called the 
Fontages Legion, were in the front ranks at the siege of Savannah 
and helped prevent a rout of the American forces.
While thousands of Haitian and American blacks were press­
ing the American cause, other blacks, no less courageous, were 
pursuing the same objective—black freedom—in the ranks of the 
British army. Lord Dunmore and other British commanders 
issued open-ended invitations, and thousands of American 
slaves, including certain slaves of the white founding fathers, 
abandoned the plantations and picked up guns and picks in 
defense of the British cause. Some of these soldiers participated 
in major battles, but most were confined to labor details and 
many, if we can credit contemporary reports, were abused and 
betrayed by their British colleagues. Even with these drawbacks, 
the British army offered many blacks, especially Southern 
slaves, opportunities denied them by American patriots. It is well 
worth noting that some twenty thousand blacks, four times as 
many as served in the American army, embarked with the British 
troops when they left American ports in 1782 and 1783. The 
descendants of some of these soldiers later played key roles in the 
founding of the African country of Sierra Leone.


--- PAGE 83 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 69
There was still another front in this war, and it was perhaps the 
largest front of all for black Americans. Fighting on this front, 
which constituted the fourth phase of the black war, tens of 
thousands of slaves maneuvered between the contending forces 
in generally successful attempts to achieve their own freedom. By 
the end of the war, more than one hundred thousand slaves, 
according to some authorities, had freed themselves by escaping 
to Canada, Spanish Florida and the Indian camps.
Not all fugitive slaves left the country. Sizeable numbers hid in 
the swamps and staged guerilla raids on slavemasters. In 1781 a 
Virginia slaveholder told a correspondent that “we have had most 
alarming times this summer, all along the shore, from a set of 
Barges manned mostly by our own Negroes who have run off— 
These fellows are really dangerous to an individual singled out for 
their vengeance whose Property lay exposed.—They burnt sever­
al houses.” As late as 1786 a group of former slaves who called 
themselves the King of England’s Soldiers were fighting guerilla 
actions against slaveowners along the Savannah River in Georgia 
and South Carolina.
To all this lastly must be added the thousands who were 
manumitted by slaveholders infected by the germinal ideas of the 
Declaration. In one characteristic transaction, Philip Graham of 
Maryland freed his slaves and said the holding of his “fellow men 
in bondage and slavery is repugnant to the golden law of God and 
the unalienable right of mankind as well as to every principle of 
the late glorious revolution which has taken place in America.” 
Similar words came from Richard Randolph, brother of John 
Randolph, who wrote the following letter to his guardian: “With 
regard to the division of the estate, I have only to say that I want 
not a single Negro for any other purpose than his immediate 
liberation. I consider every individual thus unshackled as the 
source of future generations, not to say nations, of freedmen; and 
I shudder when I think that so insignificant an animal as I am is 
invested with this monstrous, this horrid power.” Randolph, of 
course, was an exception, but his act and the words undergirding 
his act pointed to one of the powerful currents of the time.
Slavery in the North died as a direct result of these currents. 
The Northern emancipation process, prodded and shaped by 
black and white patriots, began in 1777, at the height of the 
revolutionary struggle, when Vermont, responding to the Rights


--- PAGE 84 ---
70 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
of Man ideology, became the first American state to abolish 
slavery. Moved by like sentiments, and pressure from black and 
white rebels, Northern states, one after another, followed Ver­
mont’s lead. In some of these states, notably New York and 
Pennsylvania, legislative emancipation was a gradual process 
that extended over several years. The preamble of the Pennsyl­
vania act of 1780 accurately reflected the spirit of the age, saying 
it was the duty of Pennsylvanians to give proof of their gratitude 
for deliverance from the oppression of Great Britain “by extend­
ing freedom to those of a different color by the work of the same 
Almighty hand.”
With the founding of the American commonwealth and the eman­
cipation of Northern slaves, Black America entered that phase of 
its history that I have called elsewhere the Black Pioneer period. 
There was no consensus at that point on the place of blacks in a 
commonwealth founded on the inalienable rights of all men. It 
was apparent to most people that the Declaration had created a 
new situation, but few believed that the new social compact in­
cluded blacks or Indians or even white women. For all that, there 
was a provocative fluidity to the first years of the American ven­
ture. There was, to be sure, an undercurrent of racism, but 
people seemed to be uncertain about its meaning and use in a new 
climate governed by the egalitarian ideals of the Declaration of 
Independence.
During this interesting interim period, blacks like Josiah 
Bishop of Virginia and Lemuel Haynes of New England pastored 
white churches, and the Baptist and Methodist denominations 
strongly condemned slavery. In the same period Phillis Wheatley 
became an internationally known poet, and Benjamin Banneker 
became a celebrated mathematician. Banneker and Wheatley, in 
different ways and in different places, dramatized the pos­
sibilities and limitations of the age. In an age in which few 
women—or men for that matter—read books, Phillis Wheatley 
wrote one. Her book, Poems on Various Subjects , Religious and  
Moral , was the first volume by a black woman and the second 
book by an American woman.*
*Jupiter Hammon, a New York slave, was probably the first black author. His  
poem, An Evening Thought: Salvation by Christ, with Penetential Cries,  was  
printed as a broadside in 1760.


--- PAGE 85 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 71
The pioneer American poet did not write as a black  American; 
she wrote as an eighteenth-century Bostonian, a proper  eight­
eenth-century Bostonian. When Washington was appointed 
commander in chief of the American army, she celebrated the 
event in herioc couplets. Washington was delighted and acknowl­
edged receipt of the poems in a February 28, 1776, letter ad­
dressed to “Miss Phillis”:
I thank you most sincerely for your polite notice of me, in  
the elegant lines you enclosed; and however undeserving I  
may be of such encomium and panegyric, the style and man­
ner exhibited a striking proof of your poetical talents; in  
honor of which, and as a tribute justly due to you, I would  
have published the poem, had I not been apprehensive that,  
while I only meant to give the world this new instance of your  
genius, I might have incurred the imputation of vanity.
According to Benson Lossing, the poet visited Washington at 
Cambridge and was entertained by the general and his staff.
Above everything else, the Boston poet sang songs of thanks­
giving. She was grateful for the gift of Christianity, grateful even 
that a slave ship brought her to it:
‘Twas mercy brought me from my  Pagan land ,
Taught my benighted soul to understand  
That there’ s a God , that there’ s a Saviour too:
Once I redemption neither sought nor knew.
A delicate wisp of a woman, black, slight of build, with great 
glimmering eyes, Phillis Wheatley was born in Africa in an un­
known place. She came to America in 1761, remembering nothing 
save that her mother poured out water each morning “before the 
sun at its rising.” She was seven or eight when the slave ship 
deposited her in Boston. John Wheatley, a rich merchant and 
tailor, saw her shivering on a Boston slave block, stark naked 
except for a dirty piece of carpet around her loins. Wheatley 
bought the young girl and took her home to his wife, Susannah. 
Within sixteen months the slave girl was reading and writing 
fluent English. She read every book she could lay hands on: the 
Bible, Milton and Alexander Pope’s translation of Homer. Pope, 
the neoclassic Englishman, was her special favorite. Timidly at 
first and then with increasing confidence, she put down words in


--- PAGE 86 ---
With Washington when he crossed the Delaware were at  
least two blacks, Prince Whipple and Oliver Cromwell.  
Whipple was a bodyguard to Washington’s aide, General  
William Whipple of New Hampshire.
Richard Allen, Phillis Wheatley, and Prince Hall  
were outstanding blacks in the Black Pioneer  
period. Allen organized the AME Church. 
Wheatley became an internationally known poet.
Hall (right) organized the first black  
Masonic lodge.


--- PAGE 87 ---



--- PAGE 88 ---
74 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
the Pope manner. Within six years after her arrival in America, 
she was writing poetry. Her first poem, written at the age of 
fourteen, was a blank verse eulogy of Harvard University. In 1773 
she visited England and was hailed as a prodigy. An English 
publisher brought out her slim volume.
Her poems do not excite modern critics. The verdict is practi­
cally unanimous: too much Pope and not enough Wheatley. But 
her ease with words, her genius for sound and color and rhythm: 
these still excite awe and wonder.
Phillis Wheatley lived in the State Street house with the white 
Wheatleys and moved in a white world, apparently as an equal. 
When her patron, Susannah Wheatley, died, the poet came face 
to face with racial reality. She married John Peters, a handsome 
grocer who “wore a wig, carried a cane, and quite acted out 
‘the gentleman.’  ” The marriage didn’t work. Proud and, some 
say, irresponsible, Peters alienated his wife’s white friends. The 
couple drifted from place to place, carrying with them the first 
child and then the second child. Poverty and disease dogged 
them; the first child died and then the second. After the birth of a 
third child, the poet was reduced to earning her bread in a mean 
boarding house. She had never been physically strong and the 
exertion and the cold and the wretchedness were too much for 
her. On a cold day in December, 1784, mother and child died 
within a few hours of each other.
Phillis Wheatley said nothing of her personal griefs in her poems 
that survive; nor did she say much about the trials and tribulations of 
blacks. But on at least one occasion she abandoned Pope and 
Homer and said words from a woman’s heart.
The poem was to the Earl of Dartmouth:
Should you, my lord, while you peruse my song,  
Wonder from whence my love of  Freedom sprung,  
Whence flow these wishes for the common good,
By feeling hearts alone best understood,
I, young in life, by seeming cruel fate
Was snatch’d from  Afric’s fancy’d happy seat:
What pangs excruciating must molest,
What sorrows labour in my parent’ s breast?
Steel’d was that soul and by no misery mov’d  
That from a father seiz’d his babe belov’d:
Such, such my case. And can I then but pray  
Others may never feel tyrannic sway?


--- PAGE 89 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 75
Benjamin Banneker, like Phillis Wheatley, was a child of an 
age of birth pains. He was born in Maryland, the grandson of an 
Englishwoman and an African native. His grandmother, Molly 
Welsh, came to America as an indentured servant, worked her 
time out and bought a farm and two slaves. She later freed the 
slaves and married one of them. Banneker’s mother, Mary, was 
one of four children born to this union and she, too, married an 
African native.
Banneker attended a local school with black and white chil­
dren. Like Phillis Wheatley, he hungered and thirsted after 
books. His forte, however, was mathematics and astronomy. He 
became so proficient in these subjects that he was named to the 
commission which made the original survey of Washington, D.C. 
The Georgetown Weekly Ledger  of March 12, 1791, noted the 
arrival of the commission. Banneker, the paper said, was “an 
Ethiopian whose abilities as surveyor and astronomer already 
prove that Mr. [Thomas] Jefferson’s concluding that that race of 
men were void of mental endowment was without foundation.” 
Beginning in 1792, Banneker issued an annual almanac which has 
been compared with Benjamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Al­
manac.  He also continued the study of astronomy, mathematics 
and other scientific subjects.
Banneker lived on a farm about ten miles outside Baltimore. A 
confirmed bachelor, he studied all night, slept in the morning and 
worked in the afternoon. He washed his own clothes, cooked his 
own meals and cultivated gardens around his log cabin. He 
had an early fondness for “strong drink” but later became a 
teetotaler. His habits of study were odd, to say the least. Local 
annalists said he wrapped himself in a great cloak at night and 
lay under a pear tree and meditated on the revolutions of the 
heavenly bodies. According to these reports, he remained there 
throughout the night and went to bed at dawn.
A contemporary left a portrait of the stargazer. “His head was 
covered with a thick suit of white hair, which gave him a very 
dignified and venerable appearance. . . . His dress was uniform­
ly of superfine broadcloth, made in the old style of a plain coat, 
with straight collar and long waistcoat, and a broad-brimmed hat. 
His color was not jet-black, but decidedly Negro. In size and 
personal appearance, the statue of Franklin at the Library of 
Philadelphia, as seen from the street, is a perfect likeness. Go to 
his house when you would, either by day or night, there was


--- PAGE 90 ---
76 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
constantly standing in the middle of the floor a large table covered 
with books and papers. As he was an eminent mathematician, he 
was constantly in correspondence with other mathematicians in 
this country, with whom there was an interchange of questions of 
difficult solution.”
Banneker, unlike Wheatley, lashed out at the injustices of the 
age. In a famous letter of 1791 he told Thomas Jefferson that 
words were one thing and slavery was another: “Suffer me to 
recall to your mind that time, in which the arms of the British 
crown were exerted, with every powerful effort, in order to re­
duce you to a state of servitude; look back, I entreat you . . . You 
were then impressed with proper ideas of the great violation of 
liberty, and the free possession of those blessings, to which you 
were entitled by nature; but, sir, how pitiable is it to reflect, that 
although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the 
Father of Mankind, and of his equal and impartial distribution of 
these rights and privileges which he hath conferred upon them, 
that you should at the same time counteract his mercies, in de­
taining by fraud and violence, so numerous a part of my brethren 
under groaning captivity and cruel oppression, that you should at 
the same time be found guilty of that most criminal act, which you 
professedly detested in others.”
Banneker, like Wheatley, was a metaphor of the limitations and 
possibilities of the burgeoning American Dream. To be sure, as 
Banneker’s letter indicates, things were far from rosy in this 
period. But some blacks, a very few blacks, had room to dream 
and dare and hope. Then the roof caved in. When did this hap­
pen? No one can say. It happened at different times in different 
ways at different places. In Boston and New York City free 
blacks were insulted and assaulted on the streets. In the South 
slaveowners elaborated new laws and rules which were designed 
to deny blacks every right of personality.
There were many reasons for this. One of the triggering mech­
anisms was a machine, the cotton gin, which cooled the ardor of 
patriots and made slave-grown cotton a national mania. A second 
factor was the wave of reaction that rolled over America after 
Sha.ys’s Rebellion and the French and Haitian revolutions. A 
further contributing cause was the sharp rise in the number of 
free blacks and the failure of various plans to get rid of them.


--- PAGE 91 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 77
The Haitian Revolution, the invention of the cotton gin, slave 
conspiracies in America, the increase in the number of free 
blacks, and a rising tide of mercantilist greed—this combination 
of facts and circumstances created the conservative reaction 
which forced blacks North and South to look around them and 
ask the question of the Hebrew poet of captivity: “How shall we 
sing the Lord’s song in a strange land?”
How indeed? And which Lord?
These questions gave rise to thought and to Black America or, 
to be more precise, African-America, for all of the first black 
institutions bore the interesting prefix—African. Rebuffed, in­
sulted, incessantly villified, postwar blacks turned inward and 
formed their own social institutions and, in the process, created 
themselves. •
This act of self-generation created a community out of a collec­
tivity of isolated individuals. When the process started, in the late 
1780s, there were 757,000 black individuals in America—697,000 
slaves and 59,000 free blacks. Almost all of the slaves—92 per 
cent—lived in the South. The free population, in sharp contrast, 
was concentrated in the Northeast and revolved around two com­
peting centers of black power and creativity—New York and 
Philadelphia. Although free blacks in these Northern centers 
gave institutional form to Black America, they worked from a 
matrix created by the mass of maintaining slaves. More to the 
point, most of the free black leaders were former slaves.
In this period, as in the nineteenth century, most free blacks 
were confined by racism to low-paying jobs; and most of them 
lived, for the same reason, in cellars and shanties on narrow 
streets. But even at that early date there were black artisans and 
merchants who lived in comfortable surroundings. It is to be 
observed, too, that certain of these merchants and artisans oper­
ated in the mainstream of money. One could see examples of this 
all over the North in the Black Pioneer period. Specifically, there 
was the case of Emanuel and Mary Bernoon who opened the first 
oyster and ale house in Providence, Rhode Island, in 1736 and 
reportedly had one of the largest businesses in that city. Bernoon, 
according to Dr. Lorenzo J. Greene, was the model for the band of 
black caterers who dominated the catering industry in several 
cities for more than a century. But Bernoon is only one case in 
point. In New York City, in the same period, Samuel Fraunces


--- PAGE 92 ---
78 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
operated Fraunces’s Tavern, one of the major social centers of 
the East. It was in his restaurant in 1768 that the New York 
Chamber of Commerce was organized. Significantly and ironi­
cally, George Washington said farewell to his officers at the end 
of the Revolutionary War in rooms provided by this pioneer black 
businessman. Fraunces and Bernoon were only the most dra­
matic examples of the emerging artisan-merchant class. Through­
out these early years black artisans and merchants held com­
manding positions in Eastern cities. Between 1790 and 1820, 
according to Du Bois (The Philadelphia Negro),  “a very large 
portion, and perhaps most” of the artisans of Philadelphia were 
black.
In that day, as in this one, there were systematic attempts to 
undermine black artisans and merchants. This disturbed a 
number of witnesses, including a French traveler named Brissot 
de Warville. “Those Negroes who keep shops,” he said, “live 
moderately, and never augment their business beyond a certain 
point. The reason is obvious; the whites . . . like not to give them 
credit to enable them to undertake any extensive commerce nor 
even to give them the means of a common education by receiving 
them into their counting houses.”
Despite these pressures, certain blacks managed to reach the 
top ranks in their fields. One such entrepreneur was James For- 
ten, who invented and patented a device for handling sails and 
became one of the major sailmakers in Philadelphia. Another 
major entrepreneur was Paul Cuffe, the ship captain and ship 
builder. In 1797 Cuffe built a wharf and warehouse on the 
Westport River in Massachusetts. By 1806 he owned one ship, 
two brigs and several smaller vessels. For many years he com­
manded black crews, making voyages to Europe, Russia, Africa 
and the West Indies.
Concurrently with the elaboration of businessmen like Paul 
Cuffe there was a parallel development in the cultural field. 
Slowly before the war but with remarkable acceleration there­
after, black intellectuals emerged from the masses; and by 1780 
there were at least four recognizable types in the black commun­
ity. The first type, symbolized most notably by Jupiter Hammon, 
defected and went over to the enemy, astounding and delighting 
them by producing intellectual products that objectively but­
tressed their world view. The second type—Phillis Wheatley was


--- PAGE 93 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 79
an example—offered no direct challenge to the system but subtly 
challenged its premises by the authority of their work which was, 
like all works of art, an appeal to freedom. The third category 
found its voice in the anonymous Othello,* who directly and 
militantly challenged the intellectual and cultural premises of 
the white dispensation. Less militant but no less direct was the 
fourth category of intellectuals, composed of men like Richard 
Allen and Absalom Jones, who spoke in muted tones but created 
big sticks of organization.
From these different strata, from the artisans and merchants 
and intellectuals, and from the great mass of maintaining labor­
ers and slaves, came the founding fathers and mothers of African- 
America.
This group included Richard Allen and Absalom Jones and 
thousands of laborers and former slaves who have disappeared 
from a record that still vibrates with their presence.
Of these men and women—that is, to say, of the known men 
and women—at least twenty-one should be starred for the record: 
Richard Allen, cofounder of the Free African Society, pioneer 
bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, and 
first president of a national black convention; Absalom Jones, 
cofounder of the Free African Society, protest leader, and 
founder of one of the first black churches in the North; Prince 
Hall, founder of the first black Masonic lodge and protest leader; ‘  
George Liele, founder-pastor of a pioneer black Baptist church; 
Andrew Bryan, founder-pastor of a pioneer black Baptist church; 
Phillis Wheatley, poet; James Forten, industrialist and protest 
leader; Benjamin Banneker, astronomer, mathematician, protest 
leader; Jean Baptiste Pointe DuSable, leader in the Westward 
movement and founder of Chicago; Peter Williams Sr., cofounder 
of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church; James Varick, 
first bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church; Paul 
Cuffe, ship captain and African colonizationist; William Whip- 
per, protest leader and magazine editor; Austin Steward, mer­
chant and protest leader; Abraham Shadd, protest leader;
*In 1788, an anonymous writer who called himself “Othello” published a  
slashing antislavery essay which denounced white Americans for betraying  
the principles of the Revolution. “So flagitious a violation,” he wrote, “can  
never escape the notice of a just Creator, whose vengeance may be now on the  
wing, to disseminate and hurl the arrows of destruction.”


--- PAGE 94 ---
80 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
Dr. James Derham, pioneer black physician; Samuel E. Cornish, 
Presbyterian minister and cofounder of the black press; John B. 
Russwurm, cofounder of the black press; Daniel Coker, co­
founder of the AME church; David Ruggles, protest leader, and 
founder of the first black magazine; and Nathaniel Paul, pioneer 
black Baptist minister.
It was these men and women, working with thousands of un­
sung laborers and protestants, who laid the cornerstones and 
created the first tiers of the emerging structure of Black America.
The first step in that process, as we have seen, was the founding 
of the Free African Society by eight black pioneers: Absalom 
Jones, Richard Allen, Samuel Boston, Joseph Johnson, Cato 
Freeman, Caesar Cranchell, James Potter, and William White. 
The organization founded by these men was a church, a mutual 
aid society and an embryonic political cell. It also contained the 
germinal concept of the black insurance company.
The same archetypal figures and the same issues dominated 
the racial dialogue in other cities; and within a short time similar 
organizations were established in other Northern centers with 
large black populations. The leaders of these societies quickly 
established a correspondence network that linked—and iden­
tified and shaped—Black America for the first time. The creation 
of this network was a formative experience for pioneer black 
leaders. Through the medium of these organizations, blacks ex­
changed information, ideas and programs. More importantly, 
they began to see their lives in a time-line extending from Africa 
to the Day of Judgement they believed would vindicate them.*
The second step on the road to Black America—and the sec­
ond tier of the structure of Black America—was the independent 
black church movement, which started in the late 1770s with the 
founding of the first African Baptist churches in South Carolina, 
Virginia and Georgia by pioneer black ministers like Andrew 
Bryan and George Liele. This movement continued unabatedly 
throughout the war and reached a peak in postwar Philadelphia 
with the first public demonstration against Jim Crow. The dem­
onstration occurred at St. George’s Methodist Episcopal Church 
at Fourth and Vine in the year of the founding of the Free African
*The Shaping of Black America


--- PAGE 95 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 81
Society. When, in November of that year, a group of black wor­
shippers, composed largely of members of the Free African Soci­
ety, were pulled from their knees during prayer, they stood up, 
without a word, and filed out of the church in a body. Looking 
back on that pivotal moment many years later, Richard Allen 
said:
“A number of us usually attended St. George’s church in 
Fourth street; and when the colored people began to get numer­
ous in attending the church, they moved us from the seats we 
usually sat on, and placed us around the wall, and on Sabbath 
morning we went to church and the sexton stood at the door, and 
told us to go in the gallery. . . . We expected to take the seats 
over the ones we formerly occupied below, not knowing any bet­
ter. . . . Meeting had begun and they were nearly done singing 
and just as we got to the seats, the leader said, ‘Let us pray.’ We 
had not been long upon our knees before I heard considerable 
scuffling and low talking. I raised my head up and saw one of the 
trustees . . . having hold of the Rev. Absalom Jones, pulling him 
up off his knees, and saying, ‘You must get up—you must not 
kneel here.’ Mr. Jones replied, ‘Wait until the prayer is over.’ 
[The trustee] said, ‘No, you must get up now, or I will call for aid 
and force you away.’ Mr. Jones said, ‘Wait until prayer is over, 
and I will get up and trouble you no more.’ With that [the trustee] 
beckoned to one of the other trustees . . .  to come to his assis­
tance. He came, and went to William White to pull him up. By 
this time prayer was over, and we all went out of the church in a 
body, and they were no more plagued with us in the church.”
By withdrawing from the white Methodist church, the band of 
protestants affirmed the new forces moving within them. But the 
withdrawal raised large questions of identity, which were dis­
cussed at several heated meetings of the Free African Society. 
Certain members of the society suggested affiliation with the 
Quakers, while others held out for an entente with the Episcopa­
lians or Methodists. Behind this debate was another question: 
What relation, if any, should blacks have with white institutions?
After a protracted and somewhat acrimonious debate, the Free 
African Society split into two groups. The larger group followed 
Absalom Jones, an affable, easy-going former slave, into the 
Episcopal church. In 1794 the African Church of St. Thomas was


--- PAGE 96 ---
82 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
erected in Philadelphia and eleven words were engraved in the 
vestibule: “The People Who Walked in Darkness Have Seen a 
Great Light.”
But had they—really?
Richard Allen didn’t think so. The new black communicants 
were denied full status in the Episcopal church and were barred 
from annual conferences and governing boards. This, to Allen, 
was rank discrimination. He demanded full rights in a white 
church, if possible, and in a black church, if necessary. In his 
mind, in an unmanifested seed state, was an image of Negritude,  
of Negro being and becoming.
Who was Allen?
He was a former slave who started his career with an act of 
extraordinary symbolic significance: the conversion of his mas­
ter. Shrewd and hardworking, Allen accumulated enough money 
to buy his freedom and migrated to Philadelphia. After the split in 
the Free African Society, he formed an independent black 
Methodist church. In 1816 he became the first bishop of the 
African Methodist Episcopal Church, the first national organiza­
tion created by blacks. During the whole of this period, according 
to contemporary witnesses, his house was never shut “against the 
friendless, homeless, penniless fugitive from the house of bond­
age.” So persuasive was Allen’s image, so dynamic was his 
example, that author Vernon Loggin nominated him for the title 
of “Father of the Negro.” A second and independent nomina­
tion came from historian John W. Cromwell, who said Allen had 
“greater influence upon the colored people of the North than any 
other man of his times.”
Men and women made in Allen’s image dominated the second 
phase of the Black Pioneer period, creating a tier of indepen­
dent black churches that spanned the North. In 1821 leading 
black Methodists, James Varick in particular, organized an­
other national organization, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion 
Church. By 1830 there were black churches of almost every con­
ceivable description, including an Ethiopian Church of Jesus 
Christ in Savannah, Georgia, and a black Dutch Reformed 
Church in New York City.
On the foundation of these churches rose a third tier of social 
and fraternal organizations. The leading spirit in this movement


--- PAGE 97 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 83
was Prince Hall, a leather-dresser and Revolutionary War veter­
an who organized the first black Masonic lodge. Like Richard 
Allen, like Absalom Jones, like all leaders of the period, Prince 
Hall tried first to enter white American institutions. Rebuffed on 
this front, he turned to England and was granted a charter by the 
Grand Lodge of England. On May 6, 1787, African Lodge No. 459 
was formally organized in Boston with Hall as Master. In 1797 
Hall helped organize lodges in Philadelphia and Providence, 
Rhode Island, thereby becoming a pioneer in the development of 
black interstate organizations.
While Hall and other leaders were pressing forward on this 
level, they were at the same time creating the fourth tier of the 
Black American structure, the perennial movement for equal 
rights. From the beginning that movement was based on internal 
development and external protest. In succeeding years different 
protest leaders would emphasize different dimensions of this 
concept. Booker T. Washington, for example, would make an 
artificial distinction between external protest and internal de­
velopment. But in the beginning black leaders articulated a total 
concept, involving a double and reciprocal struggle for  black de­
velopment and against  white restrictions on that development.
True to their rhetoric, these leaders founded black schools and 
organized the social capital of the community. A major leader in 
this effort, as in so many others, was Richard Allen, who opened 
a day school for children and a night school for adults in Bethel 
AME Church in Philadelphia. In Boston, in the same decade, 
Prince Hall opened a school for black children in his home. This 
movement was supported by Quakers like Anthony Benezet, who 
organized a black school in Philadelphia, and the New York 
Manumission Society, which organized the famous Free African 
Schools of New York City. According to some authorities, the 
opening of the first African Free School in November, 1787, 
marked the beginning of free secular education in New York.
All the while, on another level of existence, black leaders were 
pressing an increasingly sophisticated campaign against dis­
crimination and segregation. In a 1794 pamphlet Richard Allen 
and Absalom Jones attacked slavery and its Northern twin, 
bigotry. Six years later Jones and other Philadelphians sent an 
antislavery petition to Congress. Allied with Jones and Allen in


--- PAGE 98 ---
84 THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA
the Philadelphia protest movement was industrialist James For- 
ten, who attracted national attention with a series of letters that 
demolished the arguments of whites who wanted to limit the 
number of free blacks entering Pennsylvania.
Along with equal rights, blacks pressed the equal education 
movement. On October 17, 1787, Prince Hall and other Boston 
blacks filed one of the first public petitions in this field, telling 
the Massachusetts legislature that “we. .. must fear for our rising 
offspring to see them in ignorance in a land of gospel light, when 
there is provision made for them as well as others and [they] can’t 
enjoy them, and [no other reason] can be given [than that] they are 
black. . . .” In a different but allied development, Paul Cuffe 
raised the issue of black suffrage. When, in 1780, he was barred 
from the ballot box in Dartmouth, Massachusetts, he refused to 
pay taxes and filed a defiant petition of protest. After a long 
controversy, it was decided that taxation without representation 
was tyranny in America. The case was widely regarded as es­
tablishing a precedent for black suffrage.
Buttressed by the four tiers of these ascending levels of ex­
pressiveness, the horizons of black pioneers expanded in widen­
ing circles that, in some cases, overlapped the efforts of white 
pioneers. Not only in the South but also in the North black 
pioneers contributed to the common effort, building schools and 
roads and extending the social capital of America. In one charac­
teristic transaction, Paul Cuffe donated a school to his town and 
built a meeting house for the Quakers.
There were also black pioneers who extended the boundaries of 
America, founding new communities and towns. The most cele­
brated of these pioneers was Jean Baptiste Pointe DuSable, who 
founded Chicago, Illinois. There is abundant evidence—a deed 
in the Wayne County courthouse, the contemporary reports of 
British officers and the journals and records of travelers and 
traders—that DuSable settled in the area in the 1770s and created 
the foundations of Chicago, building the first home there and 
opening the first business.
The contributions of DuSable and other black founding fathers 
had no appreciable effect on the level of racism in America. 
There are even indications that DuSable the founder was isolated 
and pushed to the sidelines of Chicago life in the 1790s when 
large numbers of white Americans settled in the area, bringing


--- PAGE 99 ---
THE FOUNDING OF BLACK AMERICA 85
with them traditional American perceptions. If, as seems prob­
able, DuSable was indeed the victim of his own creation, he 
shares that mournful distinction with thousands of other black 
pioneers who found themselves under increasing attack in the 
last decade of the eighteenth century.
What did it mean to be black in the America of that period?
Prince Hall, the activist and Revolutionary War veteran who 
organized the first black Masonic lodge, provided one answer in 
his charge to Boston’s African Lodge.
“Patience, I say; for were we not possessed of a great measure 
of it, we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in 
•the streets of Boston, much more on public days of recreation. 
How, at such times, are we shamefully abused, and that to such a 
degree, that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands, 
and the arrows of death are flying about our heads.”
A similar answer came from Colonel Middleton, another Rev­
olutionary War veteran. During a Boston riot, a group of whites 
attacked blacks in front of his home. The old soldier stuck a 
musket out of his door and threatened to kill any white man who 
approached. One of his neighbors, a white man, asked the whites 
to leave. Then he approached Colonel Middleton and begged him 
to put away his gun. Colonel Middleton stood silent for a moment. 
Then he turned and tottered off, dropping his gun and weeping as 
he went.
Colonel Middleton’s America, Prince Hall’s America and 
Thomas Jefferson’s America tottered into the nineteenth century, 
divided and afraid.

