=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Let-s-Gang-Up-On-Oppression-by-Owusu-Yaki-Yakubu.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 18
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:47.412784
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
 
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression: Youth Organizations and The 
Struggle For Power In Oppressed Communities (Revised)  
by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
Source: http://www.prairiefire.org/CRSN/gang.shtml 
Introduction  
"...I cannot disassociate myself from the future that is proposed for my brother."  
Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, p. 89.  
"...When [J. Edgar] Hoover initiated his counterintelligence [program], that was a form of 
genocide. They threatened to destroy anybody in the black community that was a leader. 
ANYBODY. So, they declared war on us 25-30 years ago, and that war is still going on right 
now. That's why those in power are so afraid of our unification, because you can only keep a 
person [or a people] down for so long. Then when unification comes, all of us have the same 
damn enemy, and they can't have that. But they can't stop it."  
Minister Fontain, United In Peace  
The Lumpen Times, Vol. 2, No. 13  
Soon after the original version (Parts One and Two) of this piece was published in 
CROSSROAD in 1994, members of our Collective began discussing the possible need to revise 
and expand the piece. We felt that certain points could be more clearly and forcefully made, and 
that We should set out more of the political perspective of the Collective and of the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement (NAIM).  
We became more determined to revise an d expand the piece after Larry Hoover and members of 
the Gangster Disciples/Growth and Development were indicted by the U.S. in the fall of 1995. 
We felt that We had to make a public statement about these indictments as they relate to the 
themes of this piece, i.e., that the U.S. will target any sector of the Afrikan community (and other 
oppressed communities) which seeks to acquire power in order to develop the community in a 
revolutionary manner.  
We think that note should first be taken of similar indict ments, brought by the U.S. little more 
than ten years earlier, against Abdul Malik Kabah Khalifah (aka Jeff Fort) and members of the El 
Rukns. To us, it is significant that both sets of indictments were brought as the targeted 
organizations were involved i n a process of political transformation, and each had engaged in 
actions which directly challenged U.S. interests, on local and/or international levels.  
Subsequent to the original publication of this piece (and, after the indictment of Hoover and 
other members of Growth and Development), people throughout the U.S. and the world became 
more aware of the role played by the U.S. in creating the flood of drugs into Afrikan 
communities -- in this instance, via the C.I.A., in the 1980s. The August, 1996, series run by the


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
San Jose Mercury News was in no way an actual "revelation" to political activists and large 
numbers within the Afrikan and other oppressed communities. However, those articles did serve 
-- as no other U.S. media coverage before them had -- to reach a mass audience, generating anger 
and frustration, while also confirming for many their suspicions of the existence of genocidal 
policies and programs directed against Afrikan people within the U.S., orchestrated by the U.S. 
government.  
People in Chicago didn't need the Mercury News to tell them that the U.S. was, in the mid -80s, 
trying to flood Afrikan communities with crack cocaine -- people in Chicago already knew this, 
because they knew that the El Rukns were, in the mid -1980s, struggling to enforc e a policy that 
aimed to prevent the spread of crack cocaine within the city of Chicago, generally, and to prevent 
its spread within Chicago's Afrikan communities, in particular.  
That the El Rukns would have a policy to prevent the spread of crack didn't seem unusual to 
anyone with a knowledge of the history of that organization. Dating back to the 1960s, the El 
Rukns and other street organizations in Chicago had involved themselves with the Civil Rights 
and the Black Power/Nationalist movements. They had marched with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. 
over housing issues; they had demonstrated for jobs for construction workers. Even though on 
occasion they had been tricked into playing reactionary roles in certain struggles in the city (not 
unlike so many of the so-called "legitimate" political, religious, and business forces within the 
Afrikan community), they had made great strides to become part of the revolutionary nationalist 
thrust of our people in the 1960s and early 1970s.  
By the early 1980s, Abdul Malik and the El Rukns had begun to take new initiatives in their 
program of progressive political transformation, and they had already seen what crack cocaine 
was doing to the Afrikan communities in places like New York and Los Angeles. The El Rukn 
policy against the entry of crack into Chicago was intended to prevent the inevitable devastation 
of the Afrikan community that was sure to follow its sale and use. Therefore, We believe that it 
was no accident that the entry and rapid spread of crack cocaine in Chica go coincided with the 
attack by the U.S. and Chicago authorities upon the El Rukns in the mid-1980s!  
When the U.S. indicted Larry Hoover in 1995, they claimed (for public consumption) that he had 
been involved in the sale of drugs "for the past twenty yea rs" -- failing to remind us that the U.S. 
government itself had played a major role in creating both the supply and the demand for drugs 
in our communities! Moreover, no one thought to ask why the U.S. waited until 1994 to begin 
the investigation that led to the 1995 indictment!  
We suggest that Larry Hoover and the other members of Growth and Development weren't 
targeted and indicted for their involvement in the drug scene, but rather, that they were indicted 
because they were trying to get out of that scene and enter an arena that the U.S. feels that it must 
control at all costs: electoral politics, particularly in oppressed communities.  
Everyone in the Afrikan community with eyes and ears knows that Hoover was indicted because, 
over the past ten years (a t least) he's led the "Gangster Disciples" in a process of transition into 
an organization to become known as "Growth and Development". This new organization was 
inspired by a new concept, which had it well on its way in a process of political, economic, a nd


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
social transformation that had begun to present a serious challenge to the power of the local 
political machine and its lackeys within the Afrikan community.  
Let there be no mistake: We are not trying to glorify or romanticize Larry Hoover, the GD's, t he 
El Rukns, nor any street organization. What We are saying, in part, is that Hoover's indictment 
did not result from the U.S. governments concern for the devastation of Afrikan communities 
caused by drug sales and drug use. Rather, We believe that Hoover  was indicted (just as Abdul 
Malik before him), because of the new vision that he had acquired and which he was trying to 
share with other street organizations not only in Chicago, but throughout the U.S.! He was 
indicted because, for example, he (and othe rs) had worked and were continuing to work to 
maintain a peace among street organizations, so that they could begin to redirect their energies in 
ways that would ensure the survival of their people, and the development of their communities.  
In a 1993 "Cal l for Peace" directed toward all Chicago street organizations, Larry Hoover said: 
"The time is NOW for a total refocusing of our efforts, away from nonproductive distractions 
and other elements of temptations, and focus toward those disciplines that will m ake us real men 
in our communities. We must stop the gangbanging and drive -bys. Our race is being destroyed 
by the killing of our own youth. We must stop hating one another because of the color jacket or 
hat that is worn, or the way a person wears his hat.  These actions only feed the fire to 
destruction.  
"And finally, in my sincere appeal for peace and unity: Those of us that have experienced being 
our brothers' keeper -- We must educate our members around us. Education brings about 
awareness. Awareness ge nerates the ability to think. Our youth must know the end result of 
crime is shame, disgrace, and imprisonment to themselves, as well as the community. We must 
come to the point of outlawing those who willfully disrupt our communities and our call for 
peace and unity. Crime must not be accepted as the normal way of doing things. For We are all 
together, riding in the same boat, passengers on the river of destruction. If we don't take heed to 
these few words, we're going to drown together in the sea of destruction."  
We're saying: It was no accident that the U.S. investigation which led to Hoover's indictment 
began during the 1994 election campaign. In a "Call for Action" urging prisoner/street 
organization involvement in that campaign, Hoover reminded his re aders that: "...Our women 
and children are suffering greatly at the hands of an oppressive, dominant, racist political 
system....As proud Black Men and Brown Men, we can no longer afford this forced luxury of 
non-involvement or non -participation. As men un able to physically claim our rightful place as 
heads of households, the question remains: How can we contribute within our limited capacities? 
Man to man i say to you: If We accept a partial responsibility for the plight of our own, then we 
must take an active role in the game of "Politics". I challenge each of you to accept the obligation 
to personally guarantee that each adult member (18 and older) of your family and within your 
circle of friends, registers to vote and participates in the November electio ns. (Not less than 5 
people.)...."  
Not only did candidates supported by Growth and Development nearly unseat incumbents, but 
significant numbers of people were registered and gotten to the polls; GD's acted as poll -
watchers and drew the wrath of the Chica go police: "When the young people participated in the


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
electoral process (as election judges, poll -watchers, getting people to the polls, etc.), they had 
more problems from the police on election day than on any day they may have been on a corner 
selling crack or shooting at someone." (Interview with Larry Hoover.)  
Through the efforts of the 21st Century V.O.T.E. organization, Growth and Development had 
begun to inspire political activism and self -esteem among sectors of the community that had 
heretofore seen no future for themselves arising from the electoral process. They had begun to 
look toward future elections with a new sense of purpose and direction. Growth and 
Development had led or participated in numerous marches and demonstrations in the few years  
preceding the U.S. indictments, challenging the policies of the local school board and the state 
department of education; they had challenged policies of the state department of corrections and 
the state parole board, particularly with regard to the vicio us practice of withholding parole from 
"C-Number" prisoners; they had challenged the health care practices of county and city -run 
clinics; they had started mentoring and monitoring programs in several public schools. They had 
begun the development of an ec onomic base by starting Ghetto Prisoner Clothing -- which also 
became a target of U.S. government and city efforts of disruption (e.g., in Chicago and 
throughout Illinois, young people wearing the clothing were targets of police harassment; stores 
selling the clothing were intimidated; shipments of the clothing were sabotaged). The G.D.s had 
also started Save The Children Promotions which, among other things, had sponsored free 
Halloween parties for children living in the Cabrini Green, Henry Horner and oth er housing 
projects, for three consecutive years, held at the Chicago Amphitheater. It also sponsored rap 
concerts and other events, which generated funds that went to support other community service 
projects. In the words of Larry Hoover:  
The reason I we nt from "G.D." (Gangster Disciple) to "G.D." (Growth and Development) is so 
that in the transition I don't loose 70 percent of the following.... It's definitely going to be a 
problem; nothing happens spontaneously -- it will take time. Any organization or movement is 
usually pushed by 10% -- when you got a key 10% to start moving in a direction and start 
making progress, and start getting tangible things that our people can see and feel, then they will 
feel better about transitions. You got to give them som ething other than rhetoric. We're so used 
to being talked to, and tricked, that you got to show them something....All these things guys can 
point to and associate with themselves -- something positive, something other than selling crack 
and drive-by shootings.  
There is no difference between us because we are in different organizations. We are all black 
people. When we get in front of the judge, he don't ask if you are a GD, BD, Vice Lord or El 
Rukn...He don't say "Because you're in one organization, you'll  get 2 years, and the guys in the 
other organizations will get 10 years." All of us are black, and we'll all get 10 years. It shows that 
we are all one people, and if We don't come together with each other then we are all going to 
perish.  
What we have to do is get together the conscientious progressive thinkers within these 
organizations that know that they have to make a change in order to survive... We have to put 
together a concerted effort by all segments of our community -- clergy, business, activists, and 
progressive thinkers within street organizations. You have to go within these organizations in 
order to change them... You can't just write-off a generation....


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
It is time for black men from all over the country to realize what has h appened to us as a people, 
and that while much of it can be attributed to outside forces we have to begin to take 
responsibility for ourselves. We are a power -- a sleeping giant -- and all we have to do is 
become conscious enough to rise....  
We close thi s introduction as We began it, standing on the words of Fanon: We cannot 
disassociate ourselves from the fate proposed for our brothers and sisters. We urge all members 
of the Afrikan community in particular, and other oppressed communities, to also take a stand on 
these words. Our entire community -- but especially the (nationalist) activists of our community -
- must intervene in the struggles of the "street force" to join the entire people in the war for our 
independence and progressive national development.  
Our Collective also takes a stand upon the New Afrikan CREED, which affirms our belief in the 
community and in the family... our belief in the community AS a family. The CREED affirms 
our belief in collective struggle, and in fashioning victory in concert with our brothers and sisters 
-- whom We must love as We love ourselves; with whom We must be patient and uplifting -- and 
work to bring into the community and into the Movement -- on pain of disgrace and banishment.  
An attack upon "gangs" in our com munities by the U.S. is an attack upon us all -- and We must 
intervene. We must protect our brothers and sisters, and We must encourage and assist them in 
their continued pursuit of new values, new ideas, attitudes and behaviors that are more conducive 
to our collective survival and development.  
* * * * * Part One: Point of Departure  
There's an urgent need for the Afrikan and other oppressed communities to develop new ways of 
viewing and interacting with so -called "gangs" in our communities. (This should be seen as part 
of a larger process of changing the perspective We have of ourselves, as We accept that We are a 
distinct people -- an oppressed nation -- suffering neo -colonial domination and not a mere 
"national minority" suffering the racism of a few misguided individuals or institutions.)  
Most of our current thinking and behavior toward the young people in our communities has been 
shaped by the media and other U.S. institutions -- all of which are inherently opposed to the real 
needs and interests of "gangs" and the communities (oppressed nations) of which they are a part. 
From the 17th to the mid -19th centuries, it was never in the interest of the colonizer (the "slave 
owner") to paint a true picture for the colonized people (the "slaves") which would depict the 
truthful relationship between them, thus allowing us to begin to see ourselves as a people, held in 
colonial bondage by a new form of settler -imperialism, and to begin pursuing our independence 
as a new, Afrikan nation state in the Western hemisphere.  
The same holds true in the l990s, as the modern propaganda arm of the "mother country" creates 
an anti -crime hysteria to mask its program of destabilization and genocide. In creating this 
hysteria, the U.S. has equated "crime" with "gangs," and cre ated an image of "gangs" which is 
meant to inspire fear and hatred within us, so that We will react with hostility and violence 
toward our own children and other members of our communities (oppressed nations). The U.S. 
and its media would have us believe t hat We must rid our communities of "gangs" because,


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
allegedly, they are the causes of the crime and violence in our communities, and the obstacles in 
the paths of our social, economic and political development, rather than the system of U.S. 
control under which We live.  
Rather than look upon some of our young people as enemies that We should attack and destroy, 
We must be mindful that members of "gangs" are our children and grandchildren, our brothers, 
sisters, cousins -- members of our families. We must love them unconditionally; We must protect 
them and work to help them along righteous and productive paths. Above all, We must recognize 
that negative images of "gangs" are created and used by our real enemies, as they seek to divide 
and confuse us, to undermine our collective strength, and to divert us from our proper path.  
What Is A "Gang"?  
The U.S. and its media would have us believe that there is only one way to define "gang" and 
"gang activity". They say that a "gang" is a "band of anti -social adolesc ents" which engages 
solely in illegal activity.  
However, a quick look at Webster's dictionary tells us that a "gang" is, first and foremost, a 
group of people...with close social relations...that work together. In essence, a "gang" is actually 
any group o f people which shares close social relations, and works together toward a common 
goal, i.e., a "gang" has common identity, purpose, and direction. Moreover, a "gang" has actual 
and potential power -- and it's the actual and potential power of groups within  our communities 
(and thus, the actual and potential power of the community as a whole) which is feared by our 
common enemy. The U.S. fears us because We have power, and because We can use our existing 
power to acquire more power -- a collective power that, if used in our interests, can't help but be 
used to oppose the interests of the U.S.  
The U.S. actually aims to define the entire Afrikan community as "criminal," seen for example 
when a proposal was put before the Chicago city council, seeking an ordina nce which defined a 
"criminal gang" as a group in which three or more members have been convicted in U.S. courts! 
Such an ordinance (definition) is clearly intended as a weapon in the war upon the entire Afrikan 
community -- where today, 33% of males betwe en the ages of 18 and 24 have been convicted of 
"crimes" in U.S. courts! (A similar law was passed in California, which makes it a criminal 
offence not only to be a member of a so -called "criminal street gang," but for merely being an 
associate of such a g roup!) It's not hard to see that by such laws, any group of people whose 
membership includes those with criminal convictions would be considered a "criminal gang" to 
local, state and federal authorities operating a sinister agenda relative to the Afrikan a nd other 
oppressed communities.  
Hopefully, We don't need to point out that there's really nothing "new" about such laws and their 
underlying purposes. Such laws -- and their purposes -- can be traced as far back as the 
beginning of the colonial relationsh ip between Afrikan people and what would become the U.S. 
settler-imperialist state, with new forms appearing as changes took place in the forms of our 
oppression (i.e., laws applied to Afrikans prior to 1865, after 1865, e.g., "runaway slave" laws; 
"vagrancy" laws; "Black Codes"; "Jim Crow" laws, etc.).


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
We need to do one of two things with regard to the word "gang": 1) abandon the word to those 
who have defined it so that it now has a purely negative connotation; 2) redefine the word -- or 
create a new word or phrase to describe organized youth/groups in oppressed communities.  
However, new concepts must be developed to accompany whichever choice We make, and new 
forms of activity should begin to appear on the basis of the new concepts. The people in the 
community must begin to work collectively, to transform "gangs" into progressive organizations 
of Afrikan people, which struggle for freedom and development.  
Our problem is not that there are "gangs" in our communities -- our problem is that our 
communities are colonized territories that suffer from arrested development caused by the U.S. 
settler- imperialist state. Thus, We have no need to attack "gangs" --that is, ideally, We have no 
need to attack any organized groups of our people that work to free the pr ocess of our collective 
development. What We must do is make sure that all organized groups in our communities have 
this as their goal --and so long as We deal with members of our communities (i.e., members of 
our families), the means that We use should be education and persuasion, rather than physical 
force. However, even if stronger means are called for, they should be ones created and employed 
by forces within our own communities and not those of U.S. local, state and federal 
governments. The transformati on of "gangs" into progressive groups within our communities is 
part of the process of acquiring the group power that will enable us to control every aspect of our 
lives. Our problem is that too many people in our communities -- old and young -- lack the 
identity, purpose, and direction required of us if We are to acquire the kind of power that We 
need to truly free ourselves and begin to pursue the development of our ideal social order.  
Why Was The Anti-Crime/Anti-Gang Hysteria Created?  
The anti-crime/anti-"gang" hysteria was created for several inter -related reasons, which include, 
but are not limited to: 1) the U.S. and local governments needed a smokescreen to cover and 
divert attention from the worsening conditions of ever -larger numbers of people; 2)  the U.S. and 
local governments needed to undermine actual and potential bases of contending power within 
oppressed communities; 3) the U.S. and local governments needed to test new tactical genocidal 
initiatives (new forms of colonial violence) in the on -going war between themselves and 
oppressed peoples inside U.S. borders.  
Those who rule the U.S. and who operate its propaganda machine, have a long history and much 
experience in diverting the attention of those under their control, manipulating them so t hat their 
real problems and their underlying causes go unchallenged, while they are led to chase "ghosts" 
and shadows. The real problem of all peoples under capitalist domination is capitalism itself -- 
which creates the alienation that is driving people i nto madness, the pursuit of illusions, and the 
embrace of the commodity fetish.  
The "criminalization" of Afrikan youth (e.g., lowering the age at which juveniles can be tried as 
adults and sentenced to long prison terms -- including life without possibili ty of parole, and the 
death penalty), is actually about the U.S. trying to protect its power and the privileges of empire. 
It's using its legal system as a major weapon in the war to destabilize the entire Afrikan


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
community, while turning the prison system  into a new economic appendage (e.g., the 
privatization of prisons).  
Rather than trying to "rid" our communities of "gangs," We should definitely try to assist them as 
they themselves engage in a process of transformation into community groups that aim to combat 
some of our real problems, e.g.: homelessness (the leading cause of which is the inability of poor 
people to find affordable housing -- while housing costs are rising, the incomes of ever -larger 
numbers of people are declining); hunger; inadequate and decreasing access to health care (43 
million people in the U.S. lack health insurance, while hospitals and clinics are closing, and 
plans are being made to decrease the number of doctors and other medical personnel). Eighty -
five million people in the U .S. today live below the poverty line (over twenty -one and one -half 
million of these are Afrikan people, constituting 34.8% of the Afrikan population), and the U.S. 
job market is shrinking at the rate of 100,000 per year!  
"Youth Organizations" -- Afrocentric and Revolutionary  
We can take at least one step toward power -- one critical step closer to a new sense of collective 
identity, purpose, and direction -- by using the power that We already have, to define ourselves, 
name ourselves, and speak for ourselves -- instead of being defined and spoken for by others.  
Let's begin to transform part of the reality in our communities, by defining so -called "gangs" as 
organized groups of people in our communities who are essentially misdirected and who need 
our hel p getting on the right track. We should stop referring to these organized groups as 
"gangs," and instead refer to them as "youth organizations in need of adult supervision" -- i.e., 
supervision and assistance from adults who are themselves Afrocentric and revolutionary 
(nationalists).  
Some of you like to say (usually only when it's convenient and won't cost you anything), that "it 
takes an entire community to raise a child" -- well, you are part of the community, and We 
wanna know what YOU will DO to help raise our children. Rather, the question is: What will 
YOU DO to help fight the system that turns our children into criminals and victims?  
All of the people in our communities must come to share the responsibility for providing a new, 
broader sense of collective identity, purpose and direction -- for our children, and for ourselves. 
We all suffer the same oppression, at the hands of the same oppressor. We all confront and react 
to the obstacles to our progress that are created and sustained by the U.S. and its local 
governments.  
We must begin to promote new ideas about how We want to live and the kind of society We 
want to live in; We must be gin to promote new definitions of the causes of our problems (e.g., 
"racism" or capitalism/colonialism), and the real solutions to our problems (e.g., "empowerment" 
or genuine independence). We must begin to WORK TOGETHER as a collective, distinct 
community that is primarily engaged in the struggle for sovereign power.  
We must promote ideas which encourage our young people to identify themselves as Afrikans; 
We must promote among our young people the idea that their purpose is not to merely seek


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
quasi-control over a few city blocks, but to share in our control of entire cities, entire states, and 
ultimately, to share in the control of our independent nation. We need ideas which promote the 
notion that the direction We must take is toward national independence.  
Let's "gang-up" against oppression -- and struggle for power!  
Part Two: Planting Seeds -- Building Bases  
In the Spike Lee film, MALCOLM X , there's a scene which depicts a real event: Malcolm, 
without uttering a word, used his hand to direct a discip lined corps of the F.O.I. outside of a 
police station, through the streets of New York City, and to the hospital to which an injured 
member of the Nation of Islam has been taken -- at Malcolm's insistence, and under the threat of 
the unleashed power repres ented by Malcolm, the F.O.I., and the community which surrounds 
them. A police captain says: "That's too much power for one man to have." Clearly, that was not 
an objective observation.  
The officer in question would not object to HIS having that much powe r -- nor would he object 
to any other "one man" having that much power -- so long as it was a man with whom he shared 
ideological, political, and economic interests.  
The officer in question was uptight because "that much power" had just been used against him, 
his fellow officers, and the interests of the state that they had pledged to serve and protect. He 
had been shocked upon seeing that a KIND of power existed in an oppressed community -- 
power that could force him to refrain from doing that to which he  was accustomed, in a 
community in which he was used to having his way, with no fear of opposition or reprisal.  
When the police captain spoke, he was speaking for the federal and local U.S. governments. 
And, he really meant that: 1) No person in the Afrik an (nor any other oppressed) community 
should have the power to successfully act in opposition to federal, state, or local governments 
and their police forces; 2) Organized power should not exist within, nor be exercised by, the 
Afrikan or any other oppressed community -- to realize its interests, in opposition to the interests 
of the oppressive U.S.  
When that police officer witnessed and responded to the power of Malcolm, the F.O.I., and the 
Afrikan community, he knew it for what it was -- he knew, too, the possibilities of that power -- 
AND THAT IS WHAT SHOOK HIS WORLD! Those who rule the U.S. STILL tremble at the 
thought of "ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE," and socialist revolution.  
We witnessed a similar reaction by police and government officials when youth organizations in 
L.A. and Chicago announced, on separate occasions, that they were initiating a PEACE that 
would end violence between "gangs" in parts of both cities.  
The police and government officials in both cities responded to this news with anger and  alarm. 
They issued hasty releases to the media, claiming that the peace initiatives were shams, and that 
the peace wouldn't last (voicing, of course, their own desires). They made special attempts to


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
discredit the youth organizations in the eyes of the co mmunities to which the organizations 
belonged, calling into question their motives, their sincerity, and their integrity.  
We would think that in light of all of the calls from all quarters for an end to fratricidal violence 
in Afrikan and other oppressed communities, that the police and other U.S. government agencies 
would have welcomed news of a peace, and that they would have used their resources to support 
and sustain it. Instead, they tried to undermine it, going so far as to create situations that the y 
hoped would help to reignite hostilities (e.g., paying or otherwise encouraging renegade elements 
within the organizations to initiate attacks, or to otherwise engage in activities that were contrary 
to the rules and aims of the peace initiatives). Why w ould the U.S. and its agencies want to 
undermine peace among so-called "gangs"?  
Peace, Development, and New Contradictions  
POWER: The ability to act in a desired manner, or to produce a desired effect. Legal or 
official capacity or LEGITIMACY. Possession  of control, authority, or influence over 
others. Specifically, A SOVEREIGN STATE...A CONTROLLING GROUP. Shared 
meaning element: The ability of a group to perform in a given way, or its capacity for a 
particular kind of performance.  
Peace among youth orga nizations in our communities means much more than an end to violent 
conflict -- it also means that young people AND ADULTS begin to re -order our priorities, 
redirect our energies, and assume new responsibilities -- for ourselves, our families, our 
communities -- our nation. Peace among youth organizations in oppressed communities CAN 
lead to the resolution of other problems in our communities which, in their turn, can help to pull 
the covers off of U.S. socio -economic structural obstacles that block our pat h to genuine peace 
and development. Once exposed, these obstacles will present themselves as new problems to be 
resolved; We will find ourselves confronting long -standing enemies who are far more 
threatening to us than are some of the young people in our communities.  
A. When Youth Organizations End The Violence  
The initiation of a peace process by youth organizations immediately brought to light one source 
of the actual/potential power of the community -- power that We can use to solve ALL of our 
problems, ourselves. Fred Hampton often reminded us that there is "power, wherever there are 
people," and people in our communities stopped violence that the U.S. settler -imperialist state 
couldn't or wouldn't stop -- even with its greater resources, skills, and its alleged greater will.  
When, on one day, it wasn't safe for children to sit in their windows, or to play outside of their 
homes -- and, on the next day the entire community sat safely in parks and playgrounds that until 
then had been little more than free-fire zones -- the people were relieved and thankful -- but more 
was happening!  
The end to the violence in parts of L.A. and Chicago generated new hope, and a new sense of 
community and COMMUNITY POWER, which had not existed in these areas for some time . 
While recognizing that this power had manifested itself initially through the actions of groups of


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
organized youth ("gangs"), there was also a gradual realization among people that an even 
greater power lay dormant within the body of the collective commu nity. As this realization 
spread, so, too, did the new LEGITIMACY that was bestowed upon the youth organizations by 
the people in the communities. The existence of youth organizations taking a new course, now 
provided a vision of new possibilities for comp rehensive community development, and the 
people looked toward the organizations with new expectations.  
It is this transfer of LEGITIMACY by the community -- from the police and their bosses, to 
itself and the youth organizations -- that so alarmed the U.S . when the peace process was 
announced. it wasn't just that the state didn't want the youth organizations to be seen as "heroes" 
-- the state doesn't want us to view the organizations as RESPONSIBLE -- doesn't want them to 
be seen as legitimate actors for positive development...doesn't want them to become models for 
the process of transforming negative energy into positive energy. The U.S. doesn't want 
dependent people to become self -reliant and begin to determine their own destiny. The U.S. 
doesn't want Afrikan and other oppressed people to recognize that We can count on ourselves -- 
and ourselves alone -- for solutions to the problems of violence, inadequate health care, 
inadequate housing, unemployment, etc.  
The police, and those that they truly serve an d protect, do not want us to respect the actual and 
potential power of our young people; they do not want us to glimpse, through our youth, the 
power that lies within each of us: If the Crips and Bloods can bring peace to our communities, 
and the police ca n't or won't, then why do We need the police? If the Disciples, Vice Lords, 
Cobras, Latin Kings and other street organizations can serve and protect our children and our 
elders, and the state demonstrates that it can't or won't, then why should We continue  to depend 
upon it and profess loyalty to it? If the power to end violence exists within our own communities, 
then We should be looking for ways to increase our power, and We should be looking for ways 
to exercise it.  
B. When Youth Organizations Participate In The Development of the Community  
Other social, political, and economic implications arise as a result of youth organizations ending 
fratricidal violence in our communities. For example: The U.S. can't then use the occurrence of 
such violence as a ju stification for increased expenditures on police personnel, equipment, and 
prison construction; politicians can't then use the occurrence of such violence as a pretext for 
additional repressive measures in our communities, and as planks in their campaign platforms.  
For these and other reasons, an end to fratricidal violence would mean that We could then push 
for the attention and funds of the U.S. to be redirected toward the development of our 
communities -- even though this would be a demand that the U.S.  can't fulfill. That is, the U.S. 
WON'T promote the kind of community development that We want and need, because it CAN'T 
-- the U.S. is not structurally designed to do so! Under the U.S. system of capitalist -imperialism, 
for example, a significant number of people must ALWAYS be unemployed, uneducated, ill-fed, 
ill-housed, and in all other respects, oppressed and exploited. Capitalism MEANS development 
and prosperity for a few, and underdevelopment and poverty for the many. If We put more 
pressure on the U .S. to house the homeless, to feed the hungry, to hire the jobless (at wages 
above subsistence level), to educate and to provide adequate health care for ALL of the people --


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
it We pushed for all this, the U.S. would come up short. Contradictions would sha rpen. 
Consciousness would rise and consolidate. People would organize to struggle for their real 
needs. Lines would be drawn and people would choose sides. Interests would be distinguished 
and fought for -- AND THIS IS WHAT WE WANT TO HAPPEN!  
* * * * *  
When the youth organizations in L.A. and Chicago announced their plans for peace, they 
subsequently announced plans for their participation in the development of their communities. 
The plan drafted by the Crips and Bloods in L.A., proposed activities in five (5) defined areas:  
1) Community "face-lift": to get abandoned buildings, and to encourage the city to purchase and 
to build community centers upon the property; to repair pavements and sidewalks, plant trees, 
increase lighting, and clean up vacant lots -- all with community involvement and financial 
assistance from the city.  
2) Education: to implement accelerated learning programs; to increase and upgrade school 
bathrooms and provide new landscapes for schools.  
3) Health and Welfare: the construction of three new hospitals,  forty health care clinics and 
dental clinics; the establishment of day care centers. Eliminate welfare, and provide full 
employment, with the construction of new plants and facilities to service the city -- provide 
welfare only for the invalid and the elderly.  
4) Law Enforcement: the creation of "buddy patrols" whereby members of youth organizations 
are paired with police, trained, and patrol the communities. Those who police the community 
must live there, and commanders of the districts must be ten -year residents of the communities 
they serve.  
5) Economic Development: loans must be provided to all Afrikan small businesses at four per 
cent annual interest, and they must be security -free; ninety per cent of the people employed by 
the businesses in the community must be residents thereof.  
The Chicago plan, which focused primarily upon the Cabrini -Green area, was drafted by the 
King David Black Disciples, the King Cobra Nation, the North Branch Gangster Disciples, and 
the Magic Insane. It was endorsed by a c oalition of other community organizations, religious 
institutions, political activists, and elected officials. It was presented to Chicago's mayor, Richard 
M. Daley, and to the equally infamous housing authority chairman, Vince Lane. This plan called 
for:  
1) The provision of educational, job training, and recreational activities to all youth and adults.  
2) U.S. Representative Cardiss Collins to convene a congressional hearing on "what led to the 
destruction of Cabrini-Green and the entire Near-North Black community."


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
3) U.S. Housing and Urban Development regional administrator Gertrude Jordan to "cite 
Metroplex, the owners of Town and Garden Apartments, for gross violation of their contract with 
HUD, and to reclaim the property and turn them into scattere d site housing" for Cabrini -Green 
residents.  
4) The repair of all vacant Chicago Housing Authority units, and their occupation by homeless 
families.  
5) The turning of the 1117 -1119 Cleveland Ave. building into a multi -purpose service center 
including an alternative high school, drug program, library, and a shelter for youth and adults.  
6) The construction of a theatre, bowling alley, and a recreational arcade.  
7) The support of existing agencies, churches, and community organizations that already provid e 
services to the area residents.  
8) The provision of additional resources and support to all area schools.  
9) The establishment of food and clothing cooperatives for the area. The establishment of a 24 -
hour trouble-shooter hotline.  
10) The holding of e lections for Local Advisory Councils. The establishment of community -
wide Governing Councils that represent all groups in the community. And, the holding of 
monthly community accountability sessions and status reports.  
* * * * *  
Above our discussion of t hese plans, We tried to emphasize the fact that VIOLENCE IN THE 
L.A. AND CHICAGO COMMUNITIES IN QUESTION WAS STOPPED BY THE PEOPLE 
OF THOSE COMMUNITIES, and not by the police or other U.S. government agencies. The 
people in these communities made a decisio n to harness and exercise some of their power, and 
their action resulted in a victory that can have far -reaching possibilities. However, in order to 
realize any of these possibilities, We must be sure about what We're fighting for, and We must 
think through the tactics and strategies that We use in the fight.  
We fight so that We can become the masters of our own destinies. We fight so that We can seize 
the power to freely determine and fully benefit from our productive capacities, and to shape all 
productive and social relations in our own society. In this fight, We will unavoidably choose 
methods and employ tactics that will be called "reformist" -- but such methods and tactics must 
be chosen and employed on the basis of a strategy that seeks to fundamenta lly change the socio-
economic order according to which We will live. In other words, ours must be a revolutionary 
strategy, i.e., a "revolutionary -democratic program," designed to transfer ALL power to the 
people. We must remember that the state was alarme d when peace was announced because of its 
understanding of the POSSIBILITIES of the power of the people: The U.S. was alarmed because 
it feared that the people would exploit their potential TO GO BEYOND REFORM, and to pursue 
a revolutionary-democratic agenda. (A "democratic" agenda, in simple terms, is one that seeks to


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
satisfy all of the basic rights and needs of the people. Such an agenda is "revolutionary" for us, 
because its realization will require the overthrow and junking of the present U.S. socio -economic 
order, and the construction of a non -capitalist, i.e., a socialist, society.) These points are raised 
because both of the plans discussed above exhibit a dual character, i.e., potentially harmful (mere 
reformist) and potentially beneficial (revolutionary-democratic) tendencies.  
The primary reason for offering any proposal to local and federal U.S. governments should be 
that We want to further expose to the people the unwillingness and/or the inability of the U.S. to 
solve our problems. We need to us e all opportunities to show to the people that these 
governments are not righteous, that they are illegitimate, and that they have no right to rule over 
us. Every struggle that We engage in must have the dual purpose of undermining U.S. power, 
and of trans ferring that power to the people. We must gradually dismantle the oppressive state 
apparatus, and begin to build a new, people's state apparatus, creating its embryonic structures in 
our communities, as We build people's organizations and institutions that end the violence, house 
the homeless, feed the hungry, heal the sick, and educate and train our people for their 
responsibilities in a new society. Each time the people themselves create and develop an idea, 
build an organization, solve a problem, We show  through practice that We can create new 
structures, and new ways, that satisfy our needs. Otherwise, our needs will go unsatisfied.  
We must understand that by appealing to the state with a belief that it will satisfy our needs, We 
end up hampering the de velopment of the people's self -confidence, their class and national 
consciousness, and their power. When We call upon the oppressive state to solve our problems, 
We promote the idea that it is not necessary to struggle against it and to replace it. This is  a 
principle that should be stressed as often and in as many ways as possible. However, none of this 
is to say that demands should not be made upon the state: It is only to say that We should have 
no illusions, and We should allow none to be cast.  
 
Once put under pressure, the state will make cosmetic changes -- changes designed to lessen, or 
to give the impression of lessening, certain contradictions, or the resolution of certain problems. 
Some of these changes will be made on the state's own initiative,  but most of them will come as 
a result of the pressure applied by organized groups of the people. No matter what form the 
inspiration takes, the purpose of reforms by the state is to preserve its rule, to distract and 
disperse the groups of people that challenge its legitimacy, its power and its privilege.  
All demands made upon the state by people's organizations should be widely exposed, and each 
step in the process should be analyzed, discussed, summed up, and the lessons shared with the 
masses. This is part of the process of mass political education, and part of the process of creating 
responsible organizations and leadership which emerges from within the masses. The people will 
learn when, why, and how the U.S. is failing them and, at the same time, they will learn that their 
own organized strength is working to serve their interests. The state will make a concession here 
or there, and soon the people will realize that the concession meant nothing -- that daily struggles 
and victories over single issues aren't in themselves decisive. But, more covers will be pulled off, 
more consciousness will develop; people will see more clearly just how far they will have to go 
in order to fully realize fundamental change -- in themselves, and in the world.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
The plans discussed above provide us with good, concrete examples of how the process We're 
describing can and should unfold, i.e., make your appeals to the state, but build upon the power 
of the people -- use existing resources to meet existing needs. Find out exac tly what the people 
need, and organize them through the process of serving those needs.  
To begin with, We should take special note of the fact that the youth organizations were not 
alone in the initiation of the peace, the articulation of the plans, and t he daily activities in the 
communities. They were encouraged by...they were joined by other community activists, 
organizations, and institutions (e.g., churches, businesses, local elected officials, educators, 
health care providers, etc.). This is an examp le of unity in the community that should not be 
wasted.  
We see varied groups and strata, representing the entire community, binding together and 
pursuing particular, shared interests. Rather than MARCH AGAINST the youth, some 
responsible and conscious adults decided to MARCH WITH youth and other organizations, to 
challenge the real criminals and to regain control of the colonized territories that are commonly 
referred to as "inner cities." Let's talk less about marching against our children, talk more about 
marching with them, to take back our communities from t he colonial powers, which have 
arrested our creative and productive capacities. Now, let's look briefly at other examples in the 
plans discussed above, to check out some of the elements of a people's program for self -reliance, 
self-determination, and independence.  
Both plans called upon U.S. federal and local government forces, placing little emphasis upon a 
reliance upon the people in the communities to address their own needs. For example, the 
"community face-lift" of the L.A. plan could surely be taken up by the people and institutions in 
the Afrikan communities, using presently available resources and, within the process of 
instituting comprehensive development of the community (economic, political, socio -cultural), 
create the means of acquiring/creating new resources.  
We know that We can't complete the development of the community in one day... We can't repair 
or replace all of the abandoned housing overnight -- but We can select one site, and use this as a 
model, a starting point. The entire community can be involved in such a project. Or, several sites 
can be selected, one in each of the areas where certain organizations predominate, or where 
certain churches or businesses are located, or which are represented by certain local, state, or 
federally elected officials. Youth organizations may decide to get into the business of housing 
construction or rehab.... The point, however, is that if appeals are made to the city, asking it to 
pave sidewalks or to clean up vacant lots, and the city fails to respond -- what happens when the 
people in the community take on the tasks themselves? THE PEOPLE IN THE COMMUNITY 
SHOULD TAKE ON THE TASKS THEMSELVES!  
What does it really take to repair sidewalks, plant trees, increase lighting, or clean up vacant lots 
in our co mmunities??!! How much money? How many people? What kinds of examples or 
models? Again, We don't have to start big -- We can start on one block, learning "how to win 
judiciously, step by step." Poor, colonized neighborhoods CAN BE CLEAN neighborhoods -- if 
enough of the people therein assume the responsibility for making it so -- and it doesn't take 
"hundreds" of people to begin or to complete such projects! We CAN do this; We can take pride


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
in it, and We can use the sense of accomplishment that We will der ive from it as a springboard 
for greater accomplishments.  
The people in the communities can harness available resources (financial and human) to do such 
things as clean up and upgrade the bathrooms in the public schools. Some of the conscious and 
responsible adults that worked (and continue to work) with the youth organizations in L.A. and 
Chicago were educators. The coalitions that spring up in each of our neighborhoods should 
include educators, and they must help us develop OUR OWN "accelerated learning programs." 
There's nothing wrong with making demands upon city governments and upon city, state and 
federal educational agencies -- but our primary objective must be that WE seek control of the 
institutions that must educate our children -- and educate the m so that they can become fully 
developed, and so that they can help us to serve OUR INTERESTS. What can WE do to create 
programs that combat illiteracy within our communities and nation? What can WE do to provide 
an adequate number of textbooks (as well a s develop new textbooks) for our children? What can 
WE do to "put a computer in every home" as well as a sufficient number in every school? What 
can WE do to insure that those who help to develop the minds of our children are themselves 
psychologically and ideologically "stable"? Who do the schools belong to? Who do the teachers 
work for? To what community (of interests!) do the teachers belong?  
Our communities do not lack experience in providing health care to the people therein, i.e., We 
know how to assi st one another, and We know how to develop health and dental clinics, how to 
create preventive health programs, how to develop programs to test for sickle cell anemia, etc. 
We've done it before, and We can do it again. There should be no insurmountable pro blems in 
the process of our developing our own day care centers, which can not only adequately provide 
for the needs of our children and the parents who need such service, but can also provide 
employment for people both young and old!  
Moreover, We must begin to challenge the profit motive (in this case, with particular reference to 
the health care "industry"), and raise the question of society's responsibility to provide for those 
who are unable to provide for themselves (as well as the more basic principl e of society's 
responsibility for ALL of its members) -- especially when, under U.S. capitalism, jobs are 
structurally eliminated, the health care system is consciously dismantled, and insurance 
companies and not health care providers are calling the shots over the health delivery system.  
Those who control the U.S. talk out of both sides of their mouths -- from one side they say that 
they want to put people to work; from the other side they say that they need to keep an 
unemployment level of at least six per cent in order to insure the stability of U.S. capitalism! The 
people of our communities will NEVER be "fully employed" so long as U.S. capitalism remains 
in place. We will not receive adequate health care so long as insurance companies and corporate 
boards are in control of the health care system and place more value on profits than they do on 
people.  
We don't need to receive permission from the state in order to hold elections or otherwise select 
people from within our communities to lead and represent us. The creation of our own governing 
councils is a needed step toward the creation of leadership which is truly accountable to the


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
people that are served. It is also a prerequisite in the establishment of "dual or contending" bases 
of power, in the hands of the people, in the fight to create a new social order.  
Very important: We don't and shouldn't rely upon our enemies for the creation of or assistance 
in, the development of "food and clothing co -ops". Such institutions are essential as models or 
starting points in the process of economic development -- especially as We look toward the 
future, where We will have to feed and clothe ourselves. The hundreds of billions of dollars that 
We cite as the "wealth" of Afrikans in the U.S. does not actually repres ent "wealth" -- because 
We don't control the means of production, nor do We control the means of distribution -- We are 
mere consumers (and this is part of our role as neo-colonial subjects in the 21st century).  
The economic development of the Afrikan com munities should start with basic education in the 
science of political economy and a clear understanding as to the commodity that We know as 
"money". We must understand that..how...social wealth is actually created by us, by people, 
through our labor, and not by investments in money market funds or the stock exchange. 
Fundamentally, social wealth originates through a combination of the labor of people, upon the 
land that they control, through production and distribution of the material resources that flow 
from that land (and the sea). Do you get the drift?  
C. New Contradictions  
As stated above, peace in our communities, and our struggle to develop our communities, will 
place new demands upon us, and will take us to new levels of confrontation with our real  
enemies.  
We must first wage battles within ourselves -- as individuals who want to be better persons, and 
as communities that want unhindered development. We must develop new values, abandoning 
individualism, petty envy and jealousy. We must abandon fear  of the enemy and fear of change 
and sacrifice in service to collective interests. We must truly love ourselves, love our sisters and 
brothers as We love ourselves. We must "believe in the family and the community, and in the 
community as a family," and work to make this concept live. We must believe in the community 
as more important than the individual, because no individual interests can be realized apart from 
realization of the interests of the community. Through all this, and more, new contradictions w ill 
arise -- most notably those which will stand us in opposition to the U.S.  
The U.S. is an oppressive, exploitative state. It seems all -powerful because We do not have the 
kind of power that We need; the power that We do have is not yet fully exercised in the proper 
manner, toward the proper ends. The more We exercise our power, the more antagonistic our 
relationship to the U.S. will become. This antagonism is both part and consequence of our 
struggle to become more socially responsible, more politically  conscious and active, more 
economically powerful and self-sufficient.  
 
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE THAT DON'T FEAR FREEDOM!


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 18 
  
Let's "Gang-Up" On Oppression                                                       by Owusu Yaki Yakubu 
 
Spear & Shield Publications  
1340 West Irving Park Road  
Suite 108  
Chicago, Illinois 60613  
 
Crossroad 
The Newsletter of the Crossroad Support Network  
From Spear & Shield Publications 
http://www.prairiefire.org/Crossroad.shtml 
Crossroads is a non-sectarian newsletter produced by and for New Afrikan 
Prisoners of War and Political Prisoners.  
This publication is dedicated to contributing to and continuing an ongoing 
discussion around identity, purpose and direction for Afrikan-descended 
people who want a higher level of human life.  
Docum edit and PDF by RBG Street Scholar for Study, Sharing and Download 
Please Visit RBGz New Afrikan Independence Movement TV, Feat. Assata Shakur Docum., Eyes of the Rainbow

