=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Lugira-Aloysius-African-Traditional-Religion.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 145
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:31:07.159569
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
AFRICAN TRADITIONAL 
RELIGION
WORLD RELIGIONS
THIRD EDITION


--- PAGE 3 ---
WORLD RELIGIONS
African Traditional Religion
Baha’i Faith
Buddhism
Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity
Confucianism
Daoism
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Native American Religions
Protestantism
Shinto
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism


--- PAGE 4 ---
by
Aloysius M. Lugira
Series Editors: Joanne O’Brien and Martin Palmer
WORLD RELIGIONS
AFRICAN TRADITIONAL 
RELIGION
THIRD EDITION


--- PAGE 5 ---
African Traditional Religion, Third Edition
Copyright © 2009, 2004, 1999 by Infobase Publishing
  
All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, without 
permission in writing from the publisher.  For information contact:
   
Chelsea House
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lugira, Aloysius Muzzanganda.
  African traditional religion / by Aloysius M. Lugira. —3rd ed.
       p. cm. — (World religions)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-60413-103-1
 1.  Africa—Religion. 2.  Africa—Religious life and customs.  I.
Title. II. Series.
  BL2400.L84 2009
  299.6—dc22
 2
008051188
Chelsea House books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quantities for businesses, 
associations, institutions, or sales promotions.  Please call our Special Sales Department in New York at 
(212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can find Chelsea House on the World Wide Web at http://www.chelseahouse.com
This book was produced for Chelsea House by Bender Richardson White, Uxbridge, U.K.
Project Editor: Lionel Bender
Text Editor: Ronne Randall
Designer: Ben White
Picture Researchers: Joanne O’Brien and Kim Richardson
Maps and symbols: Stefan Chabluk
  
Printed in China
CP BRW  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
All links and Web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of publication. Because of the 
dynamic nature of the Web, some addresses and links may have changed since publication and may no longer 
be valid.


--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
	 Pr eface	 6
CHAPTER 1 Introduction:	Africa	and	Its	People	 8
CHAPTER 2 The	Beginning	of	Time:		
	 T
he	Oral	Tradition	 26
CHAPTER 3 The	Supreme	Being	 36
CHAPTER 4 The	Spirit	World	 46
CHAPTER 5 Rites	and	Ritual	in	African	Religion		 64
CHAPTER 6 Sacred	Spaces	and	Places		 88
CHAPTER 7 Mystical	Forces	 96
CHAPTER 8 African	Religion	in	Today’s	World					 104
CHAPTER 9 African	Religion	Past,	Present,	and	Future				 116
 F act	File	and	Bibliography	 132
	 Further	Reading		 134
	 Web	Sites	 135
	 G lossary	 136
 Index	 140
 A bout	the	Author	and	Series	Editors	 144
	 Picture	Credits		 144


--- PAGE 7 ---
6
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Preface
Almost from the start of civilization, more 
than 10,000 years ago, religion has shaped 
human history. Today more than half the 
world’s population practice a major reli-
gion or indigenous spiritual tradition. In 
many 21st-century societies, including 
the United States, religion still shapes peo-
ple’s lives and plays a key role in politics 
and culture. And in societies throughout 
the world increasing ethnic and cultural 
diversity has led to a variety of religions 
being practiced side by side. This makes 
it vital that we understand as much as we 
can about the world’s religions.
The World Religions series, of which 
this book is a part, sets out to achieve this 
aim. It is written and designed to appeal 
to both students and general readers. The 
books offer clear, accessible overviews of 
the major religious traditions and insti-
tutions of our time. Each volume in the 
series describes where a particular religion 
is practiced, its origins and history, its cen-
tral beliefs and important rituals, and its 
contributions to world civilization. Care-
fully chosen photographs complement 
the text, and sidebars, a map, fact file, glos-
sary, bibliography, and index are included 
to help readers gain a more complete 
understanding of the subject at hand.
These books will help clarify what 
religion is all about and reveal both the 
similarities and differences in the great 
spiritual traditions practiced around the 
world today.
Religions of Africa
Northern Africa
Western Africa
Eastern Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa


--- PAGE 8 ---

© Infobase Publishing
Preface


--- PAGE 9 ---
8
CHAPTER 1
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
INTRODUCTION:
AFRICA AND  
ITS PEOPLE
Iwa ni csin
“Character is religion.”
T
his proverb of the Yoruba people of Nigeria, West Africa, 
expresses a fundamental truth about the character of the 
African people. When they are in need they turn to superhuman 
powers for help. They address their prayers to a God, either direct-
ly or indirectly, through lesser gods or spiritual go-betweens. 
When they address their God the elders of the Kikuyu peo-
ple of Kenya, for example, gather the people of the community 
together under a sacred tree. A procession arrives. At its head are 
two children. A boy carries a calabash, or gourd, filled with milk; 
a girl carries a calabash of honey-beer. A lamb follows them, and 
last come the elders. When the procession reaches the base of the 
sacred tree, the leading elder takes the calabashes from the chil-
dren. Facing Mount Kenya, he raises the calabashes and addresses 
God with the following prayer.
Acacia trees growing on the savanna of Tanzania. 
The extensive spirit world of African religion includes 
spirit guardians that reside in natural landmarks 
such as rivers, mountains, or trees. These places often 
become the focus of communal ritual.


--- PAGE 10 ---
9
i ntroduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 11 ---
10
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
 “Reverend Elder who lives on Kere-Nyaga (‘Mountain of 
Brightness,’ which is the Kikuyu name for Mount Kenya). You 
who make mountains tremble and rivers fl  ood; we offer you 
this sacrifi  ce that you may bring us rain. People and children are 
crying; sheep, goats, and cattle are crying. Mwene-Nyaga (‘Pos-
sessor of Brightness,’ the Kikuyu name for God), we beseech you, 
with the blood of this lamb, which we are going to sacrifi  ce to 
you. Refi  ned honey and milk we have brought for you. We praise 
you in the same way as our forefathers used to praise you under 
this very same tree, and you heard them and brought them rain. 
We beseech you to accept this, our sacrifi  ce, and bring us rain of 
prosperity.” The people respond, “Peace, we beseech you, Ngai, 
peace be with us.”
More than 930 million people live on the African continent. 
Many are at home in the bustling cities of the north—Cairo, Trip-
oli, Tunis, Algiers—where the religion today is predominantly 
Islam. In sub-Saharan Africa, especially in the eastern and west-
ern coastal countries and in southern Africa, Christianity is the 
predominant religion. However throughout Africa, especially in 
central Saharan regions, many people live in communities that 
at least to some extent follow traditional 
ways of life that stretch back thousands 
of years.
Beginning in prehistoric times the peo-
ple of Africa gathered in groups related 
by family ties and similar needs. These 
communities developed their own indi-
vidual languages, cultures, practices, and 
religions. Although waves of exploration 
and modernization have had their impact 
on the traditional African way of life, it is 
estimated that there are more than 6,000 
different peoples in Africa today. Many of 
these people continue to live by the spiri-
tual infl  uence of their ancestral way of life. 
Even after they have left their native vil-
foLLowERs of AfRiCAn RELigion
A
frican countries where African reli-
gion is practiced by more than 33 
percent of the population
Benin 51.5%
Sierra leone 46.4%
guinea-Bissau 45.4%
Botswana 38.8%
Mozambique 35.1%
liberia 34.1%
ivory coast 33.5%
Burkina faso 33.5%
(Source: www.adherents.com)


--- PAGE 12 ---
11
AfRiCAn RELigion As mAnifEsTED By AfRiCAn EThniCiTiEs
Northern Africa Obsolete Religions:
Berber religion
cushite religion
egyptian religion
Eastern Africa Obsolete Religion:
Aksumite religion
Eastern Africa Living Religions:
dinka religion
nuer religion
Shilluk religion
galla religion
Acholi religion
Ateso religion
Baganda religion
Bagisu religion
Banyankore religion
langi religion
Banyoro religion
lugbara religion
Akamba religion
Akikuyu religion
Maasai religion
Bahaya religion
Bachagga religion
Baﬁ  pa religion
Bahehe religion
Bamakonda religion
Banyakyusa religion
Basukuma religion
Banyamwezi religion
Central Africa Living Religions:
Babemba religion
Bacongo religion
Baluba religion
Bandembu religion
Banyakyusa religion
Baka religion
Bambuti religion
Shona religion
Banyarwanda religion
Barundi religion
Southern Africa Living Religions:
!Kung religion
Khoi religion
lovedu religion
San religion
Sotho religion
Swazi religion
Tswana religion
Xhosa religion
Zulu religion
Western Africa Living Religions:
Ashanti religion
Bambara religion
dogon religion
edo religion
ewe religion
fang religion
fanti religion
fon religion
ga religion
igbo religion
Mende religion
nupe religion
Tiv religion
Yoruba religion
introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 13 ---
12
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
An Adinkira symbol dyed on 
a cloth. The Ashanti people 
of Ghana in West Africa 
have developed a variety 
of Adinkira, designs that 
have symbolic meaning. 
These designs are often 
stamped on cloth known as 
Adinkira cloth and used for 
decoration. The Adinkira, 
right, is the Gye Nyame, 
which means “Except God (I 
fear none). ” It expresses the 
supremacy of God.
lages to live in the cities, most Africans still identify themselves 
according to the heritage of their ancestors. 
A PoPuLATion of B ELiEvERs
African religion remains very much alive. Even those countries 
on the West African coast that have had a Christian presence 
since the 15th century still have high percentages of adherents of 
African religion. In five of these countries—Benin, Mozambique, 
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, and the Ivory Coast—African religion is 
the majority religion. In Sierra Leone, Botswana, and Burkina 
Faso more than 33 percent follow African religion, although it 
is not the religion of the majority. These figures represent peo-
ple who primarily follow African traditional religion; however, 
there are also Christians and Muslims who still practice elements 
of traditional African religion alongside their professed beliefs. 
This accounts for the varying figures that are sometimes seen in


--- PAGE 14 ---
13
numbers of adherents of African religion. In addition there is a 
sizable number of adherents in African-influenced religions in 
the Americas and elsewhere in the world. If numbers of adher-
ents are indicative of the continued existence of a religion, then 
the numbers of adherents of African religion ensure its continu-
ation in the future. 
For many people, combining traditional religion with either 
Christianity or Islam is also a way of life. In particular, what is 
known variously as indigenous Christianity or independent 
churches have arisen throughout sub-Saharan Africa and prob-
ably represent the largest current manifestation of traditional 
African religion, albeit in a pluralist context.
ThE AfRiCAn ConTinEnT
To understand African religion, it helps to look at Africa itself. 
Africa is the second largest continent on Earth. Only Asia is larger. 
Africa’s 11.7 million square miles make it about three times the 
size of Europe and twice the size of the United States, including 
Alaska. On the north, where it shares the waters of the Mediterra-
nean Sea with Spain, Italy, and Greece, it lies close to Europe. Only 
the narrow Red Sea separates it from the Middle East. Its western 
shore stretches along the North and South Atlantic Ocean, and 
its eastern shore the entire length of the Indian Ocean. 
Because of its vast size Africa is a land of contrasts. It contains 
one of the world’s greatest deserts, the Sahara, which stretches 
across the north-central part of the continent, dividing north 
from south. North of the Sahara lie countries rich with ancient 
tradition. Ancient Egypt, whose pharaoh once ruled vast hold-
ings in the Middle East, was one of the most powerful countries 
in the world. Carthage, a great city-state centuries before the 
Roman Empire, lay in what is now Tunisia. Trading with Greece 
and Rome, and with Asia to the east, the North Africans devel-
oped cosmopolitan cultures. They built large cities, erected 
monuments, and developed written language. They worshipped 
their own ancient gods. Later their traditional religions would be 
swept aside by first Christianity and then Islam. 
introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 15 ---
14
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A member of the Tuareg 
community, who live mostly 
in the Saharan and Sahelian 
regions of Africa. The Tuareg are 
seminomadic and travel with their 
herds on a seasonal basis. 
 Tuareg 
means “people of the veil”—
Tuareg men have traditionally 
worn a veil across their faces. 
The Tuareg are Muslim, but their 
traditional rituals and beliefs, 
including widespread beliefs in a 
spirit world, overlap with those 
of Islam.


--- PAGE 16 ---
15
ThE suB-sAhARA
Below the Sahara is a land of enormous variety, from snow-cov-
ered mountains and deep valleys with great rivers to open grass-
lands to rainforest. Cut off from known civilization by the huge, 
empty Sahara, these lands remained largely untouched by out-
side exploration for centuries. However they were not uninhab-
ited. Indeed humanity as we know it may have sprung from deep 
within the African continent. Recent scientifi  c studies in Kenya 
and elsewhere in Africa strongly suggest that Africa may be the 
birthplace of the human race.
AfRiCAn PEoPLEs AnD ThEiR RELigions
Over many centuries the African peoples below the Sahara lived 
in close relationship with the land. Some were nomads—wan-
derers—who followed the animals they hunted or established 
camps where their herds could graze. Others farmed or lived off 
the land, gathering native plants for food. Often they were widely 
separated from their closest neighbors. Living more or less in iso-
lation, they developed their own languages and customs. They 
also developed religious practices that served their particular 
lives and needs.
African religion is not the only religion found in Africa today. 
However, it is the only religion that can claim to have originated 
in Africa. Other religions found in Africa 
have their origins in other parts of the 
world.
AfRiCAn RELigion AnD oThER 
RELigions
African religion differs from religions 
such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam 
in a number of ways. Although individual 
peoples may remember legendary fi  gures 
from their history, African religion has no 
single founder or central historical fi  gure. 
Like Native American religions and Asian 
Physical	and	Spiritual	Suffering	
African religion teaches that people 
are made up of moral, social, 
spiritual, and physical parts. These 
parts function together. If any part 
is out of balance, the person may 
become physically ill or suffer 
spiritually. That is why a confl  ict with 
another person may make someone 
sick, or a moral misdeed may bring 
about misfortune.
introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 17 ---
16
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
religions such as Shinto and Daoism, it 
originates with the people themselves. It is 
an expression of many thousands of years 
of living close to the land and of seeking 
answers to the mysteries of life: Why are 
we here? How do we live well? Why do 
we die? African religion has no churches 
or mosques like those of Christianity or 
Islam. Instead it has shrines constructed 
according to the traditions of the particu-
lar geographical area. People may also turn 
to a geographical or natural feature, such 
as a mountain or a large tree, as a focus for 
worship. 
In African religion there is no single 
ordained priesthood. Religious duties are 
carried out by a variety of religious lead-
ers. There are priests and priestesses, heal-
ers, diviners, mediums, seers, rainmakers, 
elders, and rulers, each with a special role 
in maintaining the spiritual life of the 
community and its people.
ThE oRAL TRADiTion
Traditional African lore has always been 
passed down orally. There is no written set 
of beliefs, no “holy book” such as the Bible 
or the Quran. Cultural beliefs and rules for 
living are passed down from generation to 
generation by word of mouth. Most Afri-
can peoples have no written language, but 
members of the community are trained 
from childhood to perform prodigious 
acts of memorization, reciting the whole 
history of the community for successive 
generations.
Common ThEmEs in AfRiCAn LifE
A
lthough traditional African religion 
varies widely from region to region 
and people to people, there are a number 
of things that they all have in common.
• All things in the universe are part of a 
whole. There is no sharp distinction be-
tween the sacred and the nonsacred.
• in most African traditions there is a Su-
preme Being: a creator, sustainer, pro-
vider, and controller of all creation.
• Serving with the creator are a variety of 
lesser and intermediary gods and guard-
ian spirits. These lesser gods are con-
stantly involved in human aﬀ  airs. People 
communicate with these gods through 
rituals, sacriﬁ  ces, and prayers.
• The human condition is imperfect and 
always will be. Sickness, suﬀ  ering, and 
death are all fundamental parts of life. 
Suﬀ  ering is caused by sins and misdeeds 
that oﬀ  end the gods and ancestors, or by 
being out of harmony with society. 
• ritual actions may relieve the problems 
and suﬀ  erings of human life, either by 
satisfying the oﬀ  ended gods or by resolv-
ing social conﬂ  icts. rituals help to restore 
people to the traditional values and 
renew their commitment to a spiritual life. 
• Human society is communal. Ancestors, 
the living, the living-dead, and those yet 
to be born are all an important part of the 
community. The relationships between 
the worldly and the otherworldly help to 
guide and balance the lives of the com-
munity. Humans need to interact with the 
spirit world, which is all around them.


--- PAGE 18 ---
1
An African father and child 
in their village. Community 
values are a central force 
in African life and the 
African view of the world is 
focused on being part of a 
communal group. 
BAsiC BELiEfs
Followers of African religion make no distinction between reli-
gion and other aspects of their lives. Their beliefs are so closely 
bound to their culture that religion and culture are one. Religion is 
therefore not something people do at certain times and in certain 
places, but it is part of the fabric of living. Although a Supreme 
Being is above the living, lesser gods, spirits, and ancestors walk 
beside the living and guide them in the direction they must go. 
They are sometimes displeased by those who do not heed them. 
People and gods are constantly interacting through ritual, prayer, 
and sacrifice, but mostly through the business of living.
Among African peoples community, culture, and religion are 
tightly bound together. The African view of the world is funda-
mentally one of being part of a communal group. People believe 
introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 19 ---
18
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
in sharing their property and services, and they expect the other 
members of the community to share with them. According to 
noted scholar John Mbiti they believe that “whatever happens to 
the individual happens to the whole group, and whatever hap-
pens to the group happens to the individual. The individual can 
only say, ‘I am, because we are, and since 
we are, therefore I am.’” In this communi-
ty spirit lies their security. (In John Mbiti,  
African Religions & Philosophy.)
AfRiCA AnD iTs hisToRy
Although much of Africa was isolated 
from the rest of the world, the areas along 
the coasts developed important cultures. 
By 3400 
b.c.e. Egypt was a flourishing 
empire with a highly developed religion. 
The pyramids are its most visible and last-
ing testimony. However although they rep-
resent a triumph of technology, Egyptian 
pyramids are more than just great won-
ders of the world. They are also religious 
structures. Spiritually pyramids are ritual 
objects that reflect the ancient connection 
of kingship to African religion, along with 
belief in life hereafter and immortality. 
Egyptian religion was not the only reli-
gion in ancient Africa. Judaism originated 
in the Middle East, but as early as 1300 
b.c.e.  
groups of Hebrew peoples were living on 
the African continent, primarily in Egypt. 
Since biblical times in Ethiopia, there have 
lived thousands of African Jews, known 
to Ethiopians as Falashas. These so-called 
Black Jews of Ethiopia practice a religion 
based entirely on the Old Testament of the 
Bible but including certain Ethiopian Afri-


--- PAGE 20 ---
19
The Pyramid of Cheops and the Sphinx at Giza, outside Cairo, 
Egypt. The pyramids were the burial places of the pharaohs, 
the kings of Egypt, in the period known as the Old Kingdom 
(2649 
b.c.e.–2150 b.c.e.). The word for pyramid in ancient 
Egyptian was mr, meaning “place of ascension, ” because it 
enabled the pharaoh to join the Sun god, Re.
i ntroduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 21 ---
20
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
can religious elements. Like other Ethio-
pians they believe in and use amulets, 
charms, and magic ritual and prayers.
EARLy ChRisTiAniTy in Af RiCA
According to Christian tradition Mary and 
Joseph, the parents of Jesus Christ, fled to 
Egypt with the baby Jesus to escape perse-
cution. So in one sense Christianity came 
to Africa even before its founding. Some 
of the earliest Christian communities were 
in North Africa. When Christianity began 
its spread out of the Middle East it moved 
into Greece, and from there to Greek col-
onies. Historians believe that Christian-
ity first came into Africa around 40 
c.e. 
through Alexandria, a city of the Hellenic 
Empire founded by Alexander the Great. 
At about the same time a Christian com-
munity arose in Egypt that was made up 
of native Egyptians. The Copts, a Christian 
tradition, trace their origins to the preach-
ing of Saint Mark, one of the writers of the 
Christian Gospels, who visited Egypt.
A second way in which Christianity 
spread to Africans was through Carthage, 
a Roman province that lay in what is now 
Tunisia. From about 44 
b.c.e. Carthage was 
culturally Roman; its official language was 
Latin. The official religion was worship of 
the Roman gods. Christians were perse-
cuted and even killed. Persecution seems 
to have worked against the Romans, how-
ever, because Christianity grew rapidly in 
North Africa. African Christianity pro-
duced such great leaders as Tertullian,


--- PAGE 22 ---
21
The Church of Saint George in Lalibela, in the Amhara region of Ethiopia. This 
rock-hewn church, built in the 13th century, is an important pilgrimage site 
for members of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. 
i ntroduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 23 ---
22
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Saint Augustine, Saint Cyprian, and Saints Perpetua and Fel i-
city. At least one writer, Tertullian, recognized the impor-
tance of the African religious concepts of God to developing 
Christianity.
In 350 
c.e. the ancient kingdom of Aksum, known as Ethiopia 
today, officially embraced Christianity. At that time the Aksumite 
king Ezana, originally a strong adherent of his African religion, 
converted to Christianity. Aksumite Chris-
tianity, later called Ethiopian Christianity, 
has its roots in the Coptic Christianity of 
Egypt.
AfRiCAn RELigion AnD isLAm
Islam means “submission to the will of 
God.” The creed of Islam is “There is no 
god but Allah [God], and Muhammad is 
His prophet.” When Muslims arrived in 
Africa in the seventh century 
c.e. they did 
not identify African religion as a religion. 
They called the native people kaffirs, which 
means “infidels”— people who have no 
faith, or unbelievers. The name stuck, and 
Africans came to be known as people with 
no faith. 
The early Muslims did not wage a holy 
war against African religion or prac-
tice forced conversions. However, Islam 
proved to be an attractive religion to many 
Africans, particularly in the north, who 
may have found similarities between their 
religion and Islam. Today Islam is one of 
the most dynamic religions in Africa. It is 
well represented in practically all African 
nations. In some African countries such 
as Libya and Morocco it is the predomi-
nant religion.


--- PAGE 24 ---
23
ThE ARRivAL of ThE PoRTuguEsE
The Portuguese came to Africa during the 15th century. Prince 
Henry the Navigator hoped to find a safe new access to Asia and 
Africa and their treasures, which included pepper, spices, gold, 
ivory, and precious gems. He received the blessing of the pope, 
who authorized Portugal and Spain to conquer and possess lands 
and their riches as well as to pass on the message of Christianity.
There has been a mosque 
on this site in Djenné in Mali 
since the 13th century. The 
current mosque was built of 
clay by traditional methods 
between 1906 and 1909. introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 25 ---
24
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
CulTuRAl Misund ERsTAndings
The expeditions usually included chaplains and priests. Sailing 
along the West and East African coasts, they preached the Chris-
tian message to the people they met and took advantage of Afri-
can hospitality. Eventually they established African Christian 
communities. However they were to be disappointed. African 
peoples had welcomed them warmly. But that did not mean that 
they were ready to give up their cultures and beliefs. The mis-
sionaries failed to appreciate the African religion and culture on 
which the welcome was based, and misunderstanding arose. In 
frustration the missionaries developed hostile attitudes toward 
the people. Finally they succumbed to the temptations of the 
slave trade. Portuguese-sponsored Christianity in Africa ended 
badly.
EuRoPEAn Mission ARy ACTiviTy
During the 19th century European countries staked claims to 
African lands in the rush to build empires. This so-called scram-
ble for Africa saw African countries divided among the British, 
the French, the Germans, and the Dutch, among others. Over-
whelmingly Christian, they invited a new wave of Christian mis-
sionaries, who came bringing “missions Christianity” with them. 
Missionaries to Africa included not only Roman Catholic priests, 
as in the case of the Portuguese and Spanish, but also clerics and 
laypeople of various Protestant denominations.
undERsTAnding Af RiCAn CulTuRE
The missionaries established schools and hospitals and began 
preaching the Gospel of Christianity. They were well-meaning, 
but they had little understanding of the cultures they were enter-
ing. Their intent was to bring Christianity to a continent they 
believed to have no true religion. They meant to stamp out Afri-
can religious practices they saw as superstition and ignorance.
Living and working among the African people, some mem-
bers of missionary societies began to appreciate Africans and 
African religion. They began to make the effort to understand the


--- PAGE 26 ---
25
culture. From this effort they could finally begin to establish a 
Christian relationship with African religion. Christianity is now 
the majority religion within Africa followed by more than 46 
percent of the continent’s population.
uniTy AnD DivERsiTy in Af RiCAn RELigions
Although it is possible to make some generalizations about Afri-
can religion, it is important to remember that African religions 
are not one, but many. African religions have a great variety of 
rituals, myths, beliefs, and deities. Yet in spite of their differences 
from each other and from many other world religions, they share 
with each other and with most other faiths the goal of guiding 
individuals safely through the passages of life, from birth and 
puberty, marriage and maturity, to death and ancestorhood. 
They mark not only the seasons of life, each with its particular 
responsibilities and duties, but also the seasons of the year and 
the cycles of time. They answer the questions of why there is 
suffering and death in the world and offer ways of dealing with 
human pain. Finally they provide a way for the people who fol-
low them to be in touch with the spiritual in themselves and in 
the universe. 
There are as many African religions as there are African peo-
ples. However in their diversity they are one. Whether African 
religion is based in Central Africa, eastern Africa, western Africa, 
or southern Africa, the belief in a Supreme Being, superhuman 
beings, and honoring ancestors are its cornerstones. They point 
to the same understanding.
introduction: Africa and its People


--- PAGE 27 ---
26 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A
frican peoples have wonderful tales to tell about the begin-
ning of time. Traditionally the elders of the village gather 
the children and tell them about times when the world was 
young, when animals could talk, when heroes walked among 
humankind, when their God made the Earth and everything in it. 
In the hands of the skilled storyteller the characters come alive, 
and the children will never forget them. The stories are entertain-
ing, but entertainment is not their primary goal. As they listen, 
the children are absorbing the myths and the culture of their 
community.
how TRADiTion is PAssED on
Living close to nature, Africans have always observed the world 
around them. Looking up, they saw the vast expanse of the sky. 
Around them they saw oceans, seas, lakes, rivers, forests, animals, 
and many other marvels of creation. They pondered the kinds of 
Masai girls doing beadwork. The Masai are 
a seminomadic people living in Kenya and 
northern Tanzania. The Masai have a body of 
oral law, and major decisions in the community 
are governed by elders. Their Supreme Being, 
called Enkai, has a dual nature with benevolent 
and vengeful sides. 
THE BEGINNING 
OF TIME: THE 
ORAL TRADITION
CHAPTER 2


--- PAGE 28 ---
2
The Beginning of Time: The oral Tradition


--- PAGE 29 ---
28
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
An elderly San 
(Bushmen) hunter tells a 
story of magical powers 
in the Kalahari Desert in 
Namibia.


--- PAGE 30 ---
29
questions that humankind has asked for untold centuries. How 
did the world come to be? What hand fashioned us and put us 
here? What does it mean to be alive? 
Over centuries people have formed answers to such questions, 
often in the form of stories, myths, and proverbs. These answers 
were passed down by word of mouth from one generation to the 
next. In this way oral traditions, many of which address ques-
tions of existence from the beginning of time, are established. 
The oral traditions constitute the method of transmitting history 
and religious traditions by spoken rather than written means. In 
African traditional communities it was part of home education 
to memorize those traditions with great accuracy. 
Oral traditions are passed on in a variety of forms—in myths, 
legends, stories, and proverbs. Stories generally say something 
about life in order to educate and entertain the community. 
Myths deal with the divine. They have religious subjects, such as 
the origin of the universe and of nature. They address and answer 
questions like, Where did humankind come from? How are 
human beings expected to act as they travel through life? What 
is the destiny of the human race? Legends are a body of stories 
about families, people, and particularly heroes of the communi-
ty. Often based on real people and facts, they have been told and 
retold until they become part of the lore of the community as a 
whole. Proverbs are short statements that express wisdom about 
creation and human experience.
CREATion myThs AnD ThE fALL of humAnkin D
From their earliest beginnings, African people have asked ques-
tions about their existence. Such questions as, Who are we? How 
did we come to be here? How should we understand our place in 
this world? have given rise to the rich and varied creation myths 
of African peoples. 
Myths of creation tell of the sacred beginnings of the people. 
They usually center on a Supreme Being who, according to Afri-
can oral tradition, created the world. They recognize the special 
position the Creator has given to humankind. In the creation  
The Beginning of Time: The oral Tradition


--- PAGE 31 ---
30
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
myth of the Yoruba people, for example, the Supreme Being, 
Olodumare, enlists the help of Orisha Nla (“the Great God”) to 
make a world out of “magic earth.” Orisha Nla fashions human 
beings out of earth, but only Olodumare knows the secret of 
how to give the bodies life. “To this day,” the myth ends, “Orisha 
Nla, through the agency of parents, makes the body, but only the 
Supreme Being can give it life.” (In J. F. Bierlein, Parallel Myths.)
African creation myths often tell about the special relation-
ship between a God and the first people, when the heavens were 
very close to Earth. However humankind, being imperfect, made 
mistakes for which they must be punished. The Dinka people say 
that once a rope hung down from heaven for people to climb up 
when they wanted to talk to their God. But an old woman mash-
ing yams kept hitting the underside of heaven with her pestle and, 
weary of the noise, the God pulled up the rope and withdrew the 
heavens to a higher plane. Still, people are always encouraged to 
make up for their failures. African myths commonly conclude 
with a lesson about the importance of people living well in this 
world.
hERoEs AnD LEgEnDs
Human life is generally marked by success and failure as well as 
a variety of minor ups and downs. Hero tales and legends focus 
on success, encouraging a positive group image. In African tra-
ditions, many heroes are human beings who are deified, that is, 
elevated to the status of gods. Through their acts on Earth they 
become associates of the Supreme Being. A hero may be some-
one who does a great deed for the community or someone who 
seems touched by the gods, especially chosen from childhood for 
some higher purpose. 
Lubaale Mukasa, a god of the Baganda people of East Africa, 
is an example of a deified hero, a human who has become a god. 
(The title Lubaale refers to a spiritual being.) When, as a child, 
he disappeared from his home and appeared mysteriously on 
another island, the people there thought he must be superhuman 
to have appeared, seemingly out of nowhere. He refused to eat


--- PAGE 32 ---
31
Bushmen or Baswara people setting traps to catch food. The Baswara, who live in the Kalahari 
Desert in Botswana, are the second-largest group of indigenous hunter-gatherers in Africa. 
Their traditional life, with beliefs and lifestyle closely tied to the land, is currently changing. 
They are controversially being encouraged by the government to move outside their traditional 
reserves to settlements in a government scheme to integrate them into modern life. 
The Beginning of Time: The oral Tradition


--- PAGE 33 ---
32
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Masai warriors in northern Tanzania perform a coming-
of-age “jumping dance. ”  The Masai are cattle-herders, 
and they believe that Enkai (their Supreme Being and 
rain god) granted all cattle to them for safekeeping 
when the Earth and sky split.


--- PAGE 34 ---
33
anything but the heart and liver of an ox, and he drank its blood, 
confi  rming the people’s opinion that he was a god. The people 
soon began consulting him on matters of health and money. 
When he disappeared as mysteriously as he had arrived, Lubaale 
Mukasa was acknowledged as one of the highest-ranking gods 
of their people.  
sToRiEs AnD fABLEs
Stories and fables usually illustrate some truth about human 
nature and end with a stated or unstated moral. Such stories are 
partly for entertainment, but they are more than just amusing 
tales. They are the African way of teaching and passing down eth-
ics, or right behavior, to the next genera-
tion. One of the most famous African folk 
heroes is Ananse, the spider. Ananse is the 
hero of many folktales of the Akan people 
of West Africa. The Ananse tales have 
crossed from West Africa to the Americas, 
where they are familiar to many children. 
Ananse is a trickster. Tricksters may be 
human or animal or a little of both, but 
they all have superhuman powers that 
they can use for good or for harm. They 
also suffer from many of the character 
fl  aws that ordinary humans have, such as 
greed and envy. As a result, they are often 
caught in their own snares. Stories about 
Ananse, or as he is usually called, Father 
Ananse, attribute great skill and ingenu-
ity to him. In one tale Ananse tries to take 
back the wisdom he has distributed in the 
world by storing it in a large pot. However, 
when he is challenged by his son Ntikuma, 
Ananse angrily allows the pot to fall from 
the top of a tree, and human beings are 
able to gather it up for themselves. 
Proverbs	in	African	Society
Proverbs teach reverence for and 
appreciation of authority; the realization 
that God the Creator is a supreme being, 
reverence for justice, human sympathy 
and fellow feeling among individuals, the 
ability to [turn away from] bitterness and 
learn from painful experiences, and the 
futility of envy and competitiveness. They 
help you to understand that if you twist 
the arm of justice, you twist the morals 
of the society. We cannot all hope to be 
like the maize (corn). The maize has good 
luck all the time. It goes to the soil naked 
and returns with good luck with hundreds 
of children. Look at your fi  ve fi  ngers. Are 
they equal? So are human beings. The old 
man is wise because he is in his second 
childhood and, like a child, he is always 
ready to learn.
(In Ryszard Pachocinski, 
Proverbs of 
Africa: Human Nature in the Nigerian 
Oral Tradition.
) 
The Beginning of Time: The oral Tradition


--- PAGE 35 ---
34
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A bronze mask of a leopard. 
The leopard, like the lion, 
symbolizes ritual power. 
The leopard is also a symbol 
of royalty—for example, 
the leopard represents 
the spiritual aspect of the 
kingdom of Benin in Nigeria. 
PRovERBs
The Nupe people of West Africa express their God’s being with-
out end in the proverb “God will outlive eternity.” Proverbs are 
short sayings that express a recognized truth. Because people 
repeat them often, they are easy to remember. African people


--- PAGE 36 ---
35
express their belief in their God and his 
works through proverbs that remind them 
constantly of his power.
AfRiCAn RELigions AnD 
ThE oRAL TRADiTion
The African oral tradition, with its myths, 
legends, stories, and proverbs, instills 
the important elements of religion and 
culture in the minds and hearts of the 
African people all the way across the con-
tinent. The stories, myths, and tales that 
they hear and repeat from early childhood 
teach them about the ethics, beliefs, and 
traditions of their community. From their 
oral literature they learn why things are 
as they are and how life is to be lived on 
this Earth. Perhaps most importantly they 
learn of the power and majesty of a God, 
the Supreme Being, and of their special 
relationship to him, their Creator and the 
giver of all life.
The	Shining	One
The Akan people of West Africa 
have many proverbs that are related 
to their creation myths. Their name 
for God is Nyame, which means 
“the Supreme Being,” “the Shining 
One,” “the Originator,” and “fi  rst 
mover of everything.” Here are 
some of the ways in which their 
proverbs depict him:
No one points out the Nyame to a child.
The Earth is wide, but Nyame is chief. 
All people are Nyame’s offspring; no one 
is the offspring of Earth. 
Says Hawk: All Nyame did is good. 
The order Nyame has settled, living 
people cannot subvert.
There is no by-pass to Nyame’s destiny. 
The Beginning of Time: The oral Tradition


--- PAGE 37 ---
36 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
CHAPTER 3
THE SUPREME 
BEING
I
n the Adinkira patterns of Akan art, there is a pattern that is 
called Gye Nyame, meaning “Except God.” When it appeared 
on a Ghana postage stamp, it was called “The Omniscience of 
God,” referring to God’s quality of omniscience, or knowing all 
things. A stamp collector remarked: “How apt that an African 
country should be the first to remind the world of God’s power 
[on a stamp].” “Except God” is an end of a proverb that goes, “No 
one saw the beginning, none shall see the end, except God.” That is 
to say that no one saw the beginning of creation, and no one will 
see its end, except God. (In Noel Q. King, Religions of Africa.)
 Most African oral traditions have pointed to the existence of 
a power above which there is no other power, a Supreme Being, 
Creator, and Originator of the World. 
ThE AfRiCAn ConCEPT of monoThEism
In Western religion religious systems are usually classified as 
either monotheistic, that is, believing in one God, or polytheis-
tic, believing in many gods. In African religion monotheism and 
polytheism exist side by side. 
A spirit ceremony is held by the Fon people of Benin, Nigeria, to contact the 
spirit world. In African traditional religion the spirits are always present, and 
requests and offerings are made to them for health, prosperity, and protection.


--- PAGE 38 ---
3
The Supreme Being


--- PAGE 39 ---
38
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Often the African concept of monotheism is one of a hierar-
chy with a Supreme Being at its head. In this system the Supreme 
Being rules over a vast number of divinities who are considered 
to be the associates of the God. African understanding of the 
structure of the heavenly kingdom might be compared to the 
Christian concept of God ruling over the saints and angels. The 
divine hierarchy in African religion makes it possible to classify 
them as both monotheistic and polytheistic at once (monothe-
ism with polytheism).
ThE nATuRE of ThE suPREmE BEing
How the many different African peoples conceive of God usu-
ally follows the social structure of a particular locality or culture. 
African people whose cultures are organized as monarchies with 
a king at the head usually conceive of their God as the supreme 
king. As there can be only one supreme king in a community, 
Kente cloth, made by the 
Ashanti people of Ghana, is 
woven exclusively by men in 
narrow strips with complex 
patterns. The warp and weft 
threads that run up and 
down the cloth are each 
given names that symbolize 
beliefs, historical events, 
and political or community 
organizations. There are 
names such as dependency 
on God, progress, harmony, 
warmth, and bravery.


--- PAGE 40 ---
39
Africans have traditionally concluded that 
there can be only one Supreme Being for 
the entire human race.
The majority of African peoples con-
ceive of God as one. However, among the 
Fon people of Benin in West Africa, Nana-
Buluku, the name for God, expresses one 
God in duality, or two. In the Fon religion 
God is two beings, male and female. 
The most complex concept of God is 
that of the Bambara people of West Africa. 
The Supreme God of the Bambara is called 
Bemba or Ngala. Bemba has, in a way, cre-
ated himself as a quarternity (a union of a 
group of four). The four aspects of Bemba 
are Bemba, Nyale, Faro, and Ndomadyiri. 
The Bambara people understand these 
aspects of their God to be pure creative 
energy that is expressed as four “persons.” 
Each plays a different role in the creation 
of the universe. This concept of a single 
God having a multiple nature is somewhat 
similar to the Christian doctrine of God as 
a trinity, or three in one—father, son, and 
holy spirit.
ATTRiBuTEs of goD
People in African religious traditions fre-
quently associate their Supreme Being 
with certain basic attributes. These are:
• God is the Creator of all things. 
• God is the absolute controller and 
    sustainer of the universe. 
• God provides for what he created. 
• God possesses all that he created.
The	Aspects	of	Bemba
The Supreme Being of the Bambara, 
Bemba or Ngala, is one God in four. 
As the Supreme Being, he is master 
of all creation. Yet he has created 
himself in four aspects. They are:
• Bemba, master of air
• Nyale, also known as Mousso   
 Koroni Koundye, master of fi  re
• Faro, master of water
• Ndomadyiri, master of Earth
Together as one, the four aspects of 
Bemba rule all of the elements on 
which life is based.
Nyame	Symbol
Nyame, biribi wo soro, ma no meka 
me nsa 
(“O God, there is something 
above, let it reach me”). “This pattern was 
stamped on paper and hung above the 
lintel of a door in the palace. The King 
of Ashanti used to touch this lintel, then 
his forehead, then his breast, repeating 
these words three times.” It is sometimes 
stamped on sheepskin or leather.
(In J. B. Danquah,
 The Akan Doctrine of 
God: A Fragment of Gold Coast Ethics 
and Religion.
)
The Supreme Being


--- PAGE 41 ---
40
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ThE CREAToR of ALL Things
Both African oral traditions and later writ-
ten sources indicate that all African peo-
ples believe that power of creation is the 
foremost attribute of the Supreme Being. 
African myths of creation strongly sup-
port the idea that all Africans at all times 
from prehistory to the present-day have 
recognized a Supreme Being as the Cre-
ator of all things. In addition the names 
by which many different groups across 
Africa call the Supreme Being express the 
idea of God as the “Originator,” Creator of 
everything.
ConTRollER And susTAinER 
of THE univERsE
In most African tradition and thought 
one’s God has absolute control of the 
universe and all that it contains. This is 
because all other beings exist because of 
him. As Originator of the universe, God is 
the ultimate fountainhead of all power of 
all natural rules for orderly existence. 
Peoples of the different regions of Afri-
ca express God’s controlling and sustaining role of creation in 
various ways. The Ashanti of Ghana in West Africa regard God 
as the “Supreme Being, upon whom men lean and do not fall.” 
The Nandi of Kenya in Eastern Africa believe that God “is the far-
off driving force behind everything, the balance of nature.” The 
Bambuti of Congo in Central Africa express the control and sus-
tenance of God in the saying “If God should die, the world would 
also collapse,” which expresses their belief in the controlling and 
sustaining power of God. From South Africa the Zulu say that 
God “made us, and is, as it were, in us his work. We exist because 
He existed.”
The	Originator
The Banyarwanda of Rwanda in 
Central Africa speak simply of 
creation by saying, “There was 
nothing before God created the 
world.” In the same region the Baila 
of Zambia call God “Creator.” The 
Baila name is derived from the verb 
that means “to make, to originate, 
to be the fi  rst to do anything.” So 
God is thought of as the Originator 
of all things. The Ngoni people of 
Southern Africa call God as Creator 
“the Original Source,” and the Zulu of 
South Africa believe that God “made 
all things”; pointing to heaven they 
say, “the Creator of all things is in 
heaven.” The Banyankore of Uganda 
in eastern Africa refer to God as “the 
Creator who sets things in order, 
creates everything and gives new life,” 
while the Akan of Western Africa 
refer to God as “He who alone created 
the world.”


--- PAGE 42 ---
41
Snow-covered Mount 
Kilimanjaro is the highest 
mountain on the African 
continent. Such mountains, 
including Kenya, Elgon, 
Cameroon, and the Rwenzori 
Range, are regarded as seats 
of divinity. 
THE PRovidER
In names, in mythology, in legends, and particularly in proverbs, 
African people show that they are aware that their God provides 
for them. They acknowledge this in a variety of ways.
 The name for God among the Ovimbundu of southwestern 
Africa means “He who supplies the needs of his creatures.” In 
expressing the basis of God’s providence, the Baganda of Uganda 
in eastern Africa have a proverb: “God gives his gifts to whoso-
ever he favors.” Africans have also observed that the providence 
of God functions entirely independently of human beings. The 
Ewe of Ghana in western Africa say that God “is good, for he has 
never withdrawn from us the good things which he gave us”; the 
name by which the Bakiga know God means “the One who gave 
everything on this Earth and can also take it away.”
The Supreme Being


--- PAGE 43 ---
42
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A totem in a street in the 
town of Possotome in Benin. 
A totem represents a spirit 
that offers protection to 
an individual, family, or 
community. Totems can 
represent animals, plants, 
or natural phenomena such 
as lightning or flowing 
water, and their strength 
and power flows into those 
protected by it. 
THE Poss EssoR of All H E CREATEd
In many African traditions God is not only the giver of life, he is 
also the possessor of whatever has been created. The Barundi of 
Central Africa have two names that describe God as “the Owner 
of everything” and “the Owner of all powers.” The Baganda of 
Uganda in Eastern Africa call God “the Master of all things.” The 
Nuer of Sudan in North Africa neither grumble nor complain 
when a person or a cow dies, but simply say that God “has taken 
only what was his own.”


--- PAGE 44 ---
43
ThE nAmEs of goD
T
he following names of god express 
African ideas of the one god the cre-
ator. These African names demonstrate the 
unity of thinking about a god while at the 
same time expressing the African diversity 
of expression about the same and one god. 
The names listed are all taken from Africa 
south of the Sahara desert, where living Afri-
can religion is found. They represent diﬀ  erent 
regions, countries, and ethnicities.
Central African Regions
Country Ethnicity Name M
 eaning
Burundi Barundi i mana The creator of everything
 Bamum n jinyi He who is everywhere;
   He who sees and hears   
cameroon      ev erything
        Bulu                          Mabee    The one who bears the world
 d uala ebasi omnipotent father
central African Baya Zambi c reator
republic
congo  V ili nzambi creator and ultimate 
(Brazzaville)      sour ce of power
congo (Kinshasa) Baluba V idye great creator Spirit
gabon f ang nyame creator
rwanda Banyarwanda imana T he creator of everything
 A mbo leza creator
Zambia Bar otse nyambi creator
 Baila l eza creator
The Supreme Being
(continues)


--- PAGE 45 ---
44
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ThE nAmEs of goD (continued)
Eastern African Regions
Country Ethnicity Name M eaning
Kenya A kamba Mumbi creator, Maker, fashioner
Sudan nuer K woth creator Spirit
 dinka Jok creator Spirit
 Shilluk Juok c reator Spirit
Tanzania chagga ruw a Sun
 g ogo Mulungu creator
 n yakyusa Kyala owner of all things
 Bazinza K azooba Power of the Sun
Uganda Baganda Katonda creator, originator
 A lur Jok creator Spirit
 Ban yankore ruhanga creator and fixer of everything
Western African Regions
Country Ethnicity Name M
 eaning
Benin f on nana-Buluku original creator
  M awu-lisa continuer of creation
Burkina faso Tallensi W ene Sky god
gambia S erer rog creator
ghana A shanti nyame The Shining one
ivory coast Akan on yankopon Alone, the great one


--- PAGE 46 ---
45
Country Ethnicity Name Meaning
nigeria igbo chwuku great Spirit 
 Y oruba  olodumare  The Most Supreme Being
Senegal Serer r og creator
Sierra leone Mende l eve The High-Up one
 Kono Y ataa The one you meet everywhere
Southern African Regions
Country Ethnicity Name M eaning
Angola Bac ongo nzambi creator
 o vimbundu Suku He who supplies the 
      needs of H is creatures
Botswana Tswana M odimo The greatest Spirit
lesotho Basuto M olimo The greatest Spirit
Malawi chew a Mulungu The creator
 ngoni Uluhlanga The original Source
South Africa Zulu Unk ulunkulu The great oldest one
Swaziland Swazi M velamqandi “Who-appeared-ﬁ  rst, ” the 
      po wer above, unapproach-
      able , unpredictable, of no 
      speciﬁ  c sex
  
Zimbabwe Shona Mwari He who is in, or owns the 
      sk y, the great one of the Sky
 ndebele Unkulunkulu The great oldest one
The Supreme Being


--- PAGE 47 ---
46 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
I
n African religion the Supreme Being reigns as the chief god in 
heaven. However, in most traditions he is not involved in the 
day-to-day affairs of human beings. This function he delegates to 
the less important gods of African belief who occupy the spirit 
world. The spirit world is made up of superhuman beings, beings 
that occupy the spiritual universe between gods and humanity, the 
space between heaven and Earth. They invisibly tread the Earth 
so that they are continually present. It is to these lesser gods that 
people turn in times of joy and sorrow. It is to them that they make 
requests concerning their needs and desires, and to them that they 
make offerings and sacrifices for health and happiness, successful 
crops, the birth of healthy children, and protection from evil.
Superhuman beings exist in a hierarchy—that is, they are 
ranked according to their nearness and importance to the 
Supreme Being. The most important superhuman beings may be 
called associates of God. These are lesser gods who rank below 
A Dogon hunter next to the bones of the animals he has 
killed. The Dogon have a close relationship with the spirits of 
the animal kingdom, and Dogon hunters were traditionally 
the members of the tribe who left the protected world of 
the village to learn what lay beyond. This original role of the 
hunter is still celebrated in the music and dance of the Dogon. 
THE SPIRIT 
WORLD
CHAPTER 4


--- PAGE 48 ---
4
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 49 ---
48
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
the Supreme Being but who often work jointly with him. Other 
infl  uential spirits of the community are intermediaries, guard-
ians, and ancestors. Intermediaries are spirit agents that act as 
go-betweens between divinities and humans. Spiritual guardians 
and ancestors are protectors and advocates for humans, spiritu-
ally positioned between superhuman beings and human beings.
sPiRiTs of ThE sPiRiT woRLD
African tradition and thought consider spirits to be elements of 
power, force, authority, and vital energy underlying all existence. 
Invisible though this power may be, Africans perceive it directly. 
People know and believe that spirits are there. In their daily lives 
they point to a variety of actions that verify the existence of spir-
its. They also know that spirits are to be handled with care. Hence 
the variety of rituals and taboos that acknowledge the existence 
of spirits. 
Spirits are found everywhere. And where they are considered 
to be, people feel their presence. There is no object or creature, 
there is no corner of the Earth, that is not inhabited by spirits. 
The more something commands awe—by its size, beauty, or 
power—the more that thing becomes identifi  ed with spirits.
sPiRiTuAL guARDiAns
Spirits, no matter at which level they may be, inspire some sense 
of superhumanity. One example of this 
is those spirits designated as spiritual 
guardians. Spiritual guardians are a varied 
group. Among them are ancestors and the 
spirits of departed heroes. Another type 
of spirit resides in natural landmarks. A 
nearby mountain may be the abode of the 
spirit that is guardian to the community. 
The spirit of a river may be identifi  ed as 
guardian of that area. An extraordinarily 
huge tree in a village may be considered 
the abode of a local spiritual guardian. 
Protection	from	Enemies
The Galla people of Ethiopia and 
Kenya in East Africa call on spiritual 
guardians of the community for 
protection against enemies with the 
following prayer:
If enemies would come, 
let not your small worm die, 
but stretch your hand over him.


--- PAGE 50 ---
49
Animal life, too, may house spirits. A leopard may be accepted in 
a community not as a mascot, but as a spiritual anchorage of the 
guardian spirit of a locality. Guardian spirits of a community are 
A guardian figure of the Kota people of Gabon in Central Africa 
dating from the early 20th century. It consists of a copper and 
brass plate attached to wood. It serves to protect the local 
community and is a focus for prayers and sacrifices. 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 51 ---
50
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
identifi  ed in numerous ways. They become 
a focus of communal ritual. 
sPiRiTs of ThE DEPARTED
The spirits of the dead are part of the spirit 
world. Some are ancestors and others are 
the spirits of the ordinary dead—that is, 
the dead of the community who are nei-
ther ancestors nor identifi  ed as outstand-
ing members of the community. Africans 
do not worship their dead ancestors, but 
they do venerate and respect them. The 
ordinary dead are respected as well, with 
due ritual observations by all the mem-
bers of the community. In African reli-
gious belief, when a person dies his or her 
soul separates from the body and changes 
from being a soul to being a spirit. Becoming a spirit is a social 
elevation. What was human becomes superhuman. At this point 
the spirit enters the state of immortality. The living are expected 
to take note of this development and render due respect to the 
departed through ritual.
People expect ancestors to be unceasing guardians of the living. 
The Edo people of Nigeria bury their dead with their feet point-
ing west, toward the Ughoton, the old port 
of Benin on the West African coast. From 
Ughoton the dead are believed to embark 
in canoes and cross the sea to the spirit 
world that lies in the dome of the sky.
ThE sPiRiTuAL hiERARChy 
Imagine the universe as being like a gov-
ernment. At the head is the Creator, the 
Supreme Being. He is ever present but does 
not manage the daily affairs of human 
beings. This responsibility he delegates to 
Crossing	to	the	Spirit	World
Among the Edo people of Nigeria, 
when someone dies senior family 
members speak prayers at the 
burial. One such prayer 
is the following:
Your children whom you have left here, 
you should order money for them. You 
should send them children. You should 
send them everything That is used in 
the world . . . As they have lived to do 
this for you. Let their children live to do 
it for them . . . As you looked after your 
children. When you were in the world, So 
you should look after them Unceasingly.
African	Polytheism
The term 
polytheism
 is derived from 
two Greek words: polus, meaning 
“many,” and theos, “god.” With 
regard to African religion, it means a 
system of belief that recognizes and 
venerates many gods. These are the 
gods with a lowercase g, who are also 
described as associates of a Supreme 
Being, a God with a capital G.


--- PAGE 52 ---
51
A traditional healer in 
South Africa uses a snake 
skin as a magic charm to 
bring health and success. 
Traditional healers have 
extensive knowledge of 
medicinal herbs that they 
combine with a knowledge 
of spiritual and mystical 
forces. 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 53 ---
52
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A 
sangoma,
 or traditional 
diviner, using charms to 
interpret or forecast events in 
KwaZulu–Natal, South Africa.


--- PAGE 54 ---
53
his associates—also divine, but of a lesser order. The associates 
of God are spiritually made to head departments. These gods 
have been brought into being as functionaries in the God-cen-
tered government of the universe. They are the divinities who do 
the spiritual work of managing the human world, and they are 
the ones people call on in times of trouble. They are local gods, 
intimately connected with local situations. Each of them is the 
god of a particular people with a specifi  c function in ordering 
the total life of the community. Under their various names and 
functions the divinities form the pantheon of gods in each par-
ticular locality. Pantheon is the term for all the gods of a particu-
lar people taken together. The pantheons of the different African 
religions differ somewhat according to the needs and character 
of the people.
ThE yoRuBA PAnThEon: oRisA 
The Yoruba are a Nigerian ethnic group of 
12 million people with a rich religious tra-
dition. At the top of their religious ranking 
is Olodumare, the Supreme Being. Next 
are the associates of God known as divini-
ties, gods, or deities. These are ranked 
according to the importance of the func-
tion they oversee. Next are the spirits of 
ancestors and those of the ordinary dead. 
The pantheon of Yoruba gods is known as 
the Orisa. It has a membership of as many 
as 1,700 divinities. Examples of a few of 
the most important follow.
oRisAnlA
Orisanla or, as he is sometimes called, 
Obatala, is the second in command in the 
Yoruba pantheon. Yoruba tradition refers 
to Orisanla as the offspring of Olodumare. 
He has many of Olodumare’s attributes, 
Iwa
Among the Yoruba, morality is 
summed up in the word
 iwa
, which 
can be translated as “character.”
 Iwa
, 
according to the Yoruba, is the very 
stuff that makes life a joy, because 
it is pleasing to God. Orunmilla 
once sought the means of success 
in life and was told that the only 
way was for him to marry Iwa. 
He accordingly married Iwa and 
became very successful. 
The Yoruba people say:
Character is all that is requisite.
Character is all that is requisite.
There is no destiny to be called 
unhappy in Ife city.
Character is all that is requisite.
(In E. Bolaji Idowu, 
Olodumare: 
God in Yoruba Belief.
) 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 55 ---
54
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Music usually accompanies African religious ritual and is used 
in prayer to request favors or help from the spirit world. The 
drum unlocks communication with the spirit world. 
and Olodumare has delegated creative 
powers to him. As Olodumare’s deputy, he 
created the Earth and its arrangement as 
well as the physical part of human beings. 
For that reason he is called the “Maker.”
oRunMillA
Orunmilla is the Yoruba god of divination, 
the practice of seeking to discover future 
events or hidden knowledge in one’s life 
by consulting the superhuman world. 
The Yoruba believe that Olodumare has 
endowed Orunmilla with special wisdom 
and foreknowledge, so anyone wishing to 
know the future may consult Orunmilla 
through his priest, known as a babalawo. 
Yoruba tradition provides divination in a 
form known as Ifa, which Yoruba religious 
devotees consult before undertaking any-
thing important.
Esu
Esu is the most complex of the Orisa. He 
contains both good and evil properties. 
Esu’s function is primarily that of a “spe-
cial relations officer” between heaven and 
Earth. He is the “inspector general” who 
reports to Olodumare on the actions of 
other divinities and those of human beings. 
Esu investigates, checks, and reports on 
the correctness of worship and sacrifices. 
Because of his assignment as inspector,


--- PAGE 56 ---
55
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 57 ---
56
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Esu may be found everywhere, checking on the spiritual orderli-
ness of the community. 
Esu’s dual nature of good and evil, together with the role of 
corresponding as mediator between heaven and Earth, makes


--- PAGE 58 ---
5
him a “trickster” figure, a kind of mischievous superhuman 
being. He is believed to hold the power of life and death, depend-
ing on the kind of reports he makes to Olodumare. Consequently 
Yoruba people seek to be on good terms with him. They vener-
ate him whenever they venerate any other 
Orisa. Because of this Esu has a place in 
every shrine.
People strive to be on good terms with 
Esu by being constantly vigilant. They try 
to avoid anything that may annoy him. 
For example, should some mishap occur, 
they are quick to make good what may 
have gone wrong. They also make sure 
that Esu’s portions of sacrifices are duly 
offered to him.
ogun
Ogun is another associate of God who 
ranks high in the Yoruba pantheon. He 
is the divinity of war and of iron. Ogun 
exists on the edge of society. He is as hard 
and tough as steel, and all iron and steel 
are his spiritual possessions. He rules over 
oaths, covenant making, and the cement-
ing of pacts. In local courts, instead of 
swearing “to speak the truth and nothing 
but the truth” by holding the Bible or the 
Quran, Yoruba people take oaths by kiss-
ing a piece of iron, usually a machete, in 
recognition of Ogun’s spiritual authority. 
A giant baobab tree in Mali. The baobab stores water in 
its trunk and can grow to an enormous size and great age. 
It is believed that the various spirits that live in this tree 
need to be placated to protect and guard the communities 
who live near them. 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 59 ---
58
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Ogun is recognized as the patron of warriors, hunters, arti-
sans, blacksmiths, goldsmiths, engineers, mechanics, barbers, 
butchers, truck and taxi drivers, and ironworkers of all kinds. 
Such people often visit Ogun’s shrine in search of spiritual assur-
ances for their work.
JAkuTA And sAngo
The expression the wrath of God is represented by the gods Jakuta 
and Sango. Jakuta is one of the lesser divinities of heaven, where-
as Sango is believed to have once been a human being who was 
raised to the status of a divinity. Jakuta literally means “the one 
who fights with stones” or “the one who hurls stones,” and origi-
nally the commandments against stealing, falsehood, and poi-
soning were his. 
Jakuta and Sango are regarded as coworkers in creating light-
ning and thunder. The Yoruba have such a sense of their God’s 
wrath that during a thunderstorm people who have reason to 
fear God begin to tremble. It is in this sense that Yoruba tradition 
regards Jakuta and Sango as being functionaries of God’s minis-
try of justice.
ThE BAgAnDA PAnThEon: LuBAALE  
The Baganda are an ethnic group of Uganda. Their pantheon is 
called Lubaale, or beings from Olubaale, the dome of the sky. It 
contains about 70 divinities. They know the Supreme Being as 
Katonda, which means “Creator.” The Baganda speak of Katon-
da as the father of the gods, because he created all things. While 
some Baganda divinities are connected to nature, the majority 
are hero or ancestor gods who have been raised to the status of 
divinity.
ggulu
Literally, Ggulu means “sky,” “heaven.” It is the name both of heav-
en and of the sky god. Ggulu is thus the divinity next to Katonda, 
the Supreme Being. In Buganda lore the wife of the founder of 
the Buganda kingdom was the daughter of Ggulu, who came


--- PAGE 60 ---
59
to Earth from heaven with her brother Walumbe. The Buganda 
people originate with her, and therefore from heaven.
kiwAnukA
Kiwanuka means ”something that descends at a great speed.” 
Kiwanuka is god of thunder and lightning. He is also a god of 
fertility whom couples consult when they wish to have a child. 
When their prayers are successful parents often name their child 
for the god: Kiwanuka for a son, or Nakiwanuka for a daughter.
kiTAkA
Kitaka is believed to be Mother Earth. The king consulted this 
divinity in cases of capital punishment so that the spirits of the 
dead would not return to harm him. People also consult Kitaka 
about cultivating the land, in order to have abundant crops.
wAluMbE
The literal translation of this god’s name is “Mr. Death.” Walumbe 
is the son of Ggulu, the sky god, and the brother-in-law of Kintu, 
the first king of Buganda. When Walumbe’s sister, the king’s wife, 
made the mistake of forgetting to bring some provisions to Earth 
and went back to the sky to fetch them, Walumbe, her brother, 
returned to Earth with her. Since then Mr. Death has lived in the 
underworld as the divinity of death. A temple to him, built and 
cared for at Tanda in Uganda, reminds the population of the exis-
tence of death.
wAngA
Wanga is one of the oldest of the population of the deified heroes 
of the Baganda. These “terrestrial gods,” lower ranking than the 
“sky gods” who rule in heaven, are the ones to whom the Baganda 
turn on a daily basis with their prayers and concerns. In the tradi-
tions of the Baganda people, the Sun once fell from the sky. The 
king called upon Wanga. He rose to the challenge and restored the 
Sun in its place in the heavens. As a reward the king allotted an 
estate to Wanga and built a temple there. People consult Wanga 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 61 ---
60
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
about sickness and disease. He also fore-
tells how people may turn aside calamities 
and troubles that befall communities.
Musisi
Musisi is the son of Wanga. His name 
means “earthquake.” The Baganda peo-
ple turn to him during natural calamities 
such as earthquakes.
MukAsA
Mukasa is a deifi  ed hero of the Baganda. 
Of all the superhuman beings within the 
Lubaale who invisibly populate the Earth 
and are in daily contact with humans, he 
ranks highest. People turn to Mukasa with 
concerns for health and fertility.
kibuukA
Kibuuka, the brother of Mukasa, is the war god of the Baganda. 
Consultation regarding warfare and national defense is directed 
to him, together with his nephew Nende, also a divinity of war.
ThE fon PAnThEon: voDun 
The Fon pantheon is known as the Vodun. Vodun may mean “god” 
in the sense of a divinity, and it may also mean a pantheon. Vodun 
worship is the religion of the Dahomey, or Fon, people in West 
Africa. All of the Fon gods are members of the Vodun, includ-
ing the dead, who are elevated to the level of gods. The Vodun 
includes both the great gods and also lesser gods who stem from 
the greater pantheon. 
The great gods are included in three pantheons. These are the 
Sky Pantheon, the Earth Pantheon, and the Thunder Pantheon. 
The Supreme Being of the Fon, Nana-Buluku, rules over all as 
the Originator, Creator of the beginnings of the universe. Priests 
of the Fon religion teach that Nana-Buluku was at once both 
Baganda	Prayer
O Muwanga, who ordered this land, we 
kneel and pray Thee so to order it again 
as Thou didst order it in ages past. Guard 
our Kabaka and the Throne, together 
with the ancient traditions of our people, 
that they may again become as they were 
in the beginning. Forever and ever. Amen.
O Muwanga, have mercy upon us.
O blessed Mukasa of the lake, 
have mercy upon us.
(In Frederick B. Welbourn, 
Religion 
and Politics in Uganda, 1952–62.
 )


--- PAGE 62 ---
61
male and female. This Creator is also believed to be the parent of 
Mawu-Lisa.
THE sky PAnTHEon: MAwu-lisA
Mawu-Lisa is a complex god whose most striking feature is a 
dual nature. This twin god was born to Nana-Buluku, the Cre-
ator, who also represents the duality of female and male. Mawu 
is female, associated with aspects of the world that relate to the 
Earth, the west, the Moon, the night, and the rising Sun. Lisa is 
male, representing the sky, the east, the Sun, the day, and the set-
ting Sun. 
In addition to representing the dualities of the physical world, 
Mawu-Lisa symbolizes opposing aspects of human life. Mawu, 
the female principle, reflects fertility, motherhood, gentleness, 
and forgiveness. Lisa, the male principle, reflects strength and 
toughness. Mawu-Lisa together expresses the unity and duality 
of the physical world.
THE EARTH PAnTHEon: sAgbATA
The deity Sagbata is known as the “king of the Earth.” Sometimes 
he is referred to as the “owner of the soil.” According to tradition 
veneration of Sagbata arose after an epidemic of smallpox. Thus 
Sagbata came to be the divinity who protects against smallpox.
THE THundER And THE sEA PAnTHEon: sogbo
To the people of Benin the sea, thunder, and lightning represent 
mysterious forces that are seen in terms of superhuman powers. 
Therefore anything to do with thunder and the sea is addressed 
through the pantheon whose head is Sogbo.
THE fon PAnTHEon of lEssER gods
Among the Fon pantheon of lesser gods, the most notable include 
Legba, the divine trickster; Se, the souls of man; Fa, fate and divi-
nation; and Da, the cult of the serpent. Legba was the youngest 
of the 12 children of Mawu-Lisa. When they divided the universe 
among their offspring there was no domain left for Legba. Instead 
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 63 ---
62
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A traditional mask from 
Benin in West Africa 
worn during the Gelede 
ceremony. The masks are 
worn by men during a ritual 
performance that takes 
place between March and 
May at the beginning of the 
new agricultural season. 
The ritual pays tribute to 
the special power of women 
elders and ancestors. 
The lower mask depicts a 
woman’s face and the upper 
part of the mask often 
depicts humans or animals 
such as birds or snakes. In 
African religion each ethnic 
group has its own deities, 
spirits, and ancestors; in 
addition there are local 
spirits or guardians that may 
be linked to a village  
or a family.


--- PAGE 64 ---
63
they gave Legba the role of messenger between his siblings and 
parents. Legba’s domain is therefore communication. Nothing 
happens without his awareness. Importantly, Legba conveys the 
wishes and desires of human beings to the Vodun.
 People sacrifice to Legba, fearing that if he does not receive 
the sacrifices he demands he can prevent the Vodun from hear-
ing their supplications. However they also mistrust him, and they 
may hold him responsible for the misfortunes of life. They also 
characterize him as a trickster. However, Legba is an important 
figure in determining the fortunes of human beings, who can 
normally approach Mawu-Lisa only through him.
AfRiCAn PEoPLEs AnD ThE sPiRiT woRLD
Associates of one’s God, natural spirits, the spirits of departed 
heroes, ancestors, and other members of the community all 
join together to create a sense of living in a spiritually charged 
universe. For African believers the spirit world is never very far 
away. It is present in sky and sea, Earth and all creation, and in 
the memory of those who have gone before. People feel com-
munion with the spirits all around them and communicate with 
them regularly through sacrifice, offering, worship, and simple 
conversation. The gods of African religion are as near to them as 
their family, friends, and neighbors.
The Spirit World


--- PAGE 65 ---
64 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
CHAPTER 5
RITES AND RITUAL 
IN AFRICAN 
RELIGION
T
o Africans belief without ritual action would take away 
much of religion’s natural power. Rites and ritual punctuate 
all aspects of African religious life. Religion is so deeply ingrained 
in the daily life of traditional Africa that it is all but impossible to 
separate it from other aspects of the culture. In an African com-
munity religion is the strongest influence on people’s thoughts, 
acts, and lives. Rites of passage and other communal rites are the 
clearest examples of how religion permeates all aspects of Afri-
can life.
RiTEs of PAssAgE
Rites of passage are rites that have to do with the human life cycle. 
They are practices, customs, and ceremonies that people perform 
to move people smoothly through the stages of life from begin-
ning to end. These stages include birth and childhood, puberty 
and initiation, marriage, aging, and death.
In Eastern Cape Province, South Africa, a young Xhosa 
boy, his body smeared with gray clay, sits in the bush as 
part of a manhood initiation rite. Every year, thousands 
of Xhosa boys go to the bush for about four weeks to 
become men. They are usually circumcized the first day 
and are not allowed to eat for the first seven days.


--- PAGE 66 ---
65
r ites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 67 ---
66
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
BiRTh AnD ChiLDhooD
The early stages of the life cycle include 
conception, the period of pregnancy, the 
actual birth of the child, its naming, and 
its childhood. The rites of birth begin with 
the mother’s pregnancy. Some African 
traditions regard conception as a coopera-
tive venture between the parents-to-be, 
their God, and the associate gods. 
PREgnAnCy
When the time for the birth comes, expe-
rienced elderly women act as midwives to 
help the mother deliver the child. The role 
of midwife is considered the sacred calling 
of a medicine woman. In African religion 
healing is a religious activity. The birth 
may take place in the house or nearby in a 
secure area of the garden.
 Along with the newborn baby, the 
placenta and umbilical cord receive spe-
cial consideration. These two items, so 
closely related to the newly born, require 
religious care. The ritual disposal of the 
placenta and the umbilical cord indicates 
that the child has died to the state of preg-
nancy and is now alive in another state of 
existence. The child is born into the new 
life as part of human society.
biRTH sPiRiT
The Baganda of Uganda believe that a child is born with a double, 
or twin, called a mulongo. This twin consists of the placenta and 
umbilical cord. After the birth the mother wraps the placenta in 
banana leaves and buries it at the foot of a banana tree in such 
a way as to protect it from wild animals. The tree then assumes 
“goD’s wATER”
A  
tradition of the Banyarwanda and 
Barundi of central Africa illustrates 
the idea of god’s participation in concep-
tion. They have a custom and rite known 
in their language as Amazi y’imana, which 
means “god’s Water. ” They keep a little 
water in the house at night. every woman 
who hopes to bear a child will always make 
sure that the water is there before she 
goes to bed. Starting from the moment of 
conception, imana, or god, is supposed to 
use the water in his work of creation. 
The religious reliance on god and other 
superhuman powers only becomes more 
important when a couple fails to conceive. 
Then they turn to the designated divini-
ties in charge of fertility. The couple and 
their supporters approach the divinities 
with prayers and sacriﬁ  ces as a means of 
requesting the favor of pregnancy. When 
the favor is granted and the woman 
announces that she is pregnant, there 
is rejoicing. Both spiritual and medical 
precautions are taken to ensure normal 
pregnancy and delivery. Those involved 
oﬀ  er a sacriﬁ  ce to the Supreme Being, the 
national gods, or the ancestors and guard-
ian spirits, who have an interest in seeing 
that the community continues through 
the birth of new members.


--- PAGE 68 ---
6
A mother and child of the Himba people living in northern 
Namibia. In African traditional society a child is delivered by 
a midwife, who is usually a medicine woman considered to 
have healing powers. 
r ites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 69 ---
68
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
sacred signifi  cance until the fruit matures. 
When the bananas ripen the child’s pater-
nal grandmother uses them to prepare a 
sacred feast marking the occasion.
In addition the mother preserves the 
part of the umbilical cord that remains 
attached to the child after birth. It is 
believed to contain a protective spirit. 
When it drops off she wraps it in bark 
cloth and preserves it. At the time of the 
child’s naming it is dropped in a container 
of banana wine, milk, and water. If it fl  oats 
the child is considered legitimate, and the 
naming proceeds. If the cord sinks the 
child is considered illegitimate, and the 
mother is punished. 
nAMing THE CHild
The name a child receives is expected to 
express the very essence of the person 
who bears it. Names individualize chil-
dren, give them a standing, and incorpo-
rate them into the community. Parents 
take much care, therefore, in name giving.
 Naming ceremonies in Africa dif-
fer from people to people, but the names 
themselves have a number of things in 
common. All African names have specifi  c 
meanings. Most African personal names 
at least indirectly refl  ect religious belief, 
and some have strongly religious themes. 
Countless personal names in African reli-
gious traditions express religious ideas. 
Some are connected with divinities, and 
many are related to spiritual and human circumstance. Others 
relate to attributes of the Supreme Being. For instance the Luo-
TABoos
A
frican people consider a pregnant 
woman to be chosen for a duty—
motherhood—that is a sacred calling. She 
is therefore subject to a variety of taboos. 
A taboo is the custom of putting someone 
or something under prohibition. The preg-
nant woman is encouraged and some-
times instructed to refrain from various 
activities. Some taboos have to do with 
her diet. during pregnancy women are 
forbidden salt, because it may harm the 
child’s skin. eggs and pork are also taboo 
in order to protect the child’s appear-
ance and shape. other taboos regulate 
the woman’s personal habits on religious 
grounds or to check her sexual behavior. 
All are aimed at bringing about the safe 
birth of the child, though there are also in 
some cultures underlying and increasingly 
contentious issues of the role of women 
and their autonomy.
Igbo	Names	Honoring	God
Chukwudi,
 “God lives”
Ifeanyichukwu,
 “nothing impossible   
 with God”
Chukwunwke,
 “God creates”
Kenechukwu,
 “thank God”
Chukwuemeka,
 “God has been very   
 kind”
Chukwuka
, “God is great”


--- PAGE 70 ---
69
speaking people of Kenya, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda fre-
quently name children Ojok, related to Jok, or God. The Igbo 
parents of Nigeria honor Chukwu—that is, God—by naming 
their children in praise of his power.
fRom PuBERTy inTo ADuLThooD
Puberty rites are ceremonies performed to mark the time during 
which young people move from childhood to adolescence. They 
initiate young people into the adult world, marking the physical 
changes that signal the transition from the asexual world of child-
hood to the sexual world of adulthood.
iniTiATion
The approach, timing, and places for the 
rites of initiation vary from people to peo-
ple. Young people may be initiated through 
either physical initiation or instructional 
retreats. Physical initiation usually means 
circumcision, or the removal of the fore-
skin of the penis for boys, and an opera-
tion to remove the clitoris for girls. This 
so-called female circumcision is now an 
issue of deep controversy. Its antifemale 
emphasis and the not-infrequent deaths 
caused by this painful operation on young 
girls have led to international agencies and 
many traditional elders demanding that the 
practice cease. Yet it has also now become 
an issue by which hard-line traditionalists 
express their opposition to modern trends 
such as the rights of women. 
Apart from their drama and impact, 
initiation rites convey many religious 
meanings. Elders take young people to 
retreats away from home where they 
learn the arts of communal living. They 
Ashanti	Prayer	for	a	
Girl’s	Puberty
At the time of a girl’s fi  rst 
menstruation her mother pours a 
little wine on the ground and speaks 
this prayer:
Nyankopon Tweaduapon Nyame 
(Supreme Sky God, who alone is Great) 
upon whom men lean and do not fall, 
receive this wine and drink
Earth Goddess, whose day of worship is 
a Thursday, receive this wine and drink.
Spirit of our ancestors, receive this wine 
and drink.
This girl child whom God has given 
to me, today the Bara (fi  rst menstrual 
period) state has come upon her.
O mother who dwells in the land of 
ghosts, do not come and take her away.
And do not have permitted her to 
menstruate only to die.
(In Robert S. Rattray, 
Religion and 
Art in Ashanti.
)
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 71 ---
 0
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
are introduced to the basic facts of adult 
life. They are taught the sharing of privi-
leges, rights, duties, and responsibilities of 
the community. The initiation rites give 
them instruction in matters of sexual life, 
marriage, procreation, and family respon-
sibilities. Through this initiation they 
are prepared as adults to shed blood for 
their people. They are also encouraged to 
accept the responsibility of planting their 
biological seed as a way of contributing 
toward a new generation of the commu-
nity through marriage.
mARR iAgE
Marriage is a starting point for a new gen-
eration, as it is a starting point for personal 
immortality through offspring. In African 
thought marriage is a religious obligation. 
Without marriage there is no assurance of 
having descendants. The departed count 
on being taken care of by, and are assured 
of being reincarnated or reborn through, 
their descendants. A person who has no 
descendants in effect disrupts the chain of 
reincarnation, to the great annoyance of 
the superhuman beings. Marriage there-
fore is a sacred undertaking that must not 
be neglected.
The families gather in a wide circle. The 
men, wearing Zulu costume, dance. Then 
there is an exchange of presents from the 
In Bedik village, Senegal, Bassari boys encircle a hut where 
an initiation ceremony is taking place to mark a young man’s 
transition into adult life.


--- PAGE 72 ---
 1
r ites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 73 ---
2
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
bride to members of the groom’s family. 
These are usually blankets and mats. The 
recipients dance or sing their thanks. The 
groom’s gift, a blanket, comes last. It is pre-
sented to him in a skit, where it is thrown 
over his head. The bride’s friends beat him 
playfully, indicating what they will do if 
he does not treat the bride well, until he 
escapes. With the exchange of gifts over, 
the feast begins. The feast seals the mar-
riage. When the two families have eaten 
together the couple is joined as one.
Aging
As they advance in age people are deemed 
to grow in experience and wisdom. Parents 
are expected to bear the torch that helps 
enlighten the young. They take part in the 
expectations as observed in the African 
proverb “It takes a village to raise a child.” 
In time they come to old age and qualify to 
be addressed as elders, among whom are 
found the sages and seers of the commu-
nity. However, in recent decades there has 
been a decline in traditional respect for the 
elders due to such factors as the move from 
rural to urban areas and the resulting weakening of family struc-
tures. In addition many families have been broken up by deaths 
caused by the AIDS virus, civil strife, or natural disasters. There 
is also the infl  uence of a growing global youth culture accessed 
through improved communications such as the Internet, with an 
emphasis on consumerism rather than traditional values. 
DEATh
Death is the time when the soul leaves the body to become a spir-
it. African mythology allots a great deal of space to the subject of 
A zuLu wEDDing 
B
efore a couple marry, their families 
negotiate the traditional bride pay-
ment, or lobola. People believe that the 
groom respects the bride more if he must 
pay for her. Traditionally the lobola was 
paid in cows, but now it is usually paid 
in cash. After the groom pays the lobola, 
there are other ceremonies in which gifts 
are exchanged. At the end the groom 
receives a sheep or a goat. This gift shows 
that the bride’s family has accepted him.
early on the wedding morning the 
groom’s family slaughters a cow, which is 
cooked and eaten for the wedding feast. 
The bride’s family watches, making sure 
that the meat is divided equally between 
the two families. They sing and exchange 
gifts. in the afternoon the bride arrives. 
She wears the traditional Zulu costume 
with a leopard-skin neckpiece and a bead-
ed hat and skirt. With her family carrying 
her hope chest, she tours the groom’s 
property. This symbolically introduces her 
to the groom’s family.


--- PAGE 74 ---
 3
death. Usually the same myths of creation that trace the origin of 
human beings include the origin of death. In these myths death 
often comes to the world because of human misdeeds. Although 
African people accept death as a natural part of the life cycle they 
generally feel that each individual death always has a cause asso-
ciated with supernatural powers. These include mystical powers 
like magic, witchcraft, and sorcery. The understanding of death 
brings with it the realization that a person’s body and soul are no 
longer one. In dying, the individual has joined the world of the 
departed. This fact usually evokes sorrow for those left behind. A 
spiritual period of mourning sets in, with funeral rites that vary 
by ethnic group.
Members of the Karamojong 
of northeastern Uganda 
carry a portable granary 
along the road near Kotido 
town. The granary is given 
by the bride’s family as part 
of her dowry when she 
marries. 
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 75 ---
 4
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Death calls for a ritual disposal of the body of the deceased. 
Burial rites are performed by the community. Those attending 
the burial bid farewell to the deceased by throwing a bit of soil or 
flower petals into the grave before the burial is completed. People 
are very attentive to giving the departed a proper funeral. It is 
important that the spirit of the departed be content in the world 
beyond and not come back as a dissatisfied ghost to plague those 
left behind.
In many African traditions there are final funeral rites. These 
mark the end of the time of mourning. At this time the desig-
nated heir of the deceased is officially declared, installed, and 
invested with the ritual instruments that entitle him or her to 
the inheritance. Connected to the final funeral rites is the idea 
that the deceased may be reincarnated, or reborn, into a new life 
through naming. During this time the deceased becomes increas-
ingly identified with the world of the spirits among whom he or 
she now dwells.
RiTuAL
Rituals are religiously meaningful acts that people perform in 
appropriate circumstances, usually following strictly prescribed 
patterns. Rituals are the concrete expression of belief. African 
believers, and indeed believers of all religions, feel that they have 
to show their belief in some way. They do this by worshipping the 
Supreme Being, by doing reverence to superhuman beings, and 
by paying due respect to their fellow humans. 
Prayer, music, and dancing enhance the effectiveness of ritual 
acts. Sacrifices and offerings help to confirm the relationship 
between the Supreme Being, superhumanity, and humanity. 
Rituals take place during community celebrations and festivals 
for the purpose of thanksgiving, purification, and communion. 
Their performance helps to link humanity with superhumanity.
PRAyER
In African religion there are countless prayers. Like other African 
religious literature they are handed down orally from generation


--- PAGE 76 ---
5
to generation. Many prayers are tradi-
tional and centuries old. Most are recited 
by people in offi  cial capacities. These 
include priests and priestesses, diviners, 
rainmakers, medicine men and women, 
kings, chiefs, ritual and family elders, and 
heads of organized groups such as hunt-
ers. Prayers are usually addressed to God, 
superhuman beings, and ancestors. 
People in search of spiritual assistance 
for a variety of human needs address their 
prayers to the powers above. People pray 
for life, health, healing, wealth, and pros-
perity. They pray for success at work. They 
pray to be delivered from diffi  culties. They 
address prayers either directly or indirectly through intermediar-
ies for all spiritual assistance possible. They pray in praise, they 
pray in joy, and they pray in thanksgiving.
MusiC
Music is an audible expression of African 
prayer. There are many religious songs 
in praise of one’s God and superhuman 
beings. There are many songs intended 
to express joy for spiritual blessings. 
There are songs asking favors from above. 
And there are songs exuberantly sung in 
thanksgiving. Songs are usually accompa-
nied by the beating of drums and the play-
ing of other instruments.
dAnCE
Whereas song is religious expression in 
voice, dancing concentrates on expressing 
religious emotions, elegance, and dyna-
mism through bodily movement. African 
Let	Us	Lift	Our	
Voices	in	Prayer
Let us lift our voices in prayer,
Offering up an ox to the Creator.
May this ox be permitted to grow old,
That we may gain good health.
Let us lift our voices in prayer,
Offering up an ox to the Creator.
The Creator of the sky gives us peace.
Gives us food.
(In Alfonso M. Di Nola and Patrick 
O’Connor, 
The Prayers of Man.
)
“Let	a	Fruitful	Year	
Come	upon	Me”
In preparing the fi  eld a farmer in 
Ghana brings offerings of a fowl 
and cooked yam for the spirit of the 
Earth and for his ancestors. As the 
blood of the fowl drips on the Earth 
and the yam he says, “Grandfather 
(mentions the name), you once came 
and hoed here and then you left it to 
me. You also, Earth, Ya, on whose soil 
I am going to hoe, the yearly cycle 
has come around and I am going to 
cultivate; when I work, let a fruitful 
year come upon me, do not let a knife 
cut me, do not let a tree break and fall 
upon me, do not let a snake bite me.”
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 77 ---
 6
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
religious ritual would be lifeless without the accompaniment of 
music and dancing. These are powerful means of African reli-
gious expression.
sACRifiCE
Sacrifice is giving up something valuable in order to render hom-
age to some superior being. A sacrifice is thus a gift offered to 
God or to a superhuman being in recognition of their superior-
ity over humanity. Of all acts of worship to the Supreme Being, 
sacrifices and offerings are emphasized most in African religion. 
The Abaluyia of Kenya refer to God as “the One to whom sacred 
rites and sacrifices are made.” Animal sacrifice is the usual way 
of offering praise. Bulls, goats, or chickens are the most common 
objects of sacrifice, offered at every stage of the rites of passage.
Commun AL RiTuAL
Prayer, music, songs, drums, other musical instruments, danc-
ing, and sacrifice come together in vividly orchestrated commu-
nal ritual. These rituals celebrate such things as purification rites, 
communion rites, and agricultural rites.
bRinging R Ain
Agricultural rites have to do with the way people use land for the 
production of food. Farming is one of the greatest preoccupa-
tions of the people. Its importance requires the blessings of God 
and those of the superhuman guardians of the people. For that 
reason each stage of agricultural development calls for spiritual 
assistance. Most important is the need for rain. Rain is so vital 
that there are certain rites, and ritual specialists, whose main 
function is to bring about rain at crucial times. 
PlAnTing And HARvEsT RiTEs
There are also rites concerned with the preparation of new fields, 
planting rites, and harvest rites. At the time of sowing and har-
vesting, African religious traditions have important communal 
ceremonies that link the people’s agricultural activities with the


--- PAGE 78 ---

r ites and ritual in African religion
Dogon masked dancers from Mali performing 
the Dana dance. The Dogon believe that this 
dance creates a bridge into the world of the 
spirits.  Their masks are believed to have 
magical powers.


--- PAGE 79 ---
8
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A cow slaughtered at the 
marriage of Princess Nyawo 
to Nkose Tembe, king of 
Tsonga, in KwaZulu–Natal, 
South Africa. During the 
ceremony, which took 
place on April 3, 2004, 
the princess ceremonially 
assisted in skinning the cow 
to mark her entrance into 
the royal family.


--- PAGE 80 ---
 9
spirits of the community. When the land is tilled and planted 
people of all African cultures ask blessings from the superhuman 
beings. At the time of ripening and harvest they hold “first fruits” 
ceremonies. 
According to tradition, superhuman powers must eat of the 
first fruits of harvest before human beings partake of them. They 
must receive their share in offering before anything is given to 
anyone else. To deprive them of their important place in the 
hierarchy would induce them to take revenge by threatening the 
future harvest. The first fruits ceremonies are festival times for 
offering thanksgiving to the superhuman powers for the new 
harvest. 
RiTuAL LEADER s
Ritual leaders are those members of the community who preside 
over and conduct particular religious rituals. They come to their 
leadership roles in different ways. Some positions are hereditary. 
Others are the result of a special spiritual calling along with spe-
cial training. This category of African ritual leaders includes rul-
ers, priests, mediums, diviners, healers, rainmakers, elders, and 
sages.
RulERs And lEAdERs 
African kings, queens, and chiefs have both privileges and duties. 
Their position carries with it outstanding power, authority, and 
influence. However although rulers are endowed with power 
and prerogative, they are also bound by obligations and kept in 
check by taboos. The ruler is the father/mother of the people and 
the symbol of their ethnic unity. He or she must therefore solve 
human problems and give an ear to all subjects, as well as repre-
senting the people in contact with other powers. 
In many countries where African traditional religion is strong, 
the king is the high priest of the people. As high priest he is not 
only in charge of matters of government, but also of religious 
matters. For example, in Buganda, part of Uganda in East Africa, 
the veneration of the national gods is under the immediate con-
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 81 ---
80
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
trol of the kabaka, or king. By his authority temples are built to 
the different gods. He has the ultimate power to confirm or reject 
the choice of priests made by the clans according to the traditions 
surrounding the different gods.


--- PAGE 82 ---
81
Besides being the primary religious leader of the people, the 
ruler is closely connected with ritual traditions. Ritual occa-
sions connected with kingship or chiefdom, such as coronation, 
enthronement, and funeral rites, connect strongly to the sacred-
A Himba chief with 
members of his family in the 
Kunene region of northern 
Namibia. African people 
consider the authority of 
their leaders to come from 
their God. Their rulers are 
political leaders, but they 
are also true religious 
leaders. In African traditions 
there is no such thing as 
separation of church and 
state. Religion and human 
affairs, such as politics, by 
African religious standards 
go hand in hand. 
r ites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 83 ---
82
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ness of the ruler. Rulers are regarded as a God’s earthly represen-
tatives. They are the refl  ection of the God’s rule in the universe. 
To many African peoples rulers are not ordinary men or women. 
They are living symbols of the connection between the Supreme 
Being, the superhuman beings, and the human beings.
PRiEsTs
In African religious tradition a priest is a ritual leader who over-
sees, administers, and coordinates religious matters for the com-
Father	of	Mysteries
In some African traditions the work 
of diviners is so revered that they are 
elevated to the position of divinities. 
For instance in the Yoruba religion 
the diviner is known as the Father 
of Mysteries, with no less a spiritual 
patron than Orinmilla, the Yoruba 
deity of divination.
 People usually become diviners 
either by training or by inheritance. 
Diviners-to-be are privately trained 
by experienced diviners. In many 
cases the training period may last 
from three to seven years. They must 
master the oral tradition, which 
involves memorizing names and 
signs of divination as well as fi  gures, 
proverbs, and stories connected 
with them. They learn to use the 
instruments of divination, including 
pebbles, seeds, gourds, numbers, and 
cowrie shells. They also learn how to 
read animal entrails, to read palms, to 
form images or use images in pots of 
water, and to interpret sounds.


--- PAGE 84 ---
83
Sangomas, or traditional 
diviners, gathered to 
perform a ritual at Saltpeter 
Cave, near Clarence, eastern 
Free State, South Africa. 
These diviners are believed 
to have the skills to read 
hidden signs about the past, 
present, and future. 
munity. Priests may be men or women. Priests are key figures in 
maintaining the religious affairs of an African ethnic group. 
Priests are usually attached to a temple of a god and are charged 
with its care. People become priests by both vocation and train-
ing. However, there are a few African societies like the Baamba, 
the Banyankore, and the Basoga of Uganda, the Bavenda of South 
Africa, the Binawa and the Srubu of Nigeria, and the Sonjo of 
Tanzania, in which priesthood is hereditary. People believe that 
priests and priestesses are called by the gods. Some are said to 
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 85 ---
84
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
have been set aside from birth. Others are 
said to have been called by a god through 
being possessed by his or her spirit. At oth-
er times parents send a child to be trained 
as a priest because the child was born in 
answer to prayer, and so is dedicated to the 
service of the gods. Trainees are submitted 
to the guidance of an older priest. Training 
is usually arduous. It may last some years, 
during which the child learns the secrets 
of serving a god.
divinERs
Diviners are ritual leaders whose special 
position is to unveil the mysteries of the 
past and future. In so doing they pro-
nounce what may be causing problems 
in the community. Diviners not only read 
the signs of the present but also have techniques by which they 
discover hidden knowledge about the past, the present, and the 
future of those who consult them. To fi  nd out the unknown for a 
client diviners may use shells, pebbles, water, animal entrails, and 
many other objects regarded as “mirrors.” From these they read 
why something has gone wrong.
HEAlERs
In some parts of Africa a healer is called musawo, “a person with a 
bag.” Healers are easily distinguished by the bag they carry and by 
their attire. Healers customarily wear amulets, shells, and other 
decorative accessories that ordinary people do not wear. The bag 
that they carry is their trademark. In it are all types of medicines. 
In a broad sense healers are ritual leaders whose service relies on 
supernatural powers. They come to the aid of the community in 
matters of health and well-being. Healers work in conjunction 
with other ritual leaders to keep the members of the community 
physically and spiritually healthy.
mEDiums
M
ediums are people who can con-
tact the spirit world, usually by 
being possessed by spirits. As a rule they 
become mediums through being pos-
sessed by superhuman beings, after which 
they undergo training. Mediums are usu-
ally women. They are attached either to a 
priest at a temple or to a diviner. They sink 
into a trance, usually induced by music, 
drumming, and singing, and become 
possessed. The spirit speaks through the 
medium, transmitting messages from the 
spirit world to human beings. Sometimes 
the message may be in a strange lan-
guage, and the priest or an assistant may 
be called to interpret.


--- PAGE 86 ---
85
In African thought illness is always caused by superhuman 
agencies or by extrahuman forces such as magic, witchcraft, and 
sorcery. Therefore someone who is sick must determine the spir-
itual cause of an illness in order to cure it. Answers to the ques-
tion of why an illness has occurred may come from the spirit 
world in oracles or divine pronouncements through the coop-
eration of a priest and a medium. Or they may come from the 
superhuman and extrahuman world through the cooperation of 
a diviner. Oracles and divination are the means of identifying the 
cause of illness and the illness itself. When the illness is identi-
fi  ed the healer can devise the cure. Healers then turn to the spirit 
world for help in getting and administering the right medicine.
Healers are often specialists. Some focus on performing heal-
ing rituals in combination with other ritual leaders. Others may 
concentrate on one aspect of healing such as bonesetting, herbal 
remedies, or dietary prescriptions. Their specialties depend on 
how the healer received his or her calling. Some healers are heal-
ers by inheritance. Their craft is handed down from parents or 
relatives. Others learn the trade from experienced healers with 
whom they study and work for a substantial length of time before 
they are allowed to practice on their own. 
These powers can also be used to bring 
suffering, by cursing someone who is 
thought to be behaving in an inappropri-
ate way. Fear of such curses and belief in 
their effi  cacy is widespread throughout 
Africa and can cause real distress, men-
tal breakdown, or even death. Its role is 
intended to be one that places the safety 
of the community above the safety of the 
individual.
RAinmAkERs
Rain, so essential to agriculture and there-
fore to survival, is closely connected to 
African religion. Rain is viewed as divine 
mEDiCinE mEn AnD womEn
H
ealers are variously referred to as 
medicine men or women, herbal-
ists, and sometimes as witch doctors. They 
are some of the most inﬂ  uential people 
in an African community. Their inﬂ  uence 
comes from their important work of cur-
ing members of the community of illness 
and disease. Their gifts are both material 
and spiritual. Materially they have wide 
knowledge of healing herbs and medica-
tions. Spiritually they heal the underlying 
spiritual causes of illness.
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 87 ---
86
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
influence that descends to Earth. The continued fertility of the 
land requires rain. When it fails to fall people begin to wonder 
what they may have done wrong. They feel a need to put right 
whatever has caused a problem between them and the Supreme 
Being or the spirit world. They call for the ritual leadership that 
comes from those known as rainmakers.
Rainmakers are specialists in religious matters pertaining to 
rain. They determine the reasons why rain fails to fall or why 
there is too much rain. Rainmakers perform rites of prayer or 
sacrifices offered to ensure that enough rain will fall at the proper 
times. They also preside over prayers and sacrifices offered to 
check excessive rainfall. They are thus both rainmakers and rain 
stoppers.
A person may become a rainmaker either by training or by 
inheritance. Through messages from the spirit world and through 
dreams a person may find a call to become a rainmaker. Then 
that person may train under an experienced rainmaker. A fairly 
African women herding 
livestock in a canyon in 
Debre Libanos, Ethiopia. 
Rural life and the survival 
of livestock and crops is 
dependent on the rains, 
which is why the role 
of rainmaker is highly 
regarded.


--- PAGE 88 ---
8
long period of training is required before 
the person can enter a serious practice. 
There are also rainmakers who achieve 
this religious and ritual position by inheri-
tance. Most renowned of these is the queen 
of the Balovedu of southern Africa, who is 
called a “rain queen.” She is not primarily 
a ruler, but a rainmaker. People rely on her 
for their security not in regard to regimen-
tation, armies, and organization, but on 
her power to make rain for them and to 
withhold rain from their enemies.
“goD’s BLEssings ARE fALLing”
T
he dinka of Sudan know their chief 
deity as deng or dengdit, which lit-
erally means “rain. ” The Kikuyu of Kenya 
know their key god as ngai. ngai has three 
capacities. By the ﬁ  rst he sends rain and 
riches, by the second he sends good wives 
and healthy children, by the third sickness 
and loss. it is in the ﬁ  rst capacity that ngai 
is considered to be the Supreme Being 
and is credited with divine powers. The 
churi and Masai of eastern Africa and the 
ewe of western Africa say of rain, “god is 
falling” or “god is weeping. ” other African 
people say “god’s blessings are falling. ”
rites and ritual in African religion


--- PAGE 89 ---
88 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
SACRED SPACES 
AND PLACES
CHAPTER 6
T
he places where the rites and rituals of African religion are 
carried out are African sacred space. Some of these places 
are constructed specifically for religious purposes, but others are 
natural places in the environment where people come together 
for ritual purposes. There are also places that would normally be 
regarded as nonsacred but that may on occasion serve as ritual 
spaces. These are often homes in which senior family members 
may officiate as ritual elders.
sACRED  sPACE
Some places are made sacred through the relics of divine beings. 
For example, the Uganda Museum in Uganda is only a museum 
to the general visitor. However since British colonial times rel-
ics of the local gods have been confined there. For local people 
this building is therefore a sacred space. When they visit the 
The Kasubi Mausoleum is a huge thatched 
burial place of four kings of Buganda in 
Uganda. Religious functions are held there 
around the time of the new Moon throughout 
the year. Built on the outskirts of Kampala, the 
capital of Uganda, it attracts many local and 
international visitors.


--- PAGE 90 ---
89
Sacred Spaces and Places


--- PAGE 91 ---
90
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
museum they do so with care and with a 
sense of awe and mystery. So a museum 
visit becomes a casual sort of ritual. The 
gods may also signal the special sanctity 
of a place in some way. Animals, by their 
symbolic relationships to the gods as well 
as by their ritual guardianship of a local-
ity, often are signs of communication 
from the spirit world. Their appearance in 
a certain locality may mark that place as 
sacred. 
In a larger sense people understand the 
whole land of their particular culture and 
ethnic group to be sacred. The narratives 
of the sacred origins of the land and its 
people communicate this sacredness. For 
this reason present-day political leaders 
who ignore the sacredness of a people’s 
lands often become the cause of unrest.
sPiRiTuAL gEogRAPhy
Africans have long associated the wonders of nature with reli-
gion. In African tradition anything that 
seems to be shrouded in mystery has 
tended to evoke a sense of the religious, 
and the natural world is fi  lled with beauty 
and mystery.
For African people the whole universe 
is fi  lled with religious spirit. In African 
religion all elements of the universe are 
regarded as symbols of the divine. The 
sacred space of the universe has three 
parts. Above the Earth is the sky, or heav-
en, the home of the supreme being. Below 
the Earth is the realm of the spirits, which 
keeps humanity connected to the land. 
Earth	as	Mother	of	Humanity
In many African traditions the idea 
of the Supreme Being combines both 
masculine and feminine. The Sun 
represents the masculine element in 
the God, while the Moon represents 
the feminine. However in some 
African societies these gender roles 
change, so the Moon is masculine. 
In any case, positioned between the 
Sun and the Moon, the Earth has the 
symbolic role of mother to humanity.
viEwing ThE univERsE: ThE zuLu
A
ccording to the Zulu of South Africa 
the Zulu people were not speciﬁ  cally 
created but originated in heaven. in their 
language zulu means “sky and/or heaven. ” 
Zulu also means “the Zulu people” or “the 
Zulu ethnic group. ” iNkosi yeZulu means 
“the lord of the Sky/Heaven” in whom the 
Zulu originate. in other words the very 
being of anything pertaining to the Zulu 
is regarded as originating in heaven, or 
ezulwini, which might be translated as the 
“above. ” from there the process of origina-
tion continues down to earth and below 
the surface of the earth in the region of 
the universe called phansi, which means 
“the habitation place of spirits. ”


--- PAGE 92 ---
91
In the middle is the Earth, the world of humanity and the here 
and now.
ThE sky
The African sky inspires much religious feeling. High in the heav-
ens the blazing Sun and glowing Moon inspire humanity with 
awe. The night sky is embellished with thousands upon thou-
sands of twinkling stars that, on a clear night, can leave observers 
in a state of wonder. 
Sun, Moon, and Earth carry aspects of divinity. Among Afri-
can peoples in all corners of the African continent, the Sun is a 
symbol of the Supreme Being. In general the Moon is recognized 
as a natural phenomenon that carries sacredness, serenity, and 
tenderness. For that reason Africans mark the appearance of the 
new Moon with rituals that express the sacredness of the Moon.
ThE nATuRAL woRLD
The Earth, too, is a source of wonder. Africa’s geography is 
extremely varied. Natural landmarks include mountains, oceans, 
lakes, rivers, waterfalls, forests, rocks, 
caves, and trees, any or all of which may 
inspire religious feelings. The forest and 
plains are alive with a great variety of 
animals: chattering birds, creeping rep-
tiles, spiders, and insects, all of which, by 
inhabiting the world with humans, beg the 
question of their place in the universe.
RiTuAL PLACEs AnD oBjECTs
For Africans ritual places are human-
made structures or marked areas at which 
religious rites may be observed. These 
include shrines, tombs, temples, and 
sacred localities. Since the beginning of 
time Africans have sensed a great invisible 
power, a vital force that surrounds and is 
sACRED mounTAins AnD hiLLs
A
lthough almost any geographical fea-
ture in Africa may become the focus 
of worship, mountains and hills are the 
features usually identiﬁ  ed as being sacred. 
The people who live near the great Afri-
can mountains such as Mount Kilimanjaro, 
Mount Kenya, the rwenzori Mountains or 
the Mountains of the Moon, Mount elgon, 
and Mount cameroon, make sacriﬁ  ces 
and oﬀ  erings, perform rituals, and oﬀ  er 
prayers to the Supreme Being and other 
spiritual powers on or beside such places. 
other natural sites such as trees, islands, 
lakes, rivers, and waterfalls may also be 
designated as sacred spaces.
Sacred Spaces and Places


--- PAGE 93 ---
92
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ThE mAgiC of gREAT zimBABwE
T
he name “great Zimbabwe” is given to 
ancient stone ruins in the country of Zim-
babwe. These ruins, which include massive 
walls, a stone tower, an acropolis, or cluster 
of buildings on a hilltop, go back many hun-
dreds of years and testify to Africa’s ancient 
culture.
i think the place is well over a thou-
sand years old. Somewhere some day 
we may argue the case. Here is where 
we redeem the half promise. Any book 
about the magic of Africa that did 
not include a word about the great 
Zimbabwe, as it is called, would be 
unthinkable.
The ﬁ  rst thing which strikes one is the 
large expanse of ruined stone dwell-
ings, huddled together at a respectful 
distance from the great buildings of 
the temple and fort, reminding one 
irresistibly of the silent city of the dead 
sprawling in its solitary decrepitude 
under the serene gaze of the Sphinx.
(In Frederick Kaigh, Witchcraft and 
Magic of Africa.) 
A section of the Great 
Zimbabwe, massive 
stone ruins dating 
back  a thousand or 
more years. Traditions 
of the Shona people 
of Zimbabwe, who 
worship Mwari as the 
Supreme Being, connect 
religious practices to the 
Great Zimbabwe.


--- PAGE 94 ---
93
part of all nature. To help themselves come to terms with this 
power Africans have devised ways of containing it by inviting 
it to reside in human-made places and objects, so that they may 
perceive it in smaller doses. 
Places built for religious purposes may be temples and other 
constructed shrines. Temples are architectural structures that 
vary in size and shape. Other constructed shrines may vary from 
a pillar or monument to a small stone or an iron or wooden 
marker. Examples of such shrines include the Staff of Oranyan 
and the Central Shrine of the powerful Ogun in Ile Ife.
TEmPLEs
A temple is a place or a building where people congregate to wor-
ship, to pray, and to ask for favors from spiritual powers. There 
are numerous types of temples in Africa constructed accord-
ing to the various traditions of different peoples. There are large 
temples, small ones, and even miniature ones. Many have been 
overwhelmed by the appearance in Africa of religions like Chris-
tianity and Islam, but others have persisted and have been adapt-
ed to contemporary colonial types of architecture. 
Temples in other parts of Africa, built by the people and 
attended by priests and priestesses, often follow the pattern of 
local construction. In the kingdom of Buganda in Uganda these 
may be conical and thatched. Some Nigerian temples, like the 
Obatala and the Ifa temples of Ife, repre-
sent African religious temples built on the 
basis of Western architectural infl  uence. 
One of the most conspicuous temple 
buildings in Africa south of the Sahara is 
connected with Great Zimbabwe. This is 
a stone building of complex construction 
possibly devoted to the worship of Mwari, 
the Shona name of their Supreme Being, 
and cults of the mhondoro, the spirits asso-
ciated with the ruling dynasties in this 
southern African area.
Shrines
In African religion a shrine is any 
container, box, or receptacle that 
may receive and contain superhuman 
power. A shrine is therefore an 
anchorage, or place of rest, for 
spiritual powers. As a constructed 
structure, in addition to natural 
landmarks, a shrine marks the sacred 
geography of a religious tradition.
Sacred Spaces and Places


--- PAGE 95 ---
94
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
An akuaba figure is a symbol of fertility for the Ashanti people 
of Ghana. They are carved as wood statuettes and worn by 
girls and women to assure childbearing. 
TomBs
The tradition of tomb building in Africa 
goes back millennia, including tombs 
such as the pyramids of ancient Egypt and 
Nubia. Helping us to trace back some vital 
religious ideas, the Great Pyramids at Giza 
express belief in divinity of the king as 
representative of the Sun god Re and the 
place where he ascended to join the Sun 
god in the afterlife. There are many other 
representative types of religiously expres-
sive tombs, among which are the Kasubi 
Tombs of the Kabakas of Buganda in 
Uganda. These tombs are tended by young 
priestesses, who keep the fires within 
them and perform rites that worshippers 
may attend. The tombs thus serve as plac-
es where ordinary people may be in touch 
with the higher powers.
mARkED LoCALiTiEs of  
RE
Ligious signifi CAnCE
In many African religious traditions there 
are localities that are identified as shrines 
without the construction of elaborate 
buildings or structures. For example, the 
shrine of Ogun, a Yoruba divinity consid-
ered to be one of the most powerful as the 
chief blacksmith in heaven and a blood-
thirsty hunter on Earth, is a locality in Ife 
marked by stumps of wood and by stones. 
It is at such a shrine that his followers, who 
include hunters, blacksmiths, engineers, 
mechanics, drivers, artisans, and all peo-
ple who deal in iron, steel, or other metals, 
go to seek spiritual help.


--- PAGE 96 ---
95
RiTuAL oBjECTs
Ritual objects such as talismans or statues 
are used in observing African religious 
rites. The use of ritual places and objects 
goes far back in African tradition. Ritual 
objects are comparatively small human-
made items. One such item is a shrine 
object, a small amulet or charm that is 
believed to carry spiritual power. These 
objects may be produced in a multitude of 
forms. They may be owned communally 
or personally. Other religious objects are 
usually works of art with religious themes, 
such as masks or statues of gods. They 
may also be items intended for utilitar-
ian purposes, like pitchers or pots, which 
because of religious decoration or form may spontaneously be 
considered religious objects.
sACRED sPACE in AfRiCAn LifE
At home, in temples and shrines, and in the countryside, African 
people are aware of the sacredness around them. Although they 
may congregate in a particular place or turn toward a particular 
geographical feature during prayer, they have a continuing sense 
that superhuman beings walk beside them in their daily lives. 
Their presence makes all places potentially sacred. Sacredness 
may be more concentrated in a place built or designated as such, 
but in fact it is everywhere. The objects that African people create 
and place on shrines and in their homes are continuing remind-
ers of this sacredness.
Sculptures	as	Ritual	Objects
Lacking writing, Africans carried their 
mythology—their literature—in their 
heads, transmitting the legends orally 
from generation to generation. Sculpture 
was an additional language through 
which they expressed their inner life and 
communicated with the invisible world, a 
language of emotional communication, 
used from birth to death. Virtually every 
act in the life of the African had its ritual, 
and every rite had its appropriate image.
(In Ladislas Segy,
 African 
Sculpture Speaks.
)
Sacred Spaces and Places


--- PAGE 97 ---
96 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
CHAPTER 7
MYSTICAL 
FORCES
A
frican people feel the power and energy of the spirit world 
that is all around them. They experience the actions of gods 
and ancestors in everything they do. African people are deeply 
aware of the powerful force of creation that put them on the 
Earth and guides their footsteps. They are closely attuned to the 
mystical and mysterious superhuman powers in their lives. In 
addition to their sense of the vital force of the universe, Africans 
recognize other types of forces that are neither superhuman nor 
simply human but lie somewhere between. These mystical forces 
include magic, witchcraft, and sorcery. Like spiritual forces, they 
affect people’s lives and the lives of their community.
mAgiC, wiTChCRAfT, AnD soRCER y
Magic is the practice of manipulating mysterious forces for prac-
tical purposes. People who are able to bring about magic are 
known as magicians. In African belief magic is a far cry from the 
smoke and mirrors of the Western theater stage. African magic 
does not have to do with illusion or trickery. It is a true religious 
A traditional healer selling medicines and herbs in 
Durban, KwaZulu–Natal, South Africa. The healer’s 
practice of medicine combines knowledge of 
medicinal herbs with spiritual and mystical forces.


--- PAGE 98 ---
9
Mystical forces


--- PAGE 99 ---
98
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
element. Africans believe that magic is neutral. It may be used 
for either good or evil purposes. African religion is mainly con-
cerned with asking the cooperation of one’s Supreme Being and 
superhuman beings for the well-being of humanity. In the sense 
that ritual leaders are able to call upon the higher powers effec-
tively, there is always something of a magician in the personality 
of a ritual leader.
Magic in African religion, as in many other religions, makes 
the unknown less threatening and provides psychological reas-
surances for potentially diffi  cult or even dangerous situations. 
Although Westerners do not call it magic, there are many things 
people do, often without knowing they are doing them, that an 
African would consider to be magic at work. They believe it is 
magic when a baseball player crosses himself before stepping up 
to the plate in order to get a hit. It is for magical protection that a 
truck driver places a rosary on the dashboard. Ritual acts and tal-
ismans provide magical protection from 
unknown dangers around the world.
wiTCHCRAfT
Traditionally African people believe that 
witchcraft is one of the causes of misfor-
tunes in a community. Witchcraft is a 
dreaded element in African society. Peo-
ple defi  ne witchcraft as the state of being 
possessed by extrahuman forces that can 
do evil or harm. A sizable population of 
Africans at all levels of society believe in 
witchcraft. They hold witchcraft responsi-
ble for such misfortunes as failure to bear 
children, diseases, failure in life, illness, 
and death.
People have a variety of views about 
how someone becomes a witch. The most 
commonly belief is that the trait is inherit-
ed from a parent. In that sense some people 
RECEiving ThE gifT of mAgiC
T
o the peoples of Africa magic and reli-
gion are so closely related as almost 
to be one. The ewe of ghana believe that 
god sent magic power into the world 
after he had created the ﬁ  rst person. The 
langi of Uganda add that the art of magic 
originated partly in god and partly in the 
spirits. However, they are not certain as 
to when this took place. The Azande of 
Sudan note that the art of magic, together 
with the knowledge of making medicines 
and the ability to avenge crimes, were 
given to humanity by god. The Bemba of 
central Africa simply say that magic is a 
gift from their god. Behind these beliefs 
about magic is the general belief that god 
is the creator of everything, including this 
puzzling force of magic.


--- PAGE 100 ---
A 
sangoma,
 or traditional 
diviner, throwing animal bones 
to read hidden signs revealing 
events aff  ecting an individual 
or community. 
Sangomas
 are 
often called upon to interpret 
community problems or 
disturbances. 
Mystical forces 99


--- PAGE 101 ---
100
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
The	Magician	and	the	Sorcerer
Although in the broadest sense the fi  eld 
of magic might be said to include sorcery 
. . . for the sake of simplicity we shall call 
magic that which is intended to have 
benefi  cial effects, and sorcery that which 
is intended to do harm. The magician 
mainly serves the community; he or she 
performs rites to promote fertility and 
avert misfortune. The sorcerer on the 
other hand is employed privately, serving 
one person in order to harm the enemy.
(In Ladislas Segy, 
African Sculpture Speaks.
)
are born witches. In the case of hereditary 
witchcraft it is possible for someone to be 
a witch and not know it, although eventu-
ally the witch notices his or her powers. 
These powers can be used to cast a spell 
and do harm to someone. Not all witch-
craft is hereditary, however. People also 
feel that witchcraft can be “caught” like an 
infection, or that someone who wants to 
be a witch can buy the power from anoth-
er witch.
Witchcraft causes evil and unrest in 
a community. The community fi  ghts its 
infl  uence by calling on healers who spe-
cialize in curing the effects of witchcraft. 
These healers have come to be known as 
“witch doctors,” a term that is often mis-
understood both in Africa and in the wid-
er world. Witch doctors are not witches 
themselves. That is, they are not evil peo-
ple who want to harm their neighbors. 
They are respected members of society 
whose function is not to harm but to heal. 
A witch doctor helps those who believe 
they have been bewitched. The possibility 
of witchcraft is everywhere. People seek 
protection against it in a variety of ways. 
On the personal level they may use amu-
lets, charms, or talismans to help ward off 
the presence of evil. A hunter, for exam-
ple, may wear a piece of a tooth of a lion 
as protection against witchcraft during a 
hunting expedition. A pregnant woman 
may wear a talisman around her waist to 
protect her unborn child against witch-
craft. The head of a household may hang 
Magic
In magic certain gestures, words, or 
acts, separately or together, are believed 
to invoke the direct assistance of 
supernatural powers in human affairs 
or to give people control over the secret 
powers of Nature. In another sense magic 
may be defi  ned as the art of living in 
intimate union with Nature and sharing 
and using its secrets through 
ritual or “doing.”
The profession of magician is held in 
esteem. It is passed on from father to son. 
As priest the magician promoted the 
welfare of the community; as medicine 
man he healed the ailing.
(In Ladislas Segy, 
African Sculpture Speaks.
)


--- PAGE 102 ---
101
an amulet on the doorpost of his house for 
protection of those within.
soRCERy
The Oxford English Dictionary  traces the 
word sorcery to 1330 b.c.e. It means “the 
use of magic or enchantment; the practice 
of magic arts; witchcraft.” To Africans, 
however, the “magic arts” are nothing 
artistic or enchanting. The African under-
standing of sorcery is as something darker 
and more dangerous. It is the use of magic 
to do harm. Sorcery shares this quality 
with witchcraft. The difference is in degree. 
Witchcraft may be defi  ned as a mystical 
and innate power, which can be used by its 
possessor to harm other people, whereas 
sorcery is evil magic against others. 
Sorcerers set out to do harm. Unlike 
witches, who may cast spells or call on 
mystical forces to do their mischief, sor-
cerers resort to artifi  cial mean, such as 
poison to ply their craft. For example, 
they grow long fi  ngernails in which to 
hide the harmful potions that they may 
drop in someone’s food or drink. In Afri-
can understanding sorcerers are evil. They 
cause much trouble in a community in the 
form of discontent, illness, and even death. 
Some African societies specifi  cally refer to sorcerers or sorcer-
esses as “poisoners.” Theirs is evil magic, deliberately aimed at 
harming people and communities. As in the case of witchcraft, 
people turn to healers for defenses against sorcery.
To African believers there is nothing imaginary about extrahu-
man forces. People believe deeply in the infl  uence of these forces 
on their lives. Extrahuman forces are not to be ignored or taken 
goD’s CREATion AnD PRoTECTion
A
frican people understand witchcraft 
to be part of the religious forces that 
surround them. The nupe of nigeria say 
that in the context of creation, “god also 
put the power of witchcraft in the world. ” 
The Barundi of Burundi add, “god gives 
power to the magicians and witches. ” But 
although witchcraft may be a creation of 
god, he also protects against it. The igbo 
of nigeria assert that “god punishes those 
who do evil and protects people against 
witchcraft. ” The nyakyusa of Tanzania note 
that “god has the power to drive away 
witches. ” Witches are men or women who 
have within themselves the power to prac-
tice witchcraft.
Witchcraft and magic are related, but 
they are distinct from each other. The 
Azande people, for example, make a ﬁ  rm 
distinction between magic (ngwa) and 
witchcraft (mangu). Mangu is hereditary. 
it can be traced to a substance that can 
be found by autopsy in the stomach of a 
witch. it exerts a sinister inﬂ  uence over the 
lives of others in the community when it 
is roused by bad intentions. Ngwa is not 
identiﬁ  ed with any special substance. it is 
divided into good magic and bad magic.
Mystical forces


--- PAGE 103 ---
102
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A Masai woman wearing jewelry, including protective amulets or charms on her ears, to help 
ward off danger or evil spirits. Women make elaborate colored beadwork traditionally worn as 
bangles and necklaces, while both men and women wear earrings that stretch the earlobes.


--- PAGE 104 ---
103
lightly. The following event, reported as 
fact, illustrates just how powerful these 
forces and the belief in them can be. 
During the early 1960s an incident 
occurred through a combination of infl  u-
ences of superhuman and extrahuman 
powers. A husband and wife were quarrel-
ing. The situation deteriorated to the point 
that the husband consulted a medicine 
man. This medicine man, whose name was 
Kigangali, lived in a village called Mushan-
ga, in the district of Ankore in Uganda. 
No ordinary medicine man, Kigangali 
was known for his remarkable command 
of mystical forces. Kigangali told the hus-
band of Nzeera, the quarrelsome wife, that 
he would take care of the situation. Exact-
ly what Kigangali did is unknown, but the 
effect of his magical manipulations was 
that Nzeera was turned into a lion. 
Perhaps in the hope that she could be 
turned back into a woman through exor-
cism, people captured the lion and dragged it to the Christian 
parish center in Mushanga. Observers came from all over the 
area to witness what had happened. Before anything could be 
done, however, the lion died, and the woman’s soul with it. The 
lion was buried with the rites due a human being; the woman 
was never seen again. 
Almost 40 years later this extraordinary event is still discussed 
because of the sense of awe and wonder it created. To call down 
such powerful mystical forces is both terrible and wonderful, 
repellent and attractive. Yet those who believe in them have no 
doubt that such powers are real, and the changing of a woman 
into a lion is clear proof.
PRoTECTion ThRough PRAyER
P
eople may seek protection from 
witchcraft for their community 
through prayer. The following is a prayer 
against witchcraft.
Be Good to Us
I offer thee this dege, this d’lo (nut), and 
 this chicken in the sacrifi  ce that I carry  
 out in my name and in the name of my  
 children.
Keep us safe from the suba (witches)
 0, from all evil and ugly spirits.
Be good to us, keep us from sickness, give  
 us women, healthy children, 
and take care to send us rain; give us   
 physical vigor and in all ways preserve  
 us that we may gather a 
 bountiful crop.
(In Alfonso M. Di Nola and Patrick 
O’Connor, The Prayers of Man.)
Mystical forces


--- PAGE 105 ---
104 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
AFRICAN 
RELIGION IN 
TODAY’S WORLD
T
hroughout history people from outside the African conti-
nent have tended to misunderstand and to dismiss African 
religion, often because of stereotyping and prejudice. One clear 
indication of this is that until quite recently African religions were 
not considered “true” religions, not included on the list of world 
religions. Only lately has African religion received serious recog-
nition as a world religion. The followers of Islam who established 
their influence on Africa’s east coast in the 10th century called 
Africans kaffirs, or unbelievers. In the 15th century, when the 
Christians arrived, they accepted the term, and even went so far 
as to call the entire region Kaffraria. The idea that Africans were 
a people with no religion was widely accepted. African religious 
practices became known as fetishism—superstition and magic.
CHAPTER 8
Celebrations at a gathering of the Nazareth 
Baptist Church in Gingindlovu, KwaZulu–Natal, 
South Africa. This indigenous Christian church 
has more than 700,000 members in South 
Africa. The church was founded in 1910 by 
a Zulu healer, Isaiah Shembe, who sought 
to infuse traditional African religion into 
Christianity. African traditional dance and 
music continue to be widely used in worship.


--- PAGE 106 ---
105
African religion in Today’s World


--- PAGE 107 ---
106
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
RECogni Tion As A TRuE RELigion
It took some 300 years for scholars to recognize African religion 
as a true religion. At first they called African beliefs and prac-
tices “primitive religion.” This term recognized African beliefs as 
valid, yet “primitive” suggests something crude and unformed, 
whereas African religious practices were often highly refined. 
Eventually the religions of Africa came to be known simply as 
“African religion.”
In 1957 Ghana in West Africa shook off the shackles of colo-
nialism and became independent. This began a general move-
ment toward independence in Africa. Political independence 
meant a return to African roots and a new appreciation of things 
African. It restored the “Africanness” of the African people. One 
outcome was that African religion experienced a comeback. By 
this time, too, the Western world had come to a greater apprecia-
tion and understanding of the value of African religion. 
In the 1964 Vatican II Council, Roman Catholic bishops from 
all over the world met in Rome. They accepted African religion 
as a full partner among world religions. The influence of Vati-
can II spread well beyond the Catholic Church. Observers from 
almost all Christian denominations attended and carried its mes-
sage back to their churches. They also quickly accepted African 
religion in its many manifestations as a full partner among world 
religions. 
infLuEnCE on RELigion woRLDwiDE
African religion has great influence on African society and on 
African people throughout the world. All people of African heri-
tage are tied to African religion by the bonds of culture. Their 
environment shapes their religious feelings and ideas. Although 
they may convert to other religions, people cannot give up their 
Africanness. It is too much a part of them. And a part of that 
Africanness is African religion. Even if they are Catholic,  Protes-
tant, or Orthodox Christians or Muslims, as many Africans are, 
they have formed their feelings about religion in general on the 
basis of their African roots.


--- PAGE 108 ---
10
UBUNTU
A
frican religion is deeply and funda-
mentally humanistic, centered on the 
human condition. This humanism colors all 
of life and its relationships. African human-
ism may be summarized in the principle of 
Ubuntu. Ubuntu is diﬃ   cult to translate, but as 
South Africa’s Archbishop desmond Tutu, the 
nobel Prize–winning churchman, has said, 
“You know when it is there, and it is obvious 
when it is absent. it has to do with what it 
means to be truly human, it refers to gentle-
ness, to compassion, to hospitality, to open-
ness to others, to vulnerability, to be available 
for others and to know that you are bound up 
with them in the bundle of life, for a person 
is only a person through other persons. ” This 
is the principle behind African religion. Ulti-
mately this is the principle that empowers 
African religion to exert worldwide inﬂ  uence.
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, is 
recognized for his campaigning work on peace and justice 
issues not only within Christianity but among communities of 
many religious traditions and with secular governments. 
African religion in Today’s World


--- PAGE 109 ---
108
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
kwAnzAA
K
wanzaa is an African-American holi-
day. it was begun in 1966 by Maulana 
Karenga. This holiday pays tribute to the rich 
cultural roots of African Americans. Kwanzaa 
is an African word meaning “the ﬁ  rst fruits of 
the harvest, ” and the holiday is based on Afri-
can ﬁ  rst-fruits celebrations. These are yearly 
celebrations with a fourfold purpose: To 
bring people together; to honor and pay rev-
erence to the creator and creation; to com-
memorate the past; and to give the people 
the opportunity to recommit themselves to 
the highest ideals of the community. These 
ideals are summarized in the seven principles 
of unity, self-determination, collective work 
and responsibility, cooperative economics, 
purpose, creativity, and faith. Kwanzaa is cel-
ebrated annually from december 26 through 
January 1. Kwanzaa is usually presented as 
a unique holiday—not religious, political, or 
heroic, but cultural. However, as with all things 
African, it is impossible to separate religion 
from culture, and Kwanzaa carries religious 
associations along with cultural ones.
The ritual instruments of Kwanzaa festival include a straw place mat, a seven-branched candlestick, seven 
candles, a variety of fruits, a symbolic representation of the number of children in the home by ears of corn, a 
communal cup that represents unity, and a drink that is poured and shared together.


--- PAGE 110 ---
109
AfRiCAn REligion in THE AMERiCAs
The influence of African religion goes beyond the African conti-
nent. In the Western Hemisphere, for example, elements of Afri-
can religion appear in a number of local religious traditions. In 
Brazil Candomblé and Macumba are two religions whose back-
bone is African. In the Caribbean religions with strong African 
roots include Haitian Voodoo, which is based on the Fon Vodun 
worship; Cuban Santeria, a blend of African and Christian beliefs; 
Trinidadian Shango; and Jamaican Rastafarianism. Emigration 
has carried all of these to the United States. In addition traditions 
like the African Methodist Episcopal Church, which traces its 
beginnings to the time of slavery, incorporate elements of Afri-
can religion. 
indig Enous Af RiCAn CHuRCHE s
Within Africa people have adapted Christian beliefs and rituals 
to fit their own needs, establishing churches of their own. Many 
of these churches have strong elements of African religion. Peo-
ple felt that Christianity, with its emphasis on salvation in the 
next world, was not meeting their needs for the here and now. 
It did not, for example, offer protection against witches, ways of 
divining the future, and healing, which the new churches offer. 
The Aladura Church of Yoruba, with a membership of around 
1.5 million, features leaders who act as healers and diviners. By 
some estimates more than 80 million Africans belong to the new 
churches; for example, the Church of Zion in South Africa has 
5 million adherents and in Zaire, the Church of Jesus Christ on 
Earth through the Prophet Simon Kimbangu (Kimbanguists) has 
7 million.  Another factor in the development of the new church-
es has been people’s need to shake off outside influences and take 
local control of their religion.
AfRiCAn musiC
Music, either vocal or instrumental, usually accompanies Afri-
can religious ritual. Music is used to praise the Supreme Being, 
the superhuman beings, and the ancestors. It is used as prayer in 
African religion in Today’s World


--- PAGE 111 ---
110
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 112 ---
111
Singers at a community celebration in Nampula province, 
northeastern Mozambique. In traditional African religion 
instrumental or vocal music are used both in religious ritual 
and as an expression of community identity. 
supplication for favors from heaven. The 
drum is the primary instrument. It is a 
key that unlocks communication with the 
spirit world. People beat or play drums to 
induce oracles from high above, through 
mediums.
African Americans originated one of 
America’s earliest original musical forms, 
the Negro spiritual. Negro spirituals, now 
familiar worldwide, were the creation of 
African Americans during the time of 
slavery. People sang them to express the 
grief and suffering to which they were 
often subject. The music soothed their 
own souls and those of their listeners. It 
presented religious, usually Christian, sen-
timents in a distinctly African style. From 
the United States to Europe and to the rest 
of the world, Negro spirituals have made a 
special mark on world music.
ThE visuAL ARTs
From their beginnings the people of Afri-
ca have expressed themselves through the 
visual arts. Rock paintings from ancient 
times have been discovered in many 
parts of Africa. Stone and wood carvings 
abound in African villages and homes. 
True works of art, they have found places 
in museums and in the homes of Ameri-
can and European collectors as well. 
African religion in Today’s World


--- PAGE 113 ---
112
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Originally all of these objects had a religious purpose. Afri-
can religion is a religion without scripture and originally without 
written records. At one time people therefore concluded that it 
was a religion of illiteracy and without any kind of record. How-
ever in fact records of African religion are many. Some of the 
most important of these are its visual arts.
African visual arts have infl  uenced some of the great Western 
artists of the 20th century. Among these were Pablo Picasso and 
Henri Matisse. Matisse recalled how an African statuette, with its 
strong character and purity of line, infl  uenced Picasso’s style and 
led to the birth of cubism, one of the most important movements 
of modern art.
AfRiCAn RELigion AnD oThER RELigions
African religion is a vital part of the African heritage, and Afri-
cans who live on the African continent 
belong to that heritage. They are cultur-
ally connected to African religion. How-
ever, not all African people today claim to 
be adherents of African religion. Many of 
them are declared Christians, Muslims, or 
members of other religions. 
Today leaders from other religions 
understand that they must fi  rst be able to 
talk meaningfully with others about the 
religion they have grown up in as well as 
the one they are adopting. Not long ago 
the missionary effort was aimed at eras-
ing African religion from the African 
continent and the world. Today, however, 
the message is one of dialogue. That this 
is happening is a further assurance that 
African religion will continue to prosper. 
Far from being wiped out by the infl  ux of 
other religions, African religion continues 
to thrive.
The	Inﬂ 	 uence	of	African	
Religion	on	20th-Century	
Visual	Arts
It was the spirit . . . not merely African 
but universal, which was truly captured by 
modern Cubist artists. The fact that they 
collected African sculptures meant that 
these moderns lived with them suffi  ciently 
to absorb the sculptures’ radiance, and 
not merely to “borrow” forms. They did 
not divide the form from the content, 
any more than the human body can 
be separated from the mind. It was an 
“inﬂ  uence,” if one wishes to use this word; 
but an inﬂ  uence of the content which was 
fi  rst digested in its essence by the artists, 
and then recreated by them.
(In Ladislas Segy, 
African Sculpture Speaks.
)


--- PAGE 114 ---
113
PiCAsso AnD sACRED ART
P
ablo Picasso well understood the connec-
tion between African art and religion. He 
wrote, “My greatest artistic revelation came 
about when i was suddenly struck by the 
sublime beauty of the sculpture done by the 
anonymous artists of Africa. in their passion-
ate and rigorous logic, these works of sacred 
art are the most powerful and beautiful prod-
ucts of the human imagination. ”
(in John richardson, A Life of Picasso.)
A handmade wooden mask from Nubia, southern Egypt.
African religion in Today’s World


--- PAGE 115 ---
114
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
AfRiCAn RELigion As A suBjECT of sTuDy
Only recently has African religion become a serious subject for 
study. Early students of African culture tended to see only what 
they wanted to see—exotic ritual and mysterious rites that meant 
nothing to them. They reported on its color and strangeness, but 
without understanding. Since that time anthropologists, scien-
tists who study humans and their societies and cultures, have 
conducted many studies of African religion that have promoted 
a better understanding. They have greatly contributed to assur-
ing African religion a place among world religions. 
During the late 1950s, along with African independence Afri-
cans developed a keen awareness of their religion. They began to 
study it as never before. Books and textbooks appeared on the 
subject. In the United States Harvard University inaugurated the 
teaching of African religion in 1977. Since that time African reli-
gion has become a popular subject of study at colleges and uni-
versities and at the high school level. 
AfRiCAn RELigion As An oRgAnizATion
African religion is usually called a “traditional religion,” one that 
is spontaneously passed down from generation to generation. 
It has not been considered an “organized religion” in the sense 
that it does not have an elected church leader, a church hierar-
chy, or elected officials to run the business of the church and rule 
on matters of doctrine. However, African religion does have an 
internal structure. It is first of all a dynamic and living religion. 
Its leaders regard their religion as a whole consisting of interde-
pendently coordinated parts. In recent years leaders of African 
religion have begun to apply practices of organization and asso-
ciation to African religion. For that reason, today in Africa and 
in other countries where African religion exists, it is becoming 
increasingly organized.
Other aspects of African religion are becoming increasingly 
organized as well. One of these is healing. Practically all African 
countries have taken initiatives to establish organizations and 
associations through which members of the healing communi-


--- PAGE 116 ---
ties may work together, for example by exchanging notes for the 
material and spiritual well-being of the people. Organizations 
such as the Uganda Herbalists and Cultural Association in Ugan-
da and the Traditional Doctors’ Association in South Africa are 
two of these. 
International drug companies are working to understand 
the healing knowledge that the medicine men and women pos-
sess, particularly with regard to healing herbs. In the invaluable 
knowledge of the African healers may lie the treasure that sets off 
the new “scramble for Africa.” 
Importantly for African religion, the knowledge and secrets of 
the healers cannot be cut away from their religious connections. 
There is the opportunity here for the knowledge and the secrets 
of the African healers to be preserved for the future but there is 
also a real risk. Outside organizations, especially multination-
al companies, are not interested in this vital link. How healing 
knowledge can maintain its religious ties in the face of this medi-
cal exploration poses a great challenge to contemporary African 
religion. 
African religion in Today’s World 115


--- PAGE 117 ---
116 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
CHAPTER 9
AFRICAN 
RELIGION PAST, 
PRESENT, AND 
FUTURE
S
tudy has shown that besides being rational, humans are also 
social and religious by nature. For ages inhabitants of Africa 
chose their elders to be their religious leaders and sages. These 
leaders and sages have been the custodians of and consultants 
to the religious needs of a community. And there is no reason 
to believe that such cornerstones of African religion will cease 
to exist in the near future. The influence of religion among Afri-
cans is powerful. Geoffrey Parrinder wrote that many colonial-
ist administrators described Africans as an “incurably religious 
people.” With this in mind the history of African religion can be 
organized in terms of precolonialist times, colonialist times, and 
postcolonialist times.
Prehistoric paintings of early San people (Bushmen) 
herding cattle, on the walls of a cave in the 
Cederberg region of South Africa. San rock paintings 
believed to date back 25,000 years have been 
discovered at more than 2,500 sites. The San were 
the first inhabitants of the Cape in South Africa.


--- PAGE 118 ---
11
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 119 ---
118
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ThE LAnD of ThE AfRi
I
n latin Africa (i.e., terra Africa ) means 
“the land of the Afri. ” This name des-
ignated only the area that contained the 
roman province, while the rest of the 
landmass was simply considered unknown 
land. in latin this unknown land was called 
terra incognita. The incorrect translation of 
that latin phrase later became “the dark 
continent. ” over time Africa—the name for 
the roman province only—was extended 
to include the entire continent as we know 
it today. 
The Antonius Pius arch 
of the second-century 
Roman city of Sufetula 
near present-day Sbeitla in 
Tunisia. The city was built on 
an area once inhabited by 
nomadic tribes, especially 
Berber people.
PRECoLoniALisT TimEs 
African religion cannot be discussed with-
out looking at the origins of the name Afri-
ca. From a geographic point of view Africa 
refers to the second largest of the seven 
continents. In early times, around 264–
146 
b.c.e., inhabitants of northern Africa 
lived within the borders of the political 
infl  uences of the city-state of Carthage; 
they were known as Afri. In 146 
b.c.e. the 
Romans conquered Carthage and coined a 
new name for the area: Africa. 
The phrase African traditional religion,  
then, is meant to include the obsolete and 
the living religions of Africa. It includes the 
indigenous religions of Africans as experi-
enced in all fi  ve regions of the continent of 
Africa, as well as the fundamentally basic 
units of the religious expressions of Afri-
cans. While the label indigenous religions of 
Africa refers to religions that originate in 
Africa, the fi  ve regions of the continent


--- PAGE 120 ---
119
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 121 ---
120
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
represent the geographical bases of the 
diversity of African ethnicity. We speak 
of African religion both in the singular 
and in the plural. The singular represents 
the oneness of the religion of Africa as far 
as the spirit of the religion is concerned. 
However African religion can also be 
expressed in the plural with respect to the 
expressions of the religion of Africa by the 
many African ethnicities.
oLD AnD nEw AfRiCAn RELigion
For a very long time before the colonialist 
occupation, people in sub-Saharan Africa 
practiced religion. The existence of those 
religions is evident in ancient African art—particularly in rock 
engravings and paintings, sculptures, and buildings—as well as 
in the traditions of African folklore. Both artistic objects and oral 
traditions were created to refl  ect the religious fabric of the people 
who created them. It is helpful to look at some examples in the 
different regions of sub-Saharan Africa.
AnCiEnT EAsTERn AfRiCA
Eastern Africa is not known for ancient artworks such as rock 
engravings. It is, however, well known as the source of the Nile 
River. Peoples from Burundi to Egypt consider the Nile to be the 
personifi  cation of a river god. As such, they regard the river with 
religious admiration and respect. Also, contemporary eastern 
African paleoanthropologists such as Dr. Richard E. F. Leakey 
have publicized the region as the home of the “East African Man.” 
Dr. Leakey’s discovery of this important fossil has led many to 
regard eastern Africa as the place where humankind originated.
AnCiEnT souTHERn AfRiCA
African religion in southern Africa is expressed through oral tra-
dition and art. Southern Africa has ages-old art records in the 
oBsoLETE AfRiCAn RELigions
I
n some areas of the African continent, 
especially in the north, indigenous reli-
gions became obsolete because they were 
no longer practiced. egypt was home to 
a now-outdated ancient egyptian reli-
gion; the Berber religion was found in the 
northern part of Africa, west of egypt; the 
cushite religion was practiced south of 
egypt; the Aksumite religion in the south-
east area of present-day ethiopia. These 
religions have fallen into disuse for many 
centuries and are now obsolete.


--- PAGE 122 ---
121
form of buildings and utensils. These are functionally related 
to the systems of beliefs and modes of thinking of the people of 
southern Africa. The San people of southern Africa have excelled 
in rock art in the form of engravings and paintings that refl  ect the 
life they lived long ago. Archaeologists, anthropologists, and art 
historians believe that the rock art of the San people was pro-
duced some 25,000 years ago.
AnCiEnT wEsTERn AfRiCA
Several art forms—ancient sculptures in particular—give evi-
dence to the rich religious expressions of the peoples of western 
Africa. A serious study of western African sculpture is likely to 
challenge the observer with a sense of religiosity revealed in the 
art. In 2002 the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City 
opened an exhibition of African sculpture titled “Genesis: Ideas 
of Origin in African Sculpture,” and described the exhibit in this 
way: “The works relate to traditions that interweave elements of 
myth, history, religion, and contemporary experience to address 
universal questions: How did the world 
begin? What is our ancestry? What is the 
source of agriculture, kingship, and other 
societal institutions?”
In western Africa there are many tra-
ditions of sculpture that enshrine the 
spirituality and religiosity of the people. 
Perhaps the most visible of those traditions 
is that of the Yoruba people. Ile Ife, the 
capital of Yorubaland, is said to have been 
in existence since around 350 
b.c.e. and is 
believed to be the center of the world. 
One of the most impressive things in 
Ile Ife is the sculptured granite monolith 
known as Opa Oranyan, which means 
“the staff of Oranyan.” As oral tradition 
has it Oranyan was the hero warrior and 
son of Oduduwa. Oduduwa was associat-
Ancestral	Home	and	Holy	City
The Yoruba people of western Africa 
believe that Ife is the center of the 
world. E. Bolaji Idowu, one of the most 
outstanding writers on Yoruba religion, 
summarizes the relationship between Ile 
Ife and Yoruba religion in the following 
way: “In order to reach the heart of the 
Yoruba in this way, the fi  rst place of 
importance for us to go is Ile Ife, their 
Ancestral Home, and their Holy City. 
After this, and only after it, should we 
look elsewhere. And so let us pay a visit to 
that Ancient City!” 
(In E. Bolaji Idowu, 
Olodumare: God 
in Yoruba Belief.
)
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 123 ---
122
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ed with Olodumare, the Supreme Being in matters that relate to 
creation. He is the progenitor of the Yoruba people and heritage 
that originate in Ile Ife.
Yoruba religious heritage has extended to many corners of the 
world. In particular it has made notable contributions to the cul-
tures of Brazil, Cuba, and the United States. Many modern people 
recognize Ile Ife to be central to their roots.
AnCiEnT CEnTRAl AfRiCA
Christianity, at its entry point in ancient Central Africa, testifies 
to the presence of African religion since ancient times. In 1491 
King Nzinga of the kingdom of Kongo in Central Africa convert-
ed to Christianity through contacts with the Portuguese adven-
turers. He encouraged the Kongo nobility and peasants to follow 
his example. African Christianity lasted in Kongo for 200 years. 
The strength of African religion accounts for the swift embrace 
of Christianity by the people of the Kongo kingdom.
In African religion a king is not only a ruler; he is also a reli-
gious leader. When their king converted to Christianity it was 
obvious that his subjects would follow suit. The highly central-
ized and hierarchically structured society helped information 
flow throughout the kingdom. Christian doctrine was easily 
translated into Kikongo, the local language. Concepts like god, 
spirit, and holiness easily found equivalents with concepts in Kon-
go religion. Portuguese missionaries helped establish a spirit of 
cooperation.
CoLoniALisT TimEs 
The Portuguese exercised navigational prowess along the west-
ern and eastern coast of the African continent. What they saw of 
African religious practice in coastal areas led them to conclude 
that Africans worshipped fetishes. The interior of Africa, how-
ever, continued to remain a mystery to Europeans. Stories about 
the Mountains of the Moon, suppositions about raw materials in 
the interior of the continent, and pagans who remained uncon-
verted attracted much speculation and attention in Europe. The


--- PAGE 124 ---
123
situation encouraged Europeans to consider exploring the inte-
rior of Africa. Between 1768 and 1892, 10 European explorers 
went to Africa. Seven of these were British, one was French, one 
was German (working for the British government), and one was 
Anglo-American.
Europeans learned about Africa from the explorers and this 
knowledge led to European ideas about colonialism. (The term 
colonization refers to acts of settling on a given piece of land, while 
colonialism is the system in which a nation imposes its authority 
over other peoples’ territory.) The European scramble for Africa 
that ended in the Berlin Conference of 1884–85 arbitrarily divid-
ed Africa among European colonialist powers. Colonialism left 
all parts of African native cultures, including religion, fractured 
and bleeding.
During colonialist times African reli-
gion was thought of as a “less-than” reli-
gion—on a par with paganism, fetishism, 
primitive religion, and animism. Before 
and during the times of colonialism Afri-
can religion was dismissed as being unim-
portant to the development of modern 
society. And even to those with less criti-
cal views African religion was often toler-
ated rather than accepted.
PosTCoLoniALisT TimEs 
By the time World War II began about 
80 percent of the African continent was 
under European colonialist rule. During 
the war many African men were recruited 
into serving in the armies of the colonial-
ist countries. African soldiers served in 
many different corners of the world for 
long periods of time. The length of their 
service and the experiences they gained 
made them think differently about the 
Dismissing BELiEfs
U
nder colonialism African belief sys-
tems and modes of thought became 
subjects of ridicule. explorer Samuel Baker 
was among those who thought that Afri-
can belief systems did not even exist. in 
an 1867 article (“race of the nile Basin”) 
he said, “Without any exception [Africans] 
are without a belief in a Supreme Being, 
neither have they any form of worship or 
idolatry; nor is the darkness of their minds 
enlightened by even a ray of superstition. 
The mind is as stagnant as the morass 
which forms its puny world. ” Some colo-
nialist administrators spoke with disgust 
about Africans, whom they called “these 
incurably religious” folk. Some missionar-
ies wished to destroy what they thought 
of as devilish and superstitious beliefs and 
replace them with what they considered 
to be true religion. 
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 125 ---
124
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
A drawing of the Anglo-American explorer Henry Morton Stanley approaching Lake 
Tanganyika. In 1869 Stanley was commissioned by the New York Herald to search for the 
missing Scottish explorer and missionary David Livingstone, whom he finally found at Lake 
Tanganyika in 1871. In the years that followed Stanley continued to explore 
large areas of Central Africa.


--- PAGE 126 ---
125
future of their countries when they returned home. As war vet-
erans Africans now had the knowledge and experience to work 
for the end of colonialism in Africa.
In 1945 the United Nations was formed to promote peace, 
security, and cooperation, and in 1948 it issued the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. Africans started demanding polit-
ical independence from European colonialist administrators. In 
some cases Africans demanded the return of religious objects 
that had been sent to Europe. For example, the Baganda in Ugan-
da demanded the return of the relics of Kibuuka, the Buganda 
god of war, from the United Kingdom. The relics were returned. 
In 1957 Ghana in western Africa was the first African country to 
gain political independence from the government of Her Majesty 
Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom.
inDEPE nDEnT AfRiCA
Colonialist administrators and missionaries had put many Afri-
can religious practitioners under watch. As a result people prac-
ticed religion secretly and under the cover of the night. Many 
Africans practiced Christianity during the day while they attend-
ed African religious sessions at night. Political independence 
brought about change, however. It made people feel confident 
about themselves—not only politically, but also in terms of their 
relationship to African religion. Many postindependent Afri-
can governments protected the practices of African religion and 
many African governments have declared African religions to be 
official religions. 
EduCATion And REnEwEd Confid EnCE
Since independence many Africans have rediscovered the worth 
of their religion and have stopped feeling insecure about their 
religious heritage. Such insecurity was instilled in them by out-
side religious and colonialist rule that had viewed African reli-
gion as being inferior. 
To deal with challenges and doubts about African religion, 
African leaders looked to education. Departments of religious 
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 127 ---
126
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
studies were first introduced in the top universities in sub-Saha-
ran Africa, including the University of Ibadan in Nigeria, the 
University of Ghana, the University of Sierra Leone, Makerere 
University in Uganda, and the University of Nairobi in Kenya. 
These institutions paved the way for the teaching of what came 
to be African Traditional Religion.
Catholic lay missionaries working on an educational training program with children 
in Nairobi whose parents have died from AIDS. Members of various religious 
traditions, including indigenous African religion, are increasingly working together 
in Africa on health and community programs.


--- PAGE 128 ---
12
islAM And CHRisTiAniTy in indEPEndEnT AfRiCA
The fi  rst outside religion to fi  nd its way into Africa south of the 
equator was Islam. Muslims fi  rst arrived in eastern Africa from 
southern Arabia in the eighth century. The newly arrived Mus-
lims considered Africans to be unbelievers. 
From the late 15th century onward Christianity began to 
arrive in sub-Saharan Africa. Long established in countries such 
as Egypt and Ethiopia, it was the European journeys of discovery 
starting with the Portuguese that brought Catholicism, and then 
from the 17th century Protestantism, to Africa. Many missionar-
ies, both Catholic and Protestant, regard-
ed as devilish anything that had elements 
of African belief. As John Baur states in 
his book 2000 Years of Christianity in Africa: 
“This was due to two misconceptions: on 
the one hand, there was the unfortunate 
but quite general European prejudice that 
Africans were a primitive people without 
religion; on the other hand it had become 
generally accepted in Europe that all mag-
ic and all spirits were devilish.” 
TolERAnCE, undERsTAnding, 
And diAloguE
Both Christianity and Islam were essen-
tially hostile to traditional African religion, 
destroying statues and shrines and over-
turning ancient customs as devil worship 
or as being of no signifi  cance any longer. 
In recent decades attitudes have changed, 
led in particular by the theological changes 
within the Catholic Church after Vatican 
II, which encouraged Catholics to see God 
within all religions; and by changes within 
Protestantism brought about by the rise 
of the anti-imperialism movement associ-
PRiEsT, hEALER, AnD DoCToR
I
n addition to the many local religious 
oﬃ   ciants, there are many outstand-
ing healers and priests of international 
importance in Africa. one of them is dr. 
erick V. A. gbodossou. He is an ob-gyn and 
psychiatrist who holds a joint degree in 
medicine and pharmacy. His experience 
in traditional medicine goes back to child-
hood. At the age of two he was chosen to 
be trained as a healer under the direction 
of his grandfather and a team of elders. 
dr. gbodossou is now a healer and priest. 
His spiritual beliefs are based on a saying 
by Hippocrates: “one cannot be a good 
physician without being a good priest. ” 
He considers this to be the African ancient 
ideal and one that a traditional healer 
should not lose sight of. dr. gbodossou 
is the president of ProMeTrA interna-
tional—the Association for the Promotion 
of Traditional Medicine—in dakar, Sen-
egal. ceMeTrA—experimental center for 
Traditional Medicine—is his medical and 
research complex; it attracts professionals 
from all over the world.
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 129 ---
128
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Members of the Zion Christian Church at an open-air prayer 
meeting in the streets of Gugulethu, a black township outside 
Cape Town, South Africa. The Zionist Church is particularly 
strong in South Africa, with more than 5 million members 
drawn largely from the Zulu and Swazi people. The church 
has Protestant mission origins but has blended itself into 
traditional African culture within a generation. Its practice 
emphasizes healing and spiritual experience and draws upon 
elements of traditional African religion. 
ated with the World Council of Churches. 
Now there is a much greater appreciation 
of the spirituality of African traditional 
religion and apologies have been made for 
past actions and insensitivity. 
mEET ing nEED s AnD  
f
ACing Ch ALLE ngEs
In Africa people turn to African religion 
for their spiritual needs at a variety of lev-
els. Healers, mediums, diviners, rainmak-
ers, priests, elders, rulers, queens, and kings 
all serve the religious needs of the people. 
They attain their positions by inheritance 
or by apprenticeship. In the past they were 
usually traditional, in the sense that they 
were not formally educated. Today there 
are many African religious service provid-
ers who hold academic degrees, including 
PhDs, who serve communities both in 
Africa and abroad.
However alongside its development 
and spread, African religion is also subject 
to many of the problems that affect oth-
er religious traditions. For example, the 
rise of feminism is challenging the male-
dominated structures and taboos of much


--- PAGE 130 ---
129
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 131 ---
130
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
of African religion. Whether this is to do with female circumci-
sion—now more commonly and controversially called “female 
genital mutilation”—or the traditional authority given primar-
ily to men, or the abuse of women within traditional notions of 
female subservience to men, feminism presents as many chal-
lenges to African religion as it does to other faiths. 
youTH CulTuRE
The drift of young people away from traditional cultures and 
models of authority is another problem. The role of the elder is 
no longer one that can be assumed. The urbanization of much 
of the African population means that many young people have 
never known the traditional structures of family, tribe, or village 
that are the mainstays of African religion. Growing global com-
munications, such as the Internet, offer an influential youth cul-
ture that so many young urban Africans desire, and ultimately 
shrinks or even denies the role of elders and collective ancient 
wisdom.  This is not only breaking the ties that bound people 
to traditional religion, it is also placing strains on other religious 
communities such as the Christian churches.
ExPloiTATion of T RAdiTionAl PRACT iCEs
The lack of clear structures of authority also poses problems for 
African religion, because it leaves it open to exploitation by peo-
ple who abuse its power and structures of power. Because of the 
informal nature of African religion, it is difficult to counter claims 
by groups that call themselves traditional African religion, even 
if they seem to be clear aberrations. For example, issues such as 
the supposed ritual use of bush meat, for which wildlife such as 
gorillas and chimpanzees are slain, featured in a 2006 trial in the 
United States, where differing understandings of African tradi-
tion were argued in court.
hoLDing on To AfRiCAn iDEnTiTy
The rise of a more fundamentalist Islam in some parts of Africa 
has led to the suppression of many elements of traditional Afri-


--- PAGE 132 ---
131
can religion that formerly found a home or at least an umbrella 
in Islam. Within Christianity the degree to which African tradi-
tional religion maintains a distinct identity is increasingly look-
ing doubtful. The same Westernizing influences that turn young 
people away from tradition are likewise affecting these indige-
nous churches. Nevertheless it is perhaps within such churches 
that African religion can best hold on in areas where it is no lon-
ger the dominant tradition.
Worldwide, traditional religions are losing ground to other 
faiths or simply to secularism and Westernization. In 1993 the 
State of Religion Atlas (Simon and Schuster) listed eight African 
countries in which traditional beliefs were the majority religion. 
By the 2007 edition this had dropped to five. 
Despite some degree of decline in Africa, however, African 
religion continues to be practiced widely and is finding a place 
outside Africa. Priests of African religion appear to be in demand 
for their spiritual service internationally. The popularity of Web 
sites such as “Outstanding Priests of Traditional African Reli-
gion” indicates that the Americas and the United Kingdom are 
increasingly becoming homes of the religion.
African religion Past, Present, and future


--- PAGE 133 ---
132
FACT FILE
worldwide numbers 
Of Africa’s population of more than 930 million people, 
most are influenced by African traditional religion and a 
significant proportion practice some form of it.
h
oly symbol
The Adinkira symbol is one expression of the supremacy 
of  God in traditional beliefs.
Asihene, Emmanuel V. Traditional Folk-Tales of Ghana. 
Lewiston, N.Y .: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1997. 
Baker, Sir Samuel White. “The Races of the Nile Basin, ” in 
Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London , N.S. 
v (1867), p.231.
Baur, John. 2000 Years of Christianity in Africa: An African 
Church History. Nairobi, Kenya: Paulines, 1998.
Bierlein, J.F . Parallel Myths. New York: Ballantine Books, 
1994. 
Boadle, Anthony. “Yoruba Deity Worshipers Open 
Congress in Havana, ” in Havana Journal. URL: http://
havanajournal.com/culture/entry/yoruba_deity_
BIBLIOGRAPHY
worshipers_open_congress_in_havana. Accessed on 
February 10, 2009. 
Danquah, J. B. The Akan Doctrine of God: A Fragment  
of Gold Coast Ethics and Religion.  London: Cass,  
1968.
di Nola, A.M., and Patrick O’Connor. The Prayers of Man. 
London: William Heinemann, 1962.
Idowu, E. Bolaji. Olodumare: God in Yoruba Belief. London: 
Longmans, 1966.
Kaigh, Frederick. Witchcraft and Magic of Africa . [London]: 
R. Lesley, 1947.
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
holy writings
The religion is based on oral traditions: There are no 
specific holy writings.
h
oly Places
There are no specific pilgrimage sites.
fo
unders 
There is no specific founder of African traditional religion.
fe
stivals
In Africa, each tribal community has it own celebrations. 
These are mainly related to coming-of-age, the seasons, 
and harvests. Kwanzaa is an African-American holiday 
celebrated annually (December 26–January 1) in the 
United States to pay tribute to the cultural roots of 
African Americans.


--- PAGE 134 ---
133
King, Noel Q. Religions of Africa. New York: Harper & Row, 
1970.
Lienhardt, G. Divinity and Experience: The Religion of the 
Dinka. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961.
Pachocinski, Ryszard. Proverbs of Africa: Human Nature in 
the Nigerian Oral Tradition ; an Exposition and Analysis 
of 2,600 Proverbs from 64 Peoples. St. Paul, Minn.: 
Professors World Peace Academy, 1996.
Parrinder, Geoffrey. African Traditional Religion. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1962.
Potter, Paul. Hippocrates, Volume VIII. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1995.
Rattray, R. S. Religion & Art in Ashanti.  New York: AMS 
Press, 1979.
Richardson, John. A Life of Picasso. New York: Random 
House, 1991.
Roscoe, John. The Baganda: An Account of Their Native 
Customs and Beliefs. London: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., 
1911.
Segy, Ladislas. African Sculpture Speaks.  New York: Da Capo 
Press, 1975.
Sproul, Barbara. Primal Myths: Creation Myths Around the 
World. San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1991.
Vatican Council, and Walter M. Abbott. The Documents of 
Vatican II. New York: Guild Press, 1966.
Welbourn, Frederick Burkewood. Religion and Politics in 
Uganda, 1952–1962.  Nairobi: East African Pub. House, 
1965.
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 135 ---
134
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
FURTHER READING
Achebe, Chinua. Things Fall Apart. New York: Doubleday 
and Company, 1994.
Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick. Fragments of Bone: Neo-African 
Religions in a New World. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 2005.
Bohannan, Paul. Africa and Africans, 4th ed. Prospect 
Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press, 1999.
Breuilly, Elizabeth, Joanne O’Brien, Martin Palmer, and 
Martin E. Marty. Religions of the World: The Illustrated 
Guide to Origins, Beliefs, Traditions & Festivals.  New York: 
Checkmark Books, 2005.
Brodd, Jeffrey. World Religions: A Voyage of Discovery. 
Winona, Minn.: Saint Mary’s Press, 2003.
Clarke, Peter B. New Trends and Developments in African 
Religions. Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1998.
Fisher, Robert B. West African Religions Traditions: Focus on 
the Akan of Ghana. New York: Orbis Books, 1998.
Isichei, Elizabeth. A History of Christianity in Africa.  Grand 
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1995.
Kinsley, David R. Health, Healing and Religion: A Cross 
Cultural Perspective. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice 
Hall, 1995.
Lawson, E. Thomas. Religions of Africa: Traditions in 
Transformation, 2nd ed. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland 
Press, 1998.
Lewis-Williams, J. David. A Cosmos In Stone: Interpreting 
Religion and Society Through Rock Art.  Walnut Creek, 
Calif.: AltaMira Press, 2002.
Magesa, Laurenti. African Religion: The Moral Traditions of 
Abundant Life. New York: Orbis Books, 1997.
Mbiti, John S. African Religions & Philosophy. Portsmouth, 
N.H.: Heinemann, 1992.
Murphy, Larry. Down by the Riverside: Readings in African 
American Religion.  New York: New York University Press, 
2000.
O’Brien, Joanne, Martin Palmer, David B. Barrett, and 
Joanne O’Brien. The Atlas of Religion . Berkeley, Calif.: 
University of California Press, 2007.
Ray, Benjamin C. African Religions: Symbol, Ritual, 
and Community, 2nd ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Pearson 
Education, 1999.
Some, Malidoma Patrice. The Healing Wisdom of Africa: 
Finding Life Purpose Through Nature, Ritual, and 
Community. New York: Penguin Putnam Inc., 1998.
Tutu, Desmond, ed. The African Prayer Book. New York: 
Doubleday and Company, 1995.


--- PAGE 136 ---
135
Further facts and figures, history, and current status of 
the religion can be found on the following Web sites:
www.afrikaworld.net/afrel
A major source of information on African Traditional 
Religion. Provides topical information and an insight 
into the relationships with Christianity and Islam.
www.sacred-texts.com/afr/index.htm
An electronic version of rare public-domain books about 
African traditional religion.
www.africa.upenn.edu/About_African/ww_relig.
html
A broad-based resource on African traditional religion 
from the University of Pennsylvania’s African Studies 
Center.
www.nationmaster.com/encyclopedia/African-
traditional-religion
An outline of the faith.
WEB SITES
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 137 ---
136 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
GLOSSARY
extrahuman	forces—Mystical forces that include 
magic, witchcraft, and sorcery. 
Fa—The Fon divinity of divination. 
Falasha—A member of the African Ethiopian 
Jewish community. 
Fon—A people of Benin, formerly known as 
Dahomey, whose religion on the basis of its 
concept of Vodun has had a noticeable influ-
ence in the Western Hemisphere. 
Ggulu—The divinity of the sky in the Baganda 
pantheon of gods. 
gu
ardian	 spirit—A spirit identified as watching 
over the interests of a group of people, such as 
an extended family, a clan, or an ethnic group. 
Such spirits are symbolized by mountains, 
extraordinary trees, rocks, waterfalls, animals, 
reptiles, and so on. 
healer—A ritual leader who is endowed with the 
knowledge of herbal medicine by superhu-
man powers, inheritance, and training. He or 
she may be referred to as a medicine man or 
woman, an herbalist, or many other familiar 
names in local languages. 
herbalist—A person who conducts healing prac-
tices with superhuman assistance, mainly by 
using herbal medicine. 
heroes—Legendary people whose feats in a  
community have distinguished them, some-
times to the extent of being made into  
gods. 
Imana—The primary name used by the Ban-
yarwanda and Barundi of Central Africa to 
express their concept of the Supreme Being.
iNkosi yeZulu—In the language of the Zulu peo-
ple of South Africa, “the Lord of the sky or 
heaven.” 
Jakuta—The divinity and functionary of the 
Supreme Being’s ministry of justice in the Yor-
uba pantheon of gods. 
kaffir—A term of abuse from Islam used to 
describe a person who has no faith; an infidel, 
unbeliever. 
Kaffraria— A land of unbelievers. 
Aksum
	or	Axum—The name of a capital and of 
an ancient kingdom of Ethiopia. 
ancestors—Forebears whose distinguished posi-
tion in a community qualify their spirits to be 
regarded with veneration. 
a
ssociates	 of	 the	 Supreme	 Being—In African 
religion these are the deities, divinities, or gods 
holding spiritual power that is subordinated to 
the power of the Supreme Being. 
Candomblé—A Brazilian version of Yoruba 
religion. 
Chukwu—The name by which the Igbo people of 
Nigeria call God. It means the “Great Spirit.” 
Copts—Indigenous Egyptians. 
cubism—A style of painting and sculpture noted 
for the reduction of natural forms to geomet-
ric ones, which, to a certain extent, was influ-
enced by African art. 
Da—The Fon divinity of the cult of the serpent.
divination— The art of interpreting human 
events and situations, discovering the past, 
revealing future events, and obtaining any 
required information by using specified 
techniques.
diviner—A ritual leader who is qualified to con-
duct the art of divination. 
duality—A term applied to the African concept 
of the Supreme Being, in which the Supreme 
Being is understood to be one but in two 
constituents. 
Ebasi—The name of the Supreme Being for the 
Duala people of Cameroon. It means “the 
Omnipotent Father.” 
Esu—The divinity in the Yoruba pantheon of gods 
who is charged with the office of inspector 
general in the theocratic government of the 
Supreme Being. 
e
thnic	 group—A community or a people that 
shares a common distinctive culture, religion, 
language, and other connecting links. In an 
African context the term is preferred as a sub-
stitute for the colonially loaded and misused 
word tribe.


--- PAGE 138 ---
13
Katonda—The name by which the Baganda of 
Uganda call the Supreme Being. It means “Cre-
ator,” “Originator.” 
Kazooba—The name for God used by some Afri-
can peoples, such as the Bazinza of Tanzania, 
Banyankore, and the Baganda of Uganda. The 
name means “the Sun,” which is used here 
metaphorically to mean the Supreme Being.
Kibuuka—The divinity of war in the Baganda 
pantheon of gods. 
Kiwanuka—The divinity of thunder, lightning, 
and fertility in the Baganda pantheon of gods. 
Kwanzaa—The holiday based on the African first-
fruits celebrations, intended to pay tribute to 
the rich cultural roots of African Americans.
Kwoth—The name used by the Nuer of Sudan to 
express their concept of the Supreme Being. It 
means “spirit.” 
Kyala—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Nyakyusa of Tanzania. It means “Owner of 
all things.” 
Legba—The divine trickster in the Fon religion. 
Legba determines the fortunes and misfor-
tunes of people; he is the messenger between 
the Supreme Being and other gods. 
Leve—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Mende of Sierra Leone. 
Leza—The primary name used by the Ambo and 
Baila of Zambia to express their concept of the 
Supreme Being. It means “Creator.”
Lubaale—The pantheon of the Baganda religion 
of Uganda. Katonda, the Baganda name for the 
Supreme Being, is not strictly part of Lubaale. 
He is above Lubaale as the Creator and meta-
phorical father of the Balubaale, the plural 
form of Lubaale. 
Mabee—The name by which the Bulu people of 
Cameroon call the Supreme Being. It means 
“the One who bears the world.” 
Macumba—A Brazilian version of the Yoruba 
religion. 
magic—The ability and practice of manipulating 
mysterious forces for practical ends. 
mangu—An innate substance in a person’s 
body that is believed to carry the germ of 
witchcraft. 
Mawu-Lisa—The hyphenated divinity that 
makes up the Fon pantheon of the sky gods. 
Mawu is female and Lisa is male; together 
they advance the work of creation initiated by 
Nana-Buluku.
medium—A person who is capable of being pos-
sessed by a spirit. 
mhondoro—Spirits that were associated with the 
ruling dynasties of Great Zimbabwe. 
Modimo—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Tswana people of Botswana in Southern 
Africa. It means “Greatest Ancestral Spirit.”
monotheism—A system of a belief in one God.
Mukasa—The divinity of fertility, health, wealth, 
and general welfare in the Baganda pantheon 
of gods. 
Mulungu—The name for the Supreme Being 
among the Gogo ethnic group of Tanzania 
and the Chewa ethnic group of Malawi.
Musisi—The divinity in charge of earthquakes in 
the Baganda pantheon of gods. 
Musoke—The rainbow spirit in the Baganda pan-
theon of gods. 
Mvelamqandi—The name for the Supreme Being 
among the Swazi people of Swaziland. It 
means “the One who appears first.” 
Mwari—The name of the Supreme Being among 
the Shona people of Zimbabwe. 
Nana-Buluku—The name used by the Fon people 
of Benin to express the idea of the Supreme 
Being as the Creator. 
Ngai—The name for God used by the Kikuyu and 
Akamba ethnic groups of Kenya. It is also used 
by the Masai, who live both in Kenya and Tanza-
nia. The name means “the Creator, the Divider, 
the Benefactor, the Possessor of Brightness.” 
Nyambi—The name for the Supreme Being and 
Creator of everything among the Barotse peo-
ple of Zambia. Their concept of the Supreme 
Being is distinguished by their belief that 
Nyambi had a wife, whose name is Nasilele.
Nyame—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Ashanti of Ghana. It means “Shining One.”
Nzambi—The name by which the Vili people of 
the Congo know the Supreme Being. It means 
“Creator and Ultimate Source of Power.” 
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 139 ---
138 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
Ruwa—The name by which the Chagga of Tan-
zania know the Supreme Being. It means “the 
Sun.” 
Sagbata—The Fon divinity of the Earth. 
Sango—Like Jakuta, a Yoruba divinity and func-
tionary in God’s ministry of justice. 
Se—The Fon divinity of the souls of human 
beings. 
Sogbo—The Fon divinity of thunder and the sea. 
sorcery—Wicked magic intended to hurt others. 
spirit—A bodiless and superhuman power, force, 
or vital element, which human beings are 
mindful of with reverence. 
s
pirit	world—Spirits collectively considered. 
s
pirits	 of	 the	 departed— The souls of par-
ticular human beings and other animated 
creatures, which are transformed into spir-
its at the moment when they are separated 
from the body, and which are regarded with 
reverence. 
s
piritual	 guardian—A spirit identified as watch-
ing over the interests of a group of people. 
Suku—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Ovimbundu of Angola. It means “He who 
supplies the needs of His creatures.” 
su
perhuman	 beings—Gods, ancestors, guard-
ian spirits, and spirits of the departed, who are 
regarded as powers above human beings. 
Su
preme	Being—the unique power above which 
there is no other. 
taboo—A prohibition from doing something or 
using something because of its reverential 
nature. 
ubuntu—Being truly human. 
Uluhlanga—The name for the Supreme Being 
used by the Ngoni people of Malawi. It means 
“the Original Source.” 
unity—A term applied to the ideas and concept 
of the Supreme Being to reflect the Supreme 
Being as one and uniquely one. 
Unkulunkulu—The name for the Supreme Being 
used by the Zulu of South Africa and the Nde-
bele of Zimbabwe. It means “the Great Oldest 
One.” 
Vidye—The name by which the Baluba of Congo 
know the Supreme Being. It means “Great Cre-
ator Spirit.” 
Ogun—The divinity of war and iron in the Yoruba 
pantheon of gods; patron of all works con-
nected with iron, and presiding divinity over 
matters concerned with oaths, covenants, and 
pacts. 
Olodumare—The name for the Supreme Being 
among the Yoruba people. It means “Most 
Supreme Being.” 
Onyankopon—The name for the Supreme Being 
among the Akan people of Ivory Coast and 
Ghana. It means “Alone the Great One.”
Orisa—The pantheon of the Yoruba religion. 
Orisanla—Second in command in the Yoruba 
pantheon of gods. Also known as Obatala, 
this divinity holds the position of associate 
creator.
Orunmilla—The divinity of divination in the Yor-
uba pantheon of gods. 
pantheon—In the context of African religion, all 
national gods collectively considered. 
phansi—The habitation place of spirits, believed by 
the Zulu to be below the surface of the Earth. 
polytheism—Belief in a hierarchy of many gods. 
priest—The overseer, administrator, and coordi-
nator of matters that relate to divine premises, 
such as temple of a god. The priest officiates 
over the rites pertaining to the temple and 
sacred grounds. 
rainmaker—A person capable of effectively pray-
ing for the rain to fall and for it to stop. 
rites—Ceremonial, customary, and prescribed 
practices that punctuate all aspects of life in 
African religion. 
r
ites	 of	 passage—The ceremonies, customs, 
and practices that are performed in order to 
religiously enable people to move smoothly 
through turning points of their lives, from 
their earliest to their last moment of existence 
on Earth.  
ritual—The actualization of a belief system; a cer-
emonial act. 
Rog—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Serer of Gambia and Senegal. It means 
“Creator.” 
Ruhanga—The name by which the Banyankore and 
Banyoro of Uganda know the Supreme Being. It 
means “Creator and Fixer of everything.”


--- PAGE 140 ---
139
vital	 force—The invisible power that is believed 
to underlie and energize a variety of objects of 
the Supreme Being’s creation. 
Vodun—The Fon pantheon of gods. 
Walumbe—The divinity of death in the Baganda 
pantheon of gods. 
Wanga—The divinity charged with fixing what 
goes wrong in the Baganda pantheon of gods. 
Wene—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Tallensi  of Burkina Faso. It means “sky 
god.” 
witch—A person who has in himself or herself an 
innate power or force of witchcraft. 
witchcraft—A cause of misfortune in a 
community. 
Yala—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Kpelle of Liberia. 
Yataa—The name for the Supreme Being among 
the Kono people of Sierra Leone. It means “the 
One you meet everywhere.” 
Zambi—The name by which the Baya of the 
Central African Republic know the Supreme 
Being. It means “Creator.” 
zulu—The sky or heaven.
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 141 ---
140 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
INDEX
A
Abaluyia people of Kenya: 
sacrifices 76
Africa: the arts 13, 111–112, 
120–121; culture 106; 
European explorers 
24–25, 122–123; geog-
raphy of 91, 118–122; 
history of 13–15, 18–20, 
116–125; independence 
106, 114, 125–128; 
Kwanzaa 108; mission-
aries in 24–25; modern 
Africa 128–131; music 
75, 109–110; the oral 
tradition 16, 26–35; slave 
trade in 24; spread of 
religion in 10–13, 15–18, 
20–25, 112
African Sculpture Speaks (Segy) 
95, 100, 112
AIDS virus 72
Akamba people of Kenya: 
Mumbi (god) 44
Akan people of Ivory Coast: 
Ananse, the spider 33; art 
36; god as the origina-
tor 40; Nyame (god) 35; 
Onyankopan (god) 44; 
proverbs 35
Alur people of Uganda: Jok 
(god) 44
Ambo people of Zambia: 
Leza (god) 43
Angola: Bacongo people of 
45; Ovimbundu people 
of 41, 45
animals, as spirits 49, 90
arts, the 13, 111–112, 
120–121
Ashanti people of Ghana 40; 
Nyame (god) 44; puberty 
rites 69
Azande people of Sudan: 
magic and witchcraft 98, 
101
B
Baamba people: priests 83
Bacongo people of Angola: 
Nzambi (god) 45
Baganda people of Uganda 
42; birth and 66–68; 
Ggulu (god) 58–59; 
Katonda (god) 44; 
Kibuuka (god) 60, 125; 
Kitaka (god) 59; Kiwa-
nuka (god) 59; Lubaale 
Mukasa 30–32, 58–60; 
proverb 41; Mukasa 
(god) 30, 33, 60; Musisi 
(god) 60; return of relics 
125; Walumbe (god) 59; 
Wanga (god) 59–60
Baila people of Zambia 40; 
Leza (god) 43
Bakiga people 41
Baluba people of Congo: 
Vidye (god) 43
Bambara people of West 
Africa: Bemba or Ngala 
(god) 39
Bambuti people of Congo 40
Bamum people of Camer-
oon: Njinyi (god) 43
Banyankore people of 
Uganda 40; priests 83; 
Ruhanga (god) 44
Banyarwanda people of 
Rwanda: conception 
and  creation 66; and 40; 
Imana (god) 43
Barotse people of Zambia: 
Nyambi (god) 43
Barundi people of Central 
Africa 42; conception 
and creation 66; Imana 
(god) 43; and magic 101
Basuto people of Lesotho: 
Molimo (god) 45
Bavenda people of South 
Africa: priests 83
Baya people of Central 
Africa: Zambi (god) 43
Bazinza people of Tanzania: 
Kazooba (god) 44
Bemba (god) 39
Bemba people of Central 
Africa: and magic 98
Benin 12; Fon people of 39, 
44, 60–63
Binawa people of Nigeria: 
priests 83
birth, rituals for 66–69
Black Jews 18–20
Botswana 12; Tswana people 
of 45
bride payment (lobola) 72
Bulu people of Cameroon: 
Mabee (god) 43
burial 50, 74
Burkina Faso 12; Tallensi 
people of 44
C
Cameroon: Bamum people 
of 43; Bulu people of 43; 
Duala people of 43
Chagga people of Tanzania: 
Ruwa (god) 44


--- PAGE 142 ---
141
Chewa people of Malawi: 
Mulungu (god) 45
children, naming 68–69
Christianity 10, 12–13, 15, 
16, 20–22, 23–25, 106, 
122, 127–128, 131
Churi people of eastern 
Africa: rain and 87
Chwuku (god) 45
circumcision 69
colonial rule 123–125
community 16, 17–18; burial 
rites 74; communal 
rituals 76–79; guardian 
spirits and 49–50; and 
legends 29, 30–32
Congo: Baluba people of 43; 
Bambuti people of 40; 
Vili people of 43
Copts, the 20, 22
creation, myths of 29–30, 
35, 40
D
Da (god) 61–63
dance 75–76
death 72–74; prayers 50; 
Walumbe 59
Deng (god) 87
Dinka people of Sudan 30; 
Deng (god) 87; Jok (god) 
44
diviners 82, 84
Duala people of Cameroon: 
Ebasi (god) 43
E
Ebasi (god) 43
Edo people of Nigeria: and 
death 50
education 125–126
Egypt 13, 94, 120; Christian-
ity in 20; history of 18
Esu (god) 54–57
ethics 15, 33
Ethiopia 18–20; Christianity 
in 22; Galla people of 49
Ewe people of Ghana 41; 
magic and 98; rain and 
87
F
Fa (god) 61–63
Fang people of Gabon: 
Nyame (god) 43
female circumcision 69, 130
Fon people of Benin: Da (god) 
61–63; Fa (god) 61–63; 
Legba (god) 61–63; 
Mawu-Lisa (god) 44, 61–
63; Nana-Buluku (god) 
39, 44, 60–61; Sagbata 
(god) 61; Se (god) 61–63; 
the Vodun 60–63
G
Gabon, Fang people of 43
Galla people of Ethiopia: 
spiritual guardians and 
49
Gambia, Serer people of 44
Ggulu 58–59
Ghana: Ashanti people of 40, 
44, 69; Ewe people of 41, 
87, 98; independence of 
106, 125
God, names of 43–45 See also 
separate entries
Gogo people of Tanzania: 
Mulungu (god) 44
“Great Zimbabwe” 92
guardians, spiritual 48–50
H
harvest rites 76–79
healers 84–85, 115, 127
herbalists 85, 115
heroes and legends 30–32
I
Igbo people of Nigeria: 
Chwuku (god) 45; and 
magic 101; naming a 
child 68, 69
Imana (god) 43
initiation rites 69–70
Islam 10, 12–13, 15, 16, 22, 
104, 127, 131
Ivory Coast 12; Akan people 
of 33, 35, 36, 40, 44
J
Jakuta (god) 58
Jok (god) 44
Judaism 15, 18–20
Juok (god) 44
K
Kabakas people of Uganda: 
Kasubi Tombs 94
kaffirs 22, 104
Kasubi Tombs, Uganda 94
Katonda (god) 44, 58–60
Kazooba (god) 44
Kenya 15; Abaluyia people 
76; Akamba people 44; 
Kikuyu people 8–10, 87; 
Nandi people 40
Kibuuka (god) 60, 125
Kikuyu people of Kenya: 
Ngai (god) 87; rituals and 
prayer 8–10
Kitaka (god) 59
Kiwanuka (god) 59
Kono people of Sierra Leone: 
Yataa (god) 45
Kwanzaa 108
Kwoth (god) 44
Kyala (god) 44
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 143 ---
142
 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
L
Langi people of Uganda: and 
magic 98
Legba (god) 61–63
legends 29, 30–32
Lesotho, Basuto people of 45
Leve (god) 45
Leza (god) 43
Libya, Islam in 22
lobola (bride payment) 72
Lubaale Mukasa 30–32
M
Mabee (god) 43
magic 97–98
Malawi: Chewa people of 45; 
Ngoni people of 40, 45
marriage 70–72
Masai people of eastern 
Africa: rain and 87
Mawu-Lisa (god) 44, 61–63
medicine men or women 85, 
115
mediums 84
Mende people of Sierra 
Leone: Leve (god) 45
missionaries 24–25, 125
Modimo (god) 45
Molimo (god) 45
Moon, the 90, 91
morality 15, 33
Morocco, Islam in 22
Mukasa 60
mulongo 66–68
Mulungu (god) 44, 45
Mumbi (god) 44
musawo (healer) 84
Musisi (god) 60
music 75, 109–110
Mvelamqandi (god) 45
Mwari (god) 45, 93
Mwene-Nyaga (god) 10
mystical sources 96–103
myths 29–30
N
naming children 68–69
Nana-Buluku (god) 44, 60–63
Nandi people of Kenya 40
Native American religions 
15–16
nature 26–29, 91; spirits and 
48–49
Ndebele people of Zimba-
bwe: Unkulunkulu (god) 
45
Negro spirituals 111
Ngai (god) 87
Ngala (god) 39
Ngoni people of Malawi 40; 
Uluhlanga (god) 45
Nigeria: Binawa people of 
83; Edo people of 50; 
Igbo people of 45, 68, 
69, 101; Srubu people 
of 83; Yoruba people of 
8, 30, 45, 53–58, 82, 94, 
121–122
Njinyi (god) 43
Nuer people of Sudan 42; 
Kwoth (god) 44
Nupe people of West Africa: 
proverbs 33–34
Nyakyusa people of Tanza-
nia: Kyala (god) 44; and 
witchcraft 101
Nyambi (god) 43
Nyame (god) 35, 43, 44
Nyame symbol 39
Nzambi (god) 43, 45
Nzinga, King of Kongo 122
O
Ogun (god) 57–58
Olodumare: god in Yoruba 
Belief (Idowu) 53, 121
Olodumare (god) 30, 45
Onyankopan (god) 44
oral tradition, the 16, 26–35
Orisa, the 53–58
Orisanla (god) 53–54
Orisha Nila (“the Great god”) 
30
Orunmilla (god) 53, 54, 82
Ovimbundu people of 
Angola 41; Suku (god) 45
P
physical suffering: healers 
84–85; morality and 15, 
16
planting rites 76–79
Portuguese, the 23–24, 122
prayers 16, 74–75; Ashanti 
prayer for puberty 69; 
for the dead 50; Kikuyu 
people of Kenya 10; 
against witchcraft 103
pregnancy, rituals for 66
proverbs 29, 33–34, 36, 72
puberty rites 69–70
R
rain, rituals for 76
rainmakers 85–87
reincarnation 74
relics 88–90
religious leaders 16, 116; 
babalawo 54; prayer and 
75; rituals and 79–85
rites of passage 25; aging 72; 
birth 66–69; death 50, 
72–74; marriage 70–72; 
naming a child 68–69; 
pregnancy 66; puberty 
rites 69–70
rituals 16; communal rituals 
76–79; dance 75–76; 
on death 50; music


--- PAGE 144 ---
143
75; objects for 18, 95; 
prayers 10, 16, 50, 69, 
74–75, 103; rainmak-
ers 85–87; ritual leaders 
79–85; sacred spaces 
88–95; sacrifices 16, 54, 
63, 76, 91; spirits and 48
Rog (god) 44, 45
Ruhanga (god) 44
Ruwa (god) 44
Rwanda, Banyarwanda 
people of 40, 43, 66
S
sacred space 88–95
sacrifices 16, 54, 63, 76, 91
Sagbata (god) 61
Sango (god) 58
San people of southern 
Africa 121
Se (god) 61–63
sculptures 121–122; as ritual 
objects 95
Segy, Ladislas 95, 100, 112
Serer people 44, 45
Shilluk people of Sudan: 
Juok (god) 44
Shona people of Zimbabwe: 
Mwari (god) 45, 93
shrines 16, 91–93, 94
Sierra Leone 12; Kono 
people of 45; Mende 
people of 45
slave trade, the 24
Sonjo people of Tanzania: 
priests 83
sorcery 101–103
spirits 46–63; animal spirits 
49, 90
spiritual suffering 15
Srubu people of Nigeria: 
priests 83
Sudan: Azande people of 98; 
Dinka people of 30, 44, 
87; Nuer people of 42, 
44; Shilluk people of 44
Suku (god) 45
Sun, the 90, 91
Supreme Being 35, 46–47; 
attributes of 39; mono-
theism 36–37; nature of 
38–39; originator of the 
universe 29–30, 40; the 
possessor 42; prayers 
to 75; the provider 41; 
sacrifices to 66, 76, 91 see 
also god (names for)
Swazi people of Swaziland: 
Mvelamqandi (god) 45
T
taboos, during pregnancy 68
Tallensi people of Burkina 
Faso: Wene (god) 44
Tanzania: Bazinza people 
of 44; Chagga people of 
44; Gogo people of 44; 
Nyakyusa people of 44, 
101; Sonjo people of 83
temples and tombs 93, 94
Tswana people of Botswana: 
Modimo (god) 45
Tunisia 13; Christianity in 20
U
Uganda: Alur people of 
44; Baganda people of 
30–32, 41, 42, 44, 58–60, 
66–68, 125; Banyankore 
people of 40, 44, 83; 
Kabakas people of 94; 
Langi people of 98
Uluhlanga (god) 45
United States, African reli-
gions in 109, 111, 114
Unkulunkulu (god) 45
V
Vidye (god) 43
Vili people of Congo: Nzam-
bi (god) 43
W
Walumbe (god) 59
Wanga (god) 59–60
weddings 71–72
Wene (god) 44
witch doctors 85, 100, 115
witchcraft 98–101, 103
women: female circumcision 
69, 130; feminism and 
128–130
Y
Yataa (god) 45
Yoruba people of Nigeria: 
diviners 82; Esu (god) 
54–57; Jakuta 58; Ogun 
(god) 57; Olodumare 
(god) 30, 45; Orisana 
53–54; Orunmilla 53, 54; 
the Orisa 53–58; proverb 
8; sculptures 121–122; 
Sango (god) 58; shrine of 
Ogun 94
Z
Zambi (god) 43
Zambia: Ambo people of 43; 
Baila people of 40, 43; 
Barotse people of 43
Zimbabwe: “Great Zimba-
bwe” 92; Ndebele people 
of 45; Shona people of 
45, 93
Zulu people of Southern 
Africa 40; marriage 
71, 72; origination 90; 
Unkulunkulu (god) 45
AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion


--- PAGE 145 ---
144 AfricAn TrAdiTionAl religion
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Aloysius	M.	Lugira is adjunct associate professor of theology and religion at Bos-
ton College in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts.  He has authored numerous books 
and articles on African religion.
PICTURE CREDITS
Title Page: © iStockphoto.com/Alena Yaroslavtseva; Table of Contents: © iStockphoto.com/Alan Tobey; Pages 8–9: © iStockphoto.com/Chris Crafter; 
12: © iStockphoto.com/Peeter Viisimaa; 14: © iStockphoto.com/Alan Tobey; 17: © iStockphoto.com/Peeter Viisimaa; 18–19: © iStockphoto.com/
paul kline; 20–21: © iStockphoto.com/Klaas Lingbeek- van Kranen; 22–23: © iStockphoto.com/Ellen Ebenau; 26–27: © Dave Estment/Independent 
Contributors/africanpictures.net; 28: © Anthony Bannister/Gallo/Corbis; 31: © iStockphoto.com/Angel Herrero de Frutos; 33: © www.shutterstock.
com/Steffen Foerster Photography; 34: © iStockphoto.com/Peeter Viisimaa; 36–37: © Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis; 38: © iStockphoto.com/Alan 
Tobey; 41: © iStockphoto.com/Markus Divis; 42: © iStockphoto.com/Peeter Viisimaa; 46–47: © iStockphoto.com/David Kerkhoff; 49: © Werner 
Forman Archive/Courtesy Entwistle Gallery, London; 51: © Roger de la Harpe/Africa Imagery/africanpictures.net; 52: © Roger de la Harpe/Africa 
Imagery/africanpictures.net; 54–55: © Guy Stubbs/Independent Contributors/africanpictures.net; 56–57: © iStockphoto.com/David Kerkhoff; 62: 
© iStockphoto.com/Alan Tobey; 64–65: © Getty Images; 67: © iStockphoto.com/Angel Herrero de Fruto; 70–71: © Ariadne Van Zandbergen/Africa 
Imagery/africanpictures.net; 73: © Colin Walker/Independent Contributors/africanpictures.net; 77: © iStockphoto.com/Alan Tobey; 78: © Chris 
Kerkhoff/South Photographs/africanpictures.net; 80–81: © Karin Duffie/Illustrative options/africanpictures.net; 82–83: © Roger de la Harpe/Africa 
Imagery/africanpictures.net; 86: © iStockphoto.com/Klaas Lingbeek-van Kranen; 88–89: © iStockphoto.com/Frank van den Bergh; 92: © Robert 
Aberman/Werner Forman Archive; 94: © Judy Dillon/BigStockPhoto.com; 96–97: © Roger de la Harpe/Africa Imagery/africanpictures.net; 99: © 
Roger de la Harpe/Africa Imagery/africanpictures.net; 102: © Graeme Williams/South Photographs/africanpictures.net; 104–105: © David Larsen/
The Media Bank/africanpictures.net; 107: © Oryx Media Archive/africanpictures.net; 108: © Bernardo Martino/BigStockPhoto.com; 110–111: © ilam 
archive/ILAM/africanpictures.net; 113: © iStockphoto.com/Luke Daniek; 116–117: © www.dreamstime.com; 118–119: © iStockphoto.com; 124: © 
Stapleton/HIP/TopFoto; 126: © Image Works/Topfoto; 131: © TopFoto/ImageWorks; 129: © Oryx media/africanpictures.net
ABOUT THE SERIES EDITORS
Martin	 Palmer is the founder of ICOREC (International Consultancy on Reli-
gion, Education, and Culture) in 1983 and is the secretary-general of the Alliance 
of Religions and Conservation (ARC). He is the author of many books on world 
religions.
J
oanne	O’Brien has an M.A. degree in theology and has written a range of edu-
cational and general reference books on religion and contemporary culture. She is 
co-author, with Martin Palmer and Elizabeth Breuilly, of Religions of the World and 
Festivals of the World published by Facts On File Inc.

