=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Making-Malcolm-The-Myth-and-Meaning-of-Malcolm-X-by-Michael-Eric-Dyson.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 246
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:15:30.796198
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
MAKING MALCOLM


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
MAKING
MALCOLM
The Myth and Meaning
of Malcolm X
MICHAEL ERIC DYSON
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
New York Oxford


--- PAGE 5 ---
Oxford University Press
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bombay
Calcutta Cape Town Dar es Salaam Delhi
Florence Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madras Madrid Melbourne
Mexico City Nairobi Paris Singapore
Taipei Tokyo Toronto
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan
Copyright © 1995 by Michael Eric Dyson
First published in 1995 by Oxford University Press, Inc.,
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 1996
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Dyson, Michael Eric.
Making Malcolm : the myth and meaning of Malcolm X /
Michael Eric Dyson.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-19-509235-X
ISBN 0-19-510285-1 (Pbk.)
1. X, Malcolm, 1925-1965. I. Title.
BP223.Z8L573338 1994 320.5'4'092—dc20 94-16396
X by Amiri Baraka, Copyright © by Amiri Baraka. Reprinted by permission
of Sterling Lord Literistic, Inc.
"What I'm Telling You" by Elizabeth Alexander, Copyright © by Elizabeth
Alexander. Reprinted by permission of the author.
10 987654321
Printed in the United States of America


--- PAGE 6 ---
For my marvelous son Michael Eric Dyson, II,
who, like Malcolm, is tall and intelligent
and who keeps the spirit of Malcolm alive
in his willingness to question


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
PREFACE
TEACHING MALCOLM
We don't judge a man because of the color of his skin.
We don't judge you because you're white; we don't
judge you because you're black; we don't judge you
because you're brown. We judge you because of what
you do and what you practice.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X: The Last Speeches
"Professor Dyson, what you did was wrong, man," my stu-
dent bellowed at me across my desk, supported by three of
his equally angry classmates.
"You embarrassed us in front of all those people."
"No! What y'all did was wrong," I fired back at him.
"You embarrassed and dissed me in front of the whole
class."
I had just stormed out of the classroom and up the stairs
to my space in the bank of second-floor offices in Churchill
House, the building that houses Afro-American Studies at
Brown, with my four accusers chasing closely behind. A full
hour and a half before my seminar on Malcolm X was due
to end for the day, I had publicly scolded these students—
all young, black, male, and very bright—for what I felt was
intolerable behavior.
"I will not put up with this any more," I angrily an-
nounced as I interrupted the class on the heels of a remark


--- PAGE 9 ---
Preface
from one of the young men that proved to be the final
straw.
"You have held this class hostage to your narrow be-
liefs and rude behavior from the very beginning. And since
you've made a big deal of being a black male in this class, I
resent how you've treated me—a black man—with great
disrespect in my own course. Class is over."
This had never happened to me before in all my teach-
ing career, not at Hartford Seminary, not at Chicago Theo-
logical Seminary, and not at Brown, though I had faced
tough situations in each place. I felt a mixture of embar-
rassment and anger because I'd lost control of the class and
myself, something I hadn't done even when I endured
bruising battles as a pastor of three Baptist churches in the
South. But I felt I had no choice.
The conflict had been building to an inevitable climax
the entire semester. I knew that a seminar on a figure as
explosively controversial as Malcolm X would mimic dis-
agreements about him in other quarters of American cul-
ture. Like fiercely contested discussions about Malcolm in
the popular press and in scholarly books, a seminar on Mal-
colm would provoke heated exchanges between students as
they debated his intellectual meaning and cultural signifi-
cance for black people, and for a nation that misunderstood
and often reviled him when he was alive.
This proved to be true when I taught the seminar at
Vlli


--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface
Brown during the previous semester. My students engaged
in intense scrutiny of Malcolm's writings and pored over
the secondary literature that addressed his thought and ca-
reer. There were representatives from across the ideological,
political, and racial spectrum in that seminar of twenty stu-
dents. There were Asians and Latinas, conservatives and
radicals, blacks and whites, men and women. There were
black neonationalists as well as more moderate integration-
ists. There were students who deployed densely laden the-
oretical perspectives popular in post structuralism seated
next to students whose unfamiliarity with the intricacies of
race and class marked their beginner's pace. But the class
worked because all of us fought, sometimes with ferocious
abandon, sometimes with subtle restraint, over Malcolm's
meaning in an environment that encouraged intellectual
rigor and respect for the cantankerous differences that
abounded.
Ironically, the success of my first Malcolm X seminar at
Brown made me vulnerable to the sorts of problems that
plagued its second incarnation a mere semester later. From
the first day of class, it became obvious that this seminar
possessed a dynamic that razed any arguments about race
not rooted in personal experience or black cultural author-
ity. Each class became a highly ritualized installment in a
morality play about the tension between good and evil. In
the case of my seminar, this conflict was crudely reduced
IX


--- PAGE 11 ---
Preface
to the tension between black and white, and, in other in-
stances, between bourgeois and ghetto (read "authentically
black") cultural and political expressions.
This narrowly conceived and troubling vision of au-
thentic racial discourse reflects the character of debates
about race now taking place in a country reeling from the
implications of multiculturalism, ethnic and sexual differ-
ence, and identity politics. Often the proponents of narrow
notions of racial, ethnic, or sexual identity are simply re-
sponding to the egregious and increasingly unremarked-on
offenses heaped on them in a culture that remains, in cru-
cial ways, uncomfortable with their heightened visibility. To
make matters worse, blacks, gays and lesbians, Latinos and
Latinas, feminists, the ghetto poor, and other minorities
who defend themselves in public are often attacked under
the banner of crusades against "political correctness."
"p.c." has become the common rallying cry of conser-
vatives, liberals, and radicals, many of whom harbor re-
sentments against the assertive presence and practices of
formerly excluded minorities who no longer need represen-
tation by proxy. When these minorities show up to speak
for themselves, and often in terms that are radically differ-
ent from how stereotyping or scapegoating has made them
appear, there is resistance from friend and foe alike. The
plausible complaints that can be launched against debilitat-
ing conceptions of racial, sexual, or political identity (after
all, the term "political correctness" was invented by the
X


--- PAGE 12 ---
Preface
left to get its own house in order) are lost as anti-p.c. forces
lose a sense of proportion. By and large, racial, sexual, and
political minorities don't control resources or wield power
in ways comparable to those used by the people and powers
they oppose.
This doesn't mean that the legitimate battles that some
minorities fight are not occasionally fraught with self-
defeating tactics of defense that trump their highest aims.
This was quite evident in my Malcolm X seminar during
that second semester. It showed innocuously in small mat-
ters like the patterns of white and black bodies grouped by
race in the classroom. But it was revealed more menacingly
in the rigid racial reasoning of several black males who ap-
pealed to Malcolm's masculinity, his blackness, and his
ghetto grounding as the basis for their strict identification
with him. In their eyes, such a strategy lent their interpre-
tations of the leader a natural advantage.
The unyielding insistence of my black male students
that a racial litmus test be evoked through highly charged
personal narrative (the sort of jockeying for privilege of the
"because I'm black, poor, male and angry I understand him
better than you" variety that I wanted to avoid) made class
time a wearying exercise in either defending or defeating
racial borders. The examination of ideological justifications
for racist practices, or an in-depth investigation of the links
between racial and class oppression—in short, the kinds of
analysis that undoubtedly would have contributed to their
XI


--- PAGE 13 ---
Preface
cause—was constantly put off by appeals to a severely lim-
iting politics of experience and authenticity.
Now I am not one of those black intellectuals who ar-
gues for a strategic point of Archimedean objectivity beyond
the realm of slashing ideological conflict, longing wistfully
for a neutral zone free of the fracturing results of racial pol-
itics. Neither am I committed to the belief that if Americans
simply understood more about one another we could do
better or that through knowledge alone, we could achieve
a racial nirvana signalled in Rodney King's desperate plea
that "we all get along." I understand that so much of our
nation's claims of racial peace are haunted by the hypocrisy
of hidden white power and concealed bigotry. I know that
a great deal of discourse about race is trapped in abstraction
and avoidance as we ingeniously seek to deflect the link
between past injustices and present injuries.
But I also know that the game of proving you're blacker
than the next Negro, an art engaged in and encouraged by
Malcolm at various stages of his career, can have disastrous
results. Not only does it set in motion a rancid Aristotelian
regression back to a mythic "real blackness" that spins on
endlessly, but it borrows from a peculiarly European quest
for racial purity, a troubling Manichaean mind-set that dis-
tinguishes between "us" and "them." This is precisely the
sort of thinking that anyone paying careful attention to the
complex workings of black culture in Africa and throughout
the diaspora cannot help but abhor.
XII


--- PAGE 14 ---
Preface
Moreover, Malcolm's cultural renaissance—his im-
probable second coming—brims with irony. Our era is
marked by vigorous debates about racial authenticity and
selling-out, and about the consequences of crossing over to
larger markets to increase mass appeal. Participants in these
debates, which include not only my seminar, but everyone
from politicians to rap artists, often draw on Malcolm's
scorching rebukes to such moves. Meanwhile, Malcolm's X
is marketed in countless business endeavors and is stylishly
branded on baseball hats and T-shirts by every age, race,
and gender. So much for the politics of purity.
But no matter how powerfully or with how many dif-
ferent examples I plied many of my black male students,
they remained suspicious of any attempt to divorce Mal-
colm from his exclusive meaning for young, black, angry
males. In many ways, they were fighting over Malcolm's
tall body and short life, allowing no dibs on a legacy they
felt Malcolm had bequeathed to them alone. They seemed
to be saying, "White folk have ripped off so much of black
culture; they can't have Malcolm too." Their black neona-
tionalist politics led them to lay claim to Malcolm's mantle,
and Malcolm's moral authority supplied support for their
gestures of reappropriating his image.
Malcolm's moral authority was fueled by a moral mag-
netism so great that it continues to attract people who were
not yet born when he met his gruesome death. Malcolm
possessed an unperturbable quality that my students found
XIII


--- PAGE 15 ---
Preface
irresistible: he fixed his sight on the racial goals to be ob-
tained and pursued them with unvarying zeal. This single -
mindedness is especially true of the period when, under the
spell of Nation of Islam leader Elijah Muhammad's scheme
of evil by colors, he pummeled the notion of black cultural
inferiority with consummate skill. He eventually grew sus-
picious of the conclusions about race that insular versions
of nationalism entail. He also gained distance on the indis-
criminate demonizing of color that had already imposed se-
vere penalties on black people's lives. He achieved a moral
maturity that gave him a more complex view of the possi-
bilities of human community across the racial divide.
Admittedly, it is difficult to highlight Malcolm's moral
maturity in the midst of the contemporary reemergence of
racism, a fact that many of my black male students were
right to point out. In large part, Malcolm's renewed pres-
ence on the cultural scene has been made possible by stu-
dents like them and by others who've kept the flame of
Malcolm's life burning brightly in black nationalist book
stores and community gatherings across the nation while
Malcolm was out of vogue. Such groups have held up Mal-
colm's Promethean accomplishments of mind and body—
which constitute a style of black leadership barely glimpsed
in our age—as models of black cultural achievement.
More than that, Malcolm's moral authority remains in-
tact because he wasn't given to the kind of racial hustling
that often passes for leadership. No, he wasn't against using
XIV


--- PAGE 16 ---
Preface
the hustling tactics he gleaned from his years on the street
to portray the crimes of white racism. He knew how to rhe-
torically master black and white opponents. But he rarely
allowed that hustling ethic to distort his relations to the
black people he selflessly loved. He rarely lost sight of the
fact that he was the servant, not the master, of their best
hopes and bravest dreams. Malcolm's love of black people
made my black male students love him in return.
But'they weren't willing to subject Malcolm, the object
of their devotion, to rigorous criticism. Uncritical devotion
cuts across Malcolm's mature skepticism about blindly fol-
lowing leaders. Malcolm learned that bitter lesson in the
deadly fallout of his dissociation from Elijah Muhammad,
whom he had once passionately adored. Malcolm wasn't
perfect, and he knew it. And those of us who want to cap-
ture some of Malcolm's magic—and to learn through critical
analysis of his failures and successes, his weaknesses and
strengths—don't have to make him an idol.
Malcolm's moral authority finally consisted in telling
the truth about our nation as best he could. He damned its
moral hypocrisy and insincerity in trying to aid the people
it had harmed for so long, a fact that created seething pock-
ets of rage within the corporate black psyche. Malcolm
blessed our rage by releasing it. His tall body was a vessel
for our outrage at the way things were and always had been
for most black people, especially those punished by poverty
and forced to live in enclaves of urban terror. It was their
xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
Preface
desire to reclaim Malcolm for themselves and to display
their superior grasp of black culture that motivated many
of my black male students to take my Malcolm X seminar,
as I was to later discover in our confrontation in my office.
"We get tired of going to classes and having white stu-
dents discuss things they don't know about, while we take
a back seat and remain quiet," one of my students told me.
"When we came in the first day and saw how many
white students were signed up for this class, we had a de-
cision to make," another related to me. "We could either
do like we usually do, and just say 'forget it/ because they
weren't going to understand us anyway, or we could take
charge and be the ones to set the pace."
Although I could figure out why they didn't want to
let the white students have Malcolm, I found it off-putting
and a bit bizarre, maybe even disingenuous, that their
efforts excluded me too. After all, if the best chance of
understanding Malcolm, as they often reminded me, de-
pended on the possibility of having as close to an experience
of life as Malcolm had had, then I certainly qualified, per-
haps even more than they did.
I was born in 1958 in Detroit's inner city, my age,
ghetto experience, and geographic proximity to his child-
hood digs giving me a link to Malcolm's life not immediately
suggested by my students' experiences. Like Malcolm, I was
reared in a large clan. My immediate family included my
parents and four brothers, plus four older step-siblings who
XVI


--- PAGE 18 ---
Preface
lived on their own. My father was a factory laborer; my
mother, a para-professional with the Detroit public schools.
Neither had been to college. My father was laid off from his
job as master set-up man at Kelsey Hayes Wheel-brake and
Drum Company after thirty-three years of faithful service.
After that, he started Dyson and Sons grass-cutting and
sodding business, with three of us boys working with him.
That work, plus our work at Morton's Nursery every day
after I got home from school in the seventh grade, and later
at Sam's Drugstore—besides foraging the city's alleys in
search of discarded steel and iron we could turn in at the
junk yard for a modest sum of money—kept us from fully
going on welfare. (We did receive food stamps at one time.)
Money was tight, and times were tough.
Although I received a scholarship to Cranbrook, a pres-
tigious secondary school thirty miles from Detroit in the rich
suburb of Bloomfield Hills, I left after two years and received
a diploma from "night school" at Northwestern High
School. Shortly after graduation at eighteen, I got my
twenty-six-year-old girlfriend pregnant, and married her
before our son was born in 1978. I worked at a variety of
jobs (and at one time, two full-time jobs simultaneously),
from fast-food to maintenance jobs, from construction work
to hustling painting gigs, before I was fired from a job at
Chrysler one month before my son was born. My wife and
I had no insurance to cover his birth. Welfare was our only
option. And as with many shotgun marriages plagued by
XVII


--- PAGE 19 ---
Preface
poverty, ours misfired. We divorced scarcely a year after
we'd been married.
I didn't go south to attend college until I was twenty-
one. By then, I had become a Baptist minister, and I pas-
tored three churches, and worked in a factory in Knoxville,
Tennessee, to put myself through school. I graduated magna
cum laude from Carson-Newman College (the first person
in my family to graduate from college) and then received
an M.A. and a Ph.D. in religion from Princeton University.
By the time I sat before my students at Brown, I not only
had been held up twice at gunpoint, but also had been a
veteran of countless battles against racial, gender, and class
oppression. Also I'd been virtually the sole financial sup-
porter of my younger brother Everett's attempt to free him-
self from a life sentence in prison for second-degree murder.
I was no stranger to young, black, angry males. I had been
one, and depending on who's consulted, I'm still considered
in the running. And yet, as I was to learn in our heated
conflict in my office, these black males were suspicious of
me from the very beginning.
"We wondered why you were teaching this course,"
one of the young men said, relaying a conversation they'd
had earlier. "We wanted to know what your motive was
for teaching a course on Malcolm." Having been a poor,
angry black male who was also a preacher and from the
same state where Malcolm spent his childhood wasn't
enough, I guess. But I also knew that many of the young
XVIII


--- PAGE 20 ---
Preface
black males who were suspicious of me were greatly exag-
gerating their homeboy-from-the-hood backgrounds; most
of them were well-to-do kids from upper-middle-class
homes.
Their suspicions obviously extended to other members
of the class. Time and again, in ways that were sometimes
subtle, sometimes painfully conspicuous, the black males
drew boundaries around Malcolm that kept even black fe-
males at bay. Sure, in the scheme of things black women
had a greater chance of understanding Malcolm than, say,
white men and women, but their gender prevented their
complete comprehension. The hierarchy of interpretation
the black males established, at once laughable and lamen-
table, only provoked further feelings of injury in the rest of
the class.
Throughout the semester, several class members—
black and white women and men, Asian and mixed-race
students—came to me to vent their frustrations about many
of my black male students. I felt awkward in hearing their
complaints, and mostly agreeing with them. I understood
what my black male students were up to, even though we
were at cross-purposes as to what to make of the seminar's
weekly three hours. I even gently chided the white students
who came to me in private to express their bewilderment.
"I understand your feelings, even empathize with
them," I told a white female student. "But we can't have a
class on Malcolm X and not expect to feel some of the heat
XIX


--- PAGE 21 ---
Preface
and passion he generated. The anger of some of these young
black men mirrors the anger of Malcolm X."
"You're right, Professor Dyson," she responded. "I
agree with you. But some of these men think it's all right
to sleep with white women—'cuz some of them have slept
with white women in our seminar. But when we make
statements in class, even statements that might support
Malcolm X, they frown at us."
I was sorely tempted to divulge this bit of information
in the next seminar, all in the interest, mind you, of making
the greatest amount of data available as we debated the
precise role of experience in racial politics. But alas, cooler
instincts prevailed. (My student's story reminded me of a
humorous exchange between Jesse Jackson and some mil-
itant black nationalists who were criticizing him as a sellout.
As he pointed out that they all had white girlfriends, they
informed Jackson, "We're punishing their fathers.")
I detected, too, in the classroom exchanges between me
and the black males who trailed me to my office, a gener-
ational rift whose accusing distance I had, I believed until
then, successfully overcome.
"We're talking about Onyx, about 'Baccdafuccup,' "
one of the black men said the first day of class, referring to
a rap group and its album that had garnered critical praise
for its street-savvy lyrics and its barely tempered rage.
"That's who expresses what we're talking about."
Of course, there were more gentle signs of a perception
xx


--- PAGE 22 ---
Preface
that I was no longer "young," such as the time I recently
testified before a U.S. Senate subcommittee hearing on
gangsta' rap. I quoted verbatim, from memory, the lyrics to
a song by rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg while making a com-
plex defense of gangsta' rappers, even as I scored their mi-
sogyny and homophobia.
"My, man," beamed a young black male in the audi-
ence who sought me out after the hearings that day, his
hand extended to me in a gesture of brotherly affirmation.
"For a guy your age, you really can flow."
His compliment reminded me that while my thirty-five
years made me a young man in the academy, it granted me
outsider "adult" status with many young blacks.
But I also knew that more than generational forces
were at work, more than age separated me from my
younger compatriots. In fact, I believed that, based on his
moral perspective, Malcolm X most likely would have dis-
dained rap's materialistic impulses to get paid, spurned its
hedonistic joie de vivre, its celebration of vulgar verbal ex-
pression. Hip-hop's sexual and rhetorical liberation might
well have been Malcolm's moral chaos. But such disso-
nances between Malcolm and my young black male stu-
dents went largely unnoticed, even as a basis for criticizing
Malcolm's black moral puritanism, a force that surely chal-
lenged their way of life.
Malcolm's further contradictions, and the conflicting
uses to which his legacy can be put, came home to me
XXI


--- PAGE 23 ---
Preface
as I traveled during Thanksgiving recess to lecture on Mal-
colm in the Netherlands. After my public presentation, I was
engaged in debate by a renowned Dutch writer, Stephan
Sanders, who is black, is openly gay, and was reared in a
white Dutch Jewish family. Sanders insisted that Malcolm
was "far more American than he wanted to acknowledge,"
a product of an American culture that was obsessed with
racial purity.
Sanders contended that Malcolm's lifelong struggle
against domination showed classic signs of the "colonial di-
lemma." "The real dilemma is that being a black American
as Malcolm called himself, [means that] he was born an
American. So America is a ... part of him." For Sanders,
the "question is how one can definitely free oneself from
the colonizer [while recognizing] that the colonizer is
within you." His observations about Malcolm's internal
struggles for a liberated consciousness were poignant, even
moving.
Sanders couldn't understand why I voiced critical sup-
port for Malcolm, since it seemed that, as an opponent of
racial essentialism, homophobia, and ethnic bigotry, I was
in direct conflict with Malcolm's values. I responded that
Malcolm was a complex figure, that his thought evolved,
and that his moral vision was transformed over the course
of a complicated, heroic life. Without either romanticizing
Malcolm or making his memory a mere metaphor of rage,
and thereby softening his palpable threat to black and white
xxit


--- PAGE 24 ---
Preface
defenders of the status quo, I attempted to argue Malcolm's
use in a progressive politics that was racially conscious, but
not racially exclusive. The mature Malcolm, I contended, was
open to a range of political negotiations of identity and ide-
ology that promoted lasting liberation. That Malcolm, I
claimed, was a figure who could be celebrated and put to
use internationally by despised and degraded people, even
as his radical edge was being rounded off by worldwide
commercialization.
I felt a deep gratification in communicating the mean-
ing of Malcolm X to an international audience in a way that
I had been prevented from doing closer to home. Maybe it
was that sense of foreign appreciation that helped empha-
size, perhaps even exaggerate, the struggles for clarity of
Malcolm's meaning I experienced back at Brown. It was not
long after my return home that my class exploded and that
most of my students came to me that night, heaving a col-
lective sigh of relief, saying that they'd wished that I had
dramatically confronted many of my black male students
earlier.
I couldn't derive much consolation from their senti-
ments, as much as I personally benefitted from hearing
them. I knew that many of the fears that my black males
harbored—that Malcolm would be done in by sell-out Ne-
groes, that his sometimes harsh words would be
soft-pedaled to suit the crossover ambitions of people pimp-
ing off of Malcolm's newfound popularity—had already
XXIII


--- PAGE 25 ---
Preface
been ominously realized. In my office after the seminar's
abrupt dismissal, I warned my black male students that too
often conclusions about who is deemed "in" or "out" of
black cultural style are based on flimsy evidence, on slippery
surfaces of judgment that don't account for complexity of
belief or depth of commitment.
But I also assured them that my opposition to their
tendentious arguments and uselessly divisive techniques
in class grew out of a deep love for them. With tears
streaming down my cheeks, I confessed that I pushed
them hard, yes, perhaps harder than my white students,
because I expected more from them. If they were to be
fearless warriors in the battle against racial oppression,
then they must be prepared to wage fierce intellectual
combat that was rooted in persuasive argumentation as
well as edifying passion.
"We didn't realize that you felt this way," one of them
offered as consolation to my obvious distress. "We didn't
know that when you did what you did in class that you
cared for us."
"Of course I care for you," I said. "You're my brothers.
You're precious to me. You're precious to our race. You all
have brilliant futures."
"Well, if we did anything to embarrass you, we're
sorry," another replied. "We were only trying to defend
ourselves."
XXIV


--- PAGE 26 ---
Preface
"And if I did anything to hurt or embarrass you, I'm
truly sorry," I offered in return. After this, I embraced each
one of them, and we parted with the mutual benediction
to "stay strong."
I am not suggesting by this seemingly sappy ending that
my black male students and I don't have prqfound disagree-
ments about Malcolm's meaning for our people or nation.
We do. Neither do I mean that a late-evening embrace and
show of solidarity between me and my black male students
wiped away the hurt feelings that either side may have en-
dured in the skirmishes that occurred over much of the
seminar. It probably didn't.
What that encounter did accomplish, however, is a re-
newed determination on my part to make Malcolm avail-
able to the wider audience that he deserves without making
him a puppet for moderate, mainstream purposes, and with-
out freighting him with the early bigotries and blindnesses
he grew to discard. Ironically, my black male students'
abrasive resistance helped me understand the urgency
of such a task. All of us who have a stake in the meaning
and myth of Malcolm's life will continue to do battle,
will continue to disagree about how and why Malcolm's
memory is used in one way or another, even as we make
wildly different uses of his career. From filmmakers to in-
tellectuals, from hip-hop artists to community organizers,
we are together involved in the process of exploring and
XXV


--- PAGE 27 ---
Preface
evaluating the making of Malcolm's legacy. This book is a
contribution to that enterprise.
Providence M.E.D.
May 19, 1994 (Malcolm's birthday)
XXVI


--- PAGE 28 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my wonderful editor, Liz Maguire,
for bringing this book to Oxford and for making its pro-
duction such sheer pleasure. Her support of the book and
its author is largely responsible for its appearance. I would
also like to thank Elda Rotor and the other folk at Oxford
who assisted with the book for their tireless energy in as-
sisting Liz and me on this project. I would also like to
thank my wonderful children, Michael, Mwata, and
Maisha, for their love and support. I am grateful to my
mother, Addie Mae Dyson, for her continued love and de-
votion, and to my brothers Anthony, Gregory, and Brian
for their interest in my work. For my brother Everett,
prisoner 212687, I am grateful for his intelligent conver-
sation and his will to be free; stay strong and keep the
faith! I am grateful to my thoughtful niece and nephew,
Mejai and Torkwase Dyson, for their stimulating conver-
sation. I am also thankful for the extremely helpful critical
comments of William Van Deburg and Robin D. G. Kelley.
And for my precious friend D. Soyini Madison, I am grate-
ful for intellectual and spiritual companionship. And, of
course, for my intelligent, beautiful wife, Marcia, I reserve


--- PAGE 29 ---
Acknowledgments
special gratitude for her inexhaustible store of loyalty and
love, and for her belief in me and this book.
Portions of this manuscript have appeared in much different
form than published here in Social Text, Tikkun, and Christian
Century.
XXVIII


--- PAGE 30 ---
CONTENTS
1. Meeting Malcolm, 3
Part I MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
2. X Marks the Plots: A Critical Reading of Malcolm's
Readers, 21
Part II MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY
SOCIETY
3. Malcolm X and the Resurgence
of Black Nationalism, 79
4. In Malcolm's Shadow: Masculinity and the Ghetto
in Black Film, 107
5. Spike's Malcolm, 129
6. Using Malcolm: Heroism, Collective Memory,
and the Crisis of Black Males, 145
Afterword: Turning the Corner, 175
Notes, 185
Index, 203


--- PAGE 31 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 32 ---
MAKING MALCOLM


--- PAGE 33 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 34 ---
1
MEETING MALCOLM
First, I don't profess to be anybody's leader. I'm one of
22 million Afro-Americans, all of whom have suffered
the same things. And I probably cry out a little louder
against the suffering than most others and therefore,
perhaps, I'm better known. I don't profess to have a
political, economic, or social solution to a problem as
complicated as the one which our people face in the
States, but I am one of those who is willing to try any
means necessary to bring an end to the injustices that
our people suffer.
Malcolm X, in By Any Means Necessary: Speeches,
Interviews, and a Letter, by Malcolm X
Malcolm X, one of the most complex and enigmatic African-
American leaders ever, was born Malcolm Little on May 19,
1925, in Omaha, Nebraska. Since his death in 1965, Mal-
colm's life has increasingly acquired mythic stature. Along
with Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm is a member of the
pantheon of twentieth-century black saints. Unlike that of
King, however, Malcolm's heroic rise was both aided and
complicated by his championing of black nationalism and
his advocacy of black self-defense against white racist vio-
lence.
Malcolm's ideas of black nationalism were shaped vir-
tually from the womb by the example of his parents, Earl
3


--- PAGE 35 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
and Louise Little, both members of Marcus Garvey's Uni-
versal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). As presi-
dent of the Omaha branch of the UNIA, Earl Little, who was
also an itinerant Baptist preacher, vigorously proclaimed
the Garveyite doctrine of racial self-help and black unity,
often with Malcolm at his side. Louise Little served as re-
porter of the Omaha UNIA. A native of Grenada, Louise was
a deeply spiritual woman who presided over her brood of
eight children even as she endured the abuse of her hus-
band, and together they heaped domestic violence on their
children.
According to Malcolm, his family was driven from
Omaha by the Ku Klux Klan while he was still an infant,
forcing them to seek safer habitation in Lansing, the capital
city of Michigan eighty miles northwest of Detroit. Their
respite was only temporary, however; the Little family
house was burned down by a white hate group, the Black
Legionnaires, during Malcolm's early childhood in 1929.
This experience of racial violence, which Malcolm termed
his "earliest vivid memory," deeply influenced his unspar-
ing denunciation of white racism during his public career
as a black nationalist leader.
When Malcolm was only six, his father died after being
crushed under a streetcar. It is unclear whether Earl died at
the hands of the Black Legionnaires, as Malcolm reports in
his autobiography, or .whether his death was accidental, as
recent scholarship has suggested.1 In either case, his loss
4


--- PAGE 36 ---
Meeting Malcolm
bore fateful consequences for the Little family because Lou-
ise Little was faced with raising eight children alone during
the Great Depression. She eventually suffered a mental
breakdown, and her children were dispersed to different
foster homes.
Malcolm's life after his family's breakup went from
bleak to desperate, as he was shuttled between several fos-
ter homes. Malcolm stole food to survive and began devel-
oping hustling habits that he later perfected in Boston,
where he went to live with his half-sister Ella after dropping
out of school in Lansing after completing the eighth grade.
Before leaving school, Malcolm had become eighth-grade
class president at Mason Junior High School. But a devas-
tating rebuff from a teacher—who discouraged Malcolm in
his desire to become an attorney by claiming that it was an
unrealistic goal for "niggers"—finally sealed Malcolm's
early fate as an academic failure.
It was in Boston that Malcolm encountered for the first
time the black bourgeoisie, with its social pretensions and
exaggerated rituals of cultural self-affirmation, leading him
to conclude later that the black middle class was largely in-
effective in achieving authentic black liberation. It was also
in Boston's Roxbury and New York's Harlem that Malcolm
was introduced to the street life of the northern urban poor
and working class, gaining crucial insight about the cultural
styles, social sufferings, and personal aspirations of every-
day black people. Malcolm's hustling repertoire ranged
5


--- PAGE 37 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
from drug dealing and numbers running to burglary, the
last activity landing him in a penitentiary for a six- to ten-
year sentence. Malcolm's prison period—lasting from 1946
to 1952—marked the first of several extraordinary trans-
formations he underwent as he searched for the truth about
himself and his relation to black consciousness, black free-
dom and unity, and black religion.
While in prison, Malcolm read widely and argued pas-
sionately about a broad scope of subjects, from biblical the-
ology to Western philosophy, voraciously absorbing the
work of authors as diverse as Louis S. B. Leakey and Fried-
rich Nietzsche. Malcolm read so much during this period
that his eyesight became strained, and he began wearing his
trademark glasses. It was during his prison stay that Mal-
colm experienced his first religious conversion, slowly
evolving from a slick street hustler and con artist to a so-
phisticated, self-taught devotee of Elijah Muhammad and
the Nation of Islam, the black nationalist religious group
that Muhammad headed. Malcolm was drawn to the Nation
of Islam because of the character of its black nationalist
practices and beliefs: its peculiar gift for rehabilitating black
male prisoners; its strong emphasis on black pride, history,
culture, and unity; and its unblinking assertion that white
men were devils, a belief that led Muhammad and his fol-
lowers to advocate black separation from white society.
Within a year of his release from prison on parole in
1952, Malcolm became a minister with the Nation of Islam,
6


--- PAGE 38 ---
Meeting Malcolm
journeying to its Chicago headquarters to meet face to face
with the man whose theological doctrines of white evil and
black racial superiority had given Malcolm new life. Through
a herculean work ethic and spartan self-discipline—key fea-
tures of the black puritanism that characterized the Nation's
moral orientation—Malcolm worked his way in short order
from assistant minister of Detroit's Temple Number One to
national spokesman for Elijah Muhammad and the Nation
of Islam. In his role as the mouthpiece for the Nation of
Islam, Malcolm brought unprecedented visibility to a relig-
ious group that many critics had either ignored or dismissed
as fundamentalist fringe fanatics. Under Malcolm's leader-
ship, the Nation grew from several hundred to a hundred
thousand members by the early 1960s. The Nation under
Malcolm also produced forty temples throughout the
United States and purchased thirty radio stations.
During the late 1950s and early 1960s, enormous
changes were rapidly occurring within American society in
regard to race. The momentous Brown v. Board of Education
Supreme Court decision, delivered in 1954, struck down the
"separate-but-equal" law that had enforced racially segre-
gated public education since 1896. And in 1955, the historic
bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama—sparked by seam-
stress Rosa Parks's refusal to surrender her seat to a white
passenger, as legally mandated by a segregated public-
transportation system—brought its leader, Martin Luther
King, Jr., to national prominence. King's fusion of black
7


--- PAGE 39 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
Christian civic piety and traditions of American public mo-
rality and radical democracy unleashed an irresistible force
on American politics that fundamentally altered the social
conditions of millions of blacks, especially the black middle
classes in the South.
The civil rights movement, though, barely affected the
circumstances of poor southern rural blacks. Neither did it
greatly enhance the plight of poor northern urban blacks,
whose economic status and social standing were severely
handicapped by forces of deindustrialization: the rise of au-
tomated technology that displaced human wage earners,
the severe decline in manufacturing and in retail and
wholesale trade, and escalating patterns of black unem-
ployment. These social and economic trends, coupled with
the growing spiritual despair that beginning in the early
1950s gripped Rust Belt cities like New York, Chicago, Phil-
adelphia, Detroit, Cleveland, Indianapolis, and Baltimore,
did not initially occupy the social agenda of the southern-
based civil rights movement.
Malcolm's ministry, however, as was true of the Nation
of Islam in general, was directed toward the socially dispos-
sessed, the morally compromised, and the economically
desperate members of the black proletariat and ghetto poor
who were unaided by the civil rights movement. The Nation
of Islam recruited many of its members among the prison
populations largely forgotten by traditional Christianity
(black and white). The Nation also proselytized among the
8


--- PAGE 40 ---
Meeting Malcolm
hustlers, drug dealers, pimps, prostitutes, and thieves whose
lives, the Nation contended, were ethically impoverished by
white racist neglect of their most fundamental needs: the
need for self-respect, the need for social dignity, the need
to understand their royal black history, and the need to
worship and serve a black God. All of these were provided
in the black nationalist world view of the Nation of Islam.
Malcolm's public ministry of proselytizing for the Na-
tion of Islam depended heavily on drawing contrasts be-
tween what he and other Nation members viewed as the
corruption of black culture by white Christianity (best sym-
bolized in Martin Luther King, Jr., and segments of the civil
rights movement) and the redemptive messages of racial
salvation proffered by Elijah Muhammad. Malcolm relent-
lessly preached the virtues of black self-determination and
self-defense even as he denounced the brainwashing of
black people by Christian preachers like King who espoused
passive strategies of resistance in the face of white racist
violence.
Where King advocated redemptive suffering for blacks
through their own bloodshed, Malcolm promulgated "re-
ciprocal bleeding" for blacks and whites. As King preached
the virtues of Christian love, Malcolm articulated black an-
ger with unmitigated passion. While King urged nonviolent
civil disobedience, Malcolm promoted the liberation of
blacks by whatever means were necessary, including
(though not exclusively, as some have argued) the possi-
9


--- PAGE 41 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
bility of armed self-defense. While King dreamed, Malcolm
saw nightmares.
It was Malcolm's unique ability to narrate the prospects
of black resistance at the edge of racial apocalypse that made
him both exciting and threatening. Malcolm spoke out loud
what many blacks secretly felt about racist white people and
practices, but were afraid to acknowledge publicly. Malcolm
boldly specified in lucid rhetoric the hurts, agonies, and
frustrations of black people chafing from an enforced racial
silence about the considerable cultural costs of white racism.
Unfortunately, as was the case with most of his black
nationalist compatriots and civil rights advocates, Malcolm
cast black liberation in terms of masculine self-realization.
Malcolm's zealous trumpeting of the social costs of black
male cultural emasculation went hand in hand with his of-
ten aggressive, occasionally vicious, put-downs of black
women. These slights of black women reflected the demon-
ology of the Nation of Islam, which not only viewed racism
as an ill from outside its group, but argued that women were
a lethal source of deception and seduction from within.
Hence, Nation of Islam women were virtually desexualized
through "modest" dress, kept under the close supervision
of men, and relegated to the background while their men
took center stage. Such beliefs reinforced the already infe-
rior position of black women in black culture.
These views, ironically, placed Malcolm and the Nation
of Islam squarely within misogynist traditions of white and
10


--- PAGE 42 ---
Meeting Malcolm
black Christianity. It is this aspect, especially, of Malcolm's
public ministry that has been adopted by contemporary
black urban youth, including rappers and filmmakers. Al-
though Malcolm would near the end of his life renounce
his sometimes vitriolic denunciations of black women, his
contemporary followers have not often followed suit.
But as the civil rights movement expanded its influ-
ence, Malcolm and the Nation came under increasing crit-
icism for its deeply apolitical stance. Officially, the Nation
of Islam was forbidden by Elijah Muhammad to become
involved in acts of civil disobedience or social protest, iron-
ically containing the forces of anger and rage that Malcolm's
fiery rhetoric helped unleash. This ideological constraint sti-
fled Malcolm's natural inclination to action, and increas-
ingly caused him great discomfort as he sought to explain
publicly the glaring disparity between the Nation's aggres-
sive rhetoric and its refusal to become politically engaged.
Malcolm's growing dissatisfaction with the Nation's
apolitical posture only deepened his suspicions about its
leadership role in aiding blacks to achieve real liberation.
Malcolm also became increasingly aware of the internal cor-
ruption of the Nation—unprincipled financial practices
among top officials who reaped personal benefit at the ex-
pense of the rank and file, and extramarital affairs involving
leader Elijah Muhammad. Moreover, there is evidence that
Malcolm had privately forsaken his belief in the whites-are-
devils doctrine years before his widely discussed public re-
11


--- PAGE 43 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
jection of the doctrine after his 1964 split from the Nation
of Islam, his embrace of orthodox Islamic belief, and his
religious pilgrimage to Mecca.2
The official cause of Malcolm's departure from the Na-
tion of Islam was Elijah Muhammad's public reprimand of
Malcolm for his famous comments that President John F.
Kennedy's assassination merely represented the "chickens
coming home to roost." Malcolm was saying that the vio-
lence the United States had committed in other parts of the
world was returning to haunt this nation. Muhammad
quickly forbade Malcolm from publicly speaking, initially
for ninety days, motivated as much by jealousy of Mal-
colm's enormous popularity among blacks outside the Na-
tion of Islam as by his desire to punish Malcolm for a
comment that would bring the Nation undesired negative
attention from an already racially paranoid government.
In March 1964, Malcolm left the Nation of Islam after
it became apparent that he could not mend his relationship
with his estranged mentor. He formed two organizations,
one religious (Muslim Mosque) and the other political (Or-
ganization of Afro-American Unity, or OAAU). The OAAU
was modeled after the Organization of African Unity and
reflected Malcolm's belief that broad social engagement
provided blacks their best chance for ending racism. Before
establishing the OAAU, however, Malcolm fulfilled a long-
standing dream of making a hajj to Mecca. While there,
Malcolm wrote a series of letters to his followers detailing
12


--- PAGE 44 ---
Meeting Malcolm
his stunning change of heart about race relations, declaring
that his humane treatment by white Muslims and his per-
ception of the universality of Islamic religious truth had
forced him to reject his former narrow beliefs about whites.
Malcolm's change of heart, though, did not blind him to the
persistence of American racism and the need to oppose its
broad variety of expressions with aggressive social resis-
tance.
After his departure from the Nation of Islam, Malcolm
traveled extensively, including trips to the Middle East and
Africa. His travels broadened his political perspective con-
siderably, a fact reflected in his new appreciation of socialist
movements (though he didn't embrace socialism) and a
new international note in his public discourse as he em-
phasized the link between African-American liberation and
movements for freedom throughout the world, especially
in African nations. Malcolm didn't live long enough to fulfill
the promise of his new directions. On February 21, 1965,
three months shy of his fortieth birthday, Malcolm X was
gunned down by Nation of Islam loyalists as he prepared to
speak to a meeting of the OAAU. Fortunately, Malcolm had
recently completed his autobiography with the help of Alex
Haley. That work, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, stands as
a classic of black letters and American autobiography.3
Malcolm lived only fifty weeks after his break with the
Nation of Islam, initiating his last and perhaps most mean-
ingful transformation of all: from revolutionary black na-
13


--- PAGE 45 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
tionalist to human rights advocate. Although Malcolm
never gave up on black unity or self-determination—and
neither did he surrender his acerbic wit on behalf of the
voiceless millions of poor blacks who could never speak
their pain before the world—he did expand his field of vi-
sion to include poor, dispossessed people of color from
around the world, people whose plight resulted from class
inequality and economic oppression as much as from racial
domination. Had he lived, we can only hope that vexing
contemporary problems from gender oppression to homo-
phobia might have exercised his considerable skills of social
rage and incisive, passionate oratory in giving voice to fears
and resentments that most people can speak only in private.
During the last year of his life, Malcolm's social criti-
cism and political engagement reflected a will to sponta-
neity, his analysis an improvisatory and fluid affair that
drew from his rapidly evolving quest for the best means
available for real black liberation—but a black liberation
connected to the realization of human rights for all suffering
peoples. In the end, Malcolm's moral pragmatism and ex-
perimental social criticism linked him more nearly to the
heart of African-American culture and American radical
practices than it might have otherwise appeared during his
controversial career. Malcolm's complexity resists neat cat-
egories of analysis and rigid conclusions about his meaning.
It is this Malcolm—the Malcolm who spoke with un-
compromising ardor about the poor, black, and dispos-
14


--- PAGE 46 ---
Meeting Malcolm
sessed, and who named racism when and where he found
it—who appealed to me as a young black male coming to
maturity during the 1970s in the ghetto of Detroit. I took
pleasure in his early moniker Detroit Red, feeling that our
common geography joined us in a project to reclaim the
dignity of black identity from the chaotic dissemblances and
self-deceptions instigated by racist oppression.
But the riots of 1967—with their flames of frustration
burning bitterly in my neighborhood, a testament to the un-
reconciled grievances that fueled racial resentments—had
already confirmed Malcolm's warnings about the desperate
state of urban black America. And the death of Martin Lu-
ther King, Jr., one year later ruptured the veins of nonvio-
lent response to black suffering, evoking seizures of social
unrest in the nerve centers of hundreds of black communi-
ties across the nation. King's death and Malcolm's life forced
me to grapple with the best remedy for resisting racism.
As a result, I turned more frequently to a means of
communication and combat that King and Malcolm had fa-
vored and that had been nurtured in me by my experience
in the black church: rhetorical resistance. In African-
American cultures, acts of rhetorical resistance are often
more than mere words. They encompass a complex set of
symbolic expressions and oral interactions with the "real"
world. These expressions and interactions are usually sup-
ported by substantive black cultural traditions—from relig-
ious worship to social protest—that fuse speech and
15


--- PAGE 47 ---
MEETING MALCOLM
performance. Much of the ingenuity and inventiveness of
black rhetorical resistance was evident in the church-based
civil rights movement and in black nationalist struggles for
self-determination in the 1960s.
One form of rhetorical resistance that has been prom-
inently featured throughout black cultural history is the
black sermon, the jewel in the crown of black sacred rhet-
oric. Here, a minister, or another authorized figure, thrives
in the delivery of priestly wisdom and prophetic warning
through words of encouragement and comfort, of chasten-
ing and challenge. Martin and Malcolm, of course, were
widely acknowledged masters of black sacred rhetoric—as
well as brilliant political rhetoricians whose deft weaving of
spiritual uplift and secular complaint forged a powerful basis
for black action in a bruising white world. The excellent
examples of Martin and Malcolm—along with the more im-
mediate impact of my pastor, Frederick G. Sampson—
brought me to believe that words can have world-making
and life-altering consequences.
In the years following Malcolm's and Martin's deaths,
I participated in all manner of black public oral perform-
ance—from church plays and speeches to poetry recitations
and oratorical contests—that whetted my appetite for the
word. At eleven, I wrote a speech for the local Optimist Club
that won me a first-place trophy and a photograph and
headline in the Detroit News that read "Boy's Plea Against
Racism Wins Award." Martin's and Malcolm's spirit hov-
16


--- PAGE 48 ---
Meeting Malcolm
ered intimately around my performance. Their presence
in word also inspired my decision to become an ordained
Baptist minister, and sustained me as I became, in quick
succession, a teen-age father, a welfare recipient, a wheel-
brake-and-drum-factory laborer, and a pastor in the South.
As I have matured, journeying from factory worker to
professor, it is the Malcolm who valued truth over habit
who has appealed most to me, his ability to be self-critical
and to change his direction an unfailing sign of integrity and
courage. But these two Malcolms need not be in ultimate,
fatal conflict, need not be fractured by the choice between
seeking an empowering racial identity and linking ourselves
to the truth no matter what it looks like, regardless of color,
class, gender, sex, or age. They are both legitimate quests,
and Malcolm's career and memory are enabling agents for
both pursuits. His complexity is our gift.
17


--- PAGE 49 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 50 ---
PARTI
MALCOLM X'S
INTELLECTUAL
LEGACY
If I say, my father was Betty Shabazz's lawyer, the
poem can go no further. I've given you the punchline.
If you know who she is, all you can think about is how
and what you want to know about me, about my father,
about Malcolm, especially in 1990 when he's all over t-
shirts and medallions, but what I'm telling you is that
Mrs. Shabazz was a nice lady to me, and I loved her
name for the wrong reasons, SHABAZZ! and what I
remember is going to visit her daughters in 1970 in a
dark house with little furniture and leaving with a
candy necklace the daughters gave me, to keep. Now that
children see his name and call him, Malcolm Ten, and
someone called her Mrs. Ex-es, and they don't really
remember who he was or what he said or how he smiled
the way it happened when it did, and neither do I, I
think about how history is made more than what happened
and about a nice woman in a dark house filled with
daughters and candy, something dim and unspoken,
expectation.
Elizabeth Alexander, "What I'm Telling You"


--- PAGE 51 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 52 ---
2
X MARKS THE PLOTS:
A CRITICAL READING
OF MALCOLM'S
READERS
I think all of us should be critics of each other. When-
ever you can't stand criticism you can never grow. I
don't think that it serves any purpose for the leaders
of our people to waste their time fighting each other
needlessly. I think that we accomplish more when we
sit down in private and iron out whatever differences
that may exist and try and then do something con-
structive for the benefit of our people. But on the other
hand, I don't think that we should be above criticism.
I don't think that anyone should be above criticism.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X: The Last Speeches
The life and thought of Malcolm X have traced a curious
path to black cultural authority and social acceptance
since his assassination in 1965. At the time of his mar-
tyrdom—achieved through a murder that rivaled in its
fumbling but lethal execution the treacherous twists of a
Shakespearean tragedy—Malcolm was experiencing a rad-
ical shift in the personal and political understandings that
21


--- PAGE 53 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
governed his life and thought.1 Malcolm's death height-
ened the confusion that had already seized his inner circle
because of his last religious conversion. His death also en-
gendered bitter disagreement among fellow travelers
about his evolving political direction, conflicts that often
traded on polemic, diatribe, and intolerance. Thus Mal-
colm's legacy was severely fragmented, his contributions
shredded in ideological disputes even as ignorance and
fear ensured his further denigration as the symbol of black
hatred and violence.
Although broader cultural investigation of his impor-
tance has sometimes flagged, Malcolm has never disap-
peared among racial and political subcultures that proclaim
his heroic stature because he embodied ideals of black re-
bellion and revolutionary social action.2 The contemporary
revival of black nationalism, in particular, has focused re-
newed attention on him. Indeed, he has risen to a black
cultural stratosphere that was once exclusively occupied by
Martin Luther King, Jr. The icons of success that mark Mal-
colm's ascent—ranging from posters, clothing, speeches,
and endless sampling of his voice on rap recordings—attest
to his achieving the pinnacle of his popularity more than a
quarter century after his death.
Malcolm, however, has received nothing like the in-
tellectual attention devoted to Martin Luther King, Jr., at
least nothing equal to his cultural significance. Competing
22


--- PAGE 54 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
waves of uncritical celebration and vicious criticism—which
settle easily into myth and caricature—have undermined
appreciation of Malcolm's greatest accomplishments. The
peculiar needs that idolizing or demonizing Malcolm fulfill
mean that intellectuals who study him are faced with the
difficult task of describing and explaining a controversial
black leader and the forces that produced him.3 Such critical
studies must achieve the "thickest description" possible of
Malcolm's career while avoiding explanations that either
obscure or reduce the complex nature of his achievements
and failures.4
Judging by these standards, the literature on Malcolm
X has often missed the mark. Even the classic Autobiography
of Malcolm X reflects both Malcolm's need to shape his per-
sonal history for public racial edification while bringing co-
herence to a radically conflicting set of life experiences and
coauthor Alex Haley's political biases and ideological pur-
poses.5 Much writing about Malcolm has either lost its way
in the murky waters of psychology dissolved from history
or simply substituted—given racial politics in the United
States—defensive praise for critical appraisal. At times,
insights on Malcolm have been tarnished by insular ideo-
logical arguments that neither illuminate nor surprise. Mal-
colm X was too formidable a historic figure—the
movements he led too variable and contradictory, the pas-
sion and intelligence he summoned too extraordinary and
S3


--- PAGE 55 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
disconcerting—to be viewed through a narrow cultural
prism.
My intent in this chapter is to provide a critical path
through the quagmire of conflicting views of Malcolm X.
I have identified at least four Malcolms who emerge in
the intellectual investigations of his life and career: Mal-
colm as hero and saint, Malcolm as a public moralist, Mal-
colm as victim and vehicle of psychohistorical forces, and
Malcolm as revolutionary figure judged by his career tra-
jectory from nationalist to alleged socialist. Of course,
many treatments of Malcolm's life and thought transgress
rigid boundaries of interpretation. The Malcolms I have
identified, and especially the categories of interpretation
to which they give rise, should be viewed as handles on
broader issues of ideological warfare over who Malcolm is,
and to whom he rightfully belongs. In short, they help us
answer Whose Malcolm is it?
I am not providing an exhaustive review of the litera-
ture, but a critical reading of the dominant tendencies in
the writings on Malcolm X.6 The writings make up an in-
tellectual universe riddled with philosophical blindnesses
and ideological constraints, filled with problematic inter-
pretations, and sometimes brimming with brilliant insights.
They reveal as much about the possibilities of understand-
ing and explaining the life of a great black man as they do
about Malcolm's life and thought.
24


--- PAGE 56 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
Hero Worship and the Construction
of a Black Revolutionary
In the tense and confused aftermath of Malcolm's death,
several groups claiming to be his ideological heirs competed
in a warfare of interpretation over Malcolm's torn legacy.
The most prominent of these included black nationalist and
revolutionary groups such as the Student Nonviolent Coor-
dinating Committee (SNCC, under the leadership of Stokely
Carmichael), the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE, un-
der the leadership of James Farmer and especially Floyd
McKissick), the Black Panther party, the Republic of New
Africa, and the League of Revolutionary Black Workers.7
They appealed to his vision and spirit in developing styles of
moral criticism and social action aimed at the destruction of
white supremacy. These groups also advocated versions of
Black Power, racial self-determination, black pride, cultural
autonomy, cooperative socialism, and black capitalism.8
Malcolm's death also caused often bitter debate be-
tween custodians of his legacy and his detractors, either side
arguing his genius or evil in a potpourri of journals, books,
magazines, and newspapers. For many of Malcolm's keep-
ers, the embrace of his legacy by integrationists or Marxists
out to re-create Malcolm in their distorted image was more
destructive than his critics characterizing him in exclusively
pejorative terms.
25


--- PAGE 57 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
For all his nationalist followers, Malcolm is largely
viewed as a saintly figure defending the cause of black
unity while fighting racist oppression. Admittedly, the de-
velopment of stories that posit black heroes and saints
serves a crucial cultural and political function. Such stories
may be used to combat historical amnesia and to chal-
lenge the deification of black heroes—especially those
deemed capable of betraying the best interests of African-
Americans—by forces outside black communities. Fur-
thermore, such stories reveal that the creation of (black)
heroes is neither accidental nor value neutral, and often
serves political ends that are not defined or controlled by
black communities. Even heroes proclaimed worthy of
broad black support are often subject to cultural manip-
ulation and distortion.
The most striking example of this involves Martin Lu-
ther King, Jr. Like Malcolm X, King was a complex his-
toric figure whose moral vision and social thought
evolved over time.9 When King was alive, his efforts to
effect a beloved community of racial equality were widely
viewed as a threat to a stable social order. His advocacy of
nonviolent civil disobedience was also viewed as a detri-
mental detour from the proper role that religious leaders
should play in public. Of course, the rise of black radical-
ism during the late 1960s softened King's perception
among many whites and blacks. But King's power to ex-
26


--- PAGE 58 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
cite the social imagination of Americans only increased af-
ter his assassination.
The conflicting uses to which King's memory can be
put—and the obscene manner in which his radical legacy
can be deliberately forgotten—are displayed in aspects of
the public commemoration of his birthday. To a significant
degree, perceptions of King's public aims have been shaped
by the corporate sector and (sometimes hostile) govern-
mental forces. These forces may be glimpsed in Coca-Cola
commercials celebrating King's birthday, and in Ronald
Reagan's unseemly hints of King's personal and political de-
fects at the signing of legislation to establish King's birthday
as a national holiday.
King's legacy is viewed as most useful when promot-
ing an unalloyed optimism about the possibilities of Amer-
ican social transformation, which peaked during his "I
Have a Dream" speech. What is not often discussed—and
is perhaps deliberately ignored—is how King dramatically
revised his views, glimpsed most eloquently in his Vietnam-
era antiwar rhetoric and in his War-on-Poverty social activ-
ism. Corporation-sponsored commercials that celebrate
King's memory—most notably, television spots by Mc-
Donald's and Coca-Cola aimed at connecting their products
to King's legacy—reveal a truncated understanding of
King's meaning and value to American democracy. These
and other efforts at public explanation of King's meaning
27


--- PAGE 59 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
portray his worth as underwriting the interests of the state,
which advocates a distorted cultural history of an era ac-
tually shaped more by blood and brutality than by distant
dreams.
Many events of public commemoration avoid assigning
specific responsibility for opposition to King's and the civil
rights movement's quest for equality. On such occasions,
the uneven path to racial justice is often described in a man-
ner that makes progress appear an inevitable fact of our
national life. Little mention is made of the concerted ef-
forts—not only of bigots and white supremacists, but, more
important, of government officials and average citizens—to
stop racial progress. Such stories deny King's radical chal-
lenge to narrow conceptions of American democracy. Al-
though King and other sacrificial civil rights participants are
lauded for their possession of the virtue of courage, not
enough attention is given to the vicious cultural contexts
that called forth such heroic action.
Most insidious of all, consent to these whitewashed sto-
ries of King and the 1960s is often secured by the veiled
threat that King's memory will be either celebrated in this
manner or forgotten altogether. The logic behind such a
threat is premised on a belief that blacks should be grateful
for the state's allowing King's celebration to occur at all.
These realities make the battle over King's memory—waged
by communities invested in his radical challenge to Amer-
ican society—a constant obligation. The battle over King's
28


--- PAGE 60 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
memory also provides an important example to communi-
ties interested in preserving and employing Malcolm's
memory in contemporary social action. As with King, mak-
ing Malcolm X a hero reveals the political utility of memory
and reflects a deliberate choice made by black communities
to identify and honor the principles for which Malcolm
lived and died.
For many adherents, Malcolm remained until his death
a revolutionary black nationalist whose exclusive interest
was to combat white supremacy while fostering black unity.
Although near the end of his life Malcolm displayed a
broadened humanity and moral awareness—qualities over-
looked by his unprincipled critics and often denied by his
true believers—his revolutionary cohorts contended that
Malcolm's late-life changes were cosmetic and confused,
the painful evidence of ideological vertigo brought on by
paranoia and exhaustion.
All these interpretations are vividly elaborated in John
Henrik Clarke's anthology Malcolm X: The Man and His
Times.10 Clarke's book brings together essays, personal re-
flections, interviews, and organizational statements that
provide a basis for understanding and explaining different
dimensions of Malcolm's life and career. Although its vari-
ous voices certainly undermine a single understanding of
Malcolm's meaning as a father, leader, friend, and husband
(after all, it includes writers as different as Albert Cleage and
Gordon Parks), the book's tone suggests an exercise in hero
29


--- PAGE 61 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
worship and saint making, as cultural interpreters gather
and preserve fragments of Malcolm's memory.
Thus even the power of an individual essay to critically
engage an aspect of Malcolm's contribution or failure is
overcome by the greater urgency of the collective enter-
prise: to establish Malcolm as a genuine hero of the people,
but more than this, a sainted son of revolutionary struggle
who was perfectly fit for the leadership task he helped de-
fine. But moments of criticism come through. For instance,
in the course of a mostly favorable discussion of Malcolm's
leadership, Charles Wilson insightfully addresses the struc-
tural problems confronting black protest leaders as he
probes Malcolm's "failure of leadership style and a failure
to evolve a sound organizational base for his activities,"
concluding that Malcolm was a "victim of his own cha-
risma."11
At least two other writers in the collection also attempt
to critically explore Malcolm's limitations and the distor-
tions of his legacy by other groups. James Boggs deplores
both the racism of white Marxist revolutionaries who can-
not see beyond color and the lack of "scientific analysis"
displayed by Malcolm's black nationalist heirs whose activ-
ity degenerates into Black Power sloganeering. And Wyatt
Tee Walker, King's former lieutenant, criticizes Malcolm for
"useless illogical and intemperate remarks that helped nei-
ther him nor his cause," while emphasizing the importance
of Malcolm's pro-black rhetoric and his promulgation of the
30


--- PAGE 62 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
righ
t to self-defense.1.2 At the same time, Walker uselessly
repeats old saws about the vices of black matriarchy.
But these flutters of criticism are mostly overridden by
the celebrative and romantic impulses that are expressed in
several essays. Fortunately, Patricia Robinson's paean to
Malcolm X as a revolutionary figure stops short of viewing
black male patriarchy as a heroic achievement. Instead, she
sees Malcolm as the beginning of a redeemed black mas-
culinity that helps, not oppresses, black children and
women. But in essays by W. Keorapetse Kgositsile, Abdel-
wahab M. Elmessiri, and Albert Cleage, Malcolm's revolu-
tionary black nationalist legacy is almost breathlessly, even
reverentially, evoked.
Cleage especially, in his "Myths About Malcolm X,"
seeks to defend Malcolm's black nationalist reputation from
assertions that he was becoming an integrationist, an inter-
nationalist, or a Trotskyist Marxist, concluding that "if in
Mecca he had decided that blacks and whites can unite,
then his life at that moment would have become meaning-
less in terms of the world struggle of black people."13
Clarke's book makes sense, especially when viewed against
the historical canvas of late-1960s racial politics and in light
of the specific cultural needs of urban blacks confronting
deepening social crisis after Malcolm's death. But its goal of
redeeming Malcolm's legacy through laudatory means
makes its value more curatorial than critical.
Similarly, Oba T'Shaka's The Political Legacy of Malcolm
31


--- PAGE 63 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
X is an interpretation of Malcolm X as a revolutionary black
nationalist, and The End of White World Supremacy: Four
Speeches by Malcolm X, edited by Benjamin Karirn, attempts
to freeze Malcolm's development in the fateful year before
his break with Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam.14
T'Shaka is an often perceptive social critic and political ac-
tivist who believes that "the scattering of Africans through-
out the world gave birth to the idea of Pan-Africanism,"
and that the "oppression of Blacks in the United States can-
not be separated from the oppression of Africans on the
African continent and in the world."15
Such an international perspective establishes links
between blacks throughout the world, forged by revolu-
tionary black nationalist activity expressed in political in-
surgency, material and resource sharing, and the exchange
of ideas. In this context, T'Shaka maintains that Malcolm
was a revolutionary black nationalist who "identified the
world-wide system of white supremacy as the number one
enemy of Africans and people of color throughout the
world." He argues that Malcolm's internationalist perspec-
tive on revolutionary political resistance was specifically
linked to African experiments in socialist politics, contend-
ing that Malcolm rejected European models of political
transformation. Not surprisingly, T'Shaka is sour on the no-
tion that after his trip to Mecca Malcolm accepted and ex-
pressed support for black-white unity, and he characterizes
32


--- PAGE 64 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
beliefs that Malcolm began to advocate a Trotskyite social-
ism as "farfetched statements."16
Although he gives a close reading of Malcolm's ideas,
T'Shaka's treatment of Malcolm is marred by largely un-
critical explorations of Malcolm's rhetoric. He fails to chal-
lenge Malcolm's philosophical presuppositions or even
critically to juxtapose contradictory elements of Malcolm's
rhetoric. In effect, he bestows a canonical cloak on Mal-
colm's words. Nor does T'Shaka give a persuasive expla-
nation of the social forces and political action that shaped
Malcolm's thinking in his last years. Understanding these
facts might illuminate the motivation behind Malcolm's
Utopian interpretations of black separatist ideology, which
maintained that racial division was based on blacks pos-
sessing land either in Africa or in the United States. Al-
though T'Shaka, following Malcolm's own schema, draws
distinctions between his long-range program (that is, return
to Africa, which he claims Malcolm never gave up) and
short-term tactics (that is, cultural, psychological, and phil-
osophical migration), he doesn't prove that Malcolm ever
resolved the ideological tensions in black nationalism.
Karim's The End of White World Supremacy is an attempt
to wrench Malcolm's speeches from their political context
and place them in a narrative framework that uses Mal-
colm's own words—even after his break with the Nation of
Islam—to justify Elijah Muhammad's religious theodicy.
33


--- PAGE 65 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
Such a move ignores Malcolm's radically transformed self-
understanding and asserts, through his own words, a world-
view he eventually rejected. Karim, who as Benjamin
Goodman was Malcolm's close associate through his Nation
of Islam phase until his death, says in his introduction that
Muhammad gave Malcolm "the keys to knowledge and un-
derstanding," that this is "one key point in Malcolm's life
that is still generally misunderstood, or overlooked," and
that these speeches "represent a fair cross section of his
teaching during that crucial last year as a leader in the Na-
tion of Islam."17
Karim's introduction to the speeches winks away the
ideological warfare that helped drive Malcolm from the Na-
tion of Islam, and ignores evidence that Malcolm grew to
characterize his years with Muhammad as "the sickness and
madness of those days."18 Here we have Malcolm the mas-
ter polemicist telling twice-told tales of Mr. Yacub and white
devils, a doctrine he had long forsaken. Here, too, is Mal-
colm the skillful dogmatist deriding Paul Robeson for not
knowing his history, when in reality Malcolm grew to ad-
mire Robeson and tried to meet him a month before his
own death.19 The political context Karim gives to the
speeches attempts to transform interesting and essential his-
torical artifacts from Malcolm's past into a living document
of personal faith and belief.
Karim's shortcomings reveal the futility of examining
34


--- PAGE 66 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
Malcolm's life and thought without regard for sound his-
torical judgment and intellectual honesty. Serious engage-
ment with Malcolm's life and thought must be critical and
balanced. The most useful evaluations of Malcolm X are
those anchored in forceful but fair criticism of his career that
hold him to the same standards of scholarly examination as
we would any figure of importance to (African-) American
society. But such judgments must acknowledge the tattered
history of vicious, uncomprehending, and disabling cultural
criticism aimed at black life, a variety of criticism reflected
in many cultural commentaries on Malcolm's life.20
The overwhelming weakness of hero worship, often, is
the belief that the community of hero worshipers possesses
the definitive understanding of the subject—in this instance,
Malcolm—and that critical dissenters from the received
view of Malcolm are traitors to black unity, inauthentic
heirs to his political legacy, or misguided interpreters of his
ideas.21 This is even more reason for intellectuals to bring
the full weight of their critical powers to bear on Malcolm's
life. Otherwise, his real brilliance will be diminished by ef-
forts to canonize his views without first considering them,
his ultimate importance as a revolutionary figure sacrificed
to celebratory claims about his historic meaning. Toward
this end, Malcolm's words best describe the critical ap-
proach that should be adopted in examining his life and
thought:
35


--- PAGE 67 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
Now many Negroes don't like to be criticized—they
don't like for it to be said that we're not ready. They
say that that's a stereotype. We have assets—we have
liabilities as well as assets. And until our people are able
to ... analyze ourselves and discover our own liabili-
ties as well as our assets, we never will be able to win
any struggle that we become involved in. As long as
the black community and the leaders of the black com-
munity are afraid of criticism and want to classify all
criticism, collective criticism, as a stereotype, no one
will ever be able to pull our coat. . . . [W]e have to ...
find out where we are lacking, and what we need to
replace that which we are lacking, [or] we never will
be able to be successful.22
The Vocation of a Public Moralist
Within African-American life, a strong heritage of black
leadership has relentlessly and imaginatively addressed the
major obstacles to the achievement of a sacred trinity of
social goods for African-Americans: freedom, justice, and
equality. Racism has been historically viewed as the most
lethal force to deny black Americans their share in the
abundant life that these goods make possible. The central
role that the church has traditionally played in many black
communities means that religion has profoundly shaped
36


--- PAGE 68 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
the moral vision and social thought of black leaders' re-
sponses to racism.23 Because freedom, justice, and equality
have been viewed by black communities as fundamental in
the exercise of citizenship rights and the expression of social
dignity, a diverse group of black leaders has advocated var-
ied models of racial transformation in public life.
The centrality of Christianity in African-American cul-
ture means that the moral character of black public protest
against racism has oscillated between reformist and revo-
lutionary models of racial transformation. From Booker T.
Washington to Joseph H. Jackson, black Christian reformist
approaches to racial transformation have embraced liberal
notions of the importance of social stability and the legiti-
macy of the state. Black Christian reformist leaders have
sought to shape religious resistance to oppression, inequal-
ity, and injustice around styles of rational dissent that re-
inforce a stable political order. From Nat Turner to the
latter-day Martin Luther King, Jr., black Christian revolu-
tionary approaches to racial transformation have often pre-
sumed the fundamental moral and social limitations of the
state. Black Christian revolutionary leaders have advocated
public protest against racism in a manner that disrupts the
forceful alliance of unjust social privilege and political le-
gitimacy that have undermined African-American life.
In practice, black resistance to American racism has
fallen somewhere between these two poles. At their best,
black leaders have opposed American racism while appeal-
37


--- PAGE 69 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
ing to religion and politics in prescribing a remedy. Whether
influenced by black Christianity, Black Muslim belief, or
other varieties of black religious experience, proponents of
public morality combined spiritual insight with political re-
sistance in the attempt to achieve social reconstruction. Any
effort to understand Malcolm X, and the cultural and relig-
ious beliefs he appealed to and argued against in making
his specific claims, must take these traditions of prophetic
and public morality into consideration.
Of the four books that largely view Malcolm's career
through his unrelenting ethical insights and the moral
abominations to which his vision forcefully responded,
Louis Lomax's When the Word Is Given: A Report on Elijah
Muhammad, Malcolm X, and the Black Muslim World and
James Cone's Martin and Malcolm and America: A Dream or a
Nightmare? treat the religious roots of Malcolm's moral vi-
sion. Peter Goldman's The Death and Life of Malcolm X and
Lomax's To Kill a Black Man expound the social vision and
political implications of Malcolm's moral perspective. More-
over, both Lomax's and Cone's books are comparative stud-
ies of Malcolm and Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm's
widely perceived ideological opposite. The pairing of these
figures invites inquiry about the legitimacy and usefulness
of such comparisons, questions I will take up later.24
Lomax's When the Word Is Given is a perceptive and in-
formal ethnography of the inner structure of belief of the
Nation of Islam, a journalist's attempt to unveil the mys-
38


--- PAGE 70 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
terious concatenation of religious rituals, puritanical behav-
ior, and unorthodox beliefs that have at once intimidated
and intrigued outsiders. Although other, more scholarly
critics have examined Black Muslim belief, Lomax is a lit-
erate amateur whose lucid prose and imaginative reporting
evoke the electricity and immediacy of the events he de-
scribes.25
Lomax is also insightful in his description of the cul-
tural forces that helped bring Black Muslim faith into ex-
istence. He artfully probes how the Nation of Islam proved
essential during the 1950s and 1960s for many black citizens
who were vulnerably perched at the crux of the racial di-
lemma in the United States, seeking psychic and social ref-
uge from the insanity of the country's fractured urban
center. In Lomax's portrait, it is at the juncture between
racist attack and cultural defense that Malcolm X's moral
vocation emerges: he voices the aspirations of the disen-
franchised, the racially displaced, the religiously confused,
and the economically devastated black person. As Lomax
observes, the "Black Muslims came to power during a moral
interregnum"; Malcolm "brings his message of importance
and dignity to a class of Negroes who have had little, if any,
reason to feel proud of themselves as a race or as individ-
uals."26
Despite the virtue of including several of Malcolm's
speeches and interviews, which compose the second half of
the book (including an interview during Malcolm's suspen-
39


--- PAGE 71 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
sion from the Nation), the study's popular purposes largely
stifle a sharp analysis of Malcolm's moral thought. Lomax
provides helpful historical background of the origins and
evolution of the Black Muslim worldview, linking useful
insights on the emergence of religion in general to Islamic
and Christian belief in Africa and in the United States. But
his study does not engage the contradictions of belief and
ambiguities of emotion that characterized Malcolm's moral
life. In fairness to Lomax, this study was not his final word
on Malcolm. But his later comparative biography of Mal-
colm and King is more striking for its compelling personal
insight into two tragic, heroic men than for its comprehen-
sion of the constellation of cultural factors that shaped their
lives.
Cone's Martin and Malcolm and America, on the contrary,
is useful precisely because it explores the cultural, racial,
and religious roots of Malcolm's public moral thought.27
Cone, the widely acknowledged founder of black theology,
has been significantly influenced by both King and Mal-
colm, and his book is a public acknowledgment of intellec-
tual debt and personal inspiration. In chapters devoted to
the impact of Malcolm's northern ghetto origins on his later
thought, the content of his social vision, and the nature of
his mature reflections on American society and black polit-
ical activity, Cone discusses Malcolm's understanding of
racial oppression, social justice, black unity, self-love, sep-
40


--- PAGE 72 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
aratism, and self-defense that in the main constituted his
vision of black nationalism.28
Cone performs a valuable service by shedding light on
Malcolm's religious faith and then linking that faith to his
social ideals and public moral vision, recognizing that his
faith "was marginal not only in America as a whole but in
the African-American community itself."29 Cone covers fa-
miliar ground in his exposition of Malcolm's views on white
Americans, black Christianity, and the religious and moral
virtues of Elijah Muhammad's Black Muslim faith. But he
also manages to show how Malcolm's withering criticisms
of race anticipated "the rise of black liberation theology in
the United States and South Africa and other expressions
of liberation theology in the Third World."30
The most prominent feature of Cone's book is its com-
parative framework, paralleling and opposing two semi-
nal influences on late-twentieth-century American culture.
It is just this presumption—that Malcolm and Martin rep-
resented two contradictory, if not mutually exclusive,
ideological options available to blacks in combating the ab-
surdity of white racism—that generates interest in Cone's
book, and in Lomax's To Kill a Black Man.31 But is this pre-
sumption accurate?
As with all strictly imagined oppositions, an either-or
division does not capture what Ralph Ellison termed the
"beautiful and confounding complexities of Afro-American
41


--- PAGE 73 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
culture."32 Nor does a rigid dualism account for the fashion
in which even sharp ideological differences depend on some
common intellectual ground to make disagreement plausi-
ble. For instance, the acrimonious ideological schism be-
tween Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois drew
energy from a common agreement that something must be
done about the black cultural condition, that intellectual
investigation must be wed to cultural and political activity
in addressing the various problems of black culture, and that
varying degrees of white support were crucial to the attain-
ment of concrete freedom for black Americans.33 Although
Washington is characterized as an "accommodationist" and
Du Bois as a "Pan-African nationalist," they were complex
human beings whose political activity and social thought
were more than the sum of their parts.
The comparative analysis of King and Malcolm sheds
light on the strengths and weaknesses of the public-moralist
approach to Malcolm's life and career. By comparing the
two denning figures of twentieth-century black public mo-
rality, we are allowed to grasp the experienced, lived-out
distinctions between King's and Malcolm's approaches to
racial reform and revolution. Because King and Malcolm
represent as well major tendencies in historic black ideo-
logical warfare against white racism, their lives and thought
are useful examples of the social strategies, civil rebellion,
religious resources, and psychic maneuvers adopted by di-
42


--- PAGE 74 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
verse black movements for liberation within American so-
ciety.
The challenge to the public-moralist approach is to
probe the sort of tensions between King and Malcolm that
remain largely unexplored by other views of either figure.
For instance, it is the presence of class differences within
black life that bestowed particular meanings on King's
and Malcolm's leadership. Such differences shaped the
styles each leader adapted in voicing the grievances of his
constituency—for King, a guilt-laden, upwardly mobile,
and ever-expanding black middle class; for Malcolm, an
ever-widening, trouble-prone, and rigidly oppressed black
ghetto poor. These differences reflect deep and abiding
schisms within African-American life that challenge facile
or pedestrian interpretations of black leaders, inviting in-
stead complex theoretical analyses of their public moral lan-
guage and behavior.
The comparison of King and Malcolm may also, ironi-
cally, void the self-critical dimensions of the public-moralist
perspective, causing its proponents to leave unaddressed,
for instance, the shortcomings of a sexual hierarchy of social
criticism in black life. Although Cone is critical of Malcolm's
and Martin's failures of sight and sense on gender issues,
more is demanded. What we need is an explanation of how
intellectuals and leaders within vibrant traditions of black
social criticism seem, with notable exception, unwilling or
43


--- PAGE 75 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
unable to include gender difference as a keyword in their
public-moralist vocabulary. A comparative analysis of King
and Malcolm may point out how they did not take gender
difference seriously, but it does not explain how the public-
moralist traditions in which they participated either enabled
or prevented them from doing so.
By gaining such knowledge, we could determine if
their beliefs were representative of their traditions, or if
other participants (for example, Douglass and Du Bois, who
held more enlightened views on gender) provide alternative
perspectives from which to criticize Malcolm and Martin
without resorting to the fmgerpointing that derives from
the clear advantage of historical hindsight.
As Cone makes clear, Malcolm and Martin were com-
plex political actors whose thought derived from venerable
traditions of response to American racism, usefully char-
acterized as nationalism and Integrationism. But as Cone
also points out, the rhetoric of these two traditions has been
employed to express complex beliefs, and black leaders and
intellectuals have often combined them in their struggles
against slavery and other forms of racial oppression.
Lomax, by comparison, more rigidly employs these fig-
ures to "examine the issues of 'integration versus separa-
tion/ 'violence versus nonviolence,' 'the relevance of the
Christian ethic to modern life,' and the question 'can Amer-
ican institutions as now constructed activate the self-
corrective power that is the basic prerequisite for racial
44


--- PAGE 76 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
harmony?' "34 Lomax is most critical of Malcolm, leading
one commentator to suggest that Lomax's assessment of
Malcolm betrayed their friendship." Lomax points out the
wrongheadedness of Malcolm's advocacy of violence, the
contradictions of his ideological absolutism, and the limi-
tations of his imprecisely formulated organizational plans in
his last year. His criticisms of King, however, are mostly
framed as the miscalculations of strategy and the failure of
white people to justify King's belief in them. Lomax's vision
of Malcolm loses sight of the formidable forces that were
arrayed against him, and the common moral worldviews
occupied by King and his white oppressors, which made
King's philosophical inclinations seem natural and legiti-
mate, and Malcolm's, by that measure, foreign and unac-
ceptable. One result of Lomax's lack of appreciation for this
difference is his failure to explore King's challenge to capi-
talism, a challenge that distinguished King from Malcolm
for most of Malcolm's career.
Another problem is that we fail to gain a more profit-
able view of Malcolm's real achievements, overlooking the
strengths and weaknesses of the moral tradition in which
he notably participated. Malcolm was, perhaps, the living
indictment of a white American moral worldview. But his
career was the first fruit as well of something more radical:
an alternative racial cosmos where existing moral principles
are viewed as the naked justification of power and thought
to be useless in illumining or judging the propositions of an
45


--- PAGE 77 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
authentically black ethical worldview. Not only did Mal-
colm call for the rejection of particular incarnations of moral
viewpoints that have failed to live up to their own best po-
tential meanings (a strategy King employed to brilliant ef-
fect), but, given how American morality is indivisible from
the network of intellectual arguments that support and
justify it, he argued for the rejection of American public
morality itself. Malcolm lived against the fundamental
premises of American public moral judgment: that inno-
cence and corruption are on a continuum, that justice and
injustice are on a scale, and that proper moral choices reflect
right decisions made between good and evil within the
given moral outlook.
Malcolm's black Islamic moral criticism posed a signif-
icant challenge to its black Christian counterpart, which has
enjoyed a central place in African-American culture. Mal-
colm challenged an assumption held by the most prominent
black Christian public moralists: that the social structure of
American society should be rearranged, but not recon-
structed. Consequently, Malcolm focused a harshly critical
light on the very possibility of interracial cooperation, com-
mon moral vision, and social coexistence.
A powerful vision of Malcolm as a public moralist can
be seen in Goldman's The Death and Life of Malcolm X. Gold-
man captures with eloquence and imagination the Brob-
dingnagian forces of white racial oppression that made life
hell for northern poor blacks, and the Lilliputian psychic
46


--- PAGE 78 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
resources apparently at their disposal before Malcolm's
oversized and defiant rhetoric rallied black rage and anger
to their defense. Goldman's Malcolm is one whose "life was
itself an accusation—a passage to the ninth circle of that
black man's hell and back—and the real meaning of his
ministry, in and out of the Nation of Islam, was to deliver
that accusation to us." Malcolm was a "witness for the pros-
ecution" of white injustice, a "public moralist." With each
aspect of Malcolm's life that he treats—whether his antici-
pation of Black Power or his capitulation to standards of
moral evaluation rooted in the white society he so vigor-
ously despised—Goldman's narrative skillfully defends the
central proposition of Malcolm's prophetic public moral vo-
cation.36
Goldman's book is focused on Malcolm's last years be-
fore his break with Muhammad, and tracks Malcolm's
transformation after Mecca. Goldman contends that this
transformation occurred as process, not revelation, and that
it ran over weeks and months of trial and error, discovery,
disappointment. Additionally, Goldman sifts through the
conflicting evidence of Malcolm's assassination.37 Goldman
maintains that only one of Malcolm's three convicted and
imprisoned assassins is justly jailed, and that two other mur-
derers remain free.38 Goldman says about Malcolm's Organ-
ization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU), which he founded
in his last year, that its "greatest single asset was its star: its
fatal flaw was that it was constructed specifically as a star
47


--- PAGE 79 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
vehicle for a man who didn't have the time to invest in
making it go."39
When it was written in 1973, and revised in 1979,
Goldman's was the only full-length biography of Malcolm
besides Lomax's To Kill a Black Man. The virtue of Goldman's
book is that it taps into the sense of immediacy that drives
Lomax's book, while also featuring independent investiga-
tion of Malcolm's life through more than a hundred inter-
views with Malcolm himself. Goldman's treatment of
Malcolm also raises a question that I will more completely
address later: Can a white intellectual understand and ex-
plain black experience? Goldman's book helps expose the
cultural roots and religious expression of Elijah Muham-
mad's social theodicy, an argument Malcolm took up and
defended with exemplary passion and fidelity. He describes
Malcolm's public moral mission to proclaim judgment on
white America with the same kind of insight and clarity that
characterized many of Malcolm's public declarations.
Explaining Malcolm as a public moralist moves admi-
rably beyond heroic reconstruction to critical appreciation.
The significance of such an approach is its insistence on
viewing Malcolm as a critical figure in the development of
black nationalist repudiations of white cultural traditions,
economic practices, and religious institutions. And yet, un-
like hero worshipers who present treatments of Malcolm's
meaning, the authors who examine the moral dimensions
of Malcolm's public ministry are unafraid to be critical of
48


--- PAGE 80 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
his ideological blindnesses, his strategic weakness, his or-
ganizational limitations, and his sometimes bristling moral
contradictions.
But if they display an avidity, and aptitude, for por-
traying Malcolm's moral dimensions and the forces that
made his vision necessary, Malcolm's public-moralist inter-
preters have not as convincingly depicted the forces that
make public morality possible. The public-moralist ap-
proach is almost by definition limited to explaining Malcolm
in terms of the broad shifts and realignment of contours
created within the logic of American morality itself, rarely
asking whether public moral proclamation and action are
the best means of effecting social revolution. This approach
largely ignores the hints of rebellion against capitalist dom-
ination contained in Malcolm's latest speeches, blurring as
well a focus on King's mature beliefs that American society
was "sick" and in need of a "reconstruction of the entire
society, a revolution of values."40
This approach also fails to place Malcolm in the intri-
cate nexus of social and political forces that shaped his ca-
reer as a religious militant and a revolutionary black
nationalist. It does not adequately convey the mammoth
scope of economic and cultural forces that converged during
the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, not only shaping the expres-
sion of racial domination, but influencing as well patterns
of class antagonism and gender oppression. As Clayborne
Carson argues in his splendid introduction to the FBI files
49


--- PAGE 81 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
on Malcolm X, most writings have failed to "study him
within the context of American racial politics during the
1950s and 1960s."41 According to Carson, the files track
Malcolm's growth from the "narrowly religious perspective
of the Nation of Islam toward a broader Pan-Africanist
worldview," shed light on his religious and political views
and the degree to which they "threatened the American
state," and "clarif[y] his role in modern AM can-American
politics."42
Moreover, the story of Malcolm X and the black revo-
lution he sought to effect is also the story of how such social
aspirations were shaped by the advent of nuclear holocaust
in the mid-1940s (altering American ideals of social stability
and communal life expectation), the repression of dissident
speech in the 1950s under the banner of McCarthyism, and
the economic boom of the mid-1960s that contrasted
starkly to shrinking resources for the black poor. A refined
social history not only accents such features, but provides
as well a complex portrait of Malcolm's philosophical and
political goals, and the myriad factors that drove or denied
their achievement.
Malcolm's most radical and original contribution rested
in reconceiving the possibility of being a worthful black
human being in what he deemed a wicked white world.
He saw black racial debasement as the core of an alter-
native moral sphere that was justified for no other reason
than its abuse and attack by white Americans. To un-
50


--- PAGE 82 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
derstand and explain Malcolm, however, we must wedge
beneath the influences that determined his career in learn-
ing how his public moral vocation was both necessary and
possible.
Psychobiography and the Forces of History
If the task of biography is to help readers understand human
action, the purpose of psychobiography is to probe the re-
lationship between psychic motivation, personal behavior,
and social activity in explaining human achievement and
failure. The project to connect psychology and biography
grows out of a well-established quest to merge various
schools of psychological theory with other intellectual dis-
ciplines, resulting in ethnopsychiatry, psychohistory, social
psychology, and psychoanalytic approaches to philosophy.43
Behind the turn toward psychology and social theory
by biographers is a desire to take advantage of the insight
yielded from attempts to correlate or synthesize the largely
incompatible worlds of psychoanalysis and Marxism carved
out by Freud and Marx and their unwieldy legion of ad-
vocates and interpreters. If one argues, however, as Richard
Lichtman does, that "the structure of the two theories
makes them ultimate rivals," then, as he concedes, "prior-
ities must be established."44 In his analysis of the integration
of psychoanalysis into Marxist theory, Lichtman argues that
51


--- PAGE 83 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
"working through the limitations of Freud's view makes its
very significant insights available for incorporation into an
expanded Marxist theory."45
Psychobiographers have acknowledged the intellectual
difficulties to which Lichtman points while using Marxist or
Freudian theory (and sometimes both) to locate and illu-
mine gnarled areas of human experience. For instance, Erik
Erikson's Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonvio-
lence, one of psychobiography's foundational works, weds
critical analysis of its subject's cultural and intellectual roots
to imaginative reflections on the sources of Gandhi's mo-
tivation, sacrifice, and spiritual achievement.46
As they bring together social and psychological theory
in their research, psychobiographers often rupture the rules
that separate academic disciplines. Then again, if the psy-
chobiographer is ruled by rigid presuppositions and is in-
sensitive to the subject of study, nothing can prevent the
results from being fatally flat. Two recent psychobiographies
of Malcolm X reveal that genre's virtues and vices.
Eugene Victor Wolfenstein's The Victims of Democracy:
Malcolm X and the Black Revolution is a work of consid-
erable intellectual imagination and rigorous theoretical
insight.47 It takes measure of the energies that created
Malcolm and the demons that drove him. Wolfenstein as-
sesses Malcolm's accomplishments through a theoretical
lens as noteworthy for its startling clarity about Malcolm
the individual as for its wide-angled view of the field of
52


--- PAGE 84 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
forces with which Malcolm contended during his child-
hood and mature career.
Wolfenstein uses an elaborate conceptual machinery to
examine how racism falsifies "the consciousness of the ra-
cially oppressed," and how racially oppressed individuals
struggle to "free themselves from both the falsification of
their consciousness and the racist domination of their prac-
tical activity."48 For Wolfenstein's purpose, neither a psy-
choanalytic nor a Marxist theory alone could yield adequate
insight because Freudianism "provides no foundation for
the analysis of interests, be they individual or collective,"
and Marxism "provides no foundation for the analysis of
desires." Therefore, a "unifying concept of human nature
was required."49
Wolfenstein's psychobiography is especially helpful be-
cause it combines several compelling features: a historical
analysis of the black (nationalist) revolutionary struggle, an
insightful biographical analysis of Malcolm X's life, and an
imaginative social theory that explains how a figure like
Malcolm X could emerge from the womb of black struggle
against American apartheid. Wolfenstein accounts for how
Malcolm's childhood was affected by violent, conflicting do-
mestic forces and describes how black culture's quest for
identity at the margins of American society—especially
when viewed from the even more marginal perspective of
the black poor—shaped Malcolm's adolescence and young
adulthood.
53


--- PAGE 85 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
Wolfenstein also explores Malcolm's career as a zealous
young prophet and public mouthpiece for Elijah Muhum-
mad, revealing the psychic and social needs that Malcolm's
commitments served. Wolfenstein's imaginative remapping
of Malcolm's intellectual and emotional landscape marks a
significant contribution as well to the history of African-
American ideas, offering new ways of understanding one of
the most complex figures in our nation's history.
Undoubtedly, Wolfenstein's book would have bene-
fited from a discussion of how black religious groups pro-
vided social and moral cohesion in northern urban black
communities, and from a description of their impact on Earl
Little's ministry. Although Wolfenstein perceptively probes
the appeal of Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro Improve-
ment Association to blacks—and the social, psychological,
and economic ground it partly shared with the Ku Klux
Klan and white proletarian workers—his psychoanalytic
Marxist interpretation of Earl Little and Malcolm would
have been substantially enhanced by an engagement with
black Protestant beliefs about the relationship between
work, morality, and self-regard.50
Wolfenstein is often keenly insightful about black lib-
eration movements and the forces that precipitated their
eruption, but his dependence on biological definitions of
race weakens his arguments.51 The value of more complex
readings of race is that they not only show how the varied
meanings of racism are created in society; but prove as well
54


--- PAGE 86 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
that the idea of race has a cultural history.52 More complex
theories of race would permit Wolfenstein to illumine the
changing intellectual and social terrain of struggle by groups
that oppose the vicious meanings attributed to African-
American identity by cultural racists.
In the end, Wolfenstein is too dependent on the reve-
lations and reconstructions of self-identity that Malcolm
(with Haley's assistance) achieved in his autobiography. In
answering his own rhetorical questions about whether Mal-
colm and Haley represented Malcolm accurately, Wolfen-
stein says that from a "purely empirical standpoint, I believe
the answer to both questions is generally affirmative."53 The
problem, of course, is that Malcolm's recollections are not
without distortions. These distortions, when taken together
with the book's interpretive framework, not only reveal his
attempts to record his life history, but reflect as well his need
to control how his life was viewed during the ideological
frenzy that marked his last year. By itself, self-description is
an unreliable basis for reconstructing the meaning of Mal-
colm's life and career. Still, Wolfenstein's work is the most
sophisticated treatment to date of Malcolm's intellectual
and psychological roots.
But Bruce Perry's uneven psychobiographical study,
Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America, which
reaches exhaustively beyond Malcolm's self-representation
in his autobiography, possesses little of the psychoanalytic
rigor and insight of Wolfenstein's work.54 Although Perry
55


--- PAGE 87 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
unearths new information about Malcolm, he does not
skillfully clarify the impact that such information should
have on our understanding of Malcolm. The volume ren-
ders Malcolm smaller than life.
In Perry's estimation, Malcolm's childhood holds the
interpretive key to understanding his mature career as a
black leader: Malcolm's "war against the white power struc-
ture evolved from the same inner needs that had spawned
earlier rebellions against his teachers, the law, established
religion, and other symbols of authority."55 Perry's picture
of Malcolm's family is one of unremitting violence, crimi-
nality, and pathology. The mature Malcolm is equally tragic:
a man of looming greatness whose self-destruction "con-
tributed to his premature death."56 It is precisely here that
Perry's psychobiography folds in on itself, its rough edges
puncturing the center of its explanatory purpose. It is not
that psychobiography cannot remark on the unraveling of
domestic relations that weave together important threads
of personal identity, threads that are also woven into ado-
lescent and adult behavior. But Perry has a penchant for
explaining complex psychic forces—and the social condi-
tions that influence their makeup—in simplistic terms and
tabloid-like arguments.
Still, Perry's new information about Malcolm is occa-
sionally revealing, though some of the claims he extracts
from this information are more dubious than others. When,
for instance, Perry addresses areas of Malcolm's life that can
56


--- PAGE 88 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
be factually verified, he is on solid ground. By simply check-
ing Malcolm's school records Perry proves that, contrary to
his autobiography, Malcolm was not expelled from West
Junior High School but actually completed the seventh
grade in 1939. And by interviewing several family mem-
bers, Perry establishes that neither Malcolm's half-sister Ella
nor his father, Earl, were, as Malcolm contended, "jet
black," a claim Perry views as Malcolm's way of equating
"blackness and the strength his light-skinned mother had
lacked."57 Despite Malcolm X's assertion of close friendships
with Lionel Hampton, Sonny Greer, and Cootie Williams
during his hustling days, Perry's interviews show that the
"closeness Malcolm described was as fictitious as the close-
ness he said he had shared with the members of his own
family."58
But when Perry addresses aspects of Malcolm's expe-
rience that invite close argument and analytical interpre-
tation, he is on shakier ground. At this juncture, Perry
displays an insensitivity to African-American life and an ig-
norance about black intellectual traditions that weaken his
book. For instance, Perry depicts Malcolm's travels to Af-
rica—partially in an attempt to expand his organization's
political and financial base, but also to express his increas-
ingly international social vision—as intended solely to fund
his fledgling organization. Perry also draws questionable
parallels between the cloudy events surrounding a fire at
Malcolm's family farm during his early childhood in 1929
57


--- PAGE 89 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
(which Perry concludes points to arson by Earl Little) and
the fire at Malcolm's New York house after his dispute with
Nation of Islam officials over ownership rights.
A major example of the limitation of Perry's psycho-
biographical approach is his treatment of Malcolm's alleged
homosexual activity, both as an experimenting adolescent
and as a hustling, income-seeking young adult. Perry's re-
marks are more striking for the narrow assumptions that
underlie his interpretations than for their potential to dis-
mantle the quintessential symbol of African-American
manhood. If Malcolm did have homosexual relations, they
might serve Perry as a powerful tool of interpretation to
expose the tangled cultural roots of black machismo, and to
help him explain the cruel varieties of homophobia that
afflict black communities. A complex understanding of
black sexual politics challenges a psychology of masculinity
that views "male" as a homogeneous, natural, and univer-
sally understood identity. A complex understanding of mas-
culinity maintains that male identity is also significantly
affected by ethnic, racial, economic, and sexual differences.
But Perry's framework of interpretation cannot assim-
ilate the information his research has unearthed. Although
the masculinist psychology that chokes much of black lead-
ership culture needs to be forcefully criticized, Perry's ob-
servations do not suffice. Because he displays neither
sensitivity to nor knowledge about complex black cultural
beliefs regarding gender and sexual difference, Perry's por-
58


--- PAGE 90 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
trait of Malcolm's sex life forms a rhetorical low blow, sim-
ply reinforcing a line of attack against an already sexually
demonized black leadership culture.
The power of psychobiography in discussing black
leaders is its potential to shed light on its subjects in a man-
ner that traditional biography fails to achieve. African-
American cultural studies, which has traditionally made
little use of psychoanalytic theory, has sacrificed the insights
such an undertaking might offer while avoiding the pitfalls
of psychological explanations of human motivation. After
all, psychobiography is also prone to overreach its capacity
to explain.
In some ways, the psychobiographer's quest for (in this
case) the "real Malcolm" presumes that human experience
is objective and that truth is produced by explaining the
relation between human action and psychic motivation.
Such an approach may seduce psychobiographers into be-
lieving that they are gaining access to the static, internal
psychic reality of a historical figure. Often such access is
wrongly believed to be separate from the methods of in-
vestigation psychobiographers employ, and from the aims
and presumptions, as well as the biases and intellectual lim-
itations, that influence their work.
Because both Wolfenstein and Perry (like Goldman)
are white, their psychobiographies in particular raise sus-
picion about the ability of white intellectuals to interpret
black experience. Although such speculation is rarely sys-
59


--- PAGE 91 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
tematically examined, it surfaces as both healthy skepticism
and debilitating paranoia in the informal debates that
abound in a variety of black intellectual circles. Such de-
bates reflect two crucial tensions generated by psychobio-
graphical explanations of black leaders by white authors:
that such explanations reflect insensitivity to black culture,
and that white proponents of psychobiographical analysis
are incompetent to assess black life adequately. Several fac-
tors are at the base of such conclusions.
First is the racist history that has affected every tradi-
tion of American scholarship and that has obscured, erased,
or distorted accounts of the culture and history of African-
Americans.59 Given this history (and the strong currents of
anti-intellectualism that flood most segments of American
culture), suspicion of certain forms of critical intellectual
activity survive in many segments of black culture. Also,
black intellectuals have experienced enormous difficulty in
securing adequate cultural and financial support to develop
self-sustaining traditions of scholarly investigation and
communities of intellectual inquiry.60
For example, from its birth in the womb of political
protest during the late 1960s and early 1970s, black studies
has been largely stigmatized and usually underfunded. Per-
haps the principal reasons for this are the beliefs held by
many whites (and some blacks) that, first, black scholars
should master nonblack subjects, and second, that black
studies is intellectually worthless. Ironically, once the more
60


--- PAGE 92 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
than 200 black studies programs in American colleges and
universities became established, many white academics be-
came convinced that blacks are capable of studying only
"black" subjects.
At the same time, black studies experienced a new "in-
vasion" by white intellectuals. This new invasion—mimick-
ing earlier patterns of white scholarship on black life even
as most black scholars were prevented from being pub-
lished—provoked resentment from black scholars.61 The
resentment hinged on the difficulty black scholars experi-
enced in securing appointments in most academic fields
beyond black studies. Black scholars were also skeptical of
the intellectual assumptions and political agendas of white
scholars, especially because there was strong precedence for
many white scholars to distort black culture in their work
by either exoticizing or demonizing its expression. Black in-
tellectual skeptics opposed to white interpretations of black
culture and figures employ a variety of arguments in their
defense.
Many black intellectuals contend that black experience
is unique and can be understood, described, and explained
only by blacks. Unquestionably, African-American history
produces cultural and personal experiences that are distinct,
even singular. But the historical character of such experi-
ences makes them theoretically accessible to any interpreter
who has a broad knowledge of African-American intellec-
tual traditions, a balanced and sensible approach to black
61


--- PAGE 93 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
culture, and the same skills of rational argumentation and
scholarly inquiry required in other fields of study.
There is no special status of being that derives from
black cultural or historical experience that grants black in-
terpreters an automatically superior understanding of black
cultural meanings. This same principle allows black scholars
to interpret Shakespeare, study Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle, and master Marxist social theory. In sum, black
cultural and historical experiences do not produce ideas and
practices that are incapable of interpretation when the most
critically judicious and culturally sensitive methods of in-
tellectual inquiry are applied.
Many intellectuals also believe that black culture is uni-
fied and relatively homogeneous. But this contention is as
misleading as the first, especially in light of black culture's
wonderful complexity and radical diversity. The complexity
and diversity of black culture means that a bewildering va-
riety of opinions, beliefs, ideologies, traditions, and practices
coexist, even if in a provisional sort of way. Black conser-
vatives, scuba divers, socialists, and rock musicians come
easily to mind. All these tendencies and traditions constitute
and help define black culture. Given these realities, it is
pointless to dismiss studies of black cultural figures simply
because their authors are white. One must judge any work
on African-American culture by standards of rigorous crit-
ical investigation while attending to both the presupposi-
62


--- PAGE 94 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
tions that ground scholarly perspectives and the biases that
influence intellectual arguments.
Psychobiographies of Malcolm X's life and career repre-
sent an important advance in Malcolm studies. The crucial is-
sue is not color, but consciousness about African-American
culture, sensitivity to trends and developments in black so-
ciety, knowledge of the growing literature about various
dimensions of black American life, and a theoretical so-
phistication that artfully blends a variety of disciplinary ap-
proaches in yielding insight about a complex historic figure
like Malcolm X. When psychobiography is employed in this
manner, it can go a long way toward breaking new ground
in understanding and explaining the life of important black
figures. When it is incompetently wielded, psychobiograph-
ical analysis ends up simply projecting the psychobiogra-
pher's intellectual biases and limitations of perspective onto
the historical screen of a black figure's career.
Voices in the Wilderness:
Revolutionary Sparks and Malcolm's Last Year
To comprehend the full sweep of a figure's life and thought,
it is necessary to place that figure's career in its cultural and
historical context and view the trends and twists of thought
that mark significant periods of change and development.
63


--- PAGE 95 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
Such an approach may be termed a trajectory analysis be-
cause it attempts to outline the evolution of belief and
thought of historic figures by matching previously held
ideas to newer ones, seeking to grasp whatever continuities
and departures can be discerned from such an enterprise.
Trajectory analysis, then, may be a helpful way of viewing
a figure such as Martin Luther King, Jr., whose career may
be divided into the early optimism of civil rights ideology to
the latter-day aggressive nonviolence he advocated on the
eve of his assassination. It may also be enlightening when
grappling with the serpentine mysteries of Malcolm's final
days.
Malcolm's turbulent severance from Elijah Muham-
mad's psychic and world-making womb initiated yet an-
other stage of his personal and political evolution, marking
a conversion experience. On one level, Malcolm freed him-
self from Elijah's destructive ideological grip, shattering
molds of belief and practice that were no longer useful or
enabling. On another level, Malcolm's maturation and con-
version were the result of his internal ideals of moral ex-
pectation, social behavior, and authentic religious belief. His
conversion, though suddenly manifest, was most likely a
gradual process involving both conscious acts of dissociation
from the Nation of Islam and the "subconscious incubation
and maturing of motives deposited by the experiences of
life."62
Many commentators have heavily debated the precise
64


--- PAGE 96 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
nature of Malcolm's transformation. Indeed, his last fifty
weeks on earth form a fertile intellectual field where the
seeds of speculation readily blossom into conflicting in-
terpretations of Malcolm's meaning at the end of his life.
Lomax says that Malcolm became a "lukewarm integra-
tionist."63 Goldman suggests that Malcolm was "improvis-
ing," that he embraced and discarded ideological options as
he went along.64 Cleage and T'Shaka hold that he remained
a revolutionary black nationalist. And Cone asserts that
Malcolm became an internationalist with a humanist bent.
But the most prominent and vigorous interpreters of
the meaning of Malcolm's last year have been a group of
intellectuals associated with the Socialist Workers Party, a
Trotskyist Marxist group that took keen interest in Mal-
colm's post-Mecca social criticism and sponsored some of
his last speeches. For the most part, their views have been
articulately promoted by George Breitman, author of The
Last Year of Malcolm X: The Evolution of a Revolutionary and
editor of two volumes of Malcolm's speeches, organiza-
tional statements, and interviews during his last years: Mal-
colm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements and By Any
Means Necessary: Speeches, Interviews, and a Letter, by Malcolm
X. A third volume of Malcolm's speeches, Malcolm X: The
Last Speeches, was edited by Bruce Perry, who claimed ide-
ological difference with the publisher.65
Breitman's The Last Year of Malcolm X is a passionately
argued book that maintains Malcolm's split with Elijah took
65


--- PAGE 97 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
Malcolm by surprise, making it necessary for him to gain
time and experience to reconstruct his ideological beliefs
and redefine his organizational orientation. Breitman di-
vides Malcolm's independent phase into two parts: the tran-
sition period, lasting the few months between his split in
March 1964 and his return from Africa at the end of May
1964; and the final period, lasting from June 1964 until his
death in February 1965. Breitman maintains that in the fi-
nal period, Malcolm "was on the way to a synthesis of black
nationalism and socialism that would be fitting for the
American scene and acceptable to the masses in the black
ghetto."66
For Breitman's argument to be persuasive, it had to
address Malcolm's continuing association with a black na-
tionalism that effectively excluded white participation, or
else show that he had developed a different understanding
of black nationalism. Also, he had to prove that Malcolm's
anticapitalist statements and remarks about socialism rep-
resented a coherent and systematic exposition of his beliefs
as a political strategist and social critic. Breitman contends
that in the final period, Malcolm made distinctions between
separatism (the belief that blacks should be socially, cultur-
ally, politically, and economically separate from white so-
ciety) and nationalism (the belief that blacks should control
their own culture).
Malcolm's views of nationalism changed after his en-
66


--- PAGE 98 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
counters with revolutionaries in Africa who were "white,"
however, and in his "Young Socialist" interview in By Any
Means Necessary, Malcolm confessed that he had "had to do
a lot of thinking and reappraising" of his definition of black
nationalism.67 Breitman argues that though he "had virtu-
ally stopped calling himself and the OAAU black national-
ist," because others persisted in the practice, he accepted
"its continued use in discussion and debate."68 Malcolm
said in the same interview, "I haven't been using the ex-
pression for several months."69
But how can Breitman then argue that Malcolm was
attempting a synthesis of black nationalism and socialism if
the basis for Malcolm's continued use of the phrase "black
nationalism" was apparently more convenience and habit
than ideological conviction? What is apparent from my
reading of Malcolm's speeches is that his reconsideration of
black nationalism occurred amid a radically shifting world-
view that was being shaped by events unfolding on the in-
ternational scene and by his broadened horizon of
experience. His social and intellectual contact with activists
and intellectuals from several African nations forced him to
relinquish the narrow focus of his black nationalist practice
and challenged him to consider restructuring his organiza-
tional base to reflect his broadened interests.
If, therefore, even Malcolm's conceptions of black na-
tionalist strategy were undergoing profound restructuring,
67


--- PAGE 99 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
it is possible to say only that his revised black nationalist
ideology might have accommodated socialist strategy. It is
equally plausible to suggest that his nationalist beliefs might
have collapsed altogether under the weight of apparent ide-
ological contradictions introduced by his growing appreci-
ation of class and economic factors in forming the lives of
the black masses.70 For the synthesis of black nationalism
and socialism that Breitman asserts Malcolm was forging to
have been plausible, several interrelated processes needed
to be set in motion.
First, for such a synthesis to have occurred, a clear def-
inition of the potential connection of black nationalism and
socialism was needed. The second need was for a discussion
of the ideological similarities and differences between the
varieties of black nationalism and socialism to be joined.
And the third need was for an explicit expression of the
political, economic, and social interests that an allied black
nationalism and socialism would mutually emphasize and
embrace; the exploration of intellectual and political prob-
lems both would address; and an identification of the
common enemies both would oppose. But given the exis-
tential and material matters that claimed his rapidly evap-
orating energy near the end of his life, Malcolm hardly had
the wherewithal to perform such tasks.
Breitman also maintains that Malcolm's final period
marked his maturation as "a revolutionary—increasingly
68


--- PAGE 100 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
anti-capitalist and pro-socialist as well as anti-imperialist,"
labels that Breitman acknowledges Malcolm himself never
adopted.71 Breitman reads Malcolm's two trips to Africa as
a time of expansive political reeducation, when Malcolm
gained insight into the progressive possibilities of socialist
revolutionary practice. After his return to the United States
from his second trip, Malcolm felt, Breitman says, the need
to express publicly his "own anti-capitalist and pro-socialist
convictions," which had "become quite strong by this
time."72 He cites interviews and speeches Malcolm made
during this period to substantiate his claim, including Mal-
colm's speaking at the Audubon Ballroom on December 20,
1964, of how almost "every one of the countries that has
gotten independence has devised some kind of socialist sys-
tem, and this is no accident."73
Such a strategy, one that seeks to predict probable ide-
ological and intellectual outcomes, may shed less light on
Malcolm than is initially apparent. Breitman's contention
that Malcolm was becoming a socialist; Cleage's that he was
confused; T'Shaka's that he maintained a vigorous revolu-
tionary black nationalist stance; and Goldman's that he was
improvising can all be proclaimed and documented with
varying degrees of evidence and credibility.
This is not to suggest that one view is as good as the
next or that they are somehow interchangeable, because we
are uncertain'about Malcolm's final direction. It simply sug-
69


--- PAGE 101 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
gests that the nature of Malcolm's thought during his last
year was ambiguous and that making definite judgments
about his direction is impossible. In this light, trajectories
say more about the ideological commitments and intellec-
tual viewpoints of interpreters than the objective evidence
evoked to substantiate claims about Malcolm's final views.
The truth is that we have only a bare-bones outline of
Malcolm's emerging worldview. In "The Harlem 'Hate-
Gang' Scare," contained in Malcolm X Speaks (and delivered
during what Breitman says was Malcolm's final period),
Malcolm says that during his travels he
noticed that most of the countries that had recently
emerged into independence have turned away from
the so-called capitalistic system in the direction of so-
cialism. So out of curiosity, I can't resist the temptation
to do a little investigating wherever that particular phi-
losophy happens to be in existence or an attempt is
being made to bring it into existence.74
But at the end of his speech, in reply to a question about
the kind of political and economic system that Malcolm
wanted, he said, "I don't know. But I'm flexible. ... As was
stated earlier, all of the countries that are emerging today
from under the shackles of colonialism are turning toward
socialism."75
This tentativeness is characteristic of Malcolm's
70


--- PAGE 102 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
speeches throughout the three collections that contain frag-
ments of his evolving worldview, especially Malcolm X
Speaks and By Any Means Necessary. Even the speeches deliv-
ered during his final period showcase a common feature:
Malcolm displays sympathy for and interest in socialist phi-
losophy without committing himself to its practice as a
means of achieving liberation for African-Americans.
Malcolm confessed in the "Young Socialist" interview,
"I still would be hard pressed to give a specific definition of
the overall philosophy which I think is necessary for the
liberation of the black people in this country."76 Of course,
as Breitman implies, Malcolm's self-description is not the
only basis for drawing conclusions about his philosophy.
But even empirical investigation fails to yield conclusive ev-
idence of his social philosophy because it was in such radical
transformation and flux.
Malcolm was indeed improvising from the chords of
an expanded black nationalist rhetoric and an embryonic
socialist criticism of capitalist civilization. Although Breit-
man has been maligned as a latecomer seeking to foist his
ideological beliefs onto Malcolm's last days, there is prec-
edence for Trotskyist attempts to address the problem of
racism and black nationalism in the United States.77 And
the venerable black historian C. L. R. James became a
Marxist, in part, by reading Trotsky's History of the Russian
Revolution.78 Although Malcolm consistently denounced
71


--- PAGE 103 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
capitalism, he did not live long enough to embrace social-
ism.
The weakness of such an interpretive trajectory, then,
is that it tends to demand a certainty about Malcolm that is
clearly unachievable. An ideological trajectory of Malcolm's
later moments is forced to bring coherence to fragments of
political speech more than systematic social thought, to ex-
aggerate moments of highly suggestive ideological gestures
rather than substantive political activity, and to focus on
slices of organizational breakthrough instead of the complex
integrative activity envisioned for the OAAU. In the end, it
is apparent that Malcolm was rapidly revising his worldview
as he experienced a personal, religious, and ideological con-
version that was still transpiring when he met his brutal
death.
But the thrust behind such speculation is often a focus
on how Malcolm attempted to shape the cultural forces of
his time through the agency of moral rhetoric, social criti-
cism, and prophetic declaration. Just as important, but often
neglected in such analyses, is an account of how Malcolm
was shaped by his times, of how he was the peculiar and
particular creation of black cultural forces and American
social practices. Armed with such an understanding, the fo-
cus on Malcolm's last year would be shifted away from sim-
ply determining what he said and did to determining how
we should use his example to respond to our current cul-
tural and national crises.
72


--- PAGE 104 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
In the Prison of Prisms:
The Future of Malcolm's Past
The literature on Malcolm X is certain to swell with the
renewed cultural interest in his life. And although the par-
ticular incarnations of the approaches I have detailed may
fade from intellectual view or cultural vogue, the ideological
commitments, methodological procedures, historical per-
spectives, cultural assumptions, religious beliefs, and phil-
osophical presuppositions they employ will most assuredly
be expressed in one form or another in future treatments
of his life and thought.79
The canonization of Malcolm will undoubtedly con-
tinue. Romantic and celebratory treatments of his social ac-
tion and revolutionary rhetoric will issue forth from black
intellectuals, activists, and cultural artists. This is especially
true in the independent black press, where Malcolm's mem-
ory has been heroically kept alive in books, pamphlets, and
magazines, even as his presence receded from wide visibility
and celebration before his recent revival. The independent
black press preserves and circulates cultural beliefs, intel-
lectual arguments, and racial wisdom among black folk
away from the omniscient eye and acceptance of main-
stream publishing.
Shahrazad Ali's controversial book, The Blackman's
Guide to Understanding the Blackwoman, for instance, sold hun-
dreds of thousands of copies without receiving much atten-
73


--- PAGE 105 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
tion from mainstream newspapers, magazines, or journals.
The mainstream press often overlooked Malcolm's contri-
butions, but black publications like The Amsterdam News, The
Afro-American, Bilalian News, and Black News scrupulously
recorded his public career. The black independent press, in
alliance with various black nationalist groups throughout
the country that have maintained Malcolm's heroic stature
from the time of his assassination, is a crucial force in Mal-
colm's ongoing celebration. Such treatments of his legacy
will most likely be employed by these groups to active-
ly resist Malcolm's symbolic manipulation by what they
understand to be the forces of cultural racism, state domi-
nation, commodification, and especially religious brain-
washing that Malcolm detested and opposed.
The enormous influence of the culture of hip-hop on
black youth, coupled with the resurgence of black cultural
nationalism among powerful subcultures within African-
America, suggests that Malcolm's heroic example will con-
tinue to be emulated and proclaimed. The stakes of hero
worship are raised when considering the resurgent racism
of American society and the increased personal and social
desperation among the constituency for whom Malcolm el-
oquently argued, the black ghetto poor. Heightened racial
antipathy in cultural institutions such as universities and
businesses, and escalated attacks on black cultural figures,
ideas, and movements, precipitate the celebration of figures
74


--- PAGE 106 ---
A Critical Reading of Malcolm's Readers
who embody the strongest gestures of resistance to white
racism.
Moreover, the destructive effects of gentrification, ec-
onomic crisis, and social dislocation; the expansion of cor-
porate privilege; and the development of underground
political economies—along with the violence and criminal-
ity they breed—means that Malcolm is even more a pre-
cious symbol of the self-discipline, self-esteem, and moral
leadership necessary to combat the spiritual and economic
corruption of poor black communities. With their efforts
to situate him among the truly great in African-American
history, hero worshipers' discussion of Malcolm will be of
important but limited value in critically investigating his
revolutionary speech, thought, and action.
Malcolm's weaknesses and strengths must be rigor-
ously examined if we are to have a richly hued picture
of one of the most intriguing figures of twentieth-century
public life in the United States. Malcolm's past is not yet
settled, savaged as it has been in the embrace of unprin-
cipled denigrators while being equally smothered in the
well-meaning grip of romantic and uncritical loyalists. He
deserves what every towering and seminal figure in his-
tory should receive: comprehensive and critical examina-
tion of what he said and did so that his life and thought
will be useful to future generations of peoples in struggle
around the globe.
75


--- PAGE 107 ---
MALCOLM X'S INTELLECTUAL LEGACY
As the cadre of Malcolm scholars expands, Malcolm's
relation to black nationalism must be explored, especially
because its themes and goals occupied so much of his life
and thought. I will now turn to a discussion of how Mal-
colm's renewed popularity is wedded to a resurgence of
black nationalist sentiment. The strengths of black nation-
alism, and its limitations and contradictions as well, serve
to magnify Malcolm's achievements and failures alike.
76


--- PAGE 108 ---
PART II
MALCOLM X IN
CONTEMPORARY
SOCIETY
x
Everything we dont understand
is explained
in Art
The Sun
beats inside us
The Spirit courses in and out
A circling transbluesency
pumping Detroit Red inside, deep thru us
like a Sea
& who calls us bitter
has bitten us
& from that wound
pours Malcolm
Little
by
Little"
Amiri Baraka


--- PAGE 109 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 110 ---
3
MALCOLM X AND
THE RESURGENCE OF
BLACK NATIONALISM
And in my opinion the young generation of whites,
blacks, browns, whatever else there is, you're living at
a time of extremism, a time of revolution, a time when
there's got to be a change. People in power have mis-
used it, and now there has to be a change and a better
world has to be built, and the only way it's going to be
built is with extreme methods. I for one will join in
with anyone, I don't care what color you are, as long
as you want to change this miserable condition that
exists on this earth.
Malcolm X, in By Any Means Necessary: Speeches,
Interviews, and a Letter, by Malcolm X
Because Malcolm X for the duration of his life and most of
his death occupied the shadowy periphery of black cultural
politics—subsisting as the suppressed premise of the logic
of black bourgeois resistance to racism—his reemergence as
a cultural hero is something of a paradox. His newly ac-
claimed status is indivisible from the renaissance of black
nationalism and owes as much to his overhauled heroism
as to his commodification by black and white cultural en-
79


--- PAGE 111 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
trepreneurs. I will explore Malcolm's brand of black nation-
alism while evaluating his use as a powerful icon in
contemporary black nationalism. I will end with a brief re-
flection on his possible use in a program of progressive black
politics.
Given this nation's racist legacy, it is no surprise that
black folk have at every crucial juncture of their history in
the United States expressed nationalist sentiment.1 The pe-
culiar social, economic, and political constraints of oppres-
sion, stretching from slavery to the present day, have always
precipitated varying degrees of resistance, revolt, rebellion,
or resentment from African-Americans. If nationalism is
viewed as an attempt to establish and maintain a nation's
identity, growing out of circumstances of social and cultural
conflict, then black nationalism is a response of racial soli-
darity to the divisive practices of white supremacist nation-
alism.
Black nationalism has also been viewed as a response
to the erosion of communal identity and the eradication of
collective self-determination under slavery, and as a strat-
egy to combat the destructive cultural effects resulting from
the rejection of fragile black political liberties after Eman-
cipation and Reconstruction. Black nationalism was often
an expression of healthy self-regard in a legal and social
climate that reinforced black Americans' inferior political
status. Unlike many other expressions of nationalism, how-
ever, black nationalism was coerced from the beginning into
80


--- PAGE 112 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
a parasitic relationship to American culture. This confound-
ing irony of black nationalist discourse and practice haunts
it to this day.
Black nationalism is often contrasted to liberal integra-
tionist ideology. Liberal integrationists believe that the goal
of African-American struggles for liberation ought to be the
inclusion of blacks in the larger compass of American social,
political, and economic privilege, while maintaining a dis-
tinct appreciation for African-American culture. In its ex-
treme expression, however, liberal integrationist ideology
acquires a bland assimilationist emphasis. Racial assimila-
tionists promote the uncritical adoption by blacks of the
norms of civility, education, and culture nurtured in main-
stream white American culture. Although overly sharp dis-
tinctions between forms of nationalism and integrationism
are problematic (the two ideologies often coexist in a fig-
ure's thought or at different periods in an institution's or
organization's life), comparing them can be helpful in cap-
turing the two primary ideological thrusts in African-
American communities.
The most prominent recent phase of black nationalist
activity, prior to its contemporary resurgence, lasted from
1965 until 1973, from the emergence of Stokely Carmichael
as leader of the Black Power movement, until the demise
of the Black Panthers.2 This period saw major black organ-
izations denying whites participation in radical civil rights
organizations like the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
81


--- PAGE 113 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
Committee, the advocacy by black nationalist leaders of
armed self-defense against racist state repression in the form
of the police and the National Guard, the end of the pow-
erful leadership of Malcolm X with his assassination in
1965, the bold articulation of black theology from James
Cone in 1969, and the revolutionary insurgence planned
and partially implemented by the Black Panthers.3
The cultural rebirth of Malcolm X, then, is the remark-
able result of complex forces converging to lift him from his
violent death in 1965. His heroic status hinges partially on
the broad, if belated, appeal of his variety of black nation-
alism to Americans who, when he lived, either ignored or
despised him. But Malcolm's appeal is strongest among
black youth between the ages of fifteen and twenty-four,
who find in him a figure of epic racial achievement.4
Rap culture, especially, has had a decisive influence in
promoting Malcolm as a cultural hero. Because of the issues
it addresses, and the often militant viewpoints it espouses,
rap has often served as the popular cultural elaboration of
certain features of Malcolm's legacy. The obstacles that rap
has overcome in establishing itself as a mainstay of Ameri-
can popular culture—connected primarily to its style of ex-
pression and its themes—provide a natural link between
Malcolm's radical social vocation and aspects of black youth
culture. The similarity between aspects of hip-hop culture
and Malcolm's public career (for example, charges of vio-
lence, the problems associated with expressing black rage
82


--- PAGE 114 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
and experiences in the ghetto, the celebration of black pride
and historical memory) prods rappers to take the lead in
asserting Malcolm's heroism for contemporary black Amer-
ica.
Rap music originated in the Bronx over a decade ago
as urban teens experimented with various forms of cultural
expression, from graffiti art to break dancing, creating art
in the midst of the cultural and political invisibility to which
they had been relegated. Rap was initially popular among
black teens because of its staccato beats, its driving, lancing
rhythms, and its hip lyrics, reflecting its origins in their
world, a world that is increasingly an odyssey—through the
terror of ghetto gangs, drugs, violence, and racism—in
search of an authentic personal identity and legitimate so-
cial standing. The seemingly endless obstacles that frustrate
this search, together with the humor, nonsense, and latent
absurdity of some forms of urban life, provide the content
of many rap songs.
Hip-hop began as an underground phenomenon, with
artists such as Busy Bee, DJ Kool Hurk, Funky 4 Plus 1,
Kurtis Blow, Kool Moe Dee, Afrika Bambaata, Cold Rush
Brothers, and Grandmaster Melle Mel producing cassette
tapes of their verbal play and distributing them from the
trunks of cars, on street corners, and at neighborhood par-
ties. In rap's initial phase, hip-hop artists usually applied
their rhythmic skills by inserting words over music bor-
rowed from popular 1970s R&B songs. For instance, hip-
83


--- PAGE 115 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
hop's breakthrough song, "Rapper's Delight," featured
words added to the hit "Good Times," originally recorded
by the R&B group Chic.
As rap evolved, it has largely proved to be a flexible
musical form that experiments widely in order to reflect the
varied visions of its creators. And like most black music be-
fore it, rap has escaped classification and ghettoization as a
transient "black" fad and garnered mainstream attention.
The fate of rap as a "legitimate" contender for mainstream
acceptance was tied initially to the fortunes of the rap group
Run-D.M.C. It produced the first rap album to be certified
gold (500,000 copies sold), the first rap song to be featured
on MTV, and the first rap album—"Raising Hell"—to go
triple platinum (3 million copies sold). Run-D.M.C.'s cross-
over appeal was secured with its rap version of the white
rock group Aerosmith's 1970s song "Walk This Way."
Since Run-D.M.C.'s epochal success, rap has exploded
all previous predictions of its cultural and commercial ap-
peal, nearly becoming a billion-dollar industry. And the re-
cent rise to popularity of the controversial gangsta' rap—in
which rappers employ guns, violence, and drugs as meta-
phors for cultural creativity, personal agency, and social
criticism—has only increased the visibility and demoniza-
tion of black youth culture. From socially conscious rap to
hardcore hip-hop, from pop rappers to black nationalist
groups, rap has easily become, with country music, the most
popular form of musical expression during the 1990s.
84


--- PAGE 116 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
One of the most obvious and starkly compelling fea-
tures of rap culture is its form, drawing from an oral tradi-
tion with deep roots in African-American culture.5 The
tradition is one that Malcolm brilliantly participated in, rel-
ishing his capacity to verbally outfox his opponents with a
well-placed word or a cleverly engineered rebuke. His broad
familiarity with the devices of African-American oral cul-
ture—the saucy put-down, the feigned agreement turned
to oppositional advantage, the hyperbolic expression gen-
erously employed to make a point, the fetish for powerful
metaphor—marks his public rhetoric.
The hip-hop generation has appropriated Malcolm
with unequaled passion, pushed along by the same affection
for the word that drove him to read voraciously and speak
with eloquence. Malcolm is the rap revolution's rhetorician
of choice, his words forming the ideological framework for
authentic black consciousness.6 His verbal ferocity has been
combined with the rhythms of James Brown and George
Clinton, the three figures forming a trio of griots dispensing
cultural wisdom harnessed to polyrhythmic beats.
Malcolm's public career, too, is the powerful if per-
plexing story of a series of personal and intellectual changes,
a constellation of complicated and sometimes conflicting
identities, that mark his evolution of thought, foreshad-
owing the perennial transformations of style and theme
that characterize contemporary hip-hop. As rapper Michael
Franti, says:
85


--- PAGE 117 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
The thing I gained from him is not his symbol as a mil-
itant, but his ongoing examination of his life and how
he was able to think critically about himself and grow
and change as he encountered new information. That's
where I feel that we gain strength, through constantly
conquering our own shortcomings, and questioning
our beliefs.7
Furthermore, as in Malcolm's public rallies—which fo-
cused black rage on suitable targets, especially black bour-
geois liberal leaders and white racists—the rap concert
encourages the explicit articulation of black anger in public.
And like the misconceptions that often prevailed about Mal-
colm's provocative statements about self-defense, percep-
tions about the automatic or inevitable link between rap
and violence are often grounded in ignorance rather than
critical investigation of hip-hop's words or deeds.
Because Malcolm, too, addressed with unexcelled clar-
ity and moral suasion the predicament of the ghetto poor,
he is a natural icon for rap culture. As rappers Ultramagnetic
M.C.'s state:
Everybody still listens to Malcolm X. When he talks you
can't walk away. The thing about X is that he attracted
and still attracts the people who have given up and lives
[sic] recklessly—the crowd that just don't care what's
86


--- PAGE 118 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
going on. Making a difference in these people's lives is
truly the essence of Malcolm X.8
Rappers often point as well to Malcolm X's phrase "no sell-
out, no sellout, no sellout" as the touchstone of a black
cultural consciousness intent on preserving the authenticity
of black cultural expressions, and as the basis for a true black
nationalism.9 But what precisely about Malcolm's black na-
tionalist beliefs is the basis of his revived American heroism,
especially for black youth?
Malcolm's defiant expression of black rage has won
him a new hearing among a generation of black youth
whose embattled social status due to a brutally resurgent
racism makes them sympathetic to his fiery, often angry
rhetoric. Malcolm's take-no-prisoners approach to racial
crisis appeals to young blacks disaffected from white society
and alienated from older black generations whose con-
tained style of revolt owes more to Martin Luther King,
Jr./s nonviolent philosophy than to Malcolm's advocacy of
self-defense.
Moreover, Malcolm's expression of black rage—which,
by his own confession, tapped a vulnerability even in
King—has been adopted by participants in the culture of
hip-hop, who often reflect Malcolm's militant posture.
These artists, as do many of their black peers, find in Mal-
colm's uncompromising rhetoric the confirmation of their
87


--- PAGE 119 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
instincts about the "permanence of American racism."10
Also, Malcolm's ability to say out loud what many blacks
could say only privately endeared him to blacks when he
was alive, and explains his appeal to youth seeking an ex-
plicit articulation of anger at American racism and injustice.
Another feature of Malcolm's nationalism has ce-
mented his heroic status among young blacks: his withering
indictments of the limitations of black bourgeois liberalism,
expressed most clearly in the civil rights protest against
white racial dominance. Malcolm showed little tolerance for
the strategies, tactics, and philosophy of nonviolence that
were central to the civil rights movement led by Martin Lu-
ther King, Jr.11 Further, King's limited successes in reaching
those most severely punished by poverty only reinforced
the value of Malcolm's criticism of civil rights ideology.
Malcolm's pointed denunciations of black liberal pro-
test against white racism hinged on the belief that black
people should maintain independence from the very people
who had helped oppress them—white people. Black bour-
geois liberal protest encouraged white cooperation in the
struggle to secure the fragile gains for which civil rights
groups aimed in their quest for social justice. As one rap
group illumines Malcolm's appeal: "The reason why Mal-
colm X has an influence on today's youth is because his
influence as a leader was certainly equal, if not better than
Dr. Martin Luther King. Everybody still listens to Malcolm
X."12 Another rap group believes that the "legacy of Mal-
88


--- PAGE 120 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
colm X is to provide a clear counterpoint to the non-violent/
passive resistance theme presented by Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr."13 Malcolm's heroic appeal as a critic of black bour-
geois protest of white racism is summarized by C. Eric Lin-
coln, who contends that the source of Malcolm's undying
magnetism
lies in the simple fact that we have not yet overcome.
. . . For many of the kids in the ghetto we are right back
where we were. The few advances that have been
made have not reached them. So if we didn't make it
with King, what have we to lose? We might as well
make it with Malcolm.14
Malcolm's black nationalist ideology expressed an al-
ternative black spirituality and religious worldview that
provided bold relief to the ethic of love advocated in black
Christian conceptions of social protest. Although this com-
ponent of his thinking is linked to Malcolm's denunciation
of black liberal protest philosophies and strategies, his al-
ternative black spirituality was rooted in the religious
worldview of the Nation of Islam and promoted a black pub-
lic theodicy that demonized whites as unquestionably evil.15
And although Malcolm's understanding of white racism
was rooted in a theological vision that lent religious signif-
icance to the unequal relationship between whites and
blacks, his colorful articulation of his beliefs in his public
addresses forged the expression of a black public theodicy
89


--- PAGE 121 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
with which even secular or non-Muslim blacks could iden-
tify.
Central to Malcolm's alternative black spirituality was
his rejection of the belief that black people should redeem
white people through black bloodshed, sacrifice, and suf-
fering. "We don't believe that Afro-Americans should be
victims any longer," he said. "We believe that bloodshed is
a two-way street."16 He also contended that not "a single
white person in America would sit idly by and let someone
do to him what we Black men have been letting others do
to us."17
Malcolm's theological premises—the underpinning of
his black public theodicy—forced him to the conclusion that
white violence must be met with intelligent opposition and
committed resistance, even if potentially violent means
must be adopted in self-defense against white racism. Al-
though Malcolm would near the end of his life alter his
views and concede the humanity of whites and their poten-
tial for assistance, he maintained a strong philosophical
commitment to proclaiming the evil of white racism and to
detailing its lethal consequences in poor black communities.
A fundamental appeal of Malcolm's black nationalism,
and indeed a large part of the cultural crisis that has precip-
itated Malcolm's mythic return, is rooted in a characteristic
quest in black America: the search for a secure and empow-
ering racial identity. That quest is perennially frustrated by
the demands of American culture to cleanse ethnic and
90


--- PAGE 122 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
racial particularity at the altar of a superior American iden-
tity, substituting the terms of one strain of nationalism for
the priorities of another.
By this common ritual of national identity, for instance,
the Irish, Poles, Italians, and Jews have been absorbed into
a universal image of common citizenship. But the transfor-
mation of black cultural identity is often poorly served by
this process, impeded as much by the external pressures of
racism and class prejudice as by internal racial resistance to
an "inclusion" that would rob blacks of whatever power
and privilege they already enjoy in their own domains.
As further testimony to the contemporary black quest
for a secure racial identity, gusts of racial pride sweep across
black America as scholars retrieve the lost treasures of
an unjustly degraded African past. This quest continues a
project of racial reclamation begun in earnest in the nine-
teenth century, but recast to fit the needs of end-of-the-
century Utopian nationalists, including followers of Louis
Farrakhan and Leonard Jeffries, and proponents of certain
versions of Afrocentrism.18
Louis Farrakhan has caused a firestorm of controversial
reaction to his anti-Semitism and to his support of the con-
tent of racist, sexist, and homophobic remarks made by for-
mer aide Khalid Abdul Muhammad at an infamous speech
at Kean College in 1993. Leonard Jeffries has gained wide
attention because of his allegedly anti-Semitic remarks
about Jews' financing of the slave trade and his allegedly
91


--- PAGE 123 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
bigoted beliefs that Italians and Jews had collaborated in
Hollywood to stereotype and denigrate blacks.19 Both Far-
rakhan and Jeffries are beloved and celebrated among many
blacks, however, because they speak their truth to the white
powers-that-be without fear of punishment or retaliation.
And the Afrocentric movement has quickened the debate
about multicultural education and cast a searching light on
the intellectual blindness and racist claims of Eurocentric
scholars, even as it avoids acknowledging the romantic fea-
tures of its own household.20
Malcolm's unabashed love for black history, his relent-
less pedagogy of racial redemption through cultural con-
sciousness and racial self-awareness, mesh effortlessly with
black Americans' (especially black youths') recovery of their
African roots. As rapper KRS-One summarized a crucial fea-
ture of Malcolm's legacy, black children will "come to know
that they come from a long race and line of kings, queens
and warriors," a knowledge that will make them "have a
better feeling of themselves."21
Perhaps above all other facets of Malcolm's heroic stat-
ure is his unfettered championing of the politics of black
masculinity (a theme I will pursue more fully in the next
chapter). Few other aspects of Malcolm's rejuvenated ap-
peal have been as prominently invoked as Malcolm's focus
on the plight and place of black men in American society.
In light of the contemporary cultural status of black men,
92


--- PAGE 124 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
particularly young black males, it is easy to comprehend his
heroic status as a defender of black men.
Although established black males like Bill Cosby, Mi-
chael Jordan, and Bryant Gumbel enjoy enormous success
and broad acceptance because of their superior talent and
clean-cut images, young black male hard-core rappers such
as Dr. Dre, Tupac Shakur, and Snoop Doggy Dogg continue
to face sharp criticism because of their "vulgar" language,
their toughened images, and their run-ins with the law.
Moreover, young black male rappers are obsessed with the
terms and tensions of black manhood, often employing
women and gays as rhetorical foils in exploring what they
think is authentic masculinity.
Too often, though, a crude reductionism on the part of
its critics hampers a truly insightful engagement with
gangsta' rap. Like any art form, gangsta' rap allows the cre-
ation of a musical persona, an artistic convention honored
in opera and even the Tin Pan Alley gangsterism of Frank
Sinatra. This convention has been observed in many ante-
cedent black oral traditions, from the long, narrative poems
known as toasts to the explicitly vulgar lyrics of Jelly Roll
Morton (whose music, by the way, is stored in the Library
of Congress) and the ribald and rambunctious reflections of
many blues artists.
The wide distribution of recorded music has allowed
technological eavesdropping on what formerly were tightly
93


--- PAGE 125 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
contained communities of vulgar discourse circulated
within secular black gatherings. (Note, too, Chaucer's Can-
terbury Tales are strewn with the day's vulgarities; might
this mean Snoop Doggy Dogg's "What's My Name" will be
read with great reverence, with an eye to imitation, in
American classrooms in a couple of centuries?!) These oral
traditions, rife with signifying practices, symbolic distor-
tions, and lewd language, must be kept in mind in compre-
hending and justly criticizing the troubled quest for an
enabling black masculinity expressed in much of gangsta'
rap.
In this light, the recent attacks on gangsta' rap as fatally
misogynistic and deeply sexist by prominent black women
like political activist C. Delores Tucker and entertainer
Dionne Warwick must be qualified considerably.22 Gangsta'
rap is neither the primary source nor the most nefarious
expression of sexism or misogyny, in either society at large
or black communities in particular. That honor belongs
to cherished branches of our national culture, including
the nuclear family, religious communities, and the educa-
tional institutions of our society. Black bourgeois civic life,
religious communities, and educational institutions have
certainly not been immune. These cultural centers that re-
flect and spread sexist and misogynist mythology—espe-
cially the black church, black civil rights organizations, and
the black family—much more effectively influence black
cultural understandings of gender than does gangsta' rap.
94


--- PAGE 126 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
Also, most attacks on gangsta' rap not only continue
the widespread demonization of black male youth culture—
its alleged out-of-control sexuality, pathological criminality,
and sadistic preoccupation with violence—but conceal an
attack on black women. Accompanying the wails and whis-
pers of complaint aimed at black males throughout the
United States are the detrimental accusations that black
males are shaped as they are by black women in single-
parent, female-headed households; by welfare queens; or,
in the vicious logic that Tucker and Warwick are right to
point to, by black mothers who are the bitches and ho's
named in many rap lyrics. But Tucker and Warwick often
miss the larger point about how their conservative allies in
their struggle against gangsta' rap have similarly, but more
subtly, demonized black women. (And besides, like most
critics, Tucker and Warwick don't mention the homophobia
of gangsta' rap; is it because like many mainstream critics,
they are not disturbed by sentiments they hold in common
with gangsta' rappers?)
The most just manner of criticizing gangsta' rap is by
juxtaposing salient features of black culture—such as moral
criticism, sage advice, and common-sense admonitions
against out-of-bounds behavior—with a ready appreciation
of black oral practices like signifying and distorting. By do-
ing this, we can powerfully criticize gangsta' rap for its faults
while skillfully avoiding the move of collapsing and corre-
sponding rhetoric and art to reality. Also, we can criticize
95


--- PAGE 127 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
the conceptions of black masculinity that are prevalent in
hip-hop culture without making rappers the scapegoats for
all that is seriously wrong with gender in our culture. In the
process, we might more clearly see and name the real cul-
prits.
The difficult personal and social conditions of most
young black males make Malcolm's rhetoric about the ob-
stacles to true black manhood and the virtues of a strong
black masculinity doubly attractive. Indeed, blacks from the
very beginning of Malcolm's career have accented his focus
on a virile black manhood denied them because of white
racism as a primary contribution of his vocation.23 As Ossie
Davis stated in his beautiful eulogy at Malcolm's funeral,
"Malcolm was our manhood! This was his meaning to his
people."24 From gang members to preachers, from college
students to black intellectuals, Malcolm's focus on black
men has made him a critical spokesman for unjustly ag-
grieved black males plagued by sexual jealousy and social
fear.
But if the reemergence of black nationalism and
Malcolm's explosive popularity go hand in hand—are
duplicate images of response to the continuing plague of
an equally rejuvenated racism—then not only their
strengths, but also their limitations are mutually reveal-
ing. In this regard, two aspects of Malcolm's legacy are
striking: the troubling consequences of his focus on the
black male predicament, and the ironic uses of black na-
96


--- PAGE 128 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
tionalist discourse by a black middle class often closed
from nationalism's most desperate constituency—the black
ghetto poor.
Malcolm's brand of black nationalism was not only a
fierce attack on white Americans, but a sharp rebuke as well
to black women. Malcolm went to extremes in demonizing
women, saying that the "closest thing to a woman is a
devil." Although he later amended his beliefs, confessing
his regret at "spit[ting] acid at the sisters" and contending
that they should be treated equally, many contemporary
black nationalist advocates have failed to take his changed
position on gender seriously. Malcolm, Patricia Hill Collins
notes, died "before Black feminist politics were articulated
in the 1970s and 1980s," but his
Black nationalism projects an implicit and highly prob-
lematic gender analysis. Given today's understanding
of the gender-specific structures of Black oppression
... his ideas about gender may be interpreted in ways
detrimental not only to both African-American women
and men but to policies of Black community develop-
ment. . . . Malcolm X's treatment of gender reflected
the widespread belief of his time that, like race, men's
and women's roles were "natural" and were rooted in
biological difference.25
Like the early Malcolm and other 1960s nationalists,
contemporary black nationalists have defined the quest for
97


--- PAGE 129 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
emancipation in largely masculine terms. Such a strategy
not only borrows ideological capital from the white patri-
archy that has historically demeaned black America, but
blunts awareness of how the practice of patriarchy by black
men has created another class of victims within black com-
munities.
Further, the strategy of viewing racial oppression ex-
clusively through a male lens distorts the suffering of black
women at the hands of white society and blurs the focus on
the especially difficult choices that befall black women
caught in a sometimes bewildering nexus of kinship groups
assembled around race, class, and gender. Reducing black
suffering to its lowest common male denominator not only
presumes a hierarchy of pain that removes priority from
black female struggle, but also trivializes the analysis and
actions of black women in the quest for black liberation.
Given Malcolm's mature pronouncements, his heirs have
reneged on the virtues of his enlightened gender beliefs. It
is these heirs, particularly young black filmmakers, whose
artistic meditations on black masculinity I will explore in
the next chapter.
The cultural renaissance of Malcolm X also embodies
the paradoxical nature of black nationalist politics over the
past two decades: those most aided by its successes have
rarely stuck around to witness the misery of those most hurt
by its failures. The truth is that black nationalist rhetoric has
helped an expanding black middle class gain increased ma-
98


--- PAGE 130 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
terial comfort, while black nationalism's most desperate
constituency, the working class and working poor, contin-
ues to toil in the aftermath of nationalism's unrealized po-
litical promise.
Ironically, talk of black cultural solidarity and racial
loyalty has propelled the careers of intellectuals, cultural
artists, and politicians as they seek access to institutions of
power and ranks of privilege, even within black commu-
nities, as esteemed vox populi. The trouble is they are often
cut off from the very people on whose behalf they ostensibly
speak, the perks and rewards of success insulating them
from the misery of their constituencies.
The greatest irony of contemporary black nationalism
may be its use by members of the black middle class—for
instance, black intellectuals and artists thoroughly insulated
in niches of protection within the academy—to consolidate
their class interests at the expense of working-class and poor
blacks. By refusing to take class seriously—or only half-
heartedly as they decry, without irony, the moves of a self-
serving black bourgeoisie—many nationalists discard a
crucial analytical tool in exploring the causes of black racial
and economic suffering. If Malcolm's brand of black nation-
alism is to have an even more substantive impact on con-
temporary racial politics, his heirs must relentlessly criticize
his limitations while celebrating his heroic embrace of is-
sues, like class and opposing white nationalism, long denied
currency in mainstream social thought.
99


--- PAGE 131 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
This is not to suggest that nationalism's vaunted alter-
native, bourgeois liberal Integrationism, has enjoyed wide
success, either, in bringing the black masses within striking
distance of prosperity, or at least to parity with white middle
and working classes. Commentators usually gloss over this
fact when comparing the legacies of Malcolm X and Martin
Luther King, Jr. For the most part, Malcolm and Martin
have come to symbolize the parting of paths in black Amer-
ica over the best answer to racial domination. Although
Malcolm's strident rhetoric is keyed in by nationalists at the
appropriate moments of black disgust with the pace and
point of integration, King's conciliatory gestures are evoked
by integrationists as the standard of striving for the prom-
ised land of racial harmony and economic equity.
In truth, however, King's admirers have also forsaken
the bitter lessons of his mature career in deference to the
soaring optimism of his dream years.26 King discerned as
early as 1965 that the fundamental problems of black Amer-
ica were economic in nature and that a shift in strategies
was necessary for the civil rights movement to become a
movement for economic equality. After witnessing wasted
human capital in the slums of Watts and Chicago, and after
touring the rural wreckage of life in the Mississippi Delta,
King became convinced that the only solution to black suf-
fering was to understand it in relation to a capitalist econ-
omy that hurt all poor people. He determined that nothing
short of a wholesale criticism and overhaul of existing ec-
100


--- PAGE 132 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
onomic arrangements could effectively remedy the predic-
ament of the black poor and working class.
This is a far cry from contemporary black capitalist and
business strategies that attempt to address the economic
plight of black Americans by creating more black million-
aires. Highly paid entertainers and athletes participate in the
lucrative culture of consumption by selling their talents to
the highest bidder in the marketplace—a legacy, we are of-
ten reminded, of King's and the civil rights movement's vi-
sion of a just society where social goods are distributed
according to merit, not color. King's willingness, toward the
end of his life, to question the legitimacy of the present
economic order and to challenge the logic of capitalism has
been obscured by appeals to his early beliefs about the vir-
tues of integration.
The relative failure of both black nationalist and inte-
grationist strategies to affect large numbers of black Amer-
icans beyond the middle and upper classes raises questions
about how we can expand Malcolm's and Martin's legacies
to address the present crises in black America. What is the
answer? I believe the best route for remedy can be found
in a new progressive black politics anchored in radical de-
mocracy.27
Black progressive intellectuals and activists must view
class, gender, and sex as crucial components of a complex
and insightful explanation of the problems of black Amer-
ica.28 Such an approach provides a larger range of social and
101


--- PAGE 133 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
cultural variables from which to choose in depicting the vast
array of forces that constrain black economic, political, and
social progress. It also acknowledges the radical diversity of
experiences within black communities, offering a more re-
alistic possibility of addressing the particular needs of a wide
range of blacks: the ghetto poor, gays and lesbians, single
black females, working mothers, underemployed black
men, and elderly blacks, for instance.
Black progressives must also deepen Malcolm's and
Martin's criticisms of capitalism and their leanings toward
radical democracy. The prevailing economic policies have
contributed to the persistent poverty of the poorest Amer-
icans (including great numbers of blacks) and the relative
inability of most Americans to reap the real rewards of po-
litical democracy and economic empowerment. A radical
democratic perspective raises questions about the account-
ability of the disproportionately wealthy, providing a critical
platform for criticizing black capitalist and business strate-
gies that merely replicate unjust economic practices.
A radical democratic perspective—which criticizes cap-
ital accumulation and the maximization of profit for the few
without regard to its effects on the many, advocates an eq-
uitable redistribution of wealth through progressive taxa-
tion and the increased financial responsibility of the truly
wealthy, and promotes the restructuring of social oppor-
tunities for the neediest through public policy and direct
political intervention—also encourages the adoption of po-
102


--- PAGE 134 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
litical and social policies that benefit all Americans, while
addressing the specific needs of blacks, such as universal
health care.
At present, black Americans are overwhelmingly rep-
resented among the 37 million uninsured in our nation. A
radical democratic perspective asks why a nation that pays
over $820 billion, or 13 percent of the GNP, for the well-
insured cannot redistribute its wealth through a progressive
tax on the wealthiest 2 percent (and a fair tax on the top
50 percent) to help provide the $50 or $60 billion more
needed to provide universal health coverage.29 By refusing
to take class seriously, many black nationalists undermine
their ability to completely explain and understand racial
and economic suffering.
The quest for black racial and economic justice has been
heavily influenced by black religious conceptions of justice,
charity, equality, and freedom. During the civil rights move-
ment, King articulated black Christian conceptions of justice
through the language of human rights and the political lan-
guage of civil religion. Likewise, Malcolm X expressed his
conceptions of divine retribution for racial injustice, and the
religious basis for healthy self-esteem through black Islamic,
and later orthodox Islamic, belief that accorded with black
secular ideas about racial self-determination and cultural
pride. A radical democratic perspective encourages the
broad expression of conceptions of justice, equality, and po-
litical freedom that are tempered by regard for the widest
103


--- PAGE 135 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
possible audience of intellectual interlocutors and political
participants, including those trained in the rich traditions of
black social protest.
Finally, black progressives must make sensible but
forceful criticisms of narrow visions of black racial identity,
especially after the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill debacle.
That wrenching drama provided a glimpse of the underde-
veloped state of gender analysis in most black communities
and provoked a serious reconsideration of the politics of
racial unity and loyalty.30 In reflecting on Thomas's nomi-
nation to the Supreme Court, black Americans were torn
between fidelity to principles of fairness and justice. Many
blacks agonized over his qualifications for office and trou-
bled over whether blacks should support one of their own,
despite his opposition to many of the legal principles cher-
ished by black communities.
The introduction of Hill's perspective into this already
complex calculus ripped open ancient antagonisms between
black women and men. The Hill-Thomas affair also affirmed
the need for black progressives to pay special attention to
the roots of sexism and misogyny in our communities, in-
stead of hitting easy targets like gangsta' rappers. Black pro-
gressives must address the pitiful state of gender relations
reflected in the lyrics of hip-hop culture, while also address-
ing the pernicious consequences of the economic misery
and social collapse in which they live.
104


--- PAGE 136 ---
Malcolm X and the Resurgence of Black Nationalism
In a public and painful manner, the hearings forced
many black Americans to a new awareness of the need to
place principles of justice above automatic appeals to race
loyalty premised exclusively on skin color. Many Ameri-
cans, including many blacks, came to a clearer understand-
ing of the idea of the "social construction of racial identity"
(which argues that race extends beyond biology to include
psychological, cultural, and ideological factors), recognizing
that black folk are by no means a homogeneous group. The
differences that factors such as geography, sexual prefer-
ence, gender, and class make in the lives of black Americans
are too complex to be captured in a monolithic model of
racial unity.31 Progressive blacks share more ideological and
political ground with white progressives such as Barbara
Ehrenreich and Stanley Aronowitz, for instance, than they
do with conservatives of the ilk of Clarence Thomas, or even
Anita Hill.
For black leaders, the political and social significance of
this fact should further the building of bridges across the
chasm of color in the common embrace of ideals that tran-
scend racial rooting. Progressive blacks must join with pro-
gressive Latinas and Latinos, gays and lesbians, feminists,
environmental activists, and all others who profess and
practice personal and social equality and radical democracy.
The relative absence of sustained progressive black political
opposition, or even a radical political organization that ex-
105


--- PAGE 137 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
presses the views of the working class and working poor,
signals a loss of the political courage and nerve in the United
States that characterized Malcolm and Martin at their best.32
In the end, Malcolm and Martin are in varying degrees
captives of their true believers, trapped by literal interpret-
ers who refuse to let them, in Malcolm's words, "turn the
corner." The bulk of each man's achievements lay in his
willingness to constantly consider and employ new tactics
in chiseling the best route to social reconstruction and racial
redemption. Their legacy to us is the imagination and en-
ergy to pursue the goals of liberation on as wide a scale as
the complex nature of our contemporary crises demand and
our talents allow.
One segment of black cultural artists in particular—
young black filmmakers—have fashioned intriguing and of-
ten troubling responses to the issues of thwarted liberation
that Malcolm X so boldly raised, especially as they engage
the politics of black masculinity and understandings of the
ghetto. It is the accomplishments of these artists that I will
now explore in seeking to gauge Malcolm X's impact on
their lives, most powerfully and painfully in their obsessions
with what it means to be a black male in racist white Amer-
ica.
106


--- PAGE 138 ---
4
IN MALCOLM'S
SHADOW:
MASCULINITY AND THE
GHETTO IN BLACK FILM
I'm the man you think you are. And if it doesn't take
legislation to make you a man and get your rights rec-
ognized, don't even talk that legislative talk to me. No,
if we're both human beings we'll both do the same
thing. And if you want to know what I'll do, figure out
what you'll do. I'll do the same thing—only more of
it.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches
and Statements
The emergence of contemporary black cinema and hip-
hop culture marks the wide influence of black popular
culture on American life.1 The work of contemporary
black filmmakers embodies the important effort to por-
tray the complexities and particularities of black life.
Through the images, symbols, and themes it explores, the
new black cinema promises artistic visions of black life
that shatter the troubled zone of narrow white interpre-
tations of black culture.
107


--- PAGE 139 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
Several recent black films investigate the politics of
black masculinity and its relationship to the ghetto culture
in which ideals of manhood are nurtured. Debates about
masculinity abound in black communities, driven by a need
for blacks to understand and address the often tragic cir-
cumstances—from high percentages of infant mortality and
AIDS infection to staggering rates of imprisonment—that
plague black boys and men.2 Because of the strong link in
Malcolm's thought between loyalty to the race and the re-
sponsible representation of a disciplined, dignified man-
hood, he presaged—and continues to influence—the work
of contemporary black filmmakers.
Indeed, without the sustained hero worship of Mal-
colm X, contemporary black cinema, often dubbed New
Jack cinema or ghettocentric film, is almost inconceivable.
By examining the work of contemporary black filmmak-
ers—the themes they treat, the styles they adopt, the moods
they evoke—I seek to gauge Malcolm's ongoing impact on
a generation that has driven and seized on his heroic return.
In this chapter, I will examine several films as examples of
the failure or success in treating the relation between the
ghetto and black manhood in powerful and productive
ways.3 In the process, I hope to characterize the manner in
which these films engage or distort issues of black female
identity.
In his 1991 debut film, Straight Out of Brooklyn, director
Matty Rich desolately rejects the logic of liberal democracy:
108


--- PAGE 140 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
that individuals can act to realize themselves and enhance
their freedom through the organs of the community or the
state. For the inhabitants of Brooklyn's Red Hook Housing
Project, the possibilities of self-realization and freedom are
severely reduced by the menacing ubiquity of the ghetto.
The suppressed premise of Rich's film is a rebuke to all
pretensions that the ghetto is not a totalizing force, that it
is possible to maintain the boundaries between geography
and psychic health implied by the expression: live in the
ghetto, but don't let the ghetto live in you. It is precisely in
showing that the ghetto survives parasitically—that its lim-
its are as small or as large as the bodies it inhabits and de-
stroys—that Straight Out of Brooklyn achieves a distinct niche
in black film while contributing to black popular culture's
avid exploration of black urban (male) identities.
After disappearing from the intellectual gaze of the
American academy and being obscured from mainstream
cultural view by the successes of nouveau riche yuppies and
the newly prominent black middle class, the ghetto has
made a comeback at the scene of its defeat. The reinvention
of American popular culture by young African-American
cultural artists is fueled by paradox: now that they have
escaped the fiercely maintained artistic ghetto that once suf-
focated the greatest achievements of their predecessors,
black artists have reinvented the urban ghetto through a
nationalist aesthetic strategy that joins racial naturalism and
romantic imagination. That the most recent phase of black
109


--- PAGE 141 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
nationalism is cultural rather than political indicates how
successfully mainstream politics has absorbed radical dis-
sent, and betokens the hunger of black youth culture for
the intellectual sources of its hypnotic remix of pride and
anger.
Mostly anger, and little pride, stirs in the fragmented
lives of teenager Dennis Brown (Lawrence Gilliard, Jr.); his
younger sister, Carolyn (Barbara Sanon); and their parents,
Frankie (Ann D. Sanders) and Ray (George T. Odom). Each
of the family members is the prisoner of a personal and
ecological misery so great that distinguishing its impact on
their lives appears impossible.
The exception to their equally shaded misery is the ex-
traordinarily acute condition of father and son. The black
male predicament is first glimpsed in the cinematic chiaro-
scuro of Ray's descent into a Dantean hell of racial agony
so absurd and grotesque that its bleakness is a sadistic com-
fort, a last stop before absurdity turns to insanity. Ray's
gradual decline is suffered stoically by Frankie, a throwback
to an earlier era when the black-woman-as-suffering-
servant role was thrust on black women by black men,
themselves forced to pay obeisance to white society. These
same men, when they came home, expected to claim the
rewards and privileges of masculinity denied them in the
white world. Another model of female identity engaged by
black women consisted of an equally punishing (and
mythic) black matriarchy that both damned and praised
110


--- PAGE 142 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
them for an alleged strength of character absent in their
feckless male counterparts. Thus the logic of black com-
munities ran: as the black man's fate goes, so goes the fate
of the family.
Straight Out of Brooklyn's narrative line ties generously
into the fabric of this argument, its dramatic tension drawn
from the furious catastrophes that sweep down on its black
male characters, the defining center of the film's raw med-
itation on the angst of emasculation. Ray's frequent beat-
ings of Frankie are rituals of self-destruction, her brutally
bloodied countenance a sign of his will to redefine the shape
of his agony by redefining the shape of her face.
Ray's suffering-as-emasculation is further sealed by his
denial of desire for white women during a Lear-like verbal
jousting with an imaginary white man, a deus ex machina
produced by his search for an explanation of his suffering,
and a dramatic ploy by Rich that ascribes black suffering to
the omnipotent white bogeyman. And Dennis's soliloquies
about his quest for money to reverse his family's collapse
in the presence of his girlfriend, Shirley (Reana E. Drum-
mond), underscores a deeper need to redeem black mas-
culinity by displaying his virility, his desire to provide for
his family allied disastrously with his gratuitous desires to
"get paid."
A different tack is pursued, of course, in John Single-
ton's 1991 debut, Boyz N the Hood. Singleton's neorealist rep-
resentation of the black working-class ghetto neighborhood
111


--- PAGE 143 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
provides a fluid background to his literate script, which con-
denses and recasts the debates on black manhood that have
filled the black American independent press for the past
decade.4 Avoiding the heavy-handed approach of racial di-
dacticism, Singleton instead traces the outline of the mo-
rality play in recognizable black cultural form. All the while,
he keeps his film focused on The Message: black men must
raise black boys if they are to become healthy black men.
Thus Tre (Cuba Gooding, Jr.); his father, Furious (Laurence
Fishburne); Ricky (Morris Chestnut); and Doughboy (Ice
Cube), the four black males whose lives form the fabric of
^ingleton's narrative quilt, are the films's interpretive cen-
ter. Reva (Angela Bassett), Brenda Baker (Tyra Ferrell), and
Brandi (Nia Long), the mothers of Tre and of Ricky and
Doughboy, and Tre's girlfriend, respectively, occupy the
film's distant periphery.
As in most cultural responses to black male crisis, Sin-
gleton's film is an attempt to answer Marvin Gaye's plea to
save the babies. He focuses his lens especially on the male
baby that he and many others believe has been thrown out
with the bathwater to float down the river, like Doughboy
and one out of four black men, into the waiting hands of
the prison warden.
Singleton's moral premise, like so many assertions of
black male suffering, rests dangerously on the shoulders of
a tragic racial triage: black male salvation at the expense
112


--- PAGE 144 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
of black female suffering, black male autonomy at the cost
of black female subordination, black male dignity at the
cost of black female infirmity. In jarring fashion, Singleton's
film reveals the unintended but deadly alliance between
black cultural nationalists and the cultured despisers of
black women. His thinly veiled swipe at black women fuses
easily with the arguments of conservative cultural com-
mentators who bash poor and working-class black women
as promiscuous welfare queens. Furious's brilliant presence
as a redemptive and unswerving North Star and Brenda's
uncertain orbit as a dim satellite are the telling contrast in
Singleton's cinematic world.
Singleton's moral premise would seem outdated—the
warmed-up leftovers of black macho posturing painfully ev-
ident in strains of 1960s black nationalism—were it not for
its countless updates in black youth culture. Such senti-
ments are also expressed in rap lyrics, for instance, that de-
nounce white racism while glorifying black males' sexual
and material mastery of black women. Of course, the quest
for black manhood is everywhere apparent in black cul-
ture—note its evocation as well in the upper climes of re-
spectable bourgeois life as the implicit backdrop to Clarence
Thomas's claim of betrayal by Anita Hill, his charge com-
municated in the racial code of his undertone: another sister
pulling a brother down. But it is with the reemergence of
the ghetto in popular culture and its prominence in a re-
113


--- PAGE 145 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
surgent black nationalist cultural politics that lionizes Mal-
colm X that for better and worse the images of black
masculinity find an intellectual home.
This circumstance is especially true of black film and
rap music. The politics of cultural nationalism has re-
emerged precisely as the escalation of racist hostility has
been redirected toward poor black people. Given the crisis
of black bourgeois political leadership and a greater crisis of
black liberal social imagination about the roots of black suf-
fering, black nationalist politics becomes for many blacks
the logical means of remedy and resistance. This explains
in part the renewed popularity of Malcolm X, whose un-
compromising focus on nationalist themes of unity and au-
thentic blackness help secure his heroic niche in black youth
culture. Viewed in this way, black film and rap music are
the embodiment of a black populist aesthetic that prevents
authentic blackness from being fatally diluted.
Rap music has grown from its origins in New York's
inner city over a decade ago as a musical outlet for creative
cultural energies and as a way to contest the invisibility of
the ghetto in mainstream American society.5 Rap remy-
thologized New York's status as the spiritual center of black
America, boldly asserting appropriation and collage as its
primary artistic strategies. Rap developed as a relatively in-
dependent artistic expression of black male rebellion against
a black bourgeois worldview, tapping instead into the cul-
tural virtues and vices of the so-called underclass. Male rap
114


--- PAGE 146 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
artists romanticize the ghetto as the fertile root of cultural
identity and racial authenticity, asserting that knowledge of
ghetto styles and sensibilities provides a Rorschach test of
legitimate masculinity.6
The styles and sensibilities encouraged in the hip-hop
aesthetic have found expression in many recent black films.
Mario Van Peebles's 1991 directoral debut, New Jack City,
for instance, boils with the fusion of ghetto attitude and
style that expresses a substantive politics of culture among
young black males. As in Boyz N the Hood with Ice Cube
(Doughboy) and Juice with Tupac Shakur (Bishop), New
Jack City appeals directly to the ironic surplus of hip-hop
culture by drawing on a main character, rapper Ice-T, to
convey the film's thinly supplied and poorly argued moral
message: crime doesn't pay.
Thus Ice-T's "new jack cop" is an inside joke, a hip-
hop reconfiguration of the tales of terror Ice-T explodes on
wax as a lethal pimp, dope dealer, and bitch hater. The
adoption of the interchangeable persona of the criminal and
"the law" in hip-hop culture is taken to its extreme with
Ice-T's character. Although he appears as a cop in New Jack
City, Ice-T on the soundtrack as a rapper detailing his ex-
ploits as a "gangsta"' blurs the moral distinctions between
cops and robbers, criminalizing the redemptive intent of his
film character (even more so retroactively in light of the
subsequent controversy over his hit "Cop Killer," recorded
with his speed metal band).
115


--- PAGE 147 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
Van Peebles's cinematic choices in New Jack City reflect
a mode of exaggerated cultural representation that char-
acterizes many ghetto films of old. His ghetto is a sinister
and languid dungeon of human filth and greed drawn
equally from cartoon and camp. Its sheer artifice is meant
to convey the inhuman consequences of living in this en-
clave of civic horror, but its overdrawn dimensions reveal a
cinematic pedigree traced more easily to 1970s blaxploita-
tion flicks than to neorealist portrayals of the ghetto in re-
cent black films.
As a black gangster film, New Jack City reveals the Cag-
neyization of black ghetto life, the inexorable force of
woman bashing and partner killing sweeping the hidden
icon of the people to a visible position larger than life. Thus
criminal Nino Brown (Wesley Snipes) reigns because he
tests the limits of the American Dream, a Horatio Alger in
blackface who pulls himself up by forging consensus among
his peers that his life is a ghetto jeremiad, a strident protest
against the unjust material limits imposed on black males.
As Nino Brown intones with full awareness of the irony of
his criminal vocation: "You got to rob to get rich in the
Reagan era."
But it is the state of black male love that is the story's
unnarrated plot, its twisted pursuit ironically and tragically
trumped by boys seeking to become men by killing one an-
other. Thus when a crying Nino clasps his teary-eyed closest
friend and partner in crime, Gee-Money, on the top of the
116


--- PAGE 148 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
apartment building that provides the mise-en-scene for the
proverbial ode to an empire destroyed by the fatal winds of
undisciplined ambition, he avows his love even as he fills
Gee-Money's belly with steel as recompense for disloyalty.
It is the tough love of the gang in action, the logic of ven-
geance passing as justice in gang love's fulfillment of its un-
stated obligations.
The mostly black and Latino gang, of course, has also
recaptured the focus of American social theory and jour-
nalism in the past decade. Urban sociologists such as New
York's Terry Williams in Cocaine Kids and Los Angeles's Mike
Davis in City of Quartz have written insightfully about the
economic and social conditions that have led to the emer-
gence of contemporary black and Latino gang culture.7 And
model turned journalist Leon Bing has interviewed Los An-
geles gang members who speak eloquently about their own
lives in words as moving for their emotional directness as
their honesty about the need for affection and comfort that
drives them together.8 In Straight Out of Brooklyn and in Er-
nest Dickerson's Juice, the theme of black male love ex-
pressed in the ghetto gang looms large.
In Straight Out of Brooklyn, Rich presents a loosely as-
sociated group of three black male teens, Dennis, Kevin
(Mark Malone), and Larry (played by Rich), who are frus-
trated by poverty and the stifling of opportunity that lack
of money signifies. In Juice, the crushing consequences of
capital's absence are more skillfully explored through the
117


--- PAGE 149 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
interactions between the characters (its damning effects as
subtly evoked in the threads of anger, surrender, and regret
weaved into the moral texture of the film's dialogue as they
are dramatically revealed in the teens' action in the streets);
in Straight Out of Brooklyn, money's power is more crudely
symbolized in the material and sexual icons that dominate
the landscape of desire expressed by Dennis and his friends:
big cars, more money, and mo' ho's.
The lifelessness of the ghetto is represented in the very
textu(r)al construction through which Straight Out of Brook-
lyn comes to us. Although it's in color, the film seems eerily
black and white, its crude terms of representation estab-
lished by its harsh video quality and its horizontal dialogue.
Of course, the film's unavoidable amateur rawness is its
premise of poignancy: after all, this is art imitating life, the
vision of Matty Rich, a nineteen-year-old Brooklyn youth
with little financial aid committing his life to film. This is
the closest derivation in film of the guerrilla methods of hip-
hop music culture, the sheer projection of will—onto an
artistic canvas composed of the rudimentary elements of
one's life—in the guise of vision and message..
In Straight Out of Brooklyn, the trio of teens is not a rov-
ing, menacing crew engaging in the business of selling crack
rock and duplicating capitalism's excesses on their native
terrain. Rather, they are forced by desperation to momen-
tary relief of their conditions by robbing a dope dealer, an
118


--- PAGE 150 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
impulse that is routinized in the crack gang, where rituals
of gunplay and death feed on the lives of opponents out to
seize their turf in the harrowing geopolitics of the drug
economy.
The anomie produced by everyday acts of surrender to
despair, and the spiraling violence of his father, Ray, force
Dennis from his family to affectionate camaraderie with
Larry and Kevin, and with Shirley. All other hints of family
are absent, except Larry's barber uncle, who unwittingly
provides the ill-named getaway car for their even more ill-
fated heist. But the vacuum at home for Dennis is made
more obvious by Ray's attempt to preserve the disappearing
remnants of a "traditional" family: he angrily reminds Den-
nis after he misses dinner that his empty plate on the table
symbolizes his membership in the family. But Rich shatters
this icon into shards of ironic judgment on the nuclear fam-
ily, as Ray breaks the dishes and beats Frankie each time he
becomes drunk.
Dennis's only relief is Shirley and his crew. When Shir-
ley disappoints him by refusing to buy into his logic about
escape from the ghetto by robbery, he turns to his crew,
who, in the final analysis, leave Dennis to his own wits
when they agree that they have stolen too much cash ("kill-
ing money," Kevin says) from the local dope dealer, an act
whose consequences roll back on Dennis in bitter irony
when the heist leads to his father's death. The film's ines-
119


--- PAGE 151 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
capably dismal conclusion is that black men cannot depend
on one another, nor can they depend on their own dreams
to find a way past mutual destruction.
In Juice, the crew is more tightly organized than in
Straight Out of Brooklyn, though their activity, like that of the
teens from Red Hook, is not regularized primarily for eco-
nomic profit. Their salient function is as a surrogate family,
their substitute kinship formed around their protection of
one another from rival gangs, and the camaraderie and so-
cial support their association brings. But trouble penetrates
the tightly webbed group when the gangster ambitions of
Bishop threaten their equanimity. Of all the crew—leader
Raheem, a teenage father; GQ, a DJ with ambitions to refine
his craft; and Steel, a likable youth who is most notably "the
follower"—Bishop is the one who wants to take them to
the next level, to make them like the hard-core gangsters
he watches on television.
Viewing Cagney's famed ending in White Heat, and a
news bulletin announcing the death of an acquaintance as
he attempted armed robbery, Bishop rises to proclaim Cag-
ney's and their friend's oneness, lauding their commenda-
ble bravado by taking their fate into their own hands and
remaking the world on their own violent terms. Dickerson's
aim is transparent: to highlight the link between violence
and criminality fostered in the collective American imagi-
nation by television, a medium whose images compete with
the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence for
120


--- PAGE 152 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
supplying the unifying fictions of national citizenship and
identity. Television is also the daily and exclusive occupa-
tion of Bishop's listless father, a reminder that its influence
unfolds from its dulling effects in one generation to its cre-
ation of lethal desires in the next, twin strategies of destruc-
tion when applied in the black male ghetto.
Like the teens in Straight Out of Brooklyn, Juice's crew
must endure the fatal consequences of their failed attempt
at getting paid and living large, two oft-repeated mantras of
material abundance in the lexicon of hip-hop culture. After
Bishop's determination to seize immortality leads him to kill
the owner of the store his crew robs, the terms of his Faust-
ian bargain are more clearly revealed when he then kills
Raheem, destroying all claims of brotherhood with a mali-
cious act of machismo, succeeding to Raheem's throne
through murder.
Dickerson, who has colorfully photographed most of
Spike Lee's films, uses darker hues in Juice but nowhere
near the drained colored canvas on which Straight Out of
Brooklyn is drawn. Dickerson's moral strategy is to elaborate
to its fatal ends the contradictory logic of the gang as a fam-
ily unit, a faulty premise as far as he is concerned because
it overlooks the gang's lack of moral constraints and the
destructive consequences it breeds. Dickerson's aesthetic
and directorial strategy is to move the cameras with the
action from the observer's frame of reference, borrowing a
few pages from Lee's book without mimicking Lee's pa-
121


--- PAGE 153 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
nache for decentering the observer through unusual angles
and the fast pace of editing. Like Rich in Straight Out of Brook-
lyn, Dickerson wants the impact of his message to hit home,
but his methods are not as harsh as Rich's. Instead, he draws
us into his moral worldview with an invitation to view the
spectacle of black male loss of love by degrees and effects.
The ghetto working-class family in Juice is much more
visible and vital than the one in Straight Out of Brooklyn.
Mothers and fathers wake their children in the morning for
breakfast and make certain they take their books to school.
The notion of extended family and "fictive kin" is even
given a nice twist when GQ fetches a gun from one of his
mother's old friends, a small-time neighborhood supplier.9
And Dickerson subtly draws attention to the contrasts be-
tween the aesthetic and moral worldviews of the genera-
tions, and the thriving of an earlier era's values among the
younger generation, at the dinner at Raheem's family's
house after Raheem's funeral.
As snatches of gospel music float gently through the
house, GQ and Steel pay their respects to Raheem's family.
But when Bishop arrives, the rupture between generational
values forces to the surface the choice each of the remaining
three crew must make. GQ and Steel are offended at Bish-
op's effrontery, his mean-spirited hypocrisy leading him to
violate Raheem's memory with this latest act of machismo
and pride. For them, the choice is clear. The religious values
signified in the quiet gospel music seem no longer for-
122


--- PAGE 154 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
eign, providing a gentle counterpoint to the hip-hop aes-
thetic of violent metaphors used in the service of greater
self-expression.
Instead, the gospel music and the world of black re-
spectability that it symbolizes carry over into GQ's and
Steel's grieving acknowledgment of the bonds between
them and their departed friend, a sure sign that religious
consciousness survives in them no matter how distant the
teens appear to be from its redemptive effects. Bishop's des-
ecration of Raheem's memory and family signify the depth
of Bishop's moral failure, embodying the reckless abandon
to which his acts of violence have given cruel expression.
Unlike the black teens in Straight Out of Brooklyn's ghetto,
the black males can depend on one another, but only after
being encouraged to acknowledge their debts to the moral
vision of an older culture, and only after discovering the
limits of their freedom in destructive alliance with one an-
other.
In sharp contrast to Juice—which portrays the perni-
cious effects of generational decline and narrates the car-
nage of fratricide from within the arc of traditional black
morality—the Hughes brothers' brilliant, disturbing 1992
debut, Menace II Society, unblinkingly unveils the absurdity
and terror that cloak young black male ghetto life. Their
terse, lean script—complemented by the cast's surprising
economy of emotional expression, given the genre's ten-
dency to trumpet more than whisper—counterpoints the
123


--- PAGE 155 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
unwieldy realities the film brutually reveals: postindustrial
urban collapse, the ravaging personal and social effects of
underground drug economies, the sheer violence of every-
day life in the ghetto, and the destruction of black male life.
From the opening scene, where "Old Dog" (Larenz
Tate) makes his childhood friend (Tyrin Turner) an unwit-
ting partner in crime by murdering the Korean owner of
the store they visit, to the film's finish, where Turner's char-
acter is gunned down as he attempts to escape Los Angeles
and enjoy a more promising life in Atlanta with his girl-
friend and her son, Menace II Society exposes the contradic-
tory impulses of black male life that fuel its hope even as it
ensures its destruction. Menace II Society, even more than
Juice (or the Oliver Stone-produced South Central), registers
the raw realities of black ghetto life in the message that
black men are both one another's greatest allies and most
lethal enemies. Turner's narration throughout the film—
bringing coherence to a world, and his own life, fragmented
by the forces of violence and retribution that mark the
rhythm of urban existence—reveals an ironic hopefulness
and even a muted moral passion that redeem young black
life on its own terms.
The contemporary debate within black culture about
black film and its enabling or destructive representations of
black males and black females started with the meteoric rise
of Spike Lee. With Lee's groundbreaking She's Gotta Have It,
young black men laid hold of a cultural and artistic form—
124


--- PAGE 156 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
the Hollywood film—from which they had with rare excep-
tion been previously barred. In gaining access to film as di-
rectors, they began to seize interpretive and representational
authority from what they deemed ignorant or insensitive
cultural elites whose cinematic portrayals of blacks were
contorted or hackneyed, the ridiculously bloated or painfully
shriveled disfigurements of black life seen from outside black
culture. Lee's arrival promised a new day beyond stereotype.
What we get with Lee, however, is Jungian archetype,
frozen snapshots of moods in the black male psyche pho-
tographed to brilliant effect by Ernest Dickerson. Lee's mis-
sion to represent the various streams of black life denied
cinematic outlets has led him to resolve the complexity of
black culture into rigid categories of being that hollow his
characters' fierce and contradictory rumblings toward au-
thentic humanity.10 And after She's Gotta Have It, black
women became context clues for the exploration of black
male rituals of social bonding (School Daze), the negotiation
of black male styles of social resistance (Do the Right Thing),
the expansion and pursuit of black male artistic ambitions
(Mo' Better Blues], or the resolution of black male penis pol-
itics (Jungle Fever).
Lee's cinematic representations of black male life oc-
casioned sound and fury over his most important project to
date: his film biography of Malcolm X. As a reigning icon of
black popular culture, Malcolm's autobiography is the Ur-
text of contemporary black nationalism. Because his legacy
125


--- PAGE 157 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
is claimed by fiercely competing groups within black Amer-
ica, Lee's film was a hard sell to some factions. More im-
portant, since Malcolm's complex legacy has only recently
been opened to critical review and wider cultural scrutiny,
his admirers and detractors have rushed forward to have
their say once again.
To many, however, Malcolm is black manhood
squared, the unadulterated truth of white racism ever on
his tongue, the unity of black people ever on his agenda,
the pain of black ghetto dwellers ever on his mind. Thus
the films that I have discussed, which also represent the
visual arm of black nationalism's revival, bear in many ways
the burden of Malcolm X's presence in every frame, his phi-
losophy touching every aspect of the issues they deal in:
drugs, morality, religion, ghetto life, and, especially, the
conditions of being a black man. For many, as for his eu-
logist Ossie Davis, Malcolm embodied the primordial, quin-
tessential Real Man.
But as with the films of Dickerson, Lee, Rich, Singleton,
and Van Peebles, this focus on black masculinity spells real
trouble for black women. Perhaps only when more major-
studio black films begin to be directed by black women will
the repertoire of identities that black women command be
adequately represented on the large screen. Powerful ges-
tures toward black female-centered film exist in the work
of Julie Dash in Daughters of the Dust and especially in Leslie
Harris's Just Another Girl on the IRT. But until the cultural
126


--- PAGE 158 ---
Masculinity and the Ghetto in Black Film
and economic barriers that prevent the flourishing of films
by black women are removed, such works threaten to be-
come exceptions to the rule of black male film.
In the meantime, black male directors remain preoc-
cupied, even trapped, by the quest for an enabling concep-
tion of male identity. Such an enterprise will continue to
be hampered until black male filmmakers explore mascu-
linity's relationship to black women, promoting ideas of
black masculinity that dissolve its links to the worst traits of
Malcolm's lethal sexism. (John Singleton's 1993 Poetic Jus-
tice, however, failed dismally; its attempt to explore the life
of a young black female [Janet Jackson] was fatally frus-
trated as the film's center turned quickly, and unapologet-
ically, to the struggles of her male companion [Tupac
Shakur]). Gestures of Malcolm's new attitude survive in the
short hereafter Malcolm enjoyed on his escape from Elijah
Muhummad's ideological straitjacket. Malcolm's split from
the Nation of Islam demanded a powerful act of will and
self-reinvention, an unsparing commitment to self-critical
reflection, a trait that led him to reject his former hostility
to (black) women.
But this is not the aspect of Malcolm most remarked
on by his contemporary imitators who champion his return
to prominence. Is this the Malcolm who emerges in Spike
Lee's cinematic portrait of the slain leader? This question,
of course, entails many others. What are the costs of pre-
senting Malcolm's complexity on screen? Can Lee break the
127


--- PAGE 159 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
mold of severely limited female agency that characterizes
his work and the work of his black film contemporaries up
to this point? What happens to Malcolm when his life is
treated by a cultural nationalist who is also a bourgeois
black artist? I turn my attention now to Lee's film biography
of Malcolm, the most important cultural representation of
the black cultural hero yet created, in search of answers.
128


--- PAGE 160 ---
5
SPIKE'S MALCOLM
When you teach a man to hate his lips, the lips that
God gave him, the shape of his nose that God gave him,
the texture of the hair that God gave him, the color of
the skin that God gave him, you've committed the
worst crime that a race of people can commit. And this
is the crime you've committed. . . . This is how you im-
prisoned us. Not just bringing us over here and making
us slaves. But the image that you created of our moth-
erland and the image that you created of our people
on that continent was a trap, was a prison, was a chain,
was the worst form of slavery that has ever been in-
vented by a so-called civilized race and a civilized na-
tion since the beginning of the world.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X: The Last Speeches
Malcolm X's intellectual legacy and his representation in
popular culture are often, not surprisingly, at odds with
each other. Although the stated point of analytical investi-
gations of Malcolm's life is to probe the roots of his thought
and action with critical sophistication and intellectual rigor,
artistic treatments of Malcolm's career encourage a greater,
freer use of the imagination. Although art may occasionally
dispense with "fact" (since, at its best, art reveals cultural
biases that shape radically opposed interpretations of
events), it has an obligation to tell, if not the truth, then its
truth.
129


--- PAGE 161 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
In Malcolm's case in particular, making choices about
how to portray him on film are indivisible from the long,
bitter struggle to bring his life to the screen at all.1 As David
Bradley argues, Hollywood "didn't keep firing writers from
the 'X' project because the scripts were wrong. They kept
firing writers because the story was wrong."2 If Malcolm's
story, then, was too controversial to bring to the big lights,
too prickly for bourgeois formulas about racial problems
and their smooth, painless removal, then what kind of Mal-
colm worth anything could possibly survive Hollywood's
pulverizing machinery? And of the Malcolms being ad-
vanced by conflicting cultural constituencies for a starring
role—including Malcolm as symbol of racial hatred and
violence, Malcolm as black nationalist, Malcolm as newly
minted American cultural icon, Malcolm as revolutionary
internationalist, Malcolm as weak integrationist, Malcolm
as reborn humanist—which one would ultimately make the
cut?
These questions barely graze the interpretive and cul-
tural complexities that Spike Lee confronted as he set out
to make history and his film on Malcolm X. From the start,
Lee was embroiled in controversy as he sought to seize con-
trol of the project from white director Norman Jewison.
whom Lee believed categorically incapable of telling the
story of not just any black man, but the quintessential An-
gry Black Man and, by extension, the urban black Ameri-
can. Lee played the politics of racial privilege with cunning,
130


--- PAGE 162 ---
Spike's Malcolm
but barely before his success had settled in, he in turn came
under attack for his anticipated mistreatment of Malcolm.
Even before filming began, writer and social critic
Amiri Baraka drew blood in a war of words with Lee, as-
serting that Lee's poor history of representing black men
meant that he would savage the memory of Malcolm X—a
memory, by the way, to which Baraka presumed to have
special access—loading onto Malcolm's historical frame
Lee's own bourgeois distortions. This battle between the
two diminutive firebrands, ironic for its poignant portrayal
of the only logical outcome of the politics of more-black -
nationalist-than-thou—a game Lee himself has played with
relish on occasion—was but a foretaste of the warfare of
interpretation to come because of Lee's portrait of Malcolm.
Besides these considerations, Lee's shrewd and, at
times, crass commercialization of Malcolm's memory—plus
his grandstanding public-relations stunts meant to make his
film a guaranteed draw (for instance, telling children to skip
school to see his film on opening day)—raised serious ques-
tions about his integrity in doing the film. Lee's merchan-
dising of Malcolm memorabilia led many to conclude that
he was hustling Malcolm's history to his own financial ad-
vantage. Plus Lee's methods of promotion appeared to some
a bourgeois exploitation of black nationalist politics severed
from a real commitment to the working-class and poor con-
stituency Malcolm loved. And ironically, Lee, who has often
been perceived in the white media as a hotheaded film-
131


--- PAGE 163 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
maker and racial firebrand, became, in the eyes of many,
the vehicle for the mass production and dilution of Malcolm
X as an acceptable, easily packaged, even chic commodity
that Lee sold in his film and in his 40 Acres and a Mule
Shops.
In light of these realities, and the inherent difficulties
of cinematically representing a man whose life has been
reconstructed by webs of myth and romance, however,
Lee's Malcolm X is still an often impressive, occasionally
stunning achievement. It is a richly textured and subtly nu-
anced evocation of the life and times of a supremely Amer-
ican paradox: a onetime racial particularist whose fame has
been shaped to display his belated, if confusing, universal
appeal.
Lee's Malcolm is inevitably a creation of Lee's own
oversized ambitions. He has reframed the racial themes of
his earlier work around the shadow figure at its spiritual
core.3 In School Daze, Lee ridiculed the petty but pernicious
politics of skin color that abound within black culture, an
echo of Malcolm's warnings against the ubiquitous threat
of black self-hate. In Do the Right Thing, Lee dashed the easy
sentimentalism that often prevails in integration-minded
talk about racial progress and harmony, a favorite rhetorical
trump in Malcolm's shuffling and dealing of the racial deck.
And in Jungle Fever, Lee explored the fatal conflicts that can
ensnare interracial romance, which in his view and in the
view of the early Malcolm is a chasm of pathology.
132


--- PAGE 164 ---
Spike's Malcolm
In Malcolm X, Lee's racial ruminations, which have of-
ten spun out of control, have found their artistic apotheosis.
The last time Lee integrated Malcolm into one of his films,
Malcolm's words about violence in aid of black liberation
served as a textual coda to Do the Right Thing, his sentiments
set in black and white, much like the image Lee conjured
of Malcolm in that context. But Lee's understanding of Mal-
colm has matured since Malcolm was used to supply a styl-
ized signature to Lee's own racial reflections.
The genre of Malcolm X—the epic—and the film's real-
life subject impose historical limits, aesthetic constraints,
and artistic conventions that work wonders for Lee's treat-
ment of the complexities of race. The field of fire sparked
before filming began by his battles with the writer Baraka
and others over the "correct" representation of Malcolm
made Lee's job virtually impossible. Satisfying the varying
constituencies that have a stake in shaping the memory of
Malcolm is no small task, and it is the sort that few directors
have faced. The directors of comparable epic films—David
Lean (Lawrence of Arabia) and Sir Richard Attenborough
(Gandhi)—confronted nothing like the scale of attack that
Lee endured in the battle over Malcolm's legacy.
The three hours and twenty-one minutes Lee takes to
explore Malcolm's life are divided between the three major
stages in his career: as street hustler and criminal; as devotee
of Elijah Muhammad and preacher par excellence of black
nationalism; and as an independent black leader who
133


--- PAGE 165 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
formed two organizations, the Muslim Mosque and the Or-
ganization of Afro-American Unity, to reflect his changed
religious and political views after his departure from the
Nation of Islam and his pilgrimage to Mecca. Lee seems to
rush through the last stage with dizzying and distorting
speed, leaving largely untouched Malcolm's visit to Africa
and the substantial broadening of his ideological perspec-
tive. Lee's pace may be unintentional, but it is nevertheless
effective in dramatizing the almost desperate improvisation
that Malcolm displayed. He lived less than a year after his
break with the Nation of Islam, and no matter how much
we want to fill in the blanks, a definitive account of his latter
days is hard to come by.
The tripartite division of the life follows faithfully the
lineaments of Malcolm's various emergences and conver-
sions as detailed in his autobiography (as told to Alex Ha-
ley), The Autobiography of Malcolm X.4 That text itself has
been criticized for avoiding or distorting certain facts. In-
deed, the autobiography is as much a testament to Haley's
ingenuity in shaping the manuscript as it is a record of Mal-
colm's own attempt to tell his story. The profound personal,
intellectual, and ideological changes Malcolm was under-
going near the end of his life led him to order the events of
his life to support a mythology of metamorphosis and trans-
formation that bore fruit in spiritual wisdom. But that doc-
ument bears deep traces as well of Malcolm's attempt to
fend against the inevitable vulnerabilities revealed in the
134


--- PAGE 166 ---
Spike's Malcolm
process of recalling and reconstructing one's life. In simple
terms, this means that Malcolm's claim that he was expelled
from West Junior High School in Lansing, Michigan, for
instance, is inaccurate; he slid through the seventh grade
there in 1939. In a more profound manner, however, Mal-
colm never mentions his meeting with the Ku Klux Klan in
1961 to see if that group, which like the Nation of Islam
espoused racial separatism, could help Elijah Muhammad
and his followers obtain land to implement their beliefs.5
As with most autobiographies, Malcolm's recollections
were an effort to impose order on the fragments of his ex-
perience. The story of his escape from functional illiteracy,
his exodus from mental and social slavery, and his conver-
sion to true belief—only to have that belief betrayed by the
father figure of his faith—is a narrative whose philosophical
pedigree draws on Augustine, Booker T. Washington, Fred-
erick Douglass, and Sigmund Freud. To the extent that Lee
embellishes the historical account, he is being faithful in a
way to the spirit of self-re-creation that Malcolm evidenced
in his colorful telling of his own life.
Oscar-winning actor Denzel Washington invests the
early Malcolm, then known as Malcolm Little and eventu-
ally as Detroit Red, with a canny and charismatic mix of
steely determination and unpolished naivete. He plays per-
fectly Malcolm's entree into the black hustling world at the
awkward age of fifteen. The mix of awe and aspiration is
captured on Washington's face when he is spotted and
135


--- PAGE 167 ---
MALCOLM X !N CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
wooed by Sophia (Kate Vernon), a white woman at the
ballroom where he and his partner Shorty (played by Lee)
are jitterbugging. In Jungle Fever, Lee cluttered his exami-
nation of interracial love with diverting, confusing stories
about drugs and adultery. Here Malcolm's experience places
a cinematic loop around Lee's treatment. The moral of the
story is the same as in Lee's earlier coverage: interracial love
is lethal and self-destructive. But the historical context and
racial rationale of that moral is given a denser treatment.
Lee's version is drawn from Malcolm's early and middle
rhetoric, not from his later declarations to James Farmer
and others that interracial love is a personal, not a political,
choice.
Lee evokes the criminal phase of Malcolm's career with
a vibrant and dream-time palette of colors that suggests the
hustling life's attraction to people of color in the 1940s and
1950s. All too often, cinematic treatments of black street life
are reduced to an appendage of chic white goings-on (as in
Francis Ford Coppola's The Cotton Club) or a cartoonish col-
ored approximation of a parallel white street buffoonery (as
in Eddie Murphy's Harlem Nights). With Lee, we feel the
pulse and passion of the streets through a hodgepodge of
crafty and stylized characters who possess intelligence and
dignity. Later in the film, however, Lee addresses the brut-
ish and seedy underside of that life,- which gets canned and
canonized as black cultural pathology in the lazy eyes of
social theory in journalistic dress, and gets viewed as the
136


--- PAGE 168 ---
Spike's Malcolm
harmful and insidious symptom of white racist neglect in
the black puritanism of the Nation of Islam that Malcolm
preached.
West Indian Archie, played with smooth and seductive
equanimity by Delroy Lindo, is the embodiment, in both
the autobiography and Lee's film, of the misled ingenuity
that betrays the citizen of the street when his or her life is
severed from a black religious mooring. Although he takes
the young Malcolm under his wing, it is he who, after a
dispute over money in his numbers racket, eventually
forces Malcolm to flee Harlem and return to Boston, the
scene of his earliest hustling, before his fateful turn in
prison. West Indian Archie is both father and foil to Mal-
colm, and thus a foreshadowing of the treachery he will
confront in Elijah Muhammad.
Here and throughout his film, Lee conflates characters:
West Indian Archie (mentioned in the autobiography) and
his cronies stand in for Sammy the Pimp and others in the
autobiography who befriended Malcolm and showed him
the ropes of hustling. In the prison sequence, Lee produces
a fictional character named Baines (Albert Hall), who ac-
complishes the work of both the disciplined prisoner Bimbi
in the autobiography (who told Malcolm that he "had some
brains" and should use them) and his brother Reginald,
who along with his other brother, Philbert, had become a
member of the Nation of Islam. Reginald advised Malcolm
that if he didn't "eat any more pork" or "smoke any more
137


--- PAGE 169 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
cigarettes," he would show Malcolm how to get out of
prison.
Lee's tactic finds precedence in Malcolm himself, who
conceded that Shorty was a composite of characters. And as
in Malcolm's case, perhaps, Lee's strategy allows him to
avoid dealing with some painful truths. By making Baines
the source of Malcolm's conversion, Lee doesn't have to
unravel the messy ironies involved when Malcolm observed
the enforced shunning of Reginald, the very brother who
had introduced him to the faith. And by making Baines the
traitor to Malcolm because of his (and other Nation minis-
ters') resentment of Malcolm's prominence in the white
media, Lee avoids laying the blame for the jealousy at the
feet of its likely source, Elijah Muhammad, whose quirky
resonances are deftly presented in the charming and gnom-
ish bearing of Al Freeman, Jr. Lee escapes as well explaining
the betrayal and renunciation of Malcolm by two of his
brothers in the Nation after his assassination.
Lee's choices make sound cinematic sense for the most
part, especially in his treatment of Malcolm's slow awak-
ening from an unconscious worship of the white world. Lee
takes his time, allowing us to watch the unraveling of layer
upon layer of resistance to the truth that Elijah Muhammad
brought: that the white man is a "devil," that black people
are the true masters of the universe, that white culture has
throughout the world left death and destruction in its wake.
This was strong brew for a black male barely out of his
138


--- PAGE 170 ---
Spike's Malcolm
teens whose "conked" hair style reflected his esteem for the
white world. "It look white, don't it?" he asks after getting
his hair processed for the first time, seeking the approval of
other black men who had endured the painful process of
relaxing their stiffened manes.
Lee is especially effective in portraying the profound
spirituality that marked Malcolm's mature years and that
was the source of an eerie poise in the midst of social up-
heaval and personal crisis. The markers of black spirituality
have been dominated by the Christian cosmos; the themes,
images, and ideas of black spiritual life are usually evoked
by gospel choirs enthralled in joyous praise or a passionate
preacher engaged in ecstatic proclamation. Never before in
American cinema has an alternative black spirituality been
so intelligently presented. One montage of Malcolm's rhe-
torical ripostes and verbal volleys extends, incredibly, for
several minutes. And throughout Lee's treatment of Mal-
colm's Nation of Islam stage, his words, thoughts, and ideas
and those of the Nation are vigorously presented. This is no
small achievement in our anti-intellectual environment,
which punishes the constituency that has made Malcolm its
hero: black teens and young adults.
Lee portrays Malcolm's extraordinary self-possession
when, without words, he waves away the followers who
have collected to make certain that justice will be rendered
by white New York police after a beating of one of the
"brothers." The police captain both acknowledges and la-
139


--- PAGE 171 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
ments Malcolm's quiet authority, saying, "That's too much
power for one man to have." Malcolm's balance would
eventually collapse under the threat to his life posed by Na-
tion loyalists who resented Malcolm's rebuff of Elijah Mu-
hammad and who hatefully hounded him during his last
few months, inducing in Malcolm a psychic vertigo that Lee
only barely captures.
By contrast, and in keeping with the hagiographical
tendencies of all epic films, Lee presents Malcolm near the
end as harried but hushed, a man of saintly moral attain-
ment. Lee's intent to portray Malcolm as having it all to-
gether on the inside while his world crumbles around him
not only is romantic, but does a disservice finally to the
greater truth that Malcolm continued to work even in the
midst of the palpable premonition of his quickly approach-
ing death.
The murder scene is one of the most brilliantly staged
film accounts of the emotional pitch and pandemonium
surrounding an assassination. As is true throughout the
film, Lee's choice of period music is haunting and effective.
As Malcolm glides toward death at Harlem's Audubon Ball-
room in his sleek Oldsmobile 98, the sweetly agonizing
verse of "A Change Is Gonna Come" (penned and sung by
former gospel great Sam Cooke, another black genius killed
in his prime) captures Malcolm's impossible predicament.
Cooke's pathos-brimmed melisma reminds us that though
it's been "too hard living," he's "afraid to die."
140


--- PAGE 172 ---
Spike's Malcolm
Although Lee's Malcolm is more subdued, even softer,
than many had wished—possessed less by strident rage
than by hard-won wisdom—he survives the Hollywood
machinery and remains a provocative, valuable figure. Still,
Lee's Malcolm speaks rhetoric that is a far cry from the vol-
atile, incendiary talk that the police and government feared
would be spewed by Malcolm's character and that would
incite riots in theaters on opening night. That fear, as with
Lee's earlier Do the Right Thing, reflects a tragic lack of aware-
ness about the dynamics of racial rage and the suitable tar-
gets of its expression. Such racial paranoia prevented many
filmgoers from viewing the film in its theatrical release.
Interesting as well is Lee's portrayal of Malcolm's
finely nuanced relationship with his wife, Betty Shabazz,
whose mellow thunder and independent temperament are
sketched with revealing concentration by Angela Bassett.
Shabazz was alternately supportive and sternly self-willed
(she left Malcolm after the birth of each of their first three
children). But Shabazz's affectionately sparring relationship
with Malcolm, especially over gender roles, is only slightly
acknowledged in the film.
There are other absences. Chief among them is Louis
Farrakhan, former calypso singer, Malcolm's onetime as-
sociate turned enemy, and the current leader of the Nation
of Islam. The bad blood between Malcolm and Farrakhan
and the Nation of Islam continues to this day, despite Far-
rakhan's moderation of his sentiments expressed in the
141


--- PAGE 173 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
1964 statement that "a man such as Malcolm deserves to
die." Absent, too, is the figure of Muhammad Ali, who was
led into the Nation by Malcolm and was a huge attraction
to young black men. The two had a falling-out over Mal-
colm's departure from Elijah Muhammad's ranks. A few
years later, though, Ali himself would be straitjacketed by
the Nation, leading to his eventual passage into the pre-
cincts of orthodox Islam.
One might also quibble about the unnecessary didac-
ticism of the film after the assassination. In this part, staged
in classrooms in the United States and South Africa, chil-
dren repeat, "I am Malcolm X," to indicate their inheritance
of the fallen leader's legacy. This move is Lee's attempt to
solve cinematically a perplexing condition: how to get black
youth to identify with the redemptive message of Malcolm's
racial edification. It comes off as needlessly contrived and
facile, but it reveals just how difficult the task of reaching
black youth really is. Still, Lee's failed attempt at least forces
us to concede how our most desperate attempts to address
the problems of black youth, either through law and order
or by appealing to an ethical norm in a golden past of black
tradition, have likewise failed.
The appearance of Nelson Mandela, before his ascent
to the presidency of South Africa, is at once riveting and
revealing. In an ironically poignant coda, Mandela's pres-
ence reinforces for our eyes the difficult lot of living heroes,
142


--- PAGE 174 ---
Spike's Malcolm
his well-worn visage registering complexities of fate that in
figures like King and Malcolm are swept away by the sacred
wash of early martyrdom. At the end of Mandela's speech
about Malcolm and black freedom, it is not Mandela's voice
but Malcolm's that utters the widely quoted and more
widely misunderstood phrase "by any means necessary."
One senses at that moment, albeit ever so slightly, the loss
of heroic authority that marks our era and that sends mil-
lions back to the words of a dead man for hope.
Like The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Lee's work avoids
uncomfortable questions about Malcolm's alleged homo-
sexual alliances during his hustling days, the ambiguous
events surrounding the burning of his Nation-owned home
(and allegations that Malcolm himself set the fire), doubts
about whether Malcolm's father died at the hands of
revenge-minded white racists (a scenario Lee reproduces),
and Malcolm's skillful manipulation of white media fasci-
nated by his rhetorical excesses.
Nevertheless, Lee has rendered the life of an American
original in terms that are both poignant and insightful.
Above all, in taking the risk of defining and interpreting a
figure entwined in racial and cultural controversy, he has
sent us back into our own memories, or to books and doc-
umentaries, in search of the truth for ourselves. And he has
done more than that. He has set the nation talking about a
figure whose life deserves to be discussed, whose achieve-
143


--- PAGE 175 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
ments deserve critical scrutiny, and whose career merits the
widest possible exposure. Many great films have achieved
considerably less than that.
Lee's film has contributed significantly to the renewed
heroism of Malcolm X among black and other Americans.
But the enormous buildup to his film has also, ironically,
contained and capped the interest in the leader it has in-
spired. Now the real work of intellectual and political re-
covery and reconstruction of Malcolm's legacy must begin.
What are the most powerful, liberating uses to which
Malcolm's legacy can be put? What is Malcolm's meaning
to the black males who have invested heavily in his heroic
return, especially as their fortunes continue to decline? And
how will the progressive vision of race encouraged by Mal-
colm's mature philosophy fare in the age of Clinton? I will
attempt to answer these questions in the final chapter.
144


--- PAGE 176 ---
g
USING MALCOLM:
HEROISM, COLLECTIVE
MEMORY, AND
THE CRISIS OF
BLACK MALES
It's not wrong to expect justice. It's not wrong to expect
freedom. It's not wrong to expect equality. If Patrick
Henry and all of the Founding Fathers of this country
were willing to lay down their lives to get what you
are enjoying today, then it's time for you to realize that
a large, ever-increasing number of Black people in this
country are willing to die for what we know is due us
by birth.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X: The Last Speeches
Malcolm X's heroism not only is linked to the resurgence
of black nationalism and a revived racism to which it force-
fully responds, but draws as well from a grand tradition
of black heroism that dates back to slavery. A significant
feature of historic black heroism is the stimulation and pres-
ervation of cultural achievement through collective mem-
ory.1 Thus the achievements of heroes and movements
145


--- PAGE 177 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
from the black past were ceaselessly evoked in black com-
munities in oral and written form as an inspiration to con-
tinued thought and action in the same vein. The logic of
such strategies hinged on the belief that if other blacks in
the past could perform heroic activities, and often under
brutal circumstances that defied adequate description, then
blacks in succeeding historical eras could surmount obsta-
cles to racial achievement.
Another closely related function of collective memory
was its use as "an instrument of survival."2 Through the
stories black folk have always told one another about a his-
tory filled with accomplishment and failure—tales about in-
credible feats performed against inhuman odds as well as
bitter accounts of justice denied, of opportunities missed,
and of dreams and lives cut short prematurely—they have
managed to negotiate the treacherous terrain of American
life with their lives intact.
The celebration of Malcolm's memory, then, has cul-
tural and racial precedent. I want to examine briefly the
roots of an African-American heroism that illumines Mal-
colm's legacy, while exploring varieties of collective mem-
ory in suggesting how Malcolm's memory may be useful
now. I will also examine the progressive vision of race in-
spired by Malcolm's latter-day humanist philosophy. Per-
haps the greatest use of Malcolm's memory today can be in
dissolving the links that connect the tragic triangle of self-
hatred, violence, and racism that plagues the constituency
146


--- PAGE 178 ---
Using Malcolm
most invested in Malcolm's cultural return: young black
males. Because the collective morale of young black males
is threatened, I will suggest helpful ways to think about
their vexing problems.
In African-American culture, heroic traditions have
usually developed in response to forces of oppression, es-
pecially white racism in various forms: chattel slavery, black
codes, Jim Crow, separate-but-equal laws, lynching, cas-
tration, and the like. During slavery, heroes were seen as
figures who resisted racial dominance through slave insur-
rections, plantation rebellions, work slowdowns, or running
away.3 Leaders like Denmark Vesey, Gabriel Prosser, Harriet
Tubman, and Nat Turner acquired mythic stature as heroes
because they defied white rule during slavery.
After slavery, when African-American society faced
enormous obstacles in reshaping a culture that had been
deliberately undermined by the forces of white racism and
vulgar capitalism, heroic action consisted of the continued
battle against racist oppression in various forms. Most no-
tably, black heroism was viewed in autobiographical stories
of escape from slavery, the rehabilitation of African-
American culture through political action, and the remak-
ing of the moral life of African-American communities in
religious affiliation and spiritual devotion.4 Figures like
Frederick Douglass, Henry Turner, Sojourner Truth, and
Henry Highland Garnett became heroes during Reconstruc-
tion.
147


--- PAGE 179 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
From slavery until the present, African-American he-
roes have been instrumental in preserving the collective
memory of black culture against the detrimental conse-
quences of racial amnesia while fighting racism in American
public culture.5 The collective memory of black Americans
countered the racial amnesia represented in the selective
memory of the recent American past in white America. As
Michael Kammen has pointed out, selective memory ex-
presses the desire for reconciliation—through strategies
of depoliticization and amnesia—by dominant traditions
that obscure or distort the collective memory of minority
traditions.6
In discussing the heroic use of collective memory by
African-Americans, Kammen describes how selective mem-
ory "kept African-Americans outside the mainstream of
retrospective consciousness," leading to blacks' perpetuat-
ing their own heroic "traditions and memories." From "the
mid-1880s onward, therefore, African-Americans largely
celebrated their heroes and pursued their own historic oc-
casions alone."7 African-Americans' "collective memory of
slavery remained vivid," and "what they chose to empha-
size by means of traditional activities each year was the
memory of gaining freedom."8
Frederick Douglass in large measure carved out his he-
roic niche in African-American culture by advocating a tra-
dition of collective memory that fought racial amnesia:
148


--- PAGE 180 ---
Using Malcolm
It is not well to forget the past. Memory was given to
man for some wise purpose. The past is ... the mirror
in which we may discern the dim outlines of the future.
. . . Well the nation may forget, it may shut its eyes to
the past, and frown upon any who may do otherwise,
but the colored people of this country are bound to
keep the past in lively memory till justice shall be done
them.9
It is the quest for social justice in a racist society, along
with the preservation of collective memory, that has forged
a powerful connection between earlier expressions and
contemporary varieties of black heroism. Malcolm X fits
easily into this tradition. Both progressive and conservative
views of collective memory may be useful in viewing Mal-
colm's life.
In discussing twentieth-century studies on collective
memory, Barry Schwartz makes a distinction between two
views. The first view, a progressivist or constructionist one,
"sees the past as a social construction shaped by the con-
cerns and needs of the present."10 This approach draws on
the work of George Herbert Mead and Maurice Halbwachs
in showing how conceptions of the past are drawn from
contemporary problems and how collective memory recon-
structs the past by adapting the images of past beliefs to
present historical needs."
149


--- PAGE 181 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
The second perspective on collective memory, a con-
servative one, "is distorted in a different direction: It is the
past that shapes our understanding of the present rather
than the other way around."12 This perspective draws on
the work of Emile Durkheim and Edward Shils in contend-
ing that commemoration rites reproduce the past, while of-
fering an understanding of a stable tradition that transmits
a common heritage.13 As Schwartz maintains, the conser-
vative view "draws attention to continuities in our percep-
tions of the past and to the way these perceptions are
maintained in the face of social change."14
Both views have relevance for African-American uses
of collective memory in preserving heroic images of Mal-
colm and in combating paralyzing forms of political and ra-
cial amnesia. The contention that the past is constructed
from present historical needs contains a powerful—if par-
tial—insight about the function of contemporary struggles
in not merely preserving, but also re-creating, memories of
Malcolm. This view accents the agency of contemporary
participants in the heroic tradition of response to racism that
he so imaginatively represented.
This view also actively includes the intellectual contri-
butions of contemporary participants in reshaping a tradition
of heroic response to racism given to them by Malcolm. It
confirms, too, the flexibility of traditions of social protest, en-
couraging the rejection of literal interpretations of heroic fig-
ures that make narrow notions of loyalty to their ideas a
150


--- PAGE 182 ---
Using Malcolm
prerequisite for participation. This view provides welcome re-
lief from heroic celebrations of Malcolm that turn on strict and
selective interpretations of his social and historical meaning.
A constructionist approach to the collective memory about
Malcolm stresses the ongoing evolution of understanding
about his career that acknowledges the many uses to which
his memory may be put in reaching the goals he expressed.
Finally, this understanding encourages the expansion
of social criticism and moral vision that Malcolm repre-
sented, inviting criticism of aspects of his legacy that under-
mine the needs of contemporary participants. For example,
Malcolm's sexism is a significant blight on his achievements.
Principled opposition to his gender blindness actually en-
courages the observation of broader principles of fairness
and justice that Malcolm cherished.
The more conservative approach to collective memory,
though, ensures an attention to historical detail that guards
against romantic fictions and unrestrained myths that so
easily attach to Malcolm's career. This conservative ap-
proach emphasizes the historical character of Malcolm's ca-
reer, linking present observations about his heroism to
interpretations of his rhetoric, practice, and behavior in ac-
counting for his enduring racial significance.
This perspective also encourages a more lucid expla-
nation of the complex positions Malcolm adopted through-
out his career and an exploration of how his radical
transformations of thought reflected a self-critical posture.
151


--- PAGE 183 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
The Malcolm that has often been lost in hero worship is the
Malcolm who could be critical of himself as well as the so-
ciety that treated black people with fundamental disrespect.
This is the most promising dimension of Malcolm's legacy
that we can extend: a willingness to see the errors of our
ways, to acknowledge that without sometimes severe self-
criticism black folk will never achieve the true measure of
our intended greatness as a people.
The conservative view of collective memory carries
with it a rebuke to all who believe that they have the defin-
itive view of Malcolm X without critically engaging his life
and thought. Those who spare Malcolm from criticism do
his legacy the most harm. For his best ideas and most pow-
erful insights to flourish in our present historical context,
they must be subjected to thorough examination. Only then
can we understand and measure his true greatness, ac-
knowledging his accomplishments and failures as we assess
his place in our national history.
Among the most helpful ways that Malcolm's memory
may be used in our contemporary moment is to develop a
powerful defense of radical democracy and a sharp criticism
of race and racism in the age of Clinton. Malcolm's antiracist
speech anticipated the sort of keen, no-nonsense analysis
and action we must undertake, especially when our na-
tion's political condition seems to favor, on its surface, the
interests and aspirations of most African-Americans. But as
Malcolm so clearly understood, it is just such a "favorable"
152


--- PAGE 184 ---
Using Malcolm
political climate that may encourage the worst offenses
against black interests, because those figures in violation of
black progress shield themselves from attack under cover of
an often unmerited black loyalty. As Malcolm might muse,
a political wolf in sheep's clothing often does more harm to
black folk than an explicit enemy.
President Clinton's policies and actions so far indicate
that he may be just the sort of political figure Malcolm often
warned us against. Clinton's public positions on race en-
courage clever but often unprincipled manipulations, even
distortions, of racial rhetoric in our national life. A brief look
at recent racial history will help illuminate the hopes of ra-
cial progress that Bill Clinton has come to embody and, I
think, annul in his time in office.
For the past twelve years, fateful changes in American
culture have sapped our nation's ability to speak about race
with informed passion. The collapse of the will to undo the
legacy of past racial injustice with immediate intervention,
through either governmental sponsorship or the beneficent
public action of the private sector, has left a gaping hole in
the patchwork of remedies that at our most hopeful mo-
ments we imagined could remove the bruising inequalities
that continue to haunt us.
Also, the fierce rivalry among previously despised or
ignored groups for a visible stake in the politics of public
attention has masked the source of their anxieties: that too
often, social goods are parceled out as so many concessions
153


--- PAGE 185 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
to demands by the strongest group in a system of reward
held hostage by zero-sum thinking. African-Americans,
women, Latinos and Latinas, and Asian-Americans are of-
ten pitted against one another in a battle for scarce re-
sources—a sour arrangement indeed, for they aren't the
source of one another's primary pains. In this light, all the
noise about "special interest groups" seems a disingenuous
denial of the factors that led minorities to adopt competition
as their stock-in-trade to begin with.
Moreover, the thinly veiled contempt for racial minor-
ities during the Reagan and Bush administrations unleashed
a racist backlash, the worse effects of which had been held
in check by the gains of the civil rights movement and the
altered social landscape it brought into existence. For those
who point out that even that arrangement was dishonest
(that it simply shifted racism underground, concealing the
persistence of bigotry that conforms the American character
to its ugly, irrational image), a word of caution is in order.
To paraphrase Ernest Becker, the American character may
be a lie, but it's a vital lie. Some forms of restraint that pro-
tect the possibility of rational dialogue and humane behav-
ior must be retained as we work through the occasionally
deadly consequences of reordering our unjust racial prac-
tices.
To this end, the election of Bill Clinton promised a
breath of fresh air, and in some ways, his presidency has
154


--- PAGE 186 ---
Using Malcolm
been refreshing. The hoopla surrounding his ascendancy
marked a return to the rituals of public participation in
power largely absent since the gilded mythology of John
Kennedy's Camelot, and more narrowly glimpsed in the
cowboy captivity of Ronald Reagan's reign. Clinton's charm
with the media, his crafting of a persona as the American
everyperson who invites his constituency to become part-
ners in reshaping American democracy around the com-
mon good, and his revival of a vocabulary of national
service have all combined to make his appeal larger and
more humane than that of his Republican predecessors.
Clinton's cabinet appointments reflected his stab at a
new direction. Undeniably, Clinton was plagued early on
by his asleep-at-the wheel handling of the attorney general
"nanny-gate" affair, which both betrayed his ignorance of
the average citizen's perspective and documented his insen-
sitivity to child-care issues. Overall, however, Clinton
pulled in racial minorities and women to make his official
advisers "look more like America" than before. But his bris-
tling at pressure to appoint more women, as he responded
that he wouldn't "count beans," revealed that he is more
closely allied with George Bush's principles of gender and
race relations than was initially believed. Clinton's unprin-
cipled about-face on the Haitians coercively sequestered at
Guantanamo Bay and his vicious repatriation of Haitians
seeking asylum from political tyranny (a policy on which
155


--- PAGE 187 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
he finally relented only after Randall Robinson's hunger
strike and protest from the Congressional Black Caucus)
only reinforce this suspicion.
The real danger of race in the age of Clinton is a cau-
tionary tale about "friendly fire," the unintended wounds
inflicted by alleged friends, not the deliberate assaults of
enemies. (No one knows this more painfully than Clinton's
friend Lani Guinier, whom Clinton proposed to head the
Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice. Clinton's
abandoning of Guinier after she was unfairly dubbed a
"quota queen" by the Wall Street Journal, and his refusal to
permit her a fair hearing before the Senate after the tide of
public opinion turned against her, only reinforced the per-
ception that Clinton was quite willing to sacrifice loyalty for
popularity.)
During his campaign, Clinton expanded the influence
of the conservative Democratic Leadership Council, a group
composed of disgruntled neoliberals formed after the col-
lapse of traditional liberalism within the Democratic party.
Signs of this conservatism, especially in regard to race,
flashed during the presidential campaign when Clinton em-
ployed the code phrase "winning back the suburbs." By
using this phrase, Clinton implicitly distanced himself from
the pain and perspectives of the working class and the
ghetto poor. The gesture not only smacked of hubris—the
premise was that he didn't need poor blacks and Latinos
and Latinas, and that middle-class minority support was al-
156


--- PAGE 188 ---
Using Malcolm
ready sewn up—but further endangered the racial goodwill
that many citizens, especially progressives, had expected
from Clinton.
Such hopes of racial goodwill were dealt a further blow
with Clinton's exploitative treatment of Sister Souljah, ap-
ing the rancid public-relations maneuvers associated with
the late Lee Atwater's symbolic manipulation of white sub-
urban angst in the infamous Willie Horton affair. Clinton's
cynical and opportunistic response to rapper Sister Souljah's
comments that blacks should harm white folk during the
urban rebellion in Los Angeles revealed the flawed char-
acter of much liberal thought about race in America. Per-
haps Clinton was seeking to generate moral revenue by
investing in Dan Quayle's school of shallow ethical analysis
or looking to bolster his sagging campaign, but the timing
and venue of opportunity for Clinton's remarks suggested
something tragically awry.
Why did Clinton wait so long before responding to Sis-
ter Souljah's comments? On the face of it, his camp's con-
tention that swift reaction by Clinton would have been
viewed as gratuitous seemed to wash. But it is more likely
that neither Clinton nor his handlers had any idea of Sister
Souljah's existence before she made her observations. Her
sole importance to Clinton derived from Sister Souljah's
symbolic worth in his quest to make a highly visible, if un-
principled, moral gesture. Moreover, by making his remarks
at the Rainbow Conference, where Sister Souljah had ap-
157


--- PAGE 189 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
peared the previous day, Clinton distanced himself ideolog-
ically from Jesse Jackson and rang the register of race
suspicion while appearing to practice racial fairness.
But his gain was the American citizenry's loss. Clinton
blew a prime opportunity to become a public moralist, to
move beyond the treacherous insinuations and finger-
pointing that abound in discussions of race and to teach us
something genuinely useful about the ethical consequences
of racial desperation. Sister Souljah's statements certainly
warranted careful critical commentary. But Clinton might
have as easily acknowledged the extreme difficulty of ade-
quately responding to social forces that have made Los An-
geles a powerful symbol of the postindustrial urban crises
that fueled the riots and evoked the rapper's sharp obser-
vations. By drawing attention to Souljah, Clinton chose an
easy target. He also avoided the more challenging task of
addressing the futility embodied in Souljah's sentiments
and in the cultural expression of many young blacks, es-
pecially hip-hop artists.
What Clinton failed to grasp—-a trait he shares with
many American intellectuals and leaders—is that, like Mal-
colm, rappers channel black rage and defiant rhetoric at the
conditions that make life hell for urban residents. At its best,
rap entails a refusal of silent complicity in the social and
political destruction of black life by offering sometimes rude
rebukes to the white and black powers-that-be. Of course,
rap is sometimes intoxicated with its own candor and right-
158


--- PAGE 190 ---
Using Malcolm
ness of cause, leading to rhetorical excesses that are some-
times more desperate passion than hateful harangue.
Had Clinton played to his announced strengths of sharp
social and political analysis, he could have challenged Sister
Souljah's understanding of the political utility of violence
by linking a discussion of the Los Angeles rebellion with
previous incarnations in Detroit and Watts. This turn of
conversation might have led to an insightful discussion of
the loss of political will and imagination around remedying
the problems generated by race and class. And where better
to launch such a project than at the Rainbow Conference.
Standing on Jesse Jackson's political terrain and going toe-
to-toe in a much needed debate about these issues?
Instead, Clinton shrank moral ambiguity and racial
desperation to simplistic terms. He searched through the
fortuitous arrangements of a lately lackluster schedule to
seize a golden, if gratuitous, opportunity to shine. In so do-
ing, Clinton betrayed his desire to broaden liberal political
debates about race beyond hackneyed phrases, contemp-
tuous posturing, and stifling opportunism. That such de-
bates are sorely needed is demonstrated by the character of
most cultural criticism expressed in the aftermath of Clin-
ton's attack on Sister Souljah. Praising Clinton for his right-
eous rhetorical ripostes to Souljah's sentiments, lauding his
jettisoning of Jackson from the moderate ship of liberalism
that Clinton sails, or condemning Jackson for his condem-
nations of Clinton, most commentary was moralistic and
159


--- PAGE 191 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
narrow. The real moral tragedy is that neoliberal race the-
orists and practitioners have underplayed or misdiagnosed
the urban blight, social hopelessness, and thinly veiled an-
ger that give rise to raw and sometimes misdirected state-
ments like those made by Sister Souljah.
Young black ghetto residents, a major constituency of
rap music, have remained invisible to the Bill Clintons of
the world until they serve useful political purposes that
have nothing redemptive to say about their painful predic-
ament. By playing to the greatest fears of disaffected, drop-
out white Democratic voters at the expense of loyal black
Democrats (and only after the primaries were over), Clinton
displayed the ugliest sort of political opportunism.
When she appeared on the "Phil Donahue Show" in the
winter of 1991, Sister Souljah revealed that she had grown up
on welfare in the Bronx, escaped poverty, studied in Spain,
and won a scholarship to Rutgers. Her ridiculous statement
about harming white people—after all, most people who died
in the riots were people of color—was a departure from her
severe but articulate defense of black nationalism. Of
course, Bill Clinton didn't know this, because he used her
for his small purposes and not our larger learning.
Despite these signs of a lapsed faculty for principled
debate about the future of race, there is lingering hope that
Clinton can recover moral ground and begin to speak and
think about race in complex and productive ways. Equally
important, there is still hope that the new era he aspires to
160


--- PAGE 192 ---
Using Malcolm
embody will encourage the elaboration of radical demo-
cratic tendencies within our culture. Such activity can help
lift the veil of fear and ignorance about racial difference, a
veil that reinforces the structural political and economic in-
equities already eroding the lives of many minorities.
For now the end of the Reagan-Bush era, more than
the beginning of the age of Clinton, contains the seeds of
hope for radical democrats and other progressives and an-
tiracists. Because we are losing a clear target to aim for—
one of the virtues, after all, of outright opponents is that
they encourage outright opposition—radical democrats
must become even more vigilant in clarifying the terms of
antiracist struggle in our culture. Inspired by the example
of the mature Malcolm X, and the radical democratic views
he began to express near the end of his life, such a project
can find a broad base of support.
One of the major forms such struggle should take is
continued opposition to the pernicious stereotyping of black
women as the symbol bearers for the afflictions of the wel-
fare system. Conservatives like Charles Murray contend
that if we could somehow improve poor black women's in-
itiative, their will to upward mobility, we could solve the
problem of a congenital welfare syndrome. Most conser-
vative analyses of welfare dependency and initiative (to
which Clinton seems inclined) are notoriously one-sided,
neglecting the structural factors that prevent black women
from flourishing.
161


--- PAGE 193 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
For instance, initiative is often dependent on the
amount of reward one receives for it. One's motivation to
continually seek employment will not be high when there
is little prospect of finding it. In this scenario, initiative ex-
presses the relation between expectation and reward. What
kinds of jobs are available? What kinds of education or
training does the employment seeker have? To what kinds
of education or training has she or he had access? What are
the structural changes in the economy that affect the via-
bility of the kind of work the person does? What are the
chances for education or retraining? What is the person's
relation to the informal network of information that often
influences employment chances? These are simply a few of
the questions that must be pressed in assessing the level of
initiative present and in understanding how one can relate
initiative to a larger range of factors.
A radical democratic rethinking of such questions,
buttressed by investigations of the social causes behind the
fragile place of poor black women in the economy; an un-
derstanding of the sexist employment force, in which
women continue to earn only 70 percent of what men make
for comparable work; and an explanation of the dominance
of the service industry over manufacturing, which has
eroded the wage base of poor black women, compromising
their ability to support their families, might help place ini-
tiative in a more illumined framework. Further, compre-
hending the effects on women of the casualization of labor
162


--- PAGE 194 ---
Using Malcolm
and honestly acknowledging the disincentives to initiative
contained in regulations that bar women from supple-
menting their welfare incomes with work would chasten
those who call for simpleminded workfare solutions that tie
welfare benefits to employment.
The radical democratic antiracist struggle must con-
tinue to oppose racist violence, manifested most recently in
the Rodney King beating in Los Angeles. While the riot that
followed the acquittal of the police officers who savagely
assaulted King is a complex phenomenon, the conditions
that provoked that social rebellion remain buried in poor
communities across the United States. For the past decade,
rap artists—who as informal ethnographers of black youth
culture translate the inarticulate suffering of poor black
masses into articulate anger—have warned of the genocidal
consequences of ghetto life for poor blacks. Their narratives,
though plagued by vicious forms of misogyny and homo-
phobia that merit strong criticism, communicate the ab-
surdity and desperation, the chronic hopelessness, that
festers inside the postindustrial urban center. Police brutal-
ity is a recurring theme of rap narratives, generated by
young black males victimized by the unchecked exercise of
state repression. Radical democrats must take the lead in
criticizing the actions and rhetoric of prominent figures who
help shape a national climate where racist violence, partic-
ularly police brutality, seems a plausible or unpunishable
action.
163


--- PAGE 195 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
The radical democratic antiracist struggle should, in
Malcolm's spirit, oppose all forms of oppression while con-
stantly forging links with other progressive peoples and or-
ganizations. Religion, for example, continues to play a
significant role in the lives of Latinos and Latinas and of
African-Americans, and it remains a major route of entry
into a common politics of opposition to racism within their
communities. Given the erosion of moral community across
our nation, religion continues to provide moral strength and
insight for millions of people through narratives of personal
transcendence, ethical responsibility, and spiritual nurture.
Especially within minority communities, where issues of
meaning and morality are often fused with politics in pro-
phetic religious practices, religion can provide a means of
personal stability and social criticism. Radical democrats
must continue to overcome antireligious sentiment if we
expect to connect with many African-Americans, and La-
tinas and Latinos, for whom it is relevant to talk of God
while speaking of human community.
Particularly within African-American communities,
the fight against racism has centered in black religion. With
their noble articulation of the norm of fundamental human
equality and their strong insistence on black worth, black
religionists (Christian and Muslim) are suspicious of secular
ideologies that deny the validity of religious experience.
Conversely, the strength of radical democratic philosophy
and practice has been its unblinking description of the ills
164


--- PAGE 196 ---
Using Malcolm
associated with forms of thought and political practice
shaped by unjust forces, some of which were maintained
by religious belief.
These mutual suspicions may be put to good use as
black religionists and radical democrats join forces in the
reconstitution of the civic order and the reconstruction of
political practice. Radical democratic thought can provide a
rich vocabulary of social criticism to engage the varied forms
of social inequality that prevail in black communities across
America. And black religion can offer a needed emphasis
on the moral dimensions of political practice and social crit-
icism. Black religionists can insist on anchoring such prac-
tice and criticism in a perspective that values human life
and asserts the priority of meaning as a fundamental goal
of human life.
Given Bill Clinton's identification with the politics of
meaning, and his advocacy of the virtues of placing discus-
sions about the common good at the center of American
political discourse, radical democrats can make headway by
pushing him to broaden his understanding of the problems
of race. Radical democrats must urge Clinton to live up to
his inaugural-ceremony rhetoric about springtime in the
United States. Otherwise, the calamitous consequences of
racial domination and violence will make it the long winter
of our nation's discontent, especially for a population hit
hard by these forces—black men. Malcolm's memory can
help us understand and combat the precarious predicament
165


--- PAGE 197 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
of young black males in America, even if by only forcing
our nation to acknowledge its role in their condition.
Urban America is living through an epidemic of vio-
lence that has targeted and viciously transformed black
male life.15 With chilling redundancy, black men are dying
at the hands of other black men. The mutual harming of
black males is a thematic mainstay of the contemporary
black films I discuss in Chapter 3. Such films portray the
cruel consequences of urban collapse on black male life. The
situation for black men, especially juvenile and young adult
males, is now so fatally encrusted in chronic hopelessness
that terms usually reserved for large-scale social catastro-
phes—terms like "genocide" and "endangered species"—
are now applied to a wide variety of black males with trou-
bling regularity.16
Many cultural critics, especially conservative commen-
tators, have concluded that black male violence is the ex-
clusive result of pathological cultural tendencies working
themselves out with self-destructive fury. On this view,
black male aggression is part of a larger black cultural mal-
aise manifest in welfare dependence, criminal lifestyles,
gang activity, and other morally impaired behavior associ-
ated with an ominously expanding "underclass." And even
when more reasonable critics, especially politically liberal
figures, weigh in on the causes and consequences of black
male violence, their analyses often skid dangerously
166


--- PAGE 198 ---
Using Malcolm
close to reductionist cultural arguments that blame the vic-
tims of violence for its existence.
Because the situation of black males has become so for-
midably complex, the horizon of clarity often recedes behind
vigorous yet confusing attempts to understand and explain
their predicament. Can Malcolm X's example and memory in
any way help black men past mutual destruction and the
threat of social annihilation? How should we proceed in
thinking about these highly charged, complex issues?
In combating the crisis of black males, we must first
comprehend the staggering array of difficulties that hound
and hurry them from the cradle to the grave. Malcolm was
keen on scrupulously documenting the truth of black life,
a trait that led him to combine common-sense observation
and critical investigation in detailing the plight of African-
Americans. In this vein, the extent of social injuries to black
male life is indexed in the virtually mind-numbing statistics
whose mere recital is the most powerful testimony to a
hydra-headed crisis.
Black males are more likely than any other group to be
spontaneously aborted. Of all babies, black males have the
lowest birth weights. Black males have the highest infant
mortality rates. Black males have the greatest chance of dy-
ing before they reach age 20. Although they are only 6 per-
cent of the U.S. population, blacks make up half the male
prisoners in local, state, and federal jails. Thirty-two percent
167


--- PAGE 199 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
of black men have incomes below the poverty level. Fifty
percent of black men under 21 are unemployed. But it
doesn't end here.
Between 1980 and 1985, the life expectancy for white
males increased from 63 to 74.6 years; for black males, only
from 59 to 65. Between 1973 and 1986, the real earnings
of black males between the ages of 18 and 29 fell 31 percent,
as the percentage of young black males in the work force
plummeted 20 percent. Suicide is the third-leading cause of
death among young black men. And as noted earlier, black-
on-black homicide is the leading cause of death for black
males between the ages of 15 and 34, as young black males
have a l-in-21 lifetime chance of being killed. This is not
new; in 1987 alone, more young black men were killed
within the United States in a single year than had been
killed abroad in the entire nine years of the Vietnam War.
This deadly pattern of problems, which accumulates with-
out apparent abatement and taxes black male mortality be-
yond expected limits—makes it difficult to view the black
male condition as the product primarily of black cultural
failure.
Next, we should place black male suffering in a histor-
ical framework that illumines how black males, far earlier
than their recent troubles suggest, have been culturally fash-
ioned as a "problem" category. From the plantation to the
postindustrial city, black males have been seen as brutishly
behaved, morally flawed, uniquely ugly, and fatally over-
168


--- PAGE 200 ---
Using Malcolm
sexed. The creation of negative black male images through
the organs of popular culture—especially in theological
tracts, novels, and, more recently, film and television—sim-
ply reinforced stereotypes of black males as undisciplined
social pariahs, citizens of a corrupt subculture of crime, or
imbeciles. Add to that the influence of scholarly portrayals
of black males, particularly those contained in ethnographic
studies that have both aided and undermined the cultural
status of black men, and one gets a hint of the forces chal-
lenging a balanced interpretation of their condition.
Finally, we must pay attention to the structural factors
that spawn black male suffering. As Malcolm preached a
year before his death, "Unemployment and poverty have
forced many of our people into [a] life of crime."17 The shift
of the labor base of black males from high-wage, low-skill
jobs to scarcer service employment; the expanding technical
monopoly of information services; the part-timing of Amer-
ican labor (leaving workers without employee benefits);
and the wrenching of the U.S. economy by crises in global
capitalism all bode ill for black males.18 These changes, cou-
pled with cycles of persistent poverty, the gentrification of
inner-city living space, the juvenilization of crime, and the
demoralization of poor blacks through cultural stereotypes
about widespread loss of initiative, only compound the an-
guish of an already untenable situation for black males.
I am not suggesting that we can reduce the black male
crisis to its economic or social determinants. Nor do I con-
169


--- PAGE 201 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
tend that black males are without responsibility for ele-
ments of their condition. Indeed, the example of Malcolm's
black moral puritanism—which promoted self-reliance, rig-
orous self-discipline, a strong work ethic, and law-abiding
behavior—is a rebuke to black males who profess to follow
his example while shirking personal and moral responsibil-
ities to their families and communities.
I am simply arguing that the debate about black males
must become much more complex and sophisticated, that
its participants must be more honest in unearthing the roots
of black male agony. It is much easier to damn black males
for being irresponsible, immoral, or even criminal than to
own up to how American cultural traditions and economic
practices have contributed to their plight. Malcolm believed
that
the real criminal is the white man who poses as a lib-
eral—the political hypocrite. And it is these legal
crooks, posing as our friends, [who are] forcing us into
a life of crime and then using us to spread the white
man's evil vices among own people. Our people are
scientifically maneuvered by the white man into a life
of poverty. You are not poor accidentally. He maneu-
vers you into poverty. . . . There is nothing about your
condition here in America that is an accident.19
Although Malcolm's conspiracy theory of history ascribes
too much responsibility to individual whites, his words un-
17O


--- PAGE 202 ---
Using Malcolm
derscore an understanding that American society bears sig-
nificant responsibility for the plight of black males.
This is perhaps most tragically true of the spiritual fa-
tigue and psychic trauma occasioned by racism, and the
black male self-hate that it engenders, most viciously ex-
pressed in black-on-black homicide, but also insidiously
present in less conspicuous gestures of mutual black male
contempt. After all, black males have not been immune to
the destructive influence of negative cultural messages
about themselves, fatally absorbing surface and subtle re-
minders that their lives are perishable and expendable, less
valuable than white lives, and not as useful as those of fa-
mous figures like Michael Jordan and Bill Cosby. Malcolm
poignantly described the self-hatred that sits at the heart of
black-on-black crime:
We hated our heads, we hated the shape of our nose
. . . we hated the color of our skin, hated the blood of
Africa that was in our veins. And in hating our features
and our skin and our blood, why we had to end up
hating ourselves. ... It made us feel inferior; it made
us feel inadequate; made us helpless.20
Neither have young black males resisted the seduc-
tions of violence; the addictive character of aggression is
symptomatic of American popular culture from hockey to
Hollywood. It is this combination of violence, racism, self-
hatred, and economic desperation that makes black male
171


--- PAGE 203 ---
MALCOLM X IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
life vulnerable to confused and often unfair criticism. But if
we are to solve the problem of violent black males, we must
solve their problems. To paraphrase the great Catholic social
prophet Dorothy Day, we must work toward a world in
which it is possible for black males to behave decently.
Malcolm's memory may yet help save an entire gen-
eration of black males buffetted by brutal forms of racial and
class antagonism from outside black culture, and beseiged
by internal demons and temptations, from drug addiction
and violence directed against one another, from within. His
wise, salvific offer of comfort to black males—that they are
worthy of the highest measures of respect and love—came
wrapped in poignant demands of self-discipline and racial
uplift. And his heroic example of relentlessly questioning
his own unjust thoughts and deeds, leading him to reject
narrow racialism and blind gender scapegoating, remains
the truest and most meaningful monument to black man-
hood. Perhaps more than when he first spoke and lived
them, Malcolm's words and deeds carry profound import
for black males at the dawning of our first full century of
American freedom.
Malcolm X's words and deeds can also spur us on to
great efforts: they can move us to build on his most valuable
ideas even as we are encouraged to transcend his failures
and weaknesses. We can confirm his true significance as a
prophetic orator and fearless spokesman by acting to en-
17E


--- PAGE 204 ---
Using Malcolm
flesh the ideals of humane community and progressive po-
litical action he didn't live long enough to see become a
reality. By this measure, the greatest achievements of the
heroic tradition Malcolm X participated in remain in the
future.
173


--- PAGE 205 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 206 ---
AFTERWORD
TURNING THE CORNER
The only person who can organize the man in the
street is the one who is unacceptable to the white com-
munity. They don't trust the other kind. They don't
know who controls his actions. . . . The greatest mis-
take of the movement has been trying to organize a
sleeping people around specific goals. You have to
wake the people up ... to their humanity, to their
own worth, and to their heritage. The biggest differ-
ence between the parallel oppression of the Jew and
the Negro is that the Jew never lost his pride in being
a Jew. He never ceased to be a man. He knew he had
made a significant contribution to the world, and his
sense of his own value gave him the courage to fight
back. It enabled him to act and think independently,
unlike our people and our leaders.
Malcolm X, in Malcolm X Speaks:
Selected Speeches and Statements
Since Malcolm's death in 1965, black Americans have wit-
nessed the arrival of pretenders and wannabees to his
throne of rage. There have been many lesser incarnations
of Malcolm's prophetic spirit and rhetorical passion, men
and women who believed that all that was in Malcolm's bag
of tricks was loud speech and hateful harangue. (Khalid
Abdul Muhammad's ad hominem attacks on black leaders
and Jews is only the most recent example.) Although Mal-
175


--- PAGE 207 ---
AFTERWORD
colm's withering words would sometimes transport vicious
verbal assassinations of other black leaders—and though he
could be stubbornly, willfully blind to the truth of a situa-
tion that stared him straight in the face—he learned, finally,
to make his rage work for the best interests of black folk.
That included learning to work with people—like Martin
Luther King, Jr., and other leaders of a civil rights move-
ment that he grew to respect for its masked radicalism—
with whom he didn't always agree, in fact to whom he'd
formerly been vehemently opposed.
Malcolm also came to believe that real leadership was
empowering people to lead themselves, to eventually do
without the mortal suffering that he had endured at the
hands of charismatic but corrupt leadership. Malcolm's
push near the end of his life was for people to learn and
grow as much as they could in the struggle to free mind and
body from the poisonous persistence of racism and blind
ethnic loyalty, as well as economic and class slavery. He
apologized for his former mistakes, took his lumps for things
he'd done wrong in the past, and tried to move on, even
though, as he lamented, many devotees (and enemies)
wouldn't allow him to "turn the corner." For Malcolm's
sake, and for the sake of our survival, black folk must turn
the corner.
But what does turning the corner mean for us now? It
means that we must turn away from the easy scapegoating
of other minorities and ethnic groups in assigning blame for
176


--- PAGE 208 ---
Turning the Corner
our pain. The problems between blacks and Jews, for in-
stance, are much ballyhooed and bemoaned. Of course,
with countless pressing problems facing black communities,
we must ask why the media has given so much attention
to black-Jewish relations.
In large measure, the media has exploited conflicts be-
tween blacks and Jews by imbuing them with an almost
surreal intensity and by helping to construct black anti-
Semitism as a much more pervasive and virulent phenom-
enon than empirical research can support. The media has
fanned the flames of alleged black discontent with Jews by
irresponsible reporting that fails to place relations between
the two groups in historical and political perspective. While
the fractures of spirit and face suffered by aggrieved parties
on both sides are significant, the deeper truth is that these
tensions are part of a broader conflict between African-
American communities and other groups. Because the
black-Jewish compact is certainly among the oldest and
most enduring intergroup relations for both sides, the
black-Jewish conflict is undeniably a complex, special case;
but there are also black-Korean conflicts, black-Latina and
-Latino tensions, and black-Chaldean rifts, of shorter du-
ration, of course, though hurtful nonetheless.
The ready temptation is for commentators and critics
to chide black folk for being ethnosaurs, upholders of an-
cient forms of racial complaint against every other group
that has come to America and made it over us. The real
177


--- PAGE 209 ---
AFTERWORD
story, of course, is that as black folk we have been stepped
on and passed over. As Toni Morrison has eloquently re-
minded us, it is on the "backs of blacks" that America has
been fashioned in such splendid economic privilege and cul-
tural glory. So when I say black folk should turn the corner
on the easy route of blame-the-Jew or blame-the-Korean,
I don't mean we shouldn't raise tough questions. We should
simply move from finger-pointing to serious analysis in dis-
covering the source of our suffering.
When Kahlid Abdul Muhammad, former spokesman
for Louis Farrakhan, finds a Jew behind every problem that
plagues black folk, he is engaging in a highly imitative move
ripped off from the worst proponents of black conspiratorial
thinking throughout our history. That his verbiage is vicious
is obvious, though he still strikes a chord in desperate black
people who want to find some concrete reason for their
plight. Why? Because we haven't done our homework.
While Muhammad manipulates the understandable
human emotion to name the demon that vexes us—and
when you're in bad shape, any demon will do—we fall far-
ther from the truth of our condition. Jews are not our prob-
lem. Koreans are not our problem. Latinos and Latinas are
not our problem. And though we have legitimate gripes
with each group (as they do with blacks), what conscien-
tious blacks have in common with conscientious Jews, Ko-
reans, and Latinos and Latinas is much more interesting to
ponder and exploit.
178


--- PAGE 210 ---
Turning the Corner
By forging alliances between such groups, substantive
issues get debated and dealt with in ways that don't make
the destruction of our opponents the way we gain cachet
in our communities. And real conflicts surface that have
much more to do with how power is distributed, how
wealth is circulated, how influence is shared than with how
your last name ends. The case of blacks and Jews is instruc-
tive. Blacks question why powerful Jews have sided with
conservative southern politicians in opposing the renewal
of the Voting Rights Act and important redistricting mea-
sures that would bring enhanced political power to black
citizens. And blacks ask Jews why there is no outcry against
these conservative Jews, nor is there a demand for Jews to
renounce the potentially racist policies of their brothers and
sisters.
Thus Jews ask blacks why their constant love affair
with conspiracy makes them vulnerable to claims by some
black intellectuals and leaders—from Leonard Jeffries to
Louis Farrakhan—that Jews are the major roadblocks to
black progress. Jews ask blacks why any criticisms of affir-
mative action are viewed automatically as racist, why blacks
emotionally chafe when any suggestion that alternative
strategies for black improvement are proffered. And Jews
and blacks ask each other about the hierarchy of pain that
grants privilege for each group's collective suffering, viewed
in the Holocaust-versus-slavery debate, which often turns
ugly and irrational. The point here is that we turn the corner
179


--- PAGE 211 ---
AFTERWORD
on the acrimonious assaults on each other, and turn to more
serious conflicts whose resolution might relieve the need of
glorified pettiness on both sides.
But turning the corner also means that black folk have
to come to grips with how we do one another in. Not simply
in the ghettos of urban America, where black-on-black
crime is much lamented and commented on, even if in ri-
diculously racist and sexist manners. The black-on-black
crime I'm speaking about happens at the highest levels of
intellectual and organizational endeavor. The deep distrust
we harbor for one another—we still think white folk have
some magic that black folk don't possess, whether in med-
icine or in marketing—makes us liable to vicious forms of
professional backbiting and jealousy. It's the same for
preachers and professors, lawyers and doctors, and jour-
nalist and judges. We kill with the pen as swiftly as we do
with the Uzi.
This impulse to hurt those with whom we disagree, and
with whom we share the greatest resemblance, is an ancient
passion, a form of intolerance that only intimate contact can
ignite. It's what killed Malcolm, this inability to disagree
close-up without destruction. And there is so much at stake
in our fights—identity, loyalty, passion, and love, as well as
hatred, dissemblance, treachery, and betrayal.
We can turn the corner on the impulse to destroy
what's black only by affirming the best of what's black—by
offering simple economic measures that circulate black dol-
180


--- PAGE 212 ---
Turning the Corner
lars in black communities; by taking a chance on black
brothers and sisters in a professional service blacks have
need of; by black parents insisting on excellence from their
children in their schoolwork and social life; by refusing,
consciously, to destroy the reputation of a brother or sister
by speaking false or irresponsible words; and by heeding
edifying, enabling criticism. This sounds, of course, so naive
as to be incredible; but the ministration of a daily political
ethic of care for fractured black bodies and spirits, as well
as the sort of profound structural analysis and radical dem-
ocratic social activity that I have advocated, is like Poe's
purloined letter, made invisible because it lies hidden in full
sight.
Such a political ethic of care might have saved Mal-
colm's life, might have enabled his promethean will to self-
improvement and re-creatiori to be extended vastly into our
bewildering wastelands of lost hope and surrendered faith.
He was, after all, a holy man, a troublesome formulation to
declare because religion—and rightfully so in many cases—
is viewed with increased suspicion in our nation. But his
hardheaded insistence on enlivening a black public theod-
icy, on delineating the shape and limits of black angst and
rage against racial and economic injustice, makes his vision
just right for our times.
If we are to turn the corner in earnest, ordinary black
folk and leaders—local and national alike—must stop bash-
ing young black people. The perennial evocation of a golden
181


--- PAGE 213 ---
AFTERWORD
age of black ethical achievement, when the fabric of our
common moral and social life was magically knit together,
is certainly produced out of the whole cloth of Utopian rev-
erie. At every stage of our sojourn on American soil, black
folk have appealed to a time, largely mythical and unques-
tionably romantic, when we were better than we are in
whatever age in which we happen to be struggling. This
understandable strategy of moral regeneration by harken-
ing to past ideals is sometimes helpful and, as we're now
discovering, sometimes quite harmful.
The present generation of young blacks has been re-
buked and reviled for its fateful loss of a moral compass that
had been bequeathed from one black generation to the next
since slavery. They have been called a "lost generation,"
and damned for their violent self-destruction. Their hip-hop
music has been scorned and attacked in a manner virtually
unprecedented in our nation's history, and their culture has
been viewed as damaged and pathological.
In turning the corner on our views of young blacks, we
must acknowledge the incredible assault on mind and body
that they have endured in ways hard to imagine for most
adults. Although they are the victims of violence more than
any other population, they are blamed for its vicious ex-
pression. Although they are caught in cycles of poverty that
begin before they are born, their indigence is laid at the feet
of their stubborn refusal to work. Although they are often
born into families hardest hit by the postindustrial collapse
182


--- PAGE 214 ---
Turning the Corner
and restructuring of industries that once provided stable
work, their turn to informal economies to survive is viewed
in coldly animalistic terms. And not just by white folk.
Most young black people want to do well, are afraid of
a violent world, spurn self-destructive behavior, and aren't
pathological. As we continue to demand the best of our
young people, as we listen to them and learn from them, as
we shed tears for them as they make mistakes while we
recall our own foibles and failings, and as we continue to
affirm their value as worthful human beings hampered
from their best in a world determined, often, to snuff out
their lives, we can help them survive to witness their chil-
dren's prospering. Not without, however, a radical reorien-
tation in our willingness to criticize capitalism and classism,
and not without a willingness to sacrifice the comforts of
our bourgeois, conservative black culture for a deeper anal-
ysis of why so few have so much while so many have so
little.
Malcolm's greatest contribution to us is to think for
ourselves, to learn to help ourselves when others refuse,
and to demand a world in which such help is not the pre-
serve of the privileged, but the domain of the masses. Mal-
colm's example still invites us to ask hard questions of
ourselves, to renew ourselves at the altar of rigorous sac-
rifice and a shameless love of black folk. With the broad,
humane vision that powered Malcolm's final days, African-
American life can surge forward against the incredible odds
183


--- PAGE 215 ---
AFTERWORD
we presently face. We can continue to reinvent ourselves
as Malcolm reinvented himself. By our willingness to think
and do the impossible in the name of the inextinguishable
hope that moved our ancestors to dream and act with great
boldness, we too can triumph, like Malcolm, by any means
necessary.
184


--- PAGE 216 ---
NOTES
Chapter 1
1. Bruce Perry, Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black
America (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1991).
2. Louis Lomax, To Kill a Black Man (Los Angeles: Holloway
House, 1968); Perry, Malcolm.
3. Malcolm X, with the assistance of Alex Haley, The Auto-
biography of Malcolm X (New York: Grove Press, 1965).
Chapter 2
1. These personal and political understandings can be de-
scribed as paradigms, or theories that explain evidence or account
for behavior, that shift over space and time. For a discussion about
paradigm shifts in the history of science, see Thomas Kuhn, The
Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1970). According to Kuhn, revolutions in science oc-
cur when a given paradigm fails to account for an increasing
degree of disconfirming evidence, called anomalies. Failure of the
paradigm creates a crisis, and can be resolved only with the emer-
gence of a new scientific paradigm. For an application of Kuhn's
work to moral philosophy and religious experience, see Jon Gun-
nemann, The Moral Meaning of Revolution (New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1979).
2. The lack of a significant body of scholarly literature about
Malcolm reveals more about the priorities, interests, and limita-
tions of contemporary scholarship than about his importance as
a revolutionary social figure. There is no dearth of interest in Mal-
185


--- PAGE 217 ---
Notes
colm, however, in the popular press, and though cultural curiosity
about him is now undoubtedly at a peak, he has unfailingly pro-
voked popular reflection about his life and career among jour-
nalists, activists, and organic intellectuals since his death in 1965.
This is made abundantly clear in two book-length bibliographies
on Malcolm: Lenwood G. Davis, with the assistance of Marsha L.
Moore, comps., Malcolm X: A Selected Bibliography (Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1984), and Timothy V. Johnson, comp.,
Malcolm X: A Comprehensive Annotated Bibliography (New York: Gar-
land, 1986).
3. For an illuminating discussion of the philosophical issues
and problems involved in understanding and explanation in the
humanities, see Charles Taylor, "Interpretation and The Sciences
of Man," in Interpretive Social Science: A Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow
and William M. Sullivan (Berkely: University of California Press,
1979), pp. 25-71.
4. For the notion of thick description, see Clifford Geertz,
"Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture,"
in The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
5. Michael Eric Dyson, "Probing a Divided Metaphor," in
Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 115-128. For discussion
of Malcolm's motivations for his autobiography, and Alex Haley's
role in shaping the narrative of Malcolm's life, see also Arnold
Rampersad, "The Color of His Eyes: Bruce Perry's Malcolm and
Malcolm's Malcolm," and Robin D. G. Kelley, "The Riddle of the
Zoot: Malcolm Little and Black Cultural Politics During World War
II," both in Malcolm X: In Our Own Image, ed. Joe Wood (New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1992), pp. 117-134, 155-175, respectively.
6. For more of my comment on other books about Mal-
colm, see Dyson, "Probing a Divided Metaphor," pp. 115-128.
7. For a good overview and discussion of these groups, see
Raymond Hall, Black Separatism in the United States (Hanover, N.H.:
University Press of New England, 1978).
8. For an excellent discussion of the links between Malcolm
186


--- PAGE 218 ---
Notes
X and the Black Power movement, of which he was a precursor,
with discussions of SNCC, CORE, and the Black Panthers, see
Robert Allen, Black Awakening in Capitalist America: An Analytic His-
tory (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1969), pp. 21-88. For a dis-
cussion of the economic programs and comparisons of the social
visions of each group, see Hall, Black Separatism in the United States,
especially pp. 139-196.
9. See especially John Ansbro, Martin Luther King, Jr.: The
Making of a Mind (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1982); Stephen
B. Gates, Let the Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther King, Jr.
(New York: Harper & Row, 1982); and David Garrow, Bearing the
Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, 1955-1968 (New York: Morrow, 1986).
10. John Henrik Clarke, ed., Malcolm X: The Man and His
Times (1969; Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1990).
11. Charles Wilson, "Leadership Triumph in Leadership
Tragedy," in Malcolm X, ed. Clarke, pp. 36-37.
12. James Boggs, "The Influence of Malcolm X on the Polit-
ical Consciousness of Black Americans," and Wyatt Tee Walker,
"Nothing but a Man," in Malcolm X, ed. Clarke, pp. 52, 67.
13. Albert Cleage, "Myths About Malcolm X," in Malcolm X,
ed. Clarke, p. 15.
14. Oba T'Shaka, The Political Legacy of Malcolm X (Richmond,
Calif.: Pan Afrikan, 1983); Malcolm X, The End of White World
Supremacy: Four Speeches by Malcolm X, ed. Benjamin Karim [Good-
man] (New York: Arcade, 1971).
15. T'Shaka, Political Legacy of Malcolm X, pp. 244-245.
16. Ibid., pp. 57, 118.
17. Karim, Introduction to Malcolm X, End of White World
Supremacy, pp. 21-22.
18. Gordon Parks, "Malcolm X: The Minutes of Our Last
Meeting," in Malcolm X, ed. Clark, p. 120.
19. On his repudiation of the white devil theory, see Mal-
colm X, with the assistance of Alex Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm
X (New York: Grove Press, 1965), pp. 362-363. For Malcolm's
187


--- PAGE 219 ---
Notes
desire to meet Robeson a month before his death, see Martin Dub-
erman, Paul Robeson (New York: Knopf, 1988), p. 528.
20. I take up this issue in "Beyond Essentialism: Expanding
African-American Cultural Criticism," in Reflecting Black, pp. xiii-
xxxiii.
21. The debate about cultural and racial authenticity as it
relates to who is able to interpret Malcolm's legacy legitimately
has most recently occurred in writer-activist Amiri Baraka's at-
tacks on Spike Lee about Lee's film portrait of Malcolm X before
his film appeared. Implicit in Baraka's charges that Lee would not
adequately or accurately represent Malcolm is the belief that Bar-
aka's representation of Malcolm is superior. Baraka's hagiograph-
ical recollections of Malcolm and his refusal to concede that Lee's
claims and representations of him may be equally valid are a
prime example of the often insular intellectual climate surround-
ing debates about Malcolm. The irony here, of course, is that of
all current black directors, with the possible exception of John
Singleton, Spike Lee appears most suitably disposed to represent
a vision of Malcolm that jibes with Baraka's cultural views, given
Lee's Afrocentric film and aesthetic vocabulary and his neona-
tionalist cultural perspective.
22. Malcolm X, "Answers to Questions at the Militant Labor
Forum," in By Any Means Necessary: Speeches, Interviews, and a Letter,
by Malcolm X, ed. George Breitman (New York: Pathfinder Press,
1970), pp. 22-23.
23. See Henry Young's two-volume study, Major Black Relig-
ious Leaders (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1977, 1979).
24. Louis E. Lomax, When the Word Is Given: A Report on Elijah
Muhammad, Malcolm X, and the Black Muslim World (Cleveland:
World, 1963), and To Kill a Black Man (Los Angeles: Holloway
House, 1968); James H. Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America: A
Dream or a Nightmare? (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991); Peter
Goldman, The Death and Life of Malcolm X, 2d ed. (1973; Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1979). For a discussion of moral saints,
see Susan Wolf, "Moral Saints," Journal of Philosophy 8 (1982):
419-439, and Robert Merrihew Adam's response to her essay in
188


--- PAGE 220 ---
Notes
The Virtue of Faith and Other Essays in Philosophical Theology (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1987), pp. 164-173.
25. Of course, the classic treatment of the Black Muslims
during the leadership of Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X is C.
Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America (Boston: Beacon Press,
1961, 1973). Also very helpful is E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Na-
tionalism: A Search for an Identity in America (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962). For a treatment of the Nation of Islam under
Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X, and it transition to orthodox
Islamic practice and belief under Wallace Muhammad as the
World Community of al-Islam in the West, see Clifton E. Marsh,
From Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition from Separatism to Is-
lam, 1930-1980 (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1984). For a
historical and analytic treatment of the Nation of Islam, including
its history under Muhammad and Wallace Muhammad, and its
separate revitalization as the second incarnation of the Nation of
Islam under Louis Farrakhan, see Martha F. Lee, The Nation of
Islam: An American Millenarian Movement (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin
Mellen Press, 1988).
26. Lomax, When the Word Is Given, pp. 87, 68.
27. For an extended review of Cone's book, see my essay
"Martin and Malcolm," in Reflecting Black, pp. 250-263.
28. Of course, Malcolm's life and thought represented and
addressed various aspects of both religious and revolutionary na-
tionalism. In this regard, see John H. Bracey, Jr., August Meier,
and Elliott Rudwick, eds., Black Nationalism in America (Indian-
apolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970), p. 505. Also see Essien-Udom, Black
Nationalism. For a fine historical treatment of the heyday of
black nationalism, see Wilson Jeremiah Moses, The Golden Age
of Black Nationalism, 1850-1925 (Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books,
1978).
29. Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America, p. 151.
30. Ibid., p. 170.
31. Other works explore the relationship between King and
Malcolm, along with comparative analyses of other intellectual
and religious figures, in a religious and social ethical context. For
189


--- PAGE 221 ---
Notes
two fine examples, see Peter Paris, Black Leaders in Conflict, 2d ed.
(Louisville: Westminster Press/John Knox Press, 1991), and Rob-
ert M. Franklin, Liberating Visions: Human Fulfillment and Social Jus-
tice in African-American Thought (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1990).
32. Ralph Ellison, quoted in Robert B. Stepto and Michael S.
Harper, "Study and Experience: An Interview with Ralph Elli-
son," in Chant of Saints: A Gathering of Afro-American Literature, Art,
and Scholarship, ed. Stepto and Harper (Urbana: University of Il-
linois Press, 1979), p. 458.
33. For insightful treatments of Du Bois, see Arnold Ram-
persad, The Art and Imagination of W. E. B. Du Bois (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976); Gerald Home, Black and
Red: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War,
1944-1963 (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986);
Manning Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois: Black Radical Democrat (Boston:
Twayne, 1986); and, of course, the definitive treatment of Du Bois
to date, David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race,
1868-1919 (New York: Holt, 1993). For the definitive treatment
of Booker T. Washington, see Louis Harlan's two volumes: Booker
T. Washington: The Making of a Black Leader, 1856-1901 (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1972), and Booker T. Washington: The Wiz-
ard of Tuskegee, 1901-1915 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1983).
34. Lomax, To Kill a Black Man, p. 10.
35. George Breitman, "More Than One Way To Kill a Black
Man,' " in The Assassination of Malcolm X, ed. George Breitman,
Herman Porter, and Baxter Smith (New York: Pathfinder Press,
1976), pp. 131-144.
36. Robert Franklin also makes use of Goldman's notion of
public moralist in his excellent book Liberating Visions, a compar-
ative study of Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, Malcolm
X, and Martin Luther King, Jr.
37. There is a swelling literature on the possible plots and
theories of how Malcolm was murdered. While the close study of
this literature is beyond my purposes here, it certainly constitutes
an intriguing category of debate around Malcolm. See, for ex-
190


--- PAGE 222 ---
Notes
ample, Breitman, Porter, and Smith, eds., Assassination of Malcolm
X, and Karl Evanzz, The Judas Factor: The Plot to Kill Malcolm X
(New York: Thunder Mouth Press, 1992).
38. For arguments that Goldman's views about Malcolm's
assassination support the official government story, and that the
CIA and the Bureau of Special Services (BOSS)—the name of the
New York secret police agency at the time of Malcolm's death—
were implicated in his assassination, see George Breitman, "A Lib-
eral Supports the Government Version," in Assassination of Mal-
colm X, ed. Breitman, Porter, and Smith, pp. 145-166.
39. Goldman, Death and Life of Malcolm X,p. 191.
40. Martin Luther King, Jr., quoted in David Halberstam,
"When 'Civil Rights' and 'Peace' Join Forces," in Martin Luther
King, Jr.- A Profile, ed. C. Eric Lincoln, rev. ed. (New York: Hill &
Wang, 1984), p. 202.
41. Clayborne Carson, "Malcolm and the American State,"
in Malcolm X: The FBI File, ed. David Gallen (New York: Carroll &
Graf, 1991), p. 18.
42. Ibid.
43. See George Devereux, Basic Problems of Ethnopsychiatry,
trans. Basia Miller Gulati and George Devereux (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1980); Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the
Earth (New York: Grove Press, 1966), and Black Skin, White Masks
(New York: Grove Press, 1967); Erich Fromm, Beyond the Chains
of Illusion: My Encounter with Marx and Freud (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1962); Christopher Lasch, The Culture of Narcissism
(New York: Warner Books, 1979); Bruce Brown, Marx, Freud, and
the Critique of Everyday Life: Toward a Permanent Cultural Revolution
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1973); Margaret MacDonald,
ed., Philosophy and Analysis (Oxford: Blackwell, 1954); and rele-
vant work of the Frankfurt school, including Theodor W. Adorno,
Walter Benjamin, Erich Fromm, Max Horkheimer, Herbert Mar-
cuse, and Jiirgen Habermas. For a collection of essays by these
authors, see Andrew Arato and Eike Gebhardt, eds., The Essential
Frankfurt School Reader (New York: Continuum, 1982). For a treat-
ment of their work in relation to psychoanalytic theory, see C.
191


--- PAGE 223 ---
Notes
Fred Alford, Narcissism: Socrates, the Frankfurt School, and Psycho-
analytic Theory (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988).
44. Richard Lichtman, The Production of Desire: The Integration
of Psychoanalysis into Marxist Theory (New York: Free Press, 1982),
p. ix.
45. Ibid., pp. ix-x.
46. Erik H. Erikson, Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant
Nonviolence (New York: Norton, 1969). For a more controversial
psychobiographical treatment of a historical figure, see Erikson's
study of Protestant reformer Martin Luther, Young Man Luther
(New York: Norton, 1958).
47. Eugene Victor Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy: Mal-
colm X and the Black Revolution (1981; London: Free Association
Books, 1989).
48. Ibid., pp. 1-2.
49. Ibid., p. xiii.
50. For an important historical examination of white work-
ing-class racism, see David R. Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness:
Race and the Making of the American Working Class (London: Verso,
1991).
51. Other Marxist, socialist, and progressive approaches to
race theory and racism attempt to theorize race as a socially, cul-
turally, historically, and politically constructed category that un-
dergoes change over space and time. See, for example, Cornel
West, "Marxist Theory and the Specificity of Afro-American Op-
pression," in Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture, ed. Gary Nel-
son and Lawrence Grossberg (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1988), pp. 17-33; Lucius Outlaw, "Toward a Critical Theory of
'Race,' " in Anatomy of Racism, ed. David Goldberg (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1990), pp. 58-82; Michael Eric Dy-
son, "The Liberal Theory of Race," and "Racism and Race Theory
in the Nineties," in Reflecting Black, pp. 132-156; Leonard Harris,
"Historical Subjects and Interests: Race, Class, and Conflict," and
Lucius Outlaw, "On Race and Class, or, On the Prospects of 'Rain-
bow Socialism,' " both in The Year Left 2: An American Socialist Year-
book, ed. Mike Davis et al. (London: Verso, 1987); and Michael
192


--- PAGE 224 ---
Notes
Omi and Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the United States: From
the 1960s to the 1980s (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986).
52. See Thomas Gossett, Race: The History of An Idea in America
(Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1965).
53. Wolfenstein, Victims of Democracy, p. 37.
54. Bruce Perry, Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black
America (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1991).
55. Ibid., p. ix.
56. Ibid., p. x.
57. Ibid., pp. 41-42.
58. Ibid., p. 54.
59. For further discussion of this subject, see Dyson, "Be-
yond Essentialism," pp. xiii-xxxiii.
60. For insightful discussions of the predicament of black in-
tellectuals, see, of course, Harold Cruse's pioneering The Crisis of
the Negro Intellectual (New York: Morrow, 1967); Cornel West,
"The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual," Cultural Critique, no. 1
(Fall 1985): 109-124; and Jerry Watts, "Dilemmas of Black In-
tellectuals," Dissent, Fall 1989, pp. 501-507.
61. Christian ethicist Katie Cannon writes about the "white
academic community's flourishing publishing monopoly on the
writing of black history, black thought, and black world view.
Black scholars did not abdicate their roles in these fields to white
academicians. Blacks have written monographs, theses, confer-
ence papers, proposals, and outlines for books on various aspects
of black reality since the 1700s, but white publishers did not give
them serious consideration until the 1970s" ("Racism and Eco-
nomics: The Perspective of Oliver C. Cox," in The Public Vocation
of Christian Ethics, ed. Beverly W. Harrison, Robert L. Stivers, and
Ronald H. Stone [New York: Pilgrim Press, 1986], p. 121).
62. William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902;
New York: Penguin, 1982).
63. Lomax, To Kill a Black Man, p. 142.
64. Goldman, Death and Life of Malcolm X, p. 189.
65. George Breitman, The Last Year of Malcolm X: The Evolution
of a Revolutionary (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1967); Malcolm X,
193


--- PAGE 225 ---
Notes
Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements, ed. George Breit-
man (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1965); By Any Means Necessary;
and Malcolm X: The Last Speeches, ed. Bruce Perry (New York:
Pathfinder Press, 1989).
66. Breitman, Last Year of Malcolm X, p. 69.
67. Malcolm, X, By Any Means Necessary, p. 159.
68. Breitman, Last Year of Malcolm X, p. 65.
69. Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, p. 159.
70. Given the variety and complexity of black nationalist
thought, Malcolm could have accommodated and advocated such
changes had he had sufficient time to link his broadened sense of
struggle to the subsequent social and political activity he inspired.
It is important, however, not to overlook the tensions between
groups like SNCC and Malcolm while he lived. As Lomax says:
"... Malcolm was never able to effect an alliance with the young
black militants who were then plotting the crisis that is now upon
the republic. His trip to Selma was arranged by SNCC people but
no alliance resulted. The Black Power people would later raise
Malcolm to sainthood but they would not work with him, nor let
him work with them, in life" (To Kill a Black Man, pp. 157-158).
71. Breitman, Last Year of Malcolm X, p. 27.
72. Ibid., p. 34.
73. Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks, p. 128, quoted in Breitman,
Last Year of Malcolm X, p. 35.
74. Malcolm X, "The Harlem 'Hate-Gang' Scare," in Malcolm
X Speaks, ed. Breitman, p. 65.
75. Ibid., p. 69.
76. Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, pp. 159-160.
77. See Leon Trotsky, Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and
Self-Determination (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1978).
78. C. L. R. James, interview in Visions of History, ed. MARHO
(New York: Pantheon, 1984), p. 270.
79. I do not mean to rule out other genres in which Mal-
colm's life and accomplishments may be examined. For an ex-
ample of a science fiction approach to his life and thought, see
Kent Smith, Future X (Los Angeles: Holloway House, 1989),
194


--- PAGE 226 ---
Notes
which appears to have been influenced as much by Schwarzen-
negger's Terminator films as by ideological currents in African-
American culture.
Chapter 3
1. For insightful treatments of black nationalism, see John
Bracey, Jr., August Meier, and Elliot Rudwick, eds., Black Nation-
alism in America (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970); Wilson Jer-
emiah Moses, The Golden Age of Black Nationalism: 1950-1925
(Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books, 1978); and Alphonso Pinkney,
Red, Black, and Green: Black Nationalism in the United States (London:
Cambridge University Press, 1976).
2. For useful treatments of the various stages and varieties
of black nationalism, see Moses, Golden Age of Black Nationalism;
John Bracey, Jr., "Black Nationalism Since Garvey," in Key Issues
in the Afro-American Experience, ed. Nathan Huggins, Martin Kilson,
and Daniel M. Fox (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971),
vol. 2, pp. 259-279; and Mary Frances Berry and John Blassin-
game, Long Memory: The Black Experience in America (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1982), pp. 388-423.
3. Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awak-
ening in the 1960s (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1981); Raymond Hall, Black Separatism in the United States (Hanover,
N.H.: University Press of New England, 1978); Robert Allen, Black
Awakening in Capitalist America: An Analytic History (Garden City,
N.Y.,: Doubleday, 1969); James Cone, Black Theology and Black
Power (New York: Seabury Press, 1969); William Van Deburg, New
Days in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American Culture,
1965-1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992); Hugh
Pearson, The Shadow of the Panther: Huey Newton and the Price of
Black Power in America (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1994).
4. Cited in "Malcolm X," Newsweek, November 16, 1992,
p. 72.
5. See especially, Lawrence Levine, Black Culture and Black
195


--- PAGE 227 ---
Notes
Consciousness: Afro-American Folk Thought from Slavery to Freedom
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1977).
6. I realize that there are divisions in hip-hop culture and
music, including hard-core, pop, black nationalist, and gangsta'
rap. I am referring primarily to the black nationalist expression
phase of rap, though Malcolm's influence is by no means limited
to this subgenre of hip-hop.
7. Quoted in "A Tribute to Malcolm X" [special issue], Black
Beat Magazine, 1992, p. 15.
8. Ibid., p. 13.
9. Ibid., p. 48.
10. The phrase is from Derek Bell, Faces at the Bottom of the
Well: The Permanence of Racism (New York: Basic Books, 1993).
11. I am not suggesting that King was, by himself, the civil
rights movement or that his accomplishments exclusively define
its scope of achievements. I am suggesting that he is the most
powerful symbol of the movement, however, and as a result was
often the most visible target of Malcolm's attacks on its strategies,
goals, and methods.
12. Quoted in "Tribute to Malcolm X," p. 13.
13. Ibid., p. 12.
14. C. Eric Lincoln, quoted in "Malcolm X," pp. 71-72.
15. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America (Boston:
Beacon Press, 1961, 1973). Max Weber defined "theodicy" as the
perception of incongruity between destiny and merit. In strict the-
ological terms, theodicy has to do with justifying the ways of God
to human beings, especially as a response to the problem of evil.
As I use the term here, I view theodicy as the attempt by Malcolm
X and the Nation of Islam to explain the evil of white racism and
the suffering of blacks, by reference to an elaborate demonology
of whiteness and a justification of the Nation of Islam's superior
moral position in relation to white people.
16. Malcolm X, quoted in "Tribute to Malcolm X," p. 50.
17. Ibid, p. 49.
18. For my take on Jeffries, see my essay "Leonard Jeffries
and the Struggle for the Black Mind," in Reflecting Black: African-
196


--- PAGE 228 ---
Notes
American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1993), pp. 157-163.
19. Ibid., p. 157.
20. I realize that Afrocentrism is a complex intellectual
movement composed of many strands. However, I have in mind
here primarily the views of its founder, Molefi Asante. For a sam-
pling of Asante's views, see his Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social
Change, 2d ed.(Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1990).
21. Quoted in "Tribute to Malcolm X," p. 12.
22. C. Delores Tucker, Dionne Warwick, Congresswoman
Maxine Waters, and I, along with music professors and critics,
testified before the U.S. Senate on gangsta' rap in 1994.1 am bas-
ing my comments about their positions on their written testi-
monies, in possession of the author, delivered that day.
23. "Malcolm X," p. 70.
24. Ossie Davis, eulogy of Malcolm X, in Malcolm X: The Man
and His Times, ed. John Henrik Clarke (1969; Trenton, N.J.: Africa
World Press, 1990), p. xii.
25. Patricia Hill Collins, "Learning to Think for Ourselves:
Malcolm X's Black Nationalism Reconsidered," in Malcolm X: In
Our Own Image, ed. Joe Wood (New York: St. Martin's Press,
1992), pp. 62, 78.
26. For more comment on this aspect of King's legacy, see
my op-ed "King's Light, Malcolm's Shadow," New York Times,
January 18, 1993, p. 19.
27. I hope to sketch out briefly in this chapter and in Chapter
6 what I mean by radical democracy. Suffice it say the term seeks
to accent the emancipatory elements of political practice, signi-
fying a broad emphasis on popular participation in the affairs of
the citizenry. For me, radical democrats view issues of race, gen-
der, sexuality, the environment, the workplace, and the like to
be crucial spheres where the negotiation over identity, equality,
and emancipation takes place. My radical democratic principles
commit me to a relentless quest for the sort of political behavior,
economic arrangements, and social conditions that promote a full,
productive life for the common citizenry. For a powerful vision
197


--- PAGE 229 ---
Notes
of radical democracy, and a defense of this term to express and
unite a wide range of progressive politics, see Stanley Aronowitz's
"The Situation of the Left in the United States," Socialist Review
23, no. 3 (1994): 5-79. See also the lively exchange between
Aronowitz and several capable interlocutors, including Amarpal
Dhaliwal, Barbara Ehrenreich, Barbara Epstein, Richard Flacks,
Michael Omi, Howard Winant, and Eli Zaretsky, on pp. 81-150.
28. By now, of course, "sex," "race," and "class" are viewed
as hackneyed terms meant to invoke an automatic knowledge of
the problems to which they refer. The strategy of some critics is
to dismiss the seriousness of these issues because of a terminolog-
ical or ideological impasse. This strategy, I believe, is disingenuous
and fails to account for the bleak persistence of sexism, racism,
and classism. Indeed, I would argue that it is not that we have
tried to employ sophisticated notions of the relationship between
these spheres of social identity and theory, and public struggle,
and they have failed, but that they have never been really tried,
actually implemented. The debate over multiculturalism and its
opponents has encouraged reactionary elements to seize the up-
per hand in the battle to describe our contemporary social land-
scape. But often, these critics fail to highlight either their own
direct complicity in racism, sexism, or classism, or their partici-
pation in traditions of thought that supply the (sometimes subtle)
rationale for these problems' bleak persistence.
29. See Uwe Reinhart, "Cut Costs? Of Course," New York
Times, June 12, 1994, sec. 4A, p. 8.
30. For instance, see Toni Morrison, ed., Race-ing Justice, En-
gendering Power (New York: Pantheon, 1992).
31.1 take up this issue in "Beyond Essentialism: Expanding
African-American Cultural Criticism," in Reflecting Black, pp. xiii-
xxxiii.
32. This does not deny the importance of forms of social ac-
tivity and group behavior manifest in cultural activity such as play
that represents subtle political resistance. For a highly creative
analysis and application of a broadened notion of politics, espe-
cially among working-class black folk, see Robin G. D. Kelley's
198


--- PAGE 230 ---
Notes
brilliant Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class
(New York: Free Press, 1994).
Chapter 4
1. On black popular culture, see Gina Dent, ed., Black Pop-
ular Culture (Seattle: Bay Press, 1992). See also my section on
black popular culture in Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural
Criticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp.
1-111; Manthia Diawara, ed., Black Cinema: Aesthetics and Specta-
torship (New York: Routledge, 1992); Mark Reid, Redefining Black
Film (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993); Ed Guerrero,
Framing Blackness: The African American Image in Film (Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1993); and Thomas Cripps, Making Mov-
ies Black: The Hollywood Movie from World War II to the Civil Rights
Era (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).
2. For my take on black men, see "The Plight of Black
Men," in Reflecting Black, pp. 182-194. See also Jewelle Taylor
Gibbs, ed., Young, Black, and Male in America: An Endangered Species
(Dover, Mass.: Auburn House, 1988).
3. A slew of recent films, from Above the Rim to Inkwell, also
treat aspects of black male life. My analysis here is not an ex-
haustive engagement with the genre of male-centered films.
Rather, I am attempting to provide a reading of dominant inter-
pretive strategies within selected black films that address black
masculinity.
4. For a discussion that provides the context for debates
about black males, and the role the black independent press has
in both fostering the debate and influencing black film, see my
essay "Between Apocalypse and Redemption: John Singleton's
'Boyz N the Hood,' " in Reflecting Black, pp. 90-110.
5. For more extensive commentary on the history of hip-
hop, and critical discussion of rap's moral and political vision, see
my Reflecting Black, pp. 1-22, 167-179, 276-281.
199


--- PAGE 231 ---
Notes
6. Of the many raps that explore these themes, see rap
group Naughty by Nature's song "Ghetto Bastard."
7. Terry Williams, Cocaine Kids: The Inside Story of a Teenage
Drug Gang (Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1989); Mike Davis,
City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles (London: Verso,
1990).
8. Leon Bing,/Do or Die (New York: HarperCollins, 1991).
9. For the notion of fictive kin, see Carol Stack, All Our Kin:
Strategies for Survival in a Black Community (New York: Harper &
Row, 1974).
10. For more on Lee's move from stereotype to archetype,
and its consequences for his artistic vision and his treatment of
film character, see my essay "Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision,"
in Reflecting Black, pp. 23-31.
Chapter 5
1. See David Bradley's discussion of this struggle, and his
role as one of the many hired and fired writers of the screenplay
of Malcolm's life, in "Malcolm's Mythmaking," Transition 56
(1992): 20-46.
2. Ibid.
3. For an exploration of some of the themes of Lee's earlier
work, see my essay "Spike Lee's Neonationalist Vision," in Reflect-
ing Black, African-American Cultural Criticism (Minneapolis: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 23-31.
4. Malcolm X, with the assistance of Alex Haley, The Auto-
biography of Malcolm X (New York: Grove Press, 1964).
5. Bruce Perry, Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black
America (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1991). Malcolm con-
fesses to this act not in his autobiography, but in a speech deliv-
ered a week before his death. See Malcolm X, "There's a
Worldwide Revolution Going On," in Malcolm X: The Last Speeches,
ed. Bruce Perry (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1989), pp. 122-123.
200


--- PAGE 232 ---
Notes
Chapter 6
1. I use the term "collective memory" in the way it is em-
ployed in contemporary historical and sociological scholarship.
Barry Schwartz says that collective memory is "a metaphor that
formulates society's retention and loss of information about its
past in the familiar terms of individual remembering and forget-
ting. Part of the collective memory is, in fact, defined by shared
individual memories, but only a small fraction of society's past is
experienced in this way. Every member of society, even the old-
est, learns most of what he knows about the past through social
institutions—through oral chronicles preserved by tradition, writ-
ten chronicles stored in archives, and commemorative activities
(making portraits, statues, and shrines, collecting relics, naming
places, observing holidays and anniversaries) that enable institu-
tions to distinguish significant events and people from the mun-
dane, and so infuse the past with moral meaning" ("Iconography
and Collective Memory: Lincoln's Image in the American Mind,"
Sociological Quarterly 32, no. 3 (1991): 302.
2. Mary Frances Berry and John Blassingame, Long Memory:
The Black Experience in America (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982), p. x.
3. Ibid., especially chaps. 1, 5.
4. Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution,
1863-1877 (New York: Harper & Row, 1988), pp. 78-123.
5. I am not suggesting that these are the only expressions
of heroism in African-American culture, but these two elements
of African-American life are certainly the central poles of African-
American heroic achievement.
6. Michael Kammen, Mystic Chords of Memory: The Transfor-
mation of Tradition in American Culture (New York: Knopf, 1991),
p. 13.
7. Ibid., p. 122.
8. Ibid.
9. Frederick Douglass, quoted in ibid., pp. 121-122.
10. Barry Schwartz, "Social Change and Collective Memory:
201


--- PAGE 233 ---
Notes
The Democratization of George Washington," American Sociological
Review 56, no. 2 (1991): 221.
11. George Herbert Mead, "The Nature of the Past," in Essays
in Honor of John Dewey, ed. John Coss (New York: Holt, 1929), pp.
235-242; Maurice Halbwachs, The Collective Memory, trans. 3. Dit-
ter, Jr., and Vida Yazdi Ditter (New York: Harper Colophon,
1980).
12. Halbwachs, Collective Memory, p. 222.
13. Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life
(1912; New York: Free Press, 1965), pp. 415, 420; Edward A.
Shils, Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp.
31-32.
14. Schwartz, "Social Change and Collective Memory," p.
222.
15. I am working on an ambitious project to wedge beneath
stereotypes and statistics to deliver a complex, sophisticated anal-
ysis and interpretation of black males in Boys to Men: Black Males
in America (New York: Random House, forthcoming [1997]).
16. See, for instance, Robert Staples, "Black Male Genocide:
A Final Solution to the Race Problem in America," Black Scholar
18, no. 3 (1987): 2-11; and Jewelle Taylor Gibbs, ed., Young Black
and Male in America: An Endangered Species (Dover, Mass.: Auburn
House, 1988).
17. Quoted in James Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America:
A Dream or a Nightmare (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1991), p.
89.
18. William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner
City, the Underclass, and Public Policy (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1987); Mike Davis, Prisoners of the American Dream: Pol-
itics and Economy in the History of the U.S. Working Class (London:
Verso, 1986).
19. Quoted in Cone, Martin and Malcolm and America, p. 89.
20. Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and State-
ments, ed. George Breitman (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1965),
p. 169.
202


--- PAGE 234 ---
INDEX
Aerosmith, 84
Aesthetic, black populist, 114. See also
Art, and truth; Artists, black
Affirmative action, 179
Africa, trips to, 69
African-Americans, religious practices
of, 164. See also Culture, African-
American
Afrika Bambaata, 83
Afro-American, The, 74
Afrocentrism, 91-92, 188, 197n.20
AIDS infection, 108
Alexander, Elizabeth, 19
AH, Muhammad, 142
All, Shahrazad, 73
Amnesia, racial, 148-149, 150
Amsterdam, News, The, 74
Anger
of black male students, xx
Malcolm's articulation of, 9
in rap music, 86, 123
and rhetorical resistance, 47
Anti-intellectualism, 60
Anti-Semitism, 91-92, 177
Aronowitz, Stanley, 105
Arson, of Malcolm's home, 58,
143
Art, and truth, 129. See also Music
Artists, black
cultural, 106
filmmakers, 106, 107, 108
ghetto reinvented by, 109
rap, 93, 158, 163
Assassination, of Malcolm, 47, 82,
190n.37, 191n.38
Attenborough, Sir Richard, 133
Atwater, Lee, 157
Audubon Ballroom, Malcolm's speech
at, 69
Augustine, 135
Authenticity
debate about, 188n.21
politics of, xii, xiii
Autobiography of Malcolm X, The, 13,
23, 55, 134-135, 143, 186n.5
Baccdafuccup, xx
Backlash, racist, 154. See also Racism
Baraka, Amiri, 131, 133, 188n.21
Bassett, Angela, 112, 141
Becker, Ernest, 154
Bibliographies, on Malcolm, I85n.2
Bigotry, ethnic, xxii
Bilalian News, 74
Bing, Leon, 117
Biography, film, 125-127. See also
Psychobiography
Black Legionnaires, 4
Blackman 's Guide to Understanding the
Blackwoman, The (Ali), 73
Black men, 165
in American society, 92-93
causes of death among, 168
crisis of, 167
in film, 199n.3
and Malcolm's legacy, 169
203


--- PAGE 235 ---
Index
Black men (continued)
mutual contempt among, 171
negative images of, 168-69
violence among, 166-169, 171-172
young, 147, 166
Blackness
of Malcolm, xi
and strength, 57
Black News, 74
Black Panthers, 25, 81, 82
Black Power movement, 25, 81,
186n.8
Black studies, 60-61
Blues artists, 93
Boggs, James, 30
Bonding, black male rituals of, 125
Bourgeoisie, black, 5
BoyzNthe Hood (Singleton), 111, 115
Bradley, David, 130
Brainwashing, religious, 74
Break dancing, 83
Breitman, George, 65-69
Brown, James, 85
Brown v. Board of Education, 7
Brown University, Malcolm X seminar
at, ix-x, xi, xvi
Burglary, 6
Bush, George, 154, 155
Businesses, racial antipathy of, 74
Busy Bee, 83
By Any Means Necessary: Speeches,
Interviews, and a Letter (Malcolm),
3, 65, 71, 79
Cagney, James, 121
Canonization, of Malcolm, 73
Capitalism
black, 25
criticism of, 183
global, 169
King's challenge to, 45, 100-101,
102
Malcolm on, 70, 102
Care, political ethic of, 181
Carmichael, Stokely, 25, 81
Carson, Clayborne, 49
Carson-Newman College, xviii
Charity, black religious conception of,
103
Chestnut, Morris, 112
Child-care issues, 155
Childhood, Malcolm's, 56
Christianity. See also Religion
in African-American culture, 37
Malcolm's challenge to, 46
Church
in African-American culture, 36-37
misogynist mythology of, 94
Cinema, new black, 107. See also
Filmmakers, young black
Citizenship, national, 121
City of Quartz (Davis), 117
Civil disobedience, nonviolent, 9, 26
Civil Rights Division, at Department of
Justice, 156
Civil rights movement, 8, 28, 88
church as base of, 16
gains of, 154
King as symbol of, 196n.l 1
shift in strategies of, 100
Clarke, John Henrik, 29
Class, and black America, 101-102
Class antagonism, 49
Class differences, and black
nationalism, 99
Classism, 183,193n.28
Class prejudice, and search for
identity, 91
Cleage, Albert, 29, 31, 65, 69
Clinton, Bill, 152, 153, 154-161, 165
Clinton, George, 85
Cocaine Kids (Williams), 117
Coexistence, social, 46
Cold Rush Brothers, 83
Collins, Patricia Hill, 97
"Colonial dilemma," xxii
204


--- PAGE 236 ---
Index
Colonialism, 70
Commercialization, of Malcolm's
memory, 131
Commodification, of Malcolm, 74, 79
Cone, James, 38, 40-41, 43, 44, 65, 82
Conflict resolution, in black
communities, 180-181
Congressional Black Caucus, 156
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE),
25
Consciousness, black, 85, 87
Contradictions, Malcolm's, xxi-xxii,
45, 49
Cooke, Sam, 140
Cooperation, interracial, 46
"Cop Killer" (Ice-T), 115
Coppola, Francis Ford, 136
Cosby, Bill, 93, 171
Cotton Club, The (Coppola), 136
Country music, 84
Crime,black-on-black, 166, 168, 180
Criminality, of underground political
economies, 75
Critical approach, 35-36
Cultural style, black, xxiv
Culture, African-American
collective memory of, 148
consciousness about, 63
corporate commemoration of, 28
critical investigation of, 62-63
film in, 124
heroic traditions in, 147, 201n.5
impact of, on Malcolm's life, 72
influence of, on American life, 107
interpretation of, 62
Malcolm's significance in, 22-24
and oppositional thinking, 41-42
oral tradition in, 85, 94, 146
quest for black manhood in, 113
racism in, 36-37
rhetorical resistance in, 15—16
white interpretations of, 61
young men in, 166-167
Culture, black. See Culture, African-
American
Culture, white, black nationalist
repudiation of, 48
Dash, Julie, 126
Daughters of the Dust (Dash), 126
Davis, Mike, 117
Davis, Ossie, 96, 126
Death and Life of Malcolm X, The
(Goldman), 38, 46
Deindustrialization, social impact
of, 8
Democracy, radical, 101, 102, 105,
161
antiracist struggle in, 164
defense of, 152
explanation of, 197n.27
and racial violence, 163
religion in, 164-165
social criticism in, 165
Democratic Leadership Council, 156
Detroit Red, 15, 135
"Devil," white man as, 11, 34, 138,
187n.l9
Dickerson, Ernest, 117, 120, 121, 122,
125, 126
Discourse, black nationalist, 81. See
also Nationalism, black
Distorting, in oral tradition, 95
DJ Kool Hurk, 83
Do the Right Thing (Lee), 125, 132,
133, 141
Douglass, Frederick, 44, 135, 147,
148-149
Dr. Ore, 93
Drugs
and black teens, 83
as metaphor, 84
Drummond, Reana E., Ill
Du Bois, W. E. B., 42, 44, 190n.33
Durkheim, Emile, 150
Dyson, Michael E., xvi-xviii
205


--- PAGE 237 ---
Index
Education
misogynist mythology of, 94
multicultural, 92
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 105
Elderly, 102
Ellison, Ralph, 41
Elmessiri, Abdelwahab M., 31
Employment
vs. unemployment, 169
vs. welfare, 162-163
End of White World Supremacy: Four
Speeches by Malcolm X (Karim), 32,
33-35
Equality
black religious conception of, 37, 103
radical democratic perspective on,
103-104
Erikson, Erik, 52
Essentialism, racial, xxii
Ethnosaurs, 177
Eurocentrism, scholarship of, 92
Experience
politics of, xii
white interpretation of black, 48,
59-60, 62
Family
gang as, 120, 121
in ghetto, 119
Farmer, James, 25, 136
Farrakhan, Louis, 91, 92, 141, 178
FBI files, 50
Ferrell, Tyra, 112
Film, black, masculinity in, 199n.3
Filmmakers, young black, 106, 107, 108
Fishburne, Laurence, 112
40 Acres and a Mule Shops, 132
Foster homes, Malcolm in, 5
Franti, Michael, 85
Fratricide, 123
Freedom
black religious conception of, 37,
103
and ghetto experience, 109
radical democratic perspective on,
103
Freeman, Al, Jr., 138
Freud, Sigmund, 51, 135
Freudianism, limitations of, 53. See
also Psychobiography
Funky 4 Plus 1, 83
Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of
Militant Nonviolence (Erikson), 52
Gangs
as family unit, 121
ghetto, 83
tough love of, 117
Gangsta' rap, xxi, 84, 93, 197n.22. See
also Rap culture
attacks on, 95
homophobia of, 95
misogynism of, 94
Garnett, Henry Highland, 147
Garvey, Marcus, 4, 54
Gaye, Marvin, 112
Gays, 102
Gender differences. See also Sexism
and black America, 101
Malcolm's treatment of, 97-98
in public-moralist perspective, 43-
44
Gender oppression, 14, 49
Generational rift, xx-xxi, 122
Gentrification, 75, 169
Ghetto
black-on-black crime in, 180
in black film, 116
lifelessness of, 118
and politics of black masculinity,
108
in popular culture, 113-114
in rap music, 114-115
Ghetto origins, Malcolm's, xi, 40
Ghetto poor, 74, 86, 102, 131, 156
Gilliard, Lawrence, Jr., 110
206


--- PAGE 238 ---
Index
Goldman, Peter, 38, 46-48, 59, 65, 69
Gooding, Cuba, Jr., 112
Goodman, Benjamin, 34
Gospel music, 122-123
Graffiti, 83
Grandmaster Melle Mel, 83
Greer, Sonny, 57
Guinier, Lani, 156
Gumbel, Bryant, 93
Guns, as metaphor, 84
Hadj. See Mecca
Haitians, and Clinton policy, 155-156
Halbwachs, Maurice, 149
Haley, Alex, 13, 23, 55, 134, 186n.5
Hall, Albert, 137
Hampton, Lionel, 57
Harlem, 5
"Harlem 'Hate-Gang' Scare, The"
(Malcolm), 70
Harlem Nights (Murphy), 136
Harmony, racial, 44-45
Harris, Leslie, 126
Healthcare, universal, 103
Hero, Malcolm as, 24, 29-30, 79, 82,
139, 145, 150, 172
Heroism, in African-American culture,
147, 201n.5
Hero worship, 74, 126, 140
Hill, Anita, 104, 105, 113
Hip-hop culture, 74, 82-83, 158
attacks on, 182
beginnings of, 83-84
and black films, 115
black masculinity in, 96
divisions in, 196n.6
gender relations in, 104
lexicon of, 121
rage in, 87
History, African-American, 61, 75
black, 62, 92, 193n.61
conspiracy theory of, 170
writing of, 193n.61
History of the Russian Revolution
(Trotsky), 71
Hollywood, and film on Malcolm, 130
Holocaust-versus-slavery debate, 179
Homeboy-from-the-hood
backgrounds, xix
Homicide, black-on-black, 166, 168.
See also Violence
Homophobia, xxii, 14, 58
of gangsta' rap, 95
of rap culture, 163
Homosexuality, Malcolm's alleged, 58,
143
Horton, Willie, 157
Households, single-parent, 95
Human rights, 103
Human rights advocate, Malcolm as,
14-15
Hustling tactics, Malcolm's, xv, 5-6,
133, 135, 136, 137
Ice Cube, 112, 115
Identity
black female, 108
erosion of communal, 80
male, 58
national, 121
Identity, racial
narrow visions of, 104
search for, 90-91
social construction of, 105
Identity politics, x
"I Have a Dream" (King), 27
Imprisonment, of black men, 108
Inequality, religious resistance to, 37.
See also Equality
Infant mortality, 108
Influence, sharing of, 179
Injustice
economic, 181
religious resistance to, 37
Integration, vs. separation, 44
Integrationism, 44
207


--- PAGE 239 ---
Index
Integrationist
assimilationist emphasis of, 81
bourgeois liberal, 100
Malcolm as, 65
International audience, Malcolm's,
xxiii
Internationalist, Malcolm as, 65
Interpretive privilege, hierarchy of,
xix
Islam, Malcolm's embrace of, 13
Islam, Nation of, 6, 189n.25
apolitical stance of, 11
black puritanism of, 137
dissociation from, 12, 34, 64, 65-66,
127
internal corruption of, 11
led by Farrakhan, 141-142
membership of, 8-9
religious worldview of, 89
role of, 39
women in, 10
Jackson, Jesse, xx, 158, 159
Jackson, Joseph H., 37
James, C. L. R., 71
Jeffries, Leonard, 91
Jewison, Norman, 130
Jews, blacks and, 177, 178-180
Jordan, Michael, 93, 171
Juice (Dickerson), 115, 117, 120, 121,
123, 124
Jungle Fever (Lee), 125, 132, 136
Just Another Girl on the IRT (Harris),
126
Justice
black religious conception of, 37,
103
radical democratic perspective on,
103-104
Kammen, Michael, 148
Karim, Benjamin, 32, 33-35
Kennedy, John F., 12, 155
Kgositsile, W. Keorapetse, 31
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 3, 7-8, 22,
37, 176
on American society, 49
civil rights movement led by, 88,
196n.ll
comparative analysis with Malcolm,
38, 41, 42-43, 189n.31
cultural manipulation of, 26-28
death of, 15
legacy of, 100
Lomax's criticisms of, 45
martyrdom of, 143
nonviolent philosophy of, 87, 89
official commemoration of, 27—29
social agenda of, 9-10
and rhetorical resistance, 16
trajectory analysis of life of, 64
King, Rodney, xii, 163
Kool Moe Dee, 83
Koreans, conflicts with, 177-178
KRS-One, 92
KuKluxKlan, 4, 54, 125
Kurds Blow, 83
Last Speeches, The (Malcolm), 21, 145
Last Year of Malcolm X: The Evolution of
a Revolutionary, The (Breitman),
65-69
Latinos, and Latinas, 156
religious practices of, 164
tensions with, 177-178
Leadership, black, xiv, 30, 176
Christian revolutionary, 37
and class differences, 43
sexually demonized, 59
skepticism about, xv
League of Revolutionary Black
Workers, 25
Leakey, Louis S. B., 6
Lean, David, 133
Lee, Spike, 121-122, 124, 125-127,
130, 136, 188
208


--- PAGE 240 ---
Index
Legacy, Malcolm's, 22, 25, 30, 96-97
criticism of, 151
future of, 75, 144
intellectual, 129
promising dimension of, 152
on racial domination, 100
and rap culture, 88-89
and young black men, 146-147,
165-166
Lesbians, 102
Liberalism
black bourgeois, 88
within Democratic party, 156
Liberation movements, black, 54
Liberation theology, black, 41
Lichtman, Richard, 51-52
Lincoln, C. Eric, 89
Lindo, Delroy, 137
Litmus test, racial, xi
Little, Earl, 3-4, 54, 58, 143
Little, Louise, 4-5
Little, Malcolm, 135. See also X,
Malcolm
Lomax, Louis, 38-40, 44, 48, 65
Long, Nia, 112
Los Angeles, 158, 159, 163
"Lost generation," 182
Love
black male, 116-117
interracial, 136
McCarthyism, 50
Machismo, 121, 122
McKissick, Floyd, 25
Magnetism, Malcolm's, 89
Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed
Black America (Perry), 55-59
Malcolm X (Lee), 125-127
criminal phase in, 136-137
critique of, 132, 143
early problems with, 130-131
as epic, 133-134
last year in, 139-140
murder scene in, 140
Nation of Islam stage in, 138-139
pace of, 134
prison period in, 137-138
in theaters, 141
Malcolm X: The Last Speeches, vii, 65
Malcolm X: The Man and His Times
(Clarke), 29-30
Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and
Statements, 65, 70, 71, 107, 175
Malone, Mark, 117
Mandela, Nelson, 142-143
Manhood, black, Malcolm as symbol
of, 96. See also Black men
Manichaean mind-set, xii
Marginalism, perspective of, 53
Marketing, of Malcolm, xiii
Martin and Malcolm and America: A
Dream or a Nightmare? (Cone), 38,
40-41
Marxism, 51, 53
Masculinity
Malcolm's, xi
politics of, 92
Mason Junior High School, 5
Matriarchy, black, 31, 110
Maturity, Malcolm's, xxiii
Mead, George Herbert,. 149
Mecca
Malcolm's transformation after,
47
religious pilgrimage to, 12—13, 31,
134
Media, violence and criminality in,
120-121
Memorabilia, Malcolm, 131
Memory, Malcolm's, uses of, xxv. See
also Legacy, Malcolm's
Memory, collective
of black culture, 148
and commemoration rites, 150
conservative view of, 151, 152
constructionist approach to, 151
209


--- PAGE 241 ---
Index
Memory, collective (continued)
cultural achievement in, 145-146,
148
explanation of, 201n.l
preservation of, 149
Menace H Society (Hughes), 123, 124
Message, Malcolm's, and black youth,
142. See also Legacy, Malcolm's
Middle class, black, 109
Ministry, Malcolm's, 6-7
criticism of, 48
direction of, 8-9
meaning of, 47
public, 11
Minorities
and "political correctness," x
and social goods, 154
Misogyny, 10-11
in African-American culture, 94
of rap culture, 163
roots of, 104
Mo' Better Blues (Lee), 125
Montgomery, Ala., bus boycott in, 7
Moral authority, Malcolm's, xiii-xv.
See also Public moralist
Morality, American public, 46
Morrison, Toni, 178
Morton, Jelly Roll, 93
Muhammad, Elijah, xiv, xv, 6, 11, 33,
133, 137, 138
Malcolm as spokesman for, 7, 54
Malcolm's severance from, 64, 65-
66, 140
message of, 9
public reprimand from, 12
Muhammad, Khalid Abdul, 91, 178
Multiculturalism, x
Murphy, Eddie, 136
Murray, Charles, 161
Music
gospel, 122-123
of 1990s, 84
rap, 83, 114, 160
Muslim Mosque, 12, 134
Muslims, Black, 40, 189n.25
"Myths About Malcolm X" (Cleage),
31
"Nanny-gate" affair, 155
Nation of Islam. See Islam, Nation of
Nationalism
cultural, 114
religious, 187n.28
revolutionary, 189n.28
vs. separatism, 66
white, 80, 99
Nationalism, black, 3-4, 22, 195n.l
and class differences, 99
cultural phase of, 74, 110
dilemma of, 33
film revival of, 116
fundamental appeal of, 90-91
vs. liberal integrationist ideology,
81
Malcolm's, 40-41, 66-68, 76, 89,
194n.70
of 1960s, 113
reemergence of, 96, 145
relative failure of, 101
renaissance of, 79-80
and role of women, 97-98
Sister Souljah's defense of, 160
and socialism, 67, 68-69
Trotskyist views of, 71
National service, 155
Neonationalism, black, xiii. See also
Nationalism, black
New Jack City (Van Peebles), 115-117
"New jack cop," 115
New York City, 114
Nietzsche, Fried rich, 6
Nuclear holocaust, 50
Odom, George T., 110
Omaha, Nebraska, 3
Onyx, xx
210


--- PAGE 242 ---
Index
Oppression
racial and class, xi
religious resistance to, 37
Oral tradition, black, 85, 93, 94, 95,
146
Organization of African Unity (OAU),
12
Organization of Afro-American Unity
(OAAU), 12,47, 67, 72, 134
Pan-Africanism, 32
Paradigm shifts, 185n.l
Parks, Gordon, 29
Parks, Rosa, 7
Patriarchy, practice of, 98
"p.c." See "Political correctness"
Perry, Bruce, 55-59, 65
"Phil Donahue Show," 160
Poe, Edgar Allan, 181
Poetic Justice (Singleton), 127
Police brutality, 163
"Political correctness," x
Political economies, underground,
75
Political Legacy of Malcolm X, The
(T'Shaka), 31-33
Politics
black feminist, 97
of black masculinity, 106, 108
black sexual, 58
of cultural nationalism, 114
identity, x
of Lee's film on Malcolm, 130-131
of meaning, 165
of opposition to racism, 164
penis, 125
progressive black, 101
of public attention, 153-154
racial, xx, 23
of racial privilege, 130
among working-class black,
198n.31
Popularity, of Malcolm, 22, 76
Postindustrialism, 124, 182-183
Poverty, 169
Power, distribution of, 179
Press
independent black, 73, 74, 112
mainstream, 74
Pride, black, 25
Princeton University, xviii
Prison, Malcolm in, 6, 137-138
Prophet, Malcolm as, 54
Prosser, Gabriel, 147
Protest leaders, black, 30
Psyche, corporate black, xv
Psychoanalytic theory, 51, 191n.43
Psychobiography, 192n.46
examples of, 52
features of, 53
limitations of, 59, 63
Perry's, 55-60
purpose of, 51
Wolfenstein's, 52-55, 59-60
Publications, black, 74
Public moralist
Clinton as, 158
Malcolm as, 24, 36-51
notion of, 190n.36
Public rallies, Malcolm's, 86
Publishing monopoly, 193n.61
Puritanism
black moral, xxi
of Nation of Islam, 7
Purity, politics of, xiii
Quayle, Dan, 157
Race
cultural determination of, 55
as politically constructed category,
192n.51
Racial discourse, x, xii
Racial purity
American obsession with, xxii
European quest for, xii
211


--- PAGE 243 ---
Index
Racism, 198n.28
American, 13, 37-38, 88
black resistance to, 37-38, 79
and black teens, 83
cultural, 74
heroic response to, 150
impact of, on African-American
culture, 36-37
meanings of, 54
permanence of, 88
resisting, 15
resurgent, 87
revived, 145
and search for identity, 91
Trotskyist views of, 71
and young black men, 146-147
Racism, white, xv, 4
black bourgeois protest of, 89
and black manhood, 126
cultural costs of, 10
evil of, 90
and heroic traditions, 147
resistance to, 75
Radicalism. See also Democracy,
radical
black, 26
of Malcolm, 45
masked, 176
Radio stations, of Nation of Islam, 7
Rage, black, 87, 158. See also
Anger
Rainbow Conference, 157, 159
"Raising Hell" (Run-D.M.C), 84
Rap artists
as ethnographers, 163
rage and, 158
young black male, 93
Rap culture, 82, 83. See also Gangsta'
rap
black nationalist expression of,
196n.6
form in, 85
and Malcolm's legacy, 88-89
Rap music
development of, 114-115
lyrics, 113
Reagan, Ronald, 27, 154, 155
era of, 116
Received view, of Malcolm, 35
"Reciprocal bleeding," 9
Reconstruction
and black nationalism, 80
heroic traditions during, 147
Record industry, 93-94
Religion
and black nationalism, 89
misogynist mythology of, 94
moral cohesion provided by, 54
and racism, 164
Religious conversions, Malcolm's, 6,
22, 64
Republic of New Africa, 25
Revolutionary figure, Malcolm as, 24,
68-69, 130
Revolutionary leaders, black Christian,
37. See also Leadership, black
Rhetorical resistance, 15-16
Malcolm's, 47, 87
of rap culture, 158-159
sermons, 16
Rich, Matty, 108, 117, 118, 122, 126
Riots
in Los Angeles, 163
of 1967, 15
Robeson, Paul, 34
Robinson, Patricia, 31
Robinson, Randall, 156
Role model, Malcolm as, 86
Roxbury, Massachusetts, 5
Run-D.M.C., 84
Rust Belt, 8
Saint, Malcolm as, 24, 25-36, 73
Salvation, black male, 112-113
Sampson, Frederick, G., 16
Sanders, Ann D., 110
212


--- PAGE 244 ---
Index
Sanders, Stephan, xxii
Sanon, Barbara, 110
Scapegoating, x, 176
School Daze (Lee), 125, 132
Schwartz, Barry, 149, 150
Science fiction approach, 194n.79
Self-awareness, racial, 92
Self-criticism, of Malcolm, 17
Self-defense, 3, 31
Self-destruction, 56, 182
Self-determination, black, 9, 25, 80,
103
Self-discipline, 170
Self-hatred, 146-147, 171
Self-realization, and ghetto
experience, 109
Self-reliance, 170
Seminar, on Malcolm, viii-x, xi, xvi
Senate subcommittee, U.S., testifying
before, xxi
Separatism
advocation of, 6
definition of, 66
ideology of, 33
Sermon, black, 16
Sex, and problems of black America,
101
Sexism, 198n.28. See also Gender
differences; Misogyny
Malcolm's, 151
roots of, 104
Sex life, Malcolm's, 58-59
Shabazz, Betty, 19, 141
She's Gotta Have It (Lee), 124
Shils, Edward, 150
Signifying practices, 94, 95
Sinatra, Frank, 93
Singleton, John, 111, 113, 126, 127,
188
Sister Souljah, 157-158, 159, 160
Slavery, 80
collective memory of, 148
heroic traditions during, 147
Snipes, Wesley, 116
Snoop Doggy Dogg, xxi, 93, 94
Social action, Malcolm's, 22
Social criticism
of radical democrats, 164, 165
sexual hierarchy of, 43-44
Social dislocation, 75
Social goods, 36, 153-154
Socialism
black nationalism and, 67, 68-69
cooperative, 25
Malcolm on, 70
Socialist movements, 13
Socialist Workers Party, 65
Social protest, 89, 150
Social reconstruction, 106
Social revolution, 49
South Central (Stone), 124
Speeches, Malcolm's
at Audubon Ballroom, 69
rhythms of, 85
Spirituality, black, 89, 139
Stereotyping, x
Stone, Oliver, 124
Straight Out of Brooklyn (Rich), 108-
111, 117, 118-120, 121, 122,
123
Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC), 25, 81-82
Students, black female, xix
Survival, and collective memory,
146
Symbol, Malcolm as, 130
Television, violence on, 120-121. See
also Violence
Temples, of Nation of Islam, 7
Theodicy
black public, 89-90, 181
definition of, 196n.l5
Theological premises, Malcolm's, 90
Thick description, 23, 186n.4
Thomas, Clarence, 104, 105, 113
213


--- PAGE 245 ---
Index
Toasts, 93
To Kill a Black Man (Lomax), 38, 41,
48
Tough love, 117
Trajectory analysis, 63-72
Trotsky, Leon, 71
Truth, Suzanna, 147
T'Shaka, 31-33, 65, 69
Tubman, Harriet, 147
Tucker, C. Delores, 94, 95, 197n.22
Tupac Shakur, 93, 115, 127
Turner, Henry, 147
Turner, Nat, 37, 147
Ultramagnetic M.C., 86-87
Unemployment, 169
Unity
black, 29
black-white, 32
racial, 105
Universal Negro Improvement
Association (UNIA), 4, 54
Universities, racial antipathy of, 74
Urban crises, 158, 166
Utopian interpretations, of black
separatist ideology, 33
Van Peebles, Mario, 115-116, 126
Vernon, Kate, 136
Victim, Malcolm as, 24
Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the
Black Revolution, The
(Wolfenstein), 52
Violence
and black men, 171, 166-169
and black teens, 83
and criminality, 120
of ghetto life, 124
Malcolm's advocacy of, 45
as metaphor, 84
vs. nonviolence, 44
political utility of, 159
rap and, 86
of underground political economies,
75
victims of, 182
and young black men, 146-147
Vocation, Malcolm's, 51, 82
Voting Rights Act, 179
Walker, Wyatt Tee, 30-31
Warwick, Dionne, 94, 95, 197n.22
Washington, Booker T., 37, 42, 135
Washington, Denzel, 135
Waters, Maxine, 197n.22
Wealth, circulation of, 179
Welfare, vs. employment, 162-163
Welfare queens, 113
Welfare system, 161
When the Word Is Given: A Report on
Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, and
the Black Muslim World (Lomax),
38-40
"White devil" theory of, 11, 34, 138,
187n.l9
White Heat, 120
White supremacy, worldwide system
of, 32
Williams, Cootie, 57
Williams, Terry, 117
Wilson, Charles, 30
Wolfenstein, Eugene Victor, 52-55, 59
Women, in employment force, 162
Women, black, xix
and black male salvation, 112-113
in contemporary film, 126
demonization of, 97
Malcolm's put-down of, 10-11
in Nation of Islam, 10-11
single, 102
stereotyping of, 161
suffering-servant role of, 110
as working mothers, 102
Women bashing, in black film, 116
Work ethic, 170
Workfare solutions, 163
214


--- PAGE 246 ---
Index
Working class, 99, 101, 106, 131, 156 future representation of, xxiii-xxiv
Worldview last year of, 14, 63-72, 134, 176
of Nation of Islam, 89 mature, 161
white American moral, 45 as minister of Nation of Islam, 6-12
psychobiography of, 51-62
X, Malcolm and rhetorical resistance, 16
birth of, 3 "Young Socialist" interview of, 67,
childhood of, 56-57 71
compared with King, 42-43,
189n.31 Youth, black, 142
death of, 13 Yuppies, 109
education of, 5, 135
feminist politics of, 97-98 Zero-sum thinking, 154
215

