=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Manning Marabele-Let Nobody Turn Us Around.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 713
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:15:03.608836
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
LET
NOBODY
TURN US
AROUND


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS , INC .
Lanham • Boulder • New York • Oxford
LET
NOBODY
TURN US
AROUND
Voices of Resistance, 
Reform, and Renewal
AN AFRICAN AMERICAN ANTHOLOGY
Second Edition
editors
Manning Marable
Leith Mullings


--- PAGE 5 ---
Every reasonable effort to secure permission and acknowledge copyright owners of
material used in this book has been made. Any copyright owners who have not been
properly identified and acknowledged should contact us so that corrections can be made.
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC.
Published in the United States of America
by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowmanlittlefield.com
Estover Road
Plymouth PL6 7PY
United Kingdom
Copyright © 2009 by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publisher.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Let nobody turn us around : an African American anthology : voices of resistance,
reform, and renewal / Manning Marable and Leith Mullings, editors. — 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-7425-6056-7 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-0-7425-6057-4 (pbk. : alk. paper
ISBN 978-0-7425-6545-6 (electronic)
1. African Americans—History—Sources. 2. African Americans—Civil rights—
History—Sources. 3. African Americans—Social conditions—Sources. I. Marable,
Manning, 1950– II. Mullings, Leith.
E184.6.L48 2009
973'.0496073—dc22
2009005113
Printed in the United States of America
/H11009∞™The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence 
of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48–1984.


--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION xiii
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION xvii
INTRODUCTION Resistance, Reform, and Renewal xxi
in the Black Experience
SECTION ONE FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND 1
ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861
1. “On Being Brought from Africa to America” 7
Equiano,” Phillis Wheatley, 1768
2. “The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah 9
Equiano,” Olaudah Equiano, 1789
3. “Thus Doth Ethiopia Stretch Forth Her Hand from 17
Slavery, to Freedom and Equality,” Prince Hall, 1797
4. The Founding of the African Methodist 20
Episcopal Church, Richard Allen, 1816
5. David Walker’s “Appeal,” 1829–1830 24
6. The Statement of Nat Turner, 1831 34
7. Slaves Are Prohibited to Read and Write by Law 39
8. “What If I Am a Woman?” Maria W. Stewart, 1833 40
9. A Slave Denied the Rights to Marry, Letter of 46
Milo Thompson, Slave, 1834
10. The Selling of Slaves, Advertisement, 1835 47
11. Solomon Northrup Describes a New Orleans 49
Slave Auction, 1841


--- PAGE 7 ---
12. Cinque and the Amistad Revolt, 1841 51
13. “Let Your Motto Be Resistance!” 56
Henry Highland Garnet, 1843
14. “Slavery as It Is,” William Wells Brown, 1847 63
15. “A’n’t I a Woman?” Sojourner Truth, 1851 66
16. “A Plea for Emigration, or, Notes of Canada West” 68
Mary Ann Shadd Cary, 1852
17. A Black Nationalist Manifesto, 70
Martin R. Delany, 1852
18. “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” 84
Frederick Douglass, 1852
19. “No Rights That a White Man Is Bound to Respect”: 88
The Dred Scott Case and Its Aftermath
20. “Whenever the Colored Man Is Elevated, It Will 107
Be by His Own Exertions,” John S. Rock, 1858
21. The Spirituals: “Go Down, Moses” and 111
“Didn’t My Lord Deliver Daniel”
SECTION TWO RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION: THE AFTERMATH 115
OF SLAVERY AND THE DAWN OF SEGREGATION, 
1861–1915
1. “What the Black Man Wants,” 122
Frederick Douglass, 1865
2. Henry McNeal Turner, Black Christian Nationalist 128
3. Black Urban Workers during Reconstruction 132
Anonymous Document on the National Colored Labor Convention, 1869
New York Tribune Article on African-American Workers, 1870
4. “Labor and Capital Are in Deadly Conflict,” 135
T. Thomas Fortune, 1886
5. Edward Wilmot Blyden and the African Diaspora 138
6. “The Democratic Idea Is Humanity,” 150
Alexander Crummell, 1888
vi CONTENTS


--- PAGE 8 ---
CONTENTS vii
7. “A Voice from the South,” Anna Julia Cooper, 1892 159
8. The National Association of Colored Women: 165
Mary Church Terrell and Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin
9. “I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,” 171
Paul Laurence Dunbar
10. Booker T. Washington and the Politics 174
of Accommodation
“Atlanta Exposition Address”
“My View of Segregation Laws”
11. William Monroe Trotter and the Boston Guardian 181
12. Race and the Southern Worker 183
“A Negro Woman Speaks”
“The Race Question a Class Question”
“Negro Workers!”
13. Ida B. Wells-Barnett, Crusader for Justice 191
14. William Edward Burghardt Du Bois 195
Excerpts from “The Conservation of Races”
Excerpts from 
The Souls of Black Folk
15. The Niagara Movement, 1905 209
16. Hubert Henry Harrison, Black 213
Revolutionary Nationalist
SECTION THREE FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: THE GREAT MIGRATION, 217
HARLEM RENAISSANCE, AND WORLD WAR, 1915–1954
1. Black Conflict over World War I 224
W. E. B. Du Bois, “Close Ranks”
Hubert H. Harrison, “The Descent of Du Bois”
W. E. B. Du Bois, “Returning Soldiers”
2. “If We Must Die,” Claude McKay, 1919 227
3. Black Bolsheviks: Cyril V . Briggs and Claude McKay 228
“What the African Blood Brotherhood Stands For” 
“Soviet Russia and the Negro”
4. Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro 241
Improvement Association


--- PAGE 9 ---
“Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World”
“An Appeal to the Conscience of the Black Race to See Itself”
5. “Women as Leaders,” 251
Amy Euphemia Jacques Garvey, 1925
6. Langston Hughes and the Harlem Renaissance 253
“The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain”
“My America”
Poems
7. “The Negro Woman and the Ballot,” 264
Alice Moore Dunbar-Nelson, 1927
8. James Weldon Johnson and Harlem in the 1920s 267
“Harlem: The Culture Capital”
9. Black Workers in the Great Depression 273
10. The Scottsboro Trials, 1930s 279
11. “You Cannot Kill the Working Class,” 281
Angelo Herndon, 1933
“Speech to the Jury, January 17, 1933” 
Excerpt from 
You Cannot Kill the Working Class
12. Hosea Hudson, Black Communist Activist 288
13. “Breaking the Bars to Brotherhood,” 294
Mary McLeod Bethune, 1935
14. Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., and the Fight for 298
Black Employment in Harlem
15. Black Women Workers during the Great Depression 300
Elaine Ellis, “Women of the Cotton Fields” 
Naomi Ward, “I Am a Domestic”
16. Southern Negro Youth Conference, 1939 306
17. A. Philip Randolph and the Negro March on 308
Washington Movement, 1941
18. Charles Hamilton Houston and the War Effort 314
among African Americans, 1944
19. “An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the 316
Negro Woman!” Claudia Jones, 1949
viii CONTENTS


--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS ix
20. “The Negro Artist Looks Ahead,” 326
Paul Robeson, 1951
21. Thurgood Marshall: The Brown Decision and 331
the Struggle for School Desegregation
SECTION FOUR WE SHALL OVERCOME: THE SECOND RECONSTRUCTION, 341
1954–1975
1. Rosa Parks, Jo Ann Robinson, and the 352
Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955–1956
Jo Ann Robinson’s Letter to Mayor of Montgomery
Interview with Rosa Parks
Excerpts from Jo Ann Robinson’s Account of the Boycott
2. Roy Wilkins and the NAACP 362
3. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 367
1957
4. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 371
and the Sit-In Movement, 1960
5. Freedom Songs, 1960s 372
“We Shall Overcome”
“Ain’t Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me ’Round”
6. “We Need Group-Centered Leadership,” 375
Ella Baker
7. Martin Luther King, Jr., and Nonviolence 377
Excerpt from “Nonviolence and Racial Justice,” 1957
“I Have a Dream,” 1963
8. “The Revolution Is at Hand,” John R. Lewis, 1963 383
9. “The Salvation of American Negroes Lies 385
in Socialism,” W. E. B. Du Bois
10. “The Special Plight and the Role of Black Women,” 395
Fannie Lou Hamer
11. “SNCC Position Paper: Women in the Movement,” 399
1964
12. Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam 401
13. Malcolm X and Revolutionary Black Nationalism 404


--- PAGE 11 ---
“The Ballot or the Bullet”
“Statement of the Organization of Afro-American Unity”
14. Black Power 418
Stokely Carmichael, “What We Want”
SNCC, “Position Paper on Black Power”
Bayard Rustin, “‘Black Power’ and Coalition Politics”
15. “CORE Endorses Black Power,” 435
Floyd McKissick, 1967
16. “To Atone for Our Sins and Errors in Vietnam,” 438
Martin Luther King, Jr., 1967
17. Huey P . Newton and the Black Panther Party 445
for Self-Defense
18. “The People Have to Have the Power,” 456
Fred Hampton
19. “I Am a Revolutionary Black Woman,” 459
Angela Y. Davis, 1970
20. “Our Thing Is DRUM!” The League of 463
Revolutionary Black Workers
21. Attica: “The Fury of Those Who Are Oppressed,” 466
1971
22. The National Black Political Convention, 469
Gary, Indiana, March 1972
23. “There Is No Revolution Without the People,” 473
Amiri Baraka, 1972
“The Pan-African Party and the Black Nation”
Poem
24. “My Sight Is Gone But My Vision Remains,” 480
Henry Winston
“On Returning to the Struggle”
“A Letter to My Brothers and Sisters”
SECTION FIVE THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN- 487
AMERICAN THOUGHT, 1975 TO THE PRESENT
1. Black Feminisms: The Combahee River Collective
Statement, 1977 501
x CONTENTS


--- PAGE 12 ---
CONTENTS xi
2. “Women in Prison: How We Are,” 507
Assata Shakur, 1978
3. “It’s Our Turn,” Harold Washington, 1983 513
4. “I Am Your Sister,” Audre Lorde, 1984 515
5. “Shaping Feminist Theory,” bell hooks, 1984 522
6. The Movement against Apartheid: 529
Jesse Jackson and Randall Robinson
Jesse Jackson, “Don’t Adjust to Apartheid”
“State of the U.S. Anti-Apartheid Movement: An Interview
with Randall Robinson”
7. “Keep Hope Alive,” Jesse Jackson, 1988 535
8. “Afrocentricity,” Molefi Asante, 1991 546
9. The Anita Hill–Clarence Thomas Controversy, 1991 552
“African-American Women in Defense of Ourselves”
June Jordan, “Can I Get a Witness?”
10. “Race Matters,” Cornel West, 1991 558
11. “Black Anti-Semitism,” Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 1992 566
12. “Crime—Causes and Cures,” Jarvis Tyner, 1994 571
13. Louis Farrakhan: The Million Man March, 1995 580
14. “A Voice from Death Row,” Mumia Abu-Jamal 584
15. “Let Justice Roll Down Like Waters,” 586
African-American Prisoners in Sing Sing, 1998
“Statement by Sing Sing Prisoners”
Michael J. Love, “The Prison-Industrial Complex: An Investment in Failure”
Willis L. Steele, Jr., “River Hudson”
16. Black Radical Congress, 1998 592
“Principles of Unity”
“The Struggle Continues: Setting a Black Liberation Agenda
for the 21st Century”
“The Freedom Agenda”
17. 2000 Presidential Election 600
“Letter to Governor Bush from Chairperson Mary Frances Berry,” 2001


--- PAGE 13 ---
18. Hip-Hop Activism 603
“What We Want” Statement Hip-Hop Action Summit Network, 2001
“Tookie Protocol for Peace,” 2004
19. World Conference Against Racism— 606
Durban, South Africa
20. African Americans Respond to Terrorism and War 613
“Barbara Lee’s Stand,” 2001
10 Points from Iraq Veterans against the War, 2001
21. The Cosby vs. Dyson Debate, 2004–2005 617
Summary of “Dr. Bill Cosby Speaks at the 50th Anniversary
Commemoration of the Brown vs. Topeka Board of Education
Supreme Court Decision”
Excerpt from 
“Is Bill Cosby Right?: or Has the Black Middle Class
Lost Its Mind?”
22. U.S. Senate Resolution Against Lynching, 2005 621
23. Hurricane Katrina Crisis, 2005 623
“‘This is Criminal’: Malik Rahim Reports from New Orleans,” 2005
24. Barack Obama’s Presidential Campaign, 2007–2008 627
Excerpts from National Democratic Party Convention Speech, 2004
“A More Perfect Union,” 2008
PERMISSIONS 643
INDEX 653
ABOUT 677
THE EDITORS
xii CONTENTS


--- PAGE 14 ---
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
N
early four years ago we jointly taught a graduate seminar offered at both
City University Graduate School and Columbia University that was
called, “Identity, Inequality, and Power.” The basic idea behind the
course was to identify significant and provocative ethnographic, histori-
cal, and theoretical articles and sources that explored the complex con-
nections between the imagined communities such as those of race, gender, and
nation, and the structures of social inequality, state power, and economic
exploitation. We wanted to talk about the African-American experience in a
manner that placed black people at the center of the forces of history. We
believed that the greatest weight in the judgments made by social scientists in
researching the black experience should be given to the voices of black people
themselves. In countless ways—from speeches and religious sermons, personal
letters to friends and family, political manifestos and editorials, through the
development of common rituals and ceremonies that convey membership in
kinship networks—African-American people made themselves. Their notions
of identity, of who they were, were constructed over time through their collec-
tive struggles and experiences against inequality, as well as from memories and
traditions they had brought from Africa.
We attempted to locate texts or anthologies that were appropriate for the
seminar. We found, of course, a number of excellent social histories and ethno-
graphic studies of different aspects of the experience of black people in the
United States. Many of these works have interwoven the historical narrative with
the voices and insights of black people themselves. That is to say, the authors of
these works attempted to write history from the vantage point of being a partic-
ipant observer of the culture. To theorize issues of identity, or questions about
how any people understand the institutions of power that circumscribe their
lives, scholars should first listen and learn from the people themselves. However,
we were disappointed to find that in the past decade and more, very few
anthologies designed for classroom usage incorporating this perspective into the
collection and organization of sources have been published. What we wanted


--- PAGE 15 ---
was a collection of primary materials, rare published articles, speeches, and
other sources that told the story of how black people made themselves and inter-
preted the world in which they lived, in their own words and specifically from
their own point of view.
After teaching the seminar, we decided to collaborate in the writing of two
books on black American history and culture. The first is a long-term project, a
study of the black experience from within, over a series of seven generations.
We would like to develop a text that explores the ways in which African
Americans have perceived themselves as a people, how they understood the
structural barriers that denied them real opportunity, and how through their
culture they found their own imagination, voice, and agency. The book is a
work-in-progress, with the tentative title The African Americans: A People’s
History. The second book was conceived as a comprehensive anthology of
African-American social thought, broadly defined as the bodies of knowledge
through which black people theorized from their experiences and social condi-
tions, and proposed strategies and programs to enhance their power. Politics
begins at the moment when any group recognizes for itself its specific objective
interests and aspirations, and seeks agency to realize those interests. Black
social and political thought is the expression of how people of African descent
articulated and constructed the means to permit their communities to survive,
to resist, and to reform or transform the structures of white power all around
them. That story is what we hope Let Nobody Turn Us Around presents. More
than one hundred documents represent widely different ideological and politi-
cal perspectives, reflecting an ongoing debate within the black community over
the appropriate strategies and tactics to achieve social change. It is by examin-
ing that diversity that we may discern the common ground that the vast major-
ity of African Americans occupy.
O
There were a number of individuals who provided invaluable help in the
research and publication of this anthology. Columbia University doctoral can-
didates Johanna Fernandez and Devin Fergus assisted in the identification of
primary and secondary sources that were reviewed at the initial stage of prepar-
ing the text. Michele Hay, a graduate student at City University of New York,
helped to select important documents and did background research that was
important in the preparation of the biographical profiles and historical notes
that accompanied each text. We would especially like to express our gratitude
for the efforts of John McMillian, a doctoral candidate in history at Columbia
University. Over a period of more than one year, John reviewed and evaluated
the entire list of documents, tracked down hard-to-find biographical details on
a number of subjects, and wrote the first drafts of many biographical profiles.
John’s careful attention to details and his enthusiasm and interest in the project
greatly enhanced the character of the book.
x i v PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


--- PAGE 16 ---
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDTION x v
The book manuscript went through three major revisions and reorganiza-
tions during two years. We appreciate the efforts of the secretarial staff of the
Institute for Research in African-American Studies at Columbia University—
Diane Tinsley-Hatcher, Jennifer Jones, and Theresa Wilcox—who typed and
revised the book throughout its many stages of development. Jennifer Jones,
Sherell Daniels, and Andrea Queeley were also especially helpful in proof-
reading the final text and carefully checking for errors.
A major architect of this work is our editor Dean Birkenkamp at Rowman &
Littlefield. When the concept of this book was initially discussed in 1996, Dean
provided strong support for its development. Dean is an author’s ideal editor—
patient but persistent, and always helpful in thinking through problems con-
nected with the technical aspects of putting a book together. Sallie Greenwood
was extraordinarily diligent in identifying and securing permissions for all the
sources—no small accomplishment given the large number of documents she
was asked to review.
Finally and most importantly, we wish to dedicate this anthology to our five
children, Alia, Malaika, Sojourner, Joshua, and Michael. We hope that our
efforts to help rediscover and document the visions of black folk past and pre-
sent may provide part of that knowledge necessary to assist the next generation
of black children to win that freedom which their foremothers and forefathers
struggled for so long to achieve.
M
ANNING MARABLE
LEITH MULLINGS
September 6, 1999


--- PAGE 17 ---



--- PAGE 18 ---
I
n the past two decades, the African-American community has experienced
profound transformations. For many, the long freedom struggle has signifi-
cantly recast how “race” is lived. There are African-American millionaires,
politicians, and, most amazingly, Barack Obama, an African American, has
been elected as the forty-fourth president of the United States. Clearly, the
freedom struggle has also substantially modified the public discourse about
race and the meaning of racial difference. Furthermore the immigration of mil-
lions of Latinos, Asians, and others since 1980, as well as a biracial president,
has altered the racial and ethnic composition of the United States, undermin-
ing the older bipolar categories of white and black.
But simultaneously, African Americans have experience new forms of bound
labor, massive incarceration, and deepening class stratification. Continuing
racial and class inequality is largely masked by a new racial ideology—color-
blind racism—the claims that the civil rights struggle has eliminated all forms
of discrimination, and that the United States has successfully been transformed
into a “color-blind society” in which each individual is free to determine her or
his own destiny. In this sense, the U.S. racial system appears to be moving
toward a model that characterized much of Latin America, where racial dis-
crimination is maintained and reproduced, but is not sanctioned by law and
often vigorously denied.
The contours of the freedom movement have consequently shifted.
Electoral political struggles have intensified, but black candidates, especially in
federal and statewide elections, are no longer answerable only to the black
community. In the recent period, much of the freedom movement has not been
waged in the large overarching organizations that characterized the civil rights
struggle, but on the ground—in neighborhood networks and locally-based
organizations concerned with a living wage, tenants’ rights, prisoners’ rights,
environmental racism, education, and health. In many of these grassroots
movements, women not only constitute the great majority of the cadre, but are
also the leaders and theoreticians. As neoliberal capitalism is increasingly
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


--- PAGE 19 ---
unable to meet the basic needs of most citizens and residents, calls for trans-
formation from the most oppressed sectors of society have become louder and
more determined.
Four centuries ago, people of African descent were among the first to expe-
rience the destructive effects of globalization. The most recent phase of glob-
alized capitalism has had a major and largely negative impact on African
Americans. For many, it has contributed to increased poverty and marginaliza-
tion. But globalization has also provided new opportunities: new global tech-
nologies have facilitated innovative forms of communication, fostering new
transnational networks and promoting mobilizing efforts. As the world has
become smaller, the space for traditional race-based organizing based on older
historical models has become increasingly constricted. Yet paradoxically, race-
based movements, often inspired by the history of African-American struggle,
have emerged in many parts of the globe in the past decade. Internationalism
has always been a central feature of the U.S. black freedom struggle, but new
transnational networks make it possible for activists to collectively challenge
“global apartheid.” The emergent discourse of “diaspora” encompasses a broad
range of imagined communities and reframes the context for social change pro-
jects led by black people in diverse national contexts.
As we observed at the beginning of the introduction of the first edition, African
Americans are a people who have created themselves under the most difficult
conditions. The sojourn of black people has been at times defined by a crucible
of exploitation. Yet it has also been a triumph of the human spirit, a call for jus-
tice in a wasteland of oppression. In this way, people who were not considered
to be citizens with inalienable rights fought to redefine the character of the
nation and how it was run. Through the 240 years of slavery, followed by nearly
a century of Jim Crow segregation and only 45 years of desegregation, black
people learned more than survival skills. They struggled to become trade union
leaders and social workers, doctors and lawyers, engineers and architects.
Only six generations ago, it was forbidden by law to teach slaves to read and
write. Today some of the greatest novelists, playwrights, and poets produced in
the United States are African American. Less than seventy years ago black peo-
ple were barred from professional athletics; today they dominate them. Black
popular culture, relegated to obscurity as “race music” in the early twentieth
century, now largely defines U.S. popular culture. As late as 1960, the majority
of African Americans had never been permitted to vote in a presidential elec-
tion, and were largely excluded from the electoral political system in the South.
Today, the U.S. president is African American, there are over 10,000 black
elected officials, and black voters comprise the essential core group for a liberal
and progressive political coalition in national elections. African Americans have
done more than make “contributions”: they have instead largely reshaped and
redefined what U.S. life and society are about. All these gains were the result
of the struggles of ordinary people. Our struggle continues.
xviii PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


--- PAGE 20 ---
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION x i x
The acknowledgments of the second edition of Let Nobody Turn Us Around
reflects these old and new contexts. The bibliographies have been updated
throughout the volume. The final section, section V , has been significantly
revised and expanded, with a new introduction and the addition of readings
that bring the book up-to-date and address the new debates about culture, pol-
itics, and possible the directions of the black freedom struggle.
We would like to thank Karen Williams, a graduate student in anthropology
at the Graduate Center of City University of New York, for her invaluable help
with the new edition. She tracked down the new documents and wrote the first
draft of several of the new profiles. We are also grateful to Courtney Teague
and Sara Ingram for their assistance in preparing the manuscript.
M
ANNING MARABLE
LEITH MULLINGS
November 24, 2008
New York City


--- PAGE 21 ---



--- PAGE 22 ---
INTRODUCTION
Resistance, Reform, and Renewal
in the Black Experience
T
hroughout their entire history as a people, African Americans have cre-
ated themselves. They did so in the context of the transatlantic slave trade
and two-and-a-half centuries of chattel slavery—a structure of over-
whelming inequality and brutality characterized by the sale of human
beings and routine rapes and executions. They constructed their cultural
identity and notions of humanity in a country that denied them citizenship and
basic human dignity for hundreds of years. Beginning as enslaved Africans from
various locations and ethnic and language groups across the continent of Africa,
within several generations they found their voice, meaning, and consciousness
as a special people.
Those captured from Africa were not people without history and culture.
They were mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, and descendants of ances-
tors; they were religious specialists and supplicants, chiefs and commoners,
cooks, musicians, metalworkers, scribes, farmers, and grioles; they belonged to
states, clans, lineages, age grades, men’s and women’s associations, artisan
guilds, and secret societies. Their memories of how life should be lived, of
womanhood and manhood, of beauty and aesthetics, of worship and spiritual-
ity, were not annihilated by the Middle Passage. But what they could do with
these memories was very much constrained by the conditions in which they
found themselves—the racial and class structure of enslavement. To para-
phrase a well-known observation, African Americans created themselves, but
not just as they pleased, not under circumstances chosen by themselves, but
under circumstances directly encountered, given, and transmitted from the
past. It was in the context of their African history and the prevailing social and
economic relationships that African Americans created culture, religion, family,
art forms, political institutions, and social and political theory.
Social and political theory—bodies of knowledge by which African Ameri-
cans attempted to analyze and address the social, cultural, and political issues
they confronted—emerged from everyday practices to reform and resist the
structures of oppression, and to renew their community through imagining and


--- PAGE 23 ---
enacting its continuity. Attempts to reform, utilizing group and individual
resources to mitigate the worst aspects of the society and to enhance black
interests within the state apparatus, ranged from petitions to the colonial legis-
latures and federal government for redress, lobbying for the abolition of slav-
ery, and participation in various political parties to influence white liberal opin-
ion on issues of race. Resistance was found in the various degrees of opposition
to institutional racism: from day-to-day sabotage (disruption, noncompliance,
refusals to work, running away) to overt rebellion (the murder of slaveholders,
flight to the North, the underground railroad, joining forces with American
Indian tribes to combat the U.S. army, the creation of maroon communities,
and the slave uprisings of Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey, Gabriel Prosser, and
Cinque). Throughout their history African Americans nurtured and renewed
their emerging community—creating and maintaining cultural forms and
building viable institutions to provide goods, services, and cultural and educa-
tional sustenance.
Yet social and political theory is not merely reactive. Though it was a collec-
tive effort to address existing social institutions and structures of power, it was
also a search for meaning and voice. Social thought sought to understand who
we are, envision new directions, and imagine a new society. The purpose was
not only to advocate, but to realize our meaning and being.
The themes of reform, resistance, and renewal formed the cultural and
social matrix of black consciousness, community, and public discourse. They
were the foundations for the construction of a black American society that was
self-conscious and motivated to define and achieve its specific interests. It was
within this political culture and this web of increasingly elaborate social insti-
tutions—black religious denominations, Masonic lodges, free African societies,
schools, newspapers—that competing strategic visions of how best to achieve
group empowerment and self-organization began to crystallize.
The decisive historical period in the construction of black ideologies was
between 1830 and 1865. The free black community in the North numbered
more than one hundred thousand. The immediate question confronting African
Americans was how to dismantle slavery—the oppression of four million peo-
ple of African descent. But the larger issue was whether and how black people
could find freedom, in the United States or elsewhere, while preserving what
was valuable and central to their collective identity as a people. Are we
Africans, or are we both Africans and Americans? Is our collective future inex-
tricably linked to the U.S. state and American society? It was in the context of
the national debate about slavery that two overlapping political ideologies
emerged among black Americans, representing two different aspects of the
same racial dilemma: the possibility of black Americans achieving equality
within America’s racialized social body.
What became known in the twentieth century as “integrationism” actually
originated among the free black communities in the North prior to the Civil
xxii INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 24 ---
INTRODUCTION xxiii
War. A core of free black leaders—journalists, teachers, ministers, small entre-
preneurs, abolitionists—concluded that the fight to abolish slavery could be
won, but that it would represent only one part of a greater struggle: to expand
the limited boundaries of American democracy to include people of African
descent. The task ahead was to bring Negroes into every profession and to
ensure their full participation in voting, serving on juries, and running for elec-
tive office. Black people would have the unalienable right to own property, to
have unfettered access to public accommodation and schools, and the freedom
to hire themselves out for a fair wage. The only limitations on any individual’s
success would be determined by intellect and ambition, not by race.
The goal of integrationists was a society where color was insignificant and
where individual achievement and hard work largely determined the life
chances of most black people. Inherent in this ideological perspective was an
inner paradox. Integrationist reformers often had no choice but to build black
organizations behind the walls of segregation, to mobilize their supporters, and
to appeal to sympathetic whites. At times, race consciousness among African
Americans was used to challenge Jim Crow. A. Philip Randolph’s Negro March
on Washington, D.C., in 1941 and Martin Luther King, Jr.’s construction of the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1957 are two of many examples.
Building on a racial base could be useful, but only for the long-term goal of
eradicating all racial classifications and caste privileges that penalized Negroes
simply because of the color of their skin. In other words, the struggle for inte-
gration often had to be waged from within the boundaries of racial identity.
This strategy also implied that what was “wrong” with the United States could
be made right, if restrictions on the basis of race could be eliminated and if
blacks and other disadvantaged groups could be more fully represented in the
structures of civil and political authority.
In contrast, the black nationalist tradition was built on a no-nonsense set of
assumptions about the relative permanence of white supremacy. Blacks would
have to place their energies in building economic and social institutions that
would provide goods and services to other black people. By hiring blacks, they
could utilize racial segregation as a barrier to create a black consumer market.
Some nationalists also saw these steps as stopgap measures. Only when a sig-
nificant number of African Americans established their own separate geo-
political space—perhaps a territory, a group or state, or resettlement to another
country or continent—could ultimate security and the integrity of black people
be achieved. The nationalists often saw themselves as accidental Americans, or
Africans-in-exile. They frequently distrusted white liberals and reformers who
expressed sympathy toward blacks even more than they distrusted white
supremacist groups, because they felt the latter represented the true feelings of
the white majority. Some felt that race war inside the United States, and indeed
globally, was probably inevitable, and the best thing African Americans could
do was to prepare for it. In 1852, Martin R. Delany called upon African


--- PAGE 25 ---
Americans to emigrate because “we love our country, dearly love her, but she
doesn’t love us—she despises us, and bids us begone, driving us from her
embraces; but we shall not go where she desires us; but when we do go, what-
ever love we have for her, we shall love the country none the less that receives
us as her adopted children” (section 1, document 17). Similarly, the first point
in Marcus Garvey’s 1920 “Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the
World” reads: “. . . nowhere in the world, with few exceptions, are black men
accorded equal treatment with white men, although in the same situation and
circumstances, but, on the contrary, are discriminated against and denied the
common rights due to human beings for no other reason than their race and
color” (section 3, document 4). Almost fifty years later, Malcolm X observed,
“. . . it is not necessary to change the white man’s mind. We have to change our
own mind. You can’t change his mind about us” (section 4, document 13).
These were the most extreme positions of the integrationist–nationalist ideo-
logical axis, but most African Americans during the century between the Civil
War and the Civil Rights movement oscillated somewhere in between these
two poles of racial opinion. In periods of political optimism, when the bar of
institutional racism seemed to be in retreat, the integrationist perspective was
usually dominant. But in times of white reaction and retrenchment from racial
justice—such as the 1850s, 1920s, late 1960s, and early 1970s—black national-
ism resurfaced.
A third strategic vision subsequently emerged, with the developing con-
sciousness of the black working class and the growing intensity of labor strug-
gles in the United States. This perspective neither accepted the structure of the
contemporary society nor called for a separate black society, but rather advo-
cated a radical transformation of the United States based on a fundamental
redistribution of resources. This perspective did not merely push for the expan-
sion of democracy but challenged the basic inequality of the economic struc-
ture. The objective here was to dismantle all forms of class hierarchy and social
privilege. For T. Thomas Fortune, a printer who was born a slave, the working
people’s struggles of the 1880s underscored the importance of class in under-
standing and transforming society: “The iniquity of privileged class and con-
centrated wealth . . . does not admit of the argument that every man born into
the world is justly entitled to so much of the produce of nature as will satisfy his
physical necessities . . .” (section 2, document 4). In 1912 Hubert Henry Harri-
son declared that “socialism stands for the emancipation of the wage slaves”
(section 2, document 16).
This perspective coalesces in the period from 1915 to 1954, with the consol-
idation of the black working class and its struggle for jobs and for access to
employment at an equitable wage. It became a social force in the emergence of
the African Blood Brotherhood in 1922 (section 3, document 3); the “Don’t Buy
Where You Can’t Work” campaign in Harlem during the Great Depression (sec-
tion 3, document 14); and the organization of the Sleeping Car Porters (section
xxiv INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 26 ---
INTRODUCTION x x v
3, document 17). The rise of working-class “organic intellectuals”—many of
whom were associated with the Communist Party, such as southern organizers
Angelo Herndon (section 3, document 11) and Hosea Hudson (section 3, docu-
ment 12)—was particularly notable during this period. However, white racism,
including that of white workers, continued to be a major obstacle.
These social visions—integration, nationalism, and transformation—are not
mutually exclusive but are in fact broad, overlapping traditions. Throughout the
twentieth century, these tendencies have been present, to varying degrees, in
virtually every major mass movement in which black people have been
engaged, from the desegregationist campaigns of the 1950s to the anti-
apartheid mobilization of the 1980s. Though some organizations and individu-
als may have exemplified one tendency or the other, organizations and move-
ments usually displayed a spectrum of views. Individuals often began their
activist careers with one set of perspectives and moved to another as they per-
ceive limitations of that paradigm. This was the case with Hubert Henry Harri-
son, W. E. B. Du Bois, Martin Luther King, and Malcolm X.
These three competing paradigms continue to underlie the Black Freedom
movement. The broad range of forces in the desegregation struggle included the
Urban League, which conceptualized civil rights as an expression of extending
rights to black people, and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
which had “the basic aim of achieving full citizenship rights, equality, and the
integration of the Negro in all aspects of American life” (section 4, document 3).
On the other hand, the left wing of the Civil Rights movement envisioned the
necessity of a more far-reaching change. In 1963 John Lewis declared, “[t]he
revolution is at hand, and we must free ourselves of the chains of political and
economic slavery” (section 4, document 8).
Similarly the Black Power movement—a move toward nationalism that arose
when the weaknesses of integrationism become evident—encompassed compet-
ing visions of the meaning of political power. Floyd McKissick, in his endorse-
ment of Black Power, established the black capitalist venture of Soul City. On the
other hand, the Black Panthers embraced a Marxist analysis of capitalism. Black
Panther co-founder Huey P . Newton observed that “[t]he Black Panther Party
bases its ideology and philosophy on a concrete analysis of concrete conditions,
using dialectical materialism as our analytical method” (section 4, document 17).
Fred Hampton called for class struggle, observing that “[w]e have to understand
very clearly that there is a man in our community called a capitalist” (section 4,
document 18). Angela Davis, a member of the Che-Lumumba Club of the Com-
munist Party, explained why she is a Communist: “I am a Communist because I
am convinced that the reason we have been forcefully compelled to eke out an
existence at the lowest level of American society has to do with the nature of cap-
italism. . . . I am a Communist because I believe that black people, with whose
labor and blood this country was built, have a right to a great deal of the wealth
that has been hoarded in the hands of the Hughes, the Rockefellers, the


--- PAGE 27 ---
Kennedys, the DuPonts, all the super-powerful white capitalists of America” (sec-
tion 4, document 19). During this period of Black Power, the militant tradition of
black workers found expression in the creation of the Dodge Revolutionary
Union Movement (DRUM) in Detroit, and in the more moderate Coalition of
Black Trade Unionists.
Race, and to a lesser extent class, have been central to theorizing African-
American liberation. But since its inception, African-American social theory
has also included a lively discussion about gender, though this has received lit-
tle attention until relatively recently. The unusual position of African-American
women has made the issue of gender critical—both in practice and for the
development of theory. The denial of “the protections of private patriarchy”
throughout their history has made the situation of African-American women
exceptional in American life. Often doing the same work as men during slavery,
after Reconstruction they worked both outside and inside the home. Exploited
as labor, but also oppressed on the basis of gender and race, their history has
created an experience distinct from that of both black men and white women.
Though triply oppressed, they also occupy a creative space from which to cri-
tique U.S. social structure from multiple sites. As Anna Julia Cooper noted in
1892, to be an African-American woman was “to have a heritage . . . unique in
all the ages” (section 2, document 7).
Given the significance of black women in the slave community, in the strug-
gle for abolition and emancipation, and as workers and activists, it may be that
many African-American men were more open to issues of gender than white
men—advocating access to education for women and other nontraditional gen-
dered roles—though often in terms of the optimal requirements for mother-
hood. Martin Delany, who called for the emigration of black people from the
United States in 1852, declared: “Let our young women have an education; let
their minds be well informed; well stored with useful information and practical
proficiency. . . . Our females must be qualified, because they are to be the
mothers of our children” (section 1, document 17). Frederick Douglass and
W. E. B. Du Bois were among the most consistent and vocal advocates for the
rights of women.
But it is also true that, in subtle ways, the struggle for freedom was often
framed in masculine terms. Abolitionist leader William Wells Brown
lamented: “If I wish to stand up and say, ‘I am a man,’ I must leave the land
that gave me birth” (section 1, document 14). Upon being expelled from the
Georgia legislature in 1868, Henry McNeal Turner declared: “Am I a man? If
I am such, I claim the rights of a man . . .” (section 2, document 2); and
Frederick Douglass equates “what the black man wants” with the interests of
the race as a whole (section 2, document 1). While clearly these formulations
have to do with the semantic use of “man” for humankind, it is also true that
they embodied often-unstated assumptions about the masculine privileges
that nationhood entails. During Reconstruction, the demand for the hierar-
xxvi INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 28 ---
INTRODUCTION xxvii
chical gender roles of the dominant society became integrally connected with
the demand for freedom.
But black women have not had the luxury of defining freedom in patriarchal
terms, and early on created an analysis of race, class, and gender that emerged
from their experiences. While fully supporting the struggle for freedom, black
women have addressed the issues of both gender and race. In 1851 Sojourner
Truth declared “I am a woman’s rights. I have as much muscle as any man, and
can do as much work as any man” (section 1, document 15). Anticipating the
feminist theorizing of the 1980s and 1990s, in 1892 Anna Julia Cooper wrote
that the African-American woman is “confronted by both a woman question
and a race problem, and is as yet an unknown or an unacknowledged factor in
both” (section 2, document 7).
The consolidation of a black working-class perspective enhanced the devel-
opment of a race- and class-based feminism. Domestic workers and women toil-
ing in the cotton fields spoke out about their own conditions and created the
context for a feminism grounded in the experiences of working women. A
description of women workers in the cotton fields published in Crisis in 1938
laid the foundation for a sophisticated analysis of these issues, which were redis-
covered by scholars in the 1980s, such as the double day and the unpaid labor of
women. The following passage presents an analysis of the relationships between
production and reproduction that is valid today (section 3, document 15):
In the past, this woman was compelled to reproduce a large number of children
because a large labor supply was in demand. Large families also mean a cheaper
form of labor, for children, as well as women, generally represent labor that does
not have to be paid. Consequently, the “overhead” falls upon the family instead of
the landlord. The landlord himself has enforced this monopoly by letting his farm
go to the tenant or cropper having the largest family. . . . Now the tenant-
croppers are charged with “over-population” by the economists and agricultural-
ists who disregard the unwholesome economic factors that have caused an
increase in farm tenancy. . . . As one solution to the “over-population,” proponents
of the sterilization racket are endeavoring to work up an agitation for sterilization
of these cotton workers.
In 1949, Claudia Jones, a leader in the Communist Party, argued for a class-
and race-based feminism. Her remarkable historical analysis, clearly articulat-
ing the triple oppression of race, class, and gender, anticipated the race, class,
and gender theorists of the 1980s and 1990s. She analyzed the important role
of negative representations of African-American women, presented an early
formulation of “the personal is political,” and called for the organization of
domestic workers.
As women activists took militant and leading roles in the Civil Rights and
Black Power movements—in SCLC, SNCC, and the Black Panther Party—
they confronted real problems of how to deal in practice with the dilemmas of
race, class, and gender. Activists such as Fannie Lou Hamer spoke eloquently


--- PAGE 29 ---
of the solidarities of race and the contradictions of gender and class: “. . . we are
here to work side by side with this black man in trying to bring liberation to all
people” (section 4, document 10). In the 1980s there was a proliferation of
work on gender that seriously attends to the centrality of race and racism in the
lives of African-American women, and critiques the essentialist view put for-
ward by Euro-American feminists. But divergent perspectives also emerged
that reflect the differences in strategic social visions among the African-
American people as a whole. While most feminist theorists now write of the
integration of race, class, and gender, there are clear differences in how women
of diverse class backgrounds and experiences understand these relationships,
their visions of a new society, and their notions of how to get there.
This book is an attempt to compile a representative sample of a range of
writings that reflect the political thought of black Americans in the United
States from colonial times to the end of the twentieth century. We have
attempted to include varied opinions from women and men, workers, and the
intelligentsia.
As in any anthology, there are limitations. This is not a typical encyclopedia
of African-American thought. We wanted the book to reflect the full range of
African-American thought, but as extensive as the scope of this volume is, there
are some obvious omissions. In several cases copyright problems limited our
access to certain materials. In another instance, one prominent black conserv-
ative economist refused to permit his published work to appear in this volume.
Because it is a collection of social theory, the focus on thought, to some extent,
abstracts it from practice. The purpose of this book is not to assess social and
political movements, but rather to present the theories that informed them.
Furthermore, the emphasis on available written sources omits a body of popu-
lar reflections that might tell us much about “organic” social theory.
Section 1 begins with the period from 1768 to 1861. This was the era of slav-
ery and the issue motivating African Americans was abolitionism and efforts at
reform, resistance, and revolt against slavery. It was also the time of the birth of
African-American culture and society. Section 2 covers 1861 to 1915. The Civil
War, Reconstruction, and the establishment of Jim Crow segregation defined
the politics of this period. African Americans were overwhelmingly rural and
the majority continued to live in the South, as two generations of African
Americans coped with the aftermath of slavery and the War.
Section 3 concerns the years 1915 to 1954, which marks the period of the
“great migration,” when African Americans in large numbers migrated from the
rural South to the urban North. Two world wars, the “Red Summer” of 1919, the
consolidation of the modern black working-class, the rise of black radicalism,
and the emergence of the Civil Rights movement are also part of this era.
During the period covered by section 4—1954 to 1975—the Black Freedom
movement flourishes through the Civil Rights struggle and the Black Power
movement.
xxviii INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 30 ---
INTRODUCTION xxix
The years since 1975, treated in section 5, have been described as the sec-
ond post-Reconstruction era. A time of rapidly developing class stratification
both globally and within the United States, it has been characterized by new
divisions and ideological debates among African Americans.
Whatever the site or political perspective from which African Americans
theorize and struggle for freedom, resistance has had real consequences. In
these pages you will read the words of people who, from different ideological
vantage points, have fought for freedom. For those who have opposed the dom-
inant society, taking a stand has often exacted a price: Marcus Garvey and
Claudia Jones were exiled; W. E. B. Du Bois and Paul Robeson were severely
harassed and denied passports; Henry Winston, Angela Davis, and Angelo
Herndon spent years in jail; Fannie Lou Hamer and John Lewis were brutally
beaten. From the mysterious death of David Walker to the executions and/or
assassinations of Nat Turner, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Fred Hampton,
the Attica Brothers, and countless known and unknown others, freedom for
black people has always been won at a dear price. To these brave women and
men we dedicate this book.
New York City
September 1999


--- PAGE 31 ---



--- PAGE 32 ---
FOUNDATIONS:
SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM,
1768–1861
– SECTION ONE –


--- PAGE 33 ---



--- PAGE 34 ---
INTRODUCTION
A
frican Americans created themselves through a series of vast historical
events and social forces that greatly transformed the global political
economy over half a millennium. Chief among these were the develop-
ment of the transatlantic slave trade, beginning at the dawn of the six-
teenth century, which transported at least fifteen million Africans
against their will into the Americas and the Caribbean; the subsequent institu-
tionalization and expansion of monocrop agricultural production relying on
forced labor; and, with these, the establishment of the new world settler soci-
eties based on the extermination of indigenous populations. These broad his-
torical forces were the context for the development of the British colonies in
North America, which in 1787 would become the United States. Within these
states about 650,000 Africans were resettled as slaves between 1619 and the eve
of the Civil War.
The Africans were immediately confronted with the harsh realities of chattel
enslavement, the brutal domination of their bodies and labor power for the
benefit of others. Within this stratified social order, people of African descent
were explicitly denied access to the courts, excluded from participation in pub-
lic life, and legally categorized as private property. A process of racial stigmati-
zation developed in which people of African descent were penalized for their
physical appearance and phenotype, and Europeans began transforming them-
selves into the privileged racial category of whiteness. By the middle of the
eighteenth century, the innate inferiority of black people was generally
accepted by white Americans, including even most white critics of the slave
trade, such as the Quakers. The relative permanence of physical markers com-
bined with institutions of coercion helped to construct a social universe that in
most respects confined African Americans to the most oppressive conditions
within society.
Several of the documents in section 1 present in moving detail the inhumanity
of life as a slave in the American South. Approximately three-fourths of all slaves


--- PAGE 35 ---
worked in the fields, with the remainder assigned to household tasks, or laboring
as mechanics and skilled workmen. Regardless of their tasks, all were expected to
work without compensation. The slave was a commodity, and it was rare that a
black person did not experience the loss of spouse, parents, children, or friends
through sale. Document 10, “The Selling of Slaves,” is drawn from an advertise-
ment posted in New Orleans in 1835, presenting individuals from the same fam-
ily for sale to the highest bidder. On the auction block were Chole, thirty-six years
old, with her daughter Fanny, age sixteen, who was described as bilingual, “a good
seamstress and ladies’ maid . . . smart, intelligent and a first rate character.”
Dandridge, a twenty-six-year-old carpenter and servant, was offered for sale along
with his wife, Nancy, twenty-four years of age, and their seven-year-old daughter
Mary Ann, who was termed “smart, active and intelligent.” The terms of this busi-
ness transaction were straightforward: one-half cash, the rest paid within six
months, “with special mortgage on the Slaves until final payment.” As indicated
in document 7, slaveholders recognized the potential dangers of teaching African
Americans to read and write, which created “a tendency to excite dissatisfaction
in their minds, and to produce insurrection and rebellion.” In 1831 North
Carolina law mandated that slaves who were caught instructing other slaves in
reading and writing “receive thirty-nine lashes on his or her bare back.” Whites
who violated this prohibition against slave literacy were instead to be fined or
imprisoned.
How did African Americans respond to this structure of oppression? Resis-
tance always assumed many forms. As the narrative of Equiano (document 2)
suggests, it began aboard the slave ships as enslaved Africans attempted to
starve themselves or jump overboard. Perhaps the most common manifestation
of protest is what many historians have called “day-to-day resistance.” There is
a large body of evidence from slaves’ narratives and other literature suggesting
that most black people fought in ways that would not openly communicate hos-
tility or anger against their masters. Instead of violent confrontations, many
used other tactics to harm and disrupt the normal business of daily life. Slaves
engaged in deliberate work slowdowns; the destruction of farming imple-
ments, tools, and other property; the burning of crops or food supplies; and the
refusal to carry out commands. Slaves routinely pretended to be ill or physi-
cally incapacitated. Enslaved women practiced contraception and sometimes
infanticide in order to control their fertility. Some slaves ran off to wooded
areas outside whites’ settlements, in some instances creating maroon, or run-
away slave, communities. Occasionally, black resistance took the form of out-
right revolt or rebellion. “The Statement of Nat Turner” (document 6) illus-
trates that slaves fully comprehended their exploitation and looked forward to
the time “when the first should be last and the last should be first.” When
asked whether he regretted his bloody actions against whites, Turner bluntly
replied, “Was not Christ crucified?”
4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 36 ---
INTRODUCTION 5
Resistance to slavery among the free black community in the North took the
form of vigilance committees—networks that provided safe shelter, food, and
transportation to runaway slaves. Even free blacks were always in danger of being
arrested, claimed as property by whites, and transported back to the South. The
free black community in the North also organized a series of regional and national
conferences bringing together the leading voices of African-American public
opinion. The documents and speeches from these “Negro Conventions” provide
excellent insights into the political and social thought of antebellum black
America. The famous speech by Henry Highland Garnet (document 13) at the
1843 Negro convention for example, emphasizes the right of the oppressed to
“use every means, both moral, intellectual and physical, that promises success.”
African Americans in the North and South alike were exhorted to use their power
“to torment the God-cursed slaveholders, that they will be glad to let you go 
free. . . . Let your motto be resistance! resistance! RESISTANCE! No oppressed
people have ever secured their liberty without resistance.” Garnet’s militant
rhetoric in many ways prefigures the protest language of Malcolm X and Huey P .
Newton a century later.
While resistance was essential, African Americans also understood that they
would have to utilize any means at their disposal to modify the restrictions of
white authority over the lives of black people. In other words, free blacks had to
agitate for fundamentals that materially benefited African Americans within the
existing political, economic, and social structure. The abolition of slavery could
not be achieved by black people alone, and early on there was an awareness that
a segment of the white population could be won to emancipation. The slave nar-
ratives, beginning with the classical 1789 account of Olaudah Equiano (document
2), were primarily designed to educate and inform European and white American
audiences about the lives and perspectives of black people. African-American
women were particularly effective in linking the struggles of black people with
other reform movements, such as the pursuit of equality for women. Maria W.
Stewart, a prominent public speaker in the 1830s, frequently linked the struggles
of black people with other reform movements, such as temperance and women’s
rights. Similarly, Sojourner Truth, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, and Mary Ann
Shadd Cary spoke powerfully for the rights of African-American women.
The long-term goal of black reform was the redefinition of American democracy
itself: the elimination of all restrictions to the full participation of African Americans
in the larger society. David Walker’s “Appeal” (document 5) carries this thesis to its
logical conclusion: that blacks, because of their experiences of suffering and strug-
gle in this country, were more American than whites: “Will any of us leave our
homes and go to Africa? I hope not. . . . Let no man of us budge one step, and let
slaveholders come to beat us from our country. America is more our country, than
it is the whites—we have enriched it with our blood and tears.” Making a similar
point, Frederick Douglass’s well-known 1852 address, “What to the Slave Is the


--- PAGE 37 ---
Fourth of July?,” challenges white Americans to recognize their political hypocrisy
by celebrating its democratic institution in a country filled with four million slaves
(document 18). To the slave, Douglass declares, the national holiday “is a sham;
your boasted liberty an unholy license; your national greatness, swelling vanity; your
sounds of rejoicing are empty and heartless; your denunciation of tyrants, brass-
fronted impudence; your shouts of liberty and equality, hollow mockery. . . .” The
righteous anger in Douglass’s words should not obscure his real objective: to con-
vince his white audience that “the great principle of political freedom and of nat-
ural justice, embodied in that Declaration of Independence,” should be extended
to African Americans. To some extent, the struggle had to be waged within the par-
adigm and boundaries of debate set by the larger society. Slaveholders argued that
enslaved people were an inferior species—African Americans asserted their
humanity. Whites insisted that African Americans were not capable of voting—
Frederick Douglass argued that they would develop the capabilities.
Black survival in an aggressively racist society also depended on the ability of
African Americans to create, preserve, and renew their communities. Enslaved
Africans who were forced into servitude in the western hemisphere were not
blank slates, but brought with them memories and cultural values. As Equiano’s
account (document 2) demonstrates, his particularly detailed recollections ranged
from family and religion to notions of beauty: “[I]deas of beauty are wholly rela-
tive. I remember while in Africa to have seen three Negro children who were
tawny, and another quite white, who were universally regarded by myself and the
natives in general, as far as related to their complexions, as deformed.” But it is
within the structural constraints of slavery and discrimination that they must cre-
ate a culture—utilizing, transforming, and giving new meanings to cultural mate-
rial from Africa and the Americas as they seek to imagine and invent the institu-
tions that would ensure their survival. For example, though nowhere did the
enslaved people have the right to marry, they continued to affirm their bonds of
family, community, and humanity (document 9). During slavery, the church was
the only legal institution through which enslaved people could congregate and
exchange information as well as worship. Throughout African-American history,
the church continued to be a major site of political organizing, and charismatic
leadership was a hallmark of black politics.
In practical terms, this meant the constructing of socioeconomic institutions
that provided goods, services, and resources to the black people. By the late eigh-
teenth century, free blacks in several northern cities had established mutual-
benefit associations—social organizations that helped black families in need. Free
women of color were particularly active in organizing activities that would con-
tribute to the abolition of slavery and black self-help. In April 1816, Richard Allen
founded the African Methodist Episcopal Church (document 4), thereby laying
the foundations of the black church, which to this day remains the largest and
most influential force inside the black community. To a great extent it reshaped
Christianity within the context of the needs of the African-American community.
Prince Hall’s Masonic lodge for African Americans (document 3) would also grow
6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 38 ---
PHILLIS WHEATLEY, “ON BEING BROUGHT FROM AFRICA . . .” 7
into a massive social network that was actively involved in all aspects of black civic
and cultural life. From these early social institutions would ultimately derive the
black press, schools and colleges, hospitals, insurance companies, banks, and
commercial enterprises of all kinds.
What is particularly interesting is that the construction of this elaborate inter-
nal black world of which most whites were ignorant was achieved 
through conscious appeals to black solidarity and collective self-help. It was nec-
essary for African Americans to become the keepers of their own history. In his
call for resistance, Henry Highland Garnet (document 13) recounts the stories of
the leaders of slave rebellions: Denmark Vessey, Nat Turner, Joseph Cinque, and
Madison Washington. Similarly, as we shall see in the next section (section 2, doc-
ument 8), Mary Church Terrell recounted the successes of black women.
There were boundaries of blackness: the expectations that African Americans
should remain loyal to their race, that they should support the goals and values
generally accepted as the cultural norm for their communities. One of the earli-
est expressions of the boundaries of blackness is by David Walker (document 5).
He condemns some of his “brethren” who were “in league with tyrants, and who
receive a great portion of their daily bread, of the moneys which they acquire
from the blood and tears of their more miserable brethren, whom they scan-
dalously delivered into the hands of our natural enemies!” An aspect of Walker’s
exhortation was a frank belief in the innate superiority of black people over
whites: “[G]lory, honour and praise to Heaven’s King . . . the sons and daughters
of Africa, will, in spite of all the opposition of their enemies, stand forth in all the
dignity and glory that is granted by the Lord to his creature man.” In a society so
grounded and permeated with white-supremacist ideology, African Americans
such as Walker—and later figures such as Marcus Garvey, Elijah Muhammad,
and Louis Farrakhan—emphasized the mental and physical superiority of black
people in order to counter the allegations of inferiority.
The outbreak of the Civil War led to the destruction of one form of racial
domination—slavery—but would ultimately be replaced by another: Jim Crow
segregation. Over 180,000 African Americans fought in the Union army to liber-
ate their people. This section presents some of the key ideas and leaders who
contributed to the black struggle for freedom.
O1 O
“On Being Brought from Africa to America,”
Phillis Wheatley, 1768
Phillis Wheatley (1753?–1784) was born in Gambia, West Africa, and is recog-
nized as the first African American to publish a book. Transported to the


--- PAGE 39 ---
United States when she was about seven, Wheatley was an enslaved domestic
servant in the household of John and Susanna Wheatley, who taught her to
read and write and supported her interests in poetry. The public, however,
could not believe that a domestic slave had the artistic and intellectual capa-
bilities to create poetry. In 1772, Wheatley was brought before a courtroom in
Boston to determine if she indeed could craft literature. The judges produced
a written document that stated that “the poems specified . . . were . . . written
by Phillis, a young Negro Girl.” This statement was instrumental in Wheatley’s
ability to secure publication of her first book, Poems on Various Subjects,
Religious and Moral. Controversy surrounding Wheatley’s poetry continues to
this day. Though it has been criticized for its weak stance on slavery, recent
interpretations are more sympathetic, pointing out that Wheatley was a prod-
uct of her times. Wheatley’s second manuscript was lost, but in the past
decade, remnants of this manuscript have surfaced. Despite her acclaim in
both the United States and Britain, Wheatley died in abject poverty.
O
‘TWAS mercy brought me from my Pagan land,
Taught my benighted soul to understand
That there’s a God, that there’s a Saviour too:
Once I redemption neither sought nor knew.
Some view our sable race with scornful eye,
“Their colour is a diabolic die.”
Remember, Christians, Negros, black as Cain,
May be refin’d, and join th’ angelic train
Source: Phillis Wheatley, Complete Writings, ed. by Vincent Carretta (New York: Penguin
Books, 2001), pg. 13.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC RESOURCES:
Mukhtar Ali Isani, “‘Gambia on My Soul’: Africa and the African in the Writings of Phillis
Wheatley,” MELUS 6, no. 1 (Spring 1979), pp. 64–72.
Helen Burke, “Problematizing American Dissent: The Subject of Phillis Wheatley,” in
Cohesion and Dissent in America, ed. by Carol Colatrella and Joseph Alkana (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1994), pp. 193–209.
Helen M. Burke, “The Rhetoric and Politics of Marginality: The Subject of Phillis Wheatley,”
Tulsa Studies in Women’s Literature10, no. 1 (Spring 1991), pp. 31–45.
Henry Louis Gates, “Phillis Wheatley on Trial,” The New Yorker(January 20, 2003).
— — —, The Trials of Phillis Wheatley: America’s First Black Poet and Her Encounters with
the Founding Fathers(New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2003).
John C. Shields, ed., The Collected Works of Phillis Wheatley(New York: Oxford University
Press, 1989).
8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 40 ---
OLAUDAH EQUIANO, “THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE . . .” 9
O2 O
“The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano,” 
Olaudah Equiano, 1789
There are questions about the birthplace and the life story of Olaudah Equiano
(1745–1797). Recent scholarship suggests that Equiano was born not on the
African continent but in South Carolina, and did not personally endure the
Middle Passage. Nevertheless, he created a public persona rooted in an African
past and slavery that was presented in his autobiography, The Interesting
Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vasa, the African, Written
by Himself, first published in 1789. Equiano claimed that he was born in the
African village of Essaka (now part of eastern Nigeria), and was captured and sold
into slavery at the age of eleven. He was first owned by a lieutenant in the English
navy, who gave him the name Gustavus Vasa, and was later purchased by a
Philadelphia merchant and Quaker. In 1766, he was finally able to buy his own
freedom. Over the years Equiano traveled extensively and established several
successful business ventures. Notwithstanding the debates about his origins and
experience of the Middle Passage, his autobiography represented an influential
text in the abolitionist movement, going through thirty-six editions between 1789
and 1857. Equiano died in London in 1797.
O
That part of Africa known by the name of Guinea to which the trade of slaves is
carried on extends along the coast above 3,400 miles, from the Senegal to Angola,
and includes a variety of kingdoms. Of these the most considerable is the king-
dom of Benin, both as to extent and wealth, the richness and cultivation of the
soil, the power of its king, and the number and warlike disposition of the inhabi-
tants. It is situated nearly under the line and extends along the coast about 170
miles, but runs back into the interior part of Africa to a distance hitherto I believe
unexplored by any traveller, and seems only terminated at length by the empire
of Abyssinia, near 1,500 miles from its beginning. This kingdom is divided into
many provinces or districts, in one of the most remote and fertile of which, called
Eboe, I was born in the year 1745, situated in a charming fruitful vale, named
Essaka. The distance of this province from the capital of Benin and the sea coast
must be very considerable, for I had never heard of white men or Europeans, nor
of the sea, and our subjection to the king of Benin was little more than nominal;
for every transaction of the government, as far as my slender observation
extended, was conducted by the chiefs or elders of the place. The manners and
government of a people who have little commerce with other countries are gen-
erally very simple, and the history of what passes in one family or village may
serve as a specimen of a nation. My father was one of those elders or chiefs I have


--- PAGE 41 ---
spoken of and was styled Embrenché, a term as I remember importing the high-
est distinction, and signifying in our language a mark of grandeur. This mark is
conferred on the person entitled to it by cutting the skin across at the top of the
forehead and drawing it down to the eyebrows, and while it is in this situation
applying a warm hand and rubbing it until it shrinks up into a thick weal across
the lower part of the forehead. Most of the judges and senators were thus
marked; my father had long borne it. I had seen it conferred on one of my broth-
ers, and I was also destined to receive it by my parents. . . .
We are almost a nation of dancers, musicians, and poets. Thus every great event
such as a triumphant return from battle or other cause of public rejoicing is cel-
ebrated in public dances, which are accompanied with songs and music suited to
the occasion. The assembly is separated into four divisions, which dance either
apart or in succession, and each with a character peculiar to itself. The first divi-
sion contains the married men, who in their dances frequently exhibit feats of
arms and the representation of a battle. To these succeed the married women,
who dance in the second division. The young men occupy the third and the maid-
ens the fourth. Each represents some interesting scene of real life, such as a great
achievement, domestic employment, a pathetic story, or some rural sport, and as
the subject is generally founded on some recent event it is therefore ever new.
This gives our dances a spirit and variety which I have scarcely seen elsewhere.
We have many musical instruments, particularly drums of different kinds, a piece
of music which resembles a guitar, and another much like a stickado. These last
are chiefly used by betrothed virgins who play on them on all grand festivals.
As our manners are simple, our luxuries are few. The dress of both sexes is
nearly the same. It generally consists of a long piece of calico or muslin, wrapped
loosely round the body somewhat in the form of a highland plaid. This is usually
dyed blue, which is our favourite colour. It is extracted from a berry and is
brighter and richer than any I have seen in Europe. Besides this our women of
distinction wear golden ornaments, which they dispose with some profusion on
their arms and legs. When our women are not employed with the men in tillage,
their usual occupation is spinning and weaving cotton, which they afterwards dye
and make into garments. They also manufacture earthen vessels, of which we
have many kinds. Among the rest tobacco pipes, made after the same fashion and
used in the same manner, as those in Turkey.
Our manner of living is entirely plain, for as yet the natives are unacquainted
with those refinements in cookery which debauch the taste: bullocks, goats, and
poultry, supply the greatest part of their food. These constitute likewise the prin-
cipal wealth of the country and the chief articles of its commerce. The flesh is
usually stewed in a pan; to make it savoury we sometimes use also pepper and
other spices, and we have salt made of wood ashes. Our vegetables are mostly
plantains, eadas, yams, beans, and Indian corn. The head of the family usually eats
alone; his wives and slaves have also their separate tables. Before we taste food
we always wash our hands: indeed our cleanliness on all occasions is extreme, but
on this it is an indispensable ceremony. After washing, libation is made by pour-
1 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 42 ---
OLAUDAH EQUIANO, “THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE . . .” 1 1
ing out a small portion of the drink on the floor, and tossing a small quantity of
the food in a certain place for the spirits of departed relations, which the natives
suppose to preside over their conduct and guard them from evil. They are totally
unacquainted with strong or spirituous liquors, and their principal beverage is
palm wine. This is got from a tree of that name by tapping it at the top and fas-
tening a large gourd to it, and sometimes one tree will yield three or four gallons
in a night. When just drawn it is of a most delicious sweetness, but in a few days
it acquires a tartish and more spirituous flavour, though I never saw anyone intox-
icated by it. The same tree also produces nuts and oil. Our principal luxury is in
perfumes; one sort of these is an odoriferous wood of delicious fragrance, the
other a kind of earth, a small portion of which thrown into the fire diffuses a more
powerful odour. We beat this wood into powder and mix it with palm oil, with
which both men and women perfume themselves.
In our buildings we study convenience rather than ornament. Each master of a
family has a large square piece of ground, surrounded with a moat or fence or
enclosed with a wall made of red earth tempered, which when dry is as hard as
brick. Within this are his houses to accommodate his family and slaves which if
numerous frequently present the appearance of a village. In the middle stands the
principal building, appropriated to the sole use of the master and consisting of two
apartments, in one of which he sits in the day with his family. The other is left apart
for the reception of his friends. He has besides these a distinct apartment in which
he sleeps, together with his male children. On each side are the apartments of his
wives, who have also their separate day and night houses. The habitations of the
slaves and their families are distributed throughout the rest of the enclosure. These
houses never exceed one story in height: they are always built of wood or stakes dri-
ven into the ground, crossed with wattles, and neatly plastered within and without.
The roof is thatched with reeds. Our day-houses are left open at the sides, but those
in which we sleep are always covered, and plastered in the inside with a composi-
tion mixed with cow-dung to keep off the different insects which annoy us during
the night. The walls and floors also of these are generally covered with mats. Our
beds consist of a platform raised three or four feet from the ground, on which are
laid skins and different parts of a spungy tree called plantain. Our covering is calico
or muslin, the same as our dress. The usual seats are a few logs of wood, but we have
benches, which are generally perfumed to accommodate strangers: these compose
the greater part of our household furniture. Houses so constructed and furnished
require but little skill to erect them. Every man is a sufficient architect for the pur-
pose. The whole neighborhood afford their unanimous assistance in building them
and in return receive and expect no other recompense than a feast.
As we live in a country where nature is prodigal of her favours, our wants are
few and easily supplied; of course we have few manufactures. They consist for the
most part of calicoes, earthenware, ornaments, and instruments of war and hus-
bandry. But these make no part of our commerce, the principal articles of which,
as I have observed, are provisions. In such a state money is of little use; however
we have some small pieces of coin, if I may call them such. They are made some-
thing like an anchor, but I do not remember either their value or denomination.


--- PAGE 43 ---
We have also markets, at which I have been frequently with my mother. These are
sometimes visited by stout mahogany-coloured men from the southwest of us: we
call them Oye-Eboe, which term signifies red men living at a distance. They gen-
erally bring us firearms, gunpowder, hats, beads, and dried fish. The last we
esteemed a great rarity as our waters were only brooks and springs. These articles
they barter with us for odoriferous woods and earth, and our salt of wood ashes.
They always carry slaves through our land, but the strictest account is exacted of
their manner of procuring them before they are suffered to pass. Some times
indeed we sold slaves to them, but they were only prisoners of war, or such among
us as had been convicted of kidnapping, or adultery, and some other crimes which
we esteemed heinous. This practice of kidnapping induces me to think that,
notwithstanding all our strictness, their principal business among us was to trepan
our people. I remember too they carried great sacks along with them, which not
long after I had an opportunity of fatally seeing applied to that infamous purpose.
Our land is uncommonly rich and fruitful, and produces all kinds of vegetables
in great abundance. We have plenty of Indian corn, and vast quantities of cotton
and tobacco. Our pineapples grow without culture; they are about the size of the
largest sugar-loaf and finely flavoured. We have also spices of different kinds, par-
ticularly pepper, and a variety of delicious fruits which I have never seen in
Europe, together with gums of various kinds and honey in abundance. All our
industry is exerted to improve those blessings of nature. Agriculture is our chief
employment, and everyone, even the children and women, are engaged in it. Thus
we are all habituated to labour from our earliest years. Everyone contributes some-
thing to the common stock, and as we are unacquainted with idleness we have no
beggars. The benefits of such a mode of living are obvious. The West India
planters prefer the slaves of Benin or Eboe to those of any other part of Guinea
for their hardiness, intelligence, integrity, and zeal. Those benefits are felt by us in
the general healthiness of the people, and in their vigour and activity; I might have
added too in their comeliness. Deformity is indeed unknown amongst us, I mean
that of shape. Numbers of the natives of Eboe now in London might be brought
in support of this assertion, for in regard to complexion, ideas of beauty are wholly
relative. I remember while in Africa to have seen three negro children who were
tawny, and another quite white, who were universally regarded by myself and the
natives in general, as far as related to their complexions, as deformed. Our women
too were in my eyes at least uncommonly graceful, alert, and modest to a degree
of bashfulness; nor do I remember to have ever heard of an instance of inconti-
nence amongst them before marriage. They are also remarkably cheerful. Indeed
cheerfulness and affability are two of the leading characteristics of our nation.
Our tillage is exercised in a large plain or common, some hours walk from our
dwellings, and all the neighbours resort thither in a body. They use no beasts of
husbandry, and their only instruments are hoes, axes, shovels, and beaks, or
pointed iron to dig with. Sometimes we are visited by locusts, which come in large
clouds so as to darken the air and destroy our harvest. This however happens
rarely, but when it does a famine is produced by it. I remember an instance or two
wherein this happened. This common is often the theatre of war, and therefore
1 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 44 ---
OLAUDAH EQUIANO, “THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE . . .” 1 3
when our people go out to till their land they not only go in a body but generally
take their arms with them for fear of a surprise, and when they apprehend an
invasion they guard the avenues to their dwellings by driving sticks into the
ground, which are so sharp at one end as to pierce the foot and are generally
dipped in poison. From what I can recollect of these battles, they appear to have
been irruptions of one little state or district on the other to obtain prisoners or
booty. Perhaps they were incited to this by those traders who brought the
European goods I mentioned amongst us. Such a mode of obtaining slaves in
Africa is common, and I believe more are procured this way and by kidnapping
than any other. When a trader wants slaves he applies to a chief for them and
tempts him with his wares. It is not extraordinary if on this occasion he yields to
the temptation with as little firmness, and accepts the price of his fellow creatures
liberty with as little reluctance as the enlightened merchant. Accordingly he falls
on his neighbours and a desperate battle ensues. If he prevails and takes prison-
ers, he gratifies his avarice by selling them; but if his party be vanquished and he
falls into the hands of the enemy, he is put to death: for as he has been known to
foment their quarrels it is thought dangerous to let him survive, and no ransom
can save him, though all other prisoners may be redeemed. . . .
O
The first object which saluted my eyes when I arrived on the coast was the sea, and
a slave ship, which was then riding at anchor, and waiting for its cargo. These filled
me with astonishment, which was soon converted into terror, when I was carried on
board I was immediately handled, and tossed up, to see if I were sound, by some of
the crew; and I was now persuaded that I had got into a world of bad spirits, and that
they were going to kill me. Their complexions too differing so much from ours, their
long hair, and the language they spoke (which was very different from any I had ever
heard) united to confirm me in this belief. Indeed such were the horrors of my views
and fears at the moment, that, if ten thousand worlds had been my own, I would
have freely parted with them all to have exchanged my condition with that of the
meanest slave in my own country. When I looked round the ship too and saw a large
furnace or copper boiling, and a multitude of black people of every description
chained together, every one of their countenances expressing dejection and sorrow,
I no longer doubted of my fate; and, quite overpowered with horror and anguish, I
fell motionless on the deck and fainted. When I recovered a little I found some black
people about me, who I believed were some of those who had brought me on board,
and had been receiving their pay; they talked to me in order to cheer me, but all in
vain. I asked them if we were not to be eaten by those white men with horrible looks,
red faces, and long hair. They told me I was not; and one of the crew brought me a
small portion of spirituous liquor in a wine-glass; but being afraid of him, I would not
take it out of his hand. One of the blacks therefore took it from him and gave it to
me, and I took a little down my palate, which, instead of reviving me, as they thought
it would, threw me into the greatest consternation at the strange feeling it produced,
having never tasted any such liquor before. Soon after this the blacks who brought


--- PAGE 45 ---
me on board went off, and left me abandoned to despair. I now saw myself deprived
of all chance of returning to my native country, or even the least glimpse of hope of
gaining the shore, which I now considered as friendly; and I even wished for my for-
mer slavery in preference to my present situation, which was filled with horrors of
every kind, still heightened by my ignorance of what I was to undergo. I was not long
suffered to indulge my grief; I was soon put down under the decks, and there I
received such a salutation in my nostrils as I had never experienced in my life: so that
with the loathsomeness of the stench, and crying together, I became so sick and low
that I was not able to eat, nor had I the least desire to taste any thing. I now wished
for the last friend, death, to relieve me; but soon, to my grief, two of the white men
offered me eatables; and, on my refusing to eat, one of them held me fast by the
hands, and laid me across, I think the windlass, and tied my feet, while the other
flogged me severely. I had never experienced any thing of this kind before: and,
although not being used to the water, I naturally feared that element the first time I
saw it, yet, nevertheless, could I have got over the nettings, I would have jumped
over the side, but I could not; and, besides, the crew used to watch us very closely
who were not chained down to the decks, lest we should leap into the water: and I
have seen some of these poor African prisoners most severely cut for attempting to
do so, and hourly whipped for not eating. This indeed was often the case with myself.
In a little time after, amongst the poor chained men, I found some of my own nation,
which in a small degree gave ease to my mind. I inquired of these what was to be
done with us? they gave me to understand we were to be carried to these white peo-
ple’s country to work for them. I then was a little revived, and thought, if it were no
worse than working, my situation was not so desperate: but still I feared I should be
put to death, the white people looked and acted, as I thought, in so savage a man-
ner; for I had never seen among any people such instances of brutal cruelty; and this
not only shown towards us blacks, but also to some of the whites themselves. One
white man in particular I saw, when we were permitted to be on deck, flogged so
unmercifully with a large rope near the foremast, that he died in consequence of it;
and they tossed him over the side as they would have done a brute. This made me
fear these people the more; and I expected nothing less than to be treated in the
same manner. I could not help expressing my fears and apprehensions to some of my
countrymen: I asked them if these people had no country, but lived in this hollow
place (the ship)? they told me they did not, but came from a distant one, “Then,” said
I, “how comes it in all our country we never heard of them!” They told me, because
they lived so very far off. I then asked where were their women? had they any like
themselves? I was told they had: “And why,” said I, “do we not see them?” they
answered, because they were left behind. I asked how the vessel could go? they told
me they could not tell; but that there were cloth put upon the masts by the help of
the ropes I saw, and then the vessel went on; and the white men had some spell or
magic they put in the water when they liked in order to stop the vessel, I was exceed-
ingly amazed at this account, and really thought they were spirits. I therefore wished
much to be from amongst them, for I expected they would sacrifice me: but my
wishes were vain; for we were so quartered that it was impossible for any of us to
make our escape. While we stayed on the coast I was mostly on deck; and one day,
1 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 46 ---
OLAUDAH EQUIANO, “THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE . . .” 1 5
to my great astonishment, I saw one of these vessels coming in with the sails up. As
soon as the whites saw it, they gave a great shout, at which we were amazed: and the
more so as the vessel appeared larger by approaching nearer. At last she came to an
anchor in my sight, and when the anchor was let go I and my countrymen who saw
it were lost in astonishment to observe the vessel stop; and were now convinced it
was done by magic. Soon after this the other ship got her boats out, and they came
on board of us, and the people of both ships seemed very glad to see each other.
Several of the strangers also shook hands with us black people, and made motions
with their hands, signifying I suppose, we were to go to their country; but we did not
understand them. At last, when the ship we were in, had got in all her cargo, they
made ready with many fearful noises, and we were all put under deck, so that we
could not see how they managed the vessel. But this disappointment was the least of
my sorrow. The stench of the hold while we were on the coast was so intolerably
loathsome, that it was dangerous to remain there for any time, and some of us had
been permitted to stay on the deck for the fresh air; but now that the whole ship’s
cargo were confined together, it became absolutely pestilential. The closeness of the
place, and the heat of the climate, added to the number in the ship, which was so
crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. This pro-
duced copious perspirations, so that the air soon became unfit for respiration, from
a variety of loathsome smells, and brought on a sickness amongst the slaves, of which
many died, thus falling victims to the improvident avarice, as I may call it, of their
purchasers. This wretched situation was again aggravated by the galling of the chains,
now become insupportable; and the filth of the necessary tubs, into which the chil-
dren often fell, and were almost suffocated. The shrieks of the women, and the
groans of the dying, rendered the whole a scene of horror almost inconceivable.
Happily perhaps for myself I was soon reduced so low here that it was thought nec-
essary to keep me almost always on deck; and from my extreme youth I was not put
in fetters. In this situation I expected every hour to share the fate of my companions,
some of whom were almost daily brought upon deck at the point of death, which I
began to hope would soon put an end to my miseries. Often did I think many of the
inhabitants of the deep much more happy than myself, I envied them the freedom
they enjoyed, and as often wished I could change my condition for theirs. Every cir-
cumstance I met with served only to render my state more painful, and heightened
my apprehensions and my opinion of the cruelty of the whites. One day they had
taken a number of fishes; and when they had killed and satisfied themselves with as
many as they thought fit, to our astonishment who were on the deck, rather than give
any of them to us to eat, as we expected, they tossed the remaining fish into the sea
again, although we begged and prayed for some as well as we could, but in vain; and
some of my countrymen, being pressed by hunger, took an opportunity, when they
thought no one saw them, of trying to get a little privately; but they were discovered,
and the attempt procured them some very severe floggings. One day, when we had
a smooth sea and moderate wind, two of my wearied countrymen who were chained
together (I was near them at the time), preferring death to such a life of misery,
somehow made through the nettings and jumped into the sea: immediately another
quite dejected fellow, who on account of his illness, was suffered to be out of irons,


--- PAGE 47 ---
also followed their example; and I believe many more would very soon have done the
same if they had not been prevented by the ship’s crew who were instantly alarmed.
Those of us that were the most active were in a moment put down under the deck,
and there was such a noise and confusion amongst the people of the ship as I never
heard before, to stop her, and get the boat out to go after the slaves. However two of
the wretches were drowned, but they got the other, and afterwards flogged him
unmercifully for thus attempting to prefer death to slavery. In this manner we con-
tinued to undergo more hardships than I can now relate, hardships which are insep-
arable from this accursed trade. Many a time we were near suffocation from the
want of fresh air, which we were often without for whole days together. This, and the
stench of the necessary tubs, carried off many. During our passage I first saw flying
fishes, which surprised me very much: they used frequently to fly across the ship, and
many of them fell on the deck. I also now first saw the use of the quadrant; I had
often with astonishment seen the mariners make observations with it, and I could not
think what it meant. They at last took notice of my surprise: and one of them, will-
ing to increase it, as well as to gratify my curiosity, made me one day look through it.
The clouds appeared to me to be land, which disappeared as they passed along. This
heightened my wonder; and I was now more persuaded than ever that I was in
another world, and that every thing about me was magic. At last we came in sight of
the island of Barbadoes, at which the whites on board gave a great shout, and made
many signs of joy to us. We did not know what to think of this; but as the vessel drew
nearer, we plainly saw the harbour, and other ships of different kinds and sizes; and
we soon anchored amongst them off Bridge-Town. Many merchants and planters
now came on board, though it was in the evening. They put us in separate parcels,
and examined us attentively. They also made us jump, and pointed to the land, sig-
nifying we were to go there. We thought by this we should be eaten by these ugly
men, as they appeared to us; and, when soon after we were all put down under the
deck again, there was much dread and trembling among us, and nothing but bitter
cries to be heard all the night from these apprehensions, insomuch that at last the
white people got some old slaves from the land to pacify us. They told us we were
not to be eaten, but to work, and were soon to go on land, where we should see many
of our country people. This report eased us much; and sure enough, soon after we
landed, there came to us Africans of all languages. We were conducted immediately
to the merchant’s yard, where we were all pent up together like so many sheep in a
fold, without regard to sex or age. As every object was new to me, every thing I saw
filled me with surprise. What struck me first was that the houses were built with
bricks and stories, and in every other respect different from those I had seen in
Africa: but I was still more astonished on seeing people on horseback. I did not know
what this could mean; and indeed I thought these people were full of nothing but
magical arts. While I was in this astonishment one of my fellow prisoners spoke to a
countryman of his about the horses, who said they were the same kind they had in
their country. I understood them, though they were from a distant part of Africa, and
I thought it odd I had not seen any horses there; but afterwards when I came to con-
verse with different Africans, I found they had many horses amongst them, and
much larger than those I saw. We were not many days in the merchant’s custody
1 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 48 ---
PRINCE HALL, “THUS DOTH ETHIOPIA STRETCH . . .” 1 7
before we were sold after their usual manner, which is this:—On a signal given, (as
the beat of a drum) the buyers rush at once into the yard where the slaves are con-
fined, and make choice of that parcel they like best. The noise and clamour with
which this is attended, and the eagerness visible in the countenances of the buyers,
serve not a little to increase the apprehension of terrified Africans, who may well be
supposed to consider them as the ministers of that destruction to which they think
themselves devoted. In this manner, without scruple, are relations and friends sepa-
rated, most of them never to see each other again. I remember in the vessel in which
I was brought over, in the men’s apartment, there were several brothers, who, in the
sale were sold in different lots; and it was very moving on this occasion to see and
hear their cries at parting. O, ye nominal Christians! might not an African ask you,
learned you this from your God, who says unto you, Do unto all men as you would
men should do unto you? Is it not enough that we are torn from our country and
friends, to toil for your luxury and lust of gain? Must every tender feeling be likewise
sacrificed to your avarice? Are the dearest friends and relations, now rendered more
dear by their separation from their kindred, still to be parted from each other, and
thus prevented from cheering the gloom of slavery with the small comfort of being
together, and mingling their sufferings and sorrows? Why are parents to lose their
children, brothers their sisters, or husbands their wives? Surely this is a new refine-
ment in cruelty, which, while it has no advantage to atone for it, thus aggravates dis-
tress, and adds fresh horrors even to the wretchedness of slavery.
Source: Excerpt from Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah
Equiano, or Gustav Vasa, the African in 2 volumes(New York, 1789 and 1791).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Houston Baker, The Journey Back: Issues in Black Literature and Criticism (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980).
Stephen Butterfield, Black Autobiography in America (Amherst: University of Massachu-
setts Press, 1974).
Alexander X. Byrd, “Captives & Voyagers Black Migrants Across the Eighteenth-Century
World of Olaudah Equiano” (Ph.D. diss., Duke University, 2001).
Vincent Carretta, Equiano, The African: Biography of a Self-Made Man(Athens: University
of Georgia Press, 2005).
Angelo Constanzo, Surprising Narrative: Olaudah Equiano and the Beginnings of Black
Autobiography (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987).
O3 O
“Thus Doth Ethiopia Stretch Forth Her Hand from Slavery, to Freedom and Equality,” 
Prince Hall, 1797
Questions remain about the birth, parentage, and early life of Prince Hall (1735?–
1807). It is generally accepted by historians that Prince Hall was owned by a


--- PAGE 49 ---
Boston leather-dresser, William Hall, who freed him on April 9, 1770, as a reward
for twenty-one years’ service. In July 1775, Hall helped to initiate the first Masonic
lodge for African Americans. Hall’s efforts would ultimately establish Masonry as
one of the major social institutions in black America. Less well known, but equally
important, were Hall’s contributions to the early abolitionist movement. Hall’s
1788 petition to the Massachusetts legislature calling for an end to the slave trade
was a contributing factor in its abolition. This sermon, originally delivered to a
black fraternal order in Menotomy (later West Cambridge), Massachusetts, is
notable as one of the earliest published speeches of an African American.
O
Beloved brethren of the African Lodge: It is now five years since I delivered a
charge to you on some parts and points of Masonry. As one branch of super-
structure of the foundation, I endeavored to show you the duty of a mason to a
mason, and of charity and love to all mankind, as the work and image of the great
God and the Father of the human race. I shall now attempt to show you that it is
our duty to sympathize with our fellow men under their troubles, and with the
families of our brethren who are gone, we hope, to the Grand Lodge above.
We are to have sympathy, but this, after all, is not to be confined to parties or
colors, nor to towns or states, nor to a kingdom, but to the kingdoms of the whole
earth, over whom Christ the King is head and Grand Master for all in distress.
Among these numerous sons and daughters of a distress, let us see our friends
and brethren; and first let us see them dragged from their native country, by the
iron hand of tyranny and oppression, from their dear friends and connections,
with weeping eyes and aching hearts, to a strange land, and among a strange peo-
ple, whose tender mercies are cruel, and there to bear the iron yoke of slavery and
cruelty, till death, as a friend, shall relieve them. And must not the unhappy con-
dition of these, our fellow men, draw forth our hearty prayers and wishes for their
deliverance from those merchants and traders, whose characters you have
described in Revelations 17:11–13? And who knows but these same sort of traders
may, in a short time, in like manner bewail the loss of the African traffic to their
shame and confusion? The day dawns now in some of the West Indies Islands.
God can and will change their condition and their hearts, too, and let Boston and
the world know that He hath no respect of persons, and that that bulwark of envy,
pride, scorn and contempt, which is so visible in some, shall fall.
Jethro, an Ethiopian, gave instructions to his son-in-law, Moses, in establishing
government. Exodus 18:22–24. Thus, Moses was not ashamed to be instructed by
a black man. Phillip was not ashamed to take a seat beside the Ethiopian Eunuch
and to instruct him in the gospel. The Grand Master Solomon was not ashamed
to hold conference with the Queen of Sheba. Our Grand Master Solomon did not
divide the living child, whatever he might do with the dead one; neither did he
pretend to make a law to forbid the parties from having free intercourse with one
another, without the fear of censure, or be turned out of the synagogue.
Now, my brethren, nothing is stable; all things are changeable. Let us seek
those things which are sure and steadfast, and let us pray God that, while we
1 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 50 ---
PRINCE HALL, “THUS DOTH ETHIOPIA STRETCH . . .” 1 9
remain here, he would give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under
all our troubles, which, at this day, God knows, we have our share of. Patience, I
say; for were we not possessed of a great measure of it, we could not bear up
under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of Boston, much more on pub-
lic days of recreation. How, at such times, are we shamefully abused, and that to
such a degree that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands, and the
arrows of death are flying about our heads. Helpless women have their clothes
torn from their backs. . . . And by whom are these disgraceful and abusive actions
committed? Not by the men born and bred in Boston—they are better bred—but
by a mob or horde of shameless, low-lived, envious, spiteful persons, some of
them not long since servants in gentlemen’s kitchens scouring knives, horse ten-
ders, chaise drivers. I was told by a gentleman who saw the filthy behavior in the
Common that, in all places he had been in, he never saw so cruel behavior in all
his life; and that a slave in the West Indies on Sundays or holidays enjoys himself
and friends without molestation. Not only this man, but many in town who have
seen their behavior to us, and that without provocation twenty or thirty cowards
have fallen upon one man. (Oh, the patience of the blacks!) ’Tis not for want of
courage in you, for they know that they do not face you man for man; but in a
mob, which we despise, and would rather suffer wrong than to do wrong, to the
disturbance of the community, and the disgrace of our reputation; for every good
citizen doth honor to the laws of the state where he resides.
My brethren, let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we
at present are laboring under, for the darkest hour is just before the break of day.
My brethren, let us remember what a dark day it was with our African brethren,
six years ago, in the French West Indies. Nothing but the snap of the whip was
heard, from morning to evening. Hanging, breaking on the wheel, burning, and
all manner of tortures were inflicted upon those unhappy people. But, blessed be
God, the scene is changed. They now confess that God hath no respect of person
and, therefore, receive them as their friends and treat them as brothers. Thus
doth Ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery, to freedom and equality.
Source: Excerpt of speech delivered at black Masonic lodge, Menotomy, Massachusetts,
June 24, 1797. Originally published in William C. Nell, The Colored Patriots of the American
Revolution (Boston: R. F. Wallcut, 1855, pp. 61–64; also in Philip S. Foner, ed., The Voice of
Black America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1972), pp. 13–15.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Joanna Brooks, “Prince Hall, Freemasonry, and Genealogy,” African American Review 34,
no. 2 (2000), pp. 197–216.
George Williamson Crawford, Prince Hall and His Followers: Being a Monograph on the
Legitimacy of the Negro Masonry(New York: AMS Press, 1914; reprint, 1971).
Harry E. Davis, A History of Freemasonary among Negroes in America (Published under
auspices of the United Supreme Council, ancient and accepted Scottish rite of
Freemasonry, Northern jurisdiction, U.S.A. [Prince Hall Affiliation] incorporated, 1946).
Sidney Kaplan, The Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution, 1770–1780, rev.
ed. (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1989).
Charles H. Wesley, Prince Hall, Life and Legacy (Washington, D.C.: United Supreme
Council, Southern Jurisdiction, Prince Hall Affiliation, 1977).


--- PAGE 51 ---
O4 O
The Founding of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, Richard Allen, 1816
Richard Allen (1760–1831) was born a slave in Philadelphia. At about the age of
twenty, Allen joined the Methodist Church and quickly began to lead local meet-
ings. Allen converted his master to Methodism, and eventually purchased his
freedom. In 1787 Allen helped to establish the independent Free African Society,
the first mutual and beneficial assistance association for African Americans.
Allen’s greatest accomplishment was his leadership in founding the African
Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church in April 1816. Allen was active in antislavery
efforts and helped sponsor the first national convention of black Americans in
1830. This document, taken from Allen’s biography, describes the establishment
of the AME Church.
O
December 1784, General Conference sat in Baltimore, the first General
Conference ever held in America. The English preachers just arrived from Europe
were, Rev. Dr. Coke, Richard Whatcoat and Thomas Vassey. This was the begin-
ning of the Episcopal Church amongst the Methodists. Many of the ministers were
set apart in holy orders at this conference, and were said to be entitled to the gown;
and I have thought religion has been declining in the church ever since. There was
a pamphlet published by some person, which stated, that when the Methodists
were no people, then they were a people; and now they have become a people they
were no people; which had often serious weight upon my mind.
In 1785 the Rev. Richard Whatcoat was appointed on Baltimore circuit. He
was, I believe, a man of God. I found great strength in travelling with him—a
father in Israel. In his advice he was fatherly and friendly. He was of a mild and
serene disposition. My lot was cast in Baltimore, in a small meeting-house called
Methodist Alley. I stopped at Richard Mould’s, and was sent to my lodgings, and
lodged at Mr. McCannon’s. I had some happy meetings in Baltimore. I was intro-
duced to Richard Russell, who was very kind and affectionate to me, and attended
several meetings. Rev. Bishop Asbury sent for me to meet him at Henry Gaff’s. I
did so. He told me he wished me to travel with him. He told me that in the slave
countries, Carolina and other places, I must not intermix with the slaves, and I
would frequently have to sleep in his carriage, and he would allow me my victuals
and clothes. I told him I would not travel with him on these conditions. He asked
me my reason. I told him if I was taken sick, who was to support me? and that I
thought people ought to lay up something while they were able, to support them-
selves in time of sickness or old age. He said that was as much as he got, his vict-
uals and clothes. I told him he would be taken care of, let his afflictions be as they
were, or let him be taken sick where he would, he would be taken care of; but I
doubted whether it would be the case with myself. He smiled, and told me he
would give me from then until he returned from the eastward to make up my
2 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 52 ---
FOUNDING OF THE AFRICAN METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH 2 1
mind, which would be about three months. But I made up my mind that I would
not accept of his proposals. Shortly after I left Hartford Circuit, and came to
Pennsylvania, on Lancaster circuit. I travelled several months on Lancaster circuit
with the Rev. Peter Morratte and Irie Ellis. They were very kind and affectionate
to me in building me up; for I had many trials to pass through, and I received
nothing from the Methodist connection. My usual method was, when I would get
bare of clothes, to stop travelling and go to work, so that no man could say I was
chargeable to the connection. My hands administered to my necessities. The
autumn of 1785 I returned again to Radnor. I stopped at George Giger’s, a man of
God, and went to work. His family were all kind and affectionate to me. I killed
seven beeves, and supplied the neighbors with meat; got myself pretty well clad
through my own industry—thank God—and preached occasionally. The elder in
charge in Philadelphia frequently sent for me to come to the city. February, 1786,
I came to Philadelphia. Preaching was given out for me at five o’clock in the morn-
ing at St. George church. I strove to preach as well as I could, but it was a great
cross to me; but the Lord was with me. We had a good time, and several souls
were awakened, and were earnestly seeking redemption in the blood of Christ. I
thought I would stop in Philadelphia a week or two. I preached at different places
in the city. My labor was much blessed. I soon saw a large field open in seeking
and instructing my African brethren, who had been a long forgotten people and
few of them attended public worship. I preached in the commons, in Southwark,
Northern Liberties, and wherever I could find an opening. I frequently preached
twice a day, at 5 o’clock in the morning and in the evening, and it was not uncom-
mon for me to preach from four to five times a day. I established prayer meetings;
I raised a society in 1786 for forty-two members. I saw the necessity of erecting a
place of worship for the colored people. I proposed it to the most respectable peo-
ple of color in this city; but here I met with opposition. I had but three colored
brethren that united with me in erecting a place of worship—the Rev. Absalom
Jones, William White and Dorus Ginnings. These united with me as soon as it
became public and known by the elder who was stationed in the city. The Rev.
C— B— opposed the plan, and would not submit to any argument we could raise;
but he was shortly removed from the charge. The Rev. Mr. W— took the charge,
and the Rev. L— G—, Mr. W— was much opposed to an African church, and
used very degrading and insulting language to us, to try and prevent us from going
on. We all belonged to St. George’s church—Rev. Absalom Jones, William White
and Dorus Ginnings. We felt ourselves much cramped; but my dear Lord was with
us, and we believed, if it was his will, the work would go on, and that we would be
able to succeed in building the house of the Lord. We established prayer meet-
ings and meetings of exhortation, and the Lord blessed our endeavors, and many
souls were awakened; but the elder soon forbid us holding any such meetings; but
we viewed the forlorn state of our colored brethren, and that they were destitute
of a place of worship. They were considered as a nuisance.
A number of us usually attended St. George’s church in Fourth street; and
when the colored people began to get numerous in attending the church, they
moved us from the seats we usually sat on, and placed us around the wall, and on


--- PAGE 53 ---
Sabbath morning we went to church and the sexton stood at the door, and told us
to go in the gallery. He told us to go, and we would see where to sit. We expected
to take the seats over the ones we formerly occupied below, not knowing any bet-
ter. We took those seats. Meeting had begun, and they were nearly done singing,
and just as we got to the seats, the elder said, “Let us pray.” We had not been long
upon our knees before I heard considerable scuffling and low talking. I raised my
head up and saw one of the trustees, H— M—, having hold of the Rev. Absalom
Jones, pulling him up off of his knees, and saying, “You must get up—you must
not kneel here.” Mr. Jones replied, “Wait until prayer is over.” Mr. H— M— said,
“No, you must get up now, or I will call for aid and force you away.” Mr. Jones
said, “Wait until prayer is over, and I will get up and trouble you no more.” With
that he beckoned to one of the other trustees, Mr. L— S— to come to his assis-
tance. He came, and went to William White to pull him up. By this time prayer
was over, and we all went out of the church in a body, and they were no more
plagued with us in the church. This raised a great excitement and inquiry among
the citizens, in so much that I believe they were ashamed of their conduct. But
my dear Lord was with us, and we were filled with fresh vigor to get a house
erected to worship God in. Seeing our forlorn and distressed situation, many of
the hearts of our citizens were moved to urge us forward; notwithstanding we had
subscribed largely towards finishing St. George’s church, in building the gallery
and laying new floors, and just as the house was made comfortable, we were
turned out from enjoying the comforts of worshipping therein. We then hired a
store-room, and held worship by ourselves. Here we were pursued with threats
of being disowned, and read publicly out of meeting if we did continue worship
in the place we had hired; but we believed the Lord would be our friend. We got
subscription papers out to raise money to build the house of the Lord. By this
time we had waited on Dr. Rush and Mr. Robert Ralston, and told them of our
distressing situation. We considered it a blessing that the Lord had put it into our
hearts to wait upon those gentlemen. They pitied our situation, and subscribed
largely towards the church, and were very friendly towards us, and advised us how
to go on. We appointed Mr. Ralston our treasurer. Dr. Rush did much for us in
public by his influence. I hope the name of Dr. Benjamin Rush and Robert
Ralston will never be forgotten among us. They were the first two gentlemen who
espoused the cause of the oppressed, and aided us in building the house of the
Lord for the poor Africans to worship in. Here was the beginning and rise of the
first African church in America. But the elder of the Methodist Church still pur-
sued us. Mr. J— M— called upon us and told us if we did not erase our names
from the subscription paper, and give up the paper, we would be publicly turned
out of meeting. We asked him if we had violated any rules of discipline by so
doing. He replied, “I have the charge given to me by the Conference, and unless
you submit I will read you publicly out of meeting.” We told him we were willing
to abide by the discipline of the Methodist Church, “And if you will show us
where we have violated any law of discipline of the Methodist Church, we will
submit; and if there is no rule violated in the discipline we will proceed on.” He
replied, “We will read you all out.” We told him if he turned us out contrary to
2 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 54 ---
FOUNDING OF THE AFRICAN METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH 2 3
rule of discipline, we should seek further redress. We told him we were dragged
off of our knees in St. George’s church, and treated worse than heathens; and we
were determined to seek out for ourselves, the Lord being our helper. He told us
we were not Methodists, and left us. Finding we would go on in raising money to
build the church, he called upon us again, and wished to see us all together. We
met him. He told us that he wished us well, that he was a friend to us, and used
many arguments to convince us that we were wrong in building a church. We told
him we had no place of worship; and we did not mean to go to St. George’s church
any more, as we were so scandalously treated in the presence of all the congre-
gation present; “and if you deny us your name, you cannot seal up the scriptures
from us, and deny us a name in heaven. We believe heaven is free for all who wor-
ship in spirit and truth.” And he said, “So you are determined to go on.” We told
him “Yes, God being our helper.” He then replied, “We will disown you all from
the Methodist connection.” We believed if we put our trust in the Lord, he would
stand by us. This was a trial that I never had to pass through before. I was confi-
dent that the great head of the church would support us. My dear Lord was with
us. . . . Robert R. Roberts, the resident elder, came to Bethel, insisted on preach-
ing to us and taking the spiritual charge of the congregation, for we were
Methodists he was told he should come on some terms with the trustees; his
answer was, that “He did not come to consult with Richard Allen or other
trustees, but to inform the congregation, that on next Sunday afternoon, he would
come and take the spiritual charge.” We told him he could not preach for us
under existing circumstances. However, at the appointed time he came, but hav-
ing taken previous advice we had our preacher in the pulpit when he came, and
the house was so fixed that he could not get but more than half way to the pulpit.
Finding himself disappointed he appealed to those who came with him as wit-
nesses, that “That man (meaning the preacher), had taken his appointment.”
Several respectable white citizens who knew the colored people had been ill-
used, were present, and told us not to fear, for they would see us righted, and not
suffer Roberts to preach in a forcible manner, after which Roberts went away.
The next elder stationed in Philadelphia was Robert Birch, who, following the
example of his predecessor, came and published a meeting for himself. But the
method just mentioned was adopted and he had to go away disappointed. In con-
sequence of this, he applied to the Supreme Court for a writ of mandamus, to
know why the pulpit was denied him. Being elder, this brought on a lawsuit, which
ended in our favor. Thus by the Providence of God we were delivered from a long,
distressing and expensive suit, which could not be resumed, being determined by
the Supreme Court. For this mercy we desire to be unfeignedly thankful.
About this time, our colored friends in Baltimore were treated in a similar
manner by the white preachers and trustees, and many of them driven away who
were disposed to seek a place of worship, rather than go to law.
Many of the colored people in other places were in a situation nearly like those
of Philadelphia and Baltimore, which induced us, in April 1816, to call a general
meeting, by way of Conference. Delegates from Baltimore and other places
which met those of Philadelphia, and taking into consideration their grievances,


--- PAGE 55 ---
and in order to secure the privileges, promote union and harmony among them-
selves, it was resolved: “That the people of Philadelphia, Baltimore, etc., etc.,
should become one body, under the name of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church.” We deemed it expedient to have a form of discipline, whereby we may
guide our people in the fear of God, in the unity of the Spirit, and in the bonds
of peace, and preserve us from that spiritual despotism which we have so recently
experienced—remembering that we are not to lord it over God’s heritage, as
greedy dogs that can never have enough. But with long suffering and bowels of
compassion, to bear each other’s burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, pray-
ing that our mutual striving together for the promulgation of the Gospel may be
crowned with abundant success. . . .
Source: Excerpt from Richard Allen, The Life, Experience and Gospel Labors of the Rt. Rev.
Richard Allen (Philadelphia: Lee & Yocum, 1888), pp. 11–17, 23–24.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Carol V . R. George, Segregated Sabbaths: Richard Allen and the Emergence of Independent
Black Churches, 1760–1840(New York: Oxford University Press, 1973).
Harry Reed, Platforms for Change: The Foundations of the Northern Free Black Commun-
ity (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1994).
Charles H. Wesley, Richard Allen: Apostle of Freedom (Washington, D.C.: Associated
Publishers, 1935).
O5 O
David Walker’s “Appeal,” 1829–1830
David Walker (1785–1830) was born in Wilmington, Ohio, and moved to Boston
in 1827, where he became a well-known spokesperson against slavery, and con-
tributed to the first African-American newspaper, Freedom’s Journal. Walker was
uncompromising in denouncing what he saw as the “evils” of slavery, and urged
enslaved African Americans to employ any tactics, including violence, to achieve
liberation. Walker’s militancy is clearly presented in his famous Appeal in Four
Articles, which was reprinted several times in 1829 and 1830. Walker died mys-
teriously in 1830, possibly due to poisoning.
O
APPEAL, &c.
PREAMBLE
My dearly beloved Brethren and Fellow Citizens.
Having travelled over a considerable portion of these United States, and hav-
ing, in the course of my travels, taken the most accurate observations of things as
2 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 56 ---
DAVID WALKER’S “APPEAL” 2 5
they exist—the result of my observations has warranted the full and unshaken
conviction, that we, (coloured people of these United States,) are the most
degraded, wretched, and abject set of beings that ever lived since the world
began; and I pray God that none like us ever may live again until time shall be no
more. They tell us of the Israelites in Egypt, the Helots in Sparta, and of the
Roman Slaves, which last were made up from almost every nation under heaven,
whose sufferings under those ancient and heathen nations, were, in comparison
with ours, under this enlightened and Christian nation, no more than a cypher—
or, in other words, those heathen nations of antiquity, had but little more among
them than the name and form of slavery; while wretchedness and endless mis-
eries were reserved, apparently in a phial, to be poured out upon our fathers, our-
selves and our children, by Christian Americans!
These positions I shall endeavour, by the help of the Lord, to demonstrate in
the course of this Appeal, to the satisfaction of the most incredulous mind—and
may God Almighty, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, open your hearts
to understand and believe the truth.
The causes, my brethren, which produce our wretchedness and miseries, are
so very numerous and aggravating, that I believe the pen only of a Josephus or a
Plutarch, can well enumerate and explain them. Upon subjects, then, of such
incomprehensible magnitude, so impenetrable, and so notorious, I shall be
obliged to omit a large class of, and content myself with giving you an exposition
of a few of those, which do indeed rage to such an alarming pitch, that they can-
not but be a perpetual source of terror and dismay to every reflecting mind.
I am fully aware, in making this appeal to my much afflicted and suffering
brethren, that I shall not only be assailed by those whose greatest earthly desires
are, to keep us in abject ignorance and wretchedness, and who are of the firm
conviction that Heaven has designed us and our children to be slaves and beasts
of burden to them and their children. I say, I do not only expect to be held up to
the public as an ignorant, impudent and restless disturber of the public peace, by
such avaricious creatures, as well as a mover of insubordination—and perhaps put
in prison or to death, for giving a superficial exposition of our miseries, and expos-
ing tyrants. But I am persuaded, that many of my brethren, particularly those who
are ignorantly in league with slave-holders or tyrants, who acquire their daily
bread by the blood and sweat of their more ignorant brethren—and not a few of
those too, who are too ignorant to see an inch beyond their noses, will rise up and
call me cursed—Yea, the jealous ones among us will perhaps use more abject sub-
tlety, by affirming that this work is not worth perusing, that we are well situated,
and there is no use in trying to better our condition, for we cannot. I will ask one
question here.—Can our condition be any worse?—Can it be more mean and
abject? If there are any changes, will they not be for the better, though they may
appear for the worst at first? Can they get us any lower? Where can they get us?
They are afraid to treat us worse, for they know well, the day they do it they are
gone. But against all accusations which may or can be preferred against me, I
appeal to Heaven for my motive in writing—who knows that my object is, if pos-
sible, to awaken in the breasts of my afflicted, degraded and slumbering brethren,


--- PAGE 57 ---
a spirit of inquiry and investigation respecting our miseries and wretchedness in
this Republican Land of Liberty!!!!!!
The sources from which our miseries are derived, and on which I shall com-
ment, I shall not combine in one, but shall put them under distinct heads and
expose them in their turn; in doing which, keeping truth on my side, and not
departing from the strictest rules of morality, I shall endeavour to penetrate,
search out, and lay them open for your inspection. If you cannot or will not profit
by them, I shall have done my duty to you, my country and my God.
And as the inhuman system of slavery, is the source from which most of our
miseries proceed, I shall begin with that curse to nations, which has spread terror
and devastation through so many nations of antiquity, and which is raging to such
a pitch at the present day in Spain and in Portugal. It had one tug in England, in
France, and in the United States of America; yet the inhabitants thereof, do not
learn wisdom, and erase it entirely from their dwellings and from all with whom
they have to do. The fact is, the labour of slaves comes so cheap to the avaricious
usurpers, and is (as they think) of such great utility to the country where it exists,
that those who are actuated by sordid avarice only, overlook the evils, which will
as sure as the Lord lives, follow after the good. In fact, they are so happy to keep
in ignorance and degradation, and to receive the homage and the labour of the
slaves, they forget that God rules in the armies of heaven and among the inhabi-
tants of the earth, having his ears continually open to the cries, tears and groans
of his oppressed people; and being a just and holy Being will at one day appear
fully in behalf of the oppressed, and arrest the progress of the avaricious oppres-
sors; for although the destruction of the oppressors God may not effect by the
oppressed, yet the Lord our God will bring other destructions upon them—for
not unfrequently will he cause them to rise up one against another, to be split and
divided, and to oppress each other, and sometimes to open hostilities with sword
in hand. Some may ask, what is the matter with this united and happy people?—
Some say it is the cause of political usurpers; tyrants, oppressors, &c. But has not
the Lord an oppressed and suffering people among them? Does the Lord conde-
scend to hear their cries and see their tears in consequence of oppression? Will
he let the oppressors rest comfortably and happy always? Will he not cause the
very children of the oppressors to rise up against them, and oftimes put them to
death? “God works in many ways his wonders to perform.”
All persons who are acquainted with history, and particularly the Bible, who
are not blinded by the God of this world, and are not actuated solely by
avarice—who are able to lay aside prejudice long enough to view candidly and
impartially, things as they were, are, and probably will be—who are willing to
admit that God made man to serve Him alone, and that man should have no
other Lord or Lords but Himself—that God Almighty is the sole proprietor or
master of the 
WHOLE human family, and will not on any consideration admit of
a colleague, being unwilling to divide his glory with another—and who can dis-
pense with prejudice long enough to admit that we are men, notwithstanding
our improminent noses and woolly heads, and believe that we feel for our
fathers, mothers, wives and children, as well as the whites do for theirs.—I say,
2 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 58 ---
DAVID WALKER’S “APPEAL” 2 7
all who are permitted to see and believe these things, can easily recognize the
judgments of God among the Spaniards. Though others may lay the cause of the
fierceness with which they cut each other’s throats, to some other circumstance,
yet they who believe that God is a God of justice, will believe that S
LAVERY is
the principal cause .
While the Spaniards are running about upon the field of battle cutting each
other’s throats, has not the Lord an afflicted and suffering people in the midst of
them, whose cries and groans in consequence of oppression are continually pour-
ing into the ears of the God of justice? Would they not cease to cut each other’s
throats, if they could? But how can they? The very support which they draw from
government to aid them in perpetrating such enormities, does it not arise in a
great degree from the wretched victims of oppression among them? And yet they
are calling for Peace!—Peace!! Will any peace be given unto them? Their destruc-
tion may indeed be procrastinated awhile, but can it continue long, while they are
oppressing the Lord’s people? Has He not the hearts of all men in His hand? Will
he suffer one part of his creatures to go on oppressing another like brutes always,
with impunity? And yet, those avaricious wretches are calling for Peace!!!! I
declare, it does appear to me, as though some nations think God is asleep, or that
he made the Africans for nothing else but to dig their mines and work their farms,
or they cannot believe history, sacred or profane. I ask every man who has a heart,
and is blessed with the privilege of believing—Is not God a God of justice to all
his creatures? Do you say he is? Then if he gives peace and tranquillity to tyrants,
and permits them to keep our fathers, our mothers, ourselves and our children in
eternal ignorance and wretchedness, to support them and their families, would he
be to us a God of justice? I ask, O ye Christians!!! who hold us and our children
in the most abject ignorance and degradation, that ever a people were afflicted
with since the world began—I say, if God gives you peace and tranquillity, and
suffers you thus to go on afflicting us, and our children, who have never given you
the least provocation—would he be to us a God of justice? If you will allow that
we are 
MEN, who feel for each other, does not the blood of our fathers and of us
their children, cry aloud to the Lord of Sabaoth against you, for the cruelties and
murders with which you have, and do continue to afflict us. But it is time for me
to close my remarks on the suburbs, just to enter more fully into the interior of
this system of cruelty and oppression. . . .
. . . I saw a paragraph, a few years since, in a South Carolina paper, which,
speaking of the barbarity of the Turks, it said: “The Turks are the most barbarous
people in the world—they treat the Greeks more like brutes than human beings.”
And in the same paper was an advertisement, which said: “Eight well built
Virginia and Maryland Negro fellows and four wenches will positively be sold this
day, to the highest bidder!” And what astonished me still more was, to see in this
same humane paper!! the cuts of three men, with clubs and budgets on their
backs, and an advertisement offering a considerable sum of money for their
apprehension and delivery. I declare, it is really so amusing to hear the Southern-
ers and Westerners of this country talk about barbarity, that it is positively,
enough to make a man smile.


--- PAGE 59 ---
The sufferings of the Helots among the Spartans, were somewhat severe, it is
true, but to say that theirs, were as severe as ours among the Americans, I do most
strenuously deny—for instance, can any man show me an article on a page of
ancient history which specifies, that, the Spartans chained, and hand-cuffed the
Helots, and dragged them from their wives and children, children from their par-
ents, mothers from their suckling babes, wives from their husbands, driving them
from one end of the country to the other? Notice the Spartans were heathens,
who lived long before our Divine Master made his appearance in the flesh. Can
Christian Americans deny these barbarous cruelties? Have you not, Americans,
having subjected us under you, added to these miseries, by insulting us in telling
us to our face, because we are helpless, that we are not of the human family? I
ask you, O! Americans, I ask you in the name of the Lord, can you deny these
charges? Some perhaps may deny, by saying, that they never thought or said that
we were not men. But do not actions speak louder than words?—have they not
made provisions for the Greeks, and Irish? Nations who have never done the least
thing for them, while we, who have enriched their country with our blood and
tears—have dug up gold and silver for them and their children, from generation
to generation, and are in more miseries than any other people under heaven, are
not seen, but by comparatively, a handful of the American people? There are
indeed, more ways to kill a dog, besides choking it to death with butter. Further—
The Spartans or Lacedemonians, had some frivolous pretext, for enslaving the
Helots, for they (Helots) while being free inhabitants of Sparta, stirred up an
intestine commotion, and were, by the Spartans subdued, and made prisoners of
war. Consequently they and their children were condemned to perpetual slavery.
1
I have been for years troubling the pages of historians, to find out what our
fathers have done to the white Christians of America, to merit such condign pun-
ishment as they have inflicted on them, and do continue to inflict on us their chil-
dren. But I must aver, that my researches have hitherto been to no effect. I have
therefore, come to the immoveable conclusion, that they (Americans) have, and
do continue to punish us for nothing else, but for enriching them and their coun-
try. For I cannot conceive of any thing else. Nor will I ever believe otherwise,
until the Lord shall convince me. . . .
O
Article II: Our Wretchedness in Consequence of Ignorance
Ignorance, my brethren, is a mist, low down into the very dark and almost impen-
etrable abyss in which, our fathers for many centuries have been plunged. The
Christians, and enlightened of Europe, and some of Asia, seeing the ignorance
and consequent degradation of our fathers, instead of trying to enlighten them,
by teaching them that religion and light with which God had blessed them, they
have plunged them into wretchedness ten thousand times more intolerable, than
if they had left them entirely to the Lord, and to add to their miseries, deep down
into which they have plunged them tell them, that they are an inferior and dis-
tinct race of beings, which they will be glad enough to recall and swallow by and
2 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 60 ---
DAVID WALKER’S “APPEAL” 2 9
by. Fortune and misfortune, two inseparable companions, lay rolled up in the
wheel of events, which have from the creation of the world, and will continue to
take place among men until God shall dash worlds together.
When we take a retrospective view of the arts and sciences—the wise legisla-
tors—the Pyramids, and other magnificent buildings—the turning of the channel
of the river Nile, by the sons of Africa or of Ham, among whom learning originated,
and was carried thence into Greece, where it was improved upon and refined.
Thence among the Romans, and all over the then enlightened parts of the world,
and it has been enlightening the dark and benighted minds of men from then, down
to this day. I say, when I view retrospectively, the renown of that once mighty peo-
ple, the children of our great progenitor I am indeed cheered. Yea further, when I
view that mighty son of Africa, H
ANNIBAL, one of the greatest generals of antiquity,
who defeated and cut off so many thousands of the white Romans or murderers,
and who carried his victorious arms, to the very gate of Rome, and I give it as my
candid opinion, that had Carthage been well united and had given him good sup-
port, he would have carried that cruel and barbarous city by storm. But they were
dis-united, as the coloured people are now, in the United States of America, the rea-
son our natural enemies are enabled to keep their feet on our throats.
Beloved brethren—here let me tell you, and believe it, that the Lord our God,
as true as he sits on his throne in heaven, and as true as our Saviour died to
redeem the world, will give you a Hannibal, and when the Lord shall have raised
him up, and given him to you for your possession, O my suffering brethren!
remember the divisions and consequent sufferings of Carthage and of Hayti.
Read the history particularly of Hayti, and see how they were butchered by the
whites, and do you take warning. The person whom God shall give you, give him
your support and let him go his length, and behold in him the salvation of your
God. God will indeed, deliver you through him from your deplorable and
wretched condition under the Christians of America. I charge you this day before
my God to lay no obstacle in his way, but let him go.
The whites want slaves, and want us for their slaves, but some of them will
curse the day they ever saw us. As true as the sun ever shone in its meridian splen-
dor, my colour will root some of them out of the very face of the earth. They shall
have enough of making slaves of, and butchering, and murdering us in the man-
ner which they have. No doubt some may say that I write with a bad spirit, and
that I being a black, wish these things to occur. Whether I write with a bad or a
good spirit, I say if these things do not occur in their proper time, it is because
the world in which we live does not exist, and we are deceived with regard to its
existence.—It is immaterial however to me, who believe, or who refuse—though
I should like to see the whites repent peradventure God may have mercy on
them, some however, have gone so far that their cup must be filled. . . .
Ignorance and treachery one against the other—a grovelling servile and abject
submission to the lash of tyrants, we see plainly, my brethren, are not the natural
elements of the blacks, as the Americans try to make us believe; but these are mis-
fortunes which God has suffered our fathers to be enveloped in for many ages, no
doubt in consequence of their disobedience to their Maker, and which do,


--- PAGE 61 ---
indeed, reign at this time among us, almost to the destruction of all other princi-
ples: for I must truly say, that ignorance, the mother of treachery and deceit,
gnaws into our very vitals. Ignorance, as it now exits among us, produces a state
of things, Oh my Lord! too horrible to present to the world. Any man who is curi-
ous to see the full force of ignorance developed among the coloured people of the
United States of America, has only to go into the southern and western states of
this confederacy, where, if he is not a tyrant, but has the feelings of a human
being, who can feel for a fellow creature, he may see enough to make his very
heart bleed! He may see there, a son take his mother, who bore almost the pains
of death to give him birth, and by the command of a tyrant, strip her as naked as
she came into the world, and apply the cow-hide to her, until she falls a victim to
death in the road! He may see a husband take his dear wife, not unfrequently in
a pregnant state, and perhaps far advanced, and beat her for an unmerciful
wretch, until his infant falls a lifeless lump at her feet! Can the Americans escape
God Almighty? If they do, can he be to us a God of Justice? God is just, and I
know it—for he has convinced me to my satisfaction—I cannot doubt him. My
observer may see fathers beating their sons, mothers their daughters, and chil-
dren their parents, all to pacify the passions of unrelenting tyrants. He may also
see them telling news and lies, making mischief one upon another. These are
some of the productions of ignorance, which he will see practised among my dear
brethren, who are held in unjust slavery and wretchedness, by avaricious and
unmerciful tyrants, to whom, and their hellish deeds, I would suffer my life to be
taken before I would submit. And when my curious observer comes to take notice
of those who are said to be free, (which assertion I deny) and who are making
some frivolous pretentions to common sense, he will see that branch of ignorance
among the slaves assuming a more cunning and deceitful course of procedure.—
He may see some of my brethren in league with tyrants, selling their own
brethren into hell upon earth, not dissimilar to the exhibitions in Africa, but in a
more secret, servile and abject manner. Oh Heaven! I am full!!! I can hardly move
my pen!!! and as I expect some will try to put me to death, to strike terror into
others, and to obliterate from their minds the notion of freedom, so as to keep my
brethren the more secure in wretchedness, where they will be permitted to stay
but a short time (whether tyrants believe it or not)—I shall give the world a devel-
opment of facts, which are already witnessed in the courts of heaven. My observer
may see some of those ignorant and treacherous creatures (coloured people)
sneaking about in the large cities, endeavouring to find out all strange coloured
people, where they work and where they reside, asking them questions, and try-
ing to ascertain whether they are runaways or not, telling them, at the same time,
that they always have been, are, and always will be, friends to their brethren; and,
perhaps, that they themselves are absconders, and a thousand such treacherous
lies to get the better information of the more ignorant!!! There have been and are
at this day in Boston, New-York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, coloured men; who
are in league with tyrants, and who receive a great portion of their daily bread, of
the moneys which they acquire from the blood and tears of their more miserable
3 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 62 ---
DAVID WALKER’S “APPEAL” 3 1
brethren, whom they scandalously delivered into the hands of our natural ene-
mies!!!!!! . . .
. . . I say, from the beginning, I do not think that we were natural enemies to
each other. But the whites having made us so wretched, by subjecting us to slav-
ery, and having murdered so many millions of us, in order to make us work for
them, and out of devilishness—and they taking our wives, whom we love as we do
ourselves—our mothers, who bore the pains of death to give us birth—our fathers
and dear little children, and ourselves, and strip and beat us one before the
other—chain, hand-cuff, and drag us about like rattle-snakes—shoot us down like
wild bears, before each other’s faces, to make us submissive to, and work to sup-
port them and their families. They (the whites) know well, if we are men—and
there is a secret monitor in their hearts which tells them we are—they know, I say,
if we are men, and see them treating us in the manner they do, that there can be
nothing in our hearts but death alone, for them, notwithstanding we may appear
cheerful, when we see them murdering our dear mothers and wives, because we
cannot help ourselves. Man, in all ages and all nations of the earth, is the same.
Man is a peculiar creature—he is the image of his God, though he may be sub-
jected to the most wretched condition upon earth, yet the spirit and feeling which
constitute the creature, man, can never be entirely erased from his breast, because
the God who made him after his own image, planted it in his heart; he cannot get
rid of it. The whites knowing this, they do not know what to do; they know that
they have done us so much injury, they are afraid that we, being men, and not
brutes, will retaliate, and woe will be to them; therefore, that dreadful fear,
together with an avaricious spirit, and the natural love in them, to be called mas-
ters, (which term will yet honour them with to their sorrow) bring them to the
resolve that they will keep us in ignorance and wretchedness, as long as they pos-
sibly can,
2 and make the best of their time, while it lasts. Consequently they, them-
selves, (and not us) render themselves our natural enemies, by treating us so cruel.
They keep us miserable now, and call us their property, but some of them will have
enough of us by and by—their stomachs shall run over with us; they want us for
their slaves, and shall have us to their fill. (We are all in the world together!!—I
said above, because we cannot help ourselves, (viz. we cannot help the whites mur-
dering our mothers and our wives) but this statement is incorrect—for we can help
ourselves; for, if we lay aside abject servility, and be determined to act like men,
and not brutes—the murders among the whites would be afraid to show their cruel
heads. But O, my God!—in sorrow I must say it, that my colour, all over the world,
have a mean, servile spirit. They yield in a moment to the whites, let them be right
or wrong—the reason they are able to keep their feet on our throats. Oh! my
coloured brethren, all over the world, when shall we arise from this death-like apa-
thy?—And be men!! You will notice, if ever we become men, I mean respectable
men, such as other people are,) we must exert ourselves to the full. For remem-
ber, that it is the greatest desire and object of the greater part of the whites, to keep
us ignorant, and make us work to support them and their families. . . . Will any of
us leave our homes and go to Africa? I hope not.
3 Let them commence their attack


--- PAGE 63 ---
upon us as they did on our brethren in Ohio, driving and beating us from our coun-
try, and my soul for theirs, they will have enough of it. Let no man of us budge one
step, and let slave-holders come to beat us from our country. America is more our
country, than it is the whites—we have enriched it with our blood and tears. The
greatest riches in all America have arisen from our blood and tears:—and will they
drive us from our property and homes, which we have earned with our blood?
They must look sharp or this very thing will bring swift destruction upon them.
The Americans have got so fat on our blood and groans, that they have almost for-
gotten the God of armies. But let them go on.
A
DDITION .—I will give here a very imperfect list of the cruelties inflicted on
us by the enlightened Christians of America.—First, no trifling portion of
them will beat us nearly to death, if they find us on our knees praying to
God,—They hinder us from going to hear the word of God—they keep us sunk
in ignorance, and will not let us learn to read the word of God, nor write—If
they find us with a book of any description in our hand, they will beat us nearly
to death—they are so afraid we will learn to read, and enlighten our dark and
benighted minds—They will not suffer us to meet together to worship the God
who made us—they brand us with hot iron—they cram bolts of fire down our
throats—they cut us as they do horses, bulls, or hogs—they crop our ears and
sometimes cut off bits of our tongues—they chain and hand-cuff us, and while
in that miserable and wretched condition, beat us with cow-hides and clubs—
they keep us half naked and starve us sometimes nearly to death under their
infernal whips or lashes (which some of them shall have enough of yet)—They
put on us fifty-sixes and chains, and make us work in that cruel situation, and
in sickness, under lashes to support them and their families.—They keep us
three or four hundred feet under ground working in their mines, night and day
to dig up gold and silver to enrich them and their children.—They keep us in
the most death-like ignorance by keeping us from all source of information,
and call us, who are free men and next to the Angels of God, their property!!!!!!
They make us fight and murder each other, many of us being ignorant, not
knowing any better,—They take us, (being ignorant,) and put us as drivers one
over the other, and make us afflict each other as bad as they themselves afflict
us—and to crown the whole of this catalogue of cruelties, they tell us that we
the (blacks) are an inferior race of beings! incapable of self government!!—We
would be injurious to society and ourselves, if tyrants should loose their unjust
hold on us!!! That if we were free we would not work, but would live on plun-
der or theft!!!! that we are the meanest and laziest set of beings in the world!!!!!
That they are obliged to keep us in bondage to do us good!!!!!!—That we are
satisfied to rest in slavery to them and their children!!!!!!—That we ought not
to be set free in America, but ought to be sent away to Africa!!!!!!!—That if we
were set free in America, we would involve the country in a civil war, which
assertion is altogether at variance with our feeling or design, for we ask them
for nothing but the rights of man, viz. for them to set us free, and treat us like
men, and there will be no danger, for we will love and respect them, and pro-
tect our country—but cannot conscientiously do these things until they treat
us like men.
3 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 64 ---
DAVID WALKER’S “APPEAL” 3 3
How cunning slave-holders think they are!!!—How much like the king of
Egypt who, after he saw plainly that God was determined to bring out his people,
in spite of him and his, as powerful as they were. He was willing that Moses,
Aaron and the Elders of Israel, but not all the people should go and serve the
Lord. But God deceived him as he will Christian Americans, unless they are very
cautious how they move. What would have become of the United States of
America, was it not for those among the whites, who not in words barely, but in
truth and in deed, love and fear the Lord?—Our Lord and Master said:—
4 “Who
so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea.” But the Americans with this very threatening of the Lord’s, not
only beat his little ones among the Africans, but many of them they put to death
or murder. Now the avaricious Americans, think that the Lord Jesus Christ will
let them off, because his words are no more than the words of a man!!! In fact,
many of them are so avaricious and ignorant, that they do not believe in our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Tyrants may think they are so skillful in State affairs is
the reason that the government is preserved. But I tell you, that this country
would have been given up long ago, was it not for the lovers of the Lord. They are
indeed, the salt of the earth. Remove the people of God among the whites, from
this land of blood, and it will stand until they cleverly get out of the way. . . .
Notes: 1. See Dr. Goldsmith’s History of Greece, page 9. See also, Plutarch’s Lives. The
Helots subdued by Agis, king of Sparta. 2. And still hold us up with indignity as being inca-
pable of acquiring knowledge!!! See the inconsistency of the assertions of those wretches—
they beat us inhumanely, sometimes almost to death, for attempting to inform ourselves,
by reading the Word of our Maker, and at the same time tell us, that we are beings void of
intellect!!!! How admirably their practices agree with their professions in this case. Let me
cry shame upon you Americans, for such outrages upon human nature!!! If it were possi-
ble for the whites always to keep us ignorant and miserable, and make us work to enrich
them and their children, and insult our feelings by representing us as talking Apes, what
would they do? But glory, honour and praise to Heaven’s King, that the sons and daugh-
ters of Africa, will, in spite of all the opposition of their enemies, stand forth in all the dig-
nity and glory that is granted by the Lord to his creature man. 3. Those who are ignorant
enough to go to Africa, the coloured people ought to be glad to have them go, for if they
are ignorant enough to let the whites fool them off to Africa, they would be no small injury
to us if they reside in this country. 4. See St. Matthew’s Gospel, chap. xviii. 6.
Source: Excerpt from David Walker, David Walker’s Appeal in Four Articles; Together with
a Preamble, to the Coloured Citizens of the World, but in Particular and Very Expressly, to
those of the United States of America(Boston: Revised and published by David Walker, 3rd
ed., 1830).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Houston A. Baker, Jr., Long Black Song (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1972).
Lerone Bennett, Pioneers in Protest(Chicago: Johnson Publishing Co., 1968).
Hasan Crockett, “The Incendiary Pamphlet: David Walker’s Appeal in Georgia,” Journal of
Negro History 86, no. 3 (2001), pp. 305–318.
Peter P . Hinks, To Awaken My Affiliated Brethren: David Walker and the Problems of
Antebellum Slave Resistance(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997).
Vernon Loggins, The Negro Author(New York: Columbia University, 1931).


--- PAGE 65 ---
O6 O
The Statement of Nat Turner, 1831
Probably the most famous slave revolt in American history was led by Nat Turner
(1800–1831). Turner was born in Southampton County, Virginia, the child of slave
parents. On August 22, 1831, Turner and a group of sixty to eighty slaves initiated
an insurrection, killing about sixty whites in the span of forty hours. The revolt
was viciously suppressed by local and state authorities. Over two hundred slaves,
most of whom had little knowledge of the uprising and had not participated in it,
were killed in retaliation. Turner himself was captured on October 30, 1831, and
summarily tried and executed on November 11, 1831. Before his trial, Turner was
interviewed by a court-appointed attorney, Thomas Gray. The document pro-
duced by Gray, which was published as Turner’s Confessions, became the basis for
a controversial novel by author William Styron depicting the revolt. Turner’s
actions symbolized to successive generations of African Americans a fierce deter-
mination to achieve freedom. It is important to keep in mind that Gray’s account
was surely influenced by his racism, and that there is no independent source that
can verify the statements attributed to Turner.
O
. . . I was thirty-one years of age the second of October last, and born the prop-
erty of Benjamin Turner, of this county. In my childhood a circumstance occurred
which made an indelible impression on my mind, and laid the groundwork of that
enthusiasm which has terminated so fatally to many, both white and black, and for
which I am about to atone at the gallows. It is here necessary to relate this cir-
cumstance. Trifling as it may seem, it was the commencement of that belief which
has grown with time; and even now, sir, in his dungeon, helpless and forsaken as
I am, I cannot divest myself of. Being at play with other children, when three or
four years old, I was telling them something, which my mother, overhearing, said
it had happened before I was born. I stuck to my story, however, and related some
things which went, in her opinion, to confirm it. Others being called on, were
greatly astonished, knowing that these things had happened, and caused them to
say, in my hearing, I surely would be a prophet, as the Lord had shown me things
that had happened before my birth. And my mother and grandmother strength-
ened me in this my first impression, saying, in my presence, I was intended for
some great purpose, which they had always thought from certain marks on my
head and breast. . . .
My grandmother, who was very religious, and to whom I was much attached—
my master, who belonged to the church, and other religious persons who visited
the house, and whom I often saw at prayers, noticing the singularity of my man-
ners, I suppose, and my uncommon intelligence for a child, remarked I had too
much sense to be raised, and, if I was, I would never be of any service to any one
as a slave. To a mind like mine, restless, inquisitive, and observant of everything
3 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 66 ---
THE STATEMENT OF NAT TURNER 3 5
that was passing, it is easy to suppose that religion was the subject to which it
would be directed; and, although this subject principally occupied my thoughts,
there was nothing that I saw or heard of to which my attention was not directed.
The manner in which I learned to read and write, not only had great influence on
my own mind, as I acquired it with the most perfect ease,—so much so, that I
have no recollection whatever of learning the alphabet; but, to the astonishment
of the family, one day, when a book was shown me, to keep me from crying, I
began spelling the names of different objects. This was a source of wonder to all
in the neighborhood, particularly the blacks—and this learning was constantly
improved at all opportunities. When I got large enough to go to work, while
employed I was reflecting on many things that would present themselves to my
imagination; and whenever an opportunity occurred of looking at a book, when
the school-children were getting their lessons, I would find many things that the
fertility of my own imagination had depicted to me before. All my time, not
devoted to my master’s service, was spent either in prayer, or in making experi-
ments in casting different things in moulds made of earth, in attempting to make
paper, gunpowder, and many other experiments, that, although I could not per-
fect, yet convinced me of its practicability if I had the means.
1
I was not addicted to stealing in my youth, nor have ever been; yet such was
the confidence of the Negroes in the neighborhood, even at this early period of
my life, in my superior judgment, that they would often carry me with them when
they were going on any roguery, to plan for them. Growing up among them with
this confidence in my superior judgment, and when this, in their opinions, was
perfected by Divine inspiration, from the circumstances already alluded to in my
infancy, and which belief was ever afterwards zealously inculcated by the auster-
ity of my life and manners, which became the subject of remark by white and
black; having soon discovered to be great, I must appear so, and therefore stu-
diously avoided mixing in society, and wrapped myself in mystery, devoting my
time to fasting and prayer.
By this time, having arrived to man’s estate, and hearing the Scriptures com-
mented on at meetings, I was struck with that particular passage which says,
“Seek ye the kingdom of heaven, and all things shall be added unto you.” I
reflected much on this passage, and prayed daily for light on this subject. As I was
praying one day at my plough, the Spirit spoke to me, saying, “Seek ye the king-
dom of heaven, and all things shall be added unto you.” Question. “What do you
mean by the Spirit?” Answer. “The Spirit that spoke to the prophets in former
days,”—and I was greatly astonished, and for two years prayed continually, when-
ever my duty would permit; and then again I had the same revelation, which fully
confirmed me in the impression that I was ordained for some great purpose in the
hands of the Almighty. Several years rolled round, in which many events occurred
to strengthen me in this my belief. At this time I reverted in my mind to the
remarks made of me in my childhood, and the things that had been shown me;
and as it had been said of me in my childhood, by those by whom I had been
taught to pray, both white and black, and in whom I had the greatest confidence,
that I had too much sense to be raised, and if I was I would never be of any use


--- PAGE 67 ---
to any one as a slave; now, finding I had arrived to man’s estate, and was a slave,
and these revelations being made known to me, I began to direct my attention to
this great object, to fulfill the purpose for which, by this time, I felt assured I was
intended. Knowing the influence I had obtained over the minds of my fellow-
servants—(not by the means of conjuring and such-like tricks—for to them I
always spoke of such things with contempt), but by the communion of the Spirit,
whose revelations I often communicated to them, and they believed and said my
wisdom came from God,—I now began to prepare them for my purpose, by
telling them something was about to happen that would terminate in fulfilling the
great promise that had been made to me.
About this time I was placed under an overseer, from whom I ran away, and
after remaining in the woods thirty days, I returned, to the astonishment of the
Negroes on the plantation, who thought I had made my escape to some other part
of the country, as my father had done before. But the reason of my return was,
that the Spirit appeared to me and said I had my wishes directed to the things of
this world, and not to the kingdom of heaven, and that I should return to the ser-
vice of my earthly master—“For he who knoweth his Master’s will, and doeth it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes, and thus have I chastened you.” And the
Negroes found fault, and murmured against me, saying that if they had my sense
they would not serve any master in the world. And about this time I had a vision—
and I saw white spirits and black spirits engaged in battle, and the sun was dark-
ened—the thunder rolled in the heavens, and blood flowed in streams—and I
heard a voice saying, “Such is your luck, such you are called to see; and let it come
rough or smooth, you must surely bear it.”
I now withdrew myself as much as my situation would permit from the inter-
course of my fellow-servants, for the avowed purpose of serving the Spirit more
fully; and it appeared to me, and reminded me of the things it had already shown
me, and that it would then reveal to me the knowledge of the elements, the revo-
lution of the planets, the operation of tides, and changes of the seasons. After this
revelation in the year 1825, and the knowledge of the elements being made known
to me, I sought more than ever to obtain true holiness before the great day of
judgment should appear, and then I began to receive the true knowledge of faith.
And from the first steps of righteousness until the last, was I made perfect; and
the Holy Ghost was with me, and said, “Behold me as I stand in the heavens.” And
I looked and saw the forms of men in different attitudes; and there were lights in
the sky, to which the children of darkness gave other names than what they really
were; for they were the lights of the Saviour’s hands, stretched forth from east to
west, even as they were extended on the cross on Calvary for the redemption of
sinners. And I wondered greatly at these miracles, and prayed to be informed of
a certainty of the meaning thereof; and shortly afterwards, while laboring in the
field, I discovered drops of blood on the corn, as though it were dew from heaven;
and I communicated it to many, both white and black, in the neighborhood—and
I then found on the leaves in the woods hieroglyphic characters and numbers,
with the forms of men in different attitudes, portrayed in blood, and representing
the figures I had seen before in the heavens. And now the Holy Ghost had
3 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 68 ---
THE STATEMENT OF NAT TURNER 3 7
revealed itself to me, and made plain the miracles it had shown me; for as the
blood of Christ had been shed on this earth, and had ascended to heaven for the
salvation of sinners, and was now returning to earth again in the form of dew,—
and as the leaves on the trees bore the impression of the figures I had seen in the
heavens,—it was plain to me that the Saviour was about to lay down the yoke he
had borne for the sins of men, and the great day of judgment was at hand.
About this time I told these things to a white man (Etheldred T. Brantley), on
whom it had a wonderful effect; and he ceased from his wickedness, and was
attacked immediately with a cutaneous eruption, and blood oozed from the pores
of his skin, and after praying and fasting nine days he was healed. And the Spirit
appeared to me again, and said, as the Saviour had been baptized, so should we
be also; and when the white people would not let us be baptized by the church,
we went down into the water together, in the sight of many who reviled us, and
were baptized by the Spirit. After this I rejoiced greatly, and gave thanks to God.
And on the 12th of May, 1828, I heard a loud noise in the heavens, and the Spirit
instantly appeared to me and said the Serpent was loosened, and Christ had laid
down the yoke he had borne for the sins of men, and that I should take it on and
fight against the Serpent, for the time was fast approaching when the first should
be last and the last should be first. Ques. “Do you not find yourself mistaken
now?”—Ans. “Was not Christ crucified?” And by signs in the heavens that it
would make known to me when I should commence the great work, and until the
first sign appeared I should conceal it from the knowledge of men; and on the
appearance of the sign (the eclipse of the sun, last February
2), I should arise and
prepare myself, and slay my enemies with their own weapons. And immediately
on the sign appearing in the heavens, the seal was removed from my lips, and I
communicated the great work laid out for me to do, to four in whom I had the
greatest confidence (Henry, Hark, Nelson, and Sam). It was intended by us to
have begun the work of death on the 4th of July last. Many were the plans formed
and rejected by us, and it affected my mind to such a degree that I fell sick, and
the time passed without our coming to any determination how to commence—
still forming new schemes and rejecting them, when the sign appeared again,
which determined me not to wait longer.
Since the commencement of 1830 I had been living with Mr. Joseph Travis,
who was to me a kind master, and placed the greatest confidence in me; in fact, I
had no cause to complain of his treatment to me. On Saturday evening, the 20th
of August, it was agreed between Henry, Hark, and myself, to prepare a dinner
the next day for the men we expected, and then to concert a plan, as we had not
yet determined on any. Hark, on the following morning, brought a pig, and Henry
brandy; and being joined by Sam, Nelson, Will, and Jack, they prepared in the
woods a dinner, where, about three o’clock, I joined them.
Q. Why were you so backward in joining them?
A. The same reason that had caused me not to mix with them years before,
I saluted them on coming up, and asked Will how came he there. He
answered, his life was worth no more than others, and his liberty as dear to him.
I asked him if he thought to obtain it. He said he would, or lose his life. This was


--- PAGE 69 ---
enough to put him in full confidence. Jack, I knew, was only a tool in the hands
of Hark. It was quickly agreed we should commence at home (Mr. J. Travis’) on
that night; and until we had armed and equipped ourselves, and gathered suffi-
cient force, neither age nor sex was to be spared—which was invariably adhered
to. We remained at the feast until about two hours in the night, when we went to
the house and found Austin. . . .
I took my station in the rear, and, as it was my object to carry terror and dev-
astation wherever we went, I placed fifteen or twenty of the best armed and most
to be relied on in front, who generally approached the houses as fast as their
horses could run. This was for two purposes—to prevent their escape, and strike
terror to the inhabitants; on this account I never got to the houses, after leaving
Mrs. Whitehead’s, until the murders were committed, except in one case. I
sometimes got in sight in time to see the work of death completed; viewed the
mangled bodies as they lay, in silent satisfaction, and immediately started in
quest of other victims. Having murdered Mrs. Waller and ten children, we
started for Mr. Wm. Williams’,—having killed him and two little boys that were
there; while engaged in this, Mrs. Williams fled and got some distance from the
house, but she was pursued, overtaken, and compelled to get up behind one of
the company, who brought her back, and, after showing her the mangled body
of her lifeless husband, she was told to get down and lay by his side, where she
was shot dead.
The white men pursued and fired on us several times. Hark had his horse shot
under him, and I caught another for him as it was running by me; five or six of my
men were wounded, but none left on the field. Finding myself defeated here, I
instantly determined to go through a private way, and cross the Nottoway River
at the Cypress Bridge, three miles below Jerusalem, and attack that place in the
rear, as I expected they would look for me on the other road, and I had a great
desire to get there to procure arms and ammunition. After going a short distance
in this private way, accompanied by about twenty men, I overtook two or three,
who told me the others were dispersed in every direction.
On this, I gave up all hope for the present; and on Thursday night, after hav-
ing supplied myself with provisions from Mr. Travis’, I scratched a hole under a
pile of fence-rails in a field, where I concealed myself for six weeks, never leav-
ing my hiding-place but for a few minutes in the dead of the night to get water,
which was very near. Thinking by this time I could venture out, I began to go
about in the night, and eavesdrop the houses in the neighborhood; pursuing this
course for about a fortnight, and gathering little or no intelligence, afraid of
speaking to any human being, and returning every morning to my cave before
the dawn of day. I know not how long I might have led this life, if accident had
not betrayed me. A dog in the neighborhood passing by my hiding-place one
night while I was out, was attracted by some meat I had in my cave, and crawled
in and stole it, and was coming out just as I returned. A few nights after, two
Negroes having started to go hunting with the same dog, and passed that way,
the dog came again to the place, and having just gone out to walk about, discov-
3 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 70 ---
SLAVES ARE PROHIBITED TO READ AND WRITE BY LAW 3 9
ered me and barked; on which, thinking myself discovered, I spoke to them to
beg concealment. On making myself known, they fled from me. Knowing then
they would betray me, I immediately left my hiding-place, and was pursued
almost incessantly, until I was taken, a fortnight afterwards, by Mr. Benjamin
Phipps, in a little hole I had dug out with my sword, for the purpose of conceal-
ment, under the top of a fallen tree.
During the time I was pursued, I had many hair-breadth escapes, which your
time will not permit you to relate. I am here loaded with chains, and willing to
suffer the fate that awaits me.
Notes: 1. When questioned as to the manner of manufacturing those different articles, he
was found well informed. [Footnote in original.] 2. An event which caused much alarm
throughout the nation.
Source: “Autobiographical Statement of Nat Turner,” published in Thomas R. Gray, ed., The
Confessions of Nat Turner, the leader of the late insurrection in Southampton, Va.(Baltimore:
1831).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Makungu M. Akinyela, “Battling the Serpent: Nat Turner, Africanized Christianity, and a
Black Ethos,” Journal of Black Studies33, no. 3 (January 2003), pp. 255–80.
Herbert Aptheker, Nat Turner’s Slave Rebellion: Together with the text of the So-Called
Confessions of Nat Turner Made in Prison in 1831(New York: Humanities Press, 1966).
John Henrik Clarke, ed., William Styron’s The Confessions of Nat Turner: Ten Black Writers
Respond (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968).
John B. Duff and Peter M. Mitchell, eds., The Nat Turner Rebellion: The Historical Event
and the Modern Controversy(New York: Harper & Row, 1971).
Kenneth S. Greenberg, ed., Nat Turner a Slave Rebellion in History and Memory (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2004).
Stephen B. Oates, The Fires of Jubilee: Nat Turner’s Fierce Rebellion(New York: Harper &
Row, 1975).
William Styron, The Confessions of Nat Turner(New York: Random House, 1967).
O7 O
Slaves Are Prohibited to Read and Write by Law
Slavemasters understood that their social control of the slaves could not be based
solely on physical coercion. Knowledge was power, and virtually all slave codes
established in the United States set restrictions making it illegal to teach slaves to
read or write. The statute below, passed by the state of North Carolina in 1830–
1831, was fairly typical.
O


--- PAGE 71 ---
AN ACT TO PREVENT ALL PERSONS FROM TEACHING SLAVES
TO READ OR WRITE, THE USE OF FIGURES EXCEPTED.
Whereas the teaching of slaves to read and write, has a tendency to excite dis-
satisfaction in their minds, and to produce insurrection and rebellion, to the man-
ifest injury of the citizens of this State:
Therefore,
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of North Carolina, and it is
hereby enacted by the authority of the same, That any free person, who shall here-
after teach, or attempt to teach, any slave within the State to read or write, the
use of figures excepted, or shall give or sell to such slave or slaves any books or
pamphlets, shall be liable to indictment in any court of record in this State hav-
ing jurisdiction thereof, and upon conviction, shall, at the discretion of the court,
if a white man or woman, be fined not less than one hundred dollars, nor more
than two hundred dollars, or imprisoned; and if a free person of color, shall be
fined, imprisoned, or whipped, at the discretion of the court, not exceeding thirty
nine lashes, nor less than twenty lashes.
II. Be it further enacted, That if any slave shall hereafter teach, or attempt to
teach, any other slave to read or write, the use of figures excepted, he or she may
be carried before any justice of the peace, and on conviction thereof, shall be sen-
tenced to receive thirty nine lashes on his or her bare back.
III. Be it further enacted, That the judges of the Superior Courts and the jus-
tices of the County Courts shall give this act in charge to the grand juries of their
respective counties.
Source: “Act Passed by the General Assembly of the State of North Carolina at the Session
of 1830–1831” (Raleigh: 1831).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Ira Berlin, ed., Free at Last: A Documentary History of Slavery, Freedom, and the Civil War
(New York: New Press, 1992).
Robert Starobin, ed., Blacks in Bondage: Letters of American Slaves(New York: New View
Points, 1974).
O8 O
“What If I Am a Woman?” Maria W. Stewart, 1833
Maria W. Stewart (1803–1879) was born in Hartford, Connecticut, and was orphan-
ed at age five. Though she lacked any formal education, she played a brief but
important political role as a public advocate of African Americans and of women—
an achievement that is all the more notable given the social mores of her period,
which generally limited the scope and content of women’s activism to temperance
societies and literary clubs. In 1831 she published a small pamphlet, Religion and
4 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 72 ---
M.W. STEWART, “WHAT IF I AM A WOMAN?” 4 1
the Pure Principles of Mortality, the Sure Foundation on Which We Must Build,
and in 1832–1833 traveled on the public lecture circuit. Later in life, Stewart was
a public school teacher in New York City, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore.
O
African rights and liberty is a subject that ought to fire the breast of every free
man of color in these United States, and excite in his bosom a lively, deep,
decided and heart-felt interest. When I cast my eyes on the long list of illustrious
names that are enrolled on the bright annals of fame amongst the whites, I turn
my eyes within, and ask my thoughts, “Where are the names of our illustrious
ones?” It must certainly have been for the want of energy on the part of the free
people of color that they have been long willing to bear the yoke of oppression. It
must have been the want of ambition and force that has given the whites occasion
to say that our natural abilities are not as good, and our capacities by nature infe-
rior to theirs. They boldly assert that, did we possess a natural independence of
soul, and feel a love for liberty within our breasts, some one of our sable race, long
before this, would have testified it, notwithstanding the disadvantages under
which we labor. We have made ourselves appear altogether unqualified to speak
in our own defence, and are therefore looked upon as objects of pity and com-
miseration. We have been imposed upon, insulted and derided on every side; and
now, if we complain, it is considered as the height of impertinence. We have suf-
fered ourselves to be considered as dastards, cowards, mean, faint-hearted
wretches; and on this account, (not because of our complexion,) many despise us
and would gladly spurn us from their presence.
These things have fired my soul with a holy indignation, and compelled me
thus to come forward, and endeavor to turn their attention to knowledge and
improvement; for knowledge is power. I would ask, is it blindness of mind, or stu-
pidity of soul, or the want of education, that has caused our men who are 60 or 70
years of age, never to let their voices be heard nor their hands be raised in behalf
of their color? Or has it been for the fear of offending the whites? If it has, O ye
fearful ones, throw off your fearfulness, and come forth in the name of the Lord,
and in the strength of the God of Justice, and make yourselves useful and active
members in society; for they admire a noble and patriotic spirit in others—and
should they not admire it in us? If you are men, convince them that you possess
the spirit of men; and as your day, so shall your strength be. Have the sons of
Africa no souls? feel they no ambitious desires? shall the chains of ignorance for-
ever confine them? shall the insipid appellation of “clever negroes,” or “good
creatures,” any longer content them? Where can we find amongst ourselves the
man of science, or a philosopher, or an able statesman, or a counsellor at law?
Show me our fearless and brave, our noble and gallant ones. Where are our lec-
turers on natural history, and our critics in useful knowledge? There may be a few
such men amongst us, but they are rare. It is true, our fathers bled and died in
the revolutionary war, and others fought bravely under the command of Jackson,
in defence of liberty. But where is the man that has distinguished himself in these


--- PAGE 73 ---
modern days by acting wholly in the defence of African rights and liberty? There
was one—although he sleeps, his memory lives.
I am sensible that there are many highly intelligent gentlemen of color in these
United States, in the force of whose arguments, doubtless, I should discover my
inferiority; but if they are blest with wit and talent, friends and fortune, why have
they not made themselves men of eminence, by striving to take all the reproach
that is cast upon the people of color, and in endeavoring to alleviate the woes of
their brethren in bondage? Talk, without effort, is nothing; you are abundantly
capable, gentlemen, of making yourselves men of distinction; and this gross
neglect, on your part, causes my blood to boil within me. Here is the grand cause
which hinders the rise and progress of the people of color. It is their want of laud-
able ambition and requisite courage.
Individuals have been distinguished according to their genius and talents, ever
since the first formation of man, and will continue to be whilst the world stands.
The different grades rise to honor and respectability as their merits may deserve.
History informs us that we sprung from one of the most learned nations of the
whole earth—from the seat, if not the parent of science; yes, poor, despised Africa
was once the resort of sages and legislators of other nations, was esteemed the
school for learning, and the most illustrious men in Greece flocked thither for
instruction. But it was our gross sins and abominations that provoked the
Almighty to frown thus heavily upon us, and give our glory unto others. Sin and
prodigality have caused the downfall of nations, kings and emperors; and were it
not that God in wrath remembers mercy, we might indeed despair; but a promise
is left us; “Ethiopia shall again stretch forth her hands unto God.”
But it is of no use for us to boast that we sprung from this learned and enlight-
ened nation, for this day a thick mist of moral gloom hangs over millions of our
race. Our condition as a people has been low for hundreds of years, and it will
continue to be so, unless, by the true piety and virtue, we strive to regain that
which we have lost. White Americans, by their prudence, economy and exertions,
have sprung up and become one of the most flourishing nations in the world, dis-
tinguished for their knowledge of the arts and sciences, for their polite literature.
Whilst our minds are vacant and starving for want of knowledge, theirs are filled
to overflowing. Most of our color have been taught to stand in fear of the white
man from their earliest infancy, to work as soon as they could walk, and call “mas-
ter” before they scarce could lisp the name of mother. Continual fear and labori-
ous servitude have in some degree lessened in us that natural force and energy
which belong to man; or else, in defiance of opposition, our men before this
would have nobly and boldly contended for their rights. But give the man of color
an equal opportunity with the white, from the cradle to manhood, and from man-
hood to the grave, and you would discover the dignified statesman, the man of sci-
ence, and the philosopher. But there is no such opportunity for the sons of Africa,
and I fear that our powerful ones are fully determined that there never shall be.
Forbid, ye Powers on High, that it should any longer be said that our men pos-
sess no force. O ye sons of Africa, when will your voices be heard in our legisla-
tive halls, in defiance of your enemies, contending for equal rights and liberty?
4 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 74 ---
M.W. STEWART, “WHAT IF I AM A WOMAN?” 4 3
How can you, when you reflect from what you have fallen, refrain from crying
mightily unto God, to turn away from us the fierceness of his anger, and remem-
ber our transgressions against us no more forever. But a God of infinite purity will
not regard the prayers of those who hold religion in one hand, and prejudice, sin
and pollution in the other; he will not regard the prayers of self-righteousness and
hypocrisy. Is it possible, I exclaim, that for the want of knowledge, we have
labored for thousands of years to support others, and been content to receive
what they chose to give us in return? Cast your eyes about—look as far as you can
see—all, all is owned by the lordly white, except here and there a lowly dwelling
which the man of color, midst deprivations, fraud and opposition, has been scarce
able to procure. Like King Solomon, who put neither nail nor hammer to the tem-
ple, yet received the praise; so also have the white Americans gained themselves
a name, like the names of the great men who are in the earth, whilst in reality we
have been their principal foundation and support. We have pursued the shadow,
they have obtained the substance; we have performed the labor, they have
received the profits; we have planted the vines, they have eaten the fruits of them.
I would implore our men, and especially our rising youth, to flee from the
gambling board and the dance hall; for we are poor, and have no money to throw
away. I do not consider dancing as criminal in itself, but it is astonishing to me that
our young men are so blind to their own interest and the future welfare of their
children, as to spend their hard earnings for this frivolous amusement; for it has
been carried on among us to such an unbecoming extent that it has become
absolutely disgusting. “Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an
enemy are deceitful.” Had those men amongst us, who have had an opportunity,
turned their attention as assiduously to mental and moral improvement as they
have to gambling and dancing, I might have remained quietly at home, and they
stood contending in my place. These polite accomplishments will never enroll
your names on the bright annals of fame, who admire the belle void of intellec-
tual knowledge, or applaud the dandy that talks largely on politics, without striv-
ing to assist his fellow in the revolution, when the nerves and muscles of every
other man forced him into the field of action. You have a right to rejoice, and to
let your hearts cheer you in the days of your youth; yet remember that for all
these things God will bring you into judgment. Then, O ye sons of Africa, turn
your mind from these perishable objects, and contend for the cause of God and
the rights of man. Form yourselves into temperance societies. There are temper-
ate men amongst you; then why will you any longer neglect to strive, by your
example, to suppress vice in all its abhorrent forms? You have been told repeat-
edly of the glorious results arising from temperance, and can you bear to see the
whites arising in honor and respectability, without endeavoring to grasp after that
honor and respectability also?
But I forbear. Let our money, instead of being thrown away as heretofore, be
appropriated for schools and seminaries of learning for our children and youth.
We ought to follow the example of the whites in this respect. Nothing would raise
our respectability, add to our peace and happiness and reflect so much honor
upon us, as to be ourselves the promoters of temperance, and the supporters, as


--- PAGE 75 ---
far as we are able, of useful and scientific knowledge. The rays of light and knowl-
edge have been hid from our view; we have been taught to consider ourselves as
scarce superior to the brute creation; and have performed the most laborious part
of American drudgery. Had we as people received one half the early advantages
the whites have received, I would defy the government of these United States to
deprive us any longer of our rights.
I am informed that the agent of the Colonization Society has recently formed
an association of young men, for the purpose of influencing those of us to go to
Liberia who may feel disposed. The colonizationists are blind to their own inter-
est, for should the nations of the earth make war with America, they would find
their forces much weakened by our absence; or should we remain here, can our
“brave soldiers” and “fellow citizens,” as they were termed in time of calamity,
condescend to defend the rights of the whites, and be again deprived of their
own, or sent to Liberia in return? O, if the colonizationists are real friends to
Africa, let them expend the money which they collect in erecting a college to edu-
cate her injured sons in this land of gospel light and liberty; for it would be most
thankfully received on our part, and convince us of the truth of their professions,
and save time, expense and anxiety. Let them place before us noble objects, wor-
thy of pursuit, and see if we prove ourselves to be those unambitious Negroes
they term us. But ah! methinks their hearts are so frozen towards us, they had
rather their money should be sunk in the ocean than to administer it to our relief;
and I fear, if they dared, like Pharaoh king of Egypt, they would order every male
child amongst us to be drowned. But the most high God is still as able to subdue
the lofty pride of these white Americans, as He was the heart of that ancient
rebel. They say though we are looked upon as things, yet we sprang from a sci-
entific people. Had our men the requisite force and energy, they would soon con-
vince them, by their efforts both in public and private, that they were men, or
things in the shape of men. Well may the colonizationists laugh us to scorn for our
negligence; well may they cry, “Shame to the sons of Africa.” As the burden of the
Israelites was too great for Moses to bear, so also is our burden too great for our
noble advocate to bear. You must feel interested, my brethren, in what he under-
takes, and hold up his hands by your good words, or in spite of himself his soul
will become discouraged, and his heart will die within him; for he has, as it were,
the strong bulls of Bashan to contend with.
It is of no use for us to wait any longer for a generation of well-educated men
to arise. We have slumbered and slept too long already; the day is far spent; the
night of death approaches; and you have sound sense and good judgment suffi-
cient to begin with, if you feel disposed to make a right use of it. Let every man
of color throughout the United States, who possesses the spirit and principles of
a man, sign a petition to Congress to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia,
and grant you the rights and privileges of common free citizens; for if you had had
faith as a grain of mustard seed, long before this the mountains of prejudice might
have been removed. We are all sensible that the Anti-Slavery Society has taken
hold of the arm of our whole population, in order to raise them out of the mire.
Now all we have to do is, by a spirit of virtuous ambition to strive to raise our-
4 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 76 ---
M.W. STEWART, “WHAT IF I AM A WOMAN?” 4 5
selves; and I am happy to have it in my power thus publicly to say that the colored
inhabitants of this city, in some respects, are beginning to improve. Had the free
people of color in these United States nobly and boldly contended for their rights,
and showed a natural genius and talent, although not so brilliant as some; had
they held up, encouraged and patronized each other; nothing could have hin-
dered us from being a thriving and flourishing people. There has been a fault
amongst us. The reason why our distinguished men have not made themselves
more influential is, because they fear the strong current of opposition through
which they must pass, would cause their downfall and prove their overthrow. And
what gives rise to this opposition? Envy. And what has it amounted to? Nothing.
And who are the cause of it? Our whited sepulchres who want to be great, and
don’t know how; who love to be called of men “Rabbi, Rabbi,” who put on false
sanctity, and humble themselves to their brethren, for the sake of acquiring the
highest place in the synagogue, and the uppermost seats at the feast. You, dearly
beloved, who are the genuine followers of our Lord Jesus Christ, the salt of the
earth and the light of the world, are not so culpable. As I told you, in the very first
of my writing, I tell you again, I am but as one drop in the bucket—as one parti-
cle of the small dust of the earth. God will surely raise up those amongst us who
will plead the cause of virtue, and the pure principles of morality, more eloquently
than I am able to do.
It appears to me that America has become like the great city of Babylon, for
she has boasted in her heart,—“I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow.” She is indeed a seller of slaves and the souls of men; she has made the
Africans drunk with the wine of her fornication; she has put them completely
beneath her feet, and she means to keep them there; her right hand supports the
reins of government, and her left hand the wheel of power, and she is determined
not to let go her grasp. But many powerful sons and daughters of Africa will
shortly arise, who will put down vice and immorality amongst us, and declare by
Him that sitteth upon the throne, that they will have their rights; and if refused, I
am afraid they will spread horror and devastation around. I believe that the
oppression of injured Africa has come up before the majesty of Heaven; and when
our cries shall have reached the ears of the Most High, it will be a tremendous day
for the people of this land; for strong is the arm of the Lord God Almighty.
Life has almost lost its charms for me; death has lost its sting and the grave its
terrors; and at times I have a strong desire to depart and dwell with Christ, which
is far better. Let me entreat my white brethren to awake and save our sons from
dissipation, and our daughters from ruin. Lend the hand of assistance to feeble
merit, and plead the cause of virtue amongst our sable race; so shall our curses
upon you be turned into blessings; and though you shall endeavor to drive us from
these shores, still we will cling to you the more firmly; nor will we attempt to rise
above you; we will presume to be called equals only.
The unfriendly whites first drove the native American from his much-loved
home. Then they stole our fathers from their peaceful and quiet dwellings, and
brought them hither and made bond men and bond women of them and their lit-
tle ones; they have obliged our brethren to labor, kept them in utter ignorance,


--- PAGE 77 ---
nourished them in vice and raised them in degradation; and now that we have
enriched their soil, and filled their coffers, they say that we are not capable of
becoming like white men, and that we never can rise to respectability in this
country. They would drive us to a strange land. But before I go, the bayonet shall
pierce me through. African rights and liberty is a subject that ought to fire the
breast of every free man of color in these United States, and excite in his bosom
a lively, deep, decided and heartfelt interest.
Source: “Mrs. Stewart’s Farewell Address to Her Friends in the City of Boston, Delivered
September 21, 1833,” published as Productions of Mrs. Maria W. Stewart(Boston: William
Lloyd Garrison and Knapp, 1832).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Marilyn Richardson, ed., Maria W. Stewart: America’s First Black Woman Political Writer:
Essays and Speeches(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987).
Lora Romero, Home Fronts: Domesticity and Its Critics in the Antebellum United States
(Durham: Duke University Press, 1997).
Rodger Streitmatter, “Maria W. Stewart: The First Female African-American Journalist,”
Historical Journal of Massachusetts21, no. 2 (1993), pp. 44–59.
O9 O
A Slave Denied the Rights to Marry, 1834
Although many African-American slaves married and had children, such marriages
were never formally recognized by law and were always tenuous. Slaves were
essentially private property, and most owners had little interest or concern about
the family life of their chattel. In many instances, slaveowners simply refused to
give their permission to allow their slaves to marry, especially if their intended
partner was someone else’s property. Slaves always feared that their spouse or chil-
dren could be sold. Many historians do not adequately present the terrible human
dimensions that this form of coercion must have had upon the slave community.
This letter illustrates one example of the larger tragedy of human bondage.
O
MILO THOMPSON (SLAVE) TO LOUISA BETHLEY
Oct. 15th 1834
Miss Louisa Bethley
I have got greatly disappointed in my expectations on next Saturday. I will be
compelled to disappoint you at that time but I regret it very much. Master says I
must put it off a little longer, until he can see farther into the matter. he says prob-
ably Mr. Birney may break up house keeping or something of the kind and he
4 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 78 ---
THE SELLING OF SLAVES 4 7
dont know what may become of you, for that reason we must defer it a little
longer. I will come up and see you shortly and then we will make some arrange-
ments about it. it is with great reluctance that I put it off any longer, but I am
compelled to do it owing to the circumstances I have related. I shall remain your
affectionate lover until death.
Milo Thompson
Source: Letter from Milo Thompson (slave) to Louisa Bethley, October 15, 1834, in 
Dwight L. Diamond, ed., Letters of James G. Birney, 1831–1857, Vol. I (New York: Apple-
ton-Century, 1938), p. 144.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Ira Berlin and Leslie S. Rowland, eds., Families and Freedom: A Documentary History of
African-American Kinship in the Civil War Era(New York: New Press, 1977).
B.A. Botkin, ed., Lay My Burden Down: Folk History of Slavery (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1989).
Herbert George Gutman, The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750–1925(New York:
Vintage Books, 1977).
Julius Lester, ed., To Be a Slave (New York: Dial Press, 1968).
Dylan Penningroth, “Claiming Kin and Property: African American Life Before and After
Emancipation” (Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 2000).
O10 O
The Selling of Slaves, 1835
Although the transatlantic slave trade was technically outlawed in the early nine-
teenth century, the barter, sale, and transportation of slaves—the domestic slave
trade—continued until the Civil War. Because slaves were legally defined as
property, they could be exchanged for land, goods, or services. Slave auctions
were advertised in local newspapers to attract potential buyers.
O
BY HEWLETT & BRIGHT
SALE OF VALUABLE SLAVES (On account of departure)
The Owner of the following named and valuable Slaves, being on the eve of
departure for Europe, will cause the same to be offered for sale, at the NEW
EXCHANGE, corner of St. Louis and Chartres streets, on Saturday, May 16, at
Twelve o’Clock, viz.
1. SARAH, a mulatress, aged 45 years, a good cook and accustomed to house
work in general, is an excellent and faithful nurse for sick persons, and in every
respect a first rate character.


--- PAGE 79 ---
2. DENNIS, her son, a mulatto, aged 24 years, a first rate cook and steward
for a vessel, having been in that capacity for many years on board one of the
Mobile packets; is strictly honest, temperate, and a first rate subject.
3. CHOLE, a mulatress, aged 36 years, she is, without exception, one of the
most competent servants in the country, a first rate washer and ironer, does up lace,
a good cook, and for a bachelor who wishes a house-keeper she would be invalu-
able; she is also a good ladies’ maid, having travelled to the North in that capacity.
4. FANNY, her daughter, a mulatress, aged 16 years, speaks French and
English, is a superior hair-dresser, (pupil of Guilliae,) a good seamstress and
ladies’ maid, is smart, intelligent, and a first rate character.
5. DANDRIDGE, a mulatoo, aged 26 years, a first rate dining-room servant, a
good painter and rough carpenter, and has but few equals for honesty and sobriety.
6. NANCY, his wife, aged about 24 years, a confidential house servant, good
seamstress, mantuamaker and tailoress, a good cook, washer and ironer, etc.
7. MARY ANN, her child, a creole, aged 7 years, speaks French and English,
is smart, active and intelligent.
8. FANNY or FRANCES, a mulatress, aged 22 years, is a first rate washer and
ironer, good cook and house servant, and has an excellent character.
9. EMMA, an orphan, aged 10 or 11 years, speaks French and English, has
been in the country 7 years, has been accustomed to waiting on table, sewing etc.,
is intelligent and active.
10. FRANK, a mulatto, aged about 32 years speaks French and English, is a
first rate hostler and coachman, understands perfectly well the management of
horses, and is, in every respect, a first rate character, with the exception that he
will occasionally drink, though not an habitual drunkard.
All the above named Slaves are acclimated and excellent subjects: they were
purchased by their present vendor many years ago, and will, therefore, be sever-
ally warranted against all vices and maladies prescribed by law, save and except
FRANK, who is fully guaranteed in every other respect but the one above men-
tioned.
TERMS:—One-half Cash, and the other half in notes at Six months, drawn
and endorsed to the satisfaction of the Vendor, with special mortgage on the
Slaves until final payment. The Acts of Sale to be passed before WILLIAM
BOSWELL, Notary Public, at the expense of the Purchaser.
New-Orleans, May 13, 1835
Source: Advertisement, “Hewlett and Bright Sale of Valuable Slaves,” New Orleans, May 13,
1835. Copy at the New-York Historical Society.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Ira Berlin and Leslie S. Rowland, eds., Families and Freedom: A Documentary History of
African-American Kinship in the Civil War Era(New York: New Press, 1997).
B.A. Botkin, ed., Lay My Burden Down: Folk History of Slavery (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1989).
4 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 80 ---
SOLOMON NORTHRUP DESCRIBES A SLAVE AUCTION 4 9
Vincent Harding, There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America(New York:
Vintage Books, 1983).
George Rawick, gen. ed.; Jan Milleagas, Ken Lawrence, eds., The American Slave: A Com-
prise Autobiography(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing, 1978).
O11 O
Solomon Northrup Describes a New Orleans Slave Auction, 1841
Solomon Northrup (1808–1862?) was born free in Sandy Hill (now Hudson
Falls), New York. He led a quiet and undistinguished life as a manual laborer,
learned to read and write, was married in 1829, and started a family. In 1841 he
was suddenly kidnapped into slavery from Washington, D.C. Northrup was made
to labor as human chattel for twelve years before he made a dramatic escape from
a Louisiana plantation. As a result, Northrup’s 1853 narrative, Twelve Years a
Slave, was a best-seller of its genre. Frederick Douglass at the time stated, “its
truth is stranger than fiction.”
O
In the first place we were required to wash thoroughly, and those with beards to
shave. We were then furnished with a new suit each, cheap, but clean. The men
had hat, coat, shirt, pants and shoes; the women frocks of calico, and handkerchief
to bind about their heads. We were now conducted into a large room in the front
part of the building to which the yard was attached, in order to be properly
trained, before the admission of customers. The men were arranged on one side
of the room, the women at the other. The tallest was placed at the head of the
row, then the next tallest, and so on in the order of their respective heights. Emily
was at the foot of the line of women. Freeman [Theophilus Freeman, owner of
the slave-pen.] charged us to remember our places; exhorted us to appear smart
and lively,—sometimes threatening, and again, holding out various inducements.
During the day he exercised us in the art of “looking smart,” and of moving to our
places with exact precision.
After being fed, in the afternoon, we were again paraded and made to dance.
Bob, a colored boy, who had some time belonged to Freeman, played on the vio-
lin. Standing near him, I made bold to inquire if he could play the “Virginia Reel.”
He answered he could not, and asked me if I could play. Replying in the affirma-
tive, he handed me the violin. I struck up a tune, and finished it. Freeman
ordered me to continue playing, and seemed well pleased, telling Bob that I far
excelled him—a remark that seemed to grieve my musical companion very much.
Next day many customers called to examine Freeman’s “new lot.” The latter
gentleman was very loquacious, dwelling at much length upon our several good


--- PAGE 81 ---
points and qualities. He would make us hold up our heads, walk briskly back and
forth, while customers would feel of our hands and arms and bodies, turn us
about, ask us what we could do, make us open our mouths and show our teeth,
precisely as a jockey examines a horse which he is about to barter for or purchase.
Sometimes a man or woman was taken back to the small house in the yard,
stripped, and inspected more minutely. Scars upon a slave’s back were considered
evidence of a rebellious or unruly spirit, and hurt his sale.
An old gentleman, who said he wanted a coachman, appeared to take a fancy
to me. From his conversation with Burch [Freeman’s business associate], I
learned he was a resident in the city. I very much desired that he would buy me,
because I conceived it would not be difficult to make my escape from New
Orleans on some northern vessel. Freeman asked him fifteen hundred dollars for
me. The old gentleman insisted it was too much as times were very hard. Free-
man, however, declared that I was sound of health, of a good constitution, and
intelligent. He made it a point to enlarge upon my musical attainments. The old
gentleman argued quite adroitly that there was nothing extraordinary about the
Negro, and finally, to my regret, went out, saying he would call again. During the
day, however, a number of sales were made. David and Caroline were purchased
together by a Natchez planter. They left us, grinning broadly, and in a most happy
state of mind, caused by the fact of their not being separated. Sethe was sold to a
planter of Baton Rouge, her eyes flashing with anger as she was led away.
The same man also purchased Randall. The little fellow was made to jump, and
run across the floor, and perform many other feats, exhibiting his activity and con-
dition. All the time the trade was going on, Eliza was crying aloud, and wringing
her hands. She besought the man not to buy him, unless he also bought herself
and Emily. She promised, in that case, to be the most faithful slave that ever lived.
The man answered that he could not afford it, and then Eliza burst into a parox-
ysm of grief, weeping plaintively. Freeman turned round to her, savagely, with his
whip in his uplifted hand, ordering her to stop her noise, or he would flog her. He
would not have such work—such snivelling; and unless she ceased that minute,
he would take her to the yard and give her a hundred lashes. Yes, he would take
the nonsense out of her pretty quick—if he didn’t, might he be d—d. Eliza shrunk
before him, and tried to wipe away her tears, but it was all in vain. She wanted to
be with her children, she said, the little time she had to live. All the frowns and
threats of Freeman, could not wholly silence the afflicted mother. She kept on
begging and beseeching them, most piteously, not to separate the three. Over and
over again she told them how she loved her boy. A great many times she repeated
her former promises—how very faithful and obedient she would be; how hard she
would labor day and night, to the last moment of her life, if he would only buy
them all together. But it was of no avail; the man could not afford it. The bargain
was agreed upon, and Randall must go alone. Then Eliza ran to him; embraced
him passionately; kissed him again and again; told him to remember her—all the
while her tears falling in the boy’s face like rain.
Freeman damned her, calling her a blubbering, bawling wench, and ordered her
to go to her place, and behave herself, and be somebody. He swore he wouldn’t
5 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 82 ---
CINQUE AND THE AMISTAD REVOLT 5 1
stand such stuff but a little longer. He would soon give her something to cry about,
if she was not mighty careful, and that she might depend upon.
The planter from Baton Rouge, with his new purchase, was ready to depart.
“Don’t cry, mama. I will be a good boy. Don’t cry,” said Randall, looking back,
as they passed out of the door.
What has become of the lad, God knows. It was a mournful scene indeed. I
would have cried myself if I had dared.
Source: Solomon Northrup, Twelve Years a Slave(Auburn, N.Y.: 1853), p. 78.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Solomon Northrup, Twelve Years a Slave, ed. Sue Eakins and Joseph Logsdon (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1968).
Carver Wendell Waters, “Voice into Slave Narratives of Olaudah Equiano, Frederick
Douglass, and Solomon Northrup” (Ph.D. diss., University of Southwestern Louisiana,
1988).
O12 O
Cinque and the Amistad Revolt, 1841
In 1839, a group of Africans who had been captured by slave traders and were
being transported to a Cuban port seized control of the ship. The Spanish
schooner Amistad eventually landed in the United States. President Martin Van
Buren urged that the Africans be turned over to the Spanish authorities.
However, former president John Quincy Adams represented the Africans before
the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1841 after reviewing the evidence, the court decided
to free the Africans. Associate Justice Joseph Story held that when the revolt on
the Amistad occurred, the “free native Africans” had been in effect kidnapped,
and therefore they had the right to be free. Several artists, including filmmaker
Steven Spielberg in 1997, have produced artistic depictions of the revolt. The
Amistad incident symbolizes the coerced migrations of roughly 15 million African
people to the western hemisphere, and illustrates that, despite the odds against
them, many captives resisted.
O
MR. JUSTICE STORY, delivered the opinion of the court.
This is the case of an appeal from the decree of the circuit court of the district
of Connecticut, sitting in admiralty. The leading facts, as they appear upon the
transcript of the proceedings, are as follows: On the 27th of June 1839, the
schooner “L’Amistad,” being the property of Spanish subjects, cleared out from
the port of Havana, in the island of Cuba, for Puerto Principe, in the same island.


--- PAGE 83 ---
On board of the schooner were the master, Ramon Ferrer, and Jose Ruiz and
Pedro Montez, all Spanish subjects. The former had with him a negro boy, named
Antonio, claimed to be his slave. Jose Ruiz had with him forty-nine negroes,
claimed by him as his slaves, and stated to be his property, in a certain pass or doc-
ument, signed by the governor-general of Cuba. Pedro Montez had with him four
other negroes, also claimed by him as his slaves, and stated to be his property, in
a similar pass or document, also signed by the governor-general of Cuba.
On the voyage, and before the arrival of the vessel at her port of destination,
the negroes rose, killed the master, and took possession of her. On the 26th of
August, the vessel was discovered by Lieutenant Gedney, of the United States
brig “Washington,” at anchor on the high seas, at the distance of half a mile from
the shore of Long Island. A part of the negroes were then on shore, at Culloden
Point, Long Island, who were seized by Lieutenant Gedney, and brought on
board. The vessel, with the negroes and other persons on board, was brought by
Lieutenant Gedney into the district of Connecticut, and there libelled for salvage
in the district court of the United States. A libel for salvage was also filed by
Henry Green and Pelatiah Fordham, of Sag Harbor, Long Island. On the 18th of
September, Ruiz and Montez filed claims and libels, in which they asserted their
ownership of the negroes as their slaves, and of certain parts of the cargo, and
prayed that the same might be “delivered to them, or to the representatives of her
Catholic Majesty, as might be most proper.” On the 19th of September, the attor-
ney of the United States for the district of Connecticut filed an information or
libel, setting forth, that the Spanish minister had officially presented to the proper
department of the government of the United States, a claim for the restoration of
the vessel, cargo, and slaves, as the property of Spanish subjects, which had
arrived within the jurisdictional limits of the United States, and were taken pos-
session of by the said public armed brig of the United States, under such cir-
cumstances as made it the duty of the United States to cause the same to be
restored to the true proprietors, pursuant to the treaty between the United States
and Spain; and praying the court, on its being made legally to appear that the
claim of the Spanish minister was well founded, to make such order for the dis-
posal of the vessel, cargo and slaves, as would best enable the United States to
comply with their treaty stipulations. But if it should appear, that the negroes
were persons transported from Africa, in violation of the laws of the United
States, and brought within the United States, contrary to the same laws; he then
prayed the court to make such order for their removal to the coast of Africa, pur-
suant to the laws of the United States, as it should deem fit. . . .
On the 7th of January 1840, the negroes, Cinque and others, with the excep-
tion of Antonio, by their counsel, filed an answer, denying that they were slaves,
or the property of Ruiz and Montez, or that the court could, under the constitu-
tion or laws of the United States, or under any treaty, exercise any jurisdiction
over their persons, by reason of the premises; and praying that they might be dis-
missed. They specially set forth and insisted in this answer, that they were native-
born Africans; born free, and still, of right, ought to be free and not slaves; that
they were, on or about the 15th of April 1839, unlawfully kidnapped, and forcibly
5 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 84 ---
CINQUE AND THE AMISTAD REVOLT 5 3
and wrongfully carried on board a certain vessel, on the coast of Africa, which was
unlawfully engaged in the slave-trade, and were unlawfully transported in the
same vessel to the island of Cuba, for the purpose of being there unlawfully sold
as slaves; that Ruiz and Montez, well knowing the premises, made a pretended
purchase of them; that afterwards, on or about the 28th of June 1839, Ruiz and
Montez, confederating with Ferrer (master of the Amistad), caused them, with-
out law or right, to be placed on board of the Amistad, to be transported to some
place unknown to them, and there to be enslaved for life; that, on the voyage, they
rose on the master, and took possession of the vessel, intending to return there-
with to their native country, or to seek an asylum in some free state; and the ves-
sel arrived, about the 26th of August 1839, off Montauk Point, near Long Island;
a part of them were sent on shore, and were seized by Lieutenant Gedney, and
carried on board; and all of them were afterwards brought by him into the district
of Connecticut. . . .
No question has been here made, as to the proprietary interests in the vessel
and cargo. It is admitted, that they belong to Spanish subjects, and that they
ought to be restored. The only point on this head is, whether the restitution ought
to be upon the payment of salvage, or not? The main controversy is, whether
these negroes are the property of Ruiz and Montez, and ought to be delivered up;
and to this, accordingly, we shall first direct our attention.
It has been argued on behalf of the United States, that the court are bound to
deliver them up, according to the treaty of 1795, with Spain, which has in this par-
ticular been continued in full force, by the treaty of 1819, ratified in 1821. The
sixth article of that treaty seems to have had, principally in view, cases where the
property of the subjects of either state had been taken possession of within the
territorial jurisdiction of the other, during war. The eighth article provides for
cases where the shipping of the inhabitants of either state are forced, through
stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent necessity, to
seek shelter in the ports of the other. There may well be some doubt entertained,
whether the present case, in its actual circumstances, falls within the purview of
this article. But it does not seem necessary, for reasons hereafter stated, abso-
lutely to decide it. The ninth article provides, “that all ships and merchandize, of
what nature soever, which shall be rescued out of the hands of any pirates or rob-
bers, on the high seas, shall be brought into some port of either state, and shall
be delivered to the custody of the officers of that port, in order to be taken care
of and restored, entire, to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof
shall be made concerning the property thereof.” This is the article on which the
main reliance is placed on behalf of the United States, for the restitution of these
negroes. To bring the case within the article, it is essential to establish: 1st, That
these negroes, under all the circumstances, fall within the description of mer-
chandize, in the sense of the treaty. 2d, That there has been a rescue of them on
the high seas, out of the hands of the pirates and robbers; which, in the present
case, can only be, by showing that they themselves are pirates and robbers; and
3d, That Ruiz and Montez, the asserted proprietors, are the true proprietors, and
have established their title by competent proof.


--- PAGE 85 ---
If these negroes were, at the time, lawfully held as slaves, under the laws of
Spain, and recognised by those laws as property, capable of being lawfully bought
and sold; we see no reason why they may not justly be deemed, within the intent
of the treaty, to be included under the denomination of merchandize, and as such
ought to be restored to the claimants; for upon that point the laws of Spain would
seem to furnish the proper rule of interpretation. But admitting this, it is clear, in
our opinion, that neither of the other essential facts and requisites has been estab-
lished in proof; and the onus probandi of both lies upon the claimants to give rise
to the casus foederis. It is plain, beyond controversy, if we examine the evidence,
that these negroes never were the lawful slaves of Ruiz or Montez, or of any other
Spanish subjects. They are natives of Africa, and were kidnapped there, and were
unlawfully transported to Cuba, in violation of the laws and treaties of Spain, and
the most solemn edicts and declarations of that government. By those laws and
treaties, and edicts, the African slave-trade is utterly abolished; the dealing in that
trade is deemed a heinous crime; and the negroes thereby introduced into the
dominions of Spain, are declared to be free. Ruiz and Montez are proved to have
made the pretended purchase of these negroes, with a full knowledge of all the
circumstances. And so cogent and irresistible is the evidence in this respect, that
the district-attorney has admitted in open court, upon the record, that these
negroes were native Africans, and recently imported into Cuba, as alleged in their
answers to the libels in the case. The supposed proprietary interest of Ruiz and
Montez is completely displaced, if we are at liberty to look at the evidence, or the
admissions of the district-attorney.
If then, these negroes are not slaves, but are kidnapped Africans, who, by the
laws of Spain itself, are entitled to their freedom, and were kidnapped and ille-
gally carried to Cuba, and illegally detained and restrained on board the
Amistad; there is no pretence to say, that they are pirates or robbers. We may
lament the dreadful acts by which they asserted their liberty, and took possession
of the Amistad, and endeavored to regain their native country; but they cannot
be deemed pirates or robbers, in the sense of the law of nations, or the treaty
with Spain, or the laws of Spain itself; at least, so far as those laws have been
brought to our knowledge. Nor do the libels of Ruiz or Montez assert them to
be such.
This posture of the facts would seem, of itself, to put an end to the whole
inquiry upon the merits. But it is argued, on behalf of the United States, that the
ship and cargo, and negroes, were duly documented as belonging to Spanish sub-
jects, and this court have no right to look behind these documents; that full faith
and credit is to be given to them; and that they are to be held conclusive evidence
in this cause, even although it should be established by the most satisfactory
proofs, that they have been obtained by the grossest frauds and impositions upon
the constituted authorities of Spain. To this argument, we can, in no wise, assent.
There is nothing in the treaty which justifies or sustains the argument. We do not
here meddle with the point, whether there has been any connivance in this ille-
gal traffic, on the part of any of the colonial authorities or subordinate officers of
Cuba; because, in our view, such an examination is unnecessary, and ought not to
5 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 86 ---
CINQUE AND THE AMISTAD REVOLT 5 5
be pursued, unless it were indispensable to public justice, although it has been
strongly pressed at the bar. What we proceed upon is this, that although public
documents of the government, accompanying property found on board of the pri-
vate ships of a foreign nation, certainly are to be deemed prima facie evidence of
the facts which they purport to state, yet they are always open to be impugned for
fraud; and whether that fraud be in the original obtaining of these documents, or
in the subsequent fraudulent and illegal use of them, when once it is satisfacto-
rily established, it overthrows all their sanctity, and destroys them as proof. Fraud
will vitiate any, even the most solemn, transactions; and an asserted title to prop-
erty, founded upon it, is utterly void. The very language of the ninth article of the
treaty of 1795, requires the proprietor to make due and sufficient proof of his
property. And how can that proof be deemed either due or sufficient, which is but
a connected and stained tissue of fraud? This is not a mere rule of municipal
jurisprudence. Nothing is more clear in the law of nations, as an established rule
to regulate their rights and duties, and intercourse, than the doctrine, that the
ship’s papers are but prima facieevidence, and that, if they are shown to be fraud-
ulent, they are not to be held proof of any valid title. This rule is familiarly
applied, and, indeed, is of every-day’s occurrence in cases of prize, in the contests
between belligerents and neutrals, as is apparent from numerous cases to be
found in the reports of this court; and it is just as applicable to the transactions of
civil intercourse between nations, in times of peace. If a private ship, clothed with
Spanish papers, should enter the ports of the United States, claiming the privi-
leges and immunities, and rights, belonging to bona fide subjects of Spain, under
our treaties or laws, and she should, in reality, belong to the subjects of another
nation, which was not entitled to any such privileges, immunities or rights, and
the proprietors were seeking, by fraud, to cover their own illegal acts, under the
flag of Spain; there can be no doubt, that it would be the duty of our courts to
strip off the disguise, and to look at the case, according to its naked realities. In
the solemn treaties between nations, it can never be presumed, that either state
intends to provide the means of perpetrating or protecting frauds; but all the pro-
visions are to be construed as intended to be applied to bona fide transactions.
The 17th article of the treaty with Spain, which provides for certain passports and
certificates, as evidence of property on board of the ships of both states, is, in its
terms, applicable only to cases where either of the parties is engaged in a war.
This article required a certain form of passport to be agreed upon by the parties,
and annexed to the treaty; it never was annexed; and therefore, in the case of The
Amiable Isabella, 6 Wheat. 1, it was held inoperative.
It is also a most important consideration, in the present case, which ought not
to be lost sight of, that, supposing these African negroes not to be slaves, but kid-
napped, and free negroes, the treaty with Spain cannot be obligatory upon them;
and the United States are bound to respect their rights as much as those of
Spanish subjects. The conflict of rights between the parties, under such circum-
stances, becomes positive and inevitable, and must be decided upon the eternal
principles of justice and international law. If the contest were about any goods on
board of this ship, to which American citizens asserted a title, which was denied


--- PAGE 87 ---
by the Spanish claimants, there could be no doubt of the right of such American
citizens to litigate their claims before any competent American tribunal, notwith-
standing the treaty with Spain. A fortiori, the doctrine must apply, where human
life and human liberty are in issue, and constitute the very essence of the contro-
versy. The treaty with Spain never could have intended to take away the equal
rights of all foreigners, who should contest their claims before any of our courts,
to equal justice; or to deprive such foreigners of the protection given them by
other treaties, or by the general law of nations. Upon the merits of the case, then,
there does not seem to us to be any ground for doubt, that these negroes ought
to be deemed free; and that the Spanish treaty interposes no obstacle to the just
assertion of their rights. . . .
Source: Excerpts from the United States Appellants v. the Libellants and Claimants of the
Schooner Amistad, Supreme Court of the United States, 15 Pet. (40 U.S.) 581, 587 (1841).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Arthur Abraham, The Amistad Revolt: An Historical Legacy of Sierra Leone and the United
States (Freetown, Sierra Leone: U.S. Information Service, 1985).
Matthew James Christensen, “Of Rebellions and Revolutions: Masculinity, Race, and
Transnational Modernity in Late Twentieth-Century U.S. and Sierra Leonean
Representations of the Amistad Slave Revolt” (Ph.D. diss., University of California, Los
Angeles, 2002).
Helen Kromer, Amistad: The Slave Uprising Aboard the Spanish Schooner (Cleveland:
Pilgrim Press, 1987).
Christopher Martin, The Amistad Affair(London and New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1970).
H. D. Motyl, The Voyage of La Amistad a Quest for Freedom [United States]: MPI Home
Video, 2005. DVD Video.
Iyunolu Folayan Osagie, The Amistad Revolt: Memory, Slavery, and the Politics of Identity
in the United States and Sierra Leone(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2000).
William A. Owens, Black Mutiny: The Revolt on the Schooner Amistad, with Introductions
by Derrick Bell and Michael Eric Dyson (Baltimore: Black Classics Press, 1997).
Steven Spielberg, Amistad, Universal City: DreamWorks, 1998. DVD Video.
O13 O
“Let Your Motto Be Resistance!” Henry Highland Garnet, 1843
Henry Highland Garnet (1815–1882) was born in Maryland, where he and his
family lived until they escaped to New York in 1825. Educated as a minister, Gar-
net became actively involved in antislavery organizing efforts. At the 1843
National Negro Convention, Garnet delivered a controversial speech, “Address to
the Slaves of the United States of America.” In tones that a century later would
be echoed by Malcolm X, Garnet called for the use of violence to overthrow the
system of slavery. Garnet’s speech was published in 1848, along with the text of
5 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 88 ---
H.H. GARNET, “LET YOUR MOTTO BE RESISTANCE!” 5 7
Davis Walker’s Appeal. After the Compromise of 1850, Garnet became more pes-
simistic about the possibility of racial justice inside the United States, and actively
explored the alternative of African-American colonization. During the Civil War,
Garnet was an adviser to President Abraham Lincoln. Garnet helped to establish
the Cuban Anti-Slavery Society in New York City in 1872. He was appointed
United States Minister to Liberia and died there in 1882.
O
Brethren and Fellow-Citizens:—Your brethren of the North, East, and West have
been accustomed to meet together in National Conventions, to sympathize with
each other, and to weep over your unhappy condition. In these meetings we have
addressed all classes of the free, but we have never, until this time, sent a word of
consolation and advice to you. We have been contented in sitting still and mourn-
ing over your sorrows, earnestly hoping that before this day your sacred liberties
would have been restored. But, we have hoped in vain. Years have rolled on, and
tens of thousands have been borne on streams of blood and tears, to the shores of
eternity. While you have been oppressed, we have also been partakers with you;
nor can we be free while you are enslaved. We, therefore, write to you as being
bound with you.
Many of you are bound to us, not only by the ties of a common humanity, but
we are connected by the more tender relations of parents, wives, husbands, chil-
dren, brothers, and sisters, and friends. As such we most affectionately address you.
Slavery has fixed a deep gulf between you and us, and while it shuts out from
you the relief and consolation which your friends would willingly render, it afflicts
and persecutes you with a fierceness which we might not expect to see in the
fiends of hell. But still the Almighty Father of mercies has left to us a glimmering
ray of hope, which shines out like a lone star in a cloudy sky. Mankind are becom-
ing wiser, and better—the oppressor’s power is fading, and you, every day, are
becoming better informed, and more numerous. Your grievances, brethren, are
many. We shall not attempt, in this short address, to present to the world all the
dark catalogue of this nation’s sins, which have been committed upon an innocent
people. Nor is it indeed necessary, for you feel them from day to day, and all the
civilized world look upon them with amazement.
Two hundred and twenty-seven years ago, the first of our injured race were
brought to the shores of America. They came not with glad spirits to select their
homes in the New World. They came not with their own consent, to find an
unmolested enjoyment of the blessings of this fruitful soil. The first dealings they
had with men calling themselves Christians, exhibited to them the worst features
of corrupt and sordid hearts: and convinced them that no cruelty is too great, no
villainy and no robbery too abhorrent for even enlightened men to perform, when
influenced by avarice and lust. Neither did they come flying upon the wings of
Liberty, to a land of freedom. But they came with broken hearts, from their
beloved native land, and were doomed to unrequited toil and deep degradation.


--- PAGE 89 ---
Nor did the evil of their bondage end at their emancipation by death. Succeeding
generations inherited their chains, and millions have come from eternity into
time, and have returned again to the world of spirits, cursed and ruined by Amer-
ican slavery.
The propagators of the system, or their immediate ancestors, very soon dis-
covered its growing evil, and its tremendous wickedness, and secret promises
were made to destroy it. The gross inconsistency of a people holding slaves, who
had themselves “ferried o’er the wave” for freedom’s sake, was too apparent to be
entirely overlooked. The voice of Freedom cried, “Emancipate your slaves.”
Humanity supplicated with tears for the deliverance of the children of Africa.
Wisdom urged her solemn plea. The bleeding captive plead his innocence, and
pointed to Christianity who stood weeping at the cross. Jehovah frowned upon
the nefarious institution, and thunderbolts, red with vengeance, struggled to leap
forth to blast the guilty wretches who maintained it. But all was vain. Slavery had
stretched its dark wings of death over the land, the Church stood silently by—the
priests prophesied falsely, and the people loved to have it so. Its throne is estab-
lished, and now it reigns triumphant.
Nearly three millions of your fellow-citizens are prohibited by law and public
opinion, (which in this country is stronger than law,) from reading the Book of
Life. Your intellect has been destroyed as much as possible, and every ray of light
they have attempted to shut out from your minds. The oppressors themselves
have become involved in the ruin. They have become weak, sensual, and rapa-
cious—they have cursed you—they have cursed themselves—they have cursed
the earth which they have trod.
The colonists threw the blame upon England. They said that the mother coun-
try entailed the evil upon them, and that they would rid themselves of it if they
could. The world thought they were sincere, and the philanthropic pitied them.
But time soon tested their sincerity. In a few years the colonists grew strong, and
severed themselves from the British Government. Their independence was
declared, and they took their station among the sovereign powers of the earth.
The declaration was a glorious document. Sages admired it, and the patriotic of
every nation reverenced the God-like sentiments which it contained. When the
power of Government returned to their hands, did they emancipate the slaves?
No; they rather added new links to our chains. Were they ignorant of the princi-
ples of Liberty? Certainly they were not. The sentiments of their revolutionary
orators fell in burning eloquence upon their hearts, and with one voice they cried,
L
IBERTY OR DEATH. Oh what a sentence was that! It ran from soul to soul like
electric fire, and nerved the arm of thousands to fight in the holy cause of
Freedom. Among the diversity of opinions that are entertained in regard to phys-
ical resistance, there are but a few found to gainsay that stern declaration. We are
among those who do not.
S
LAVERY! How much misery is comprehended in that single word. What mind
is there that does not shrink from its direful effects? Unless the image of God be
obliterated from the soul, all men cherish the love of Liberty. The nice discern-
ing political economist does not regard the sacred right more than the untutored
5 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 90 ---
H.H. GARNET, “LET YOUR MOTTO BE RESISTANCE!” 5 9
African who roams in the wilds of Congo. Nor has the one more right to the full
enjoyment of his freedom than the other. In every man’s mind the good seeds of
liberty are planted, and he who brings his fellow down so low, as to make him con-
tented with a condition of slavery, commits the highest crime against God and
man. Brethren, your oppressors aim to do this. They endeavor to make you as
much like brutes as possible. When they have blinded the eyes of your mind—
when they have embittered the sweet waters of life—when they have shut out the
light which shines from the word of God—then, and not till then, has American
slavery done its perfect work.
T
O SUCH DEGRADATION IT IS SINFUL IN THE EXTREME FOR YOU TO MAKE VOL -
UNTARY SUBMISSION. The divine commandments you are in duty bound to rever-
ence and obey. If you do not obey them, you will surely meet with the displeasure
of the Almighty. He requires you to love him supremely, and your neighbor as
yourself—to keep the Sabbath day holy—to search the Scriptures—and bring up
your children with respect for his laws, and to worship no other God but him. But
slavery sets all these at nought, and hurls defiance in the face of Jehovah. The for-
lorn condition in which you are placed, does not destroy your moral obligation to
God. You are not certain of heaven, because you suffer yourselves to remain in a
state of slavery, where you cannot obey the commandments of the Sovereign of
the universe. If the ignorance of slavery is a passport to heaven, then it is a bless-
ing, and no curse, and you should rather desire its perpetuity than its abolition.
God will not receive slavery, nor ignorance, nor any other state of mind, for love
and obedience to him. Your condition does not absolve you from your moral
obligation. The diabolical injustice by which your liberties are cloven down, 
NEI-
THER GOD, NOR ANGELS , OR JUST MEN , COMMAND YOU TO SUFFER FOR A SINGLE
MOMENT. T HEREFORE IT IS YOUR SOLEMN AND IMPERATIVE DUTY TO USE EVERY
MEANS, BOTH MORAL , INTELLECTUAL, AND PHYSICAL , THAT PROMISES SUCCESS . If a
band of heathen men should attempt to enslave a race of Christians, and to place
their children under the influence of some false religion, surely, Heaven would
frown upon the men who would not resist such aggression, even to death. If, on
the other hand, a band of Christians should attempt to enslave a race of heathen
men, and to entail slavery upon them, and to keep them in heathenism in the
midst of Christianity, the God of heaven would smile upon every effort which the
injured might make to disenthral themselves.
Brethren, it is as wrong for your lordly oppressors to keep you in slavery, as it
was for the man thief to steal our ancestors from the coast of Africa. You should
therefore now use the same manner of resistance, as would have been just in our
ancestors, when the bloody foot-prints of the first remorseless soul-thief was
placed upon the shores of our fatherland. The humblest peasant is as free in the
sight of God as the proudest monarch that ever swayed a sceptre. Liberty is a
spirit sent out from God, and like its great Author, is no respecter of persons.
Brethren, the time has come when you must act for yourselves. It is an old and
true saying that, “if hereditary bondmen would be free, they must themselves strike
the blow.” You can plead your own cause, and do the work of emancipation better
than any others. The nations of the old world are moving in the great cause of uni-


--- PAGE 91 ---
versal freedom, and some of them at least will, ere long, do you justice. The com-
bined powers of Europe have placed their broad seal of disapprobation upon the
African slave trade. But in the slaveholding parts of the United States, the trade is
as brisk as ever. They buy and sell you as though you were brute beasts. The North
has done much—her opinion of slavery in the abstract is known. But in regard to
the South, we adopt the opinion of the New York Evangelist—“We have advanced
so far, that the cause apparently waits for a more effectual door to be thrown open
than has been yet.” We are about to point you to that more effectual door. Look
around you, and behold the bosoms of your loving wives heaving with untold ago-
nies! Hear the cries of your poor children! Remember the stripes your fathers bore.
Think of the torture and disgrace of your noble mothers. Think of your wretched
sisters, loving virtue and purity, as they are driven into concubinage and are exposed
to the unbridled lusts of incarnate devils. Think of the undying glory that hangs
around the ancient name of Africa:—and forget not that you are native-born
American citizens, and as such, you are justly entitled to all the rights that are
granted to the freest. Think how many tears you have poured out upon the soil
which you have cultivated with unrequited toil and enriched with your blood; and
then go to your lordly enslavers and tell them plainly, that you are determined to be
free. Appeal to their sense of justice, and tell them that they have no more right to
oppress you, than you have to enslave them. Entreat them to remove the grievous
burdens which they have imposed upon you, and to remunerate you for your labor.
Promise them renewed diligence in the cultivation of the soil, if they will render to
you an equivalent for your services. Point them to the increase of happiness and
prosperity in the British West-Indies since the Act of Emancipation. Tell them in
language which they cannot misunderstand, of the exceeding sinfulness of slavery,
and of a future judgment, and of the righteous retributions of an indignant God.
Inform them that all you desire is 
FREEDOM, and that nothing else will suffice. Do
this, and for ever after cease to toil for the heartless tyrants, who give you no other
reward but stripes and abuse. If they then commence the work of death, they, and
not you, will be responsible for the consequences. You had far better all die— die
immediately, than live slaves, and entail your wretchedness upon your posterity. If
you would be free in this generation, here is your only hope. However much you
and all of us may desire it, there is not much hope of redemption without the shed-
ding of blood. If you must bleed, let it all come at once—rather die freemen, than
live to be the slaves. It is impossible, like the children of Israel, to make a grand exo-
dus from the land of bondage. The Pharaohs are on both sides of the blood-red
waters! You cannot move en masse, to the dominions of the British Queen—nor can
you pass through Florida and overrun Texas, and at last find peace in Mexico. The
propagators of American slavery are spending their blood and treasure, that they
may plant the black flag in the heart of Mexico and riot in the halls of Montezumas.
In the language of the Rev. Robert Hall, when addressing the volunteers of Bristol,
who were rushing forth to repel the invasion of Napoleon, who threatened to lay
waste the fair homes of England, “Religion is too much interested in your behalf,
not to shed over you her most gracious influences.”
6 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 92 ---
H.H. GARNET, “LET YOUR MOTTO BE RESISTANCE!” 6 1
You will not be compelled to spend much time in order to become inured to
hardships. From the first moment that you breathed the air of heaven, you have
been accustomed to nothing else but hardships. The heroes of the American
Revolution were never put upon harder fare than a peck of corn and a few her-
rings per week. You have not become enervated by the luxuries of life. Your
sternest energies have been beaten out upon the anvil of severe trial. Slavery has
done this, to make you subservient to its own purposes; but it has done more than
this, it has prepared you for any emergency. If you receive good treatment, it is
what you could hardly expect; if you meet with pain, sorrow, and even death,
these are the common lot of the slaves.
Fellow-men! patient sufferers! behold your dearest rights crushed to the earth!
See your sons murdered, and your wives, mothers and sisters doomed to prosti-
tution. In the name of the merciful God, and by all that life is worth, let it no
longer be a debatable question, whether it is better to choose Liberty or death.
In 1822, Denmark Veazie, of South Carolina, formed a plan for the liberation
of his fellow-men. In the whole history of human efforts to overthrow slavery, a
more complicated and tremendous plan was never formed. He was betrayed by
the treachery of his own people, and died a martyr to freedom. Many a brave hero
fell, but history, faithful to her high trust, will transcribe his name on the same
monument with Moses, Hampden, Tell, Bruce and Wallace, Toussaint L’Ouver-
ture, Lafayette and Washington. That tremendous movement shook the whole
empire of slavery. The guilty soul-thieves were overwhelmed with fear. It is a mat-
ter of fact, that at that time, and in consequence of the threatened revolution, the
slave States talked strongly of emancipation. But they blew but one blast of the
trumpet of freedom, and then laid it aside. As these men became quiet, the slave-
holders ceased to talk about emancipation: and now behold your condition to-day!
Angels sigh over it, and humanity has long since exhausted her tears in weeping
on your account!
The patriotic Nathaniel Turner followed Denmark Veazie. He was goaded to des-
peration by wrong and injustice. By despotism, his name has been recorded on the
list of infamy, and future generations will remember him among the noble and brave.
Next arose the immortal Joseph Cinque, the hero of the Amistad. He was a
native African, and by the help of God he emancipated a whole ship-load of his
fellow men on the high seas. And he now sings of liberty on the sunny hills of
Africa and beneath his native palm-trees, where he hears the lion roar and feels
himself as free as that king of the forest.
Next arose Madison Washington, that bright star of freedom, and took his sta-
tion in the constellation of true heroism. He was a slave on board the brig Creole,
of Richmond, bound to New Orleans, that great slave mart, with a hundred and
four others. Nineteen struck for liberty or death. But one life was taken, and the
whole were emancipated, and the vessel was carried into Nassau, New Providence.
Noble men! Those who have fallen in freedom’s conflict, their memories will
be cherished by the true-hearted and the God-fearing in all future generations;
those who are living, their names are surrounded by a halo of glory.


--- PAGE 93 ---
Brethren, arise, arise! Strike for your lives and liberties. Now is the day and the
hour. Let every slave throughout the land do this, and the days of slavery are num-
bered. You cannot be more oppressed than you have been—you cannot suffer
greater cruelties than you have already. Rather die freemen than live to be slaves.
Remember that you are 
FOUR MILLIONS!
It is in your power so to torment the God-cursed slaveholders, that they will
be glad to let you go free. If the scale was turned, and black men were the mas-
ters and white men the slaves, every destructive agent and element would be
employed to lay the oppressor low. Danger and death would hang over their
heads day and night. Yes, the tyrants would meet with plagues more terrible
than those of Pharaoh. But you are a patient people. You act as though you
were made for the special use of these devils. You act as though your daugh-
ters were born to pamper the lusts of your masters and overseers. And worse
than all, you tamely submit while your lords tear your wives from your
embraces and defile them before your eyes. In the name of God, we ask, are
you men? Where is the blood of your fathers? Has it all run out of your veins?
Awake, awake; millions of voices are calling you! Your dead fathers speak to
you from their graves. Heaven, as with a voice of thunder, calls on you to arise
from the dust.
Let your motto be resistance! resistance!
RESISTANCE! No oppressed people
have ever secured their liberty without resistance. What kind of resistance you
had better make, you must decide by the circumstances that surround you, and
according to the suggestion of expediency. Brethren, adieu! Trust in the living
God. Labor for the peace of the human race, and remember that you are 
FOUR
MILLIONS.
Source: “An Address to the Slaves of the United States of America,” 1843, reprinted in
Garnet, A Memorial Discourse by Rev. Henry Highland Garnet (Philadelphia: Joseph M.
Wilson, 1865), pp. 44–51.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Henry Highland Garnet, The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored
People of the United States, Politically Considered(Philadelphia: Privately Printed, 1852).
James Arthur Holmes, “Black Nationalism and Theodicy: A Comparison of the Thought of
Henry Highland Garnet, Alexander Crummell, and Henry McNeal Turner” (Th.D. diss.,
Boston University School of Theology, 1997).
Earl Ofari, Let Your Motto Be Resistance: The Life and Thought of Henry Highland Garnet
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1972).
Martin B. Pasternak, Rise Now and Fly to Arms: The Life of Henry Highland Garnet(New
York: Garland Publishing, 1995).
Joel Schor, Henry Highland Garnet: A Voice of Black Radicalism in the Nineteenth Century
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1977).
Sterling Stuckey, “A Last Stern Struggle: Henry Highland Garnet and Liberation Theory,” in
Black Leaders of the Nineteenth Century, ed. Leon Litwack and August Meier (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1988), pp. 129–48.
6 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 94 ---
W.W. BROWN, “SLAVERY AS IT IS” 6 3
O14 O
“Slavery as It Is,” William Wells Brown, 1847
William Wells Brown (1814?–1884) was born a slave near Lexington, Kentucky.
After one unsuccessful escape attempt, Brown managed to free himself by escap-
ing to Cleveland. Brown first came to prominence as an effective lecturer for the
New York Anti-Slavery Society. Brown’s widely read 1848 autobiography, Narra-
tive of William Wells Brown, A Fugitive Slave, and his novel Clotel: or, The Presi-
dent’s Daughter, published in 1853, were important contributions to early African-
American literature. Brown became a major leader in a variety of social reform
movements, speaking on behalf of temperance and women’s suffrage. Brown’s
most important, though neglected, work, Rising Son: or, The Antecedents and
Advancement of the Colored Race, published after the Civil War, was one of the
earliest texts presenting the history of black people from their own perspective.
O
. . . It is deplorable to look at the character of the American people, the charac-
ter that has been given to them by the institution of slavery. The profession of the
American people is far above the profession of the people of any other country.
Here the people profess to carry out the principles of Christianity. The American
people are a sympathizing people. They not only profess, but appear to be a sym-
pathizing people to the inhabitants of the whole world. They sympathize with
everything else but the American slave. When the Greeks were struggling for lib-
erty, meetings were held to express sympathy. Now they are sympathizing with
the poor downtrodden serfs of Ireland, and are sending their sympathy across the
ocean to them.
But what will the people of the Old World think? Will they not look upon the
American people as hypocrites? Do they not look upon your professed sympathy
as nothing more than hypocrisy? You may hold your meetings and send your
words across the ocean; you may ask Nicholas of Russia to take the chains from
his poor downtrodden serfs, but they look upon it all as nothing but hypocrisy.
Look at our twenty thousand fugitive slaves, running from under the stars and
stripes, and taking refuge in the Canadas; twenty thousand, some leaving their
wives, some their husbands, some leaving their children, some their brothers,
and some their sisters—fleeing to take refuge in the Canadas. Wherever the
stars and stripes are seen flying in the United States of America, they point him
out as a slave.
If I wish to stand up and say, “I am a man,” I must leave the land that gave me
birth. If I wish to ask protection as a man, I must leave the American stars and
stripes. Wherever the stars and stripes are seen flying upon American soil, I can
receive no protection; I am a slave, a chattel, a thing. I see your liberty poles


--- PAGE 95 ---
around in your cities. If tomorrow morning you are hoisting the stars and stripes
upon one of your liberty poles, and I should see the man following me who claims
my body and soul as his property, I might climb to the very top of your liberty
pole, I might cut the cord that held your stars and stripes and bind myself with it
as closely as I could to your liberty pole, I might talk of law and the Constitution,
but nothing could save me unless there be public sentiment enough in Salem. I
could not appeal to law or the Constitution; I could only appeal to public senti-
ment; and if public sentiment would not protect me, I must be carried back to the
plantations of the South, there to be lacerated, there to drag the chains that I left
upon the Southern soil a few years since.
This is deplorable. And yet the American slave can find a spot where he may
be a man—but it is not under the American flag. Fellow citizens, I am the last to
eulogize any country where they oppress the poor. I have nothing to say in behalf
of England or any other country, any further than as they extend protection to
mankind. I say that I honor England for protecting the black man. I honor every
country that shall receive the American slave, that shall protect him, and that shall
recognize him as a man.
I know that the United States will not do it; but I ask you to look at the efforts
of other countries. Even the Bey of Tunis, a few years since, has decreed that
there shall not be a slave in his dominions; and we see that the subject of liberty
is being discussed throughout the world. People are looking at it; they are exam-
ining it; and it seems as though every country and every people and every gov-
ernment were doing something, excepting the United States. But Christian,
democratic, republican America is doing nothing at all. It seems as though she
would be the last. It seems as though she was determined to be the last to knock
the chain from the limbs of the slave. Shall the American people be behind the
people of the Old World? Shall they be behind those who are represented as
almost living in the dark ages?
Shall every flap of England’s flag
Proclaim that all around are free,
From farthest Ind to each blue crag
That beetles o’er the western sea?
And shall we scoff at Europe’s kings,
When Freedom’s fire is dimmed with us;
And round our country’s alter clings
The damning shade of Slavery’s curse?
Shall we, I ask, shall the American people be the last? I am here, not for the
purpose of condemning the character of the American people, but for the pur-
pose of trying to protect or vindicate their character. I would to God that there
were some feature that I could vindicate. There is no liberty here for me; there is
no liberty for those with whom I am associated; there is no liberty for the Amer-
ican slave; and yet we hear a great deal about liberty! How do the people of the
Old World regard the American people? Only a short time since, an American
6 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 96 ---
W.W. BROWN, “SLAVERY AS IT IS” 6 5
gentleman, in traveling through Germany, passed the window of a bookstore
where he saw a number of pictures. One of them was a cut representing an
American slave on his knees, with chains upon his limbs. Over him stood a white
man, with a long whip; and underneath was written, “the latest specimen of
American democracy.” I ask my audience, Who placed that in the hands of those
that drew it? It was the people of the United States. Slavery, as it is to be found
in this country, has given the serfs of the Old World an opportunity of branding
the American people as the most tyrannical people upon God’s footstool.
Only a short time since, an American man-of-war was anchored in the bay
opposite Liverpool. The English came down by the hundreds and thousands. The
stars and stripes were flying; and there stood those poor persons that had never
seen an American man-of-war, but had heard a great deal of American democ-
racy. Some were eulogizing the American people; some were calling it the “land
of the free and the home of the brave.” And while they stood there, one of their
number rose up, and pointing his fingers to the American flag, said:
United States, your banner wears
Two emblems,—one of fame;
Alas, the other that it bears,
Reminds us of your shame.
The white man’s liberty entyped,
Stands blazoned by your stars;
But what’s the meaning of your stripes?
They mean your Negro scars.
What put that in the mouth of that individual? It was the system of American
slavery; it was the action of the American people; the inconsistency of the Amer-
ican people; their profession of liberty, and their practice in opposition to their
profession. . . .
Source: “A Lecture Delivered before the Female Anti-Slavery Society of Salem at Lyceum
Hall, November 4, 1847, by William Wells Brown, A Fugitive Slave,” reported by Henry M.
Parkhurst, Boston, 1847.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Bernard W. Bell, The Afro-American Novel and Its Tradition (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1987).
William Wells Brown, Narrative of William Wells Brown, A Fugitive Slave (Boston: Anti-
Slavery Office, 1848).
———, Clotel; or, The President’s Daughter(1853; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1969).
———, Rising Son; or, The Antecedents and Advancement of the Colored Race(Boston: A.G.
Brown, 1876).
William Edward Farrison, William Wells Brown: Author and Reformer(Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1969).
Paul Jefferson, ed., The Travels of William Wells Brown (New York: Markus Weiner
Publishing, 1991).
L. H. Whelchel, My Chains Fell Off: William Wells Brown, Fugitive Abolitionist(Lanham,
Md.: University Press of America).


--- PAGE 97 ---
O15 O
“A’n’t I a Woman?” Sojourner Truth, 1851
Sojourner Truth (c. 1799–1883) was a legendary figure in the struggle to abolish
human bondage in the United States. Born in slavery as Isabella Bomefree, she
was liberated by the New York State Emancipation Act of 1827. In 1843 she
assumed the name Sojourner Truth, and began to travel across the country as an
abolitionist itinerant preacher. Truth worked closely with leading abolitionists
such as Frederick Douglass, and became involved in the early women’s rights
movement. In the 1970s and 1980s, black feminist scholars such as bell hooks
cited the example of Truth as a model of black feminism’s activism and courage
within the male-dominated abolitionist movement. The memorable phrase “A’n’t
I a Woman?” was underscored in a famous speech attributed to Truth at a
women’s rights conventions held in Akron, Ohio, in May 1851. There are two dif-
ferent accounts of Truth’s address, the first published in The Anti-Slavery Bugle
in June 1851, and the second, better-known version by feminist abolitionist
France Dana Gage, published twelve years later. According to historian Nell Irvin
Painter, the latter was a largely fictive narrative. We have provided both texts.
O
One of the most unique and interesting speeches of the Convention was made by
Sojourner Truth, an emancipated slave. It is impossible to transfer it to paper, or
convey any adequate idea of the effect it produced upon the audience. Those only
can appreciate it who saw her powerful form, her whole-souled, earnest gesture,
and listened to her strong and truthful tones. She came forward to the platform
and addressing the President said with great simplicity: “May I say a few words?”
Receiving an affirmative answer, she proceeded:
I want to say a few words about this matter. I am a woman’s rights. I have as
much muscle as any man, and can do as much work as any man. I have plowed
and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed, and can any man do more than
that? I have heard much about the sexes being equal. I can carry as much as any
man, and can eat as much too, if I can get it. I am as strong as any man that is now.
As for intellect, all I can say is, if woman have a pint, and man a quart—why can’t
she have her little pint full? You need not be afraid to give us our rights for fear
we will take too much,—for we can’t take more than our pint’ll hold. The poor
men seem to be all in confusion, and don’t know what to do. Why children, if you
have woman’s rights, give it to her and you will feel better. You will have your own
rights, and they won’t be so much trouble. I can’t read, but I can hear. I have
heard the bible and have learned that Eve caused man to sin. Well, if woman
upset the world, do give her a chance to set it right side up again. The Lady has
spoken about Jesus, how he never spurned woman from him, and she was right.
When Lazarus died, Mary and Martha came to him with faith and love and
6 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 98 ---
SOJOURNER TRUTH, “A’N’T I A WOMAN?” 6 7
besought him to raise their brother. And Jesus wept and Lazarus came forth. And
how came Jesus into the world? Through God who created him and a woman who
bore him. Man, where is your part? But the women are coming up blessed be
God and a few of the men are coming up with them. But man is in a tight place,
the poor slave is on him, woman is coming on him, he is surely between a hawk
and a buzzard.
O
Wall, chilern, whar dar is so much racket dar must be somethin’ out of kilter. I
tink dat ’twixt de niggers of de Souf and de womin at de Norf, all talkin’ ’bout
rights, de white men will be in a fix pretty soon. But what’s all dis here talkin’
’bout?
Dat man ober dar say dat womin needs to be helped into carriages and lifted
ober ditches, and to hab de best place everywhar. Nobody eber helps me into car-
riages, or ober mud puddles, or gibs me any best place! And a’n’t I a woman?
Look at my arm! I have ploughed, and planted, and gathered into barns, and no
man could head me! And a’n’t I a woman? I could work as much and eat as much
as a man—when I could get it—and bear de lash as well! And a’n’t I a woman? I
have borne thirteen chilren, and seen ’em mos’ all sold off to slavery, and when I
cried out with my mother’s grief, none but Jesus heard me! And a’n’t I a woman?
Den dey talks ’bout dis ting in de head: what dis dey call it? (“Intellect,” whis-
pered some one near.) Dat’s it, honey. What dat got to do wid womin’s rights or nig-
ger’s rights? If my cup won’t hold but a pint, and yourn holds a quart, wouldn’t ye
be mean not to let me have my little half-measure full?
Den dat little man in black dar, he say women can’t have as much rights as men,
’cause Christ wan’t a woman! Whar did your Christ come from? Whar did your
Christ come from? From God and a woman! Man had nothin’ to do wid Him!
If de fust woman God ever made was strong enough to turn de world upside
down all alone, dese women togedder (and she glanced her eye over the platform)
ought to be able to turn it back, and get it right side up again! And now dey is ask-
ing to do it, de men better let ’em.
Sources: (1) Excerpt from The Anti-Slavery Bugle , June 21, 1851; and (2) Reported in
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, and M. J. Gage, History of Women Suffrage, Vol.
I (Rochester, N.Y.: 1887).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Jacqueline Bernard, Journey Toward Freedom: The Story of Sojourner Truth (New York:
Feminist Press of the City University of New York, 1990).
Nell Irvin Painter, “Representing Truth: Sojourner Truth’s Knowing and Becoming Known,”
Journal of American History81, no. 2 (September 1994), pp. 461–492.
— — —, Sojourner Truth: A Life, a Symbol(New York: W. W. Norton, 1998).
Dorothy Sterling, We Are Your Sisters: Black Women in the Nineteenth Century(New York:
W. W. Norton, 1984).


--- PAGE 99 ---
Erlene Stetson and Linda David, Glorying in Tribulation: The Lifework of Sojourner Truth
(East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1994).
Sojourner Truth, with Francis W. Titus, ed., Narrative of Sojourner Truth; a Bondswoman of
Olden Time, with a History of Her Labors and Correspondence Drawn from her “Book
of Life” (Battle Creek, Mich.: Privately Published, 1875, 1878; republished, Jeffery
Stewart, ed., 1991).
O16 O
“A Plea for Emigration, or, Notes of Canada West,” Mary Ann Shadd Cary, 1852
Mary Ann Shadd Cary (1823–1893) was born in Wilmington, Delaware, the
eldest of thirteen children. Although Delaware was a slave state, the Shadd fam-
ily was part of an elite free black community. Mary Ann Shadd’s parents were
active supporters of the antislavery movement and their next home in West
Chester, Pennsylvania, served as a way station on the Underground Railroad.
Shadd was educated in a Quaker School, and in 1839 she began a career teaching
African Americans. Shadd’s first essay, “Hints to the Colored People of the North”
(1849) called for antislavery reform, and in particular, advised middle-class blacks
to become “producers instead of mere consumers.” After the passing of the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, Mary Ann Shadd fled to Canada, where she estab-
lished a school educating former slaves and free blacks. In the pamphlet, “A Plea
for Emigration or, Notes on Canada West,” published in 1852, Shadd presented
a powerful plea to African Americans to move north. In 1854, she assumed man-
agement of The Provincial Freemanto become the first African-American woman
editor and publisher in North America. With the outbreak of the American Civil
War, Shadd Cary returned to the United States. She later became the first
African-American woman to enroll in Howard University Law School, graduating
in 1883.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
The increasing desire on the part of the coloured people to become thoroughly
informed respecting the Canadas, and particularly that part of the Province called
Canada West—to learn of the climate, soil and productions, and of the induce-
ments offered generally to emigrants, and to them particularly, since that the pas-
sage of the odious Fugitive Slave Law has made a residence in the United States
to many of them dangerous in the extreme—this consideration, and the absence
of condensed information accessible to all, is my excuse for offering this tract to
the notice of the public.
The people are in a strait. On the one hand, a pro-slavery administration, with
its entire controllable force, is bearing upon them with fatal effect. On the other,
the Colonization Society, in the garb of Christianity and Philanthropy, is second-
6 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 100 ---
MARY ANN SHADD, “A PLEA FOR EMIGRATION, . . .” 6 9
ing the efforts of the first named power, by bringing into the lists a vast social and
immoral influence, thus making more effective the agencies employed.
Information is needed. Tropical Africa, the land of promise of the colonization-
ists, teeming as she is with the breath of pestilence, a burning sun and fearful mal-
adies, bids them welcome; she feelingly invites to moral and physical death, under
a voluntary escort of their most bitter enemies at home. Again, many look with
dreadful forebodings to the probability of worse than inquisitorial inhumanity in
the Southern States from the operation of the Fugitive Law. Certain that neither
a home in Africa, nor in the Southern States, is desirable under present circum-
stances, inquiry is made respecting Canada.
I have endeavored to furnish information to a certain extent, to that end, and
believing that more reliance would be placed upon a statement of facts obtained
in the country, from reliable sources and from observation, than upon a repetition
of current statement, made elsewhere, however honestly made, I determined to
visit Canada, and to there collect such information as most persons desire. These
pages contain the result of much inquiry: matter obtained both from individuals
and from documents and papers of unquestionable character in the Province.
THE FRENCH AND FOREIGN POPULATIONS
. . . Persons emigrating to Canada need not hope to find the general state of society
as it is in the States. There is, as in the old country, a strong class feeling—lines are
as completely drawn between the different classes, and aristocracy in the Canadas
is the same in its manifestations as aristocracy in England, Scotland and elsewhere.
There is no approach to Southern chivalry, nor the sensitive democracy prevalent at
the North; but there is an aristocracy of birth, not of skin, as with Americans. In the
ordinary arrangements of society, from wealthy and titled immigrants and visitors
from the mother country, down through the intermediate circles to Yankees and
Indians, it appears to have been settled by common consent, that one class should
not “see any trouble over another”; but the common ground on which all honest and
respectable men meet is that of innate hatred of American Slavery.
RECAPITULATION
The conclusion arrived at in respect to Canada by an impartial person is that no
settled country in America offers stronger inducements to coloured people. The
climate is healthy, and they enjoy as good health as other settlers, or as the natives;
the soil is of the first quality; the laws of the country give to them, at first, the
same protection and privileges as to other persons not born subjects; and after
compliance with Acts of Parliament affecting them, as taking oath, they may enjoy
full “privileges of British birth in the Province.” The general tone of society is
healthy; vice is discountenanced, and infractions of the law promptly punished;
and, added to this, there is an increasing anti-slavery sentiment, and a progressive
system of religion.
Source: Excerpts from Mary Ann Shadd Cary, A Plea for Emigration, or, Notes of Canada
West, ed. by Richard Almonte (Toronto: Mercury Press, 1998), pp. 43–44 and 88–89.


--- PAGE 101 ---
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Richard Almonte, ed., A Plea for Emigration, or, Notes of Canada West(Toronto: Mercury
Press, 1998).
Jim Bearden, and Linda Jean Butler, Shadd: The Life and Times of Mary Shadd Cary
(Toronto: NC Press, 1977).
Jane Rhodes, Mary Ann Shadd Cary: The Black Press and Protest in the Nineteenth Century
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).
Shirley J. Yee, “Finding a Place: Mary Ann Shadd Cary and the Dilemmas of Black Migration
to Canada, 1850–1870,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies18, no. 3 (1997), pp. 1–16.
O17 O
A Black Nationalist Manifesto, Martin R. Delany, 1852
Martin R. Delany (1812–1885) was a major theoretical and political architect of
what today we call “black nationalism.” Born in Virginia, of Gullah and Mandingo
descent, Delany assumed many different vocations throughout his long career,
among them educator, physician, African explorer, unsuccessful political candi-
date, author, and journalist. In 1843 Delany produced one of the earliest African-
American newspapers, The Mystery. Although he worked briefly with Frederick
Douglass to produce The North Star newspaper, the two black leaders differed
sharply over the strategies and philosophies for the African-American community.
Delany’s The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored
People of the United States, Politically Considered presented a program of racial
separatism and advocated colonization as the only long-term hope to achieve
black freedom. In the Civil War, Delany became a major in the 104th U.S. col-
ored troops. During Reconstruction he ran unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor
of South Carolina.
O
THE CONDITION, ELEVATION, EMIGRATION, AND DESTINY OF THE
COLORED PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES, POLITICALLY CONSIDERED
V.  MEANS OF ELEVATION
Moral theories have long been resorted to by us, as a means of effecting the
redemption of our brethren in bonds, and the elevation of the free colored peo-
ple in this country. Experience has taught us, that speculations are not enough;
that the practical application of principles adduced, the thing carried out, is the
only true and proper course to pursue.
We have speculated and moralised much about equality—claiming to be as
good as our neighbors, and everybody else—all of which, may do very well in
ethics—but not in politics. We live in society among men, conducted by men, gov-
erned by rules and regulations. However arbitrary, there are certain policies that
7 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 102 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 7 1
regulate all well-organized institutions and corporate bodies. We do not intend
here to speak of the legal political relations of society, for those are treated on else-
where. The business and social, or voluntary and mutual policies, are those that
now claim our attention. Society regulates itself—being governed by mind, which
like water, finds its own level. “Like seeks like,” is a principle in the laws of matter,
as well as of mind. There is such a thing as inferiority of things, and positions; at
least society has made them so; and while we continue to live among men, we must
agree to all just measures—all those we mean, that do not necessarily infringe on
the rights of others. By the regulations of society, there is no equality of persons,
where there is not an equality of attainments. By this, we do not wish to be under-
stood as advocating the actual equal attainments of every individual; but we mean
to say, that if these attainments be necessary for the elevation of the white man,
they are necessary for the elevation of the colored man. That some colored men
and women, in a like proportion to the whites, should be qualified in all the attain-
ments possessed by them. It is one of the regulations of society the world over, and
we shall have to conform to it, or be discarded as unworthy of the associations of
our fellows.
Cast our eyes about us and reflect for a moment, and what do we behold! every
thing that presents to view gives evidence of the skill of the white man. Should we
purchase a pound of groceries, a yard of linen, a vessel of crockeryware, a piece
of furniture, the very provisions that we eat,—all, all are the products of the white
man, purchased by us from the white man, consequently, our earnings and
means, are all given to the white man.
Pass along the avenues of any city or town, in which you live—behold the trad-
ing shops—the manufactories—see the operations of the various machinery—see
the stage-coaches coming in, bringing the mails of intelligence—look at the rail-
roads interlining every section, bearing upon them their mighty trains, flying with
the velocity of the swallow, ushering in the hundreds of industrious, enterprising
travelers. Cast again your eyes widespread over the ocean—see the vessels in
every direction with their white sheets spread to the winds of heaven, freighted
with the commerce, merchandise and wealth of many nations. Look as you pass
along through the cities, at the great and massive buildings—the beautiful and
extensive structures of architecture—behold the ten thousand cupolas, with their
spires all reared up towards heaven, intersecting the territory of the clouds—all
standing as mighty living monuments, of the industry, enterprise, and intelligence
of the white man. And yet, with all these living truths, rebuking us with scorn, we
strut about, place our hands akimbo, straighten up ourselves to our greatest
height, and talk loudly about being “as good as any body.” How do we compare
with them? Our fathers are their coachmen, our brothers their cookmen, and our-
selves their waiting-men. Our mothers their nurse-women, our sisters their scrub-
women, our daughters their maid-women, and our wives their washer-women.
Until colored men, attain to a position above permitting their mothers, sisters,
wives, and daughters, to do the drudgery and menial offices of other men’s wives
and daughters; it is useless, it is nonsense, it is pitiable mockery, to talk about


--- PAGE 103 ---
equality and elevation in society. The world is looking upon us, with feelings of
commiseration, sorrow, and contempt. We scarcely deserve sympathy, if we
peremptorily refuse advice, bearing upon our elevation. . . .
White men are producers—we are consumers. They build houses, and we rent
them. They raise produce, and we consume it. They manufacture clothes and
wares, and we garnish ourselves with them. They build coaches, vessels, cars,
hotels, saloons, and other vehicles and places of accommodation, and we deliber-
ately wait until they have got them in readiness, then walk in, and contend with
as much assurance for a “right,” as though the whole thing was bought by, paid
for, and belonged to us. By their literary attainments, they are the contributors to,
authors and teachers of, literature, science, religion, law, medicine, and all other
useful attainments that the world now makes use of. We have no reference to
ancient times—we speak of modern things.
These are the means by which God intended man to succeed: and this dis-
closes the secret of the white man’s success with all of his wickedness, over the
head of the colored man, with all of his religion. We have been pointed and plain,
on this part of the subject, because we desire our readers to see persons and
things in their true position. Until we are determined to change the condition of
things, and raise ourselves above the position in which we are now prostrated, we
must hang our heads in sorrow, and hide our faces in shame. It is enough to know
that these things are so; the causes we care little about. Those we have been
examining, complaining about, and moralising over, all our life time. This we are
weary of. What we desire to learn now is, how to effect a remedy; this we have
endeavored to point out. Our elevation must be the result of self-efforts, and work
of our own hands. No other human power can accomplish it. If we but determine
it shall be so, it will be so. Let each one make the case his own, and endeavor to
rival his neighbor, in honorable competition.
These are the proper and only means of elevating ourselves and attaining
equality in this country or any other, and it is useless, utterly futile, to think about
going any where, except we are determined to use these as the necessary means
of developing our manhood. The means are at hand, within our reach. Are we
willing to try them? Are we willing to raise ourselves superior to the condition of
slaves, or continue the meanest underlings, subject to the beck and call of every
creature bearing a pale complexion? If we are, we had as well remained in the
South, as to have come to the North in search of more freedom. What was the
object of our parents in leaving the South, if it were not for the purpose of attain-
ing equality in common with others of their fellow citizens, by giving their chil-
dren access to all the advantages enjoyed by others? Surely this was their object.
They heard of liberty and equality here, and they hastened on to enjoy it, and no
people are more astonished and disappointed than they, who for the first time, on
beholding the position we occupy here in the free North—what is called, and
what they expect to find, the free States. They at once tell us, that they have as
much liberty in the South as we have in the North—that there as free people,
they are protected in their rights—that we have nothing more—that in other
respects they have the same opportunity, indeed the preferred opportunity, of
7 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 104 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 7 3
being their maids, servants, cooks, waiters, and menials in general, there, as we
have here—that had they known for a moment, before leaving, that such was to
be the only position they occupied here, they would have remained where they
were, and never left. Indeed, such is the disappointment in many cases, that they
immediately return back again, completely insulted at the idea, of having us here
at the north, assume ourselves to be their superiors. Indeed, if our superior
advantages of the free States, do not induce and stimulate us to the higher attain-
ments in life, what in the name of degraded humanity will do it?
O
VI. THE UNITED STATES OUR COUNTRY
Our common country is the United States. Here were we born, here raised and
educated; here are the scenes of childhood; the pleasant associations of our school
going days; the loved enjoyments of our domestic and fireside relations, and the
sacred graves of our departed fathers and mothers, and from here will we not be
driven by any policy that may be schemed against us.
We are Americans, having a birthright citizenship—natural claims upon the
country—claims common to all others of our fellow citizens—natural rights, which
may, by virtue of unjust laws, be obstructed, but never can be annulled. Upon
these do we place ourselves, as immovably fixed as the decrees of the living God.
But according to the economy that regulates the policy of nations, upon which
rests the basis of justifiable claims to all freemen’s rights, it may be necessary to
take another view of, and enquire into the political claims of colored men. . . .
O
XXI. CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE WEST INDIES
Central and South America, are evidently the ultimate destination and future
home of the colored race on this continent; the advantages of which in preference
to all others, will be apparent when once pointed out.
1
The advantages to the colored people of the United States, to be derived from
emigration to Central, South America, and the West Indies, are incomparably
greater than that of any other parts of the world at present.
In the first place, there never have existed in the policy of any of the nations of
Central or South America, an inequality on account of race or color, and any prohi-
bition of rights, has generally been to the white, and not to the colored races.
2 To the
whites, not because they were white, not on account of their color, but because of
the policy pursued by them towards the people of other races than themselves. The
population of Central and South America, consist of fifteen millions two hundred
and forty thousand, adding the ten millions of Mexico; twenty-five millions two hun-
dred and forty thousand, of which vast population, but one-seventhare whites, or the
pure European race. Allowing a deduction of one- seventh of this population for the
European race that may chance to be in those countries, and we have in South and
Central America alone, the vast colored population of thirteen millions one hundred


--- PAGE 105 ---
and seventy-seven thousand; and including Mexico, a coloredpopulation on this glo-
rious continent of twenty-one millions, six hundred and forty thousand.
This vast number of people, our brethren—because they are precisely the
same people as ourselves and share the same fate with us, as the case of numbers
of them have proven, who have been adventitiously thrown among us—stand
ready and willing to take us by the hand—nay, are anxiously waiting, and earnestly
importuning us to come, that they may make common cause with us, and we all
share the same fate. There is nothing under heaven in our way—the people stand
with open arms ready to receive us. The climate, soil, and productions—the vast
rivers and beautiful sea-coast—the scenery of the landscape, and beauty of the
starry heavens above—the song of the birds—the voice of the people say come—
and God our Father bids us go.—Will we go? Go we must, and go we will, as
there is no alternative. To remain here in North America, and be crushed to the
earth in vassalage and degradation, we never will.
Talk not about religious biases—we have but one reply to make. We had rather
be a Heathen freeman, than a Christian slave.
There need be no fear of annexation in these countries—the prejudices of the
people are all against it, and with our influences infused among them, the aver-
sion would be ten-fold greater. Neither need there be any fears of an attempt on
the part of the United States, at a subjugation of these countries. Policy is against
it, because the United States has too many colored slaves in their midst, to desire
to bring under their government, twenty-one millions of disfranchised people,
whom it would cost them more to keep under subjection, than ten-fold the worth
of the countries they gained. Besides, let us go to whatever parts of Central and
South America we may, we shall make common cause with the people, and shall
hope, by one judicious and signal effort, to assemble one day—and a glorious day
it will be—in a great representative convention, and form a glorious union of
South American States, “inseparably connected one and forever.”
This can be done, easily done, if the proper course be pursued, and necessity
will hold them together as it holds together the United States of North America—
self-preservation. As the British nation serves to keep in check the Americans; so
would the United States serve to keep in Union the South American States.
We should also enter into solemn treaties with Great Britain, and like other
free and independent nations, take our chance, and risk consequences. Talk not
of consequences; we are now in chains; shall we shake them off and go to a land
of liberty? shall our wives and children be protected, secure, and affectionately
cherished, or shall they be debased and degraded as our mothers and fathers
were? By the light of heaven, no! By the instincts of nature, no!
Talk not about consequences. White men seek responsibilities; shall we shun
them? They brave dangers and risk consequences; shall we shrink from them?
What are consequences, compared in the scale of value, with liberty and freedom;
the rights and privileges of our wives and children? In defence of our liberty—the
rights of my wife and children; had we the power, we would command the vault
of a volcano, charged with the wrath of heaven, and blast out of existence, every
7 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 106 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 7 5
thing that dared obstruct our way.
The time has now fully arrived, when the colored race is called upon by all the
ties of common humanity, and all the claims of consummate justice, to go forward
and take their position, and do battle in the struggle now being made for the
redemption of the world. Our cause is a just one; the greatest at present that elic-
its the attention of the world. For if there is a remedy; that remedy is now at hand.
God himself as assuredly as he rules the destinies of nations, and entereth mea-
sures into the “hearts of men,” has presented these measures to us. Our race is to
be redeemed; it is a great and glorious work, and we are the instrumentalities by
which it is to be done. But we must go from among our oppressors; it never can
be done by staying among them. God has, as certain as he has ever designed any
thing, has designed this great portion of the New World, for us, the colored races;
and as certain as we stubborn our hearts, and stiffen our necks against it, his pro-
tecting arm and fostering care will be withdrawn from us.
Shall we be told that we can live nowhere, but under the will of our North
American oppressors; that this (the United States,) is the country most favorable
to our improvement and progress? Are we incapable of self-government, and mak-
ing such improvements for ourselves as we delight to enjoy after American white
men have made them for themselves? No, it is not true. Neither is it true that the
United States is the best country for our improvement. That country is the best, in
which our manhood can be best developed; and that is Central and South America,
and the West Indies—all belonging to this glorious Continent. . . .
O
XXII. NICARAGUA AND NEW GRENADA
As it is not reasonable to suppose, that all who read this volume—especially those
whom it is intended most to benefit—understand geography; it is deemed advis-
able, to name some particular places, as locality of destination.
We consequently, to begin with, select N
ICARAGUA, in Central America, North,
and NEW GRENADA, the Northern part of South America, South of Nicaragua, as
the most favorable points at present, in every particular, for us to emigrate to.
In the first place, they are the nearest points to be reached, and countries at
which the California adventurers are now touching, on their route to that distant
land, and not half the distance of California.
In the second place, the advantages for all kinds of enterprise, are equal if
not superior, to almost any other points—the climate being healthy and highly
favorable.
In the third place, and by no means the least point of importance, the British
nation is bound by solemn treaty, to protect both of those nations from foreign
imposition, until they are able to stand alone.
Then there is nothing in the way, but everything in favor, and opportunities for
us to rise to the full stature of manhood. Remember this fact, that in these coun-
tries, colored men now fill the highest places in the country: and colored people


--- PAGE 107 ---
have the same chances there, that white people have in the United States. All that
is necessary to do, is to go, and the moment your foot touches the soil, you have
all the opportunities for elevating yourselves as the highest, according to your
industry and merits.
Nicaragua and New Grenada, are both Republics, having a President, Senate,
and Representatives of the people. The municipal affairs are well conducted; and
remember, however much the customs of the country may differ, and appear
strange to those you have left behind—remember that you are free; and that
many who, at first sight, might think that they could not become reconciled to the
new order of things, should recollect, that they were once in a situation in the
United States, (in slavery,) where they were compelled to be content with cus-
toms infinitely more averse to their feelings and desires. And that customs
become modified, just in proportion as people of different customs from differ-
ent parts, settle in the same communities together. All we ask is Liberty—the rest
follows as a matter of course.
O
XXIII. THINGS AS THEY ARE
“And if thou boast TRUTH to utter,
SPEAK, and leave the rest to God.”
In presenting this work, we have but a single object in view, and that is, to inform
the minds of the colored people at large, upon many things pertaining to their ele-
vation, that but few among us are acquainted with. Unfortunately for us, as a
body, we have been taught to believe, that we must have some person to think for
us, instead of thinking for ourselves. So accustomed are we to submission and this
kind of training, that it is with difficulty, even among the most intelligent of the
colored people, an audience may be elicited for any purpose whatever, if the
expounder is to be a colored person; and the introduction of any subject is treated
with indifference, if not contempt, when the originator is a colored person.
Indeed, the most ordinary white person, is almost revered, while the most quali-
fied colored person is totally neglected. Nothing from them is appreciated.
We have been standing comparatively still for years, following in the footsteps
of our friends, believing that what they promise us can be accomplished, just
because they say so, although our own knowledge should long since, have satis-
fied us to the contrary. Because even were it possible, with the present hate and
jealousy that the whites have towards us in this country, for us to gain equality of
rights with them; we never could have an equality of the exercise and enjoyment
of those rights—because, the great odds of numbers are against us. We might
indeed, as some at present, have the right of the elective franchise—nay, it is not
the elective franchise, because the elective franchise makes the enfranchised, eli-
gible to any position attainable; but we may exercise the right of voting only,
which to us, is but poor satisfaction; and we by no means care to cherish the priv-
ilege of voting somebody into office, to help to make laws to degrade us.
7 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 108 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 7 7
In religion—because they are both translators and commentators, we must
believe nothing, however absurd, but what our oppressors tell us. In Politics, noth-
ing but such as they promulge; in Anti-Slavery, nothing but what our white brethren
and friends say we must; in the mode and manner of our elevation, we must do
nothing, but that which may be laid down to be done by our white brethren from
some quarter or other; and now, even in the subject of emigration, there are some
colored people to be found, so lost to their own interest and self-respect, as to be
gulled by slave owners and colonizationists, who are led to believe there is no other
place in which they can become elevated, but Liberia, a government of American
slaveholders, as we have shown—simply, because white men have told them so.
Upon the possibility, means, mode and manner, of our Elevation in the United
States—Our Original Rights and Claims as Citizens—Our Determination not to
be Driven from our Native Country—the Difficulties in the Way of our Elevation
—Our Position in Relation to our Anti-Slavery Brethren—the Wicked Design
and Injurious Tendency of the American Colonization Society—Objections to
Liberia—Objections to Canada—Preferences to South America, &c., &c., all of
which we have treated without reserve; expressing our mind freely, and with can-
dor, as we are determined that as far as we can at present do so, the minds of our
readers shall be enlightened. The custom of concealing information upon vital
and important subjects, in which the interest of the people is involved, we do not
agree with, nor favor in the least; we have therefore, laid this cursory treatise
before our readers, with the hope that it may prove instrumental in directing the
attention of our people in the right way, that leads to their Elevation. Go or stay—
of course each is free to do as he pleases—one thing is certain; our Elevation is
the work of our own hands. And Mexico, Central America, the West Indies, and
South America, all present now, opportunities for the individual enterprise of our
young men, who prefer to remain in the United States, in preference to going
where they can enjoy real freedom, and equality of rights. Freedom of Religion,
as well as of politics, being tolerated in all of these places.
Let our young men and women, prepare themselves for usefulness and busi-
ness; that the men may enter into merchandise, trading, and other things of
importance; the young women may become teachers of various kinds, and other-
wise fill places of usefulness. Parents must turn their attention more to the edu-
cation of their children. We mean, to educate them for useful practical business
purposes. Educate them for the Store and the Counting House—to do every-day
practical business. Consult the children’s propensities, and direct their education
according to their inclinations. It may be, that there is too great a desire on the
part of parents, to give their children a professional education, before the body of
the people, are ready for it. A people must be a business people, and have more
to depend upon than mere help in people’s houses and Hotels, before they are
either able to support, or capable of properly appreciating the services of profes-
sional men among them. This has been one of our great mistakes—we have gone
in advance of ourselves. We have commenced at the superstructure of the build-
ing, instead of the foundation—at the top instead of the bottom. We should first


--- PAGE 109 ---
be mechanics and common tradesmen, and professions as a matter of course
would grow out of the wealth made thereby. Young men and women, must now
prepare for usefulness—the day of our Elevation is at hand—all the world now
gazes at us—and Central and South America, and the West Indies, bid us come
and be men and women, protected, secure, beloved and Free.
The branches of Education most desirable for the preparation of youth, for
practical useful every-day life, are Arithmetic and good Penmanship, in order to
be Accountants; and a good rudimental knowledge of Geography—which has
ever been neglected, and underestimated—and of Political Economy; which
without the knowledge of the first, no people can ever become adventurous—nor
of the second, never will be an enterprising people. Geography, teaches a knowl-
edge of the world, and Political Economy, a knowledge of the wealth of nations;
or how to make money. These are not abstruse sciences, or learning not easily
acquired or understood; but simply, common School Primer learning, that every
body may get. And, although it is the very Key to prosperity and success in com-
mon life, but few know anything about it. Unfortunately for our people, so soon
as their children learn to read a Chapter in the New Testament, and scribble a
miserable hand, they are pronounced to have “Learning enough”; and taken away
from School, no use to themselves, nor community. This is apparent in our Public
Meetings, and Official Church Meetings; of the great number of men present,
there are but few capable of filling a Secretaryship. Some of the large cities may
be an exception to this. Of the multitudes of Merchants, and Business men
throughout this country, Europe, and the world, few are qualified, beyond the
branches here laid down by us as necessary for business. What did John Jacob
Astor, Stephen Girard, or do the millionaires and the greater part of the merchant
princes, and mariners, know about Latin and Greek, and the Classics? Precious
few of them know any thing. In proof of this, in 1841, during the Administration
of President Tyler, when the mutiny was detected on board of the American Man
of War Brig Somers, the names of the Mutineers, were recorded by young S—a
Midshipman in Greek. Captain Alexander Slidell McKenzie, Commanding, was
unable to read them; and in his despatches to the Government, in justification of
his policy in executing the criminals, said that he “discovered some curious char-
acters which he was unable to read,” &c.; showing thereby, that that high func-
tionary, did not understand even the Greek Alphabet, which was only necessary,
to have been able to read proper names written in Greek.
What we most need then, is a good business practical Education; because, the
Classical and Professional education of so many of our young men, before their
parents are able to support them, and community ready to patronize them, only
serves to lull their energy, and cripple the otherwise, praiseworthy efforts they
would make in life. A Classical education, is only suited to the wealthy, or those
who have a prospect of gaining a livelihood by it. The writer does not wish to be
understood, as underrating a Classical and Professional education; this is not his
intention; he fully appreciates them, having had some such advantages himself;
but he desires to give a proper guide, and put a check to the extravagant idea that
is fast obtaining, among our people especially, that a Classical, or as it is named,
7 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 110 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 7 9
a “finished education,” is necessary to prepare one for usefulness in life. Let us
have an education, that shall practically develop our thinking faculties and man-
hood; and then, and not until then, shall we be able to vie with our oppressors, go
where we may. We as heretofore, have been on the extreme; either no qualifica-
tion at all, or a Collegiate education. We jumped too far; taking a leap from the
deepest abyss to the highest summit; rising from the ridiculous to the sublime;
without medium or intermission.
Let our young women have an education; let their minds be well informed;
well stored with useful information and practical proficiency, rather than the light
superficial acquirements, popularly and fashionably called accomplishments. We
desire accomplishments, but they must be useful.
Our females must be qualified, because they are to be the mothers of our chil-
dren. As mothers are the first nurses and instructors of children; from them chil-
dren consequently, get their first impressions, which being always the most last-
ing, should be the most correct. Raise the mothers above the level of degradation,
and the offspring is elevated with them. In a word, instead of our young men,
transcribing in their blank books, recipes for Cooking; we desire to see them mak-
ing the transfer of Invoices of Merchandise. Come to our aid then; the morning
of our Redemption from degradation, adorns the horizon.
In our selection of individuals, it will be observed, that we have confined ourself
entirely to those who occupy or have occupied positions among the whites, conse-
quently having a more general bearing as useful contributors to society at large.
While we do not pretend to give all such worthy cases, we gave such as we pos-
sessed information of, and desire it to be understood, that a large number of our
most intelligent and worthy men and women, have not been named, because from
their more private position in community, it was foreign to the object and design of
this work. If we have said aught to offend, “take the will for the deed,” and be
assured, that it was given with the purest of motives, and best intention, from a
true-hearted man and brother; deeply lamenting the sad fate of his race in this
country, and sincerely desiring the elevation of man, and submitted to the serious
consideration of all, who favor the promotion of the cause of God and humanity.
O
XXIV . A GLANCE AT OURSELVES—C ONCLUSION
With broken hopes—sad devastation;
A race resigned to DEGRADATION!
. . . If we did not love our race superior to others, we would not concern ourself
about their degradation; for the greatest desire of our heart is, to see them stand
on a level with the most elevated of mankind. No people are ever elevated above
the condition of their females; hence, the condition of the mother determines the
condition of the child. To know the position of a people, it is only necessary to
know the condition of their females; and despite themselves, they cannot rise
above their level. Then what is our condition? Our best ladies being washer-
women, chambermaids, children’s traveling nurses, and common house servants,


--- PAGE 111 ---
and menials, we are all a degraded, miserable people, inferior to any other peo-
ple as a whole, on the face of the globe.
These great truths, however unpleasant, must be brought before the minds of
our people in its true and proper light, as we have been too delicate about them,
and too long concealed them for fear of giving offence. It would have been infi-
nitely better for our race, if these facts had been presented before us half a cen-
tury ago—we would have been now proportionably benefitted by it.
As an evidence of the degradation to which we have been reduced, we dare
premise, that this chapter will give offence to many, very many, and why? Because
they may say, “He dared to say that the occupation of a servant is a degradation.”
It is not necessarily degrading; it would not be, to one or a few people of a kind;
but a whole race of servants are a degradation to that people.
Efforts made by men of qualifications for the toiling and degraded millions
among the whites, neither gives offence to that class, nor is it taken unkindly by
them; but received with manifestations of gratitude; to know that they are thought
to be, equally worthy of, and entitled to stand on a level with the elevated classes;
and they have only got to be informed of the way to raise themselves, to make the
effort and do so as far as they can. But how different with us. Speak of our posi-
tion in society, and it at once gives insult. Though we are servants; among our-
selves we claim to be ladies and gentlemen, equal in standing, and as the popular
expression goes, “Just as good as any body”—and so believing, we make no efforts
to raise above the common level of menials; because the best being in that capac-
ity, all are content with the position. We cannot at the same time, be domestic and
lady; servant and gentleman. We must be the one or the other. Sad, sad indeed, is
the thought, that hangs drooping in our mind, when contemplating the picture
drawn before us. Young men and women, “we write these things unto you,
because ye are strong,” because the writer, a few years ago, gave unpardonable
offence to many of the young people of Philadelphia and other places, because he
dared tell them, that he thought too much of them, to be content with seeing them
the servants of other people. Surely, she that could be the mistress, would not be
the maid; neither would he that could be the master, be content with being the
servant; then why be offended, when we point out to you, the way that leads from
the menial to the mistress or the master. All this we seem to reject with fixed
determination, repelling with anger, every effort on the part of our intelligent men
and women to elevate us, with true Israelitish degradation, in reply to any sug-
gestion or proposition that may be offered, “Who made thee a ruler and judge?”
The writer is no “Public Man,” in the sense in which this is understood among
our people, but simply an humble individual, endeavoring to seek a livelihood by
a profession obtained entirely by his own efforts, without relatives and friends
able to assist him; except such friends as he gained by the merit of his course and
conduct, which he here gratefully acknowledges; and whatever he has accom-
plished, other young men may, by making corresponding efforts, also accomplish.
In our own country, the United States, there are three million five hundred
thousand slaves; and we, the nominally free colored people, are six hundred thou-
sand in number; estimating one-sixth to be men, we have one hundred thousand
8 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 112 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 8 1
able bodied freemen, which will make a powerful auxiliary in any country to
which we may become adopted—an ally not to be despised by any power on
earth. We love our country, dearly love her, but she doesn’t love us—she despises
us, and bids us begone, driving us from her embraces; but we shall not go where
she desires us; but when we do go, whatever love we have for her, we shall love
the country none the less that receives us as her adopted children.
For the want of business habits and training, our energies have become para-
lyzed; our young men never think of business, any more than if they were so many
bondmen, without the right to pursue any calling they may think most advisable.
With our people in this country, dress and good appearances have been made the
only test of gentleman and ladyship, and that vocation which offers the best
opportunity to dress and appear well, has generally been preferred, however
menial and degrading, by our young people, without even, in the majority of
cases, an effort to do better; indeed, in many instances, refusing situations equally
lucrative, and superior in position; but which would not allow as much display of
dress and personal appearance. This, if we ever expect to rise, must be discarded
from among us, and a high and respectable position assumed.
One of our great temporal curses is our consummate poverty. We are the poor-
est people, as a class, in the world of civilized mankind—abjectly, miserably poor,
no one scarcely being able to assist the other. To this, of course, there are noble
exceptions; but that which is common to, and the very process by which white
men exist, and succeed in life, is unknown to colored men in general. In any and
every considerable community may be found, some one of our white fellow-
citizens, who is worth more than all the colored people in that community put
together. We consequently have little or no efficiency. We must have means to be
practically efficient in all the undertakings of life; and to obtain them, it is neces-
sary that we should be engaged in lucrative pursuits, trades, and general business
transactions. In order to be thus engaged, it is necessary that we should occupy
positions that afford the facilities for such pursuits. To compete now with the
mighty odds of wealth, social and religious preferences, and political influences of
this country, at this advanced stage of its national existence, we never may expect.
A new country, and new beginning, is the only true, rational, politic remedy for
our disadvantageous position; and that country we have already pointed out, with
triple golden advantages, all things considered, to that of any country to which it
has been the province of man to embark.
Every other than we, have at various periods of necessity, been a migratory peo-
ple; and all when oppressed, shown a greater abhorrence of oppression, if not a
greater love of liberty, than we. We cling to our oppressors as the objects of our
love. It is true that our enslaved brethren are here, and we have been led to believe
that it is necessary for us to remain, on that account. Is it true, that all should
remain in degradation, because a part are degraded? We believe no such thing. We
believe it to be the duty of the Free, to elevate themselves in the most speedy and
effective manner possible; as the redemption of the bondman depends entirely
upon the elevation of the freeman; therefore, to elevate the free colored people of
America, anywhere upon this continent; forebodes the speedy redemption of the


--- PAGE 113 ---
slaves. We shall hope to hear no more of so fallacious a doctrine—the necessity of
the free remaining in degradation, for the sake of the oppressed. Let us apply, first,
the lever to ourselves; and the force that elevates us to the position of manhood’s
considerations and honors, will cleft the manacle of every slave in the land.
When such great worth and talents—for want of a better sphere—of men like
Rev. Jonathan Robinson, Robert Douglass, Frederick A. Hinton, and a hundred
others that might be named, were permitted to expire in a barber-shop; and such
living men as may be found in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore,
Richmond, Washington City, Charleston (S.C.), New Orleans, Cincinnati, Louis-
ville, St. Louis, Pittsburg, Buffalo, Rochester, Albany, Utica, Cleveland, Detroit,
Milwaukee, Chicago, Columbus, Zanesville, Wheeling, and a hundred other
places, confining themselves to barber-shops and waiterships in Hotels; certainly
the necessity of such a course as we have pointed out, must be cordially acknowl-
edged; appreciated by every brother and sister of oppression; and not rejected as
heretofore, as though they preferred inferiority to equality. These minds must
become “unfettered,” and have “space to rise.” This cannot be in their present
positions. A continuance in any position, becomes what is termed “Second
Nature”; it begets an adaptation, and reconciliation of mind to such condition. It
changes the whole physiological condition of the system, and adapts man and
woman to a higher or lower sphere in the pursuits of life. The offsprings of slaves
and peasantry, have the general characteristics of their parents; and nothing but
a different course of training and education, will change the character.
The slave may become a lover of his master, and learn to forgive him for con-
tinual deeds of maltreatment and abuse; just as the Spaniel would couch and fon-
dle at the feet that kick him; because he has been taught to reverence them, and
consequently, becomes adapted in body and mind to his condition. Even the
shrubbery-loving Canary, and lofty-soaring Eagle, may be tamed to the cage, and
learn to love it from habit of confinement. It has been so with us in our position
among our oppressors; we have been so prone to such positions, that we have
learned to love them. When reflecting upon this all important, and to us, all
absorbing subject; we feel in the agony and anxiety of the moment, as though we
could cry out in the langauge of a Prophet of old: “Oh that my head were waters,
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the” degra-
dation “of my people! Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfar-
ing men; that I might leave my people, and go from them!”
The Irishman and German in the United States, are very different persons to
what they were when in Ireland and Germany, the countries of their nativity.
There their spirits were depressed and downcast; but the instant they set their
foot upon unrestricted soil; free to act and untrammelled to move; their physical
condition undergoes a change, which in time becomes physiological, which is
transmitted to the offspring, who when born under such circumstances, is a
decidedly different being to what it would have been, had it been born under dif-
ferent circumstances.
8 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 114 ---
M.R. DELANY, A BLACK NATIONALIST MANIFESTO 8 3
A child born under oppression, has all the elements of servility in its constitu-
tion; who when born under favorable circumstances, has to the contrary, all the
elements of freedom and independence of feeling. Our children then, may not be
expected, to maintain that position and manly bearing; born under the unfavor-
able circumstances with which we are surrounded in this country; that we so
much desire. To use the language of the talented Mr. Whipper, “they cannot be
raised in this country, without being stoop shouldered.” Heaven’s pathway stands
unobstructed, which will lead us into a Paradise of bliss. Let us go on and possess
the land, and the God of Israel will be our God.
The lessons of every school book, the pages of every history, and columns of
every newspaper, are so replete with stimuli to nerve us on to manly aspirations,
that those of our young people, who will now refuse to enter upon this great the-
atre of Polynesian adventure, and take their position on the stage of Central and
South America, where a brilliant engagement, of certain and most triumphant
success, in the drama of human equality awaits them; then, with the blood of
slaves, write upon the lintel of every door in sterling Capitals, to be gazed and
hissed at by every passer by—
Doomed by the Creator
To servility and degradation;
The 
SERVANT of the white man,
And despised of every nation!
Notes: 1. The native language of these countries, as well as the greater part of South
America, is Spanish, which is the easiest of all foreign languages to learn. It is very remark-
able and worthy of note, that with a view of going to Mexico or South America, the writer
several years ago paid some attention to the Spanish language; and now, a most singular
coincidence, without preunderstanding, in almost every town, where there is any intelli-
gence among them, there are some colored persons of both sexes, who are studying the
Spanish language. Even the Methodist and other clergymen, among them. And we
earnestly entreat all colored persons who can, to study, and have their children taught
Spanish. No foreign language will be of such importto colored people, in a very short time,
as the Spanish. Mexico, Central and South America, importune us to speak their language;
and if nothing else, the silent indications of Cuba, urge us to learn the Spanish tongue. 
2. The Brazilians have formed a Colonization Society, for the purpose of colonizing free
blacks to Africa. The Brazilians are Portuguese, the only nation that can be termed white,
and the only one that is a real slave holding nation in South America. Even the black and
colored men have equal privileges with whites; and the action of this society will probably
extend only to the sending back of such captives as may be taken from piratical slaves.
Colonization in Brazil, has doubtless been got up under the influence of United States
slaveholders and their abettors, such as the consuls and envoys, who are sent out to South
America, by the government. Chevalier Niteroi, charge de affaires from Brazil near the
government of Liberia, received by the President on the 28th of last January, is also
charged with the mission of establishing a colony of free blacks in Liberia. The Chevalier
was once a Captain in the Brazilian navy on the coast of Africa; and no doubt is conversant
with the sentiments of Roberts, who was charged with the slave trade at one time. The
scheme of United States slaveholders and President J.J. Roberts, their agent of Liberia,


--- PAGE 115 ---
will not succeed, in establishing prejudice against the black race; not even in slaveholding
Brazil. We have no confidence in President Roberts of Liberia, believing him to be wholly
without principle—seeking only self-aggrandizement; even should it be done, over the
ruined prospects of his staggering infant country. The people of Liberia, should beware of
this man. His privy councillors are to be found among slaveholders in the United States.
Source: Excerpt from The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored
People of the United States, Politically Considered(Philadelphia: Privately Printed, 1852).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Tunde Adeleke, “Martin R. Delany’s Philosophy of Education: A Neglected Aspect of African
American Liberation Thought,” Journal of Negro Education63, no. 2 (Spring 1994), pp.
221–36.
Benjamin G. Brawley, Early Negro American Writers (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1935).
Cyril E. Griffith, The African Dream: Martin R. Delany and the Emergence of Pan-African
Thought (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1975).
Robert S. Levine Martin, ed., Martin R. Delany: A Documentary Reader (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2003).
Tolagbe Ogunleye, “Dr. Martin Robison Delany, 19th-Century Africana Womanists:
Reflections on His Avant-Garde Politics Concerning Gender, Colorism, and Nation
Building,” Journal of Black Studies28, no. 5 (May 1998), pp. 628–49.
Tommie Shelby, “Two Conceptions of Black Nationalism: Martin Delany on the Meaning of
Black Political Solidarity,” Political Theory31, no. 5 (October 2003), pp. 664–92.
Dorothy Sterling, The Making of an Afro-American: Martin Robinson Delany, 1812–1885
(New York: Da Capo Press, 1996).
Victor Ullman, Martin R. Delany: The Beginnings of Black Nationalism (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1971).
O18 O
“What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” Frederick Douglass, 1852
Frederick Douglass (1818–1895) was the most influential African-American
leader of the nineteenth century. After escaping from slavery in 1838, Douglass
worked as an agent for the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society. Douglass was so
eloquent as a public speaker that many whites doubted that he had ever been a
slave. Partially to silence his critics, Douglass authored Narrative of the Life of
Frederick Douglass in 1845. After the publication of the autobiography, Douglass
was forced to leave the United States, living for two years in Great Britain. In
1847, returning to the United States, Douglass established The North Star news-
paper, which was later renamed Frederick Douglass’ Paper. Douglass was a prom-
inent abolitionist, but was also extensively involved in many other reform move-
ments, especially women’s suffrage. After the Civil War, Douglass became a
central figure in the national Republican Party.
8 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 116 ---
F . DOUGLASS, “WHAT TO THE SLAVE . . .” 8 5
O
Fellow Citizens: Pardon me, and allow me to ask, why am I called upon to speak
here today? What have I or those I represent to do with your national indepen-
dence? Are the great principles of political freedom and of natural justice,
embodied in that Declaration of Independence, extended to us? And am I, there-
fore, called upon to bring our humble offering to the national altar, and to con-
fess the benefits, and express devout gratitude for the blessings resulting from
your independence to us?
Would to God, both for your sakes and ours, that an affirmative answer could
be truthfully returned to these questions. Then would my task be light, and my
burden easy and delightful. For who is there so cold that a nation’s sympathy
could not warm him? Who so obdurate and dead to the claims of gratitude, that
would not thankfully acknowledge such priceless benefits? Who so stolid and self-
ish that would not give his voice to swell the halleluiahs of a nation’s jubilee, when
the chains of servitude had been torn from his limbs? I am not that man. In a case
like that, the dumb might eloquently speak, and the “lame man leap like a hare.”
But such is not the state of the case. I say it with a sad sense of disparity
between us. I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary! Your
high independence only reveals the immeasurable distance between us. The bless-
ings in which you this day rejoice are not enjoyed in common. The rich inheritance
of justice, liberty, prosperity, and independence bequeathed by your fathers is
shared by you, not by me. The sunlight that brought life and healing to you has
brought stripes and death to me. This Fourth of July is yours, not mine. You may
rejoice, I must mourn. To drag a man in fetters into the grand illuminated temple
of liberty, and call upon him to join you in joyous anthems, were inhuman mock-
ery and sacrilegious irony. Do you mean, citizens, to mock me, by asking me to
speak today? If so, there is a parallel to your conduct. And let me warn you, that it
is dangerous to copy the example of a nation whose crimes, towering up to heaven,
were thrown down by the breath of the Almighty, burying that nation in irrecov-
erable ruin. I can today take up the lament of a peeled and woe-smitten people.
“By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down. Yes! We wept when we remem-
bered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof. For
there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song; and they who
wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. How can
we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land? If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my
right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave
to the roof of my mouth.”
Fellow citizens, above your national, tumultuous joy, I hear the mournful wail of
millions, whose chains, heavy and grievous yesterday, are today rendered more intol-
erable by the jubilant shouts that reach them. If I do forget, if I do not remember
those bleeding children of sorrow this day, “may my right hand forget her cunning,
and may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth!” To forget them, to pass lightly
over their wrongs, and to chime in with the popular theme, would be treason most


--- PAGE 117 ---
scandalous and shocking, and would make me a reproach before God and the world.
My subject, then, fellow citizens, is “American Slavery.” I shall see this day and its
popular characteristics from the slave’s point of view. Standing here, identified with
the American bondman, making his wrongs mine, I do not hesitate to declare, with
all my soul, that the character and conduct of this nation never looked blacker to me
than on this Fourth of July. Whether we turn to the declarations of the past, or to the
professions of the present, the conduct of the nation seems equally hideous and
revolting. America is false to the past, false to the present, and solemnly binds her-
self to be false to the future. Standing with God and the crushed and bleeding slave
on this occasion, I will, in the name of humanity, which is outraged, in the name of
liberty, which is fettered, in the name of the Constitution and the Bible, which are
disregarded and trampled upon, dare to call in question and to denounce, with all
the emphasis I can command, everything that serves to perpetuate slavery—the
great sin and shame of America! “I will not equivocate; I will not excuse”; I will use
the severest language I can command, and yet not one word shall escape me that any
man, whose judgment is not blinded by prejudice, or who is not at heart a slave-
holder, shall not confess to be right and just.
But I fancy I hear some of my audience say it is just in this circumstance that
you and your brother Abolitionists fail to make a favorable impression on the pub-
lic mind. Would you argue more and denounce less, would you persuade more and
rebuke less, your cause would be much more likely to succeed. But, I submit,
where all is plain there is nothing to be argued. What point in the antislavery creed
would you have me argue? On what branch of the subject do the people of this
country need light? Must I undertake to prove that the slave is a man? That point
is conceded already. Nobody doubts it. The slaveholders themselves acknowledge
it in the enactment of laws for their government. They acknowledge it when they
punish disobedience on the part of the slave. There are seventy-two crimes in the
State of Virginia, which, if committed by a black man (no matter how ignorant he
be), subject him to the punishment of death; while only two of these same crimes
will subject a white man to like punishment. What is this but the acknowledgment
that the slave is a moral, intellectual, and responsible being? The manhood of the
slave is conceded. It is admitted in the fact that Southern statute-books are covered
with enactments, forbidding, under severe fines and penalties, the teaching of the
slave to read and write. When you can point to any such laws in reference to the
beasts of the field, then I may consent to argue the manhood of the slave. When
the dogs in your streets, when the fowls of the air, when the cattle on your hills,
when the fish of the sea, and the reptiles that crawl, shall be unable to distinguish
the slave from a brute, then I will argue with you that the slave is a man!
For the present it is enough to affirm the equal manhood of the Negro race. Is
it not astonishing that, while we are plowing, planting, and reaping, using all kinds
of mechanical tools, erecting houses, constructing bridges, building ships, working
in metals of brass, iron, copper, silver, and gold; that while we are reading, writing,
and cyphering, acting as clerks, merchants, and secretaries, having among us
lawyers, doctors, ministers, poets, authors, editors, orators, and teachers; that
while we are engaged in all the enterprises common to other men—digging gold
8 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 118 ---
F . DOUGLASS, “WHAT TO THE SLAVE . . .” 8 7
in California, capturing the whale in the Pacific, feeding sheep and cattle on the
hillside, living, moving, acting, thinking, planning, living in families as husbands,
wives, and children, and above all, confessing and worshipping the Christian God,
and looking hopefully for life and immortality beyond the grave—we are called
upon to prove that we are men?
Would you have me argue that man is entitled to liberty? That he is the right-
ful owner of his own body? You have already declared it. Must I argue the wrong-
fulness of slavery? Is that a question for republicans? Is it to be settled by the
rules of logic and argumentation, as a matter beset with great difficulty, involving
a doubtful application of the principle of justice, hard to understand? How should
I look today in the presence of Americans, dividing and subdividing a discourse,
to show that men have a natural right to freedom, speaking of it relatively and
positively, negatively and affirmatively? To do so would be to make myself ridicu-
lous, and to offer an insult to your understanding. There is not a man beneath the
canopy of heaven who does not know that slavery is wrong for him.
What! Am I to argue that it is wrong to make men brutes, to rob them of their
liberty, to work them without wages, to keep them ignorant of their relations to
their fellow men, to beat them with sticks, to flay their flesh with the last, to load
their limbs with irons, to hunt them with dogs, to sell them at auction, to sunder
their families, to knock out their teeth, to burn their flesh, to starve them into
obedience and submission to their masters? Must I argue that a system thus
marked with blood and stained with pollution is wrong? No; I will not. I have bet-
ter employment for my time and strength than such arguments would imply.
What, then, remains to be argued? Is it that slavery is not divine; that God
did not establish it; that our doctors of divinity are mistaken? There is blas-
phemy in the thought. That which is inhuman cannot be divine. Who can rea-
son on such a proposition? They that can, may; I cannot. The time for such
argument is past.
At a time like this, scorching irony, not convincing argument, is needed. Oh!
had I the ability, and could I reach the nation’s ear, I would today pour out a fiery
stream of biting ridicule, blasting reproach, withering sarcasm, and stern rebuke.
For it is not light that is needed, but fire; it is not the gentle shower, but thunder.
We need the storm, the whirlwind, and the earthquake. The feeling of the nation
must be quickened; the conscience of the nation must be roused; the propriety of
the nation must be startled; the hypocrisy of the nation must be exposed; and its
crimes against God and man must be denounced.
What to the American slave is your Fourth of July? I answer, a day that reveals
to him more than all other days of the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to
which he is the constant victim. To him your celebration is a sham; your boasted
liberty an unholy license; your national greatness, swelling vanity; your sounds of
rejoicing are empty and heartless; your denunciation of tyrants, brass-fronted
impudence; your shouts of liberty and equality, hollow mockery; your prayers
and hymns, your sermons and thanksgivings, with all your religious parade and
solemnity, are to him mere bombast, fraud, deception, impiety, and hypocrisy—
a thin veil to cover up crimes which would disgrace a nation of savages. There is


--- PAGE 119 ---
not a nation of the earth guilty of practices more shocking and bloody than are
the people of these United States at this very hour.
Go where you may, search where you will, roam through all the monarchies
and despotisms of the Old World, travel through South America, search out every
abuse and when you have found the last, lay your facts by the side of the every-
day practices of this nation, and you will say with me that, for revolting barbarity
and shameless hypocrisy, America reigns without a rival.
Source: Alice Moore Dunbar, ed., Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence (New York: Bookery
Publishing, 1914), pp. 42–47.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
William L. Andrews, Critical Essays on Frederick Douglass(Boston: G.K. Hall, 1991).
John Blassingame, ed., The Frederick Douglass Papers, 2 Vols. (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1979).
James A. Colaiaco, Frederick Douglass and the Fourth of July (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2006).
Frederick Douglass, My Bondage, My Freedom (New York: Miller, Orton and Mulligan,
1885).
———, Life and Times of Frederick Douglass. Written by Himself. His Early Life as a Slave,
His Escape from Bondage, and His Complete History to the Present Time, including His
Connection with the Anti-Slavery Movement (new revised edition, Boston: Dewolfe
Fishe, 1892).
Philip S. Foner, Frederick Douglass, a Biography(New York: Citadel Press, 1964).
Nathan I. Huggins, Slave and Citizen: The Life of Frederick Douglass (New York: Harper
Collins, 1980).
Christoph K. Lohmann, ed., Radical Passion: Ottilie Assing’s Reports from America and
Letters to Frederick Douglass, trans. Christoph K. Lohmann (New York: P . Lang, 1999).
Waldo Martin, The Mind of Frederick Douglass(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1984).
James Oakes, The Radical and the Republican: Frederick Douglass, Abraham Lincoln, and
the Triumph of Antislavery Politics(New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 2007).
O19 O
“No Rights That a White Man Is Bound to Respect”: 
The Dred Scott Case and Its Aftermath
Dred Scott (1795–1858) was born a slave in Southampton, Virginia, and later
became a litigator in one of the most famous cases of the nineteenth century.
Scott sued for his freedom, and in a second trial, won on the grounds that his slave
status was nullified when his master took him to Illinois (a free state) and
Wisconsin (a free territory). In 1857, however, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled
against Scott. Because slaves were not legal citizens, they were deemed to have
no standing in the courts. Chief Justice Roger B. Taney’s decision went well
beyond the actual details of the case, by voiding the Missouri Compromise of
1820, and permitting the expansion of slavery into states that had been defined as
8 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 120 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 8 9
free. The decision greatly accelerated political conflict over the issue of slavery,
leading to the Civil War. Frederick Douglass and other abolitionists immediately
denounced this decision. Immediately after the Supreme Court’s negative deci-
sion, Scott’s owner, Irene Emerson, freed him.
O
Dred Scott vs. Alex. Sandford, Saml. Russell, and Irene Emerson
To the Honorable, the Circuit Court within and for the County of St. Louis.
Your petitioner, Dred Scott, a man of color, respectfully represents that sometime
in the year 1835 your petitioner was purchased as a slave by one John Emerson,
since deceased, who afterwards, to-wit; about the year 1836 or 1837, conveyed
your petitioner from the State of Missouri to Fort Snelling, a fort then occupied
by the troops of the United States and under the jurisdiction of the United States,
situated in the territory ceded by France to the United States under the name of
Louisiana, lying north of 36 degrees and 30 ′ North latitude, now included in the
State of Missouri, and resided and continued to reside at Fort Snelling upwards
of one year, and held your petitioner in slavery at such Fort during all that time
in violation of the Act of Congress of 1806 and 1820, entitled An Act to Authorize
the People of Missouri Territory to form a Constitution and State Government,
and for the admission of such State into the Union on an equal footing with the
original states, and to Prohibit Slavery in Certain Territories.
Your petitioner avers that said Emerson has since departed this life, leaving his
widow Irene Emerson and an infant child whose name is unknown to your peti-
tioner; and that one Alexander Sandford administered upon the estate of said
Emerson and that your petitioner is now unlawfully held in slavery by said
Sandford and by said administrator and said Irene Emerson claims your peti-
tioner as part of the estate of said Emerson and by one Samuel Russell.
Your petitioner therefore prays your Honorable Court to grant him leave to
sue as a poor person, in order to establish his right to freedom, and that the nec-
essary orders may be made in the premises.
Dred Scott
State of Missouri
County of St. Louis
This day personally came before me, the undersigned, a Justice of the Peace,
Dred Scott, the person whose name is affixed to the foregoing petition, and made
oath that the facts set forth in the above petition are true to the best of his knowl-
edge and belief, that he is entitled to his freedom. Witness my hand this 1st day
of July, 1847.
his
Dred X Scott
mark
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 1st day of July, 1847.
Peter W. Johnstone
Justice of the Peace


--- PAGE 121 ---
O
ROGER B. TANEY, OPINION ON DRED SCOTT V. SANDFORD
The question is simply this: Can a Negro, whose ancestors were imported into this
country, and sold as slaves, become a member of the political community formed
and brought into existence by the Constitution of the United States, and as such
become entitled to all the rights, and privileges, and immunities, guaranteed by
that instrument to the citizen? One of which rights is the privilege of suing in a
court of the United States in the cases specified in the Constitution.
It will be observed, that the plea applies to that class of persons only whose
ancestors were Negroes of the African race, and imported into this country, and
sold and held as slaves. The only matter in issue before the court, therefore, is
whether the descendants of such slaves, when they shall be emancipated, or who
are born of parents who had become free before their birth, are citizens of a
State, in the sense in which the word citizen is used in the Constitution of the
United States. . . .
The words “people of the United States” and “citizens” are synonymous terms,
and mean the same thing. They both describe the political body who, according
to our republican institutions, from the sovereignty, and who hold the power and
conduct the government through their representatives. They are what we famil-
iarly call the “sovereign people,” and every citizen is one of this people, and a con-
stituent member of this sovereignty. The question before us is, whether the class
of persons described in the plea in abatement compose a portion of this people,
and are constituent members of this sovereignty? We think they are not, and that
they are not included, and were not intended to be included, under the word “cit-
izens” in the Constitution, and can, therefore, claim none of the rights and privi-
leges which that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the United
States. On the contrary, they were at that time considered as a subordinate and
inferior class of beings, who had been subjugated by the dominant race, and
whether emancipated or not, yet remained subject to their authority, and had no
rights or privileges but such as those who held the power and the government
might choose to grant them. . . .
It is very clear, therefore, that no State can, by any Act or law of its own, passed
since the adoption of the Constitution, introduce a new member into the political
community created by the Constitution of the United States. It cannot make him
a member of this community by making him a member of its own. And for the
same reason it cannot introduce any person, or description of persons, who were
not intended to be embraced in this new political family, which the Constitution
brought into existence, but were intended to be excluded from it. . . .
In the opinion of the court, the legislation and histories of the times, and the
language used in the Declaration of Independence, show, that neither the class of
persons who had been imported as slaves, nor their descendants, whether they
had become free or not, were then acknowledged as a part of the people, nor
intended to be included in the general words used in that memorable instrument.
It is difficult at this day to realize the state of public opinion in relation to that
9 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 122 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 9 1
unfortunate race, which prevailed in the civilized and enlightened portions of the
world at the time of the Declaration of Independence, and when the Constitution
of the United States was framed and adopted. . . .
They had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an infe-
rior order and altogether unfit to associate with the white race, either in social or
political relations; and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man
was bound to respect; and that the Negro might justly and lawfully be reduced to
slavery for his benefit. He was bought and sold and treated as an ordinary article
of merchandise and traffic whenever a profit could be made by it. This opinion
was at that time fixed and universal in the civilized portion of the white race. It
was regarded as an axiom in morals as well. . . .
. . . A Negro of the African race was regarded . . . as an article of property and
held and bought and sold as such in every one of the thirteen Colonies which
united in the Declaration of Independence and afterward formed the
Constitution of the United States. The slaves were more or less numerous in the
different Colonies, as slave labor was found more or less profitable. But no one
seems to have doubted the correctness of the prevailing opinion of the time. . . .
The language of the Declaration of Independence is equally conclusive:
It begins by declaring that “When, in the course of human events, it becomes
necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected
them with another, and to assume, among the powers of the earth the separate
and equal station to which the laws of nature and nature’s God entitle them, a
decent respect for the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation.”
It then proceeds to say: “We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men
are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to
secure these rights, governments are instituted, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed.”
The general words above quoted would seem to embrace the whole human
family, and if they were used in a similar instrument at this day would be so
understood. But it is too clear for dispute that the enslaved African race were not
intended to be included and formed no part of the people who framed and
adopted this declaration; for if the language, as understood in that day, would
embrace them, the conduct of the distinguished men who framed the Declaration
of Independence would have been utterly and flagrantly inconsistent with the
principles they asserted; and instead of the sympathy of mankind, to which they
so confidently appealed, they would have deserved and received universal rebuke
and reprobation.
Yet the men who framed this declaration were great men—high in literary
acquirements—high in their sense of honor, and incapable of asserting principles
inconsistent with those on which they were acting. They perfectly understood the
meaning of the language they used and how it would be understood by others;
and they knew that it would not in any part of the civilized world be supposed to
embrace the Negro race, which, by common consent, had been excluded from


--- PAGE 123 ---
civilized governments and the family of nations and doomed to slavery. They
spoke and acted according to the then established doctrine and principles and in
the ordinary language of the day, and no one misunderstood them. The unhappy
black race were separated from the white by indelible marks, and laws long
before established, and were never thought of or spoken of except as property
and when the claims of the owner or the profit of the trader were supposed to
need protection.
This state of public opinion had undergone no change when the Constitution
was adopted, as is equally evident from its provisions and language.
The brief preamble sets forth by whom it was formed, for what purposes, and
for whose benefit and protection. It declares that it is formed by the people of the
United States; that is to say, by those who were members of the different politi-
cal communities in the several states; and its great object is declared to be to
secure the blessing of liberty to themselves and their posterity. It speaks in gen-
eral terms of the people of the United States, and of citizens of the several states,
when it is providing for the exercise of the powers granted or the privileges
secured to the citizen. It does not define what description of persons are intended
to be included under these terms, or who shall be regarded as a citizen and one
of the people. It uses them as terms so well understood that no further descrip-
tion or definition was necessary. . . .
But there are two clauses in the Constitution which point directly and specifi-
cally to the Negro race as a separate class of persons, and show clearly that they
were not regarded as a portion of the people or citizens of the Government then
formed.
One of these clauses reserves to each of the thirteen States the right to import
slaves until the year 1808, if it thinks it proper. And the importation which it thus
sanctions was unquestionably of persons of the race of which we are speaking, as
the traffic in slaves in the United States had always been confined to them. And
by the other provision the States pledge themselves to each other to maintain the
right of property of the master, by delivering up to him any slave who may have
escaped from his service, and be found within their respective territories. . . . And
these two provisions show, conclusively, that neither the description of persons
therein referred to, nor their descendants, were embraced in any of the other
provisions of the Constitution; for certainly these two clauses were not intended
to confer on them or their posterity the blessings of liberty, or any of the personal
rights so carefully provided for the citizen. . . .
Indeed, when we look to the condition of this race in the several States at the
time, it is impossible to believe that these rights and privileges were intended to
be extended to them. . . .
The legislation of the States therefore shows, in a manner not to be mistaken,
the inferior and subject condition of that race at the time the Constitution was
adopted, and long afterwards, throughout the thirteen States by which that
instrument was framed; and it is hardly consistent with the respect due to these
States, to suppose that they regarded at that time, as fellow-citizens and members
of the sovereignty, a class of beings whom they had thus stigmatized.
9 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 124 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 9 3
O
FREDERICK DOUGLASS’S SPEECH DENOUNCING THE DECISION
While four millions of our fellow countrymen are in chains—while men, women,
and children are bought and sold on the auction-block with horses, sheep, and
swine—while the remorseless slave-whip draws the warm blood of our common
humanity—it is meet that we assemble as we have done today, and lift up our
hearts and voices in earnest denunciation of the vile and shocking abomination.
It is not for us to be governed by our hopes or our fears in this great work; yet it
is natural on occasions like this, to survey the position of the great struggle which
is going on between slavery and freedom, and to dwell upon such signs of encour-
agement as may have been lately developed, and the state of feeling these signs
or events have occasioned in us and among the people generally. It is a fitting time
to take an observation to ascertain where we are, and what our prospects are.
To many, the prospects of the struggle against slavery seem far from cheering.
Eminent men, North and South, in Church and State, tell us that the omens are
all against us. Emancipation, they tell us, is a wild, delusive idea; the price of
human flesh was never higher than now; slavery was never more closely entwined
about the hearts and affections of the southern people than now; that whatever of
conscientious scruple, religious conviction, or public policy, which opposed the
system of slavery forty or fifty years ago, has subsided; and that slavery never
reposed upon a firmer basis than now. Completing this picture of the happy and
prosperous condition of this system of wickedness, they tell us that this state of
things is to be set to our account. Abolition agitation has done it all. How deep is
the misfortune of my poor, bleeding people, if this be so! How lost their condi-
tion, if even the efforts of their friends but sink them deeper in ruin!
Without assenting to this strong representation of the increasing strength and
stability of slavery, without denouncing what of untruth pervades it, I own myself
not insensible to the many difficulties and discouragements that beset us on every
hand. They fling their broad and gloomy shadows across the pathway of every
thoughtful colored man in this country. For one, I see them clearly, and feel them
sadly. With an earnest, aching heart, I have long looked for the realization of the
hope of my people. Standing, as it were, barefoot, and treading upon the sharp
and flinty rocks of the present, and looking out upon the boundless sea of the
future, I have sought, in my humble way, to penetrate the intervening mists and
clouds, and, perchance, to descry, in the dim and shadowy distance, the white flag
of freedom, the precise speck of time at which the cruel bondage of my people
should end, and the long entombed millions rise from the foul grave of slavery
and death. But of that time I can know nothing, and you can know nothing. All is
uncertain at that point. One thing, however, is certain; slaveholders are in earnest,
and mean to cling to their slaves as long as they can, and to the bitter end. They
show no sign of a wish to quit their iron grasp upon the sable throats of their vic-
tims. Their motto is, “a firmer hold and a tighter grip” for every new effort that is
made to break their cruel power. The case is one of life or death with them, and
they will give up only when they must do that or do worse.


--- PAGE 125 ---
In one view the slaveholders have a decided advantage over all opposition. It
is well to notice this advantage—the advantage of complete organization. They
are organized; and yet were not at the pains of creating their organizations. The
State governments, where the system of slavery exists, are complete slavery orga-
nizations. The church organizations in those States are equally at the service of
slavery; while the Federal Government, with its army and navy, from the chief
magistracy in Washington, to the Supreme Court, and thence to the chief mar-
shalship at New York, is pledged to support, defend, and propagate the crying
curse of human bondage. The pen, the purse, and the sword, are united against
the simple truth, preached by humble men in obscure places.
This is one view. It is, thank God, only one view; there is another, and a
brighter view. David, you know, looked small and insignificant when going to
meet Goliath, but looked larger when he had slain his foe. The Malakoff was, to
the eye of the world, impregnable, till the hour it fell before the shot and shell of
the allied army. Thus hath it ever been. Oppression, organized as ours is, will
appear invincible up to the very hour of its fall. Sir, let us look at the other side,
and see if there are not some things to cheer our heart and nerve us up anew in
the good work of emancipation.
Take this fact—for it is a fact—the anti-slavery movement has, from first to
last, suffered no abatement. It has gone forth in all directions, and is now felt in
the remotest extremities of the Republic.
It started small, and was without capital either in men or money. The odds
were all against it. It literally had nothing to lose, and everything to gain. There
was ignorance to be enlightened, error to be combatted, conscience to be awak-
ened, prejudice to be overcome, apathy to be aroused, the right of speech to be
secured, mob violence to be subdued, and a deep, radical change to be inwrought
in the mind and heart of the whole nation. This great work, under God, has gone
on, and gone on gloriously.
Amid all changes, fluctuations, assaults, and adverses of every kind, it has
remained firm in its purpose, steady in its aim, onward and upward, defying all
opposition, and never losing a single battle. Our strength is in the growth of anti-
slavery conviction, and this has never halted.
There is a significant vitality about this abolition movement. It has taken a
deeper, broader, and more lasting hold upon the national heart than ordinary
reform movements. Other subjects of much interest come and go, expand and
contract, blaze and vanish, but the huge question of American Slavery, compre-
hending, as it does, not merely the weal or the woe of four millions, and their
countless posterity, but the weal or the woe of this entire nation, must increase in
magnitude and in majesty with every hour of its history. From a cloud not bigger
than a man’s hand, it has overspread the heavens. It has risen from a grain not big-
ger than a mustard seed. Yet see the fowls of the air, how they crowd its branches.
Politicians who cursed it, now defend it; ministers, once dumb, now speak in
its praise; and presses, which once flamed with hot denunciations against it, now
surround the sacred cause as by a wall of living fire. Politicians go with it as a pil-
9 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 126 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 9 5
lar of cloud by day, and the press as a pillar of fire by night. With these ancient
tokens of success, I, for one, will not despair of our cause.
Those who have undertaken to suppress and crush out this agitation for
Liberty and humanity, have been most woefully disappointed. Many who have
engaged to put it down, have found themselves put down. The agitation has pur-
sued them in all their meanderings, broken in upon their seclusion, and, at the
very moment of fancied security, it has settled down upon them like a mantle of
unquenchable fire. Clay, Calhoun, and Webster each tried his hand at suppress-
ing the agitation; and they went to their graves disappointed and defeated.
Loud and exultingly have we been told that the slavery question is settled, and
settled forever. You remember it was settled thirty-seven years ago, when
Missouri was admitted into the Union with a slaveholding constitution, and slav-
ery prohibited in all territory north of thirty-six degrees of north latitude. Just fif-
teen years afterwards, it was settled again by voting down the right of petition,
and gagging down free discussion in Congress. Ten years after this it was settled
again by the annexation of Texas, and with it the war with Mexico. In 1850 it was
again settled. This was called a final settlement. By it slavery was virtually
declared to be the equal of Liberty, and should come into the Union on the same
terms. By it the right and the power to hunt down men, women, and children, in
every part of this country, was conceded to our southern brethren, in order to
keep them in the Union. Four years after this settlement, the whole question was
once more settled, and settled by a settlement which unsettled all the former set-
tlements.
The fact is, the more the question has been settled, the more it has needed set-
tling. The space between the different settlements has been strikingly on the
decrease. The first stood longer than any of its successors.
This last settlement must be called the Taney settlement. We are now—the
second, ten years—the third, five years—the fourth stood four years—and the
fifth has stood the brief space of two years.
This last settlement must be called the Taney settlement. We are now told, in
tones of lofty exultation, that the day is lost—all lost—and that we might as well
give up the struggle. The highest authority has spoken. The voice of the Supreme
Court has gone out over the troubled waves of the National Conscience, saying
peace, be still.
This infamous decision of the Slaveholding wing of the Supreme Court main-
tains that slaves are within the contemplation of the Constitution of the United
States, property; that slaves are property in the same sense that horses, sheep, and
swine are property; that the old doctrine that slavery is a creature of local law is
false; that the right of the slaveholder to his slave does not depend upon the local
law, but is secured wherever the Constitution of the United States extends; that
Congress has no right to prohibit slavery anywhere; that slavery may go in safety
anywhere under the star-spangled banner; that colored persons of African
descent have no rights that white men are bound to respect; that colored men of
African descent are not and cannot be citizens of the United States.


--- PAGE 127 ---
You will readily ask me how I am affected by this devilish decision—this judi-
cial incarnation of wolfishness? My answer is, and no thanks to the slaveholding
wing of the Supreme Court, my hopes were never brighter than now.
I have no fear that the National Conscience will be put to sleep by such an
open, glaring, and scandalous tissue of lies as that decision is, and has been, over
and over, shown to be.
The Supreme Court of the United States is not the only power in this world.
It is very great, but the Supreme Court of the Almighty is greater. Judge Taney
can do many things, but he cannot perform impossibilities. He cannot bale out
the ocean, annihilate the firm old earth, or pluck the silvery star of liberty from
our Northern sky. He may decide, and decide again; but he cannot reverse the
decision of the Most High. He cannot change the essential nature of things—
making evil good, and good evil.
Happily for the whole human family, their rights have been defined, declared,
and decided in a court higher than the Supreme Court. “There is a law,” says
Brougham, “above all the enactments of human codes, and by that law, unchange-
able and eternal, man cannot hold property in man.”
Your fathers have said that man’s right to liberty is self-evident. There is no
need of argument to make it clear. The voices of nature, of conscience, of reason,
and of revelation, proclaim it as the right of all rights, the foundation of all trust,
and of all responsibility. Man was born with it. It was his before he comprehended
it. The deed conveying it to him is written in the center of his soul, and is recorded
in Heaven. The sun in the sky is not more palpable to the sight than man’s right
to liberty is to the moral vision. To decide against this right in the person of Dred
Scott, or the humblest and most whip-scarred bondman in the land, is to decide
against God. It is an open rebellion against God’s government. It is an attempt to
undo what God has done, to blot out the broad distinction instituted by the
Allwise between men and things, and to change the image and superscription of
the everliving God into a speechless piece of merchandise.
Such a decision cannot stand. God will be true though every man be a liar. We
can appeal from this hell-black judgment of the Supreme Court, to the court of
common sense and common humanity. We can appeal from man to God. If there
is no justice on earth, there is yet justice in heaven. You may close your Supreme
Court against the black man’s cry for justice, but you cannot, thank God, close
against him the ear of a sympathising world, nor shut up the Court of Heaven. All
that is merciful and just, on earth and in Heaven, will execrate and despise this
edict of Taney.
If it were at all likely that the people of these free States would tamely submit
to this demoniacal judgment, I might feel gloomy and sad over it, and possibly it
might be necessary for my people to look for a home in some other country. But
as the case stands, we have nothing to fear.
In one point of view, we, the abolitionists and colored people, should meet this
decision, unlooked for and monstrous as it appears, in a cheerful spirit. This very
attempt to blot out forever the hopes of an enslaved people may be one necessary
9 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 128 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 9 7
link in the chain of events preparatory to the downfall and complete overthrow of
the whole slave system.
The whole history of the anti-slavery movement is studded with proof that all
measures devised and executed with a view to ally and diminish the anti-slavery
agitation, have only served to increase, intensify, and embolden that agitation.
This wisdom of the crafty has been confounded, and the counsels of the ungodly
brought to nought. It was so with the Fugitive Slave Bill. It was so with the
Kansas-Nebraska Bill; and it will be so with this last and most shocking of all pro-
slavery devices, this Taney decision.
When great transactions are involved, where the fate of millions is concerned,
where a long enslaved and suffering people are to be delivered, I am superstitious
enough to believe that the finger of the Almighty may be seen bringing good out
of evil, and making the wrath of man redound to his honor, hastening the triumph
of righteousness.
The American people have been called upon, in a most striking manner, to
abolish and put away forever the system of slavery. The subject has been pressed
upon their attention in all earnestness and sincerity. The cries of the slave have
gone forth to the world, and up to the throne of God. This decision, in my view,
is a means of keeping the nation awake on the subject. It is another proof that
God does not mean that we shall go to sleep, and forget that we are a slavehold-
ing nation.
Step by step we have seen the slave power advancing; poisoning, corrupting,
and perverting the institutions of the country; growing more and more haughty,
imperious, and exacting. The white man’s liberty has been marked out for the
same grave with the black man’s.
The ballot box is desecrated, God’s law set at nought, armed legislators stalk
the halls of Congress, freedom of speech is beaten down in the Senate. The rivers
and highways are infested by border ruffians, and white men are made to feel the
iron heel of slavery. This ought to arouse us to kill off the hateful thing. They are
solemn warnings to which the white people, as well as the black people, should
take heed.
If these shall fail, judgment, more fierce or terrible, may come. The lightning,
whirlwind, and earthquake may come. Jefferson said that he trembled for his
country when he reflected that God is just, and his justice cannot sleep forever.
The time may come when even the crushed worm may turn under the tyrant’s
feet. Goaded by cruelty, stung by a burning sense of wrong, in an awful moment
of depression and desperation, the bondman and bondwoman at the south may
rush to one wild and deadly struggle for freedom. Already slaveholders go to bed
with bowie knives, and apprehend death at their dinners. Those who enslave, rob,
and torment their cooks, may well expect to find death in their dinner-pots.
The world is full of violence and fraud, and it would be strange if the slave, the
constant victim of both fraud and violence, should escape the contagion. He, too,
may learn to fight the devil with fire, and for one, I am in no frame of mind to
pray that this may be long deferred.


--- PAGE 129 ---
Two remarkable occurrences have followed the presidential election; one was
the unaccountable sickness traced to the National Hotel at Washington, and the
other was the discovery of a plan among the slaves, in different localities, to slay
their oppressors. Twenty or thirty of the suspected were put to death. Some were
shot, some hanged, some burned, and some died under the lash. One brave man
owned himself well acquainted with the conspiracy, but said he would rather die
than disclose the facts. He received seven hundred and fifty lashes, and his noble
spirit went away to the God who gave it. The name of this hero has been by the
meanness of tyrants suppressed. Such a man redeems his race. He is worthy to be
mentioned with the Hoffers and Tells, the noblest heroes of history. These insur-
rectionary movements have been put down, but they may break out at any time,
under the guidance of higher intelligence, and with a more invincible spirit.
The fire thus kindled, may be revived again;
The flames are extinguished, but the embers remain;
One terrible blast may produce an ignition,
Which shall wrap the whole South in wild conflagration.
The pathway of tyrants lies over volcanoes
The very air they breathe is heavy with sorrows;
Agonizing heart-throbs convulse them while sleeping,
And the wind whispers Death as over them sweeping.
By all the laws of nature, civilization, and of progress, slavery is a doomed sys-
tem. Not all the skill of politicians, North and South, not all the sophistries of
Judges, not all the fulminations of a corrupt press, not all the hypocritical prayers,
or the hypocritical refusals to pray of a hollow-hearted priesthood, not all the
devices of sin and Satan, can save the vile thing from extermination.
Already a gleam of hope breaks upon us from the southwest. One Southern
city has grieved and astonished the whole South by a preference for freedom. The
wedge has entered. Dred Scott, of Missouri, goes into slavery, but St. Louis
declares for freedom. The judgment of Taney is not the judgment of St. Louis.
It may be said that this demonstration in St. Louis is not to be taken as an evi-
dence of sympathy with the slave; that it is purely a white man’s victory. I admit
it. Yet I am glad that white men, bad as they generally are, should gain a victory
over slavery. I am willing to accept a judgment against slavery, whether supported
by white or black reasons—though I would much rather have it supported by
both. He that is not against us, is on our part.
Come what will, I hold it to be morally certain that, sooner or later, by fair
means or foul means, in quiet or in tumult, in peace or in blood, in judgment or
in mercy, slavery is doomed to cease out of this otherwise goodly land, and liberty
is destined to become the settled law of this Republic.
I base my sense of the certain overthrow of slavery, in part, upon the nature of
the American Government, the Constitution, the tendencies of the age, and the
character of the American people; and this, notwithstanding the important deci-
sion of Judge Taney.
9 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 130 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 9 9
I know of no soil better adapted to the growth of reform than American soil. I
know of no country where the conditions for affecting great changes in the set-
tled order of things, for the development of right ideas of liberty and humanity,
are more favorable than here in these United States.
The very groundwork of this government is a good repository of Christian civ-
ilization. The Constitution, as well as the Declaration of Independence, and the
sentiments of the founders of the Republic, give us a platform broad enough, and
strong enough, to support the most comprehensive plans for the freedom and ele-
vation of all the people of this country, without regard to color, class, or clime.
There is nothing in the present aspect of the anti-slavery question which
should drive us into the extravagance and nonsense of advocating a dissolution of
the American Union as a means of overthrowing slavery, or freeing the North
from the malign influence of slavery upon the morals of the Northern people.
While the press is at liberty, and speech is free, and the ballot-box is open to the
people of the sixteen free States; while the slaveholders are but four hundred
thousand in number, and we are fourteen millions; while the mental and moral
power of the nation is with us; while we are really the strong and they are the
weak, it would look worse than cowardly to retreat from the Union.
If the people of the North have not the power to cope with these four hundred
thousand slaveholders inside the Union, I see not how they could get out of the
Union. The strength necessary to move the Union must ever be less than is
required to break it up. If we have got to conquer the slave power to get out of
the Union, I for one would much rather conquer, and stay in the Union. The lat-
ter, it strikes me, is the far more rational mode of action.
I make these remarks in no servile spirit, nor in any superstitious reverence for
a mere human arrangement. If I felt the Union to be a curse, I should not be far
behind the very chiefest of the disunion Abolitionists in denouncing it. But the
evil to be met and abolished is not in the Union. The power arrayed against us is
not a parchment.
It is not in changing the dead form of the Union, that slavery is to be abolished
in this country. We have to do not with the dead, but the living; not with the past,
but the living present.
Those who seek slavery in the Union, and who are everlastingly dealing blows
upon the Union, in the belief that they are killing slavery, are most woefully mis-
taken. They are fighting a dead form instead of a living and powerful reality. It is
clearly not because of the peculiar character of our Constitution that we have
slavery, but the wicked pride, love of power, and selfish perverseness of the Amer-
ican people. Slavery lives in this country not because of any paper Constitution,
but in the moral blindness of the American people, who persuade themselves that
they are safe, though the rights of others may be struck down.
Besides, I think it would be difficult to hit upon any plan less likely to abolish
slavery than the dissolution of the Union. The most devoted advocates of slavery,
those who make the interests of slavery their constant study, seek a dissolution of
the Union as their final plan for preserving slavery from Abolition, and their
ground is well taken. Slavery lives and flourishes best in the absence of civilization;


--- PAGE 131 ---
a dissolution of the Union would shut up the system in its own congenial bar-
barism.
The dissolution of the Union would not give the North one single additional
advantage over slavery to the people of the North, but would manifestly take from
them many which they now certainly possess.
Within the Union we have a firm basis of anti-slavery operation. National wel-
fare, national prosperity, national reputation and honor, and national scrutiny;
common rights, common duties, and common country, are so many bridges over
which we can march to the destruction of slavery. To fling away these advantages
because James Buchanan is President or Judge Taney gives a lying decision in
favor of slavery, does not enter into my notion of common sense.
Mr. Garrison and his friends have been telling us that, while in the Union, we
are responsible for slavery; and in so telling us, he and they have told us the truth.
But in telling us that we shall cease to be responsible for slavery by dissolving the
Union, he and they have not told us the truth.
There now, clearly, is no freedom from responsibility for slavery, but in the
Abolition of slavery. We have gone too far in this business now to sum up our
whole duty in the cant phrase of “no Union with slaveholders.”
To desert the family hearth may place the recreant husband out of the sight of
his hungry children, but it cannot free him from responsibility. Though he should
roll the waters of three oceans between him and them, he could not roll from his
soul the burden of his responsibility to them; and, as with the private family, so in
this instance with the national family. To leave the slave in his chains, in the hands
of cruel masters who are too strong for him, is not to free ourselves from respon-
sibility. Again: If I were on board of a pirate ship, with a company of men and
women whose lives and liberties I had put in jeopardy, I would not clear my soul
of their blood by jumping in the long boat, and singing out no union with pirates.
My business would be to remain on board, and while I never would perform a sin-
gle act of piracy again, I should exhaust every means given me by my position, to
save the lives and liberties of those against whom I had committed piracy. In like
manner, I hold it is our duty to remain inside this Union, and use all the power to
restore to enslaved millions their precious and God-given rights. The more we
have done by our voice and our votes, in times past, to rivet their galling fetters,
the more clearly and solemnly comes the sense of duty to remain, to undo what
we have done. Where, I ask, could the slave look for release from slavery if the
Union were dissolved? I have an abiding conviction founded upon long and care-
ful study of the certain effects of slavery upon the moral sense of slaveholding
communities, that if the slaves are ever delivered from bondage, the power will
emanate from the free States. All hope that the slaveholders will be self-moved to
this great act of justice, is groundless and delusive. Now, as of old, the Redeemer
must come from above, not from beneath. To dissolve the Union would be to
withdraw the emancipating power from the field.
But I am told this is the argument of expediency. I admit it, and am prepared
to show that what is expedient in this instance is right. “Do justice, though the
heavens fall.” Yes, that is a good motto, but I deny that it would be doing justice
1 0 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 132 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 1 0 1
to the slave to dissolve the Union and leave the slave in his chains to get out by
the clemency of his master, or the strength of his arms. Justice to the slave is to
break his chains, and going out of the union is to leave him in his chains, and with-
out any probable chance of getting out of them.
But I come now to the great question as to the constitutionality of slavery. The
recent slaveholding decision, as well as the teachings of anti-slavery men, make
this a fit time to discuss the constitutional pretensions of slavery.
The people of the North are a law-abiding people. They love order and respect
the means to that end. This sentiment has sometimes led them to the folly and
wickedness of trampling upon the very life of law, to uphold its dead form. This
was so in the execution of that thrice accursed Fugitive Slave Bill. Burns and
Simms were sent back to the hell of slavery after they had looked upon Bunker
Hill, and heard liberty thunder in Faneuil Hall. The people permitted this out-
rage in obedience to the popular sentiment of reverence for law. While men thus
respect law, it becomes a serious matter so to interpret the law as to make it oper-
ate against liberty. I have a quarrel with those who fling the Supreme Law of this
land between the slave and freedom. It is a serious matter to fling the weight of
the Constitution against the cause of human liberty, and those who do it, take
upon them a heavy responsibility. Nothing but absolute necessity, shall, or ought
to drive me to such a concession to slavery.
When I admit that slavery is constitutional, I must see slavery recognized in
the Constitution. I must see that it is there plainly stated that one man of a cer-
tain description has a right of property in the body and soul of another man of a
certain description. There must be no room for a doubt. In a matter so important
as the loss of liberty, everything must be proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
The well-known rules of legal interpretation bear me out in this stubborn
refusal to see slavery where slavery is not, and only to see slavery where it is.
The Supreme Court has, in its day, done something better than make slave-
holding decisions. It has laid down rules of interpretation which are in harmony
with the true idea and object of law and liberty.
It has told us that the intention of legal instruments must prevail; and that this
must be collected from its words. It has told us that language must be construed
strictly in favor of liberty and justice.
It has told us where rights are infringed, where fundamental principles are
overthrown, where the general system of the law is departed from, the Legislative
intention must be expressed with irresistible clearness, to induce a court of jus-
tice to suppose a design to effect such objects.
These rules are as old as law. They rise out of the very elements of law. It is
to protect human rights, and promote human welfare. Law is in its nature
opposed to wrong, and must everywhere be presumed to be in favor of the
right. The pound of flesh, but not one drop of blood, is a sound rule of legal
interpretation.
Besides there is another rule of law as well of common sense, which requires
us to look to the ends for which a law is made, and to construe its details in har-
mony with the ends sought.


--- PAGE 133 ---
Now let us approach the Constitution from the standpoint thus indicated, and
instead of finding in it a warrant for the stupendous system of robbery, compre-
hended in the term slavery, we shall find it strongly against that system.
“We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union,
establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defence,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and
our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution for the United States of
America.”
Such are the objects announced by the instrument itself, and they are in har-
mony with the Declaration of Independence, and the principles of human well-
being.
Six objects are here declared, “Union,” “defence,” “welfare,” “tranquility,” and
“justice,” and “liberty.”
Neither in the preamble nor in the body of the Constitution is there a single
mention of the term slave or slave holder, slave master or slave state, neither is
there any reference to the color, or the physical peculiarities of any part of the
people of the United States. Neither is there anything in the Constitution stand-
ing alone, which would imply the existence of slavery in this country.
“We, the people”—not we, the white people—not we, the citizens, or the legal
voters—not we, the privileged class, and excluding all other classes but we, the
people; not we, the horses and cattle, but we the people—the men and women,
the human inhabitants of the United States, do ordain and establish this
Constitution, &c.
I ask, then, any man to read the Constitution, and tell me where, if he can, in
what particular that instrument affords the slightest sanction of slavery?
Where will he find a guarantee for slavery? Will he find it in the declaration
that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process
of law? Will he find it in the declaration that the Constitution was established to
secure the blessing of liberty? Will he find it in the right of the people to be
secure in their persons and papers, and houses, and effects? Will he find it in the
clause prohibiting the enactment by any State of a bill of attainder?
These all strike at the root of slavery, and any one of them, but faithfully car-
ried out, would put an end to slavery in every State in the American Union.
Take, for example, the prohibition of a bill of attainder. That is a law entailing
on the child the misfortunes of the parent. This principle would destroy slavery
in every State of the Union.
The law of slavery is a law of attainder. The child is property because its par-
ent was property, and suffers as a slave because its parent suffered as a slave.
Thus the very essence of the whole slave code is in open violation of a funda-
mental provision of the Constitution, and is in open and flagrant violation of all
the objects set forth in the Constitution.
While this and much more can be said, and has been said, and much better
said, by Lysander Spooner, William Goodell, Beriah Green, and Gerrit Smith, in
favor of the entire unconstitutionality of slavery, what have we on the other side?
1 0 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 134 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 1 0 3
How is the constitutionality of slavery made out, or attempted to be made out?
First, by discrediting and casting away as worthless the most beneficent rules of
legal interpretation; by disregarding the plain and common-sense reading of the
instrument itself; by showing that the Constitution does not mean what it says, and
says what it does not mean, by assuming that the written Constitution is to be inter-
preted in the light of a secret and unwritten understanding of its framers, which
understanding is declared to be in favor of slavery. It is in this mean, contemptible,
underhand method that the Constitution is pressed into the service of slavery.
They do not point us to the Constitution itself, for the reason that there is noth-
ing sufficiently explicit for their purpose; but they delight in supposed intentions—
intentions nowhere expressed in the Constitution, and everywhere contradicted in
the Constitution.
Judge Taney lays down this system of interpreting in this wise:
“The general words above quoted would seem to embrace the whole human
family, and, if they were used in a similar instrument at this day, would be so
understood. But it is too clear for dispute that the enslaved African race were not
intended to be included, and formed no part of the people who framed and
adopted this declaration; for if the language, as understood in that day, would
embrace them, the conduct of the distinguished men who framed the Declara-
tion of Independence would have been utterly and flagrantly inconsistent with
the principles they asserted; and instead of the sympathy of mankind, to which
they appealed, they would have deserved and received universal rebuke and
reprobation.
“It is difficult, at this day, to realize the state of public opinion respecting that
unfortunate class with the civilized and enlightened portion of the world at the time
of the Declaration of Independence and the adoption of the Constitution; but his-
tory shows they had, for more than a century, been regarded as beings of an infe-
rior order, and unfit associates for the white race, either socially or politically, and
had no rights which white men are bound to respect; and the black man might be
reduced to slavery, bought and sold, and treated as an ordinary article of merchan-
dise. This opinion, at that time, was fixed and universal with the civilized portion of
the white race. It was regarded as an axiom of morals, which no one thought of dis-
puting, and everyone habitually acted upon it, without doubting, for a moment, the
correctness of the opinion. And in no nation was this opinion more fixed, and gen-
erally acted upon, than in England; the subjects of which government not only
seized them on the coast of Africa, but took them, as ordinary merchandise, to
where they could make a profit on them. The opinion, thus entertained, was uni-
versally maintained on the colonies this side of the Atlantic; accordingly, Negroes
of the African race were regarded by them as property, and held and bought and
sold as such in every one of the thirteen colonies, which united in the Declaration
of Independence, and afterwards formed the Constitution.”
The argument here is, that the Constitution comes down to us from a slave-
holding period and a slaveholding people; and that, therefore, we are bound to
suppose that the Constitution recognizes colored persons of African descent, the


--- PAGE 135 ---
victims of slavery at that time, as debarred forever from all participation in the
benefit of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, although the
plain reading of both includes them in their beneficent range.
As a man, an American, a citizen, a colored man of both Anglo-Saxon and
African descent, I denounce this representation as a most scandalous and devilish
perversion of the Constitution, and a brazen misstatement of the facts of history.
But I will not content myself with mere denunciation; I invite attention to the
facts.
It is a fact, a great historic fact, that at the time of the adoption of the
Constitution, the leading religious denominations in this land were anti-slavery,
and were laboring for the emancipation of the colored people of African descent.
The church of a country is often a better index of the state of opinion and feel-
ing than is even the government itself.
The Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, and the denomination of Friends,
were actively opposing slavery, denouncing the system of bondage, with language
as burning and sweeping as we employ at this day.
Take the Methodists. In 1780, that denomination said: “The Conference
acknowledges that slavery is contrary to the laws of God, man, and nature, and
hurtful to society—contrary to the dictates of conscience and true religion, and
doing to others that we would not do unto us.” In 1784, the same church declared,
“that those who buy, sell, or give slaves away, except for the purpose to free them,
shall be expelled immediately.” In 1785, it spoke even more stringently on the
subject. It then said: “We hold in the deepest abhorrence the practice of slavery,
and shall not cease to seek its destruction by all wise and proper means.”
So much for the position of the Methodist Church in the early history of the
Republic, in those days of darkness to which Judge Taney refers.
Let us now see how slavery was regarded by the Presbyterian Church at that
early date.
In 1794, the General Assembly of that body pronounced the following judg-
ment in respect to slavery, slaveholders, and slaveholding.
“1st Timothy, 1st chapter, 10th verse: ‘The law was made for manstealers.’ ‘This
crime among the Jews exposed the perpetrators of it to capital punishment.’ Exodus,
xxi, 15.—And the apostle here classes them with sinners of the first rank. The word
he uses in its original import, comprehends all who are concerned in bringing any of
the human race into slavery, or in retaining them in it. Stealers of men are all those
who bring off slaves or freemen, and keep, sell, or buy them. ‘To steal a freeman,’
says Grotius, ‘is the highest kind of theft.’ In other instances, we only steal human
property, but when we steal or retain men in slavery, we seize those who, in common
with ourselves, are constituted, by the original grant, lords of the earth.”
I might quote, at length, from the sayings of the Baptist Church and the say-
ings of eminent divines at this early period, showing that Judge Taney has grossly
falsified history, but will not detain you with these quotations.
The testimony of the church, and the testimony of the founders of this
Republic, from the declaration downward, prove Judge Taney false; as false to
history as he is to law.
1 0 4 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 136 ---
THE DRED SCOTT CASE AND ITS AFTERMATH 1 0 5
Washington and Jefferson, and Adams, and Jay, and Franklin, and Rush, and
Hamilton, and a host of others, held no such degrading views on the subject of
slavery as are imputed by Judge Taney to the Fathers of the Republic.
All, at that time, looked for the gradual but certain abolition of slavery, and
shaped the constitution with a view to this grand result.
George Washington can never be claimed as a fanatic, or as the representative
of fanatics. The slaveholders impudently use his name for the base purpose of giv-
ing respectability to slavery. Yet, in a letter to Robert Morris, Washington uses this
language—language which, at this day, would make him a terror of the slave-
holders, and the natural representative of the Republican party.
“There is not a man living, who wishes more sincerely than I do, to see some
plan adopted for the abolition of slavery; but there is only one proper and effec-
tual mode by which it can be accomplished, and that is by Legislative authority;
and this, as far as my suffrage will go, shall not be wanting.”
Washington only spoke the sentiment of his times. There were, at that time,
Abolition societies in the slave States—Abolition societies in Virginia, in North
Carolina, in Maryland, in Pennsylvania, and in Georgia—all slaveholding States.
Slavery was so weak, and liberty so strong, that free speech could attack the mon-
ster to its teeth. Men were not mobbed and driven out of the presence of slavery,
merely because they condemned the slave system. The system was then on its
knees imploring to be spared, until it could get itself decently out of the world.
In the light of these facts, the Constitution was framed, and framed in confor-
mity to it.
It may, however, be asked, if the Constitution were so framed that the rights
of all the people were naturally protected by it, how happens it that a large part
of the people have been held in slavery ever since its adoption? Have the people
mistaken the requirements of their own Constitution?
The answer is ready. The Constitution is one thing, its administration is another,
and, in this instance, a very different and opposite thing. I am here to vindicate the
law, not the administration of the law. It is the written Constitution, not the unwrit-
ten Constitution, that is now before us. If, in the whole range of the Constitution,
you can find no warrant for slavery, then we may properly claim it for liberty.
Good and wholesome laws are often found dead on the statute book. We may
condemn the practice under them and against them, but never the law itself. To
condemn the good law with the wicked practice, is to weaken, not to strengthen
our testimony.
It is no evidence that the Bible is a bad book, because those who profess to
believe the Bible are bad. The slaveholders of the South, and many of their
wicked allies at the North, claim the Bible for slavery; shall we, therefore, fling
the Bible away as a pro-slavery book? It would be as reasonable to do so as it
would be to fling away the Constitution.
We are not the only people who have illustrated the truth, that a people may
have excellent law, and detestable practices. Our Savior denounces the Jews,
because they made void the law by their traditions. We have been guilty of the
same sin.


--- PAGE 137 ---
The American people have made void our Constitution by just such traditions
as Judge Taney and Mr. Garrison have been giving to the world of late, as the true
light in which to view the Constitution of the United States. I shall follow neither.
It is not what Moses allowed for the hardness of heart, but what God requires,
ought to be the rule.
It may be said that it is quite true that the Constitution was designed to secure
the blessings of liberty and justice to the people who made it, and to the poster-
ity of the people who made it, but was never designed to do any such thing for
the colored people of African descent.
This is Judge Taney’s argument, and it is Mr. Garrison’s argument, but it is not
the argument of the Constitution. The Constitution imposes no such mean and
satanic limitations upon its own beneficent operation. And, if the Constitution
makes none, I beg to know what right has anybody, outside of the Constitution,
for the special accommodation of slaveholding villainy, to impose such a con-
struction upon the Constitution?
The Constitution knows all the human inhabitants of this country as “the peo-
ple.” It makes, as I have said before, no discrimination in favor of, or against, any
class of the people, but is fitted to protect and preserve the rights of all, without
reference to color, size, or any physical peculiarities. Besides, it has been shown
by William Goodell and others, that in eleven out of the old thirteen States, col-
ored men were legal voters at the time of the adoption of the Constitution.
In conclusion, let me say, all I ask of the American people is, that they live
up to the Constitution, adopt its principles, imbibe its spirit, and enforce its
provisions.
When this is done, the wounds of my bleeding people will be healed, the chain
will no longer rust on their ankles, their backs will no longer be torn by the bloody
lash, and liberty, the glorious birthright of our common humanity, will become
the inheritance of all the inhabitants of this highly favored country—May 1857.
Sources: (1) Dred Scott petitions for his freedom, July 1847, Missouri Court Records, St.
Louis; (2) Roger B. Taney, excerpt from “Obiter Dictum on Dred Scott v. Sandford,” 1857;
and (3) excerpt from Frederick Douglass, “A Most Scandalous and Devilish Perversion of the
Constitution,” speech denouncing the Dred Scott decision, May,1857.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Austin Allen, Origins of the Dred Scott Case: Jacksonian Jurisprudence and the Supreme
Court, 1837–1857 (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2006).
Walter Ehrlich, They Have No Rights: Dred Scott’s Struggle for Freedom(Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1979).
Don E. Fehrenbacher, The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1978).
Paul Finkelman, Dred Scott v. Sandford: A Brief History with Documents(Boston: Bedford
Books, 1997).
Stanley Kutler, ed., The Dred Scott Decision: Law or Politics? (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1997).
Earl M. Maltz, Dred Scott and the Politics of Slavery(Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,
2007).
1 0 6 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 138 ---
J.S. ROCK, “WHENEVER THE COLORED MAN IS ELEVATED” 1 0 7
O20 O
“Whenever the Colored Man Is Elevated, It Will Be by His Own Exertions,” 
John S. Rock, 1858
John S. Rock (1825–1866) was an abolitionist, teacher, dentist, physician, and
lawyer. In 1865 he became the first African American to be accorded the privi-
lege of pleading before the Supreme Court. In the speech that follows, which was
originally presented to an audience in Boston’s Faneuil Hall in March 1858, Rock
proved prescient both in his analysis of racism and in his anticipation of much of
the discourse on “black pride” that became a central part of the Black Power
movement a century later.
O
Ladies and Gentlemen:
YOU WILL not expect a lengthened speech from me to-night. My health is too
poor to allow me to indulge much in speech-making. But I have not been able to
resist the temptation to unite with you in this demonstration of respect for some
of my noble but misguided ancestors.
White Americans have taken great pains to try to prove that we are cowards.
We are often insulted with the assertion, that if we had had the courage of the
Indians or the white man, we would never have submitted to be slaves. I ask if
Indians and white men have never been slaves? The white man tested the Indian’s
courage here when he had his organized armies, his battle-grounds, his places of
retreat, with everything to hope for and everything to lose. The position of the
African slave has been very different. Seized a prisoner of war, unarmed, bound
hand and foot, and conveyed to a distant country among what to him were worse
than cannibals; brutally beaten, half-starved, closely watched by armed men, with
no means of knowing their own strength or the strength of their enemies, with no
weapons, and without a probability of success. But if the white man will take the
trouble to fight the black man in Africa or in Hayti, and fight him as fair as the
black man will fight him there—if the black man does not come off victor, I am
deceived in his prowess. But, take a man, armed or unarmed, from his home, his
country, or his friends, and place him among savages, and who is he that would
not make good his retreat? ‘Discretion is the better part of valor,’ but for a man
to resist where he knows it will destroy him, shows more fool-hardiness than
courage. There have been many Anglo-Saxons and Anglo-Americans enslaved in
Africa, but I have never heard that they successfully resisted any government.
They always resort to running indispensables.
The courage of the Anglo-Saxon is best illustrated in his treatment of the negro.
A score or two of them can pounce upon a poor negro, tie and beat him, and then
call him a coward because he submits. Many of their most brilliant victories have
been achieved in the same manner. But the greatest battles which they have fought
have been upon paper. We can easily account for this; their trumpeter is dead. He


--- PAGE 139 ---
died when they used to be exposed for sale in the Roman market, about the time
that Cicero cautioned his friend Atticus not to buy them, on account of their stu-
pidity. A little more than half a century ago, this race, in connection with their
Celtic neighbors, who have long been considered (by themselves, of course,) the
bravest soldiers in the world, so far forgot themselves, as to attack a few cowardly,
stupid negro slaves, who, according to their accounts, had not sense enough to go
to bed. And what was the result? Why, sir, the negroes drove them out from the
island like so many sheep, and they have never dared to show their faces, except
with hat in hand.
Our true and tried friend, Rev. Theodore Parker, said, in his speech at the
State House, a few weeks since, that ‘the stroke of the axe would have settled the
question long ago, but the black man would not strike.’ Mr. Parker makes a very
low estimate of the courage of his race, if he means that one, two or three mil-
lions of these ignorant and cowardly black slaves could, without means, have
brought to their knees five, ten, or twenty millions of intelligent, brave white men,
backed up by a rich oligarchy. But I know of no one who is more familiar with the
true character of the Anglo-Saxon race than Mr. Parker. I will not dispute this
point with him, but I will thank him or any one else to tell us how it could have
been done. His remark calls to my mind the day which is to come, when one shall
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight. But when he says that ‘the
black man would not strike,’ I am prepared to say that he does us great injustice.
The black man is not a coward. The history of the bloody struggles for freedom
in Hayti, in which the blacks whipped the French and the English, and gained
their independence, in spite of the perfidy of that villainous First Consul, will be
a lasting refutation of the malicious aspersions of our enemies. The history of the
struggles for the liberty of the U.S. ought to silence every American calumniator.
I have learned that even so late as the Texan war, a number of black men were
silly enough to offer themselves as living sacrifices for our country’s shame. A gen-
tleman who delivered a lecture before the New York Legislature, a few years
since, whose name I do not now remember, but whose language I give with some
precision, said, ‘In the Revolution, colored soldiers fought side by side with you
in your struggles for liberty, and there is not a battle-field from Maine to Georgia
that has not been crimsoned with their blood, and whitened with their bones.’ In
1814, a bill passed the Legislature of New York, accepting the services of 2000
colored volunteers. Many black men served under Com. McDonough when he
conquered on lake Champlain. Many were in the battles of Plattsburgh and
Sackett’s Harbor, and General Jackson called out colored troops from Louisiana
and Alabama, and in a solemn proclamation attested to their fidelity and courage.
The white man contradicts himself who says, that if he were in our situation,
he would throw off the yoke. Thirty millions of white men of this proud Caucasian
race are at this moment held as slaves, and bought and sold with horses and cat-
tle. The iron heel of oppression grinds the masses of all European races to the
dust. They suffer every kind of oppression, and no one dares to open his mouth
to protest against it. Even in the Southern portion of this boasted land of liberty,
1 0 8 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 140 ---
J.S. ROCK, “WHENEVER THE COLORED MAN IS ELEVATED” 1 0 9
no white man dares advocate so much of the Declaration of Independence as
declares that ‘all men are created free and equal, and have an inalienable right to
life, liberty,’ &c.
White men have no room to taunt us with tamely submitting. If they were
black men, they would work wonders; but, as white men, they can do nothing. ‘O,
Consistency, thou art a jewel!’
Now, it would not be surprising if the brutal treatment which we have received
for the past two centuries should have crushed our spirits. But this is not the case.
Nothing but a superior force keeps us down. And when I see the slaves rising up
by hundreds annually, in the majesty of human nature, bidding defiance to every
slave code and its penalties, making the issue Canada or death, and that too while
they are closely watched by paid men armed with pistols, clubs and bowie-knives,
with the army and navy of this great Model Republic arrayed against them, I am
disposed to ask if the charge of cowardice does not come with ill-grace.
But some men are so steeped in folly and imbecility; so lost to all feelings of
their own littleness; so destitute of principle, and so regardless of humanity, that
they dare attempt to destroy everything which exists in opposition to their inter-
ests or opinions which their narrow comprehensions cannot grasp.
We ought not to come here simply to honor those brave men who shed their
blood for freedom, or to protest against the Dred Scott decision, but to take coun-
sel of each other, and to enter into new vows of duty. Our fathers fought nobly for
freedom, but they were not victorious. They fought for liberty, but they got slav-
ery. The white man was benefitted, but the black man was injured. I do not envy
the white American the little liberty which he enjoys. It is his right, and he ought
to have it. I wish him success, though I do not think he deserves it. But I would
have all men free. We have had much sad experience in this country, and it would
be strange indeed if we do not profit by some of the lessons which we have so
dearly paid for. Sooner or later, the clashing of arms will be heard in this country,
and the black man’s services will be needed: 150,000 freemen capable of bearing
arms, and not all cowards and fools, and three quarters of a million slaves, wild
with the enthusiasm caused by the dawn of the glorious opportunity of being able
to strike a genuine blow for freedom, will be a power which white men will be
“bound to respect.” Will the blacks fight? Of course they will. The black man will
never be neutral. He could not if he would, and he would not if he could. Will he
fight for this country, right or wrong? This the common sense of every one
answers; and when the time comes, and come it will, the black man will give an
intelligent answer. Judge Taney may outlaw us; Caleb Cushing may show the
depravity of his heart by abusing us; and this wicked government may oppress us;
but the black man will live when Judge Taney, Caleb Cushing and this wicked gov-
ernment are no more. White man may despise, ridicule, slander and abuse us; they
may seek as they always have done to divide us, and make us feel degraded; but no
man shall cause me to turn my back upon my race. With it I will sink or swim.
The prejudice which some white men have, or affected to have, against my
color gives me no pain. If any man does not fancy my color, that is his business,


--- PAGE 141 ---
and I shall not meddle with it. I shall give myself no trouble because he lacks good
taste. If he judges my intellectual capacity by my color, he certainly cannot expect
much profundity, for it is only skin deep, and is really of no very great importance
to any one but myself. I will not deny that I admire the talents and noble charac-
ters of many white men. But I cannot say that I am particularly pleased with their
physical appearance. If old mother nature had held out as well as she com-
menced, we should, probably, have had fewer varieties in the races. When I con-
trast the fine tough muscular system, the beautiful, rich color, the full broad fea-
tures, and the gracefully frizzled hair of the Negro, with the delicate physical
organization, wan color, sharp features and lank hair of the Caucasian, I am
inclined to believe that when the white man was created, nature was pretty well
exhausted—but determined to keep up appearances, she pinched up his features,
and did the best she could under the circumstances. (Great laughter.)
I would have you understand, that I not only love my race, but am pleased with
my color; and while many colored persons may feel degraded by being called
negroes, and wish to be classed among other races more favored, I shall feel it my
duty, my pleasure and my pride, to concentrate my feeble efforts in elevating to
a fair position a race to which I am especially identified by feelings and by blood.
My friends, we can never become elevated until we are true to ourselves. We
can come here and make brilliant speeches, but our field of duty is elsewhere. Let
us go to work—each man in his place, determined to do what he can for himself
and his race. Let us try to carry out some of the resolutions which we have made,
and are so fond of making. If we do this, friends will spring up in every quarter,
and where we least expect them. But we must not rely on them. They cannot ele-
vate us. Whenever the colored man is elevated, it will be by his own exertions.
Our friends can do what many of them are nobly doing, assist us to remove the
obstacles which prevent our elevation, and stimulate the worthy to persevere. The
colored man who, by dint of perseverance and industry, educates and elevates
himself, prepares the way for others, gives character to the race, and hastens the
day of general emancipation. While the negro who hangs around the corners of
the streets, or lives in the grog-shops or by gambling, or who has no higher ambi-
tion than to serve, is by his vocation forging fetters for the slave, and is ‘to all
intents and purposes’ a curse to his race. It is true, considering the circumstances
under which we have been placed by our white neighbors, we have a right to ask
them not only to cease to oppress us, but to give us that encouragement which
our talents and industry may merit. When this is done, they will see our minds
expand, and our pockets filled with rocks. How very few colored men are encour-
aged in their trades or business! Our young men see this, and become disheart-
ened. In this country, where money is the great sympathetic nerve which ramifies
society, and has a ganglia in every man’s pocket, a man is respected in proportion
to his success in business. When the avenues to wealth are opened to us, we will
then become educated and wealthy, and then the roughest looking colored man
that you ever saw, or ever will see, will be pleasanter than the harmonies of
Orpheus, and black will be a very pretty color. It will make our jargon, wit—our
words, oracles; flattery will then take the place of slander, and you will find no
1 1 0 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 142 ---
THE SPIRITUALS 1 1 1
prejudice in the Yankee whatever. We do not expect to occupy a much better posi-
tion than we now do, until we shall have our educated and wealthy men, who can
wield a power that cannot be misunderstood. Then, and not till then, will the
tongue of slander be silenced, and the lip of prejudice sealed. Then, and not till
then, will we be able to enjoy true equality, which can exist only among peers.
Source: Speech from The Liberator, March 12, 1858.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
J. Harlan Buzby, John Stewart Rock: Teacher, Healer, Counselor (Salem: Salem County
Historical Society, 2002).
George S. Levesque, “Boston’s Black Brahmin: Dr. John S. Rock,” Civil War History26, no.
4 (1980), pp. 326–46.
Benjamin Quarles, The Black Abolitionists(New York: Oxford University Press, 1969).
Paul E. Teed, “Racial Nationalism and Its Challengers: Theodore Parker, John Rock, and the
Antislavery Movement,” Civil War History41, no. 2 (1995), pp. 142–60.
Louise Tompkins Wright, “The Civil Rights Activities of Three Great Negro Physicians
(1840–1940),” Journal of Negro History52, no. 3 (1967), pp. 169–84.
O21 O
The Spirituals: “Go Down, Moses” and “Didn’t My Lord Deliver Daniel”
Throughout the African-American experience, spirituality has been a source for
human renewal, survival, and resistance. The meaning of faith in the black mind
in slavery was a rock upon which the oppressed could find human dignity and
hope for the future. The slaves logically interpreted the stories of the Old
Testament in the context of their own collective suffering. They came to believe
that their faith in God and themselves would create a path leading eventually
toward freedom. Many historians have observed that the same spirituals con-
tained hidden meanings or messages that could serve as a coded language, com-
municating information among slaves without the knowledge of overseers and
masters. The themes of suffering and struggle, faith and transcendence, are all
pivotal in the development of the African-American spirituals.
O
“Go Down, Moses”
Go down, Moses,
’Way down in Egypt land,
Tell ole Pharaoh,
To let my people go.
Go down, Moses,


--- PAGE 143 ---
’Way down in Egypt land,
Tell ole Pharaoh,
To let my people go.
When Israel was in Egypt land,
Let my people go,
Oppressed so hard they could not stand,
Let my people go,
Thus spoke the Lord, bold Moses said,
Let my people go,
If not I’ll smite your first-born dead,
Let my people go.
Go down, Moses,
’Way down in Egypt land,
Tell ole Pharaoh,
To let my people go.
O
“Didn’t My Lord Deliver Daniel”
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
deliver Daniel, deliver Daniel,
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
An’ why not every man.
He delivered Daniel from the lion’s den,
Jonah from the belly of the whale,
An’ the Hebrew chillun from the fiery furnace,
An’ why not every man.
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
deliver Daniel, deliver Daniel,
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
An’ why not every man.
The moon run down in a purple stream,
The sun forbear to shine,
An’ every star disappear,
King Jesus shall-a be mine.
The win’ blows eas’ an’ the win’ blows wes’,
It blows like the judg-a-ment day,
An’ ev’ry po’ soul that never did pray’ll
Be glad to pray that day.
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
deliver Daniel, deliver Daniel,
1 1 2 FOUNDATIONS: SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM, 1768–1861


--- PAGE 144 ---
THE SPIRITUALS 1 1 3
Didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel,
An’ why not every man.
Source: Traditional spirituals.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
William Francis Allen, Slave Songs of the United States(New York: Dover, 1995).
Richard Newman, Go Down Moses: A Celebration of the African-Spiritual (New York:
Clarkson Potter, 1998).
Erskine Peters, ed., Lyrics of the Afro-American Spiritual (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
Press, 1993).
Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South(New
York: Oxford University Press, 1978).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
Ed Bell and Thomas Lennon, Unchained Memories: Readings from the Slave Narratives:
HBO Documentary Films, 2003. DVD Video.
Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity: A History of African-American Slaves (Cambridge,
Mass.; London: Belknap, 2004).
———, Slaves without Masters: The Free Negro in the Antebellum South(New York: New
Press, 2007).
Sylvia R. Frey, Water from the Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolutionary Age (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1991).
Library of Congress, “Voices from the Days of Slavery,” http://memory.loc.gov/ammem
/collections/voices/.
Jennifer L. Morgan, Laboring Women: Reproduction and Gender in New World Slavery
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004).
James Oliver Horton and Lois E. Horton, In Hope of Liberty: Culture, Community and
Protest among Northern Free Blacks, 1700–1860 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1998).
PBS, “The Africans in America Web Site,” www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/home.html.
———, “Slavery and the Making of America” http://www.pbs.org/wnet/slavery/index.html.
“Race and Slavery Petition Project,” library.uncg.edu/slavery_petitions/index.asp.
“Recovered Histories: Reawakening the Narratives of Enslavement, Resistance and the
Fight for Freedom,” www.recoveredhistories.org/index.php.
“Suolair—Africa South of the Sahara,” www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/ssrg/africa/history/
hislavery.html.
Deborah G. White, Ar’n’t I a Woman?: Female Slaves in the Plantation South, rev. ed.
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1999).


--- PAGE 145 ---



--- PAGE 146 ---
RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION:
THE AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY AND 
THE DAWN OF SEGREGATION,
1861–1915
– SECTION TWO –


--- PAGE 147 ---



--- PAGE 148 ---
INTRODUCTION
T
he human toll exacted by the Civil War was, by any standard, enormous.
Over 600,000 Americans were killed in combat; and there was the destruc-
tion of property that would today be equivalent to billions of dollars. Most
white Northerners fought the war, as Lincoln insisted, “to preserve the
Union,” rather than to extend full equality to the Negro. But once slavery
had been destroyed, black people had no intention of being confined to a social
and political status of permanent servitude. Even before the military conflict
ended, black leaders were pressuring the government to go well beyond the
Emancipation Proclamation, to full voting rights and political representation for
black men. As Douglass warned in 1865 (document 1), “if abolitionists fail to
press it [black male suffrage] now, we may not see, for centuries to come, the
same disposition that exists at this moment.” Once the right to vote was guaran-
teed, Douglass believed that black men could be expected to compete fairly
within society. “What I ask for the Negro is not benevolence, not pity, not sym-
pathy, but simply justice,” Douglass emphasized. “If you will only untie his hands,
and give him a chance . . . he will work as readily for himself as the white man.”
The essence of Reconstruction was a concerted effort by African Americans
and their white allies to extend the principles of democratic government to black
people, and to give them, at the minimum, the basic educational skills and eco-
nomic resources necessary for their future development. For more than two
decades, African Americans fought vigorously in southern state legislatures and in
the U.S. Congress for the legal protections they needed to preserve their newly
won freedom. Yet in pursuing these objectives, the majority of black leaders did
not seek to achieve an economic revolution. They respected the rights of private
property, and sought opportunity rather than redistribution. One typical example
of this moderate perspective is the 1868 speech of Henry McNeal Turner, given
just before he and other black elected officials were expelled from the Georgia
state legislature by racist whites: “We have built up your country; we have worked
in your fields, and garnered your harvests, for two hundred and fifty years!”
Turner declared. “And what do we ask of you in return? Do we ask you for com-
pensation for the sweat our fathers bore for you—for the tears you have caused,
and the hearts you have broken, and the lives you have curtailed, and the blood


--- PAGE 149 ---
you have spilled? We ask it not. We are willing to let the dead past bury its dead,
but we ask you now for our RIGHTS” (document 2).
Despite the efforts of black reformers, the Compromise of 1877 and the with-
drawal of federal troops from the South effectively ended the gains of Recon-
struction. For the next quarter-century, African Americans experienced the
steady erosion of their political and civil rights, gradually usurped by state legis-
latures, courts, and law enforcement agencies. Mississippi led the way in 1890
with the adoption of its white-supremacist state constitution, largely excluding
black males from voting. By 1904, all other southern states had also held new
racist constitutional conventions or had adopted restrictive legislation, such as
“Grandfather clauses” or all-white primary elections. Blacks were soon elimi-
nated from state legislatures, and were ejected from the U.S. Congress by 1901.
Economically, millions of poor southern blacks were trapped in sharecropping, a
system structured to ensure that they provided cheap agricultural labor for the
benefit of white landlords. The sharecropping system often degenerated into
debt peonage, in which black families would be permanently indentured to their
landlords through financial obligation, creating conditions barely different from
enslavement. Throughout the South, blacks began to be excluded from all pub-
lic accommodations, denied access to schools and other essential services, and
restricted from living in certain residential areas. Thousands of skilled black
workers—plumbers, carpenters, brick masons, mechanics—lost their jobs when
these vocations were redefined as “white men’s work.” Essential to the racist
assault against black people’s rights was lynching. Thousands of African
Americans were executed without trials, convictions, or, sometimes, even accu-
sations of having committed crimes; many were mutilated and sometimes even
burned at the stake. It was as if white America had turned viciously against black
interests in every quarter.
During this reactionary period, black leaders were forced to rethink their polit-
ical and social agendas. If racial integration was out of the question, how could the
black community empower itself or even survive in a hostile white environment?
One widespread response was the rebirth of black nationalism: the ideas of racial
uplift, self-help, and black cultural pride that were embedded in the ideology of
earlier nationalists such as Delany. Many African-American leaders could see
progress only in the repatriation of blacks to the African continent. Two such lead-
ers were Edward Wilmot Blyden and Alexander Crummell. Blyden was in many
respects the first authentic “Pan-Africanist,” espousing the goals of West African
political unity and the migration of blacks from the Caribbean and the Americas
to Africa (document 5). Crummell was a noted Episcopalian minister who had
lived and worked in Liberia for twenty years, and whose appeals to the cultivation
of “the Negro intellect” prefigured W. E. B. Du Bois’s theory of the “Talented
Tenth” (document 6).
The central African-American leader during this period was Booker T. Wash-
ington. A profoundly pragmatic man, Washington cautioned blacks against
protesting segregation and disenfranchisement. In exchange for accepting white
supremacy, Washington sought the public space to develop black-owned busi-
1 1 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 150 ---
INTRODUCTION 1 1 9
nesses, banks, and other enterprises. He astutely realized that racial segregation
would, in this context, be beneficial, as it would create a black consumer market
for black businesses. Washington’s conservative ideas gained widespread accep-
tance through his control of several major black newspapers, his influence in
black churches, and his founding of the Tuskegee Institute in 1881—an institu-
tion dedicated to industrial and agricultural training for African Americans. As
Washington declared in his Atlanta Exposition address in 1895: “In all things that
are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all
things essential to mutual progress. . . . The wisest among my race understand
that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremist folly, and that
progress in the enjoyment of all privileges that will come to us must be the result
of severe and constant struggle rather than artificial forcing” (document 10).
Washington’s policies of racial self-help and political accommodation were crit-
icized by a number of black intellectuals, journalists, and political leaders. The cru-
sading journalist and newspaper editor Ida B. Wells-Barnett wrote exposés docu-
menting the crime of lynching across the South. In her essay included here
(document 13), Wells-Barnett calls for federal anti-lynching legislation. William
Monroe Trotter, editor of the Boston Guardian, repeatedly denounced
Washington as “this Benedict Arnold of the Negro race” (document 11). Du Bois
was slowly drawn into the public struggle against Washington’s influence, but
never attacked him with the angry rhetoric of Trotter. Indeed, it was Du Bois’s
more nuanced and measured criticism of the Tuskegee philosophy of accommo-
dation that won him significant support. Du Bois’s central argument against
Washington was threefold: first, economic power did not translate directly or even
necessarily into political power, and black-owned businesses and farms, while nec-
essary, would always be vulnerable to white authority in a rigidly segregated soci-
ety; second, that a political movement had to be constructed to challenge the legit-
imacy and legality of Jim Crow; and third, that a liberal-arts–educated black
middle class, the “Talented Tenth,” should be the vanguard in the struggle to
achieve a genuinely multiracial democracy (document 14).
Many critics of Washington, including Du Bois, came together in 1905 to ini-
tiate the Niagara Movement, a group of several hundred intellectuals, clergy-
men, journalists, and lawyers who opposed accommodation and Jim Crow seg-
regation. The Declaration of Principles of the Niagara Movement presented a
striking alternative to the Tuskegee philosophy: “We believe in manhood suf-
frage; we believe that no man is so good, intelligent, or wealthy as to be
entrusted wholly with the welfare of his neighbor. . . . All American citizens have
the right to equal treatment in places of public entertainment. . . . We demand
upright judges in courts, juries selected without discrimination on account of
color, and the same measure of punishment and the same efforts of reformation
for black as for white offenders. . . . Any discrimination based simply on race or
color is barbarous, we care not how hallowed it be by custom, expediency, or
prejudice” (document 15). The Niagara Movement never succeeded in offering
more than token opposition to Washington’s political organization, the “Tuskegee
Machine.” Yet within five years the Niagara Movement would help set into


--- PAGE 151 ---
motion another reform organization coalesced around a similarly liberal racial
program—the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP).
Although the period between the demise of Reconstruction and World War I
has often been characterized in African-American historiography by the conflict
between Washington and Du Bois, there were many significant social movements
and cultural currents that existed outside this debate. Both Washington and Du
Bois were in certain respects trapped in a racial discourse, and conceived of their
politics in racial categories. Washington had reluctantly accepted the reality of
racial segregation and worked to maneuver around it. Du Bois rejected Jim Crow,
but sought to supersede race by dismantling its legal and social structures of
inequality. Like Douglass before them, both men were largely engaged in a polit-
ical discourse with sections of the white establishment: Washington appealed to
the Republican Party, philanthropists, and industrialists, while Du Bois sought
the support of white reformers, liberals, and the intelligentsia. Well before 1900,
however, the objective conditions existed for a different kind of black politics that
was grounded not solely in racial terminologies and categories, but in the lan-
guage of gender and class.
African-American middle-class women had been active for decades in both the
antislavery movement and the struggle for women’s equality. In the years imme-
diately after Reconstruction, black women leaders began to establish local associ-
ations promoting racial uplift and women’s rights as well as addressing the nega-
tive representations of black women that rationalized their exploitation. In 1894,
Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin organized the Women’s Era Club, bringing together
sixty prominent blacks in the Boston area. Mary Church Terrell helped form the
Colored Women’s League in Washington, D.C., and was the central leader in
bringing together black women’s groups from all over the country to establish the
National Association of Colored Women in 1896. Margaret Murray Washington
(the wife of Booker T. Washington) and Terrell served, respectively, as president
and second vice president of the International Council of Women of the Darker
Races in the 1920s. In her 1904 speech cited here (document 8), Terrell elo-
quently makes the case for a politics based on gender emancipation as well as
race: “Not only are colored women with ambition and aspiration handicapped on
account of their sex, but they are almost everywhere baffled and mocked because
of their race. Not only because they are women, but because they are colored
women are discouragement and disappointment meeting them at every turn. . . .
[Yet] with tireless energy and eager zeal, colored women have worked in every
conceivable way to elevate their race.” Black women were in the forefront of
struggles to halt the convict-leasing system and the petitioning of southern legis-
latures to repeal “the obnoxious Jim-Crow-car laws.” Through these and other
organized efforts, “colored women who are working for the emancipation and ele-
vation of their race know where their duty lies.”
One of the most significant black intellectuals of this period was Anna Julia
Cooper. Her 1892 book, A Voice from the South, could be described as the first
text of African-American feminist thought. Cooper writes (document 7):
1 2 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 152 ---
INTRODUCTION 1 2 1
The colored woman of today occupies, one may say, a unique position in the coun-
try. In a period of itself transitional and unsettled, her status seems one of the least
ascertainable and definitive of all forces which make for our civilization. She is con-
fronted by both a woman question and a race problem, and is as yet an unknown or
an unacknowledged factor in both. . . . But no woman can possibly put herself or her
sex outside any of the interests that affect humanity. All departments in the new era
are to be hers, in the sense that her interests are in all and through all; and it is
incumbent on her to keep intelligently and sympathetically en rapport with all the
great movements of her time, that she may know on which side to throw the weight
of her influence. . . . To be a woman in such an age carries with it a privilege and an
opportunity never implied before. But to be a woman of the Negro race in America,
and to be able to grasp the deep significance of the possibilities of the crisis, is to
have a heritage . . . unique in the ages.
In her extraordinary public career, Cooper was the only woman to be selected
for membership in the American Negro Academy, the first black intellectual soci-
ety, established in 1897 by Crummell. She was only one of two black women to
speak at the first Pan-African Conference held in London in 1900, giving a pre-
sentation on “The Negro Problem in America.” In 1925, Cooper became the
fourth African-American woman to receive a doctorate degree.
During this period, African-American workers began to create their own orga-
nizations to fight for increased wages and improved working conditions. They
were confronted with blatant racial discrimination in hiring policies and in union
membership. Nevertheless, a growing number of black working women and men
began defining their political interests in terms of class as much as in terms of
race. In 1869, the Colored National Labor Union, a precursor to other black labor
formations, was formed in Washington, D.C. In this section, we have included
“The Race Question a Class Question,” first published in the journal The Worker
in October 1904 (document 12), which makes a frank appeal to African Ameri-
cans to join workers’ movements: “It is part of the instinctive policy of the capital
class to perpetuate itself by creating and playing upon race hatred in order to
keep working men of all races and nationalities from uniting to overthrow the
infamous industrial system by which the capitalists profit.” The document issued
in 1912 by the Brotherhood of Timber Workers in Alexandria, Louisiana, exhorts
black laborers to join with white workers to help “blaze freedom’s pathway
through the jungles of the South.” White Supremacy was an empty slogan to
impoverished white workers, meaning “starvation wages and child slavery . . . the
supremacy of misery and the equality of rags.” Black and white unity was thought
to be essential for the empowerment of the entire working class: “Workers of the
world, unite! You have nothing but your chains to lose! You have a world to gain!”
The socialist-inspired appeals of white workers’ movements frequently under-
estimated the significance of racism as a barrier to constructing multiracial trade
unions. Although some black workers, intellectuals, and journalists such as T.
Thomas Fortune (document 4) were attracted to socialism, many were wary of
the racism of white workers and the racially exclusionary policies of the trade
unions. In 1904, Du Bois declared himself a “socialist-of-the-path” and in 1911


--- PAGE 153 ---
joined the Socialist Party, but left it a year later. One of the first African-American
radicals who tried to bridge the political divide between race-conscious protest
and the class struggle of the workers’ movements was Hubert Henry Harrison.
Harrison recognized that “the great labor problem with which all working people
are faced is made harder for black working people by the addition of a race prob-
lem.” But in reality, one problem “grows out of the other. . . . It pays the capital-
ist to keep the workers divided. So he creates and keeps alive these prejudices.
He gets them to believe that their interests are different” (document 16). But
eventually, Harrison concluded that racism was so strong within the white left and
labor movement that it was necessary for the African Americans to develop their
own race-based protest organizations. This led Harrison to support the black
nationalist movement of Marcus Garvey, and he served for a time as editor of
Garvey’s publication, The Negro World.
The boundaries of blackness still largely set the parameters for social and polit-
ical thought within the African-American community. The omnipresence of seg-
regation and the racialization of nearly every aspect of public life forced the vast
majority of black people to frame their political ideas and practices in reference
to the racial state, either by accommodating to it, as counseled by Washington, or
demanding reforms within it, as pursued by Du Bois. But a new politics, based on
gender and class, also found a small yet growing constituency in black America.
But as long as Jim Crow was hegemonic within U.S. society, the political discourse
of black America would continue to be articulated through the context of race.
O1 O
“What the Black Man Wants,” Frederick Douglass, 1865
By the end of the Civil War, Douglass had become the most influential spokes-
person for African Americans’ rights. In this address, Douglass attempts to 
identify some of the major issues and objectives for the black community in the
aftermath of slavery’s demise. He puts forward a radical democratic program of
black empowerment that unfortunately was never achieved during the
Reconstruction period.
O
I came here, as I come always to the meetings in New England, as a listener, and
not as a speaker; and one of the reasons why I have not been more frequently to
the meetings of this society, has been because of the disposition on the part of
some of my friends to call me out upon the platform, even when they knew that
there was some difference of opinion and of feeling between those who rightfully
belong to this platform and myself; and for fear of being misconstrued, as desir-
1 2 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 154 ---
F . DOUGLASS, “WHAT THE BLACK MAN WANTS” 1 2 3
ing to interrupt or disturb the proceedings of these meetings, I have usually kept
away, and have thus been deprived of that educating influence, which I am always
free to confess is of the highest order, descending from this platform. I have felt,
since I have lived out West, that in going there I parted from a great deal that was
valuable; and I feel, every time I come to these meetings, that I have lost a great
deal by making my home west of Boston, west of Massachusetts; for, if anywhere
in the country there is to be found the highest sense of justice, or the truest
demands for my race, I look for it in the East, I look for it here. The ablest dis-
cussions of the whole question of our rights occur here, and to be deprived of the
privilege of listening to those discussions is a great deprivation.
I do not know, from what has been said, that there is any difference of opinion
as to the duty of abolitionists, at the present moment. How can we get up any dif-
ference at this point, or any point, where we are so united, so agreed? I went
especially, however, with that word of Mr. Phillips, which is the criticism of Gen.
Banks and Gen. Banks’ policy. I hold that that policy is our chief danger at the
present moment; that it practically enslaves the Negro, and makes the Proclam-
ation of 1863 a mockery and delusion. What is freedom? It is the right to choose
one’s own employment. Certainly it means that, if it means anything; and when
any individual or combination of individuals undertakes to decide for any man
when he shall work, where he shall work, at what he shall work, and for what he
shall work, he or they practically reduce him to slavery. He is a slave. That I
understand Gen. Banks to do—to determine for the so-called freedman, when,
and where, and at what, and for how much he shall work, when he shall be pun-
ished, and by whom punished. It is absolute slavery. It defeats the beneficent
intention of the Government, if it has beneficent intentions, in regards to the
freedom of our people.
I have had but one idea for the last three years to present to the American peo-
ple, and the phraseology in which I clothe it is the old abolition phraseology. I am
for the “immediate, unconditional, and universal” enfranchisement of the black
man, in every State in the Union. Without this, his liberty is a mockery; without
this, you might as well almost retain the old name of slavery for his condition; for
in fact, if he is not the slave of the individual master, he is the slave of society, and
holds his liberty as a privilege, not as a right. He is at the mercy of the mob, and
has no means of protecting himself.
It may be objected, however, that this pressing of the Negro’s right to suffrage
is premature. Let us have slavery abolished, it may be said, let us have labor orga-
nized, and then, in the natural course of events, the right of suffrage will be
extended to the Negro. I do not agree with this. The constitution of the human
mind is such, that if it once disregards the conviction forced upon it by a revela-
tion of truth, it requires the exercise of a higher power to produce the same con-
viction afterwards. The American people are now in tears. The Shenandoah has
run blood—the best blood of the North. All around Richmond, the blood of New
England and of the North has been shed—of your sons, your brothers and your
fathers. We all feel, in the existence of this Rebellion, that judgments terrible,
wide-spread, far-reaching, overwhelming, are abroad in the land; and we feel, in


--- PAGE 155 ---
view of these judgments, just now, a disposition to learn righteousness. This is the
hour. Our streets are in mourning, tears are falling at every fireside, and under
the chastisement of this Rebellion we have almost come up to the point of con-
ceding this great, this all-important right of suffrage. I fear that if we fail to do it
now, if abolitionists fail to press it now, we may not see, for centuries to come, the
same disposition that exists at this moment. Hence, I say, now is the time to press
this right.
It may be asked, “Why do you want it? Some men have got along very well
without it. Women have not this right.” Shall we justify one wrong by another?
This is a sufficient answer. Shall we at this moment justify the deprivation of the
Negro of the right to vote, because some one else is deprived of that privilege? I
hold that women, as well as men, have the right to vote, and my heart and my
voice go with the movement to extend suffrage to woman; but that question rests
upon another basis than that on which our right rests. We may be asked, I say, why
we want it. I will tell you why we want it. We want it because it is our right, first
of all. No class of men can, without insulting their own nature, be content with
any deprivation of their rights. We want it again, as a means for educating our
race. Men are so constituted that they derive their conviction of their own possi-
bilities largely from the estimate formed of them by others. If nothing is expected
of a people, that people will find it difficult to contradict that expectation. By
depriving us of suffrage, you affirm our incapacity to form an intelligent judgment
respecting public men and public measures; you declare before the world that we
are unfit to exercise the elective franchise, and by this means lead us to under-
value ourselves, to put a low estimate upon ourselves, and to feel that we have no
possibilities like other men. Again, I want the elective franchise, for one, as a col-
ored man, because ours is a peculiar government, based upon a peculiar idea, and
that idea is universal suffrage. If I were in a monarchial government, or an auto-
cratic or aristocratic government, where the few bore rule and the many were
subject, there would be no special stigma resting upon me, because I did not
exercise the elective franchise. It would do me no great violence. Mingling with
the mass I should partake of the strength of the mass; I should be supported by
the mass, and I should have the same incentives to endeavor with the mass of my
fellow-men; it would be no particular burden, no particular deprivation; but here
where universal suffrage is the rule, where that is the fundamental idea of the
Government, to rule us out is to make us an exception, to brand us with the
stigma of inferiority, and to invite to our heads the missiles of those about us;
therefore, I want the franchise for the black man.
There are, however, other reasons, not derived from any consideration merely
of our rights, but arising out of the conditions of the South, and of the country—
considerations which have already been referred to by Mr. Phillips—considera-
tions which must arrest the attention of statesmen. I believe that when the tall
heads of this Rebellion shall have been swept down, as they will be swept down,
when the Davises and Toombses and Stephenses, and others who are leading this
Rebellion shall have been blotted out, there will be this rank undergrowth of trea-
son, to which reference has been made, growing up there, and interfering with,
1 2 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 156 ---
F . DOUGLASS, “WHAT THE BLACK MAN WANTS” 1 2 5
and thwarting the quiet operation of the Federal Government in those States. You
will see those traitors, handing down, from sire to son, the same malignant spirit
which they have manifested, and which they are now exhibiting, with malicious
hearts, broad blades, and bloody hands in the field, against our sons and brothers.
That spirit will still remain; and whoever sees the Federal Government extended
over those Southern States will see that Government in a strange land, and not
only in a strange land, but in an enemy’s land. A post-master of the United States
in the South will find himself surrounded by a hostile spirit; a collector in a
Southern port will find himself surrounded by a hostile spirit; a United States
marshal or United States judge will be surrounded there by a hostile element.
That enmity will not die out in a year, will not die out in an age. The Federal
Government will be looked upon in those States precisely as the Governments of
Austria and France are looked upon in Italy at the present moment. They will
endeavor to circumvent, they will endeavor to destroy, the peaceful operation of
this Government. Now, where will you find the strength to counterbalance this
spirit, if you do not find it in the Negroes of the South? They are your friends, and
have always been your friends. They were your friends even when the Govern-
ment did not regard them as such. They comprehended the genius of this war
before you did. It is a significant fact, it is a marvellous fact, it seems almost to
imply a direct interposition of Providence, that this war, which began in the inter-
est of slavery on both sides, bids fair to end in the interest of liberty on both sides.
It was begun, I say, in the interest of slavery on both sides. The South was fight-
ing to take slavery out of the Union, and the North fighting to keep it in the
Union; the South fighting to get it beyond the limits of the United States Con-
stitution, and the North fighting to retain it within those limits; the South fight-
ing for new guarantees, and the North fighting for the old guarantees;—both
despising the Negro, both insulting the Negro. Yet, the Negro, apparently
endowed with wisdom from on high, saw more clearly the end from the begin-
ning than we did. When Seward said the status of no man in the country would
be changed by the war, the Negro did not believe him. When our generals sent
their underlings in shoulder-straps to hunt the flying Negro back from our lines
into the jaws of slavery, from which he had escaped, the Negroes thought that a
mistake had been made, and that the intentions of the Government had not been
rightly understood by our officers in shoulder-straps, and they continued to come
into our lines, threading their way through bogs and fens, over briers and thorns,
fording streams, swimming rivers, bringing us tidings as to the safe path to march,
and pointing out the dangers that threatened us. They are our only friends in the
South, and we should be true to them in this their trial hour, and see to it that
they have the elective franchise.
I know that we are inferior to you in some things—virtually inferior. We walk
about among you like dwarfs among giants. Our heads are scarcely seen above the
great sea of humanity. The Germans are superior to us; the Irish are superior to
us; the Yankees are superior to us; they can do what we cannot, that is, what we
have not hitherto been allowed to do. But while I make this admission, I utterly
deny, that we are originally, or naturally, or practically, or in any way, or in any


--- PAGE 157 ---
important sense, inferior to anybody on this globe. This charge of inferiority is an
old dodge. It has been made available for oppression on many occasions. It is only
about six centuries since the blue-eyed and fair-haired Anglo-Saxons were consid-
ered inferior by the haughty Normans, who once trampled upon them. If you read
the history of the Norman Conquest, you will find that this proud Anglo-Saxon
was once looked upon as of coarser clay than his Norman master, and might be
found in the highways and byways of old England laboring with a brass collar on
his neck, and the name of his master marked upon it. You were down then! You
are up now. I am glad you are up, and I want you to be glad to help us up also.
The story of our inferiority is an old dodge, as I have said; for wherever men
oppress their fellows, wherever they enslave them, they will endeavor to find the
needed apology for such enslavement and oppression in the character of the peo-
ple oppressed and enslaved. When we wanted, a few years ago, a slice of Mexico,
it was hinted that the Mexicans were an inferior race, that the old Castilian blood
had become so weak that it would scarcely run down hill, and that Mexico needed
the long, strong and beneficent arm of the Anglo-Saxon care extended over it. We
said that it was necessary to its salvation, and a part of the “manifest destiny” of
this Republic, to extend our arm over that dilapidated government. So, too, when
Russia wanted to take possession of a part of the Ottoman Empire, the Turks
were “an inferior race.” So, too, when England wants to set the heel of her power
more firmly in the quivering heart of old Ireland, the Celts are an “inferior race.”
So, too, the Negro, when he is to be robbed of any right which is justly his, is an
“inferior man.” It is said that we are ignorant; I admit it. But if we know enough
to be hung, we know enough to vote. If the Negro knows enough to pay taxes to
support the government, he knows enough to vote; taxation and representation
should go together. If he knows enough to shoulder a musket and fight for the
flag, fight for the government, he knows enough to vote. If he knows as much
when he is sober as an Irishman knows when drunk, he knows enough to vote, on
good American principles.
But I was saying that you needed a counterpoise in the persons of the slaves to
the enmity that would exist at the South after the Rebellion is put down. I hold
that the American people are bound, not only in self-defence, to extend this right
to the freedmen of the South, but they are bound by their love of country, and by
all their regard for the future safety of those Southern States, to do this—to do it
as a measure essential to the preservation of peace there. But I will not dwell
upon this. I put it to the American sense of honor. The honor of a nation is an
important thing. It is said in the Scriptures, “What doth it profit a man if he gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul?” It may be said, also, What doth it profit
a nation if it gain the whole world, but lose its honor? I hold that the American
government has taken upon itself a solemn obligation of honor, to see that this
war—let it be long or let it be short, let it cost much or let it cost little—that this
war shall not cease until every freedman at the South has the right to vote. It has
bound itself to it. What have you asked the black men of the South, the black men
of the whole country, to do? Why, you have asked them to incur the deadly enmity
1 2 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 158 ---
F . DOUGLASS, “WHAT THE BLACK MAN WANTS” 1 2 7
of their masters, in order to befriend you and to befriend this Government. You
have asked us to call down, not only upon ourselves, but upon our children’s chil-
dren, the deadly hate of the entire Southern people. You have called upon us to
turn our backs upon our masters, to abandon their cause and espouse yours; to
turn against the South and in favor of the North; to shoot down the Confederacy
and uphold the flag—the American flag. You have called upon us to expose our-
selves to all the subtle machinations of their malignity for all time. And now, what
do you propose to do when you come to make peace? To reward your enemies,
and trample in the dust your friends? Do you intend to sacrifice the very men who
have come to the rescue of your banner in the South, and incurred the lasting dis-
pleasure of their masters thereby? Do you intend to sacrifice them and reward
your enemies? Do you mean to give your enemies the right to vote, and take it
away from your friends? Is that wise policy? Is that honorable? Could American
honor withstand such a blow? I do not believe you will do it. I think you will see
to it that we have the right to vote. There is something too mean in looking upon
the Negro, when you are in trouble, as a citizen, and when you are free from trou-
ble, as an alien. When this nation was in trouble, in its early struggles, it looked
upon the Negro as a citizen. In 1776 he was a citizen. At the time of the forma-
tion of the Constitution the Negro had the right to vote in eleven States out of the
old thirteen. In your trouble you have made us citizens. In 1812 Gen. Jackson
addressed us as citizens—“fellow-citizens.” He wanted us to fight. We were citi-
zens then! And now, when you come to frame a conscription bill, the Negro is a
citizen again. He has been a citizen just three times in the history of this govern-
ment, and it has always been in time of trouble. In time of trouble we are citizens.
Shall we be citizens in war, and aliens in peace? Would that be just?
I ask my friends who are apologizing for not insisting upon this right, where
can the black man look, in this country, for the assertion of his right, if he may not
look to the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society? Where under the whole heavens
can he look for sympathy, in asserting this right, if he may not look to this plat-
form? Have you lifted us up to a certain height to see that we are men, and then
are any disposed to leave us there, without seeing that we are put in possession of
all our rights? We look naturally to this platform for the assertion of all our rights,
and for this one especially. I understand the anti-slavery societies of this country
to be based on two principles,—first, the freedom of the blacks of this country;
and, second, the elevation of them. Let me not be misunderstood here. I am not
asking for sympathy at the hands of abolitionists, sympathy at the hands of any. I
think the American people are disposed often to be generous rather than just. I
look over this country at the present time, and I see Educational Societies,
Sanitary Commissions, Freedmen’s Associations, and the like,—all very good: but
in regard to the colored people there is always more that is benevolent, I per-
ceive, than just, manifested towards us. What I ask for the Negro is not benevo-
lence, not pity, not sympathy, but simply justice. The American people have
always been anxious to know what they shall do with us. Gen. Banks was dis-
tressed with solicitude as to what he should do with the Negro. Everybody has


--- PAGE 159 ---
asked the question, and they learned to ask it early of the abolitionists, “What
shall we do with the Negro?” I have had but one answer from the beginning. Do
nothing with us! Your doing with us has already played the mischief with us. Do
nothing with us! If the apples will not remain on the tree of their own strength, if
they are wormeaten at the core, if they are early ripe and disposed to fall, let them
fall! I am not for tying or fastening them on the tree in any way, except by nature’s
plan, and if they will not stay there, let them fall. And if the Negro cannot stand
on his own legs, let him fall also. All I ask is, give him a chance to stand on his own
legs! Let him alone! If you see him on his way to school, let him alone, don’t dis-
turb him! If you see him going to the dinner-table at a hotel, let him go! If you
see him going to the ballot-box, let him alone, don’t disturb him! If you see him
going into a work-shop, just let him alone,—your interference is doing him a pos-
itive injury. Gen. Banks’ “preparation” is of a piece with this attempt to prop up
the Negro. Let him fall if he cannot stand alone! If the Negro cannot live by the
line of eternal justice, so beautifully pictured to you in the illustration used by Mr.
Phillips, the fault will not be yours, it will be his who made the Negro, and estab-
lished that line for his government. Let him live or die by that. If you will only
untie his hands, and give him a chance, I think he will live. He will work as read-
ily for himself as the white man. A great many delusions have been swept away by
this war. One was, that the Negro would not work; he has proved his ability to
work. Another was, that the Negro would not fight; that he possessed only the
most sheepish attributes of humanity; was a perfect lamb, or an “Uncle Tom”; dis-
posed to take off his coat whenever required, fold his hands, and be whipped by
anybody who wanted to whip him. But the war has proved that there is a great
deal of human nature in the Negro, and that “he will fight,” as Mr. Quincy, our
President, said, in earlier days than these, “when there is a reasonable probability
of his whipping anybody.”
Source: Excerpt from “What the Black Man Wants,” speech delivered in 1865.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
William Andrews, ed., Critical Essays on Frederick Douglass(Boston: G.K. Hall, 1991).
David W. Blight, Frederick Douglass’ Civil War: Keeping Faith in Jubilee (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1989).
Eric J. Sundquist, ed., Frederick Douglass: New Literary and Historical Essays(Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990).
O2 O
Henry McNeal Turner, Black Christian Nationalist
Henry McNeal Turner (1834–1915) was born near Abbeville, South Carolina, the
son of free black parents. His father died when he was young, and he was forced
1 2 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 160 ---
H.M. TURNER, BLACK CHRISTIAN NATIONALIST 1 2 9
to work picking cotton with slaves. After running away from home as a teenager,
Turner first found employment as an office boy in a law firm. In 1851 he became
an itinerant minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church, and seven years later
joined the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church. Turner’s rise in the
church was rapid. In 1862, he became pastor of the Union Bethel AME Church,
the capital’s largest African-American congregation. President Abraham Lincoln
appointed Turner the first black U.S. army chaplain. Turner accompanied black
troops into battle, and briefly served in the Freedman’s Bureau. During Recon-
struction, Turner was assigned to build the AME Church in Georgia. Elected to
the Georgia constitutional convention in 1867, Turner quickly became a central
figure in black politics in the state. After being elected to the Georgia state legis-
lature in 1868, Turner and twenty-six other African Americans were expelled
from office by racist white legislators. Moments before Turner led the black del-
egation from the capitol building in protest, he made the following address. In
later life, Turner become an AME bishop in 1880, and the founder and first pres-
ident of Morris Brown College in Atlanta in 1890. Traveling to Africa four times
between 1891 and 1898, Turner became a noted proponent of black emigration
to Africa. In 1906, Turner, W. E. B. Du Bois, and other black leaders established
the Georgia Equal Rights Association.
O
Mr. Speaker:
Before proceeding to argue this question upon its intrinsic merits, I wish the
members of this House to understand the position that I take. I hold that I am a
member of this body. Therefore, sir, I shall neither fawn or cringe before any
party, nor stoop to beg them for my rights. Some of my colored fellow members,
in the course of their remarks, took occasion to appeal to the sympathies of
Members on the opposite side, and to eulogize their character for magnanimity.
It reminds me very much, sir, of slaves begging under the lash. I am here to
demand my rights, and to hurl thunderbolts at the men who would dare to cross
the threshold of my manhood. There is an old aphorism which says, “Fight the
Devil with fire,” and if I should observe the rule in this instance, I wish gentle-
men to understand that it is but fighting them with their own weapon.
The scene presented in this House, to-day, is one unparalleled in the history of
the world. From this day, back to the day when God breathed the breath of life
into Adam, no analogy for it can be found. Never, in the history of the world, has
a man been arraigned before a body clothed with legislative, judicial or executive
functions, charged with the offence of being of a darker hue than his fellowmen.
I know that questions have been before the Courts of this country, and of other
countries, involving topics not altogether dissimilar to that which is being dis-
cussed here to-day. But, sir, never in all the history of the great nations of this
world—never before—has a man been arraigned, charged with an offence com-
mitted by the God of Heaven Himself. Cases may be found where men have been
deprived of their rights for crimes and misdemeanors; but it has remained for the


--- PAGE 161 ---
State of Georgia, in the very heart of the nineteenth century, to call a man before
the bar, and there charge him with an act for which he is no more responsible
than for the head which he carries upon his shoulders. The Anglo-Saxon race, sir,
is a most surprising one. No man has ever been more deceived in that race than
I have been for the last three weeks. I was not aware that there was in the char-
acter of that race so much cowardice, or so much pusillanimity. The treachery
which has been exhibited in it by gentlemen belonging to that race has shaken my
confidence in it more than anything that has come under my observation from the
day of my birth.
What is the question at issue? Why, sir, this Assembly, to-day, is discussing and
deliberating on a judgment; there is not a Cherubim that sits around God’s eter-
nal Throne, to-day, that would not tremble—even were an order issued by the
Supreme God Himself—to come down here and sit in judgment on my manhood.
Gentlemen may look at this question in whatever light they choose, and with just
as much indifference as they may think proper to assume, but I tell you, sir, that
this is a question which will not die to-day. This event shall be remembered by
posterity for ages yet to come, and while the sun shall continue to climb the hills
of heaven.
Whose Legislature is this? Is it a white man’s Legislature, or is it a black man’s
Legislature? Who voted for a Constitutional Convention, in obedience to the
mandate of the Congress of the United States? Who first rallied around the stan-
dard of Reconstruction? Who set the ball of loyalty rolling in the State of
Georgia? And whose voice was heard on the hills and in the valleys of this State?
It was the voice of the brawny-armed Negro, with the few humanitarian-hearted
white men who came to our assistance. I claim the honor, sir, of having been the
instrument of convincing hundreds—yea, thousands—of white men, that to
reconstruct under the measures of the United States Congress was the safest and
the best course for the interest of the State.
Let us look at some facts in connection with this matter. Did half the white
men of Georgia vote for this Legislature? Did not the great bulk of them fight,
with all their strength, the Constitution under which we are acting? And did they
not fight against the organization of this Legislature? And further, sir, did they not
vote against it? Yes, sir! And there are persons in this Legislature to-day, who are
ready to spit their poison in my face, while they themselves opposed, with all their
power, the ratification of this Constitution. They question my right to a seat in this
body, to represent the people whose legal votes elected me. This objection, sir, is
an unheard of monopoly of power. No analogy can be found for it, except it be
the case of a man who should go into my house, take possession of my wife and
children, and then tell me to walk out. I stand very much in the position of a crim-
inal before your bar, because I dare to be the exponent of the views of those who
sent me here. Or, in other words, we are told that if black men want to speak, they
must speak through white trumpets; if black men want their sentiments
expressed, they must be adulterated and sent through white messengers, who will
quibble, and equivocate, and evade, as rapidly as the pendulum of a clock. If this
be not done, then the black men have committed an outrage, and their
1 3 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 162 ---
H.M. TURNER, BLACK CHRISTIAN NATIONALIST 1 3 1
Representatives must be denied the right to represent their constituents.
The great question, sir, is this: Am I a man? If I am such, I claim the rights of
a man. Am I not a man because I happen to be of a darker hue than honorable
gentlemen around me? . . .
But Mr. Speaker, I do not regard this movement as a thrust at me, it is a thrust
at the Bible—a thrust at the God of the Universe, for making a man and not fin-
ishing him; it is simply calling the Great Jehovah a fool. Why, sir, though we are
not white, we have accomplished much. We have pioneered civilization here; we
have built up your country; we have worked in your fields, and garnered your
harvests, for two hundred and fifty years! And what do we ask of you in return?
Do we ask you for compensation for the sweat our fathers bore for you—for the
tears you have caused, and the hearts you have broken, and the lives you have
curtailed, and the blood you have spilled? Do we ask retaliation? We ask it not.
We are willing to let the dead past bury its dead; but we ask you now for our
RIGHTS. You have all the elements of superiority upon your side; you have our
money and your own; you have our education and your own; and you have your
land and our own, too. We, who number hundreds of thousands in Georgia,
including our wives and families, with not a foot of land to call our own—
strangers in the land of our birth; without money, without education, without aid,
without a roof to cover us while we live, nor sufficient clay to cover us when we
die! It is extraordinary that a race such as yours, professing gallantry, and
chivalry, and education, and superiority, living in a land where ringing chimes
call child and sire to the Church of God—a land where Bibles are read and
Gospels truths are spoken, and where courts of justice are presumed to exist; it
is extraordinary to say, that, with all these advantages on your side, you can make
war upon the poor defenseless black man. . . .
You may expel us, gentlemen, but I firmly believe that you will someday repent
it. The black man cannot protect a country, if the country doesn’t protect him; and
if, tomorrow, a war should arise, I would not raise a musket to defend a country
where my manhood is denied. The fashionable way in Georgia when hard work is
to be done, is, for the white man to sit at his ease, while the black man does the
work; but, sir, I will say this much to the colored men of Georgia, as if I should be
killed in this campaign, I may have no opportunity of telling them at any other
time: Never lift a finger nor raise a hand in defense of Georgia, unless Georgia
acknowledges that you are men, and invests you with the rights pertaining to
manhood. Pay your taxes, however, obey all orders from your employers, take
good counsel from friends, work faithfully, earn an honest living, and show, by
your conduct, that you can be good citizens. . . .
You may expel us, gentlemen, by your votes, today; but while you do it,
remember that there is a just God in Heaven, whose All-Seeing Eye beholds alike
the acts of the oppressor and the oppressed, and who, despite the machinations
of the wicked, never fails to vindicate the cause of Justice, and the sanctity of His
own handiwork.
Source: Speech delivered on September 3, 1868, before the Georgia State Legislature.


--- PAGE 163 ---
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Stephen Ward Angell, Bishop Henry McNeal Turner and African American Religion in the
South (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1992).
Gregory Mixon, “Henry McNeal Turner Versus the Tuskegee Machine: Black Leadership
in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Negro History 79, no. 4 (Autumn 1994), 
pp. 363–80.
Mongo Melanchthron Ponton, Life and Times of Henry M. Turner (Atlanta: A.B. Caldwell
Publishing, 1917).
Edwin S. Redkey, Black Exodus: Black Nationalist and Back-to-Africa Movements (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1969).
———, ed., Respect Black: The Writings and Speeches of Henry McNeal Turner(New York:
Arno Press, 1971).
Henry McNeal Turner, Methodist Polity, or the Genius and Theory of Methodism (Philadel-
phia: A.M.E. Book Concern, 1885).
Robert R. Wright, Jr., The Bishops of the African Methodist Episcopal Church (Nashville,
Tenn.: A.M.E. Sunday School Union, 1963).
O3 O
Black Urban Workers during Reconstruction
In the aftermath of the Civil War, large numbers of African Americans migrated to
northern cities. In most cases, these black workers were trying to escape the oppres-
sive labor conditions of the South. Yet increased competition from foreign-born
whites, who largely outnumbered African Americans in the North, meant that labor
conditions were difficult there as well. In December 1869, African Americans gath-
ered in Washington, D.C., to organize the National Colored Labor Union, which
lasted until 1872. Subsequently, for many decades the majority of black urban work-
ers was marginalized in segregated unions, or shut out of unions altogether.
O
ANONYMOUS DOCUMENT ON THE NATIONAL COLORED
LABOR CONVENTION, 1869
The Convention of colored men at Washington last week was in some respects the
most remarkable one we ever attended. We had always had full faith in the capac-
ity of the negro for self-improvement, but were not prepared to see, fresh from
slavery, a body of two hundred men, so thoroughly conversant with public affairs,
so independent in spirit, and so anxious apparently to improve their social condi-
tion, as the men who represented the South, in that convention. . . . The conven-
tion was called to order by Mr. Myers, of Baltimore, and Geo. T. Downing, of
Rhode Island, was chosen temporary chairman. . . .
. . . rare tact [was] shown by their permanent president, the Hon. John B.
Harris of North Carolina. . . .
1 3 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 164 ---
BLACK URBAN WORKERS DURING RECONSTRUCTION 1 3 3
. . . they formed a National Labor Union . . . and may be said to be fairly in the
field as an organized body of laborers.
Isaac Myers, a member of the present Labor Union, was chosen their perma-
nent President for the ensuing year, with a good list of other officers. . . .
Washington, D.C. (1869)
O
NEW YORK TRIBUNE ARTICLE ON AFRICAN-AMERICAN WORKERS, 1870
. . . Baltimore contains a larger proportion of skilled colored labor than any por-
tion of the country, New Orleans not excepted. . . . One of the best evidences of
thrift and enterprise I have noticed . . . are the building and other self-help asso-
ciations which exist here. The first-named societies were inspired by the success-
ful economy and activity of the Germans. There are at least 25 colored societies
in the city. There are several known as “The National Relief Association No. 1,”
etc. The admission fee is $2.50 and ten cents a week is required thereafter. . . .
Among the noteworthy efforts is an operative brickyard, owned in five-dollar
shares, and run by the share-holders themselves. It is doing very well. . . .
. . . The most interesting movement I have found is that known as the
Chesapeake Marine Railway and Dry Dock Company, which, as it illustrates the
tyranny of caste and the manner by which it can be defeated, when even energy,
industry, skill, and determination [are] combined, deserves some extended notice.
The company, or rather its leading corporators, have already attained more than a
local fame, from the fact that from among them came the movement which resulted
in the recognition last year at the Philadelphia Labor Congress of colored labor del-
egates, and subsequently of the organization at Washington, in December follow-
ing, of the National Colored Labor union. Now for the origin of this enterprise.
Baltimore had always been famous as a ship-building and repairing entrepot. In
slave times a large portion of the ship caulkers especially were colored men, as were
also many ship-carpenters. In all other trade connected with this interest, a consid-
erable share of the skilled, and nearly all of the unskilled labor, was colored. As a
rule they were and are excellent mechanics. Frederick Douglass once worked in the
very yard now owned by colored men. When last in Baltimore, he visited the yard,
and took the caulker’s tool in hand once again. The slave power was strong enough
to protect these colored mechanics, many of them being slaves. When the war ter-
minated, however, the bitter hostility, hitherto suppressed, against colored labor,
manifested itself in violent combinations. As Mr. Gaines, the present manager of
the company, informed me, extermination of colored mechanics was openly
declared to be the aim of their white rivals. The combination was against all labor,
but manifested mostly in the shipbuilding trades. The white mechanics all struck,
even refusing to work, where colored cartmen and stevedores were employed.
There was no antagonism or complaint on account of wages, as the colored men
were as strenuous as the whites in demanding full pay. The Trades Unions, to
which, of course, colored men were not admitted, organized the movement. In the


--- PAGE 165 ---
yards on one side of the Patapaco River the colored caulkers were driven off in
1865. In 1866 the general strike was organized. The bosses did not sympathize with
the white mechanics, and to the credit of many . . . they stood out as long as possi-
ble. Very soon the strike threatened to become general against all colored labor,
mechanical or otherwise; the violence threatened to be extended even to hotel wait-
ers of the proscribed race. This atrocious movement was industriously fomented by
the active men in Andrew Jackson’s reaction.
At last the leading colored caulkers, carpenters, and mechanics, seeing what
the crusade meant, determined on a vigorous protective effort. Their conclusion
was reached in the organization of the Maryland Mutual Joint Stock Railway
Company, whose capital was to consist of 10,000 shares at $50. About 2000 shares
were taken within a few days, and $10,000 subscribed, 100 shares being the largest
amount taken by any one person. Most of the shares were taken in ones, twos, and
threes, by mechanics, caulkers, laborers, even the barbers and washerwomen
being represented. The shipyard and marine railway they now own belonged to
Jas. L. Mullen and Son, earnest Union men and warm defenders of equal rights
to their workmen. They offered to sell and asked no more than the place was
worth—$40,000. The bargain was closed; another honorable gentleman, Capt.
Sipplegarth, ship-owner, builder and navigator, came forward and loaned them
the remaining $30,000, on six years’ time, at moderate interest, with the privilege
of paying at any time within the six years, taking a mortgage on the property itself.
. . . The Company was organized and got to work by Feb. 2, 1866, employing
at first 62 hands, nearly all skilled men, and some of them white. Business was
depressed, the outrageous strike having driven it away from the port, and the
work did not average for some months more than four days per week, at the aver-
age wages of $3 per day. At the present time the Company are able to employ,
fulltime, 75 hands. From Feb. 2, 1866, to Jan. 1, 1867, its business amounted to
about $60,000, on which the profits were nearly or quite 25 percent or $15,000.
The next year was better for them, though business was generally very dull. In
carrying on their work and paying their men, they had to resort to borrowing as a
rule. They never had a note protested. Within four years from organization they
completed the payment for their yard and railway, lifting the mortgage in June
last. In 1868 they were incorporated by the title I have given, having done busi-
ness previously under the firm name of John H. Smith and Co. Most of their trade
is with Eastern ship-owners and masters. At the present time they do, and have
done for three years past, more repairing than any other company on the Patap-
aco River. This success has not been achieved without serious trouble. Intimi-
dation has been practiced on their patrons. In two instances, where profitable
jobs were pending they have been driven off by white mobs; in one case a white
man who took charge of their working force was shot dead. What added point to
the act was the fact that he was ordinarily one of their bitterest antagonists. On
another occasion, having hired the Canton Marine Railway to take up a large ship
which they were caulking and repairing, the whites threatened to strike, and so
the Railway Company refused to allow its use. Still they have persevered, and
1 3 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 166 ---
T.T. FORTUNE, “LABOR AND CAPITAL . . .” 1 3 5
today are masters of the situation. They have had some good contracts, in one
case repairing Government dredges and tugs.
The managers think the feeling against them decidedly subsiding. They
accredited this fact mainly to their ability to employ labor and pay for it promptly.
They think that men have been forced to a sense of shame by finding no resent-
ments cherished on the part of the corporators of the Chesapeake Company. To
some extent, more recently, they believe that the dread of Chinese labor induces
the ultra-trades unionists to desire their (the colored mechanics’) favor. It is worth
noting that they are not, and never have been, members of the trades unions.
Their business rules, as stated to me by the manager, are simple. Asking why they
did more ship repair work than other firms or companies possessing equal facili-
ties, the reply was: 1st, because our labor is of the best; the men we employ are
thoroughly skilled, and 2nd, we seek to retain custom as well as make money. We
have never lost a patron except by outside intimidation. We try to accommodate,
work hard and overtime to finish jobs, and always use the best materials. These
are good rules, and this is a good record. . . .
Sources: (1) Excerpt, “The National Colored Labor Convention, 1869,” American Workman,
Boston (December 25, 1869), p. 2; and (2) excerpt, article on African-American workers in
Baltimore, New York Tribune(September 1, 1870).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
John H. Bracey, ed., Black Workers and Organized Labor (Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth
Publishing, 1971).
Philip S. Foner, ed., Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619–1973(New York: Inter-
national Publishers, 1976).
Philip S. Foner and Ronald L. Lewis, eds., Black Workers: A Documentary History from
Colonial Times to the Present(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989).
Michael K. Honey, Black Workers Remember: An Oral History of Segregation, Unionism,
and the Freedom Struggle(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999).
Bruce Nelson, Divided We Stand: American Workers and the Struggle for Black Equality,
Politics and Society in Twentieth-Century America (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2001).
Elizabeth H. Pleck, Black Migration and Poverty: Boston, 1865–1900(New York: Academic
Press, 1979).
O4 O
“Labor and Capital Are in Deadly Conflict,” T. Thomas Fortune, 1886
T. Thomas Fortune (1856–1928) was considered the leading African-American
journalist of his day. Born a slave in Marianna, Florida, he began his career as a
compositor on the New York Witness without any formal education but with a
practical knowledge of the printer’s trade. In 1879 he became the founding editor


--- PAGE 167 ---
of the New York Globe (later renamed the New York Age ). Karl Marx was an
important influence on Fortune’s thought, and in 1884 he authored the important
book, Black and White: Land, Labor, and Politics in the South. As Jim Crow seg-
regation became consolidated in the South, the political environment for Fortune’s
radical politics virtually disappeared. Personal and economic problems may have
contributed to Fortune’s growing dependency on the support of conservative edu-
cator Booker T. Washington. By the early 1900s Fortune edited many of Washing-
ton’s addressees and was a ghostwriter for some of his major articles.
O
I do not exaggerate the gravity of the subject when I say that it is now the very
first in importance not only in the United States but in every country in Europe.
Indeed the wall of industrial discontent encircles the civilized globe.
The iniquity of privileged class and concentrated wealth has become so glar-
ing and grievous to be borne that a thorough agitation and an early readjustment
of the relation which they sustain to labor can no longer be delayed with safety to
society.
It does not admit of argument that every man born into the world is justly enti-
tled to so much of the produce of nature as will satisfy his physical necessities; it
does not admit of argument that every man, by reason of his being, is justly enti-
tled to the air he must breathe, the water he must drink, the food he must eat and
the covering he must have to shield him from the inclemency of the weather.
These are self-evident propositions, not disputed by the most orthodox advocate
of excessive wealth on the one hand and excessive poverty on the other. That
nature intended these as the necessary correlations of physical being is abun-
dantly proved in the primitive history of mankind and in the freedom and com-
monality of possession which now obtain everywhere among savage people. The
moment you deny to a man the unrestricted enjoyment of all the elements upon
which the breath he draws is dependent, that moment you deny to him the inher-
itance to which he was born.
I maintain that organized society, as it obtains today, based as it is upon feudal
conditions, is an outrageous engine of torture and an odious tyranny; that it places
in the hands of a few the prime elements of human existence, regardless of the
great mass of mankind; that the whole aim and necessity of the extensive and
costly machinery of the law we are compelled to maintain grows out of the fact
that this fortunate or favored minority would otherwise be powerless to practice
upon the masses of society the gross injustice which everywhere prevails.
For centuries the aim and scope of all law have been to more securely hedge
about the capitalist and the landowner and to repress labor within a condition
wherein bare subsistence was the point aimed at.
From the institution of feudalism to the present time the inspiration of all con-
flict has been that of capitalist, landowner and hereditary aristocracy against the
larger masses of society—the untitled, the disinherited proletariat of the world.
1 3 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 168 ---
T.T. FORTUNE, “LABOR AND CAPITAL . . .” 1 3 7
This species of oppression received its most memorable check in the great
French Revolution, wherein a new doctrine became firmly rooted in the philoso-
phy of civil government—that is, that the toiling masses of society possessed cer-
tain inherent rights which kingcraft, hereditary aristocracy, landlordism and usury
mongers must respect. As a result of the doctrine studiously inculcated by the
philosophers of the French Revolution, we had the revolt of the blacks of Haiti,
under the heroic Touissaint L’Ouverture, the bloody Dessalines and the suave,
diplomatic and courtly Christophe, by which the blacks secured forever their
freedom as free men and their independence as a people; and our own great
Revolution, wherein the leading complaint was taxation by the British govern-
ment of the American colonies without conceding them proportionate represen-
tation. At bottom in each case, bread and butter was the main issue. So it has
always been. So it will continue to be, until the scales of justice are made to strike
a true balance between labor on the one hand and the interest on capital invested
and the wages of superintendence on the other. Heretofore the interest on capi-
tal and the wages of superintendence have absorbed so much of the wealth pro-
duced as to leave barely nothing to the share of labor.
It should be borne in mind that of this trinity labor is the supreme potential-
ity. Capital, in the first instance, is the product of labor. If there had never been
any labor there would not now be any capital to invest. Again, if a bonfire were
made of all the so-called wealth of the world it would only require a few years for
labor to reproduce it; but destroy the brawn and muscle of the world and it could
not be reproduced by all the gold ever delved from the mines of California and
Australia and the fabulous gems from the diamond fields of Africa. In short, labor
has been and is the producing agency, while capital has been and is the absorbing
or parasitical agency.
Should we, therefore, be surprised that with the constantly growing intelli-
gence and democratization of mankind labor should have grown discontented at
the systematic robbery practiced upon it for centuries, and should now clamor for
a more equitable basis of adjustment of the wealth it produces?
I could name you a dozen men who have in the last forty or fifty years amassed
among them a billion dollars, so that a millionaire has become as common a thing
almost as a pauper. How came they by their millions? Is it possible for a man in
his lifetime, under the most favorable circumstances, to amass a million dollars?
Not at all! The constitution of our laws must be such that they favor one as against
the other to permit of such a glaring disparity.
I have outlined for you the past and present relations of capital and labor. The
widespread discontent of the labor classes in our own country and in Europe gives
emphasis to the position here taken.
I abhor injustice and oppression wherever they are to be found, and my best
sympathies go out freely to the struggling poor and the tyranny-ridden of all races
and lands. I believe in the divine right of man, not of caste or class, and I believe
that any law made to perpetuate or to give immunity to these as against the
masses of mankind is an infamous and not-to-be-borne infringement of the just


--- PAGE 169 ---
laws of the Creator, who sends each of us into the world as naked as a newly
fledged jay bird and crumbles us back into the elements of Mother Earth by the
same processes of mutation and final dissolution.
The social and material differences which obtain in the relations of mankind
are the creations of man, not of God. God never made such a spook as a king or
a duke; he never made such an economic monstrosity as a millionaire; he never
gave John Jones the right to own a thousand or a hundred thousand acres of land,
with their complement of air and water. These are the conditions of man, who has
sold his birthright to the Shylocks of the world and received not even a mess of
pottage for his inheritance. The thing would really be laughable, if countless mil-
lions from the rice swamps of the Carolinas to the delvers in the mines of Russian
Siberia, were not ground to powder to make a holiday for some selfish idler.
Everywhere labor and capital are in deadly conflict. The battle has been rag-
ing for centuries, but the opposing forces are just now in a position for that death
struggle which it was inevitable must come before the end was. Nor is it within
the scope of finite intelligence to forecast the lines upon which the settlement will
be made. Capital is entrenched behind ten centuries of law and conservatism, and
controlled withal by the wisest and coolest heads in the world. The inequality of
the forces joined will appear very obvious. Yet the potentiality of labor will be able
to force concessions from time to time, even as the commoners of England have
through centuries been able to force from royalty relinquishment of prerogative
after prerogative, until, from having been among the most despotic of govern-
ments under Elizabeth, the England of today under Queen Victoria is but a royal
shadow. So the time may come when the forces of labor will stand upon absolute
equality with those of capital, and that harmony between them obtain which has
been sought for by wise men and fools for a thousand years.
Source: Speech delivered on April 20, 1886, Brooklyn Literary Union, printed in the New
York Freeman, May 1, 1886.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
T. Thomas Fortune, Black and White: Land, Labor, and Politics in the South (New York:
Fords, Howard & Hubert, 1884; reprinted, New York: Arno, 1968).
August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1966).
Emma Lou Thornbrough, T. Thomas Fortune: Militant Abolitionist(Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1972).
O5 O
Edward Wilmot Blyden and the African Diaspora
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) was in many respects the first important the-
orist of Pan-Africanism—the concept that people of African descent have a com-
1 3 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 170 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 3 9
mon cultural, social, and political destiny, and that struggles for black empower-
ment and nationalism must transcend geographical boundaries. Born in Charlotte
Amalie, St. Thomas, Danish Virgin Islands, of free parents, Blyden moved to
Liberia in 1851. He rose rapidly as an educator, minister, and journalist. In 1855
he edited the Liberia Herald, and in 1864 was named Liberia’s Secretary of State.
As a professor of classics, Greek, and Latin at Liberia College from 1861 to 1871,
he actively encouraged blacks in the United States to emigrate to Liberia. In his
later career, Blyden served as Liberia’s Ambassador to Great Britain and as Presi-
dent of the American Colonization Society. Blyden’s most famous work, Christi-
anity, Islam and the Negro Race, published in 1887, promoted Islam as a religion
that could unify and advance the black world. Negro, a periodical published by
Blyden, was the first journal that openly advocated the ideas of Pan-Africanism.
O
THE AFRICAN PROBLEM AND THE METHOD OF ITS SOLUTION
I am seriously impressed with a sense of the responsibility of my position to-night.
I stand in the presence of the representatives of that great organization which
seems first of all the associations in this country to have distinctly recognized the
hand of God in the history of the Negro race in America—to have caught some-
thing of the meaning of the Divine purpose in permitting their exile to and
bondage in this land. I stand also in the presence of what, for the time being at
least, must be considered the foremost congregation of the land—the religious
home of the President of the United States. There are present, also, I learn, on
this occasion, some of the statesmen and lawmakers of the land.
My position, then, is one of honor as well as of responsibility, and the message
I have to deliver, I venture to think, concerns directly or indirectly the whole
human race. I come from that ancient country, the home of one of the great orig-
inal races, occupied by the descendants of one of the three sons to whom, accord-
ing to Biblical history, the whole world was assigned—a country which is now
engaging the active attention of all Europe. I come, also, from the ancestral home
of at least five millions in this land. Two hundred millions of people have sent me
on an errand of invitation to their blood relations here. Their cry is, “Come over
and help us.” And I find among hundreds of thousands of the invited an eager and
enthusiastic response. . . .
. . . It would appear that the world outside of Africa has not yet stopped to con-
sider the peculiar conditions which lift that continent out of the range of the ordi-
nary agencies by which Europe has been able to occupy other countries and sub-
jugate or exterminate their inhabitants.
They have not stopped to ponder the providential lessons on this subject scat-
tered through the pages of history, both past and contemporary.
First. Let us take the most obvious lesson as indicated in the climatic condi-
tions. Perhaps in no country in the world is it so necessary (as in Africa) that the
stranger or new comer should possess the mens sana in corpore sano—the sound
mind in sound body; for the climate is most searching, bringing to the surface any
and every latent physical or mental defect. If a man has any chronic or hereditary


--- PAGE 171 ---
disease it is sure to be developed, and if wrong medical treatment is applied it is
very apt to be exaggerated and often to prove fatal to the patient. And as with the
body so with the mind. Persons of weak minds, either inherited or brought on by
excessive mental application or troubles of any kind, are almost sure to develop an
impatience or irritability, to the surprise and annoyance of their friends who knew
them at home. The Negro immigrant from a temperate region sometimes suffers
from these climatic inconveniences, only in his case, after a brief process of
acclimatization, he becomes himself again, while the white man never regains his
soundness in that climate, and can retain his mental equilibrium only by periodi-
cal visits to his native climate. The regulation of the British Government for West
Africa is that their officials are allowed six months’ leave of absence to return to
Europe after fifteen month’s residence at Sierra Leone and twelve months on the
Gold Coast or Lagos; and for every three days during which they are kept on the
coast after the time for their leave arrives, they are allowed one day in Europe. The
neglect of this regulation is often attended with most serious consequences.
Second. When we come into the moral and intellectual world it would seem as
if the Almighty several times attempted to introduce the foreigner and a foreign
civilization into Africa and then changed his purpose. The Scriptures seem to war-
rant the idea that in some way inexplicable to us, and incompatible with our con-
ception of the character of the Sovereign of the Universe, the unchangeable
Being sometimes reverses His apparent plans. We read that, “it repented God,”
&c. For thousands of years the northeastern portion of Africa witnessed a won-
derful development of civilization. The arts and sciences flourished in Egypt for
generations, and that country was the centre of almost universal influence; but
there was no effect produced upon the interior of Africa. So North Africa became
the seat of a great military and commercial power which flourished for 700 years.
After this the Roman Catholic Church constructed a mighty influence in the same
region, but the interior of the continent received no impression from it.
In the fifteenth century the Congo country, of which we now hear so much, was
the scene of extensive operations of the Roman Catholic Church. Just a little before
the discovery of America thousands of the natives of the Congo, including the most
influential families, were baptized by Catholic missionaries; and the Portuguese, for
a hundred years, devoted themselves to the work of African evangelization and
exploration. It would appear that they knew just as much of interior Africa as is
known now after the great exploits of Speke and Grant and Livingstone, Baker and
Cameron and Stanley. It is said that there is a map in the Vatican, three hundred
years old, which gives all the general physical relief and the river and lake systems
of Africa with more or less accuracy; but the Arab geographers of a century before
had described the mountain system, the great lakes, and the course of the Nile.
Just about the time that Portugal was on the way to establish a great empire on
that continent, based upon the religious system of Rome, America was discov-
ered, and, instead of the Congo, the Amazon became the seat of Portuguese
power. Neither Egyptian, Carthaginian, Persian, or Roman influence was allowed
to establish itself on that continent. It would seem that in the providential pur-
1 4 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 172 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 4 1
pose no solution of the African problem was to come from alien sources. Africans
were not doomed to share the fate of some other dark races who have come in
contact with the aggressive European. Europe was diverted to the Western
Hemisphere. The energies of that conquering race, it was decreed, should be
spent in building up a home for themselves on this side. Africa followed in chains.
The Negro race was to be preserved for a special and important work in the
future. Of the precise nature of that work no one can form any definite concep-
tion. It is probable that if foreign races had been allowed to enter their country
they would have been destroyed. So they were brought over to be helpers in this
country and at the same time to be preserved. It was not the first time in the his-
tory of the world that a people have been preserved by subjection to another peo-
ple. We know that God promised Abraham that his seed should inherit the land
of Canaan; but when He saw that in their numerically weak condition they would
have been destroyed in conflicts with the indigenous inhabitants, he took them
down to Egypt and kept them there in bondage four hundred years that they
might be fitted, both by discipline and numerical increase, for the work that
would devolve upon them. Slavery would seem to be a strange school in which to
preserve a people; but God has a way of salting as well as purifying by fire.
The Europeans, who were fleeing from their own country in search of wider
areas of freedom and larger scope for development, found here an aboriginal race
unable to co-operate with them in the labors required for the construction of the
material framework of the new civilization. The Indians would not work, and they
have suffered the consequences of that indisposition. They have passed away. To
take their place as accessories in the work to be done God suffered the African to
be brought hither, who could work and would work, and could endure the cli-
matic conditions of a new southern country, which Europeans could not. Two cur-
rents set across the Atlantic towards the west for nigh three hundred years—the
one from Europe, the other from Africa. The one from Africa had a crimson color.
From that stream of human beings millions fell victims to the cruelties of the mid-
dle passage, and otherwise suffered from the brutal instincts of their kidnappers
and enslavers. I do not know whether Africa has been invited to the celebration
of the fourth centenary of the discovery of America; but she has quite as much
reason, if not as much right, to participate in the demonstration of that occasion
as the European nations. Englishman, Hollander, and Huguenot, Nigritian and
Congo came together. If Europe brought the head, Africa furnished the hands for
a great portion of the work which has been achieved here, though it was the opin-
ion of an African chief that the man who discovered America ought to have been
imprisoned for having uncovered one people for destruction and opened a field
for the oppression and suffering of another.
But when the new continent was opened Africa was closed. The veil, which
was being drawn aside, was replaced, and darkness once more enveloped the
land, for then not the country but the people were needed. They were to do a
work elsewhere, and meanwhile their country was to be shut out from the view of
the outside world.


--- PAGE 173 ---
The first Africans landed in this country in the State of Virginia in the year
1619. Then began the first phase of what is called the Negro problem. These peo-
ple did not come hither of their own accord. Theirs was not a voluntary but a com-
pulsory expatriation. The problem, then, on their arrival in this country, which
confronted the white people was how to reduce to effective and profitable servi-
tude an alien race which it was neither possible nor desirable to assimilate. This
gave birth to that peculiar institution, established in a country whose raison d’etre
was that all men might enjoy the “right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happi-
ness.” Laws had to be enacted by Puritans, Cavaliers, and Roundheads for slaves,
and every contrivance had to be devised for the safety of the institution. It was a
difficult problem, in the effort to solve which both master and slave suffered.
It would seem, however, that in the first years of African slavery in this coun-
try, the masters upon many of whom the relationship was forced, understood its
providential origin and purpose, until after a while, avarice and greed darkened
their perceptions, and they began to invent reasons, drawn even from the Word
of God, to justify their holding these people in perpetual bondage for the advan-
tage of themselves and their children forever. But even after a blinding cupidity
had captured the generality by its bewitching spell, there were those (far-sighted
men, especially after the yoke of Great Britain had been thrown off) who saw that
the abnormal relation could not be permanent under the democratic conditions
established by the fundamental law of the land. It was Thomas Jefferson, the
writer of the Declaration of Independence, who made the celebrated utterance:
“Nothing is more clearly written in the Book of Destiny than the emancipation of
the blacks; and it is equally certain that the two races will never live in a state of
equal freedom under the same Government, so insurmountable are the barriers
which nature, habit, and opinion have established between them.”
For many years, especially in the long and weary period of the antislavery con-
flict, the latter part of this dictum of Jefferson was denounced by many good and
earnest men. The most intelligent of the colored people resented it as a preju-
diced and anti-Christian conception. But as the years go by and the Negroes rise
in education and culture, and therefore in love and pride of race, and in proper
conception of race gifts, race work and race destiny, the latter clause of that
famous sentence is not only being shorn of its obscurity and repulsiveness, but is
being welcomed as embodying a truth indispensable to the preservation and pros-
perity of both races, and as pointing to the regeneration of the African
Fatherland. There are some others of the race who, recognizing Jefferson’s prin-
ciple, would make the races one by amalgamation.
It was under the conviction of the truth expressed by that statesman that cer-
tain gentlemen of all political shades and differing religious views, met together
in this city in the winter of 1816–’17, and organized the American Colonization
Society. Though friendly to the antislavery idea, and anxious for the extinction of
the abnormal institution, these men did not make their views on that subject
prominent in their published utterances. They were not Abolitionists in the polit-
ical or technical sense of that phrase. But their labors furnished an outlet and
encouragement for persons desiring to free their slaves, giving them the assur-
1 4 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 174 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 4 3
ance that their freedmen would be returned to their Fatherland, carrying thither
what light of Christianity and civilization they had received. It seems a pity that
this humane, philanthropic, and far-seeing work should have met with organized
opposition from another band of philanthropists, who, anxious for a speedy deliv-
erance of the captives, thought they saw in the Colonization Society an agency for
riveting instead of breaking the fetters of the slave, and they denounced it with all
the earnestness and eloquence they could command, and they commanded, both
among whites and blacks, some of the finest orators the country has ever pro-
duced. And they did a grand work, both directly and indirectly, for the Negro and
for Africa. They did their work and dissolved their organization. But when their
work was done the work of the Colonization Society really began.
In the development of the Negro question in this country the colonizationists
might be called the prophets and philosophers; the abolitionists, the warriors and
politicians. Colonizationists saw what was coming and patiently prepared for its
advent. Abolitionists attacked the first phase of the Negro problem and labored
for its immediate solution; colonizationists looked to the last phase of the problem
and labored to get both the whites and blacks ready for it. They labored on two
continents, in America and in Africa. Had they not begun as early as they did to
take up lands in Africa for the exiles, had they waited for the abolition of slavery,
it would now have been impossible to obtain a foothold in their fatherland for the
returning hosts. The colonizationist, as prophet, looked at the State as it would be;
the abolitionist, as politician, looked at the State as it was. The politician sees the
present and is possessed by it. The prophet sees the future and gathers inspiration
from it. The politician may influence legislation; the prophet, although exercising
great moral influence, seldom has any legislative power. The agitation of the politi-
cian may soon culminate in legal enactments; the teachings of the prophet may
require generations before they find embodiment in action. The politician has to-
day; the prophet, to-morrow. The politician deals with facts, the prophet with
ideas, and ideas take root very slowly. Though nearly three generations have
passed away since Jefferson made his utterance, and more than two since the
organization of the Colonization Society, yet the conceptions they put forward can
scarcely be said to have gained maturity, much less currency, in the public mind.
But the recent discussions in the halls of Congress show that the teachings of the
prophet are now beginning to take hold of the politician. It may take many years
yet before the people come up to these views, and, therefore, before legislation
upon them may be possible, but there is evidently movement in that direction.
The first phase of the Negro problem was solved at Appomattox, after the bat-
tle of the warrior, with confused noise and garments rolled in blood. The institu-
tion of slavery, for which so many sacrifices had been made, so many of the prin-
ciples of humanity had been violated, so many of the finer sentiments of the heart
had been stifled, was at last destroyed by violence.
Now the nation confronts the second phase, the educational, and millions are
being poured out by State governments and by individual philanthropy for the
education of the freedmen, preparing them for the third and last phase of the
problem, viz: E
MIGRATION.


--- PAGE 175 ---
In this second phase, we have that organization, which might be called the suc-
cessor of the old Anti-Slavery Society, taking a most active and effective part. I
mean the American Missionary Association. I have watched with constant grati-
tude and admiration the course and operations of that Society, especially when I
remember that, organized in the dark days of slavery, twenty years before eman-
cipation, it held aloft courageously the banner on which was inscribed freedom
for the Negro and no fellowship with his oppressors. And they, among the first,
went South to lift the freedmen from the mental thraldom and moral degradation
in which slavery had left him. They triumphed largely over the spirit of their
opponents. They braved the dislike, the contempt, the apprehension with which
their work was at first regarded, until they succeeded by demonstrating the
advantages of knowledge over ignorance, to bring about that state of things to
which Mr. Henry Grady, in his last utterances, was able to refer with such satis-
faction, viz., that since the war the South has spent $122,000,000 in the cause of
public education, and this year it is pledged to spend $37,000,000, in the benefits
of which the Negro is a large participant.
It is not surprising that some of those who, after having been engaged in the
noble labors of solving the first phase of the problem—in the great anti-slavery
war—and are now confronting the second phase, should be unable to receive
with patience the suggestion of the third, which is the emigration phase, when the
Negro, freed in body and in mind, shall bid farewell to these scenes of his
bondage and discipline and betake himself to the land of his fathers, the scene of
larger opportunities and loftier achievements. I say it is not surprising that the
veterans of the past and the present should be unable to give much enthusiasm
to the work of the future. It is not often given to man to labor successfully in the
land of Egypt, in the wilderness and across the Jordan. Some of the most effec-
tive workers, must often, with eyes undimmed and natural force unabated, lie
down and die on the borders of full freedom, and if they live, life to them is like
a dream. The young must take up the work. To old men the indications of the
future are like a dream. Old men are like them that dream. Young men see
visions. They catch the spirit of the future and are able to place themselves in
accord with it.
But things are not yet ready for the solution of the third and last phase of the
problem. Things are not ready in this country among whites or blacks. The indus-
trial condition of the South is not prepared for it. Things are not yet ready in
Africa for a complete exodus. Europe is not yet ready; she still thinks that she can
take and utilize Africa for her own purposes. She does not yet understand that
Africa is to be for the African or for nobody. Therefore she is taking up with
renewed vigor, and confronting again, with determination, the African problem.
Englishmen, Germans, Italians, Belgians, are taking up territory and trying to
wring from the grey-haired mother of civilization the secret of the ages. Nothing
has come down from Egypt so grand and impressive as the Sphinxes that look at
you with calm and emotionless faces, guarding their secret to-day as they formerly
guarded the holy temples. They are a symbol of Africa. She will not be forced. She
1 4 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 176 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 4 5
only can reveal her secret. Her children trained in the house of bondage will show
it to the world. Some have already returned and have constructed an independent
nation as a beginning of this work on her western borders.
It is a significant fact that Africa was completely shut up until the time arrived
for the emancipation of her children in the Western World. When Jefferson and
Washington and Hamilton and Patrick Henry were predicting and urging the
freedom of the slave, Mungo Park was beginning that series of explorations by
English enterprise which has just ended in the expedition of Stanley. Just about
the time that England proclaimed freedom throughout her colonies, the brothers
Lander made the great discovery of the mouth of the Niger; and when Lincoln
issued the immortal proclamation, Livingstone was unfolding to the world that
wonderful region which Stanley has more fully revealed and which is becoming
now the scene of the secular and religious activities of Christendom. The King of
the Belgians has expended fortunes recently in opening the Congo and in intro-
ducing the appliances of civilization, and by a singular coincidence a bill has been
brought forward in the U.S. Senate to assist the emigration of Negroes to the
Fatherland just at the time when that philanthropic monarch has despatched an
agent to this country to invite the co-operation in his great work of qualified
freedmen. This is significant.
What the King of the Belgians has just done is an indication of what other
European Powers will do when they have exhausted themselves in costly experi-
ments to utilize white men as colonists in Africa. They will then understand the
purpose of the Almighty in having permitted the exile and bondage of the
Africans, and they will see that for Africa’s redemption the Negro is the chosen
instrument. They will encourage the establishment and building up of such States
as Liberia. They will recognize the scheme of the Colonization Society as the
providential one.
The little nation which has grown up on that coast as a result of the efforts of
this Society, is now taking hold upon that continent in a manner which, owing to
inexperience, it could not do in the past. The Liberians have introduced a new arti-
cle into the commerce of the world—the Liberian coffee. They are pushing to the
interior, clearing up the forests, extending the culture of coffee, sugar, cocoa, and
other tropical articles, and are training the aborigines in the arts of civilization and
in the principles of Christianity. The Republic occupies five hundred miles of coast
with an elastic interior. It has a growing commerce with various countries of
Europe and America. No one who has visited that country and has seen the farms
on the banks of the rivers and in the interior, the workshops, the schools, the
churches, and other elements and instruments of progress will say that the United
States, through Liberia, is not making a wholesome impression upon Africa—an
impression which, if the members of the American Congress understood, they
would not begrudge the money required to assist a few hundred thousand to carry
on in that country the work so well begun. They would gladly spare them from the
laboring element of this great nation to push forward the enterprises of civilization
in their Fatherland, and to build themselves up on the basis of their race manhood.


--- PAGE 177 ---
If there is an intelligent Negro here to-night I will say to him, let me take you
with me in imagination to witness the new creation or development on that distant
shore; I will not paint you an imaginary picture, but will describe an historical fact;
I will tell you of reality. Going from the coast, through those depressing alluvial
plains which fringe the eastern and western borders of the continent, you reach,
after a few miles’ travel, the first high or undulating country, which, rising abruptly
from the swamps, enchants you with its solidity, its fertility, its verdure, its refresh-
ing and healthful breezes. You go further, and you stand upon a higher elevation
where the wind sings more freshly in your ears, and your heart beats fast as you
survey the continuous and unbroken forests that stretch away from your feet to the
distant horizon. The melancholy cooing of the pigeons in some unseen retreat or
the more entrancing music of livelier and picturesque songsters alone disturb the
solemn and almost oppressive solitude. You hear no human sound and see the
traces of no human presence. You decline to pursue your adventurous journey. You
refuse to penetrate the lonely forest that confronts you. You return to the coast,
thinking of the long ages which have elapsed, the seasons which, in their onward
course, have come and gone, leaving those solitudes undisturbed. You wonder
when and how are those vast wildernesses to be made the scene of human activity
and to contribute to human wants and happiness. Finding no answer to your per-
plexing question you drop the subject from your thoughts. After a few years—a
very few it may be—you return to those scenes. To your surprise and gratification
your progress is no longer interrupted by the inconvenience of bridle-paths and
tangled vines. The roads are open and clear. You miss the troublesome creeks and
drains which, on your previous journey, harassed and fatigued you. Bridges have
been constructed, and without any of the former weariness you find yourself again
on the summit, where in loneliness you had stood sometime before. What do you
now see? The gigantic trees have disappeared, houses have sprung up on every
side. As far as the eye can see the roofs of comfortable and homelike cottages peep
through the wood. The waving corn and rice and sugar-cane, the graceful and fra-
grant coffee tree, the unbrageous cocoa, orange, and mango plum have taken the
place of the former sturdy denizens of the forest. What has brought about the
change? The Negro emigrant has arrived from America, and, slender though his
facilities have been, has produced these wonderful revolutions. You look beyond
and take in the forests that now appear on the distant horizon. You catch glimpses
of native villages embowered in plantain trees, and you say these also shall be
brought under civilized influences, and you feel yourself lifted into manhood, the
spirit of the teacher and guide and missionary comes upon you, and you say,
“There, below me and beyond lies the world into which I must go. There must I
cast my lot. I feel I have a message to it, or a work in it”; and the sense that there
are thousands dwelling there, some of whom you may touch, some of whom you
may influence, some of whom may love you or be loved by you, thrills you with a
strange joy and expectation, and it is a thrill which you can never forget; for ever
and anon it comes upon you with increased intensity. In that hour you are born
again. You hear forevermore the call ringing in your ears, “Come over and help us.”
1 4 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 178 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 4 7
These are the visions that rise before the Liberian settler who has turned away
from the coast. This is the view that exercises such an influence upon his imagi-
nation, and gives such tone to his character, making him an independent and pro-
ductive man on the continent of his fathers.
As I have said, this is no imaginary picture, but the embodiment of sober his-
tory. Liberia, then, is a fact, an aggressive and progressive fact, with a great deal
in its past and everything in its future that is inspiring and uplifting.
It occupies one of the most charming countries in the western portion of that
continent. It has been called by qualified judges the garden spot of West Africa. I
love to dwell upon the memories of scenes which I have passed through in the
interior of that land. I have read of countries which I have not visited—the
grandeur of the Rocky Mountains and the charms of the Yosemite Valley, and my
imagination adds to the written description and becomes a gallery of delightful pic-
tures. But of African scenes my memory is a treasure-house in which I delight to
revel. I have distinctly before me the days and dates when I came into contact with
their inexhaustible beauties. Leaving the coast line, the seat of malaria, and where
are often seen the remains of the slaver’s barracoons, which always give an impres-
sion of the deepest melancholy, I come to the high tablelands with their mountain
scenery and lovely valleys, their meadow streams and mountain rivulets, and there
amid the glories of a changeless and unchanging nature, I have taken off my shoes
and on that consecrated ground adored the God and Father of the Africans.
This is the country and this is the work to which the American Negro is invited.
This is the opening for him which, through the labors of the American Coloniza-
tion Society, has been effected. This organization is more than a colonizationsoci-
ety, more than an emigration society. It might with equal propriety and perhaps
with greater accuracy be called the African RepatriationSociety; or since the idea
of planting towns and introducing extensive cultivation of the soil is included in
its work, it might be called the African Repatriation and Colonization Society, for
then you bring in a somewhat higher idea than mere colonization—the mere set-
tling of a new country by strangers—you bring in the idea of restoration, of com-
pensation to a race and country much and long wronged.
Colonizationists, notwithstanding all that has been said against them, have
always recognized the manhood of the Negro and been willing to trust him to take
care of himself. They have always recognized the inscrutable providence by which
the African was brought to these shores. They have always taught that he was
brought hither to be trained out of his sense of irresponsibility to a knowledge of
his place as a factor in the great work of humanity; and that after having been thus
trained he could find his proper sphere of action only in the land of his origin to
make a way for himself. They have believed that it has not been given to the white
man to fix the intellectual or spiritual status of this race. They have recognized
that the universe is wide enough and God’s gifts are varied enough to allow the
man of Africa to find out a path of his own within the circle of genuine human
interests, and to contribute from the field of his particular enterprise to the
resources—material, intellectual, and moral—of the great human family.


--- PAGE 179 ---
But will the Negro go to do this work?
Is he willing to separate himself from a settled civilization which he has helped
to build up to betake himself to the wilderness of his ancestral home and begin
anew a career on his own responsibility?
I believe that he is. And if suitable provision were made for their departure to-
morrow hundreds of thousands would avail themselves of it. The African ques-
tion, or the Negro problem, is upon the country, and it can no more be ignored
than any other vital interest. The chief reason, it appears to me, why it is not more
seriously dealt with is because the pressure of commercial and political exigencies
does not allow time and leisure to the stronger and richer elements of the nation
to study it. It is not a question of color simply—that is a superficial accident. It
lies deeper than color. It is a question of race, which is the outcome not only of
climate, but of generations subjected to environments which have formed the
mental and moral constitution.
It is a question in which two distinct races are concerned. This is not a ques-
tion then purely of reason. It is a question also of instinct. Races feel; observers
theorize.
The work to be done beyond the seas is not to be a reproduction of what we
see in this country. It requires, therefore, distinct race perception and entire race
devotion. It is not to be the healing up of an old sore, but the unfolding of a new
bud, an evolution; the development of a new side of God’s character and a new
phase of humanity. God said to Moses, “I am that I am”; or, more exactly, “I shall
be that I shall be.” Each race sees from its own standpoint a different side of the
Almighty. The Hebrews could not see or serve God in the land of the Egyptians;
no more can the Negro under the Anglo-Saxon. He can serve man here. He can
furnish the labor of the country, but to the inspiration of the country he must ever
be an alien.
In that wonderful sermon of St. Paul on Mars Hill in which he declared that
God hath made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the
earth and hath determined the bounds of their habitation, he also said, “In Him
we live and move and have our being.” Now it cannot be supposed that in the
types and races which have already displayed themselves God has exhausted him-
self. It is by God in us, where we have freedom to act out ourselves, that we do
each our several work and live out into action, through our work, whatever we
have within us of noble and wise and true. What we do is, if we are able to be true
to our nature, the representation of some phase of the Infinite Being. If we live
and move and have our being in Him, God also lives, and moves and has His
being in us. This is why slavery of any kind is an outrage. It spoils the image of
God as it strives to express itself through the individual or the race. As in the
Kingdom of Nature, we see in her great organic types of being, in the movement,
changes, and order of the elements, those vast thoughts of God, so in the great
types of man, in the various races of the world, as distinct in character as in work,
in the great divisions of character, we see the will and character and conscious-
ness of God disclosed to us. According to this truth a distinct phase of God’s char-
acter is set forth to be wrought out into perfection in every separate character. As
1 4 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 180 ---
E.W. BLYDEN AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA 1 4 9
in every form of the inorganic universe we see some noble variation of God’s
thought and beauty, so in each separate man, in each separate race, something of
the absolute is incarnated. The whole of mankind is a vast representation of the
Deity. Therefore we cannot extinguish any race either by conflict or amalgama-
tion without serious responsibility.
You can easily see then why one race overshadowed by another should long to
express itself—should yearn for the opportunity to let out the divinity that stirs
within it. This is why the Hebrews cried to God from the depths of their affliction
in Egypt, and this is why thousands and thousands of Negroes in the South are
longing to go to the land of their fathers. They are not content to remain where
everything has been done on the line of another race. They long for the scenes
where everything is to be done under the influence of a new racial spirit, under
the impulse of new skies and the inspiration of a fresh development. Only those
are fit for this new work who believe in the race—have faith in its future—a
prophetic insight into its destiny from a consciousness of its possibilities. The
inspiration of the race is in the race.
Only one race has furnished the prophets for humanity—the Hebrew race;
and before they were qualified to do this they had to go down to the depths of
servile degradation. Only to them were revealed those broad and pregnant prin-
ciples upon which every race can stand and work and grow; but for the special
work of each race the prophets arise among the people themselves.
What is pathetic about the situation is, that numbers among whites and blacks
are disposed to ignore the seriousness and importance of the question. They seem
to think it a question for political manipulation and to be dealt with by partisan
statesmanship, not recognizing the fact that the whole country is concerned. I
freely admit the fact, to which attention has been recently called, that there are
many Afro-Americans who have no more to do with Africa than with Iceland, but
this does not destroy the truth that there are millions whose life is bound up with
that continent. It is to them that the message comes from their brethren across
the deep, “Come over and help us.”
Source: Lecture delivered at the American Colonization Society, Washington, D.C., January
19, 1890.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Edward Wilmot Blyden, Black Spokesman: Select Published Writings of Edward Wilmot
Blyden, ed. Hollis R. Lynch (New York: Humanities Press, 1971).
Howard Brotz, ed., Negro Social and Political Thought: 1850–1920(New York: Basic Books,
1966).
James Conyers, “An Afrocentric Study of the Philosophy of Edward Wilmot Blyden” (Ph.D.
diss., Temple University, 1998).
Hollis R. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832–1912(New York: Oxford
University Press, 1967).
Richard Brent Turner, “Edward Wilmot Blyden and Pan-Africanism: The Ideological Roots
of Islam and Black Nationalism in the United States,” Muslim World: A Quarterly Review
of History, Culture, Religions & the Christian Mission in Islamdom87 (April 1997), pp.
169–82.


--- PAGE 181 ---
O6 O
“The Democratic Idea Is Humanity,” Alexander Crummell, 1888
Alexander Crummell (1819–1898) was born in New York City, and as a young
man was trained to become an Episcopal priest. Refused admission to the
Diocese of Pennsylvania because of his race, he traveled to England in 1848. He
enrolled in Cambridge University, graduating in 1853. For nearly two decades,
Crummell lived in Liberia. Appointed as a professor at Liberia College in 1861,
he authored several books on African-American and African issues. Returning to
the United States in 1872, he founded and pastored St. Luke’s Episcopal Church.
Crummell taught at Howard University from 1895 to 1897. One of his major
achievements was the establishment of the American Negro Academy in 1897,
which was the first society of black scholars in the United States. Crummell
deeply influenced the thinking of the young W. E. B. Du Bois, who dedicated a
chapter to his mentor in The Souls of Black Folk.
O
THE RACE PROBLEM IN AMERICA
The residence of various races of men in the same national community, is a fact
which has occurred in every period of time and in every quarter of the globe. So
well known is this fact of history that the mention of a few special instances will
be sufficient for this occasion.
It took place in earliest times on the plains of Babylon. It was seen on the
banks of the Nile, in the land of the Pharaohs. The same fact occurred again when
the barbarian hosts of the North fell upon effete Roman society, and changed the
fate of Europe. Once more we witness the like fact when the Moors swept along
the banks of the Mediterranean, and seated themselves in might and majesty on
the hills of Granada and along the fertile slopes of Arragon and Castile. And now,
in the 19th century, we have the largest illustration of the same fact in our own
Republic, where are gathered together, in one national community, sixty millions
of people of every race and kindred under the sun. It might be supposed that an
historical fact so large and multiform would furnish a solution of the great race-
problem, which now invites attention in American society. We read the future by
the past. And without doubt there are certain principles of population which are
invariable in their working and universal in their results. Such principles are
inductions from definite conditions, and may be called the laws of population.
They are, too, both historical and predictive. One cannot only ascertain through
them the past condition of States and peoples, but they give a light which opens
up with clearness the future of great commonwealths.
But, singular as it may seem, there is no fixed law of history by which to deter-
mine the probabilities of the race-problem in the United States. We can find
nowhere such invariability of result as to set a principle or determine what may
be called an historical axiom.
1 5 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 182 ---
A. CRUMMELL, “THE DEMOCRATIC IDEA IS HUMANITY” 1 5 1
Observe just here the inevitable confusion which is sure to follow the aim after
historical precedent in this problem.
The descendants of Nimrod and Assur, people of two different stocks, settled
in Babylon; and the result was amalgamation. 1
The Jews and the Egyptians under the Pharaohs inhabited the same country
400 years; but antagonism was the result, and expulsion the final issue.
The Tartars overran China in the tenth century, and the result has been amal-
gamation.
The Goths and Vandals poured into Italy like a flood, and the result has been
absorption.
The Celts and Scandinavians clustered like bees from the fourth to the sixth
centuries in the British Isles, and the result has been absorption.
The Northmen and Gauls have lived side by side in Normandy since the tenth
century, and the result has been absorption.
The Moors and Spaniards came into the closest contact in the sixth century,
and it resulted in constant antagonism and in final expulsion.
The Caucasian and the Indian have lived in close neighborhood on this conti-
nent since 1492, and the result has been the extinction of the Indian.
The Papuan and the Malay have lived side by side for ages in the tropical
regions of the Pacific, and have maintained every possible divergence of tribal
life, of blood, government, and religion, down to the present, and yet have
remained perpetually and yet peacefully separate and distinct.
2
These facts, circling deep historic ages, show that we can find no definite his-
torical precedent or principle applicable to the race-problem in America.
Nevertheless we are not entirely at sea with regard to this problem. There are
certain tendencies, seen for over 200 years in our population, which indicate set-
tled, determinate proclivities, and which show, if I mistake not, the destiny of
races.
What, then, are the probabilities of the future? Do the indications point to
amalgamation or to absorption as the outcome of race-life in America? Are we to
have the intermingling of our peoples into one common blood or the perpetuity
of our diverse stocks, with the abiding integrity of race, blood, and character?
I might meet the theory which anticipates amalgamation by the great princi-
ple manifested in every sphere, viz: “That nature is constantly departing from the
simple to the complex; starting off in new lines from the homogeneous to the het-
erogeneous”; striking out in divers ways into variety; and hence we are hedged in,
in the aim after blood-unity, by a law of nature which is universal, and which
excludes the notion of amalgamation.
But I turn from the abstract to history. It is now about 268 years since the tides
of immigration began to beat upon our shores. This may be called a brief period,
but 268 years is long enough to fix a new type of man. Has such a new type sprung
up here to life? Has a new commingled race, the result of our diverse elements,
come forth from the crucible of our heterogeneous nationality?
We will indulge in no speculation upon this subject. We will exclude even the
faintest tinge of the imagination. The facts alone shall speak for themselves.


--- PAGE 183 ---
First of all is the history of the Anglo-Saxon race in America. In many respects
it has been the foremost element in the American population; in largeness of
numbers, in civil polity and power, in educational impress, and in religious influ-
ence. What has become of this element of our population? Has it been lost in the
current of the divergent streams of life which have been spreading abroad
throughout the land?
Why, every one knows that in New England, in Virginia, in the Far West, along
the Atlantic Seaboard, that fully three-fifths of the whole American population
are the offspring of this same hardy, plodding, common-sense people that they
were centuries ago, when their fathers pressed through the forests of Jamestown
or planted their feet upon the sterile soil of Plymouth.
Some of you may remember the remark of Mr. Lowell, on his return in 1885
from his mission to England. He said that when English people spoke to him of
Americans as a people different from themselves, he always told them that in
blood he was just as much an Englishman as they were; and Mr. Lowell in this
remark was the spokesman of not less than thirty-six millions of men of as direct
Anglo-Saxon descent as the men of Kent or the people of Yorkshire.
The Celtic element came to America in two separate columns. The French
entered Canada in 1607. They came with all that glow, fervor, gallantry, social
aptitudes, and religious loyalty which, for centuries, have characterized the
Gallic blood, and which are still conspicuous features on both sides of the
Atlantic.
The other section of the Celtic family began their immigration about 1640; and
they have almost depopulated Ireland to populate America; and their numbers
now are millions.
One or two facts are observable concerning the French and Irish, viz: (1) That,
although kindred in blood, temperament, and religion, they have avoided both
neighborhood of locality and marital alliance; and (2) so great has been the
increase of the Hibernian family that in Church life and political importance they
form a vast solidarity in the nation.
The German, like the Celtic family, came over in two sections. The Batavian
stock came first from Holland in 1608, and made New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania their habitat. The Germans proper, or High Germans, have been
streaming into the Republic since 1680, bringing with them that steadiness and
sturdiness, that thrift and acquisitiveness, that art and learning, that genius and
acumen, which have given an elastic spring to American culture, depth to philos-
ophy, and inspiration to music and to art.
And here they are in great colonies in the Middle and Western States, and in
vast sections of our great cities. And yet where can one discover any decline in the
purity of German blood, or the likelihood of its ultimate loss in the veins of alien
people?
The Negro contingent was one of the earliest contributions to the American
population. The black man came quickly on the heel of the Cavalier at James-
town, and before the arrival of the Puritan in the east. “That fatal, that perfidious
bark” of Sir John Hawkins, that “ferried the slave captive o’er the sea” from
1 5 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 184 ---
A. CRUMMELL, “THE DEMOCRATIC IDEA IS HUMANITY” 1 5 3
Africa, preceded the Mayflower one year and five months.
From that small cargo and its after arrivals have arisen the large black popula-
tion, variously estimated from 8 to 10,000,000. It is mostly, especially in the wide
rural areas of the South, a purely Negro population. In the large cities there is a
wide intermixture of blood. This, by some writers, is taken as the indication of
ultimate and entire amalgamation. But the past in this incident is no sign of the
future. The gross and violent intermingling of the blood of the southern white
man cannot be taken as an index of the future of the black race.
Amalgamation in its exact sense means the approach of affinities. The word
applied to human beings implies will, and the consent of two parties. In thissense
there has been no amalgamation of the two races; for the Negro in this land has
ever been the truest of men, in marital allegiance, to his own race.
Intermixture of blood there has been—not by the amalgamation, which
implies consent, but through the victimizing of the helpless black woman. But
even this has been limited in extent. Out of 4,500,000 of this race in the census of
1861, 400,000 were set down as of mixed blood. Thousands of these were the
legitimate offspring of colored parents; and the probability is that not more than
150,000 had white fathers. Since emancipation the black woman has gained pos-
session of her own person, and it is the testimony of Dr. Haygood and other emi-
nent Southerners that the base process of intermixture has had a wide and sud-
den decline, and that the likelihood of the so-called amalgamation of the future is
fast dying out.
And now, after this survey of race tides and race life during 268 years, I repeat
the question: “Has a new race, the product of our diverse elements, sprung up
here in America? Or, is there any such a probability for the future?”
Let me answer this question by a recent and striking reference.
Dr. Strong, in his able, startling, striking Tractate, entitled “ Our Country,”
speaks, in ch. 4, p. 44, of the Helvetian settlement in southern Wisconsin. He
deprecates the preservation of its race, its language, its worship, and its customs
in their integrity. In this, you see, he forgets the old Roman adage that “though
men cross the seas they do not change their nature.” He then protests (and
rightly, too) against the perpetuation of race antipathies, and closes his criticism
with the suggestion, similar to that of Canon Rawlinson, of Oxford, viz., that the
American people should seek the solution of the race-problem by universal assim-
ilation of blood.
Dr. Strong evidently forgets that the principle of race is one of the most per-
sistent of all things in the constitution of man. It is one of those structural facts in
our nature which abide with a fixed, vital, and reproductive power.
Races, like families, are the organisms and the ordinance of God; and race feel-
ing, like the family feeling, is of divine origin. The extinction of race feeling is just
as possible as the extinction of family feeling. Indeed, a race is a family. The prin-
ciple of continuity is as masterful in races as it is in families—as it is in nations.
History is filled with the attempts of kings and mighty generals and great states-
men to extinguish this instinct. But their failures are as numerous as their futile
attempts; for this sentiment, alike subtle and spontaneous, has both pervaded and


--- PAGE 185 ---
stimulated society in every quarter. Indeed, as Lord Beaconsfield says, “race is the
key to history.” When once the race-type gets fixed as a new variety, then it acts
precisely as the family life; for, 1
ST, it propagates itself by that divine instinct of
reproduction, vital in all living creatures, and next, 2ND, it has a growth as a “seed
after its own kind and in itself,” whereby the race-type becomes a perpetuity, with
its own distinctive form, constitution, features, and structure. Heredity is just as
true a fact in races as in families, as it is in individuals.
Nay, we see, not seldom, a special persistency in the race life. We see families
and tribes and clans swept out of existence, while race “goes on forever.” Yea,
even nations suffer the same fate. Take, for instance, the unification of States now
constantly occurring. One small nation after another is swallowed up by another
to magnify its strength and importance, and thus the great empires of the world
become colossal powers. But it is observable that the process of unification leaves
untouched the vitality and the persistency of race. You have only to turn to Great
Britain and to Austria to verify this statement. In both nations we see the inten-
sity of race cohesion, and at the same time the process of unification. Indeed, on
all sides, in Europe, we see the consolidation of States; and at the same time the
integration of race: Nature and Providence thus developing that principle of unity
which binds the universe, and yet at the same time manifesting that conserving
power which tends everywhere to fixity of type. And this reminds us of the lines
of Tennyson:
That nature lends such evil dreams?
Are God and nature, then, at strife,
So careful of the type she seems,
So careless of the single life.
Hence, when a race once seats itself permanently in a land it is almost as
impossible to get rid of it as it is to extirpate a plant that is indigenous to its soil.
You can drive out a family from a community. You can rid yourself of a clan or a
single tribe by expulsion. You can swallow up by amalgamation a simple emigrant
people.
But when a 
RACE, i.e., a compact, homogeneous population of one blood,
ancestry, and lineage—numbering, perchance, some eight or ten millions—once
enters a land and settles therein as its home and heritage, then occurs an event as
fixed and abiding as the rooting of the Pyrenees in Spain or the Alps in Italy.
The race-problem, it will thus be seen, cannot be settled by extinction of race.
No amalgamating process can eliminate it. It is not a carnal question—a problem
of breeds, or blood, or lineage.
And even if it were, amalgamation would be an impossibility. How can any one
persuade seven or eight millions of people to forget the ties of race? No one could
force them into the arms of another race. And even then it would take generations
upon generations to make the American people homogeneous in blood and
essential qualities. Thus take one single case: There are thirty millions of Negroes
on the American continent (eight or more millions in the United States of
1 5 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 186 ---
A. CRUMMELL, “THE DEMOCRATIC IDEA IS HUMANITY” 1 5 5
America), and constantly increasing at an immense ratio. Nothing but the sheer-
est, haziest imagination can anticipate the future dissolution of this race and its
final loss; and so, too, of the other races of men in America.
Indeed, the race-problem is a moral one. It is a question entirely of ideas. Its
solution will come especially from the domain of principles. Like all the other
great battles of humanity, it is to be fought out with the weapons of truth. The
race-problem is a question of organic life, and it must be dealt with as an ethical
matter by the laws of the Christian system. “As diseases of the mind are invisible,
so must their remedies be.”
And this brings me to the one vast question that still lingers, i.e., the question
of 
AMITY. Race-life is a permanent element in our system. Can it be maintained
in peace? Can these races give the world the show of brotherhood and fraternity?
Is there a moral remedy in this problem?
Such a state of concord is, we must admit, a rare sight, even in christendom.
There is great friction between Celt and Saxon in Britain. We see the violence of
both Russ and German against the Jew. The bitterness is a mutual one between
Russia on the one hand and Bulgaria and the neighboring dependent principali-
ties on the other, and France and Germany stand facing one another like great
fighting cocks.
All this is by no means assuring, and hence we cannot dismiss this question in
an off-hand and careless manner.
The current, however, does not set all one way. There is another aspect to this
question.
Thus, the Norman and the Frank have lived together harmoniously for cen-
turies; the Welsh, English, and Scotch in England; the Indian, the Spaniard, and
Negro in Brazil, and people of very divergent lineage in Spain.
And now the question arises: What are the probabilities of amity in a land
where exists such wide divergence of race as the Saxon on the one hand and the
Negro on the other?
First of all, let me say that the social idea is to be entirely excluded from con-
sideration. It is absolutely a personal matter, regulated by taste, condition, or
either by racial or family affinities; and there it must remain undisturbed forever.
The Jews in this land are sufficient for themselves. So are the Germans, the
Italians, the Irish, and so are the Negroes. Civil and political freedom trench in
no way upon the domestic state or social relations.
Besides, there is something ignoble in any man, any class, any race of men whin-
ing and crying because they cannot move in spheres where they are not wanted.
But, beyond the social range there should be no compromise; and this country
should be agitated and even convulsed till the battle of liberty is won, and every
man in the land is guaranteed fully every civil and political right and prerogative.
The question of equality pertains entirely to the two domains of civil and polit-
ical life and prerogative.
Now, I wish to show that the probabilities tend toward the complete and entire
civil and political equality of all the peoples of this land.


--- PAGE 187 ---
1st. Observe that this is the age of civil freedom. It has not as yet gained its
fullest triumphs; neither yet has Christianity.
But it is to be observed in the history of man that, in due time, certain princi-
ples get their set in human society, and there is no such thing as successfully
resisting them. Their rise is not a matter of chance or haphazard. It is God’s hand
in history. It is the providence of the Almighty, and no earthly power can stay it.
Such, pre-eminently, was the entrance of Christianity in the centre of the
world’s civilization, and the planting of the idea of human brotherhood amid the
ideas in the laws and legislation of great nations. That was the seed from which
have sprung all the great revolutions in thought and governmental policies during
the Christian era. Its work has been slow, but it has been certain and unfailing. I
cannot pause to narrate all its early victories. We will take a limited period. We
will begin at the dawn of modern civilization, and note the grand achievements of
the idea of Christian brotherhood.
It struck at the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings, and mortally wounded
it. It demanded the extinction of Feudalism, and it got it. It demanded the aboli-
tion of the Slave Trade, and it got it. It demanded the abolition of Russian Serf-
age, and it got it. It demanded the education of the masses, and it got it.
In the early part of the eighteenth century this principle of brotherhood
sprouted forth into a grander and more consummate growth, and generated the
spirit of democracy.
When I speak of the spirit of democracy I have no reference to that spurious,
blustering, self-sufficient spirit which derides God and authority on the one hand,
and crushes the weak and helpless on the other. The democratic spirit I am speak-
ing of is that which upholds the doctrine of human rights; which demands honor
to all men; which recognizes manhood in all conditions; which uses the State as
the means and agency for the unlimited progress of humanity. This principle has
its root in the Scriptures of God, and it has come forth in political society to stay!
In the hands of man it has indeed suffered harm. It has been both distorted and
exaggerated, and without doubt it needs to be chastised, regulated, and sanctified.
But the democratic principle in its essence is of God, and in its normal state it is
the consummate flower of Christianity, and is irresistible because it is the mighty
breath of God.
It is democracy which has demanded the people’s participation in government
and the extension of suffrage, and it got it. It has demanded a higher wage for
labor, and it has got it, and will get more. It has demanded the abolition of Negro
slavery, and it has got it. Its present demand is the equality of man in the State,
irrespective of race, condition, or lineage. The answer to this demand is the solu-
tion of the race-problem.
In this land the crucial test in the race-problem is the civil and political rights
of the black man. The only question now remaining among us for the full triumph
of Christian democracy is the equality of the Negro.
Nay, I take back my own words. It is 
NOT the case of the Negro in this land.
It is the nation which is on trial. The Negro is only the touch-stone. By this black
man she stands or falls.
1 5 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 188 ---
A. CRUMMELL, “THE DEMOCRATIC IDEA IS HUMANITY” 1 5 7
If the black man cannot be free in this land, if he cannot tread with firmness
every pathway to preferment and superiority, neither can the white man. “A
bridge is never stronger than its weakest point.”
In nature’s chain, whatever link you strike,
Tenth or ten-thousandth, breaks the chain alike.
So compact a thing is humanity that the despoiling of an individual is an injury
to society.
This nation has staked her existence on this principle of democracy in her every
fundamental political dogma, and in every organic State document. The demo-
cratic idea is neither Anglo-Saxonism, nor Germanism, nor Hibernianism, but
HUMANITY, and humanity can live when Anglo-Saxonism or any class of the race
of man has perished. Humanity anticipated all human varieties by thousands of
years, and rides above them all, and outlives them all, and swallows up them all!
If this nation is not truly democratic then she must die! Nothing is more
destructive to a nation than an organic falsehood! This nation cannot live—this
nation does not deserve to live—on the basis of a lie!
Her fundamental idea is democracy; and if this nation will not submit herself
to the domination of this idea—if she refuses to live in the spirit of this creed—
then she is already doomed, and she will certainly be damned.
But neither calamity, I ween, is her destiny.
The democratic spirit is of itself a prophecy of its own fulfillment. Its disasters
are trivialities; its repulses only temporary. In this nation the Negro has been the
test for over 200 years. But see how far the Negro has traveled this time.
In less than the lifetime of such a man as the great George Bancroft, observe
the transformation in the status of the Negro in this land. When he was a child
the Negro was a marketable commodity, a beast of the field, a chattel in the sham-
bles, outside of the pale of the law, and ignorant as a pagan.
Nay, when I was a boy of 13, I heard the utterance fresh from the lips of the
great J. C. Calhoun, to wit, that if he could find a Negro who knew the Greek syn-
tax he would then believe that the Negro was a human being and should be
treated as a man.
If he were living to-day he would come across scores of Negroes, not only
versed in the Greek syntax, but doctors, lawyers, college students, clergymen,
some learned professors, and one the author of a new Greek Grammar.
But just here the caste spirit interferes in this race-problem and declares: “You
Negroes may get learning; you may get property; you may have churches and reli-
gion; but this is your limit! This is a white man’s Government! No matter how
many millions you may number, we Anglo-Saxons are to rule!” This is the edict
constantly hissed in the Negro’s ear, in one vast section of the land.
Let me tell you of a similar edict in another land:
Some sixty years ago there was a young nobleman, an undergraduate at Oxford
University, a youth of much talent, learning, and political ambition; but, at the same
time, he was then a foolish youth! His patrician spirit rose in bitter protest against
the Reform Bill of that day, which lessened the power of the British aristocracy and


--- PAGE 189 ---
increased the suffrages of the Commons. He was a clever young fellow, and he
wrote a brilliant poem in defense of his order, notable, as you will see, for its
rhythm, melody, and withal for its—silliness! Here are two lines from it:
Let Laws and Letters, Arts and Learning die;
But give us still our old Nobility.
Yes, let everything go to smash! Let civilization itself go to the dogs, if only an
oligarchy may rule, flourish, and dominate!
We have a blatant provincialism in our own country, whose only solution of the
race-problem is the eternal subjection of the Negro, and the endless domination
of a lawless and self-created aristocracy.
Such men forget that the democratic spirit rejects the factious barriers of
caste, and stimulates the lowest of the kind to the very noblest ambitions of life.
They forget that nations are no longer governed by races, but by ideas. They for-
get that the triumphant spirit of democracy has bred an individualism which
brooks not the restraints of classes and aristocracies. They forget that, regardless
of “Pope, Consul, King,” or oligarchy, this same spirit of democracy lifts up to
place and power her own agents for the rule of the world; and brings to the front,
now a Dane as King of Greece, and now a Frenchman as King of Sweden; now a
Jewish D’Israeli as Prime Minister of England, and now a Gallatin and a Schurz
as cabinet ministers in America. They forget that a Wamba and a Gurth in one
generation, whispering angry discontent in secret places, become, by the inspira-
tion of democracy, the outspoken Hampdens and Sydneys of another. They for-
get that, as letters ripen and education spreads, the “Sambos” and “Pompeys” of
to-day will surely develop into the Touissants and the Christophes, the Wards and
the Garnets of the morrow, champions of their race and vindicators of their rights.
They forget that democracy, to use the words of De Tocqueville, “has severed
every link of the chain” by which aristocracy had fixed every member of the com-
munity, “from the peasant to the king.”
3
They forget that the Church of God is in the world; that her mission is, by the
Holy Ghost, “to take the weak things of the world to confound the mighty,” “to
put down the mighty from their seats, and to exalt them of low degree”; that now,
as in all the ages, she will, by the Gospel, break up tyrannies and useless dynas-
ties, and lift up the masses to nobleness of life, and exalt the humblest of men to
excellence and superiority.
Above all things, they forget that “the King invisible, immortal, eternal” is
upon the throne of the universe; that thither caste, and bigotry, and race-hate can
never reach; that He is everlastingly committed to the interests of the oppressed;
that He is constantly sending forth succors and assistances for the rescue of the
wronged and injured; that He brings all the forces of the universe to grind to pow-
der all the enormities of earth, and to rectify all the ills of humanity, and so has-
ten on the day of universal brotherhood.
By the presence and the power of that Divine Being all the alienations and dis-
severances of men shall be healed; all the race-problems of this land easily be
solved; and love and peace prevail among men.
1 5 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 190 ---
A.J. COOPER, “A VOICE FROM THE SOUTH” 1 5 9
Notes: 1. “Duties of Higher toward Lower Races.” Canon Rawlinson, Princeton Review.
Nov., 1878. 2. See “Physics and Politics,” by Bagehot, pp. 84, 85. 3. Democracy in America,
B. 2, Ch. 2.
Source: Excerpt from 1888 speech, “The Race Problem in America,” in Africa and America:
Addresses and Discourses(Springfield, Mass.: Wiley, 1891), pp. 39–57.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Alexander Crummell, Africa and America(Springfield, Mass.: Wiley, 1891).
———, The Relations and Duties of Free Colored Men in America to Africa (Hartford,
Conn.: Lockwood, 1861).
Rayford W. Logan and Michael R. Winston, eds., Dictionary of American Negro Biography
(New York: W.W. Norton, 1982).
William Jeremiah Moses, Alexander Crummell: A Study of Civilization and Discontent(New
York: Oxford University Press, 1989).
———, ed., Destiny and Race: Selected Writings, 1840–1898 (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1992).
J. R. Oldfield, Alexander Crummell (1819–1898) and the Creation of an African-American
Church in Liberia (Lewiston: E. Mellen Press, 1990).
———, ed., Civilization and Black Progress: Selected Writings of Alexander Crummell on
the South (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1995).
Gregory U. Rigsby, Alexander Crummell: A Pioneer in Nineteenth-Century Pan-African
Thought (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987).
O7 O
“A Voice from the South,” Anna Julia Cooper, 1892
Anna Julia Cooper (1858–1964) was born in Raleigh, North Carolina, the daugh-
ter of a free black woman and a slave father. She was educated at St. Augustine’s
Normal and Collegiate Institute in Raleigh. In 1877 she married an Episcopal
clergyman, George Christopher Cooper, who died two years later. Cooper
enrolled in Oberlin College in 1881, received her B.A. degree in 1884 and mas-
ter’s degree in 1887. Cooper’s outstanding career as an educator, scholar, and pub-
lic lecturer was unequaled for her time. For 39 years she taught mathematics and
later Latin at the M Street High School in Washington, D.C. Cooper participated
in the Pan-African Conference held in London in 1900. She undertook graduate
studies at Columbia University from 1913 to 1916, and received her doctorate
from the University of Paris in 1925. In the 1930s she served as president of
Frelinghuysen University. Her 1892 book, A Voice from the South, is one of the
pivotal early texts in the development of black feminist thought.
O
To-day America counts her millionaires by the thousand; questions of tariff and
questions of currency are the most vital ones agitating the public mind. In this
period, when material prosperity and well earned ease and luxury are assured


--- PAGE 191 ---
facts from a national standpoint, woman’s work and woman’s influence are needed
as never before; needed to bring a heart power into this money getting, dollar-
worshipping civilization; needed to bring a moral force into the utilitarian motives
and interests of the time; needed to stand for God and Home and Native Land
versus gain and greed and grasping selfishness.
There can be no doubt that this fourth centenary of America’s discovery which
we celebrate at Chicago, strikes the keynote of another important transition in the
history of this nation; and the prominence of woman in the management of its cel-
ebration is a fitting tribute to the part she is is destined to play among the forces of
the future. This is the first congressional recognition of woman in this country, and
this Board of Lady Managers constitute the first women legally appointed by any
government to act in a national capacity. This of itself marks the dawn of a new day.
Now the periods of discovery, of settlement, of developing resources and accu-
mulating wealth have passed in rapid succession. Wealth in the nation as in the
individual brings leisure, repose, reflection. The struggle with nature is over, the
struggle with ideas begins. We stand then, it seems to me, in this last decade of
the nineteenth century, just in the portals of a new and untried movement on a
higher plain and in a grander strain than any the past has called forth. It does not
require a prophet’s eye to divine its trend and image its possibilities from the
forces we see already at work around us; nor is it hard to guess what must be the
status of woman’s work under the new regime.
In the pioneer days her role was that of a camp-follower, an additional some-
thing to fight for and be burdened with, only repaying the anxiety and labor she
called forth by her own incomparable gifts of sympathy and appreciative love;
unable herself ordinarily to contend with the bear and the Indian, or to take active
part in clearing the wilderness and constructing the home.
In the second or wealth producing period her work is abreast of man’s, com-
plementing and supplementing, counteracting excessive tendencies, and mollify-
ing over rigorous proclivities.
In the era now about to dawn, her sentiments must strike the keynote and give
the dominant tone. And this because of the nature of her contribution to the world.
Her kingdom is not over physical forces. Not by might, nor by power can she
prevail. Her position must ever be inferior where strength of muscle creates lead-
ership. If she follows the instincts of her nature, however, she must always stand
for the conservation of those deeper moral forces which make for the happiness
of homes and the righteousness of the country. In a reign of moral ideas she is eas-
ily queen.
There is to my mind no grander and surer prophecy of the new era and of
woman’s place in it, than the work already begun in the waning years of the nine-
teenth century by the W.C.T.U.
1 in America, an organization which has even now
reached not only national but international importance, and seems destined to
permeate and purify the whole civilized world. It is the living embodiment of
woman’s activities and woman’s ideas, and its extent and strength rightly prefig-
ure her increasing power as a moral factor.
1 6 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 192 ---
A.J. COOPER, “A VOICE FROM THE SOUTH” 1 6 1
The colored woman of to-day occupies, one may say, a unique position in this
country. In a period of itself transitional and unsettled, her status seems one of the
least ascertainable and definitive of all the forces which make for our civilization.
She is confronted by both a woman question and a race problem, and is as yet an
unknown or an unacknowledged factor in both. While the women of the white
race can with calm assurance enter upon the work they feel by nature appointed
to do, while their men give loyal support and appreciative countenance to their
efforts, recognizing in most avenues of usefulness the propriety and the need of
woman’s distinctive co-operation, the colored woman too often finds herself ham-
pered and shamed by a less liberal sentiment and a more conservative attitude on
the part of those for whose opinion she cares most. That this is not universally true
I am glad to admit. There are to be found both intensely conservative white men
and exceedingly liberal colored men. But as far as my experience goes the aver-
age man of our race is less frequently ready to admit the actual need among the
sturdier forces of the world for woman’s help or influence. That great social and
economic questions await her interference, that she could throw any light on
problems of national import, that her intermeddling could improve the manage-
ment of school systems, or elevate the tone of public institutions, or humanize and
sanctify the far reaching influence of prisons and reformatories and improve the
treatment of lunatics and imbeciles,—that she has a word worth hearing on
mooted questions in political economy, that she could contribute a suggestion on
the relations of labor and capital, or offer a thought on honest money and honor-
able trade, I fear the majority of “Americans of the colored variety” are not yet
prepared to concede. It may be that they do not yet see these questions in their
right perspective, being absorbed in the immediate needs of their own political
complications. A good deal depends on where we put the emphasis in this world;
and our men are not perhaps to blame if they see everything colored by the light
of those agitations in the midst of which they live and move and have their being.
The part they have had to play in American history during the last twenty-five or
thirty years has tended rather to exaggerate the importance of mere political
advantage, as well as to set a fictitious valuation on those able to secure such
advantage. It is the astute politician, the manager who can gain preferment for
himself and his favorites, the demagogue known to stand in with the powers at the
White House and consulted on the bestowal of government plums, whom we set
in high places and denominate great. It is they who receive the hosannas of the
multitude and are regarded as leaders of the people. The thinker and the doer,
the man who solves the problem by enriching his country with an invention worth
thousands or by a thought inestimable and precious is given neither bread nor a
stone. He is too often left to die in obscurity and neglect even if spared in his life
the bitterness of fanatical jealousies and detraction.
And yet politics, and surely American politics, is hardly a school for great
minds. Sharpening rather than deepening, it develops the faculty of taking advan-
tage of present emergencies rather than the insight to distinguish between the
true and the false, the lasting and the ephemeral advantage. Highly cultivated


--- PAGE 193 ---
selfishness rather than consecrated benevolence is its passport to success. Its
votaries are never seers. At best they are but manipulators—often only jugglers.
It is conducive neither to profound statesmanship nor to the higher type of man-
hood. Altruism is its mauvais succès and naturally enough it is indifferent to any
factor which cannot be worked into its own immediate aims and purposes. As
woman’s influence as a political element is as yet nil in most of the commonwealth
of our republic, it is not surprising that with those who place the emphasis on
mere political capital she may yet seem almost a nonentity so far as it concerns
the solution of great national or even racial perplexities.
There are those, however, who value the calm elevation of the thoughtful spec-
tator who stands aloof from the heated scramble; and, above the turmoil and din
of corruption and selfishness, can listen to the teachings of eternal truth and right-
eousness. There are even those who feel that the black man’s unjust and unlawful
exclusion temporarily from participation in the elective franchise in certain states
is after all but a lesson “in the desert” fitted to develop in him insight and dis-
crimination against the day of his own appointed time. One needs occasionally to
stand aside from the hum and rush of human interests and passions to hear the
voices of God. And it not unfrequently happens that the All-loving gives a great
push to certain souls to thrust them out, as it were, from the distracting current
for awhile to promote their discipline and growth, or to enrich them by commu-
nion and reflection. And similarly it may be woman’s privilege from her peculiar
coigne of vantage as a quiet observer, to whisper just the needed suggestion or the
almost forgotten truth. The colored woman, then, should not be ignored because
her bark is resting in the silent waters of the sheltered cove. She is watching the
movements of the contestants none the less and is all the better qualified, perhaps,
to weigh and judge and advise because not herself in the excitement of the race.
Her voice, too, has always been heard in clear, unfaltering tones, ringing the
changes on those deeper interests which make for permanent good. She is always
sound and orthodox on questions affecting the well-being of her race. You do not
find the colored woman selling her birthright for a mess of pottage. Nay, even
after reason has retired from the contest, she has been known to cling blindly with
the instinct of a turtle dove to those principles and policies which to her mind
promise hope and safety for children yet unborn. It is notorious that ignorant
black women in the South have actually left their husbands’ homes and repudi-
ated their support for what was understood by the wife to be race disloyalty, or
“voting away,” as she expresses it, the privileges of herself and little ones.
It is largely our women in the South to-day who keep the black men solid in the
Republican party. The latter as they increase in intelligence and power of discrim-
ination would be more apt to divide on local issues at any rate. They begin to see
that the Grand Old Party regards the Negro’s cause as an outgrown issue, and on
Southern soil at least finds a too intimate acquaintanceship with him a somewhat
unsavory recommendation. Then, too, their political wits have been sharpened to
appreciate the fact that it is good policy to cultivate one’s neighbors and not
depend too much on a distant friend to fight one’s home battles. But the black
woman can never forget—however lukewarm the party may to-day appear—that
1 6 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 194 ---
A.J. COOPER, “A VOICE FROM THE SOUTH” 1 6 3
it was a Republican president who struck the manacles from her own wrists and
gave the possibilities of manhood to her helpless little ones; and to her mind a
Democratic Negro is a traitor and a time-server. Talk as much as you like of venal-
ity and manipulation in the South, there are not many men, I can tell you, who
would dare face a wife quivering in every fiber with the consciousness that her hus-
band is a coward who could be paid to desert her deepest and dearest interests.
Not unfelt, then, if unproclaimed has been the work and influence of the col-
ored women of America.
2 Our list of chieftains in the service, though not long, is
not inferior in strength and excellence, I dare believe, to any similar list which this
country can produce.
Among the pioneers, Frances Watkins Harper could sing with prophetic exal-
tation in the darkest days, when as yet there was not a rift in the clouds over-
hanging her people:
Yes, Ethiopia shall stretch
Her bleeding hands abroad;
Her cry of agony shall reach the burning throne of God.
Redeemed from dust and freed from chains
Her sons shall lift their eyes,
From cloud-capt hills and verdant plains
Shall shouts of triumph rise.
Among preachers of righteousness, an unanswerable silencer of cavilers and
objectors, was Sojourner Truth, that unique and rugged genius who seemed
carved out without hand or chisel from the solid mountain mass; and in pleasing
contrast, Amanda Smith, sweetest of natural singers and pleaders in dulcet tones
for the things of God and of His Christ.
Sarah Woodson Early and Martha Briggs, planting and watering in the school
room, and giving off from their matchless and irresistible personality an impetus
and inspiration which can never die so long as there lives and breathes a remote
descendant of their disciples and friends.
Charlotte Forten Grimké, the gentle spirit whose verses and life link her so
beautifully with America’s great Quaker poet and loving reformer.
Hallie Quinn Brown, charming reader, earnest, effective lecturer and devoted
worker of unflagging zeal and unquestioned power.
Fanny Jackson Coppin, the teacher and organizer, pre-eminent among women
of whatever country or race in constructive and executive force.
These women represent all shades of belief and as many departments of activ-
ity; but they have one thing in common—their sympathy with the oppressed race
in America and the consecration of their several talents in whatever line to the
work of its deliverance and development.
Fifty years ago woman’s activity according to orthodox definitions was on a
pretty clearly cut “sphere,” including primarily the kitchen and the nursery, and
rescued from the barrenness of prison bars by the womanly mania for adorning
every discoverable bit of china or canvass with forlorn looking cranes balanced


--- PAGE 195 ---
idiotically on one foot. The woman of today finds herself in the presence of
responsibilities which ramify through the profoundest and most varied interests
of her country and race. Not one of the issues of this plodding, toiling, sinning,
repenting, falling, aspiring humanity can afford to shut her out, or can deny the
reality of her influence. No plan for renovating society, no scheme for purifying
politics, no reform in church or in state, no moral, social, or economic question,
no movement upward or downward in the human plane is lost on her. A man
once said when told his house was afire: “Go tell my wife; I never meddle with
household affairs.” But no woman can possibly put herself or her sex outside any
of the interests that affect humanity. All departments in the new era are to be
hers, in the sense that her interests are in all and through all; and it is incum-
bent on her to keep intelligently and sympathetically en rapport with all the
great movements of her time, that she may know on which side to throw the
weight of her influence. She stands now at the gateway of this new era of
American civilization. In her hands must be moulded the strength, the wit, the
statesmanship, the morality, all the psychic force, the social and economic inter-
course of that era. To be alive at such an epoch is a privilege, to be a woman then
is sublime.
In this last decade of our century, changes of such moment are in progress, such
new and alluring vistas are opening out before us, such original and radical sug-
gestions for the adjustment of labor and capital, of government and the governed,
of the family, the church and the state, that to be a possible factor though an infin-
itesimal in such a movement is pregnant with hope and weighty with responsibil-
ity. To be a woman in such an age carries with it a privilege and an opportunity
never implied before. But to be a woman of the Negro race in America, and to be
able to grasp the deep significance of the possibilities of the crisis, is to have a her-
itage, it seems to me, unique in the ages. In the first place, the race is young and
full of the elasticity and hopefulness of youth. All its achievements are before it. It
does not look on the masterly triumphs of nineteenth-century civilization with that
blasé world-weary look which characterized the old washed out and worn out races
which have already, so to speak, seen their best days. . . .
Notes: 1. W.C.T.U.: Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, an organization of women that
crusaded against saloons and the drinking of alcohol. 2. In the paragraphs following, Cooper
discusses the nineteenth century’s most influential “colored women of America”: Frances
Watkins Harper (1825–1911), writer, lecturer, and poet, author of the quoted “Yes, Ethiopia
. . .”; Sojourner Truth (1797–1883), evangelist, abolitionist, and feminist; Amanda Smith
(1837–1915), evangelist and reformer; Sarah Woodson Early (1825–1907), pioneer black
feminist-nationalist; Martha Briggs (1838–1889), faculty member and public school admin-
istrator; Charlotte Forten Grimké (1837–1914), antislavery poet, educator, and minister’s
wife; Hallie Quinn Brown (1845–1949), educator and social reformer, a founder of the
National Association of Colored Women; and Fanny Jackson Coppin (1837–1913), educator
and missionary.
Source: Excerpt from A Voice from the South, By a Black Woman from the South (Xenia,
Ohio: Aldine Printing House, 1892).
1 6 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 196 ---
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED WOMEN 1 6 5
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Cathryn Bailey, “Anna Julia Cooper: ‘Dedicated in the Name of My Slave Mother to the
Education of Colored Working People,’” Hypatia 19, no. 2 (Spring 2004), pp. 56–73.
Karen Baker-Fletcher, A Singing Something: Womanist Reflections on Anna Julia Cooper
(New York: Crossroad, 1994).
Ruth Bogin and Bert Lowenburg, Black Women in Nineteenth-Century American Life: Their
Words, Their Thoughts, Their Feelings (University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press, 1985).
Kevin Gaines, Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics and Culture in the Twentieth
Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996).
Kathy L. Glass, “Tending to the Roots: Anna Julia Cooper’s Sociopolitical Thought and
Activism,” Meridians: Feminism, Race, Transnationalism 6, no. 1 (October 2005), pp.
23–55.
LaRese Charmell Hubbard, “An Afrocentric Study of the Intellectual Thought of Anna Julia
Cooper” (Ph.D. diss., Temple University, 2005).
Charles C. Lemert, and Esme Bhan, eds., The Voice of Anna Julia Cooper: Including a Voice
from the South and Other Important Essays, Papers, and Letters (Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield, 1998).
Vivian M. May, Anna Julia Cooper, Visionary Black Feminist: A Critical Introduction
(London: Routledge, 2007).
———, “Thinking from the Margins, Acting at the Intersections: Anna Julia Cooper’s a Voice
from the South,” Hypatia19, no. 2 (Spring 2004), pp. 74–91.
Christiane Warren-Christian, “Anna Julia Cooper: Feminist and Scholar” (Ph.D. diss., Drew
University, 2003).
O8 O
The National Association of Colored Women: 
Mary Church Terrell and Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin
Mary Church Terrell (1863–1954) was born in Memphis, Tennessee, into an
affluent black family. Educated at Oberlin College, she received her bachelor’s
degree in 1884 and her master’s degree four years later. In 1892 she was the first
woman president of the Bethel Literary and Historical Association. In 1895
Terrell was appointed to the Board of Education in Washington, D.C., probably
the first black women to be named to a school board in the United States. Terrell
was a cofounder and the first president of the National Association of Colored
Women (NACW) in 1896. She was active in civil rights and women’s rights causes.
While her husband, Robert Terrell, was a judge and a political ally of Booker T.
Washington, she fearlessly attacked racial segregation. Terrell was for many years
the vice president of the NAACP . At the age of ninety she led and participated in
desegregation demonstrations and picket lines.
Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin (1842–1924) was born and educated in Boston,
worked locally as an advocate of civil rights and women’s suffrage, and main-
tained friendships with Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison. She


--- PAGE 197 ---
gained further prominence through her interest in the Women’s Club
Movement, and she served as president of the National Federation of Afro-
American Women. In 1896, her organization merged into Terrell’s NACW,
where she became vice-president. Ruffin died in Boston in 1924.
O
“THE PROGRESS OF COLORED WOMEN,” MARY CHURCH TERRELL
When one considers the obstacles encountered by colored women in their effort
to educate and cultivate themselves, since they became free, the work they have
accomplished and the progress they have made will bear favorable comparison, at
least with that of their more fortunate sisters, from whom the opportunity of
acquiring knowledge and the means of self-culture have never been entirely with-
held. Not only are colored women with ambition and aspiration handicapped on
account of their sex, but they are almost everywhere baffled and mocked because
of their race. Not only because they are women, but because they are colored
women are discouragement and disappointment meeting them at every turn. But
in spite of the obstacles encountered, the progress made by colored women along
many lines appears like a veritable miracle of modern times. Forty years ago for
the great masses of colored women there was no such thing as home. Today in
each and every section of the country there are hundreds of homes among col-
ored people, the mental and moral tone of which is as high and as pure as can be
found among the best people of any land.
To the women of the race may be attributed in large measure the refinement
and purity of the colored home. The immorality of colored women is a theme
upon which those who know little about them or those who maliciously misrep-
resent them love to descant. Foul aspersions upon the character of colored
women are assiduously circulated by the press of certain sections and especially
by the direct descendants of those who in years past were responsible for the
moral degradation of their female slaves. And yet, in spite of the fateful heritage
of slavery, even though the safeguards usually thrown around maidenly youth and
innocence are in some sections entirely withheld from colored girls, statistics
compiled by men not inclined to falsify in favor of my race show that immorality
among the colored women of the United States is not so great as among women
with similar environment and temptations in Italy, Germany, Sweden and France.
Scandals in the best colored society are exceedingly rare, while the progressive
game of divorce and remarriage is practically unknown.
The intellectual progress of colored women has been marvelous. So great has
been their thirst for knowledge and so Herculean their efforts to acquire it that
there are few colleges, universities, high and normal schools in the North, East
and West from which colored girls have not graduated with honor. In Wellesley,
Vassar, Ann Arbor, Cornell and in Oberlin, my dear alma mater, whose name will
always be loved and whose praise will always be sung as the first college in the
country broad, just and generous enough to extend a cordial welcome to the
Negro and to open its doors to women on an equal footing with the men, colored
1 6 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 198 ---
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED WOMEN 1 6 7
girls by their splendid records have forever settled the question of their capacity
and worth. The instructors in these and other institutions cheerfully bear testi-
mony to their intelligence, their diligence and their success.
As the brains of colored women expanded, their hearts began to grow. No
sooner had the heads of a favored few been filled with knowledge than their
hearts yearned to dispense blessings to the less fortunate of their race. With tire-
less energy and eager zeal, colored women have worked in every conceivable way
to elevate their race. Of the colored teachers engaged in instructing our youth it
is probably no exaggeration to say that fully 80 percent are women. In the back-
woods, remote from the civilization and comforts of the city and town colored
women may be found courageously battling with those evils which such condi-
tions always entail. Many a heroine of whom the world will never hear has thus
sacrificed her life to her race amid surroundings and in the face of privations
which only martyrs can bear.
Through the medium of their societies in the church, beneficial organizations
out of it and clubs of various kinds, colored women are doing a vast amount of
good. It is almost impossible to ascertain exactly what the Negro is doing in any
field, for the records are so poorly kept. This is particularly true in the case of the
women of the race. During the past forty years there is no doubt that colored
women in their poverty have contributed large sums of money to charitable and
educational institutions as well as to the foreign and home missionary work.
Within the twenty-five years in which the educational work of the African
Methodist Episcopal Church has been systematized, the women of that organiza-
tion have contributed at least five hundred thousand dollars to the cause of edu-
cation. Dotted all over the country are charitable institutions for the aged,
orphaned and poor which have been established by colored women. Just how
many it is difficult to state, owing to the lack of statistics bearing on the progress,
possessions and prowess of colored women.
Among the charitable institutions either founded, conducted or supported by
colored women, may be mentioned the Hale Infirmary of Montgomery,
Alabama, the Carrie Steel Orphanage of Atlanta, the Reed Orphan Home of
Covington, and the Hains Industrial School of Augusta, all three in the state of
Georgia; a home for the aged of both races in New Bedford, and St. Monica’s
Home of Boston, in Massachusetts, Old Folks Home of Memphis, Tennessee,
and the Colored Orphan’s Home of Lexington, Kentucky, together with others
which lack of space forbids me to mention. Mt. Meigs Institute is an excellent
example of a work originated and carried into successful execution by a colored
woman. The school was established for the benefit of colored people on the
plantations in the black belt of Alabama. In the township of Mt. Meigs the pop-
ulation is practically all colored. Instruction given in this school is of the kind
best suited to the needs of the people for whom it was established. Along with
some scholastic training, girls are taught everything pertaining to the manage-
ment of the home, while boys are taught practical farming, wheelwrighting,
blacksmithing, and have some military training. Having started with almost noth-
ing, at the end of eight years the trustees of the school owned nine acres of land


--- PAGE 199 ---
and five buildings in which several thousand pupils had received instructions, all
through the energy, the courage and the sacrifice of one little woman.
Up to date, politics have been religiously eschewed by colored women,
although questions affecting our legal status as a race is sometimes agitated by the
most progressive class. In Louisiana and Tennessee colored women have several
times petitioned the legislatures of their respective states to repel the obnoxious
Jim-Crow-car laws. Against the convict-lease system, whose atrocities have been
so frequently exposed of late, colored women here and there in the South are
waging a ceaseless war. So long as hundreds of their brothers and sisters, many of
whom have committed no crime or misdemeanor whatever, are thrown into cells
whose cubic contents are less than those of a good-size grave, to be overworked,
underfed and only partially covered with vermin-infested rags, and so long as chil-
dren are born to the women in those camps who breathe the polluted atmosphere
of these dens of horror and vice from the time they utter their first cry in the
world till they are released from their suffering by death, colored women who are
working for the emancipation and elevation of their race know where their duty
lies. By constant agitation of this painful and hideous subject they hope to touch
the conscience of the country, so that this stain upon its escutcheon shall be for-
ever wiped away.
Alarmed at the rapidity with which the Negro is losing ground in the world of
trade, some of the farsighted women are trying to solve the labor question, so far
as it concerns the women at least, by urging the establishment of schools of
domestic science wherever means therefor can be secured. Those who are inter-
ested in this particular work hope and believe that if colored women and girls are
thoroughly trained in domestic service, the boycott which has undoubtedly been
placed upon them in many sections of the country will be removed. With so few
vocations open to the Negro and with the labor organizations increasingly hostile
to him, the future of the boys and girls of the race appears to some of our women
very foreboding and dark.
The cause of temperance has been eloquently espoused by two women, each
of whom has been appointed national superintendent of work among colored
people by the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union. In business, colored
women have had signal success. There is in Alabama a large milling and cotton
business belonging to and controlled by a colored woman, who has sometimes as
many as seventy-five men in her employ. Until a few years ago the principal ice
plant of Nova Scotia was owned and managed by a colored woman, who sold it
for a large amount. In the professions there are dentists and doctors whose prac-
tice is lucrative and large. Ever since a book was published in 1773 entitled
“Poems on Various Subjects. Religious and Moral by Phillis Wheatley, Negro
Servant of Mr. John Wheatley,” of Boston, colored women have given abundant
evidence of literary ability. In sculpture we are represented by a woman upon
whose chisel Italy has set her seal of approval; in painting by one of Bouguereau’s
pupils and in music by young women holding diplomas from the best conserva-
tories in the land.
1 6 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 200 ---
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED WOMEN 1 6 9
In short, to use a thought of the illustrious Frederick Douglass, if judged by
the depths from which they have come, rather than by the heights to which those
blessed with centuries of opportunities have attained, colored women need not
hang their heads in shame. They are slowly but surely making their way up to the
heights, wherever they can be scaled. In spite of handicaps and discouragements
they are not losing heart. In a variety of ways they are rendering valiant service to
their race. Lifting as they climb, onward and upward they go struggling and striv-
ing and hoping that the buds and blossoms of their desires may burst into glori-
ous fruition ere long. Seeking no favors because of their color nor charity because
of their needs they knock at the door of Justice and ask for an equal chance.
O
LETTER TO THE LADIES OF THE GEORGIA EDUCATIONAL LEAGUE,
JOSEPHINE ST. PIERRE RUFFIN
Ladies of the Georgia Educational League:
The telegram which you sent to Governor Northern to read to his audience,
informing the people of the North of your willingness to undertake the moral
training of the colored children of Georgia, merits more than a passing notice. It
is the first time, we believe, in the history of the South where a body of repre-
sentative Southern white women have shown such interest in the moral welfare
of the children of their former slaves as to be willing to undertake to make them
more worthy the duties and responsibilities of citizenship. True, there have been
individual cases where courageous women have felt their moral responsibility,
and have nobly met it, but one of the saddest things about the sad condition of
affairs in the South has been the utter indifference which Southern women, who
were guarded with unheard of fidelity during the war, have manifested to the
mental and moral welfare of the children of their faithful slaves, who, in the lan-
guage of Henry Grady, placed a black mass of loyalty between them and dishonor.
This was a rare opportunity for you to have shown your gratitude to your slaves
and your interest in their future welfare.
The children would have grown up in utter ignorance had not the North sent
thousands of her noblest daughters to the South on this mission of heroic love and
mercy; and it is worthy of remark of those fair daughters of the North, that, often
eating with Negroes, and in the earlier days sleeping in their humble cabins, and
always surrounded by thousands of them, there is not one recorded instance
where one has been the victim of violence or insult. If because of the bitterness
of your feelings, of your deep poverty at the close of the war, conditions were such
that you could not do this work yourselves, you might have give a Christian’s wel-
come to the women who came a thousand miles to do the work, that, in all grati-
tude and obligation belonged to you,—but instead, these women were often per-
secuted, always they have been ruthlessly ostracised, even until this day; often
they were lonely, often longed for a word of sympathy, often craved association
with their own race, but for thirty years they have been treated by the Christian


--- PAGE 201 ---
white women of the South,—simply because they were doing your work,—the
work committed to you by your Saviour, when he said, “Inasmuch as you did it to
one of the least of these my brethren, you did it unto me,”—with a contempt that
would serve to justify a suspicion that instead of being the most cultured women,
the purest, bravest missionaries in America, they were outcasts and lepers.
But at last a change has come. And so you have “decided to take up the work
of moral and industrial training of the Negroes,” as you “have been doing this
work among the whites with splendid results.” This is one of the most hopeful
stars that have shot through the darkness of the Southern sky. What untold bless-
ings might not the educated Christian women of the South prove to the Negro
groping blindly in the darkness of the swamps and bogs of prejudice for a high-
way out of servitude, oppression, ignorance, and immorality!
The leading women of Georgia should not ask Northern charity to do what they
certainly must have the means for making a beginning of themselves. If your
heart is really in this work—and we do not question it—the very best way for you
to atone for your negligence in the past is to make a start yourselves. Surely if the
conditions are as serious as you represent them to be, your husbands, who are
men of large means, who are able to run great expositions and big peace celebra-
tions, will be willing to provide you with the means to protect your virtue and that
of your daughters by the moral training you propose to give in the kindergartens.
There is much you might do without the contribution of a dollar from any
pocket, Northern or Southern. On every plantation there are scores, if not hun-
dreds, of little colored children who could be gathered about you on a Sabbath
afternoon and given many helpful inspiring lessons in morals and good conduct.
It is a good augury of better days, let us hope, when the intelligent, broad-
minded women of Georgia, spurning the incendiary advice of that human fire-
brand who would lynch a thousand Negroes a month, are willing to join in this
great altruistic movement of the age and endeavor to lift up the degraded and
ignorant, rather than to exterminate them. Your proposition implies that they may
be uplifted and further, imports a tacit confession that if you had done your duty
to them at the close of the war, which both gratitude and prudence should have
prompted you to do, you would not now be confronted with a condition which
you feel it necessary to check, in obedience to the great first law of nature—self-
protection. If you enter upon this work you will doubtless be criticised by a class
of your own people who think you are lowering your own dignity, but the South
has suffered too much already from that kind of false pride to let it longer keep
her recreant to the spirit of the age.
If, when you have entered upon it, you need the cooperation, either by advice
or other assistance, of the colored women of the North, we beg to assure you that
they will not be lacking,—until then, the earnest hope goes out that you will
bravely face and sternly conquer your former prejudices and quickly undertake
this missionary work which belongs to you.
Sources: (1) Mary Church Terrell, “The Progress of Colored Women,” excerpt from a speech
originally published in The Voice of the Negro(July 1904), pp. 292–94; and (2) Josephine St.
1 7 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 202 ---
P .L. DUNBAR, “I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS” 1 7 1
Pierre Ruffin, excerpt from “Letter to the Ladies of the Georgia Educational League,” June
1889, published in Alice Moore Dunbar, ed., Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence (New York:
Bookery Publishing, 1914), pp. 173–76.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Sharon Harley, “Mary Church Terrell: Genteel Militant,” in Black Leaders of the Nineteenth
Century, ed. Leon Litwack and August Meier (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988),
pp. 291–307.
Beverly Washington Jones, Quest for Equality: The Life and Writings of Mary Eliza Church
Terrell, 1863–1954(Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1990).
Gladys B. Shepperd, Mary Church Terrell: Respectable Person(Baltimore: Human Relations
Press, 1959).
Dorothy Sterling, Black Foremothers: Three Lives (Old Westbury, N.Y.: Feminist Press,
1979).
Mary Church Terrell, A Colored Woman in a White World (Washington, D.C.: Ransdell,
1940).
Teresa Blue Holden, “‘Earnest Women Can Do Anything’: The Public Career of Josephine
St. Pierre Ruffin, 1842–1904” (Ph.D. diss., St. Louis University, 2006).
O9 O
         
          
        
   
             
           
            
              
                
              
          
          
  
      
    
    
       
      
     
     
      
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 203 ---
1 7 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 204 ---
P .L. DUNBAR, “I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS” 1 7 3
   
       
       
      
      
    
     
      
      
   
       
     
       
      
     
   
       
        
        
        
         
       
      
        
        
         
        
         
       
      
        
        
         
        
          
        
      
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 205 ---
O10 O
Booker T. Washington and the Politics of Accommodation
Booker T. Washington (1856–1915) was the most powerful and influential African-
American politician from the end of Reconstruction until the emergence of the
Civil Rights movement. Born in slavery, Washington’s remarkable climb to per-
sonal prominence was in many ways a Horatio Alger story. Working his way
through Hampton Institute, at the age of twenty-six Washington founded Tuske-
gee Institute in the heart of Alabama’s Black Belt. With few resources, within
twenty years he had built the largest black vocational and agricultural school in the
United States. Washington first became famous among whites for his “Atlanta
Compromise” address of 1895, where he appeared to renounce civil rights and
racial equality in favor of segregated economic development. Washington’s ideol-
ogy of hard work, self-help, and black capitalism appealed to white business, phil-
anthropic, and political leaders, who lavished resources on Tuskegee. Washington
founded the National Negro Business League in 1900. His network of supporters
formed the powerful “Tuskegee Machine,” which had a vast influence among
African-American institutions in the early 1900s. Although Washington privately
lobbied against the political disfranchisement of blacks, he was accused of directly
contributing to lynchings and racial segregation by critics such as William Monroe
Trotter. Washington’s real influence rested with his strong support from Republi-
can presidents such as Theodore Roosevelt, and philanthropists like Andrew
Carnegie. But with the presidential election of Woodrow Wilson in 1912, much of
Washington’s patronage diminished. Washington’s last major essay, “My View of
1 7 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 206 ---
B.T. WASHINGTON AND THE POLITICS OF ACCOMMODATION 1 7 5
Segregation Laws,” which is excerpted here, represented a modest move away
from his accommodationist stance on Jim Crow.
O
ATLANTA EXPOSITION ADDRESS
One-third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No enterprise seek-
ing the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section can disregard this element
of our population and reach the highest success. I but convey to you, Mr. President
and Directors, the sentiment of the masses of my race when I say that in no way
have the value and manhood of the American Negro been more fittingly and gen-
erously recognized than by the managers of this magnificent exposition at every
stage of its progress. It is a recognition that will do more to cement the friendship
of the two races than any occurrence since the dawn of our freedom.
Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a new
era of industrial progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange that in the
first years of our new life we began at the top instead of at the bottom; that a seat
in Congress or the State Legislature was more sought than real estate or indus-
trial skill; that the political convention or stump-speaking had more attraction
than starting a dairy farm or truck garden.
A ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. From the
mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal: “Water, water; we die of thirst!”
The answer from the friendly vessel at once came back: “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” A second time the signal, “Water, water; send us water!” ran up
from the distressed vessel, and was answered: “Cast down your bucket where you
are.” And a third and fourth signal for water was answered, “Cast down your
bucket where you are.” The captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding the
injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full of fresh, sparkling water
from the mouth of the Amazon River. To those of my race who depend upon bet-
tering their condition in a foreign land, or who underestimate the importance of
cultivating friendly relations with the Southern white man who is their next-door
neighbor, I would say: “Cast down your bucket where you are”—cast it down in
making friends, in every manly way, of the people of all races by whom we are sur-
rounded.
Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service, and
in the professions. And in this connection it is well to bear in mind that whatever
other sins the South may be called to bear, when it comes to business, pure and
simple, it is in the South that the Negro is given a man’s chance in the commer-
cial world, and in nothing is this Exposition more eloquent than in emphasizing
this chance. Our greatest danger is that in the great leap from slavery to freedom
we may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the productions of
our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper in proportion as we learn
to dignify and glorify common labor, and put brains and skill into the common
occupations of life; shall prosper in proportion as we learn to draw the line
between the superficial and the substantial, the ornamental gewgaws of life and


--- PAGE 207 ---
the useful. No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in till-
ing a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not
at the top. Nor should we permit our grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
To those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign birth
and strange tongue and habits for the prosperity of the South, were I permitted,
I would repeat what I say to my own race, “Cast down your bucket where you
are.” Cast it down among the eight million Negroes whose habits you know,
whose fidelity and love you have tested in days when to have proved treacherous
meant the ruin of your firesides. Cast down your bucket among these people who
have without strikes and labor wars tilled your fields, cleared your forests, builded
your railroads and cities, brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth,
and helped make possible this magnificent representation of the progress of the
South. Casting down your bucket among my people, helping and encouraging
them as you are doing on these grounds, and, with education of head, hand, and
heart, you will find that they will buy your surplus land, make blossom the waste
places in your fields, and run your factories. While doing this, you can be sure in
the future, as in the past, that you and your families will be surrounded by the
most patient, faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful people that the world has
seen. As we have proved our loyalty to you in the past, in nursing your children,
watching by the sick bed of your mothers and fathers, and often following them
with tear-dimmed eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our humble way, we
shall stand by you with a devotion that no foreigner can approach, ready to lay
down our lives, if need be, in defense of yours, interlacing our industrial, com-
mercial, civil, and religious life with yours in a way that shall make the interests
of both races one. In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the
fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.
There is no defense or security for any of us except in the highest intelligence
and development of all. If anywhere there are efforts tending to curtail the fullest
growth of the Negro, let these efforts be turned into stimulating, encouraging,
and making him the most useful and intelligent citizen. Effort or means so
invested will pay a thousand per cent interest. These efforts will be twice blessed
—“Blessing him that gives and him that takes.”
There is no escape through law of man or God from the inevitable:
The laws of changeless justice bind
Oppressor with oppressed;
And close as sin and suffering joined
We march to fare abreast.
Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward, or they
will pull, against you, the load downward. We shall constitute one-third and more
of the ignorance and crime of the South, or one-third its intelligence and
progress; we shall contribute one-third to the business and industrial prosperity
of the South, or we shall prove a veritable body of death, stagnating, depressing,
retarding every effort to advance the body politic.
1 7 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 208 ---
B.T. WASHINGTON AND THE POLITICS OF ACCOMMODATION 1 7 7
Gentlemen of the Exposition, as we present to you our humble effort at an
exhibition of our progress, you must not expect overmuch. Starting thirty years
ago with ownership here and there in a few quilts and pumpkins and chickens
(gathered from miscellaneous sources), remember, the path that has led from
these to the inventions and production of agricultural implements, buggies, steam
engines, newspapers, books, statuary carving, paintings, the management of drug-
stores and banks, has not been trodden without contact with thorns and thistles.
While we take pride in what we exhibit as a result of our independent efforts, we
do not for a moment forget that our part in this exhibition would fall far short of
your expectations but for the constant help that has come to our educational life,
not only from the Southern states, but especially from Northern philanthropists,
who have made their gifts a constant stream of blessing and encouragement.
The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social
equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the priv-
ileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle
rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to contribute to the
markets of the world is long, in any degree, ostracized. It is important and right
that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be
prepared for the exercise of those privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in
a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar
in an opera house.
In conclusion, may I repeat that nothing in thirty years has given us more hope
and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white race, as this oppor-
tunity offered by the Exposition; and here bending, as it were, over the altar that
represents the results of the struggles of your race and mine, both starting practi-
cally empty-handed three decades ago, I pledge that, in your effort to work out the
great and intricate problem which God has laid at the doors of the South, you shall
have at all times the patient, sympathetic help of my race; only let this be con-
stantly in mind, that while, from representations in these buildings of the product
of field, of forest, of mine, of factory, letters, and art, much good will come, yet far
above and beyond material benefits will be that higher good, that, let us pray God,
will come in a blotting out of sectional differences and racial animosities and sus-
picions, in a determination to administer absolute justice, in a willing obedience
among all classes to the mandates of law. This, coupled with our material pros-
perity, will bring into our beloved South a new heaven and a new earth.
O
MY VIEW OF SEGREGATION LAWS
In all of my experience I have never yet found a case where the masses of the
people of any given city were interested in the matter of the segregation of white
and colored people; that is, there has been no spontaneous demand for segrega-
tion ordinances. In certain cities politicians have taken the leadership in intro-
ducing such segregation ordinances into city councils, and after making an
appeal to racial prejudices have succeeded in securing a backing for ordinances


--- PAGE 209 ---
which would segregate the Negro people from their white fellow citizens. After
such ordinances have been introduced it is always difficult, in the present state
of public opinion in the South, to have any considerable body of white people
oppose them, because their attitude is likely to be misrepresented as favoring
Negroes against white people. They are, in the main, afraid of the stigma,
“Negro-lover.”
It is probably useless to discuss the legality of segregation; that is a matter which
the courts will finally pass upon. It is reasonably certain, however, that the courts in
no section of the country would uphold a case where Negroes sought to segregate
white citizens. This is the most convincing argument that segregation is regarded
as illegal, when viewed on its merits by the whole body of our white citizens.
Personally I have little faith in the doctrine that it is necessary to segregate the
whites from the blacks to prevent race mixture. The whites are the dominant race
in the South, they control the courts, the industries and the government in all of
the cities, counties and states except in those few communities where the
Negroes, seeking some form of self-government, have established a number of
experimental towns or communities.
I have never viewed except with amusement the sentiment that white people
who live next to Negro populations suffer physically, mentally and morally
because of their proximity to colored people. Southern white people who have
been brought up in this proximity are not inferior to other white people. The
President of the United States was born and reared in the South in close contact
with black people. Five members of the present Cabinet were born in the South;
and many of them, I am sure, had black “mammies.” The Speaker of the House
of Representatives is a Southern man, the chairman of leading committees in
both the United States Senate and the Lower House of Congress are Southern
men. Throughout the country to-day, people occupying the highest positions not
only in the government but in education, industry and science, are persons born
in the South in close contact with the Negro.
Attempts at legal segregation are unnecessary for the reason that the matter of
residence is one which naturally settles itself. Both colored and whites are likely
to select a section of the city where they will be surrounded by congenial neigh-
bors. It is unusual to hear of a colored man attempting to live where he is sur-
rounded by white people or where he is not welcome. Where attempts are being
made to segregate the races legally, it should be noted that in the matter of busi-
ness no attempt is made to keep the white man from placing his grocery store, his
dry goods store, or other enterprise right in the heart of a Negro district. This is
another searching test which challenges the good faith of segregationists.
It is true that the Negro opposes these attempts to restrain him from residing
in certain sections of a city or community. He does this not because he wants to
mix with the white man socially, but because he feels that such laws are unneces-
sary. The Negro objects to being segregated because it usually means that he will
receive inferior accommodations in return for the taxes he pays. If the Negro is
segregated, it will probably mean that the sewerage in his part of the city will be
inferior; that the streets and sidewalks will be neglected, that the street lighting
1 7 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 210 ---
B.T. WASHINGTON AND THE POLITICS OF ACCOMMODATION 1 7 9
will be poor; that his section of the city will not be kept in order by the police and
other authorities, and that the “undesirables” of other races will be placed near
him, thereby making it difficult for him to rear his family in decency. It should
always be kept in mind that while the Negro may not be directly a large taxpayer,
he does pay large taxes indirectly. In the last analysis, all will agree that the man
who pays house rent pays large taxes, for the price paid for the rent includes pay-
ment of the taxes on the property.
Right here in Alabama nobody is thinking or talking about land and home seg-
regation. It is rather remarkable that in the very heart of the Black Belt where the
black man is most ignorant the white people should not find him so repulsive as
to set him away off to himself. If living side by side is such a menace as some peo-
ple think, it does seem as if the people who have had the bulk of the race ques-
tion to handle during the past fifty years would have discovered the danger and
adjusted it long ago.
A segregated Negro community is a terrible temptation to many white people.
Such a community invariably provides certain types of white men with hiding-
places—hiding-places from the law, from decent people of their own race, from
their churches and their wives and daughters. In a Negro district in a certain city
in the South a house of ill-repute for white men was next door to a Negro denom-
inational school. In another town a similar kind of house is just across the street
from the Negro grammar school. In New Orleans the legalized vice section is set
in the midst of the Negro section, and near the spot where stood a Negro school
and a Negro church, and near the place where the Negro orphanage now oper-
ates. Now when a Negro seeks to buy a house in a reputable street he does it not
only to get police protection, lights and accommodations, but to remove his chil-
dren to a locality in which vice is not paraded.
In New Orleans, Atlanta, Birmingham, Memphis—indeed in nearly every
large city in the South—I have been in the homes of Negroes who live in white
neighborhoods, and I have yet to find any race friction; the Negro goes about his
business, the white man about his. Neither the wives nor the children have the
slightest trouble.
White people who argue for the segregation of the masses of black people
forget the tremendous power of objective teaching. To hedge any set of people
off in a corner and sally among them now and then with a lecture or a sermon
is merely to add misery to degradation. But put the black man where day by day
he sees how the white man keeps his lawns, his windows; how he treats his wife
and children, and you will do more real helpful teaching than a whole library of
lectures and sermons. Moreover, this will help the white man. If he knows that
his life is to be taken as a model, that his hours, dress, manners, are all to be
patterns for someone less fortunate, he will deport himself better than he would
otherwise. Practically all the real moral uplift the black people have got from
the whites—and this has been great indeed—has come from this observation of
the white man’s conduct. The South to-day is still full of the type of Negro with
gentle manners. Where did he get them? From some master or mistress of the
same type.


--- PAGE 211 ---
Summarizing the matter in the large, segregation is ill-advised because
1. It is unjust.
2. It invites other unjust measures.
3. It will not be productive of good, because practically every thoughtful Negro
resents its injustice and doubts its sincerity. Any race adjustment based on injus-
tice finally defeats itself. The Civil War is the best illustration of what results
where it is attempted to make wrong right or seem to be right.
4. It is unnecessary.
5. It is inconsistent. The Negro is segregated from his white neighbor, but
white business men are not prevented from doing business in Negro neighbor-
hoods.
6. There has been no case of segregation of Negroes in the United States that
has not widened the breach between the two races. Wherever a form of segrega-
tion exists it will be found that it has been administered in such a way as to embit-
ter the Negro and harm more or less the moral fibre of the white man. That the
Negro does not express this constant sense of wrong is no proof that he does not
feel it.
It seems to me that the reasons given above, if carefully considered, should
serve to prevent further passage of such segregation ordinances as have been
adopted in Norfolk, Richmond, Louisville, Baltimore, and one or two cities in
South Carolina.
Finally, as I have said in another place, as white and black learn daily to adjust,
in a spirit of justice and fair play, those interests which are individual and racial,
and to see and feel the importance of those fundamental interests which are com-
mon, so will both races grow and prosper. In the long run no individual and no
race can succeed which sets itself at war against the common good; for “in the
gain or loss of one race, all the rest have equal claim.”
Sources: (1) Excerpt from “Atlanta Exposition Address,” delivered in Atlanta, Georgia,
September 18, 1895, reprinted in Washington, Up from Slavery: An Autobiography (New
York: Doubleday, Page, 1900); and (2) “My View of Segregation Laws,” New Republic 5, no.
57 (December 4, 1915), pp. 113–14.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Kevin Gaines, Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the 20th
Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996).
Louis R. Harlan, Booker T. Washington: The Making of a Black Leader, 1865–1901 (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1972).
———, Booker T. Washington: The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901–1915(New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1983).
———, ed., Booker T. Washington Papers, 14 Vols. (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1972–1989).
August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1980–1915 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1963).
Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery: An Autobiography (New York: Doubleday, Page,
1900).
1 8 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 212 ---
W.M. TROTTER AND THE BOSTON GUARDIAN 181
Houston A. Baker, Turning South Again: Re-Thinking Modernism/Re-Reading Booker T .
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2001).
W. Fitzhugh Brundage, ed., Booker T. Washington and Black Progress: Up from Slavery 100
Years Later(Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2003).
Rebecca Carroll, ed., Uncle Tom or New Negro? African Americans Reflect on Booker T.
Washington and Up from Slavery One Hundred Years Later (New York: Broadway
Books/Harlem Moon, 2006).
Michael Rudolph West, The Education of Booker T. Washington: American Democracy and
the Idea of Race Relations(New York: Columbia University Press, 2006).
O11 O
William Monroe Trotter and the Boston Guardian
The most bitter critic of Booker T. Washington was William Monroe Trotter
(1872–1934). Born in Springfield Township, Ohio, Trotter received his B.A.
degree from Harvard, graduating magna cum laude in 1895, and earned his M.A.
from Harvard the following year. Trotter hated all forms of racial segregation and
believed that Washington was nothing less than a traitor to his people. Trotter’s
publication, the Boston Guardian, became a leading voice for black radicalism.
With W. E. B. Du Bois he initiated the Niagara Movement in 1905. Trotter was
active in the Negro American Political League from 1908 to 1913. Trotter’s con-
frontational style created as many enemies as friends, yet his ideas were instru-
mental in the development of the modern black freedom movement.
O
Under the caption, “Principal Washington Defines His Position,” the Tuskegee
Student, the official organ of Tuskegee, prints the institute letter in which Mr.
Washington said: “We cannot elevate and make useful a race of people unless
there is held out to them the hope of reward for right living. Every revised con-
stitution throughout the southern states has put a premium upon intelligence,
ownership of property, thrift and character.” This little sheet begins by saying that
the letter “appeared in all of the important papers of the country on Nov. 28. It
has been unstintingly praised from one section of the country to the other for its
clarity and forcefulness of statement, and for its ringing note of sincerity.”
Although such words are to be expected from the employees of the school they
are for the most part only too true. It is true that, although the letter was sent to
the Age Herald of Birmingham, Alabama, it appeared simultaneously “in all the
important papers of the country.” Then its effect must be admitted to have been
greater than if any other Negro had written it, for admittedly no other Negro’s let-
ter could have obtained such wide publicity. If it had in it aught that was injuri-
ous to the Negro’s welfare or to his manhood rights, therefore, such worked far


--- PAGE 213 ---
more damage than if any other Negro or any other man, save the president him-
self, had written the words.
What man is there among us, whether friend or foe of the author of the letter,
who was not astounded at the reference to the disfranchising constitutions quoted
above. “Every revised constitution throughout the southern states has put a pre-
mium upon intelligence, ownership of property, thrift and character,” and all the
more so because Mr. Washington had not been accused by even the southerners
of opposing these disfranchising constitutions. . . . If the statement is false, if it is
misleading, if it is injurious to the Negro, all the more blamable and guilty is the
author because the statement was gratuitous on his part.
Is it the truth? Do these constitutions encourage Negroes to be thrifty, to be bet-
ter and more intelligent? For this sort of argument is the most effective in favor of
them. . . . Where is the Negro who says the law was or is ever intended to be fairly
applied? . . . If so, then every reputable Negro orator and writer, from Hon. A. H.
Grimke on, have been mistaken. If so, every Negro clergyman of standing, who has
spoken on the subject . . . have been misinformed. We happen to know of an under-
taker who has an enormous establishment in Virginia, who now can’t vote. Is that
encouraging thrift? Two letter carriers, who have passed the civil service examina-
tions, are now sueing because disfranchised. Is that encouraging intelligence? . . .
Even a Republican candidate for governor in Virginia recently said Negro domina-
tion was to be feared if 10 Negroes could vote because they could have the balance
of power. Mr. Washington’s statement is shamefully false and deliberately so.
But even were it true, what man is a worse enemy to a race than a leader who
looks with equanimity on the disfranchisement of his race in a country where
other races have universal suffrage by constitutions that make one rule for his
race and another for the dominant race, by constitutions made by conventions to
which his race is not allowed to send its representatives, by constitutions that his
race although endowed with the franchise by law are not allowed to vote upon,
and are, therefore, doubly illegal, by constitutions in violation to the national con-
stitution, because, forsooth, he thinks such disfranchising laws will benefit the
moral character of his people. Let our spiritual advisers condemn this idea of
reducing a people to serfdom to make them good.
But what was the effect of Mr. Washington’s letter on the northern white peo-
ple? . . .
No thinking Negro can fail to see that, with the influence Mr. Washington yields
[wields] in the North and the confidence reposed in him by the white people on
account of his school, a fatal blow has been given to the Negro’s political rights and
liberty by his statement. The benevolence idea makes it all the more deadly in its
effect. It comes very opportunely for the Negro, too, just when Roosevelt declares
the Negro shall hold office, . . . when Congress is being asked to enforce the
Negro’s constitutional rights, when these laws are being carried to the Supreme
Court. And here Mr. Washington, having gained sufficient influence through his
doctrines, his school and his elevation by the President, makes all these efforts sure
of failure by killing public sentiment against the disfranchising constitutions.
1 8 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 214 ---
RACE AND THE SOUTHERN WORKER 1 8 3
And Mr. Washington’s word is the more effective for, discreditable as it may
seem, not five Negro papers even mention a statement that belies all their edito-
rials and that would have set aflame the entire Negro press of the country, if a less
wealthy and less powerful Negro had made it. Nor will Negro orators nor Negro
preachers dare now to pick up the gauntlet thrown down by the great “educator.”
Instead of being universally repudiated by the Negro race his statement will be
practically universally endorsed by its silence because Washington said it, though
it sounds the death-knell of our liberty. The lips of our leading politicians are
sealed, because, before he said it, Mr. Washington, through the President, put
them under obligation to himself. Nor is there that heroic quality now in our race
that would lead men to throw off the shackles of fear, of obligation, of policy and
denounce a traitor though he be a friend, or even a brother. It occurs to none that
silence is tantamount to being virtually an accomplice in the treasonable act of
this Benedict Arnold of the Negro race.
O, for a black Patrick Henry to save his people from this stigma of cowardice;
to rouse them from their lethargy to a sense of danger; to score the tyrant and to
inspire his people with the spirit of those immortal words: “Give Me Liberty or
Give Me Death.”
Source: Excerpt from editorial, Boston Guardian, December 20, 1902.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Stephen R. Fox, Guardian of Boston: William Monroe Trotter(New York: Atheneum, 1970).
August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1963).
William Jeremiah Moses, The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850–1925 (New York:
Archon Books, 1978).
O12 O
Race and the Southern Worker
The demise of Reconstruction and the consolidation of Jim Crow segregation did
not destroy efforts to build coalitions between black and white working-class and
poor people in the South. The rapid expansion of industries in southern states
created the basis for the growth of biracial unions. The documents reprinted here
illustrate that a significant number of African-American and white workers rec-
ognized their common class interests.
O
A NEGRO WOMAN SPEAKS
I am a colored woman, wife and mother. I have lived all my life in the South, and
have often thought what a peculiar fact it is that the more ignorant the Southern


--- PAGE 215 ---
whites are of us the more vehement they are in their denunciation of us. They
boast that they have little intercourse with us, never see us in our homes,
churches or places of amusement, but still they know us thoroughly.
They also admit that they know us in no capacity except as servants, yet they
say that we are at our best in that single capacity. What philosophers they are! The
Southerners saw we Negroes are a happy, laughing set of people, with no thought
of tomorrow. How mistaken they are! The educated, thinking Negro is just the
opposite. There is a feeling of unrest, insecurity, almost panic among the best
class of Negroes in the South. In our homes, in our churches, wherever two or
three are gathered together, there is a discussion of what is best to do. Must we
remain in the South or go elsewhere? Where can we go to feel that security which
other people feel? Is it best to go in great numbers or only in several families?
These and many other things are discussed over and over.
People who have security in their homes, whose children can go on the street
unmolested, whose wives and daughters are treated as women, cannot, perhaps,
sympathize with the Southern Negro’s anxieties and complaints. I ask forbearance
of such people. . . .
I know of houses occupied by poor Negroes in which a respectable farmer
would not keep his cattle. It is impossible for them to rent elsewhere. All
Southern real estate agents have “white property” and “colored property.” In
one of the largest Southern cities there is a colored minister, a graduate of
Harvard, whose wife is an educated, Christian woman, who lived for weeks in a
tumble-down rookery because he could neither rent nor buy in a respectable
locality.
Many colored women who wash, iron, scrub, cook or sew all the week to help
pay the rent for these miserable hovels and help fill the many small mouths,
would deny themselves some of the necessaries of life if they could take their lit-
tle children and teething babies on the cars to the parks of a Sunday afternoon
and sit under the trees, enjoy the cool breezes and breathe God’s pure air for only
two or three hours; but this is denied them. Some of the parks have signs, “No
Negroes allowed on these grounds except as servants.” Pitiful, pitiful customs and
laws that make war on women and babes! There is no wonder that we die; the
wonder is that we persist in living.
Fourteen years ago I had just married. My husband had saved sufficient
money to buy a small home. On account of our limited means we went to the
suburbs, on unpaved streets, to look for a home, only asking for a high, healthy
locality. Some real estate agents were “sorry, but had nothing to suit,” some had
“just the thing,” but we discovered on investigation that they had “just the thing”
for an unhealthy pigsty. Others had no “colored property.” One agent said that
he had what we wanted, but we should have to go to see the lot after dark, or
walk by and give the place a casual look; for, he said, “all the white people in the
neighborhood would be down on me.” Finally we bought this lot. When the
house was being built we went to see it. Consternation reigned. We had ruined
this neighborhood of poor people; poor as we, poorer in manners at least. The
1 8 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 216 ---
RACE AND THE SOUTHERN WORKER 1 8 5
people who lived next door received the sympathy of their friends. When we
walked on the street (there were no sidewalks) we were embarrassed by the stare
of many unfriendly eyes.
Two years passed before a single woman spoke to me, and only then because
I helped one of them when a little sudden trouble came to her. Such was the
reception, I a happy young woman, just married, received from people among
whom I wanted to make a home. Fourteen years have now passed, four children
have been born to us, and one has died in this same home, among these same
neighbors. Although the neighbors speak to us, and occasionally one will send a
child to borrow the morning’s paper or ask the loan of a pattern, not one woman
has ever been inside of my house, not even at the times when a woman would
doubly appreciate the slightest attention of a neighbor.
The Southerner boasts that he is our friend; he educates our children, he pays
us for work and is most noble and generous to us. Did not the Negro by his labor
for over three hundred years help to educate the white man’s children? Is thirty
equal to three hundred? Does a white man deserve praise for paying a black man
for his work?
The Southerner also claims that the Negro get justice. Not long ago a Negro
man was cursed and struck in the face by an electric-car conductor. The Negro
knocked the conductor down and although it was clearly proven in a court of “jus-
tice” that the conductor was in the wrong the Negro had to pay a fine of $10. The
judge told him “I fine you that much to teach you that you must respect white
folks.” The conductor was acquitted. “Most noble judge! A second Daniel!” This
is the South’s idea of justice.
A noble man, who has established rescue homes for fallen women all over the
country, visited a Southern city. The women of the city were invited to meet him
in one of the churches. The fallen women were especially invited and both good
and bad went. They sat wherever they could find a seat, so long as their faces were
white; but I, a respectable married woman, was asked to sit apart. A colored
woman, however respectable, is lower than the white prostitute. The Southern
white woman will declare that no Negro women are virtuous, yet she places her
innocent children in their care. . . .
The Southerner says “the Negro must keep in his place.” That means the par-
ticular place the white man says is his. . . . A self-respecting colored man who does
not cringe but walks erect, supports his family, educates his children, and by
example and precept teaches them that God made all men equal, is called a “dan-
gerous Negro”; “he is too smart”; “he wants to be white and act like white peo-
ple.” Now we are told that the Negro has the worst traits of the whole human fam-
ily and the Southern white man the best; but we must not profit by his example
or we are regarded as “dangerous Negroes.”
White agents and other chance visitors who come into our homes ask questions
that we must not dare ask their wives. They express surprise that our children
have clean faces and that their hair is combed. You cannot insult a colored
woman, you know. . . .


--- PAGE 217 ---
There are aristocrats in crime, in poverty and in misfortune in the South. The
white criminal cannot think of eating or sleeping in the same part of the peniten-
tiary with the Negro criminal. The white pauper is just as exclusive; and although
the blind cannot see color, nor the insane care about it, they must be kept sepa-
rate, at great extra expense. Lastly, the dead white man’s bones must not be con-
taminated with the dead black man’s. . . .
Whenever a crime is committed, in the South the policemen look for the
Negro in the case. A white man with face and hands blackened can commit any
crime in the calendar. The first friendly stream soon washes away his guilt and he
is ready to join in the hunt to lynch the “big, black burly brute.” When a white
man in the South does commit a crime, that is simply one white man gone wrong.
If his crime is especially brutal he is a freak or temporarily insane. If one low,
ignorant black wretch commits a crime, that is different. All of us must bear his
guilt. A young white boy’s badness is simply the overflowing of young animal spir-
its; the black boy’s badness is badness, pure and simple. . . .
When we were shouting for Dewey, Sampson, Schley and Hobson, and were
on tiptoe to touch the hem of their garments, we were delighted to know that
some of our Spanish-American heroes were coming where we could get a glimpse
of them. Had not black men helped in a small way to give them their honors? In
the cities of the South, where these heroes went, the white school children were
assembled, flags were waved, flowers strewn, speeches made, and “My Country,
’tis of Thee, Sweet Land of Liberty,” was sung. Our children who need to be
taught so much, were not assembled, their hands waved no flags, they threw no
flowers, heard no thrilling speech, sang no song of their country. And this is the
South’s idea of justice. Is it surprising that feeling grows more bitter, when the
white mother teaches her boy to hate my boy, not because he is mean, but
because his skin is dark? I have seen very small white children hang their black
dolls. It is not the child’s fault, he is simply an apt pupil.
Someone will at last arise who will champion our cause and compel the world
to see that we deserve justice; as other heroes compelled it to see that we
deserved freedom.
O
THE RACE QUESTION A CLASS QUESTION
“There is no clash between the white man of the South and the negro of MY
CLASS!” said John Mitchell, Jr., President of the Mechanics’ Savings Bank of
Richmond, Va., at the convention of the Bankers’ Association in New York City.
Mr. Mitchell declared that no color line was drawn between the “better class” of
whites and the “better class” of blacks, and that the negro was learning that as a
business man the negro would be respected and not discriminated against. “He
was received with enthusiasm and his brief remarks proved to be one of the mem-
orable features of the convention. Among the Southern delegates a feeling of gen-
uine satisfaction was expressed and they united in praising Mr. Mitchell’s speech,”
says the New York Evening Post. And when the colored banker had finished and
1 8 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 218 ---
RACE AND THE SOUTHERN WORKER 1 8 7
was being cheered and congratulated on all sides, the bankers were roused to new
enthusiasm by a response from one of the South’s best-known financiers, Col.
Robert J. Lowry of Atlanta, who said: “I am delighted to hear from my Southern
brother. There is no fight, no hostility, between his class and my race in Georgia—
or anywhere else. I am glad to hear this gentleman from Virginia. The gentleman
is right in what he says.”
This touching scene in which the Southern white capitalist greeted the black
capitalist as a gentleman and a brother in a striking proof of the fact that the race
question is at bottom, like all other questions, a class question.
It is undoubtedly true that the negro has suffered much discrimination and
outrage merely because of race feeling, and on the surface it may seem that the
hatred of blacks is wholly caused, by repugnance to those of another race. But the
real source of this race feeling is to be found in the fact that the negroes 
AS A
RACE were once, as slaves, almost the sole working class in the North together
with the fact that most of them are now working people—wage slaves instead of
chattel slaves.
The nonproductive ruling class, whether it be a slave-holding class or capitalist
class, always looks down upon and despises the other class which toils and sweats
for it and feeds it and produces all the wealth upon which it lives in luxury. The
capitalist’s contempt of the white workingman is restrained only by the considera-
tion that it is necessary to get his vote, by the fact that it is necessary to maintain
the illusion of social and political equality in order to keep the white workingman
contented with his lot. The white workingman is used to believing himself “as good
as any man” and it is therefore necessary for the capitalists to keep up this flatter-
ing illusion in order to persuade him to continue to submit to the present indus-
trial system of legalized robbery. But because the negro working class is not long
used to political freedom, and because the master class of the South once owned
him bodily as a chattel slave, the contempt of the Southern ruling class for the
negro workingman is entirely unrestrained, and the negro’s age-long habit of sub-
mission is taken advantage of to throw out his vote or disfranchise him.
That the Southerner’s contempt for the negro is not really based on any phys-
ical repugnance to him as a person is proven by the fact that the rich whites of the
South think nothing of tolerating the presence of the black man as a personal ser-
vant waiting upon them, shaving them, attending them in baths and performing
all sorts of services which bring the colored man into the closest personal contact
with his master. And the thousands of mulattoes in the South are living proofs that
many of the white men who express their horror at the thought of “social equal-
ity” freely enter into the most intimate of all personal relations with the women
of the black race, as did many of the old slaveholders who considered their female
slaves as sexual property as well as sources of material profit.
As a matter of fact there is no “social equality” between the workingmen and the
rich men of any race. The white capitalist moves in the “cultured and respectable
society” of his own class and would regard as preposterous and abhorrent the idea of
receiving the “coarse and vulgar workingman” on a basis of equality; the workingman


--- PAGE 219 ---
is admitted to his circles only in a despised menial capacity in some places special
street cars for workingmen have been proposed (just as the South has its “Jim Crow”
cars for negroes) in order that the fine ladies and gentlemen of the capitalist class
may not have to soil themselves by riding in the same cars with “the dirty, ignorant
workingmen.”
That the Southern capitalist has no more regard for the workingman of his own
race than he has for the negro is shown by the fact that wherever white working-
men go on strike, the capitalists never hesitate to replace them with negro scabs,
and the black man who will do any equal amount of work for less wages can
always get the job of the white. When a question of capitalist profit is involved
race lines disappear and class division, regardless of race, stands out clearly for all
to see. And that the negro is despised by the Southern upper class really for the
reason that he is a workingman, and consequently poor, is proven by the fact that
both the negroes and the prosperous whites consider the “poor white trash” of the
South still lower than the black race itself.
The speech of the colored capitalist at the convention of the Bankers’
Association, and the way to which it was received by the Southern gentry present,
prove that the Southern capitalist does not say: “All ‘coons’ look alike to me.” To
the Southern capitalist the black banker is evidently a “gentleman” and a brother
in the fraternity of capitalist parasites, but the black workingman is despised as a
“loafer” and an inferior being, as is the white workingman. And the black banker
has a delightfully simple solution of the race problem: Just let all negroes become
bankers or business men and then they will be respected and race hatred will dis-
appear. White workingmen are familiar with the same advice: Just let them save
enough capital out of their wages, by the practise of industry, thrift, frugality and
other capitalist virtues, to compete with multi-million-dollar trusts and then they
will be eminently respectable citizens.
It is part of the instinctive policy of the capitalist class to perpetuate itself by
creating and playing upon race hatred in order to keep workingmen of all races
and nationalities from uniting to overthrow the infamous industrial system by
which the capitalists profit. And it is also part of capitalist policy to use a weaker
race to undermine the efforts of the more intelligent workingmen to better their
conditions and emancipate their class. So it happens that Booker T. Washington
and other prominent colored men are coddled by the ruling capitalist class and
need to teach the colored men to be hardworking, submissive and contented
under the tyranny of capitalism. . . .
Booker T. Washington, the best type of the negro leader who is entirely satis-
factory to the capitalist, has recently been put to a crucial test on the question of
working class vs. capitalist class. During the recent great meat strike, in which so
many of his race were used as strike breakers, he was asked by the union of the
workers in the stockyards to address a meeting, which both union and non-union
workingmen were invited to attend, on the question: “Should negroes act as strike
breakers?” In this position, so awkward for a man who has dined with the capi-
talist President who stands for the “open shop,” Booker escaped by pleading the
1 8 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 220 ---
RACE AND THE SOUTHERN WORKER 1 8 9
convenient excuse of “a previous engagement” which would prevent his being
present.
Some negro papers openly advise the colored man to show his “faithfulness”
and his industrial power by taking a job wherever he can get it, even if he is thus
helping to break a strike, and promise that this will result in capitalist favor and
respect; notwithstanding the fact that the strike breaker is always despised even
by the capitalist himself and kicked out when he can no longer be used.
The Socialist movement, on the other hand, appeals to all workingmen, without
regard to race, color, or previous condition of servitude (but with very lively regard
to present condition of servitude), to realize that their interests are in common and
against the interests of all capitalists and to unite to overthrow capitalist rule.
Many of the Southern trade unions are realizing this, in some measure, by
admitting the negroes to membership equally with the white, just as the bankers
recognize their common class interest by welcoming the negro banker.
To the negro Socialism says: As a workingman you are oppressed by your capi-
talist boss as you were as a slave by your master, you are enslaved and robbed of the
product of your labor under wage-slavery as you were under chattel slavery; you
must unite with all other workingmen in the Socialist movement to free yourselves.
To the white workingman Socialism says: “If you do not realize your common
interests with your black fellow-workman he will be used against you by the cap-
italist, who is the enemy of both of you. You must recognize that his interests as a
workingman are the same as yours and must enroll him as a comrade in the fight
against capitalism.
And to the white Southerner who fears the bugaboo of “social equality” with
the negro, and objects to Socialism on that ground, it may be said. No one who
objects to “social equality” with the negro, or with anyone else, can be forced to
associate with those who are uncongenial to them under Socialism or under any
other system. No one need invite to his home or seek the company of those who
are displeasing to him. Socialism stands for political and economic equality, and
in all public relations men of all races must have the same rights as human
beings; but private association is a matter for each individual to decide for him-
self. And finally it should be remembered that as repugnance to the colored man
has its chief source in his subservient position as a worker, together with all the
lack of advantages which that position implies, therefore under Socialism, when
opportunity for education and culture will be open to all, the negro and all oth-
ers who are now crushed and degraded by capitalism will develop to a point
where they will no longer be “inferior,” and consequently no longer repellent or
uncongenial.
O
NEGRO WORKERS!
Don’t Allow Yourselves to be Divided from Your Fellow Workers by the Vicious
Lumber Trust.


--- PAGE 221 ---
To all Negro Workers, and especially to the Negro Forest and Lumber
Workers of the South, we send this message and appeal:
Fellow Worker:
When the forest slaves of Louisiana and Texas revolted against peonage and
began, about two years ago, the organization of the Brotherhood of Timber
Workers, an industrial union taking in all the workers in the sawmills and camps,
the lumber kings at once recognized the power inherent in such a movement and
immediately began a campaign of lying and violence against the Union and all
persons connected with it or suspected of sympathizing with us.
First among the cries they raised against us was, of course, the bunco cries of
“white supremacy” and “social equality” coupled with that other cry: “They are
organizing negroes against whites!” which the capitalists and landlords of the
South and their political buzzard and social carrion crows always raise in order to
justify the slugging and assassination of white and colored working men who seek
to organize and better the condition of their class. From the day you, the negro
workers were “freed,” down to the present hour these cries have been used to
cloak the vilest crimes against workers, white and colored, and to hide the whole-
sale rape of the commonwealth of the South by as soulless and cold blooded a set
of industrial scalawags and carpetbaggers as ever drew the breath of life.
For a generation, under the influence of these specious cries, they have kept
us fighting each other—we to secure the “white supremacy” of a tramp and YOU
the “social equality” of a vagrant. Our fathers “feel for it,” but we, their children,
have come to the conclusion that porterhouse steaks and champagne will look as
well on your tables as on those of the industrial scalawags and carpetbaggers; that
the “white supremacy” that means starvation wages and child slavery for us and
the “social equality” that means the same for you, though they may mean the
“high life” and “Christian civilization” to the lumber kings and landlords, will have
to go. As far as we, the workers of the South, are concerned, the only “supremacy”
and “equality” they have ever granted us is the supremacy of misery and the
equality of rags. This supremacy and this equality we, the Brotherhood of Timber
Workers, mean to stand no longer than we have an organization big and strong
enough to enforce our demands, chief among which is “A man’s life for all the
workers in the mills and forests of the South.” Because the negro workers com-
prise one-half or more of the labor employed in the Southern lumber industry,
this battle cry of ours, “A man’s life for all the workers,” has been considered a
menace and therefore a crime in the eyes of the Southern oligarchy, for they, as
well as we, are fully alive to the fact that we can never raise our standard of living
and better our conditions so long as they can keep us split, whether on race, craft,
religions or national lines, and they have tried and are trying all these methods of
division in addition to their campaign of terror, wherein deeds have been and are
being committed that would make Diaz blush with shame, they are so atrocious
in their white-livered cruelty. For this reason, that they sought to organize all the
workers, A. L. Emerson, president of the Brotherhood, and 63 other Union men,
are now in prison at Lake Charles, La. under indictment, as a result of the Mass-
acre of Grabow where three Union men and one Association gunman were killed,
charged with murder in the first degree, indicted for killing their own brothers,
1 9 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 222 ---
I.B. WELLS-BARNETT, CRUSADER FOR JUSTICE 1 9 1
and they will be sent to the gallows, or, worse, to the frightful penal farms and lev-
ees of Louisiana, unless a united working class comes to their rescue with the
funds necessary to defend them and the action that will bring them all free of the
grave and levees.
Further words are idle. It is a useless waste of paper to tell you, the negro
workers, of the merciless injustice of the Southern Lumber Operators’ Associa-
tion, for 
YOUR RACE has learned through tears and blood the hyenaism we are
fighting. Enough. Emerson and his associates are in prison because they fought
for the unity of all the workers.
Will you remain silent, turn no hand to help them in this, their hour of great
danger?
Our fight is your fight, and we appeal to you to do your duty by these men, the
bravest of the brave! Help us free them all. Join the Brotherhood and help us
blaze freedom’s pathway through the jungles of the South.
“Workers of the world, unite! You have nothing but your chains to lose! You
have a world to gain!”
COMMITTEE OF DEFENSE,
BROTHERHOOD OF TIMBER WORKERS,
Box 78, Alexandria, La.
Solidarity, September 28, 1912
Sources: (1) “A Negro Woman Speaks,” The Independent 54 (September 18, 1902), pp.
2221–24; (2) “The Race Question a Class Question,” The Worker(October 2, 1904); and (3)
“Negro Workers!” appeal drafted by the Committee of Defense, Brotherhood of Timber
Workers, Alexandria, Louisiana, published in Solidarity(September 28, 1912).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
John Bracey, August Meier, and Elliot Rudwick, Black Workers and Organized Labor
(Belmont, Ca.: Wadsworth Publishing, 1971).
Lawrence Goodwyn, The Populist Moment: A Short History of the Agrarian Revolt in
America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978).
Jacqueline Jones, The Dispossessed: America’s Underclass from the Civil War to the Present
(New York: Basic Books, 1992).
———, A Social History of the Laboring Classes: From Colonial Times to the Present,
Problems in American History(Malden: Blackwell Publishers, 1999).
Sterling D. Spero and Abram L. Harris, The Black Worker: The Negro and the Labor Move-
ment (New York: Columbia University Press, 1931).
O13 O
Ida B. Wells-Barnett, Crusader for Justice
Ida B. Wells-Barnett (1862–1931) was, in our opinion, the greatest African-
American political journalist in history. Wells was born in Holly Springs, Missis-
sippi, during the Civil War. Her parents died when she was a teenager. Wells


--- PAGE 223 ---
worked as a teacher and journalist. In 1891 she moved to Memphis, where she
became co-owner of the Memphis Free Speech and Headlight newspaper. Wells’s
fiery editorials and investigative reporting outraged the local white establish-
ment. In 1892, after white racists destroyed her printing press, Wells moved to
the North and continued her campaign against lynching. Wells was an associate
of Susan B. Anthony, an outspoken supporter of women’s rights. She was an
active member of the Niagara Movement, and a cofounder of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). Her popular
political essays and journalistic commentaries inspired several generations of
black activists.
O
The lynching record for a quarter of a century merits the thoughtful study of the
American people. It presents three salient facts:
First: Lynching is color-line murder.
Second: Crimes against women is the excuse, not the cause.
Third: It is a national crime and requires a national remedy.
Proof that lynching follows the color line is to be found in the statistics which
have been kept for the past twenty-five years. During the few years preceding this
period and while frontier lynch law existed, the executions showed a majority of
white victims. Later, however, as law courts and authorized judiciary extended
into the far West, lynch law rapidly abated, and its white victims became few and
far between.
Just as the lynch-law regime came to a close in the West, a new mob movement
started in the South. This was wholly political, its purpose being to suppress the
colored vote by intimidation and murder. Thousands of assassins banded together
under the name of Ku Klux Klans, “Midnight Raiders,” “Knights of the Golden
Circle,” et cetera, et cetera, spread a reign of terror, by beating, shooting and
killing colored people by the thousands. In a few years, the purpose was accom-
plished, and the black vote was suppressed. But mob murder continued.
From 1882, in which year fifty-two were lynched, down to the present, lynch-
ing has been along the color line. Mob murder increased yearly until in 1892 more
than two hundred victims were lynched and statistics show that 3,284 men, women
and children have been put to death in this quarter of a century. During the last
ten years from 1899 to 1908 inclusive the number lynched was 959. Of this num-
ber 102 were white, while the colored victims numbered 857. No other nation, civ-
ilized or savage, burns its criminals: only under the Stars and Stripes is the human
holocaust possible. Twenty-eight human beings burned at the stake, one of them
a woman and two of them children, is the awful indictment against American civ-
ilization—the gruesome tribute which the nation pays to the color line.
Why is mob murder permitted by a Christian nation? What is the cause of this
awful slaughter? This question is answered almost daily—always the same shame-
less falsehood that “Negroes are lynched to protect womanhood.” Standing
1 9 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 224 ---
I.B. WELLS-BARNETT, CRUSADER FOR JUSTICE 1 9 3
before a Chautauqua assemblage, John Temple Graves, at once champion of
lynching and apologist for lynchers, said: “The mob stands today as the most
potential bulwark between the women of the South and such a carnival of crime
as would infuriate the world and precipitate the annihilation of the Negro race.
This is the never-varying answer of lynchers and their apologists. All know that it
is untrue. The cowardly lyncher revels in murder, then seeks to shield himself
from public execration by claiming devotion to woman. But truth is mighty and
the lynching record discloses the hypocrisy of the lyncher as well as his crime.
The Springfield, Illinois, mob rioted for two days, the militia of the entire state
was called out, two men were lynched, hundreds of people driven from their
homes, all because a white woman said a Negro assaulted her. A mad mob went to
the jail, tried to lynch the victim of her charge and, not being able to find him, pro-
ceeded to pillage and burn the town and to lynch two innocent men. Later, after
the police had found that the woman’s charge was false, she published a retraction,
the indictment was dismissed and the intended victim discharged. But the lynched
victims were dead. Hundreds were homeless and Illinois was disgraced.
As a final and complete refutation of the charge that lynching is occasioned by
crimes against women, a partial record of lynchings is cited; 285 persons were
lynched for causes as follows:
Unknown cause, 92; no cause, 10; race prejudice, 49; miscegenation, 7;
informing, 12; making threats, 11; keeping saloon, 3; practicing fraud, 5; practic-
ing voodooism, 2; bad reputation, 8; unpopularity, 3; mistaken identity, 5; using
improper language, 3; violation of contract, 1; writing insulting letter, 2; eloping,
2; poisoning horse, 1; poisoning well, 2; by white caps, 9; vigilantes, 14; Indians,
1; moonshining, 1; refusing evidence, 2; political causes, 5; disputing, 1; disobey-
ing quarantine regulations, 2; slapping a child, 1; turning state’s evidence, 3; pro-
tecting a Negro, 1; to prevent giving evidence, 1; knowledge of larceny, 1; writing
letter to white woman, 1; asking white woman to marry, 1; jilting girl, 1; having
smallpox, 1; concealing criminal, 2; threatening political exposure, 1; self-defense,
6; cruelty, 1; insulting language to woman, 5; quarreling with white man, 2; colo-
nizing Negroes, 1; throwing stones, 1; quarreling, 1; gambling, 1.
Is there a remedy, or will the nation confess that it cannot protect its protectors
at home as well as abroad? Various remedies have been suggested to abolish the
lynching infamy, but year after year, the butchery of men, women and children
continues in spite of plea and protest. Education is suggested as a preventive, but
it is as grave a crime to murder an ignorant man as it is a scholar. True, few edu-
cated men have been lynched, but the hue and cry once started stops at no bounds,
as was clearly shown by the lynchings in Atlanta, and in Springfield, Illinois.
Agitation, though helpful, will not alone stop the crime. Year after year statis-
tics are published, meetings are held, resolutions are adopted and yet lynchings
go on. Public sentiment does measurably decrease the sway of mob law, but the
irresponsible bloodthirsty criminals who swept through the streets of Springfield,
beating an inoffensive law-abiding citizen to death in one part of the town, and in
another torturing and shooting to death a man who for threescore years had made


--- PAGE 225 ---
a reputation for honesty, integrity and sobriety, had raised a family and had accu-
mulated property, were not deterred from their heinous crimes by either educa-
tion or agitation.
The only certain remedy is an appeal to law. Lawbreakers must be made to
know that human life is sacred and that every citizen of this country is first a cit-
izen of the United States and secondly a citizen of the state in which he belongs.
This nation must assert itself and defend its federal citizenship at home as well as
abroad. The strong arm of the government must reach across state lines whenever
unbridled lawlessness defies state laws and must give to the individual citizen
under the Stars and Stripes the same measure of protection which it gives to him
when he travels in foreign lands.
Federal protection of American citizenship is the remedy for lynching.
Foreigners are rarely lynched in America. If, by mistake, one is lynched, the
national government quickly pays the damages. The recent agitation in California
against the Japanese compelled this nation to recognize that federal power must
yet assert itself to protect the nation from the treason of sovereign states. Thou-
sands of American citizens have been put to death and no President has yet raised
his hand in effective protest, but a simple insult to a native of Japan was quite suf-
ficient to stir the government at Washington to prevent the threatened wrong. If
the government has power to protect a foreigner from insult, certainly it has
power to save a citizen’s life.
The practical remedy has been more than once suggested in Congress. Senator
Gallinger, of New Hampshire, in a resolution introduced in Congress called for
an investigation “with the view of ascertaining whether there is a remedy for
lynching which Congress may apply.” The Senate Committee has under consid-
eration a bill drawn by A. E. Pillsbury, formerly Attorney General of Massachu-
setts, providing for federal prosecution of lynchers in cases where the state fails
to protect citizens or foreigners. Both of these resolutions indicate that the atten-
tion of the nation has been called to this phase of the lynching question.
As a final word, it would be a beginning in the right direction if this conference
can see its way clear to establish a bureau for the investigation and publication of
the details of every lynching, so that the public could know that an influential
body of citizens has made it a duty to give the widest publicity to the facts in each
case; that it will make an effort to secure expressions of opinion all over the coun-
try against lynching for the sake of the country’s fair name; and lastly, but by no
means least, to try to influence the daily papers of the country to refuse to
become accessory to mobs either before or after the fact. Several of the greatest
riots and most brutal burnt offerings of the mobs have been suggested and incited
by the daily papers of the offending community. If the newspaper which suggests
lynching in its accounts of an alleged crime, could be held legally as well as
morally responsible for reporting that “threats of lynching were heard”; or, “it is
feared that if the guilty one is caught, he will be lynched”; or, “there were cries of
‘lynch him,’ and the only reason the threat was not carried out was because no
leader appeared,” a long step toward a remedy will have been taken.
1 9 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 226 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 1 9 5
In a multitude of counsel there is wisdom. Upon the grave question presented
by the slaughter of innocent men, women and children there should be an hon-
est, courageous conference of patriotic, law-abiding citizens anxious to punish
crime promptly, impartially and by due process of law, also to make life, liberty
and property secure against mob rule.
Time was when lynching appeared to be sectional, but now it is national—a
blight upon our nation, mocking our laws and disgracing our Christianity. “With
malice toward none but with charity for all” let us undertake the work of making
the “law of the land” effective and supreme upon every foot of American soil—a
shield to the innocent; and to the guilty, punishment swift and sure.
Source: Excerpt from a speech delivered at the National Negro Conference, 1909 ( Pro-
ceedings: National Negro Conference, 1909, pp. 174–79).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Carolyn Karcher, “Ida B. Wells and Her Allies against Lynching,” Comparative American
Studies 3, no. 2 (June 2005), pp. 131–151.
Patricia Ann Schechter, Ida B. Wells-Barnett and American Reform, 1880–1930 (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001).
Dorothy Sterling, Black Foremothers: Three Lives (Old Westbury, N.Y.: Feminist Press,
1979).
Mildred I. Thompson, Ida B. Wells-Barnett: An Exploratory Study of an American Black
Woman (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1990).
Emilie M. Townes, Womanist Justice, Womanist Hope(Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1993).
James West Davidson, ‘They Say’: Ida B. Wells and the Reconstruction of Race (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007).
O14 O
William Edward Burghardt Du Bois
The most influential black intellectual of the twentieth century was unquestionably
W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963). Born in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, Du Bois
received bachelor’s degrees from Fisk University in 1888 and from Harvard College
two years later. He completed graduate studies at the University of Berlin and
received his Ph.D. in history from Harvard University in 1895. Du Bois taught for two
years at Wilberforce University, and after holding a research position at the University
of Pennsylvania, accepted a professorship at Atlanta University in 1897. Du Bois’s
sociological research, notably his study of the black urban community of Philadelphia,
and his annual research conferences and edited volumes produced at Atlanta
University, established the field of African-American sociology. Du Bois helped to ini-
tiate the Pan-Africanist movement in 1900. He was founder of the Niagara
Movement in 1905 and was the most prominent black leader in the establishment of


--- PAGE 227 ---
the NAACP in 1910. Reluctantly, Du Bois left his academic research at Atlanta
University to assume the editorship of the NAACP’s journal, Crisis, from 1910 until
1934. Du Bois is perhaps best known for his collection of essays, The Souls of Black
Folk, which was written between 1897 and 1903. The documents cited here illustrate
the evolution of Du Bois’s ideas about race and the obligations of the African-
American middle class and intelligentsia, that he would soon term the “Talented
Tenth,” to uplift the masses of black people.
O
EXCERPTS FROM “THE CONSERVATION OF RACES”
The American Negro has always felt an intense personal interest in discussions as
to the origins and destinies of races: primarily because back of most discussions
of race with which he is familiar, have lurked certain assumptions as to his nat-
ural abilities, as to his political, intellectual and moral status, which he felt were
wrong. He has, consequently, been led to deprecate and minimize race distinc-
tions, to believe intensely that out of one blood God created all nations, and to
speak of human brotherhood as though it were the possibility of an already dawn-
ing to-morrow.
Nevertheless, in our calmer moments we must acknowledge that human
beings are divided into races; that in this country the two most extreme types of
the world’s races have met, and the resulting problem as to the future relations of
these types is not only of intense and living interest to us, but forms an epoch in
the history of mankind.
It is necessary, therefore, in planning our movements, in guiding our future
development, that at times we rise above the pressing, but smaller questions of
separate schools and cars, wage-discrimination and lynch law, to survey the whole
question of race in human philosophy and to lay, on a basis of broad knowledge
and careful insight, those large lines of policy and higher ideals which may form
our guiding lines and boundaries in the practical difficulties of every day. For it is
certain that all human striving must recognize the hard limits of natural law, and
that any striving, no matter how intense and earnest, which is against the consti-
tution of the world, is vain. The question, then, which we must seriously consider
is this: What is the real meaning of Race; what has, in the past, been the law of
race development, and what lessons has the past history of race development to
teach the rising Negro people?
When we thus come to inquire into the essential difference of races we find it
hard to come at once to any definite conclusion. Many criteria of race differences
have in the past been proposed, as color, hair, cranial measurements and lan-
guage. And manifestly, in each of these respects, human beings differ widely.
They vary in color, for instance, from the marble-like pallor of the Scandinavian
to the rich, dark brown of the Zulu, passing by the creamy Slav, the yellow
Chinese, the light brown Sicilian and the brown Egyptian. Men vary, too, in the
texture of hair from the obstinately straight hair of the Chinese to the obstinately
tufted and frizzled hair of the Bushman. In measurement of heads, again, men
1 9 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 228 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 1 9 7
vary; from the broad-headed Tartar to the medium-headed European and the
narrow-headed Hottentot; or, again in language, from the highly-inflected Roman
tongue to the monosyllabic Chinese. All these physical characteristics are patent
enough, and if they agreed with each other it would be very easy to classify
mankind. Unfortunately for scientists, however, these criteria of race are most
exasperatingly intermingled. Color does not agree with texture of hair, for many
of the dark races have straight hair; nor does color agree with the breadth of the
head, for the yellow Tartar has a broader head than the German; nor, again, has
the science of language as yet succeeded in clearing up the relative authority of
these various and contradictory criteria. The final word of science, so far, is that
we have at least two, perhaps three, great families of human beings—the whites
and Negroes, possibly the yellow race. That other races have arisen from the
intermingling of the blood of these two. This broad division of the world’s races
which men like Huxley and Raetzel have introduced as more nearly true than the
old five-race scheme of Blumenbach, is nothing more than an acknowledgment
that, so far as purely physical characteristics are concerned, the differences
between men do not explain all the differences of their history. It declares, as
Darwin himself said, that great as is the physical unlikeness of the various races
of men their likenesses are greater, and upon this rests the whole scientific doc-
trine of Human Brotherhood.
Although the wonderful developments of human history teach that the grosser
physical differences of color, hair and bone go but a short way toward explaining
the different roles which groups of men have played in Human Progress, yet
there are differences—subtle, delicate and elusive, though they may be—which
have silently but definitely separated men into groups. While these subtle forces
have generally followed the natural cleavage of common blood, descent and phys-
ical peculiarities, they have at other times swept across and ignored these. At all
times, however, they have divided human beings into races, which, while they
perhaps transcend scientific definition, nevertheless, are clearly defined to the
eye of the Historian and Sociologist.
If this be true, then the history of the world is the history, not of individuals,
but of groups, not of nations, but of races, and he who ignores or seeks to over-
ride the race idea in human history ignores and overrides the central thought of
all history. What, then, is a race? It is a vast family of human beings, generally of
common blood and language, always of common history, traditions and impulses,
who are both voluntarily and involuntarily striving together for the accomplish-
ment of certain more or less vividly conceived ideals of life.
Turning to real history, there can be no doubt, first, as to the widespread, nay,
universal, prevalence of the race idea, the race spirit, the race ideal, and as to its
efficiency as the vastest and most ingenious invention for human progress. We,
who have been reared and trained under the individualistic philosophy of the
Declaration of Independence and the laisser-faire philosophy of Adam Smith, are
loath to see and loath to acknowledge this patent fact of human history. We see
the Pharaohs, Caesars, Toussaints and Napoleons of history and forget the vast
races of which they were but epitomized expressions. We are apt to think in our


--- PAGE 229 ---
American impatience, that while it may have been true in the past that closed race
groups made history, that here in conglomerate America nous avons changer tout
cela—we have changed all that, and have no need of this ancient instrument of
progress. This assumption of which the Negro people are especially fond, can not
be established by a careful consideration of history.
We find upon the world’s stage today eight distinctly differentiated races, in
the sense in which History tells us the word must be used. They are, the Slavs of
eastern Europe, the Teutons of middle Europe, the English of Great Britain and
America, the Romance nations of Southern and Western Europe, the Negroes of
Africa and America, the Semitic people of Western Asia and Northern Africa, the
Hindoos of Central Asia and the Mongolians of Eastern Asia. There are, of
course, other minor race groups, as the American Indians, the Esquimaux and the
South Sea Islanders; these larger races, too, are far from homogeneous; the Slav
includes the Czech, the Magyar, the Pole and the Russian; the Teuton includes
the German, the Scandinavian and the Dutch; the English include the Scotch, the
Irish and the conglomerate American. Under Romance nations the widely differ-
ing Frenchman, Italian, Sicilian and Spaniard are comprehended. The term
Negro is, perhaps, the most indefinite of all, combining the Mulattoes and Zam-
boes of America and the Egyptians, Bantus and Bushmen of Africa. Among the
Hindoos are traces of widely differing nations, while the great Chinese, Tartar,
Corean and Japanese families fall under the one designation—Mongolian.
The question now is: What is the real distinction between these nations? Is it
the physical differences of blood, color and cranial measurements? Certainly we
must all acknowledge that physical differences play a great part, and that, with
wide exceptions and qualifications, these eight great races of to-day follow the
cleavage of physical race distinctions; the English and Teuton represent the white
variety of mankind; the Mongolian, the yellow; the Negroes, the black. Between
these are many crosses and mixtures, where Mongolian and Teuton have blended
into the Slav, and other mixtures have produced the Romance nations and the
Semites. But while race differences have followed mainly physical race lines, yet
no mere physical distinctions would really define or explain the deeper differ-
ences—the cohesiveness and continuity of these groups. The deeper differences
are spiritual, psychical, differences—undoubtedly based on the physical, but infi-
nitely transcending them. The forces that bind together the Teuton nations are,
then, first, their race identity and common blood; secondly, and more important, a
common history, common laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a con-
scious striving together for certain ideals of life. The whole process which has
brought about these race differentiations has been a growth, and the great char-
acteristic of this growth has been the differentiation of spiritual and mental differ-
ences between great races of mankind and the integration of physical differences.
The age of nomadic tribes of closely related individuals represents the maxi-
mum of physical differences. They were practically vast families, and there were
as many groups as families. As the families came together to form cities the phys-
ical differences lessened, purity of blood was replaced by the requirement of
1 9 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 230 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 1 9 9
domicile, and all who lived within the city bounds became gradually to be
regarded as members of the group; i.e., there was a slight and slow breaking down
of physical barriers. This, however, was accompanied by an increase of the spiri-
tual and social differences between cities. This city became husbandmen, this,
merchants, another warriors, and so on. The ideals of life for which the different
cities struggled were different. When at last cities began to coalesce into nations
there was another breaking down of barriers which separated groups of men. The
larger and broader differences of color, hair and physical proportions were not by
any means ignored, but myriads of minor differences disappeared, and the socio-
logical and historical races of men began to approximate the present division of
races as indicated by physical researches. At the same time the spiritual and phys-
ical differences of race groups which constituted the nations became deep and
decisive. The English nation stood for constitutional liberty and commercial free-
dom; the German nation for science and philosophy; the Romance nations stood
for literature and art, and the other race groups are striving, each in its own way,
to develop for civilization its particular message, its particular ideal, which shall
help to guide the world nearer and nearer that perfection of human life for which
we all long, that “one far off Divine event.”
This has been the function of race differences up to the present time. What
shall be its function in the future? Manifestly some of the great races of today—
particularly the Negro race—have not as yet given to civilization the full spiritual
message which they are capable of giving. I will not say that the Negro race has as
yet given no message to the world, for it is still a mooted question among scientists
as to just how far Egyptian civilization was Negro in its origin; if it was not wholly
Negro, it was certainly very closely allied. Be that as it may, however the fact still
remains that the full, complete Negro message of the whole Negro race has not as
yet been given to the world: that the messages and ideal of the yellow race have
not been completed, and that the striving of the mighty Slavs has but begun. The
question is, then: How shall this message be delivered; how shall these various
ideals be realized? The answer is plain: By the development of these race groups,
not as individuals, but as races. For the development of Japanese genius, Japanese
literature and art, Japanese spirit, only Japanese, bound and welded together,
Japanese inspired by one vast ideal, can work out in its fullness the wonderful mes-
sage which Japan has for the nations of the earth. For the development of Negro
genius, of Negro literature and art, of Negro spirit, only Negroes bound and
welded together, Negroes inspired by one vast ideal, can work out in its fullness
the great message we have for humanity. We cannot reverse history; we are sub-
ject to the same natural laws as other races, and if the Negro is ever to be a factor
in the world’s history—if among the gaily-colored banners that deck the broad
ramparts of civilization is to hang one uncompromising black, then it must be
placed there by black hands, fashioned by black heads and hallowed by the travail
of 200,000,000 black hearts beating in one glad song of jubilee.
For this reason, the advance guard of the Negro people—the 8,000,000 people
of Negro blood in the United States of America—must soon come to realize that


--- PAGE 231 ---
if they are to take their just place in the van of Pan-Negroism, then their destiny is
not absorption by the white Americans. That if in America it is to be proven for the
first time in the modern world that not only Negroes are capable of evolving indi-
vidual men like Toussaint, the Saviour, but are a nation stored with wonderful pos-
sibilities of culture, then their destiny is not a servile imitation of Anglo-Saxon cul-
ture, but a stalwart originality which shall unswervingly follow Negro ideals.
It may, however, be objected here that the situation of our race in America ren-
ders this attitude impossible; that our sole hope of salvation lies in our being able
to lose our race identity in the commingled blood of the nation; and that any other
course would merely increase the friction of races which we call race prejudice,
and against which we have so long and so earnestly fought.
Here, then, is the dilemma, and it is a puzzling one, I admit. No Negro who
has given earnest thought to the situation of his people in America has failed, at
some time in life, to find himself at these cross-roads; has failed to ask himself at
some time: What, after all, am I? Am I an American or am I a Negro? Can I be
both? Or is it my duty to cease to be a Negro as soon as possible and be an
American? If I strive as a Negro, am I not perpetuating the very cleft that threat-
ens and separates Black and White America? Is not my only possible practical aim
the subduction of all that is Negro in me to the American? Does my black blood
place upon me any more obligation to assert my nationality than German, or Irish
or Italian blood would?
It is such incessant self-questioning and the hesitation that arises from it, that
is making the present period a time of vacillation and contradiction for the
American Negro; combined race action is stifled, race responsibility is shirked,
race enterprises languish, and the best blood, the best talent, the best energy of
the Negro people cannot be marshalled to do the bidding of the race. They stand
back to make room for every rascal and demagogue who chooses to cloak his self-
ish deviltry under the veil of race pride.
Is this right? Is it rational? Is it good policy? Have we in America a distinct mis-
sion as a race—a distinct sphere of action and an opportunity for race develop-
ment, or is self-obliteration the highest end to which Negro blood dare aspire?
If we carefully consider what race prejudice really is, we find it, historically, to
be nothing but the friction between different groups of people; as is the differ-
ence in aim, in feeling, in ideals of two different races; if, now, this difference
exists touching territory, laws, language, or even religion, it is manifest that these
people cannot live in the same territory without fatal collision; but if, on the other
hand, there is substantial agreement in laws, language and religion; if there is a
satisfactory adjustment of economic life, then there is no reason why, in the same
country and on the same street, two or three great national ideals might not thrive
and develop, that man of different races might not strive together for their race
ideals as well, perhaps even better, than in isolation. Here, it seems to me, is the
reading of the riddle that puzzles so many of us. We are Americans, not only by
birth and by citizenship, but by our political ideals, our language, our religion.
Farther than that, our Americanism does not go. At that point, we are Negroes,
members of a vast historic race that from the very dawn of creation has slept, but
2 0 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 232 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 2 0 1
half awakening in the dark forests of its African fatherland. We are the first fruits
of this new nation, the harbinger of that black to-morrow which is yet destined to
soften the whiteness of the Teutonic to-day. We are that people whose subtle
sense of song has given America its only American music, its only American fairy
tales, its only touch of pathos and humor amid its mad money-getting plutocracy.
As such, it is our duty to conserve our physical powers, our intellectual endow-
ments, our spiritual ideals; as a race we must strive by race organization, by race
solidarity, by race unity to the realization of that broader humanity which freely
recognizes differences in men, but sternly deprecates inequality in their oppor-
tunities of development.
For the accomplishment of these ends we need race organizations: Negro col-
leges, Negro newspapers, Negro business organizations, a Negro school of liter-
ature and art, and an intellectual clearing house, for all these products of the
Negro mind, which we may call a Negro Academy. Not only is all this necessary
for positive advance, it is absolutely imperative for negative defense. Let us not
deceive ourselves at our situation in this country. Weighted with a heritage of
moral iniquity from our past history, hard pressed in the economic world by for-
eign immigrants and native prejudice, hated here, despised there and pitied
everywhere; our one haven of refuge is ourselves, and but one means of advance,
our own belief in our great destiny, our own implicit trust in our ability and
worth. There is no power under God’s high heaven that can stop the advance of
eight thousand thousand honest, earnest, inspired and united people. But—and
here is the rub—they must be honest, fearlessly criticising their own faults, zeal-
ously correcting them; they must be earnest. No people that laughs at itself, and
ridicules itself, and wishes to God it was anything but itself ever wrote its name
in history; it must be inspired with the Divine faith of our black mothers, that out
of the blood and dust of battle will march a victorious host, a mighty nation, a
peculiar people, to speak to the nations of earth a Divine truth that shall make
them free. And such a people must be united; not merely united for the orga-
nized theft of political spoils, not united to disgrace religion with whoremongers
and wardheelers; not united merely to protest and pass resolutions, but united to
stop the ravages of consumption among the Negro people, united to keep black
boys from loafing, gambling and crime; united to guard the purity of black
women and to reduce that vast army of black prostitutes that is today marching
to hell; and united in serious organizations, to determine by careful conference
and thoughtful interchange of opinion the broad lines of policy and action for the
American Negro.
This is the reason for being which the American Negro Academy has. It aims
at once to be the epitome and expression of the intellect of the black-blooded
people of America, the exponent of the race ideals of one of the world’s great
races. As such, the Academy must, if successful, be
(a). Representative in character.
(b). Impartial in conduct.
(c). Firm in leadership.


--- PAGE 233 ---
It must be representative in character; not in that it represents all interests or
all factions, but in that it seeks to comprise something of the best thought, the
most unselfish striving and the highest ideals. There are scattered in forgotten
nooks and corners throughout the land, Negroes of some considerable training,
of high minds, and high motives, who are unknown to their fellows, who exert far
too little influence. These the Negro Academy should strive to bring into touch
with each other and to give them a common mouthpiece.
The Academy should be impartial in conduct; while it aims to exalt the people
it should aim to do so by truth—not by lies, by honesty—not by flattery. It should
continually impress the fact upon the Negro people that they must not expect to
have things done for them—they 
MUST DO FOR THEMSELVES; that they have
on their hands a vast work of self-reformation to do, and that a little less complaint
and whining, and a little more dogged work and manly striving would do us more
credit and benefit than a thousand Force or Civil Rights bills.
Finally, the American Negro Academy must point out a practical path of
advance to the Negro people; there lie before every Negro today hundreds of
questions of policy and right which must be settled and which each one settles
now, not in accordance with any rule, but by impulse or individual preference; for
instance: What should be the attitude of Negroes toward the educational qualifi-
cation for voters? What should be our attitude toward separate schools? How
should we meet discriminations on railways and in hotels? Such questions need
not so much specific answers for each part as a general expression of policy, and
nobody should be better fitted to announce such a policy than a representative
honest Negro Academy.
All this, however, must come in time after careful organization and long con-
ference. The immediate work before us should be practical and have direct bear-
ing upon the situation of the Negro. The historical work of collecting the laws of
the United States and of the various States of the Union with regard to the Negro
is a work of such magnitude and importance that no body but one like this could
think of undertaking it. If we could accomplish that one task we would justify our
existence.
In the field of Sociology an appalling work lies before us. First, we must
unflinchingly and bravely face the truth, not with apologies, but with solemn
earnestness. The Negro Academy ought to sound a note of warning that would
echo in every black cabin in the land: Unless we conquer our present vices they
will conquer us; we are diseased, we are developing criminal tendencies, and an
alarmingly large percentage of our men and women are sexually impure. The
Negro Academy should stand and proclaim this over the housetops, crying with
Garrison: I will not equivocate, I will not retreat a single inch, and I will be heard.
The Academy should seek to gather about it the talented, unselfish men, the pure
and noble-minded women, to fight an army of devils that disgraces our manhood
and our womanhood. There does not stand today upon God’s earth a race more
capable in muscle, in intellect, in morals, than the American Negro, if he will
bend his energies in the right direction; if he will
2 0 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 234 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 2 0 3
Burst his birth’s invidious bar
And grasp the skirts of happy chance,
And breast the blows of circumstance,
And grapple with his evil star.
In science and morals, I have indicated two fields of work for the Academy.
Finally, in practical policy, I wish to suggest the following Academy Creed :
1. We believe that the Negro people, as a race, have a contribution to make to
civilization and humanity, which no other race can make.
2. We believe it the duty of the Americans of Negro descent, as a body, to
maintain their race identity until this mission of the Negro people is accom-
plished, and the ideal of human brotherhood has become a practical possibility.
3. We believe that, unless modern civilization is a failure, it is entirely feasible
and practicable for two races in such essential political, economic, and religious
harmony as the white and colored people of America, to develop side by side in
peace and mutual happiness, the peculiar contribution which each has to make to
the culture of their common country.
4. As a means to this end we advocate, not such social equality between these
races as would disregard human likes and dislikes, but such a social equilibrium
as would, throughout all the complicated relations of life, give due and just con-
sideration to culture, ability, and moral worth, whether they be found under white
or black skins.
5. We believe that the first and greatest step toward the settlement of the pre-
sent friction between the races—commonly called the Negro Problem—lies in
the correction of the immorality, crime, and laziness among the Negroes them-
selves, which still remains as a heritage from slavery. We believe that only earnest
and long-continued efforts on our own part can cure these social ills.
6. We believe that the second great step toward a better adjustment of the rela-
tions between the races should be a more impartial selection of ability in the eco-
nomic and intellectual world, and a greater respect for personal liberty and worth,
regardless of race. We believe that only earnest efforts on the part of the white
people of this country will bring much-needed reform in these matters.
7. On the basis of the foregoing declaration, and firmly believing in our high
destiny, we, as American Negroes, are resolved to strive in every honorable way
for the realization of the best and highest aims, for the development of strong
manhood and pure womanhood, and for the rearing of a race ideal in America
and Africa, to the glory of God and the uplifting of the Negro people.
O
EXCERPTS FROM THE SOULS OF BLACK FOLK
O water, voice of my heart, crying in the sand,
All night long crying with a mournful cry,
As I lie and listen, and cannot understand
The voice of my heart in my side or the voice of the sea,


--- PAGE 235 ---
O water, crying for rest, is it I, is it I?
All night long the water is crying to me.
Unresting water, there shall never be rest
Till the last moon droop and the last tide fail,
And the fire of the end begin to burn in the west;
And the heart shall be weary and wonder and cry like the sea,
All life long crying without avail,
As the water all night long is crying to me.
ARTHUR SIMONS
Between me and the other world there is ever an unasked question: unasked by
some through feelings of delicacy; by others through the difficulty of rightly fram-
ing it. All, nevertheless, flutter round it. They approach me in a half-hesitant sort
of way, eye me curiously or compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly,
How does it feel to be a problem? they say, I know an excellent colored man in
my town; or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not these Southern outrages make
your blood boil? At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the boiling to a sim-
mer, as the occasion may require. To the real question, How does it feel to be a
problem? I answer seldom a word.
And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,—peculiar even for one who
has never been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in Europe. It is in the
early days of rollicking boyhood that the revelation first bursts upon one, all in a
day, as it were. I remember well when the shadow swept across me. I was a little
thing, away up in the hills of New England, where the dark Housatonic winds
between Hoosac and Taghkanic to the sea. In a wee wooden schoolhouse, some-
thing put it into the boys’ and girls’ heads to buy gorgeous visiting-cards—ten cents
a package—and exchange. The exchange was merry, till one girl, a tall newcomer,
refused my card,—refused it peremptorily, with a glance. Then it dawned upon me
with a certain suddenness that I was different from the others; or like, mayhap, in
heart and life and longing, but shut out from their world by a vast veil. I had there-
after no desire to tear down that veil, to creep through; I held all beyond it in com-
mon contempt, and lived above it in a region of blue sky and great wandering shad-
ows. That sky was bluest when I could beat my mates at examination-time, or beat
them at a foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads. Alas, with the years all this
fine contempt began to fade; for the worlds I longed for, and all their dazzling
opportunities, were theirs, not mine. But they should not keep these prizes, I said;
some, all, I would wrest from them. Just how I would do it I could never decide:
by reading law, by healing the sick, by telling the wonderful tales that swam in my
head,—some way. With other black boys the strife was not so fiercely sunny: their
youth shrunk into tasteless sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the pale world
about them and mocking distrust of everything white; or wasted itself in a bitter
cry, Why did God make me an outcast and a stranger in mine own house? The
shades of the prison-house closed round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to
the whitest, but relentlessly narrow, tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must
plod darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against the stone, or
steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.
2 0 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 236 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 2 0 5
After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and Mon-
golian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and gifted with 
second-sight in this American world,—a world which yields him no true self-
consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the other
world. It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always
looking at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the
tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his two-
ness,—an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled striv-
ings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it
from being torn asunder.
The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,—this longing to
attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a better and truer self.
In this merging he wishes neither of the older selves to be lost. He would not
Africanize America, for America has too much to teach the world and Africa. He
would not bleach his Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that
Negro blood has a message for the world. He simply wishes to make it possible for
a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being cursed and spit upon by
his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face.
This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the kingdom of cul-
ture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and use his best powers and
his latent genius. These powers of body and mind have in the past been strangely
wasted, dispersed, or forgotten. The shadow of a mighty Negro past flits through
the tale of Ethiopia the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx. Throughout history,
the powers of single black men flash here and there like falling stars, and die
sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their brightness. Here in America,
in the few days since Emancipation, the black man’s turning hither and thither in
hesitant and doubtful striving has often made his very strength to lose effective-
ness, to seem like absence of power, like weakness. And yet it is not weakness,—
it is the contradiction of double aims. The double-aimed struggle of the black 
artisan—on the one hand to escape white contempt for a nation of mere hewers
of wood and drawers of water, and on the other hand to plough and nail and dig
for a poverty-stricken horde—could only result in making him a poor craftsman,
for he had but half a heart in either cause. By the poverty and ignorance of his
people, the Negro minister or doctor was tempted toward quackery and dema-
gogy; and by the criticism of the other world, toward ideals that made him
ashamed of his lowly tasks. The would-be black savant was confronted by the
paradox that the knowledge his people needed was a twice-told tale to his white
neighbors, while the knowledge which would teach the white world was Greek to
his own flesh and blood. The innate love of harmony and beauty that set the ruder
souls of his people a-dancing and a-singing raised but confusion and doubt in the
soul of the black artist; for the beauty revealed to him was the soul-beauty of a
race which his larger audience despised, and he could not articulate the message 
of another people. This waste of double aims, this seeking to satisfy two unrec-
onciled ideals, has wrought sad havoc with the courage and faith and deeds of 
ten thousand thousand people,—has sent them often wooing false gods and


--- PAGE 237 ---
invoking false means of salvation, and at times has even seemed about to make
them ashamed of themselves.
Away back in the days of bondage they thought to see in one divine event the
end of all doubt and disappointment; few men ever worshipped Freedom with
half such unquestioning faith as did the American Negro for two centuries. To
him, so far as he thought and dreamed, slavery was indeed the sum of all vil-
lainies, the cause of all sorrow, the root of all prejudice; Emancipation was the key
to a promised land of sweeter beauty than ever stretched before the eyes of wea-
ried Israelites. In song and exhortation swelled one refrain—Liberty; in his tears
and curses the God he implored had Freedom in his right hand. At last it came,—
suddenly, fearfully, like a dream. With one wild carnival of blood and passion
came the message in his own plaintive cadences:—
“Shout, O children!
Shout, you’re free!
For God has bought your liberty!”
Years have passed away since then,—ten, twenty, forty; forty years of national
life, forty years of renewal and development, and yet the swarthy spectre sits in
its accustomed seat at the Nation’s feast. In vain do we cry to this our vastest social
problem:—
“Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble!”
The Nation has not yet found peace from its sins; the freedman has not yet found
in freedom his promised land. Whatever of good may have come in these years of
change, the shadow of a deep disappointment rests upon the Negro people,—a
disappointment all the more bitter because the unattained ideal was unbounded
save by the simple ignorance of a lowly people.
The first decade was merely a prolongation of the vain search for freedom, the
boon that seemed ever barely to elude their grasp,—like a tantalizing will-o’-the-
wisp, maddening and misleading the headless host. The holocaust of war, the ter-
rors of the Ku-Klux Klan, the lies of carpet-baggers, the disorganization of indus-
try, and the contradictory advice of friends and foes, left the bewildered serf with
no new watchword beyond the old cry for freedom. As the time flew, however, he
began to grasp a new idea. The ideal of liberty demanded for its attainment pow-
erful means, and these the Fifteenth Amendment gave him. The ballot, which
before he had looked upon as a visible sign of freedom, he now regarded as the
chief means of gaining and perfecting the liberty with which war had partially
endowed him. And why not? Had not votes made war and emancipated millions?
Had not votes enfranchised the freedmen? Was anything impossible to a power
that had done all this? A million black men started with renewed zeal to vote
themselves into the kingdom. So the decade flew away, the revolution of 1876
came, and left the half-free serf weary, wondering, but still inspired. Slowly but
steadily, in the following years, a new vision began gradually to replace the dream
of political power,—a powerful movement, the rise of another ideal to guide the
2 0 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 238 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS 2 0 7
unguided, another pillar of fire by night after a clouded day. It was the ideal of
“book-learning”; the curiosity, born of compulsory ignorance, to know and test the
power of the cabalistic letters of the white man, the longing to know. Here at last
seemed to have been discovered the mountain path to Canaan; longer than the
highway of Emancipation and law, steep and rugged, but straight, leading to
heights high enough to overlook life.
Up the new path the advance guard toiled, slowly, heavily, doggedly; only those
who have watched and guided the faltering feet, the misty minds, the dull under-
standings, of the dark pupils of these schools know how faithfully, how piteously,
this people strove to learn. It was weary work. The cold statistician wrote down
the inches of progress here and there, noted also where here and there a foot had
slipped or some one had fallen. To the tired climbers, the horizon was ever dark,
the mists were often cold, the Canaan was always dim and far away. If, however,
the vistas disclosed as yet no goal, no resting-place, little but flattery and criticism,
the journey at least gave leisure for reflection and self-examination; it changed the
child of Emancipation to the youth with dawning self-consciousness, self-realiza-
tion, self-respect. In those sombre forests of his striving his own soul rose before
him, and he saw himself,—darkly as through a veil; and yet he saw in himself
some faint revelation of his power, of his mission. He began to have a dim feeling
that, to attain his place in the world, he must be himself, and not another. For the
first time he sought to analyze the burden he bore upon his back, that dead-
weight of social degradation partially masked behind a half-named Negro prob-
lem. He felt his poverty; without a cent, without a home, without land, tools, or
savings, he had entered into competition with rich, landed, skilled neighbors. To
be a poor man is hard, but to be a poor race in a land of dollars is the very bot-
tom of hardships. He felt the weight of his ignorance,—not simply of letters, but
of life, of business of the humanities; the accumulated sloth and shirking and awk-
wardness of decades and centuries shackled his hands and feet. Nor was his bur-
den all poverty and ignorance. The red stain of bastardy, which two centuries of
systematic legal defilement of Negro women had stamped upon his race, meant
not only the loss of ancient African chastity, but also the hereditary weight of a
mass of corruption from white adulterers, threatening almost the obliteration of
the Negro home.
A people thus handicapped ought not to be asked to race with the world, but
rather allowed to give all its time and thought to its own social problems. But alas!
while sociologists gleefully count his bastards and his prostitutes, the very soul of
the toiling, sweating black man is darkened by the shadow of a vast despair. Men
call the shadow prejudice, and learnedly explain it as the natural defence of cul-
ture against barbarism, learning against ignorance, purity against crime, the
“higher” against the “lower” races. To which the Negro cries Amen! and swears
that to so much of this strange prejudice as is founded on just homage to civiliza-
tion, culture, righteousness, and progress, he humbly bows and meekly does obei-
sance. But before that nameless prejudice that leaps beyond all this he stands
helpless, dismayed, and well-nigh speechless; before that personal disrespect and
mockery, the ridicule and systematic humiliation, the distortion of fact and wan-


--- PAGE 239 ---
ton license of fancy, the cynical ignoring of the better and the boisterous wel-
coming of the worse, the all-pervading desire to inculcate disdain for everything
black, from Toussaint to the devil,—before this there rises a sickening despair
that would disarm and discourage any nation save that black host to whom “dis-
couragement” is an unwritten word.
But the facing of so vast a prejudice could not but bring the inevitable self-
questioning, self-disparagement, and lowering of ideals which ever accompany
repression and breed in an atmosphere of contempt and hate. Whisperings and
portents came borne upon the four winds: Lo! we are diseased and dying, cried
the dark hosts; we cannot write, our voting is vain; what need of education, since
we must always cook and serve? And the Nation echoed and enforced this self-
criticism, saying: Be content to be servants, and nothing more; what need of
higher culture for half-men? Away with the black man’s ballot, by force or
fraud,—and behold the suicide of a race! Nevertheless, out of the evil came
something of good,—the more careful adjustment of education to real life, the
clearer perception of the Negroes’ social responsibilities, and the sobering real-
ization of the meaning of progress.
So dawned the time of Sturm und Drang:storm and stress to-day rocks our lit-
tle boat on the mad waters of the world-sea; there is within and without the sound
of conflict, the burning of body and rending of soul; inspiration strives with doubt,
and faith with vain questionings. The bright ideals of the past,—physical freedom,
political power, the training of brains and the training of hands,—all these in turn
have waxed and waned, until even the last grows dim and overcast. Are they all
wrong,—all false? No, not that, but each alone was over-simple and incom-
plete,—the dreams of a credulous race-childhood, or the fond imaginings of the
other world which does not know and does not want to know our power. To be
really true, all these ideals must be melted and welded into one. The training of
the schools we need to-day more than ever,—the training of deft hands, quick
eyes and ears, and above all the broader, deeper, higher culture of gifted minds
and pure hearts. The power of the ballot we need in sheer self-defence,—else
what shall save us from a second slavery? Freedom, too, the long-sought, we still
seek,—the freedom of life and limb, the freedom to work and think, the freedom
to love and aspire. Work, culture, liberty,—all these we need, not singly but
together, not successively but together, each growing and aiding each, and all
striving toward that vaster ideal that swims before the Negro people, the ideal of
human brotherhood, gained through the unifying ideal of Race; the ideal of fos-
tering and developing the traits and talents of the Negro, not in opposition to or
contempt for other races, but rather in large conformity to the greater ideals of
the American Republic, in order that some day on American soil two world-races
may give each to each those characteristics both so sadly lack. We the darker ones
come even now not altogether empty-handed: there are to-day no truer expo-
nents of the pure human spirit of the Declaration of Independence than the
American Negroes; there is no true American music but the wild sweet melodies
of the Negro slave; the American fairy tales and folk-lore are Indian and African;
and, all in all, we black men seem the sole oasis of simple faith and reverence in
2 0 8 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 240 ---
THE NIAGARA MOVEMENT 2 0 9
a dusty desert of dollars and smartness. Will America be poorer if she replace her
brutal dyspeptic blundering with light-hearted but determined Negro humility?
or her coarse and cruel wit with loving jovial good-humor? or her vulgar music
with the soul of the Sorrow Songs?
Merely a concrete test of the underlying principles of the great republic is the
Negro Problem, and the spiritual striving of the freedmen’s sons is the travail of
souls whose burden is almost beyond the measure of their strength, but who bear
it in the name of an historic race, in the name of this the land of their fathers’
fathers, and in the name of human opportunity.
And now what I have briefly sketched in large outline let me on coming pages tell
again in many ways, with loving emphasis and deeper detail, that men may listen
to the striving in the souls of black folk.
Sources: Excerpts from “The Conservation of Races,” paper presented to the American
Negro Academy, Occasional Papers, No. 2 (Washington, D.C., 1897); and (2) excerpts from
chapter I, “Of Our Spiritual Strivings,” and chapter II, “Of the Dawn of Freedom,” from The
Souls of Black Folk (Chicago: A.C. McClurg, 1903).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
W. E. B. Du Bois, The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade to the United States of
America, 1638–1870 (New York: Longmans, Green, 1896).
———, The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study(Boston: Ginn and Company, 1899).
———, The Souls of Black Folk: Essays and Sketches(Chicago: A.C. McClurg, 1903).
———, Darkwater: Voices from the Veil (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Stratford,
1920).
David Levering Lewis, ed., W. E. B. Du Bois: A Reader(New York: Holt, 1995).
Manning Marable, W.E.B. Du Bois: Black Radical Democrat(Boulder: Paradigm Publishers,
2005). 
Adolph Reed, W. E. B. Du Bois and American Political Thought: Fabianism and the Color
Line (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Eric J. Sundquist, ed., The Oxford W. E. B. Du Bois Reader (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1996).
Raymond Wolters, Du Bois and His Rivals (Columbia: University of Missouri Press,
2002).
O15 O
The Niagara Movement, 1905
At the invitation of W. E. B. Du Bois, a group of socially conscious black intellectu-
als and leaders gathered together at Niagara Falls in 1905. This meeting initiated the
Niagara Movement. Many participants were motivated by their opposition to the


--- PAGE 241 ---
conservative leadership of Booker T. Washington, who was widely criticized in some
circles not simply for his policy of racial accommodationism but also for his heavy-
handed political tactics against those who dared to challenge him. Though the
Niagara Movement represented the growing voice of dissent within black America
and forcefully challenged the racial oppression of Jim Crow, the success of the pro-
ject was limited. Washington used his influence with major African-American news-
papers, churches, and colleges to undermine and discredit his opponents. Tensions
between Du Bois and Trotter also contributed to the demise of this group.
O
PROGRESS: The members of the conference, known as the Niagara Movement,
assembled in annual meeting at Buffalo, July 11th, 12th and 13th, 1905, congrat-
ulate the Negro-Americans on certain undoubted evidences of progress in the last
decade, particularly the increase of intelligence, the buying of property, the
checking of crime, the uplift in home life, the advance in literature and art, and
the demonstration of constructive and executive ability in the conduct of great
religious, economic and educational institutions.
Suffrage: At the same time, we believe that this class of American citizens
should protest emphatically and continually against the curtailment of their
political rights. We believe in manhood suffrage; we believe that no man is so
good, intelligent or wealthy as to be entrusted wholly with the welfare of his
neighbor.
Civil Liberty: We believe also in protest against the curtailment of our civil
rights. All American citizens have the right to equal treatment in places of public
entertainment according to their behavior and deserts.
Economic Opportunity: We especially complain against the denial of equal
opportunities to us in economic life; in the rural districts of the South this
amounts to peonage and virtual slavery; all over the South it tends to crush labor
and small business enterprises; and everywhere American prejudice, helped often
by iniquitous laws, is making it more difficult for Negro-Americans to earn a
decent living.
Education: Common school education should be free to all American children
and compulsory. High school training should be adequately provided for all, and
college training should be the monopoly of no class or race in any section of our
common country. We believe that, in defense of our own institutions, the United
States should aid common school education, particularly in the South, and we
especially recommend concerted agitation to this end. We urge an increase in
public high school facilities in the South, where the Negro-Americans are almost
wholly without such provisions. We favor well-equipped trade and technical
schools for the training of artisans, and the need of adequate and liberal endow-
ment for a few institutions of higher education must be patent to sincere well-
wishers of the race.
Courts: We demand upright judges in courts, juries selected without discrim-
ination on account of color and the same measure of punishment and the same
2 1 0 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 242 ---
THE NIAGARA MOVEMENT 2 1 1
efforts at reformation for blacks as for white offenders. We need orphanages and
farm schools for dependent children, juvenile reformatories for delinquents, and
the abolition of the dehumanizing convict-lease system.
Public Opinion: We note with alarm the evident retrogression in this land of
sound public opinion on the subject of manhood rights, republican government
and human brotherhood, and we pray God that this nation will not degenerate
into a mob of boasters and oppressors, but rather will return to the faith of the
fathers, that all men were created free and equal, with certain unalienable rights.
Health: We plead for health—for an opportunity to live in decent houses and
localities, for a chance to rear our children in physical and moral cleanliness.
Employers and Labor Unions: We hold up for public execration the conduct of
two opposite classes of men: The practice among employers of importing ignorant
Negro-American laborers in emergencies, and then affording them neither pro-
tection nor permanent employment; and the practice of labor unions in proscrib-
ing and boycotting and oppressing thousands of their fellow-toilers, simply
because they are black. These methods have accentuated and will accentuate the
war of labor and capital, and they are disgraceful to both sides.
Protest: We refuse to allow the impression to remain that the Negro-American
assents to inferiority, is submissive under oppression and apologetic before
insults. Through helplessness we may submit, but the voice of protest of ten mil-
lion Americans must never cease to assail the ears of their fellows, so long as
America is unjust.
Color-Line: Any discrimination based simply on race or color is barbarous, we
care not how hallowed it be by custom, expediency or prejudice. Differences
made on account of ignorance, immorality, or disease are legitimate methods of
fighting evil, and against them we have no word of protest; but discriminations
based simply and solely on physical peculiarities, place of birth, color of skin, are
relics of that unreasoning human savagery of which the world is and ought to be
thoroughly ashamed.
“Jim Crow” Cars: We protest against the “Jim Crow” car, since its effect is and
must be to make us pay first-class fare for third-class accommodations, render us
open to insults and discomfort and to crucify wantonly our manhood, womanhood
and self-respect.
Soldiers: We regret that this nation has never seen fit adequately to reward the
black soldiers who, in its five wars, have defended their country with their blood,
and yet have been systematically denied the promotions which their abilities
deserve. And we regard as unjust, the exclusion of black boys from the military
and naval training schools.
War Amendments: We urge upon Congress the enactment of appropriate leg-
islation for securing the proper enforcement of those articles of freedom, the thir-
teenth, fourteenth and fifteenth amendments of the Constitution of the United
States.
Oppression: We repudiate the monstrous doctrine that the oppressor should
be the sole authority as to the rights of the oppressed. The Negro race in
America stolen, ravished and degraded, struggling up through difficulties and


--- PAGE 243 ---
oppression, needs sympathy and receives criticism; needs help and is given hin-
drance, needs protection and is given mob-violence, needs justice and is given
charity, needs leadership and is given cowardice and apology, needs bread and is
given a stone. This nation will never stand justified before God until these things
are changed.
The Church:Especially are we surprised and astonished at the recent attitude of
the church of Christ—of an increase of a desire to bow to racial prejudice, to narrow
the bounds of human brotherhood, and to segregate black men to some outer sanc-
tuary. This is wrong, unchristian and disgraceful to the twentieth century civilization.
Agitation: Of the above grievances we do not hesitate to complain, and to com-
plain loudly and insistently. To ignore, overlook, or apologize for these wrongs is
to prove ourselves unworthy of freedom. Persistent manly agitation is the way to
liberty, and toward this goal the Niagara Movement has started and asks the coop-
eration of all men of all races.
Help: At the same time we want to acknowledge with deep thankfulness the
help of our fellowmen from the abolitionist down to those who today still stand
for equal opportunity and who have given and still give of their wealth and of their
poverty for our advancement.
Duties: And while we are demanding, and ought to demand, and will continue
to demand the rights enumerated above, God forbid that we should ever forget
to urge corresponding duties upon our people:
The duty to vote.
The duty to respect the rights of others.
The duty to work.
The duty to obey the laws.
The duty to be clean and orderly.
The duty to send our children to school.
The duty to respect ourselves, even as we respect others.
This statement, complaint and prayer we submit to the American people, and
Almighty God.
Source: “The Niagara Movement Declaration of Principles,” 1905. Originally published in
the Cleveland Gazette, July 22, 1905.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
W. E. B. Du Bois, The Oxford W. E. B. Du Bois Reader, ed. Eric J. Sundquist (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996).
David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868–1919 (New York: Holt,
1993).
Manning Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois: Black Radical Democrat (Boulder: Parodiem
Publishers, 2005).
August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915: Racial Ideologies in the Age of Booker
T. Washington(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1963).
Elliot M. Rudwick, “The Niagara Movement,” Journal of Negro History42, no. 3 (1957), pp.
177–200.
2 1 2 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 244 ---
H.H. HARRISON, BLACK REVOLUTIONARY NATIONALIST 2 1 3
———, W. E. B. Du Bois: A Study in Minority Group Leadership(Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1960).
O16 O
Hubert Henry Harrison, Black Revolutionary Nationalist
Hubert Henry Harrison (1883–1927) was born in St. Croix, Danish West Indies,
and moved to New York as a teenager. Harrison read widely in history, literature,
and the social sciences, and became a socialist after arriving at the conclusion that
racism was largely driven by class exploitation. Harrison acquired a popular fol-
lowing as a charismatic street speaker both on Harlem’s Lenox Avenue and at
Madison Square in Manhattan. The racial prejudice Harrison encountered
among white socialists pushed him in the direction of black nationalism. Harrison
served for a time as editor of Marcus Garvey’s newspaper, The Negro World. His
most ambitious book, When Africa Awakes, presents a powerful perspective of
what would later be defined as “revolutionary nationalism.”
O
. . . Today, fellow sufferers, they tell us that we are free. But are we? If you will
think for a moment you will see that we are not free at all. We have simply
changed one form of slavery for another. Then it was chattel slavery, now it is
wage slavery. For that which was the essence of chattel slavery is the essence of
wage slavery. It is only a difference in form. The chattel slave was compelled to
work by physical force; the wage slave is compelled to work by starvation. The
product of the chattel slave’s labor was taken by his master; the product of the
wage slave’s labor is taken by the employer.
The United States government has made a study of the wealth-producing
power of the wage slaves and has shown that the average worker produces $2,451
a year. The government has also made a study of wages in the United States, and
that study shows that the average worker gets $437 a year. This means that the
average employer takes away from the average wage slave $2,014 a year. In the
good old days the master took away the wealth produced by the slave in the sim-
plest form; today he takes it away in the form of profits. But in one respect the
wage slave is worse off than the chattel slave. Under chattel slavery the master
owned the man and the land; he had to feed and clothe the man. Under wage
slavery the man feeds and clothes himself. Under chattel slavery it was to the
interest of the owner to give the slave work and to keep him from starving to
death. Under wage slavery, if the man is out of work the employer doesn’t care;
that is no loss to him; and if the man dies, there are millions of others eager to
take his place, because, as I said before, they must either work for him or starve.


--- PAGE 245 ---
There is one very striking parallel between the two cases. Today there are many
people who say that this system is divinely appointed—is a law of nature—just as
they said the same thing of chattel slavery. Well, there are millions of workers who
say it is wrong. Under chattel slavery black workers were robbed; under wage
slavery all the workers are robbed. The Socialist party says that this robbing shall
cease; that no worker black or white shall be exploited for profit. And it says, fur-
ther, that there is one sure and certain way of putting an end to the system, and
that is by working for the success of Socialism. . . .
Under the old system, the capitalist owned the man; today he owns the tools
with which the man must work. These tools are the factories, the mines, and the
machines. The system that owns them owns you and me and all the rest of us,
black, white, brown, red and yellow. We can’t live unless we have access to these
tools, and our masters the capitalists see to it that we are separated from what we
make by using these things, except so much as is necessary to keep us alive that
we may be able to make more—for them. This little bit is called wages. They
wouldn’t give us even that if they thought that we could live without it. In the
good old days the chattel slave would be fastened with a chain if they thought that
he might escape. Today no chain is necessary to bind us to the tools. We are as
free as air. Of course. We are free to starve. And that chain of the fear of starva-
tion binds us to the tools owned by the capitalist as firmly as any iron chain ever
did. And this system doesn’t care whether the slaves who are bound in this new
way are white or black. To the capitalist system all workers are equal—in so far as
they have a stomach.
Now the one great fact for the Negro in America today is race prejudice. The
great labor problem with which all working people are faced is made harder for
black working people by the addition of a race problem. I want to show you how
one grows out of the other and how, at bottom, they are both the same thing. In
other words, I want you to see the economic reason for race prejudice.
In the first place, do you know that the most rabid, Negro-hating, Southern
aristocrat has not the slightest objection to sleeping in the same house with a
Negro—if that Negro sleeps there as his servant? He doesn’t care if his food is
prepared by a Negro cook and handled by a Negro waiter before it gets to him;
he will eat it. But if a Negro comes into the same public restaurant to buy and eat
food, then—oh my!—he gets all hot up about it. But why? What’s the difference?
I will tell you. The aristocrat wants the black man to feel that he is on a lower
level. When he is “in his place,” he is liked. But he must not be allowed to do any-
thing to make him forget that he is on this lower level; he must be kept “in his
place,” which means the place which the aristocrat wants him to keep. You see,
the black man carries the memory of slavery with him. Everybody knows that the
slaves were the exploited working class of the South. That put them in a class by
themselves, down at the bottom, downtrodden, despised, “inferior.”
Do you begin to see now that race prejudice is only another name for caste
prejudice? If our people had never been slaves; had never been exploited work-
ers, and so, at the bottom of the ladder, there would be no prejudice against them
2 1 4 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 246 ---
H.H. HARRISON, BLACK REVOLUTIONARY NATIONALIST 2 1 5
now. In every case where there has been a downtrodden class of workers at the
bottom, that class has been despised by the class that lived by their labor. Do you
doubt it? Then look at the facts. If you had picked up a daily paper in New York
in 1848 you would have found at the end of many an advertisement for butler,
coachman, lady’s maid, clerk or bookkeeper these words: “No Irish need apply.”
There was a race prejudice against the Irish then, because most of the manual
unskilled laborers were Irish. They were at the bottom, exploited and despised.
But they have changed things since then. Beginning in the seventies, when Jewish
laborers began to come here from Russia, Austria and Germany, and lasting even
to our own day, there has been race prejudice against the Jews. And today, when
the Italian has taken the place which the Irish laborer vacated—at the bottom—
he too comes in for his share of prejudice. In every one of these cases it was the
condition of the people at the bottom—as despised, exploited, wage slaves—that
was responsible for the race prejudice. And it is just so in the black man’s case—
with this difference: his color marks what he once was, and even though he should
wear a dress suit every evening and own an automobile or a farm, he can always
be picked out and reminded.
Now, under the present system, exploiting the wage slave is respectable. I have
already shown you that wherever the worker is exploited he is despised. So you
will see that despising the wage slave is quite fashionable. . . . As long as the pre-
sent system continues, the workers will be despised; as long as the workers are
despised, the black man will be despised, robbed and murdered, because they are
least able to defend themselves. Now ask yourself whether you haven’t a very spe-
cial interest in changing the present system.
Of course, you will ask: “But haven’t white working people race prejudice too?”
Sure, they have. Do you know why? It pays the capitalist to keep the workers
divided. So he creates and keeps alive these prejudices. He gets them to believe
that their interests are different. Then he uses one half of them to club the other
half with. In Russia when the working men demand reform, the capitalists sick
them on the Jews. In America they sick them on the Negroes. That makes them
forget their own condition; as long as they can be made to look down upon another
class. “But then,” you will say, “the average wage slave must be a chump.” Sure, he
is. That’s what the capitalist counts on. And Socialism is working to educate the
workers to see this and to unite them in doing away with the present system.
Socialism stands for the emancipation of the wage slaves. Are you a wage
slave? Do you want to be emancipated? Then join hands with the Socialists. Hear
what they have to say. Read some of their literature. Get a Socialist leaflet, a pam-
phlet, or, better still, a book. You will be convinced of two things: that Socialism
is right, and that it is inevitable. It is right because any order of things in which
those who work have least while those who work them have most, is wrong. It is
inevitable because a system under which the wealth produced by the labor of
human hands amounts to more than two hundred and twenty billions a year while
many millions live on the verge of starvation, is bound to break down. Therefore,
if you wish to join with the other class-conscious, intelligent wage earners—in


--- PAGE 247 ---
putting an end to such a system; if you want to better living conditions for black
men as well as for white men; to make this woeful world of ours a little better for
you children and your children’s children, study Socialism—and think and work
your way out. . . .
Source: Excerpt from speech originally delivered in about 1912, first published in Harrison,
The Negro and the Nation(New York: 1917[?]), pp. 48–58.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
John G. Jackson, Hubert Henry Harrison: The Black Socrates(Austin, Tex.: American Athiest
Press, 1987).
Jeffrey Babcock Perry, “Hubert Henry Harrison, The Father of Harlem Radicalism: The
Early Years, 1883 through the Founding of the Liberty League and the Voice in 1917”
(Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1986).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
“The Avalon Project at Yale Law School: African-Americans—Biography, Autobiography and
History,” www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/treatise/african_americans.htm.
”Race and Place—An African-American Community in Jim Crow: Charlottesville, VA,”
www.vcdh.virginia.edu/afam/raceandplace/index.html.
Edward L. Ayers, The Promise of the New South: Life after Reconstruction(Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2007).
Jane Elizabeth Dailey, Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore, and Bryant Simon, eds., Jumpin’ Jim
Crow: Southern Politics from Civil War to Civil Rights(Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2000).
Eric Foner, Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877. (New York:
History Book Club, 2005). 
Eric Foner and illustrations edited and with commentary by Joshua Brown, Forever Free:
The Story of Emancipation and Reconstruction, 1st ed. (New York: Knopf, 2005).
Evelyn Nakano Glenn, Unequal Freedom: How Race and Gender Shaped American
Citizenship and Labor(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004).
Darlene Clark Hine, Black Women in the Nursing Profession: A Documentary History, The
History of American Nursing(New York: Garland, 1985).
———, Black Women in White: Racial Conflict and Cooperation in the Nursing Profession,
1890–1950, Blacks in the Diaspora(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989).
Gilbert Jonas and with a forward by Julian Bond, Freedom’s Sword: The NAACP and the
Struggle against Racism in America, 1909–1969(London: Routledge, 2007).
William Miles, Men of Bronze: The Black American Heroes of World War I, Santa Monica:
Direct Cinema Ltd., 1995. DVD Video.
Roger L. Ransom and Richard Sutch, One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of
Emancipation, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
2 1 6 RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915


--- PAGE 248 ---
FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO:
THE GREAT MIGRATION, HARLEM  
RENAISSANCE, AND WORLD WAR,
1915–1954
– SECTION THREE –


--- PAGE 249 ---



--- PAGE 250 ---
INTRODUCTION
T
he four decades considered in section 3 were a period of both continuity
and tremendous change for the national African-American community. The
central political reality for black Americans was, of course, Jim Crow segre-
gation. By the 1920s, the United States had become a thoroughly segre-
gated society, in which constitutional safeguards and civil liberties rarely
applied to black people. Like the South African system known years later as
apartheid, the United States was in effect a “racist state,” in which access to vot-
ing rights, political representation, and economic and social development was
rigidly determined for racialized minorities through governmental authorities
and, more informally, through deliberate acts of extralegal terror. Black Ameri-
cans were increasingly subjected to de facto segregation in many northern cities,
and white-owned banks frequently denied credit and capital to African Americans
starting businesses or buying homes in predominantly white areas. The actual
political accomplishments of Reconstruction were distorted in standard scholar-
ship, or viciously parodied in racist films such as The Birth of a Nation(1915). The
high tide of white supremacy occurred in the years immediately following World
War I. In what would later be called the “Red Summer of 1919,” hundreds of
African Americans were murdered and thousands were left homeless by the
attacks of racist mobs. The Ku Klux Klan, originally established as a white 
southern vigilante group during Reconstruction, was revived and achieved
tremendous support. By the early 1920s, several million whites, most of whom
lived outside the South, actively participated in the Ku Klux Klan and supported
its candidates for public office. Both major national political parties, the Repub-
licans and Democrats, repudiated support for the rights of Negroes. This envi-
ronment of white supremacy and unqualified racial repression led to new devel-
opments in the political character and protest organizations of African-American
people.
A second factor in the transformation of black political and social life was the
Great Migration—the vast relocation of millions of African Americans from the
rural, agricultural South to the urban, industrial North. Sociologists and histori-
ans have long debated the fundamental factors that accounted for the decision of


--- PAGE 251 ---
so many African Americans to leave the South. The mechanization of southern
agriculture and the decline of cotton farming pushed thousands of sharecroppers
off the land. Many black workers were attracted to better-paying jobs in the man-
ufacturing and industrial factories of the Midwest and Northeast. Others simply
wanted to escape the political persecution, lynching, and racial oppression. As
millions of black people resettled in the North, they quickly created new urban
communities with elaborate social infrastructures: black newspapers, churches,
schools, funeral establishments, beauty and barber shops, fraternal organizations,
Masonic lodges, theater groups, and similar institutions. By 1930, Harlem had
become the largest black urban center in North America, and was virtually the
mecca of black culture and the arts. Boston’s Roxbury, Chicago’s South Side, and
Cleveland’s Hough district also became identifiably black metropolises. Soon
after World War II, south-central Los Angeles and East Oakland in California
would join this growing list of African-American urban communities. By the end
of the war, about forty percent of all black Americans lived outside the South, and
more than half lived in cities.
The flowering of the Harlem Renaissance in the 1920s was the literary and cul-
tural expression of the social forces that produced the Great Migration and the
modern ghetto. In the writings of Jean Toomer, Claude McKay, Nella Larsen,
Zora Neale Hurston, and Countee Cullen, a new generation of artists and intel-
lectuals, born in the age of jazz, found their own unique voice. As Langston
Hughes suggested in his 1926 essay, “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain,”
the power and creativity of black art would be found within a celebration and
understanding of the culture of “black common people. . . . They furnish a wealth
of colorful, distinctive material for any artist because they still hold their own indi-
viduality in the face of American standardizations. And perhaps these common
people will give to the world its truly great Negro artist, the one who is not afraid
to be himself” (document 6).
The Harlem Renaissance also involved a social critique. The phrase “the New
Negro” was used to characterize the new levels of militancy, racial consciousness,
and cultural energy that were most visibly represented in Harlem. For poets and
politicians alike, the black metropolis was the new frontier for black life and social
development. “To my mind,” NAACP national secretary James Weldon Johnson
wrote in 1925, “Harlem is more than a Negro community; it is a large-scale labo-
ratory experiment in the race problem. . . . I believe that the Negro’s advantages
and opportunities are greater in Harlem than in any other place in the country,
and that Harlem will become the intellectual, the cultural, and the financial cen-
ter for Negroes of the United States, and will exert a vital influence upon all Negro
peoples” (document 8).
These complex factors—the Great Migration to the North, the explosive
growth of black urban communities, the development of a black working class, all
within the constraints of racial segregation—created the space for new protest
ideologies and formations. Booker T. Washington’s death in 1915 and the negoti-
ated peace between the Tuskegee Machine and the liberal integrationists led by
Du Bois at the Amenia conference the following year, destroyed accommodation
2 2 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 252 ---
INTRODUCTION 2 2 1
as a viable political strategy. By 1919, The Crisis claimed over one hundred thou-
sand readers, and the NAACP had clearly won the ideological battle to become
the voice and political agent of the black middle class. But in the wake of the Red
Summer of 1919, Du Bois’s leadership was severely challenged from several quar-
ters. The principal spokesperson for black nationalism and racial separatism was
Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, founder of the Universal Negro Improvement
Association (UNIA) in 1914. Arriving in the United States in 1916, Garvey used
his charismatic oratory and organizing skills to quickly establish a mass following
among hundreds of thousands of black poor and working-class people. Unlike the
NAACP and Frederick Douglass before him, Garvey did not desire a pluralistic,
integrated American society in which Negroes freely participated. The UNIA’s
“Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World,” ratified in Harlem in
August 1920, presents an alternative vision of black self-determination and racial
separatism that drew from the earlier ideas of Delany and Blyden: “We declare
that Negroes, wheresoever they form a community among themselves, should be
given the right to elect their own representatives to represent them in legisla-
tures, courts of law, or such institutions as may exercise control over that particu-
lar community. . . . We believe in the freedom of Africa for the Negro people of
the world, and by the principle of Europe for the Europeans and Asia for the
Asiatics; we also demand Africa for the Africans at home and abroad.” Garvey was
convinced that the NAACP was nothing less “than a scheme to destroy the Negro
Race” and that “Du Bois represents a group that hates the Negro blood in its
veins . . .” (document 4).
The liberal integrationists also came under intense attack from the left.
Influenced by the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, black socialists interpreted the
oppression of African Americans as part of the larger exploitation of the prole-
tariat. What the black masses needed was not Garvey’s racial chauvinism, the
black radicals believed, but world revolution. Cyril V . Briggs’s African Blood
Brotherhood (ABB) combined the race militancy reflected in the UNIA with a
Marxist analysis of class struggle. The ABB’s program explicitly condemned
“those Negroes who would distract the attention of the Negro workers from the
fight for better conditions in the United States to an illusory empire or republic
on the continent of Africa. . . . The ABB believes in interracial cooperation—not
the sham cooperation of the oppressed Negro workers and their oppressors, but
the honest cooperation of colored and white workers based upon mutual appre-
ciation of the fact of the identity of their interests as members of the working
class” (document 3).
Throughout the 1920s, the Marxist left did not play a dominant role in African-
American politics and society. The existence of Jim Crow served to anchor nearly
all black political discourse to the “race question”; whether one supported racial
integration or Garvey’s “back to Africa” program, racial categories and assumptions
set the parameters of politics. All of this changed, however, with the onset of the
Great Depression. By 1932, nearly half of all African-American workers were
unemployed. Millions were homeless and hungry. The NAACP had no effective
program to attack black unemployment, and Du Bois himself was pressured to


--- PAGE 253 ---
resign from the organization in 1934 over his support for a strategy of economic
“self-segregation.” Garvey had been harassed by the federal government, impris-
oned in 1925, and permanently expelled from the United States in 1927. The
UNIA, which was for a brief time the largest mass-membership organization in
black history, virtually disappeared. Into this vacuum entered a series of radical
workers, intellectuals, leaders, organizers, and organizations that favored neither
liberal integration nor racial separatism, but rather what can be termed “transfor-
mation”: the complete dismantling of institutional racism, the democratization of
the U.S. state and the fundamental redistribution of economic wealth and
resources throughout society, and the elimination of all social manifestations of
human inequality and gender discrimination.
In this section, economist Abram L. Harris outlines the theoretical justification
for a radical movement within the black community: “Progressives must realize
that Negro economic and political leadership is opportunistic and petty bour-
geois,” Harris observes. “Thus progressives [must] carry to the Negro masses some
realization of the causes of unemployment, low wages, and the need for labor
unionism and cooperation . . .” (document 9). It was through the activism of blacks
in the Communist Party that Harris’s academic Marxist critique became a social
force. The struggles to save the lives of the Scottsboro boys in Alabama, and to free
political prisoner Angelo Herndon in Georgia in the 1930s, attracted thousands of
African Americans to the Communist Party (documents 10, 11). The left helped
to organize a series of protest associations involving African Americans, including
tenants’ rights groups, sharecroppers’ unions, and the Southern Negro Youth
Conference (document 16). From the point of view of many black workers, the
Communist Party provided the rare opportunity to discuss important political
issues affecting their communities with whites on the basis of full equality. Hosea
Hudson’s personal account of his experiences inside the Communist Party pro-
vides some insights for the movement’s popularity at this time: “I found this Party,
a party of the working class, gave me rights equal with all others regardless of color,
sex, or age or educational standards. I with my uneducation could express myself,
without being made fun of by others who could read well and fast, using big words.
I was treated with high respect. I had a right to help make the policy” (document
12). At a time when southern black people were routinely denied the right to vote,
to serve on juries, or to freely express their opinions in public, the experience of
the Communist Party’s democratic procedures was a striking contrast.
The growing influence of the left served to revitalize liberal reformist organiza-
tions, and led to the formation of new protest movements. In Harlem, Reverend
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., minister of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, became the
leader of a mass campaign to boycott and picket businesses that refused to employ
black workers (document 14). A. Philip Randolph, leader of the Brotherhood of
Sleeping Car Porters, inspired the Negro March on Washington Movement in
1941, successfully pressuring the Roosevelt administration to grant Executive
Order 8802, which outlawed racial discriminatory hiring policies in defense plants
(document 17). The identification of areas of unity in the class and race questions
that occurred during this era transformed the political landscape for both labor
2 2 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 254 ---
INTRODUCTION 2 2 3
and African-American struggles. Under the visionary guidance of attorney Charles
Hamilton Houston, the NAACP pursued gradual but steady judicial assault against
the legal justifications for the racist “separate but equal” policy.
Throughout these years, black women played central roles in the shaping of all
three major political currents within black America: liberal integrationism, black
nationalism, and transformationism. In the 1920s and 1930s, the foremost voice
for women’s rights among the Negro middle class was educator Mary McLeod
Bethune, president of what would later become Bethune-Cookman College. In
her 1935 speech reprinted here (document 13), she encourages the NAACP to
“continue to struggle toward the goal of social justice. . . . Let us cease now to ren-
der our allegiance to the creed of belief in the inherent superiority of white and
the inherent inferiority of black.” Amy Euphemia Jacques Garvey, a black nation-
alist leader and women’s rights advocate, challenged African-American males to
overcome their patriarchal attitudes about politics (document 5):
We are tired of hearing Negro men say, “There is a better day coming,” while they
do nothing to usher in the day. We are becoming so impatient that we are getting in
the front ranks, and serve notice on the world that we will brush aside the halting,
cowardly Negro men, and with prayer on our lips and arms prepared for any fray,
we will press on and on until victory is over. Africa must be for Africans, and
Negroes everywhere must be independent. . . . Mr. Black man, watch your step!
Ethiopia’s queens will reign again, and her Amazons protect her shores and people.
Strengthen your shaking knees, and move forward, or we will displace you and lead
on to victory and to glory.
From the vantage point of the left, perhaps the most important radical femi-
nist voice was that of Claudia Jones. Crafting a Marxian analysis of race, gender,
and class, she points out in her 1949 essay (document 19) that “Negro women—
as workers, as Negroes, and as women—are the most oppressed stratum of the
whole population. . . . The super-exploitation of the Negro woman worker is thus
revealed not only in that she receives, as woman, less than equal pay for equal
work with men, but in that the majority of Negro women get less than half the
pay of white women.” Consequently, she observes, there is “little wonder” that
black maternity and infant mortality rates are so high. Because of their triple bur-
den of gender, race, and class exploitation, African-American women could
potentially become the most revolutionary social group in the country. Jones’s
theoretical formulation of how these three social categories are related anticipates
by thirty years the analysis of black Marxist feminists such as Angela Y. Davis and
other race, class, and gender feminists:
A developing consciousness on the woman question today, therefore, must not fail
to recognize that the Negro question in the United States is prior to, and not equal
to, the woman question; that only to the extent that we fight all chauvinist expres-
sions and actions as regards the Negro people and fight for the full equality of the
Negro people, can women as a whole advance their struggle for equal rights. For the
progressive women’s movement, the Negro woman, who combines in her status the
worker, the Negro, and the woman, is the vital link to this heightened political con-
sciousness.


--- PAGE 255 ---
The hopes for domestic social reform on issues of both race and class were
extinguished for nearly a decade, as World War II gave way to the Cold War. The
armed global confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States
rationalized a government-sponsored purge of millions of American radicals and
even liberals from public and private institutions. Approximately one million
workers in Communist-led unions were expelled from the AFL-CIO. States
passed laws defining membership in the Communist Party as a crime. Leaders
and organizers of the Communist Party were jailed. Claudia Jones was impris-
oned and expelled from the United States. The State Department seized the pass-
ports of Du Bois and black actor and activist Paul Robeson for eight years, ille-
gally denying them the right to travel. Robeson’s annual income fell from over
$100,000 to virtually nothing, since he was denied access to speak and perform.
Moderate integrationists such as NAACP leader Walter White were silent, and at
times, even encouraged the persecution of black radicals.
By the mid-1950s, the transformationist, radical current of black political
thought and activism had been seriously weakened by McCarthyism. But as
events in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955 would show, the black freedom move-
ment would soon experience another renaissance.
O1 O
Black Conflict over World War I
When the United States declared war on Germany and entered what was then
called the Great War, African Americans were bitterly divided over the conflict.
Socialists such as A. Philip Randolph and Hubert H. Harrison attacked the war
effort as imperialist. More moderate black leaders such as Du Bois saw the war
as an opportunity for Negroes to gain political advantages. Woodrow Wilson’s
pledge to make the world “safe for democracy,” if extended to African Americans,
should mean the elimination of Jim Crow segregation and European colonialism.
Unfortunately, blacks who joined the war effort discovered that American democ-
racy was still reserved for “whites only.”
    
                  
              
            
            
        
             
           
2 2 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 256 ---
BLACK CONFLICT OVER WORLD WAR I 2 2 5
             
             
             
  
           
       
THE DESCENT OF DU BOIS, HUBERT H. HARRISON
In a recent bulletin of the War Department it was declared that “justifiable griev-
ances” were producing and had produced “not disloyalty, but an amount of unrest
and bitterness which even the best efforts of their leaders may not be able always
to guide.” This is the simple truth. The essence of the present situation lies in the
fact that the people whom our white masters have “recognized” as our leaders
(without taking the trouble to consult us) and those who, by our own selection,
had actually attained to leadership among us are being revaluated and, in most
cases, rejected.
The most striking instance from the latter class is Dr. W. E. Du Bois, the edi-
tor of The Crisis. Du Bois’s case is the more significant because his former ser-
vices to his race have been undoubtedly of a high and courageous sort.
Moreover, the act by which he has brought upon himself the stormy outburst of
disapproval from his race is one which of itself, would seem to merit no such
stern condemnation. To properly gauge the value and merit of this disapproval
one must view it in the light of its attendant circumstances and of the situation
in which it arose.
Dr. Du Bois first palpably sinned in his editorial “Close Ranks” in the July
number of The Crisis. But this offense (apart from the trend and general tenor of
the brief editorial) lies in a single sentence: “Let us, while this war lasts, forget our
special grievances and close our ranks, shoulder to shoulder with our white fellow
citizens and the allied nations that are fighting for democracy.” From the latter
part of the sentence there is no dissent, so far as we know. The offense lies in that
part of the sentence which ends with the italicized words. It is felt by all his crit-
ics, that Du Bois, of all Negroes, knows best that our “special grievances” which
the War Department Bulletin describes as “justifiable” consist of lynching, segre-
gation and disfranchisement, and that the Negroes of America can not preserve
either their lives, their manhood or their vote (which is their political life and lib-
erties) with these things in existence. The doctor’s critics feel that America can
not use the Negro people to any good effect unless they have life, liberty and
manhood assured and guaranteed to them. Therefore, instead of the war for
democracy making these things less necessary, it makes them more so.
“But,” it may be asked, “why should not these few words be taken merely as a
slip of the pen or a venal error in logic? Why all this hubbub?” Is it because the
so-called leaders of the first-mentioned class have already established an unsavory
reputation by advocating this same surrender of life, liberty and manhood, mask-
ing their cowardice behind the pillars of war-time sacrifice? Du Bois’s statement,
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 257 ---
then, is believed to mark his entrance into that class, and is accepted as a “sur-
render” of the principles which brought him into prominence—and which alone
kept him there.
Later, when it was learned that Du Bois was being preened for a berth in the
War Department as a captain-assistant (adjutant) to Major Spingarn, the words
used by him in the editorial acquired a darker and more sinister significance. The
two things fitted too well together as motive and self-interest.
For these reasons Du Bois is regarded much in the same way as a knight in the
middle ages who had had his armor stripped from him, his arms reversed and his
spurs hacked off. This ruins him as an influential person among Negroes at this
time, alike whether he becomes a captain or remains an editor.
O
    
              
             
              
              
     
      
           
         
             
    
            
             
               
              
  
 
          
               
       
   
           
            
         
  
             
           
              
            
         
  
                
               
2 2 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 258 ---
C. M C KAY, “IF WE MUST DIE” 2 2 7
            
 
          
 
           
            
              
             
              
         
             
               
          
               
                 
             
 
   
 
             
              
              
              
  
          
              
              
            
 
           
  
      
        
         
             
          
O2 O
“If We Must Die,” Claude McKay, 1919
In the years following the end of World War I, a rising tide of white racism swept
across the United States. Several million whites joined the Ku Klux Klan. White
mobs began to attack black communities, destroying homes, schools, and churches.
Scores of African Americans were lynched, some of them while still wearing their
U.S. army uniforms. Jamaican-born radical Claude McKay (1889– 1948) was out-
raged by these racial atrocities, and expressed his militancy in poetry and essays.
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 259 ---
O
“If We Must Die”
If we must die—let it not be like hogs
Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot,
While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs,
Making their mock at our accursed lot.
If we must die—oh, let us nobly die,
So that our precious blood may not be shed
In vain; then even the monsters we defy
Shall be constrained to honor us though dead!
Oh, Kinsmen! We must meet the common foe;
Though far outnumbered, let us show us brave,
And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow!
What though before us lies the open grave?
Like men we’ll face the murderous, cowardly pack,
Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back!
Source: “If We Must Die,” Liberator 2 (July 1919), p. 21. Reprinted from Selected Poems of
Claude McKay (New York: Bookman Associates, 1953), p. 36.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Wayne F. Cooper, Claude McKay: Rebel Sojourner in the Harlem Renaissance: A Biography
(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987).
Addison Gayle, Claude McKay: The Black Poet at War(Detroit: Broadside Press, 1972).
Josh Gosciak, The Shadowed Country: Claude McKay and the Romance of the Victorians
(New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2006).
Winston James, A Fierce Hatred of Injustice: Claude McKay’s Jamaica and His Poetry of
Rebellion (London: Verso, 2001).
Claude McKay, Complete Poems, ed. by William J. Maxwell (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 2004).
Kotti Sree Ramesh and K. Nirupa Rani, Claude McKay: The Literary Identity from Jamaica
to Harlem and Beyond (Jefferson: McFarland, 2006).
Tyrone Tillery, Claude McKay: A Black Poet’s Struggle for Identity(Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1992).
O3 O
Black Bolsheviks: Cyril V. Briggs and Claude McKay
Cyril V . Briggs (1887–1966) was born in the British Leeward Islands, and emi-
grated to New York on July 4, 1905. Shortly upon arriving, Briggs began writing
for the Amsterdam News . Later, he became the primary organizer, executive
head, and “Primary Chief” of the African Blood Brotherhood (ABB), a radical
2 2 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 260 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 2 9
black organization that emerged in 1921. The ABB declared its primary goal as
the advancement of black rights and the “immediate protection and ultimate lib-
eration of Negroes everywhere.” Building on the revolutionary nationalism of
Hubert H. Harrison, Briggs integrated the ideology of Bolshevism. The Brother-
hood was frankly critical of the NAACP and the “Talented Tenth,” and placed its
faith in the collective consciousness and militancy of the black working class. At
first somewhat sympathetic to Garveyism, it quickly turned bitterly against the
movement. At its height, the ABB had seven thousand members. Briggs and
other ABB leaders joined the Communist Party, and formed the major black con-
stituency of the radical left throughout the 1920s.
O
“WHAT THE AFRICAN BLOOD BROTHERHOOD STANDS FOR,” CYRIL V.  BRIGGS
TALKING POINTS on the Great Negro Exodus from the South; the reasons for the
Exodus; Its Effect on Northern Labor; the Relationship between Colored and
White Workers, Etc.
With an Appeal to the Self-Interest of All Workers
Labor Unions and the Negro
(A Statement by a White Labor Leader)
“Among the many short-sighted policies of conservative union leaders few are
more harmful than the unfair attitude adopted in many cases toward the admis-
sion of colored workers into labor organizations. The Negroes are becoming an
ever greater factor in industry. In order that this progress should be accomplished
in an orderly fashion, and so that the colored workers should not be used against
the white workers, the intelligent thing to do is for the organized white workers
to go to great lengths to teach them the necessity for united action of both races
as against the exploitation set up by the employers. Unfortunately, however, too
often this has not been done. The result is that in many cases the Negro workers,
feeling themselves discriminated against, have allowed themselves to be used by
the employers to break down union conditions. Many a strike has thus been lost,
and many more will be lost if the situation is not remedied. An intelligent policy
toward the colored workers is one of the prime needs of the present-day labor
movement. Unless it is worked out, organized white labor will pay bitterly enough
for its folly by having the employers use the Negroes in industry as an army of
strike-breakers. Labor already has more enemies than it can handle. To force the
colored workers on to the employers’ side, through a stupid union policy, is to
invite disaster. The doors of the trade union movement must be thrown wide open
to the Negro workers.”—Wm. Z. Foster in “The World To-morrow,” May, 1923.
And in the Meantime—
the Great Migration of Negro workers from the South continues. Negro workers
are pouring North to escape the hellish conditions described in another part of this
folder and in search of higher wages and better living conditions. Shall they be
tools for the employers’ Open Shop plot against Labor or will Organized Labor


--- PAGE 261 ---
move to win these workers to its ranks by (1) opening the doors of the labor unions
to them on terms of full equality with white workers, not in theory only but in prac-
tice; (2) eliminating all discriminatory practices, non-promotable and “dead-line”
clauses, unfair legislative enactments, etc., and (3) acquainting the Negro workers
with the benefits of unionism and actively bidding for their membership.
A Workers’ Organization
What the A.B.B. Is
What It Stands For
What It Is Doing
The African Blood Brotherhood is an organization of Negro workers pledged by
its Constitution and Program:
To gain for Negro labor a higher rate of compensation and to prevent capital-
ist exploitation and oppression of the workers of the Race—Sec. 7, Art. 2, of its
Constitution.
To establish a true rapprochement and fellowship within the darker races and
with the truly class-conscious white workers—Sec. 9, Art. 3, of its Constitution.
Under the caption of “Higher Wages for Negro Labor, Shorter Hours and
Better Living Conditions,” the program of the A.B.B. declares:
To gain for Negro Labor a higher rate of compensation and to prevent exploi-
tation because of lack of protective organization we must encourage industrial
unionism among our people and at the same time fight to break down the preju-
dice in the unions which is stimulated and encouraged by the employers. This
prejudice is already meeting the attack of the radical and progressive element
among white labor union men and must eventually give way before the united
onslaught of Colored and White Workers. Wherever it is found impossible to
enter the existing labor unions, independent unions should be formed, that Negro
Labor be enabled to protect its interests.
The A.B.B. Seeks
To bring about co-operation between colored and white workers on the basis of
their identity of interest as workers;
To educate the Negro in the benefits of unionism and to gain admission for
him on terms of full equality to the unions;
To bring home to the Negro worker his class interests as a worker and to show
him the real source of his exploitation and oppression;
To organize the Negro’s labor power into labor and farm organizations;
To foster the principles of consumers’ co-operatives as an aid against the high
cost of living;
To oppose with counter propaganda the vicious capitalist propaganda against
the Negro as a race, which is aimed to keep the workers of both races apart and
thus facilitate their exploitation;
To realize a United front of Negro workers and organizations as the first step
in an effective fight against oppression and exploitation;
2 3 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 262 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 3 1
To acquaint the civilized world with the facts about lynchings, peonage, jim-crow-
ism, disfranchisement and other manifestations of race prejudice and mob rule.
Towards These Ends the A.B.B.
Supports a press service—the Crusader Service—for the dissemination to the
Negro Press of the facts about conditions and events in the sphere of organized
labor; reports of labor’s changing and increasingly enlightened attitude towards
the colored workers; and sends out news of general race interest, interpreted
from the working class point of view. The Service is mailed twice each week and
is used regularly by over a hundred Negro papers.
Sends organizers and lecturers into industrial sections to propagate the doc-
trines of unionism and enlist Negro workers into the ranks of the most militant
organization of Negro workers in the country.
Operates forums and classes with the aim of arousing (1) the race consciousness
of the Negro workers and (2) their class consciousness. (This is the natural process.)
Guards against the use of the Negro migrants as tools for the Open Shop advo-
cates and other unscrupulous employers who seek to break the power of Organized
Labor and to destroy all those gains won for the working class during the last twenty
years by those workers who had the good sense to organize for their protection.
Exposes the existence of mob-law, peonage, and other barbarisms in the South
and wages relentless war against these evil conditions which force the Southern
Negro to flee the South and seek employment in the industrial sections.
The Message to You—
Class-conscious white worker or race-conscious Negro (and the A.B.B. has only
one message for both!)—shocked by the conditions under which the Negro is
forced to live in the South; the conditions which are driving him northward to cre-
ate new alignments and strange problems in the industrial sections of the
North—you cannot fail to realize the potentialities evoked by this steady stream
of unorganized workers from the South. If you are a thinking, rational being you
cannot fail to recognize THAT THIS IS YOUR FIGHT and you must help us
wage it! The A.B.B. is a workers’ organization. It has no source of income other
than its membership and the masses. It is upon the workers it must depend. You
must help us in the work of reaching the Negro masses with the message of
unionism, the message of organized power, the message of united action by the
workers of both races against the capitalist combinations; against the Wall Streets,
the Chambers of Commerce, the Rotarian gang, the Ku Klux Klan, (the American
Fascisti) and against all the tools of the interests who would keep the workers
apart in order the more effectively to exploit them.
This Is Your Fight! So Help Wage It!
Race-conscious Negro, show that you recognize the source of your oppression!
Class-conscious White Worker, show that you realize the fact of the identity of
the interests of the workers of all races!


--- PAGE 263 ---
Reasons for the Negro Exodus from the South
A glimpse of hell was given newspaper readers a few weeks ago in connection
with the conditions of peonage in the State of Florida under which young Martin
Talbert, a white lad of North Dakota, was wantonly murdered under the lash of a
boss-driver’s whip. Here’s some more of hell!
Mob Law
“In some counties the Negro is being driven out as though he were a wild beast.
In others he is being held as a slave. In others, no Negroes remain.
“. . . If the condition indicated by these charges should continue, both God and
man would justly condemn Georgia more severely than man and God have con-
demned Belgium and Leopold for the Congo atrocities.
“In only two of the 135 cases cited is the ‘usual crime’ against white women
involved.”—Extracts from Governor Dorsey’s Statements As to the Negro in
Georgia.
Peonage
Case No. 135—“March 30, a Negro, said to have been held in peonage, appealed
to a justice of the peace. In the presence of the justice, a Marshal is reported to
have beaten the Negro with an axe handle. Nothing has been done to the
Marshal.”
Case No. 134.—“December, 1920, a white man is reported to have killed a
Negro for trying to leave his place. The white man has not been arrested.”—
Extracts from Governor Dorsey’s Statements As to the Negro in Georgia.
The Negro and the Courts
Southern courts are justly notorious for the brand of justice they hand out to the
Negro worker. This brand ranges from a fine of $25 for “keeping late hours,” with
a convict farm and a boss-driver in the offing if the “offender” cannot raise the
money, to sentences to death and long term imprisonments for Negroes accused
of resisting exploitation. For example, when in Phillips County, Ark., colored farm
hands got together to protest and secure legal action against vicious exploitation
and downright robbery under the share-cropping system of the South, those col-
ored farm hands were attacked and shot down by their employers and their gang-
sters. Those who escaped the massacre were locked up charged with inciting to
an insurrection against the white people of the county. In an atmosphere charged
with race prejudice and the most virulent hatred, twelve of these men were sen-
tenced to death and sixty-seven to long prison terms.
And this horrible frame-up, with its death sentences for 12 and long prison
terms for 67, is only one of many such incidents that occur throughout the
Southland and, with night-riding, whipping and lynching, contribute to keep the
Negro population in a constant state of terrorism and have led to the present
Great Migration, coupled with long hours of toil, low wages, unhealthy living con-
ditions, and other forms of savage exploitation.
2 3 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 264 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 3 3
A Free Africa:—The A.B.B. stands for the waging of a determined and unceas-
ing fight for the liberation of Africa without, however, making any surrenders or
compromises on other fronts. We have no patience, therefore, with those
Negroes who would distract the attention of the Negro workers from the fight for
better conditions in the United States to an illusory empire or republic on the
continent of Africa. We believe that the Negro workers of America can best help
their blood-brothers in Africa by first making of their own group a power in
America. The position of 12,000,000 Negroes at the heart of an imperialist power
could not long be ignored were those Negroes intelligently organized, coura-
geously led, and co-operating with the organized white workers on the basis of
identity of interests of the entire working-class of the world.
“To Be a Negro in a Day Like This”
T
HE NEGRO IS
reduced to peonage in the Southern States;
shut out from labor unions in the North;
forced to an inferior status before the courts of the land;
made a subject of public contempt everywhere;
lynched and mobbed with impunity;
deprived of the ballot in the South;
segregated in vile, unsanitary districts in cities, both North and South;
degraded economically, politically and socially;
often persecuted by reason of his very thrift and ambition;
denied (and in this he is not unlike most workers) the security of life guaran-
teed by the Constitution.
The A.B.B. believes in inter-racial co-operation—not the sham co-operation of
the oppressed Negro workers and their oppressors, but the honest co-operation
of colored and white workers based upon mutual appreciation of the fact of the
identity of their interests as members of the working class. This is the only inter-
racial co-operation the A.B.B. believes in!
The Negro’s Rock of Gibraltar!
That to a large extent is what the A.B.B. is today. That is what it must be to a
much greater degree tomorrow. And that is the task before every member of the
A.B.B. And the way to successfully achieve our task is to organize every Negro
into the A.B.B. that we possibly can. Get the intelligent and aggressive. Get the
race-conscious. Get those who know the source of their oppression and are
accordingly class-conscious as well as race-conscious. Get them all! Organize
every Negro into the Brotherhood. Once in, it will be our duty to educate them
to become effective units for the waging of the Negro Liberation Struggle. Our
educational machinery is functioning perfectly. It has yet to be taxed to capacity.
Get them in!
O


--- PAGE 265 ---
2 3 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 266 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 3 5
           
  
          
         
          
         
              
   
            
            
           
             
              
             
             
           
            
            
            
             
         
        
         
             
             
         
           
            
           
             
            
            
             
           
           
            
          
              
              
           
               
          
           
               
             
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 267 ---
2 3 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 268 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 3 7
           
           
               
            
 
             
             
              
            
           
               
            
            
            
              
           
           
               
          
           
  
               
              
           
             
              
              
               
          
           
              
              
           
            
            
             
           
           
             
                
          
           
           
            
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 269 ---
2 3 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 270 ---
BLACK BOLSHEVIKS 2 3 9
           
             
         
 
             
              
                
                
            
           
          
                
            
             
          
             
             
                
             
              
               
             
   
              
            
               
              
              
           
          
             
          
             
            
            
           
    
           
           
          
           
            
            
          
   
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 271 ---
2 4 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 272 ---
MARCUS GARVEY AND THE UNIA 2 4 1
           
  
         
           
          
           
           
              
            
       
 
            
         
           
   
          
           
           
         
        
         
     
O4 O
Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association
Marcus Garvey (1887–1940) was the charismatic leader and organizer of the
largest black nationalist movement in history, the Universal Negro Improvement
Association (UNIA). Born in Jamaica, Garvey worked as a journalist and printer
in the Caribbean, Central America, and Britain. Inspired by the ideas of Booker
T. Washington, Garvey launched the UNIA as a self-help organization for people
of African descent. Entering the United States in 1916, Garvey promptly built a
mass-based organization of largely working-class and poor black people. His
dynamic speaking ability and his flair for public demonstrations captured the pop-
ular imagination of the black masses. The UNIA established more than seven
hundred branch organizations throughout the United States, and several hundred
more across the Caribbean and Africa. British and U.S. authorities continually
harassed and undermined Garvey’s organizations, and Garvey himself was impris-
oned in Atlanta in 1925. Deported from the United States two years later, the
UNIA gradually declined as an organized movement. Garvey died in London in
1940, but his life and legacy continue to influence black nationalist and Pan-
Africanist politics throughout the black diaspora.
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 273 ---
O
DECLARATION OF RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO PEOPLES OF
THE WORLD PREAMBLE
“Be it Resolved, That the Negro people of the world, through their chosen rep-
resentatives in convention assembled in Liberty Hall, in the City of New York and
United States of America, from August 1 to August 31, in the year of our Lord,
one thousand nine hundred and twenty, protest against the wrongs and injustices
they are suffering at the hands of their white brethren, and state what they deem
their fair and just rights, as well as the treatment they propose to demand of all
men in the future.”
We complain:
I. “That nowhere in the world, with few exceptions, are black men accorded
equal treatment with white men, although in the same situation and circum-
stances, but, on the contrary, are discriminated against and denied the common
rights due to human beings for no other reason than their race and color.”
“We are not willingly accepted as guests in the public hotels and inns of the
world for no other reason than our race and color.”
II. “In certain parts of the United States of America our race is denied the right
of public trial accorded to other races when accused of crime, but are lynched and
burned by mobs, and such brutal and inhuman treatment is even practised upon
our women.”
III. “That European nations have parceled out among themselves and taken
possession of nearly all of the continent of Africa, and the natives are com-
pelled to surrender their lands to aliens and are treated in most instances like
slaves.”
IV . “In the southern portion of the United States of America, although citizens
under the Federal Constitution, and in some states almost equal to the whites in
population and are qualified land owners and taxpayers, we are, nevertheless,
denied all voice in the making and administration of the laws and are taxed with-
out representation by the state governments, and at the same time compelled to
do military service in defense of the country.”
V . “On the public conveyances and common carriers in the Southern portion
of the United States we are jim-crowed and compelled to accept separate and
inferior accommodations and made to pay the same fare charged for first-class
accommodations, and our families are often humiliated and insulted by drunken
white men who habitually pass through the jim-crow cars going to the smoking
car.”
VI. “The physicians of our race are denied the right to attend their patients
while in the public hospitals of the cities and states where they reside in certain
parts of the United States.”
“Our children are forced to attend inferior separate schools for shorter terms
than white children, and the public school funds are unequally divided between
the white and colored schools.”
2 4 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 274 ---
MARCUS GARVEY AND THE UNIA 2 4 3
VII. “We are discriminated against and denied an equal chance to earn wages
for the support of our families, and in many instances are refused admission into
labor unions, and nearly everywhere are paid smaller wages than white men.”
VIII. “In Civil Service and departmental offices we are everywhere discrimi-
nated against and made to feel that to be a black man in Europe, America and the
West Indies is equivalent to being an outcast and a leper among the races of men,
no matter what the character and attainments of the black man may be.”
IX. “In the British and other West Indian Islands and colonies, Negroes are
secretly and cunningly discriminated against, and denied those fuller rights in
government to which white citizens are appointed, nominated and elected.”
X. “That our people in those parts are forced to work for lower wages than the
average standard of white men and are kept in conditions repugnant to good civ-
ilized tastes and customs.”
XI. “That the many acts of injustice against members of our race before the
courts of law in the respective islands and colonies are of such nature as to create
disgust and disrespect for the white man’s sense of justice.”
XII. “Against all such inhuman, unchristian and uncivilized treatment we here
and now emphatically protest, and invoke the condemnation of all mankind.”
“In order to encourage our race all over the world and to stimulate it to a higher
and grander destiny, we demand and insist on the following Declaration of Rights:
1. “Be it known to all men that whereas, all men are created equal and entitled
to the rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, and because of this we,
the duly elected representatives of the Negro peoples of the world, invoking the
aid of the just and Almighty God do declare all men, women and children of our
blood throughout the world free citizens, and do claim them as free citizens of
Africa, the Motherland of all Negroes.”
2. “That we believe in the supreme authority of our race in all things racial; that
all things are created and given to man as a common possession; that there should
be an equitable distribution and apportionment of all such things, and in consid-
eration of the fact that as a race we are now deprived of those things that are
morally and legally ours, we believe it right that all such things should be acquired
and held by whatsoever means possible.”
3. “That we believe the Negro, like any other race, should be governed by the
ethics of civilization, and, therefore, should not be deprived of any of those rights
or privileges common to other human beings.”
4. “We declare that Negroes, wheresoever they form a community among
themselves, should be given the right to elect their own representatives to repre-
sent them in legislatures, courts of law, or such institutions as may exercise con-
trol over that particular community.”
5. “We assert that the Negro is entitled to even-handed justice before all courts
of law and equity in whatever country he may be found, and when this is denied
him on account of his race or color such denial is an insult to the race as a whole
and should be resented by the entire body of Negroes.”
6. “We declare it unfair and prejudicial to the rights of Negroes in communi-


--- PAGE 275 ---
ties where they exist in considerable numbers to be tried by a judge and jury com-
posed entirely of an alien race, but in all such cases members of our race are enti-
tled to representation on the jury.”
7. “We believe that any law or practice that tends to deprive any African of his
land or the privileges of free citizenship within his country is unjust and immoral,
and no native should respect any such law or practice.”
8. “We declare taxation without representation unjust and tyrannous, and there
should be no obligation on the part of the Negro to obey the levy of a tax by any
law-making body from which he is excluded and denied representation on
account of his race and color.”
9. “We believe that any law especially directed against the Negro to his detri-
ment and singling him out because of his race or color is unfair and immoral, and
should not be respected.”
10. “We believe all men entitled to common human respect, and that our race
should in no way tolerate any insults that may be interpreted to mean disrespect
to our color.”
11. “We deprecate the use of the term ‘nigger’ as applied to Negroes, and
demand that the word ‘Negro’ be written with a capital ‘N.’”
12. “We believe that the Negro should adopt every means to protect himself
against barbarous practices inflicted upon him because of color.”
13. “We believe in the freedom of Africa for the Negro people of the world,
and by the principle of Europe for the Europeans and Asia for the Asiatics; we
also demand Africa for the Africans at home and abroad.”
14. “We believe in the inherent right of the Negro to possess himself of Africa,
and that his possession of same shall not be regarded as an infringement on any
claim or purchase made by any race or nation.”
15. “We strongly condemn the cupidity of those nations of the world who, by
open aggression or secret schemes, have seized the territories and inexhaustible
natural wealth of Africa, and we place on record our most solemn determina-
tion to reclaim the treasures and possession of the vast continent of our forefa-
thers.”
16. “We believe all men should live in peace one with the other, but when races
and nations provoke the ire of other races and nations by attempting to infringe
upon their rights, war becomes inevitable, and the attempt in any way to free
one’s self or protect one’s rights or heritage becomes justifiable.”
17. “Whereas, the lynching, by burning, hanging or any other means, of human
beings is a barbarous practice, and a shame and disgrace to civilization, we there-
fore declare any country guilty of such atrocities outside the pale of civilization.”
18. “We protest against the atrocious crime of whipping, flogging and over-
working of the native tribes of Africa and Negroes everywhere. These are meth-
ods that should be abolished, and all means should be taken to prevent a contin-
uance of such brutal practices.”
19. “We protest against the atrocious practice of shaving the heads of Africans,
especially of African women or individuals of Negro blood, when placed in prison
as a punishment for crime by an alien race.”
2 4 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 276 ---
MARCUS GARVEY AND THE UNIA 2 4 5
20. “We protest against segregated districts, separate public conveyances,
industrial discrimination, lynchings and limitations of political privileges of any
Negro citizen in any part of the world on account of race, color or creed, and will
exert our full influence and power against all such.”
21. “We protest against any punishment inflicted upon a Negro with severity, as
against lighter punishment inflicted upon another of an alien race for like offense,
as an act of prejudice and injustice, and should be resented by the entire race.”
22. “We protest against the system of education in any country where Negroes
are denied the same privileges and advantages as other races.”
23. “We declare it inhuman and unfair to boycott Negroes from industries and
labor in any part of the world.”
24. “We believe in the doctrine of the freedom of the press, and we therefore
emphatically protest against the suppression of Negro newspapers and periodicals
in various parts of the world, and call upon Negroes everywhere to employ all
available means to prevent such suppression.”
25. “We further demand free speech universally for all men.”
26. “We hereby protest against the publication of scandalous and inflammatory
articles by an alien press tending to create racial strife and the exhibition of pic-
ture films showing the Negro as a cannibal.”
27. “We believe in the self-determination of all peoples.”
28. “We declare for the freedom of religious worship.”
29. “With the help of Almighty God, we declare ourselves the sworn protec-
tors of the honor and virtue of our women and children, and pledge our lives for
their protection and defense everywhere, and under all circumstances from
wrongs and outrages.”
30. “We demand the right of unlimited and unprejudiced education for our-
selves and our posterity forever.”
31. “We declare that the teaching in any school by alien teachers to our boys
and girls, that the alien race is superior to the Negro race, is an insult to the Negro
people of the world.”
32. “Where Negroes form a part of the citizenry of any country, and pass the
civil service examination of such country, we declare them entitled to the same
consideration as other citizens as to appointments in such civil service.”
33. “We vigorously protest against the increasingly unfair and unjust treatment
accorded Negro travelers on land and sea by the agents and employees of railroad
and steamship companies and insist that for equal fare we receive equal privileges
with travelers of other races.”
34. “We declare it unjust for any country, State or nation to enact laws tending
to hinder and obstruct the free immigration of Negroes on account of their race
and color.”
35. “That the right of the Negro to travel unmolested throughout the world be
not abridged by any person or persons, and all Negroes are called upon to give
aid to a fellow Negro when thus molested.”
36. “We declare that all Negroes are entitled to the same right to travel over
the world as other men.”


--- PAGE 277 ---
37. “We hereby demand that the governments of the world recognize our
leader and his representatives chosen by the race to look after the welfare of our
people under such governments.”
38. “We demand complete control of our social institutions without interfer-
ence by any alien race or races.”
39. “That the colors, Red, Black and Green, be the colors of the Negro race.”
40. “Resolved, That the anthem ‘Ethiopia, Thou Land of Our Fathers,’ etc.,
shall be the anthem of the Negro race.”. . .
41. “We believe that any limited liberty which deprives one of the complete
rights and prerogatives of full citizenship is but a modified form of slavery.”
42. “We declare it an injustice to our people and a serious impediment to the
health of the race to deny to competent licensed Negro physicians the right to
practice in the public hospitals of the communities in which they reside, for no
other reason than their race and color.”
43. “We call upon the various governments of the world to accept and acknowl-
edge Negro representatives who shall be sent to the said governments to repre-
sent the general welfare of the Negro peoples of the world.”
44. “We deplore and protest against the practice of confining juvenile prison-
ers in prisons with adults, and we recommend that such youthful prisoners be
taught gainful trades under humane supervision.”
45. “Be it further resolved, that we as a race of people declare the League of
Nations null and void as far as the Negro is concerned, in that it seeks to deprive
Negroes of their liberty.”
46. “We demand of all men to do unto us as we would do unto them, in the
name of justice; and we cheerfully accord to all men all the rights we claim herein
for ourselves.”
47. “We declare that no Negro shall engage himself in battle for an alien race
without first obtaining the consent of the leader of the Negro people of the world,
except in a matter of national self-defense.”
48. “We protest against the practice of drafting Negroes and sending them to
war with alien forces without proper training, and demand in all cases that Negro
soldiers be given the same training as the aliens.”
49. “We demand that instructions given Negro children in schools include the
subject of ‘Negro History,’ to their benefit.”
50. “We demand a free and unfettered commercial intercourse with all the
Negro people of the world.”
51. “We declare for the absolute freedom of the seas for all peoples.”
52. “We demand that our duly accredited representatives be given proper
recognition in all leagues, conferences, conventions or courts of international
arbitration wherever human rights are discussed.”
53. “We proclaim the 31st day of August of each year to be an international
holiday to be observed by all Negroes.”
54. “We want all men to know we shall maintain and contend for the freedom
and equality of every man, woman and child of our race, with our lives, our for-
tunes and our sacred honor.”
2 4 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 278 ---
MARCUS GARVEY AND THE UNIA 2 4 7
These rights we believe to be justly ours and proper for the protection of the
Negro race at large, and because of this belief we, on behalf of the four hundred
million Negroes of the world, do pledge herein the sacred blood of the race in
defense, and we hereby subscribe our names as a guarantee of the truthfulness
and faithfulness hereof in the presence of Almighty God, on the 13th day of
August, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty.
O
AN APPEAL TO THE CONSCIENCE OF THE BLACK RACE TO SEE ITSELF
It is said to be a hard and difficult task to organize and keep together large num-
bers of the Negro race for the common good. Many have tried to congregate us,
but have failed, the reason being that our characteristics are such as to keep us
more apart than together.
The evil of internal division is wrecking our existence as a people, and if we do
not seriously and quickly move in the direction of a readjustment it simply means
that our doom becomes imminently conclusive.
For years the Universal Negro Improvement Association has been working for
the unification of our race, not on domestic-national lines only, but universally.
The success which we have met in the course of our effort is rather encouraging,
considering the time consumed and the environment surrounding the object of
our concern.
It seems that the whole world of sentiment is against the Negro, and the diffi-
culty of our generation is to extricate ourselves from the prejudice that hides itself
beneath, as well as above, the action of an international environment.
Prejudice is conditional on many reasons, and it is apparent that the Negro sup-
plies, consciously or unconsciously, all the reasons by which the world seems to
ignore and avoid him. No one cares for a leper, for lepers are infectious persons,
and all are afraid of the disease, so because the Negro keeps himself poor, helpless
and undemonstrative, it is natural also that no one wants to be of him or with him.
Progress and Humanity
Progress is the attraction that moves humanity, and to whatever people or race
this “modern virtue” attaches itself, there will you find the splendor of pride and
self-esteem that never fail to win the respect and admiration of all.
It is the progress of the Anglo-Saxons that single them out for the respect of
all the world. When their race had no progress or achievement to its credit, then,
like all other inferior peoples, they paid the price in slavery, bondage, as well as
through prejudice. We cannot forget the time when even the ancient Briton was
regarded as being too dull to make a good Roman slave, yet today the influence
of that race rules the world.
It is the industrial and commercial progress of America that causes Europe and
the rest of the world to think appreciatively of the Anglo-American race. It is not
because one hundred and ten million people live in the United States that the world
is attracted to the republic with so much reverence and respect—a reverence and


--- PAGE 279 ---
respect not shown to India with its three hundred millions, or to China with its four
hundred millions. Progress of and among any people will advance them in the
respect and appreciation of the rest of their fellows. It is such a progress that the
Negro must attach to himself if he is to rise above the prejudice of the world.
The reliance of our race upon the progress and achievements of others for a
consideration in sympathy, justice and rights is like a dependence upon a broken
stick, resting upon which will eventually consign you to the ground.
Self-Reliance and Respect
The Universal Negro Improvement Association teaches our race self-help and
self-reliance, not only in one essential, but in all those things that contribute to
human happiness and well-being. The disposition of the many to depend upon
the other races for a kindly and sympathetic consideration of their needs, without
making the effort to do for themselves, has been the race’s standing disgrace by
which we have been judged and through which we have created the strongest
prejudice against ourselves.
There is no force like success, and that is why the individual makes all efforts
to surround himself throughout life with the evidence of it. As of the individual,
so should it be of the race and nation. The glittering success of Rockefeller makes
him a power in the American nation; the success of Henry Ford suggests him as
an object of universal respect, but no one knows and cares about the bum or hobo
who is Rockefeller’s or Ford’s neighbor. So, also, is the world attracted by the glit-
tering success of races and nations, and pays absolutely no attention to the bum
or hobo race that lingers by the wayside.
The Negro must be up and doing if he will break down the prejudice of the
rest of the world. Prayer alone is not going to improve our condition, nor the pol-
icy of watchful waiting. We must strike out for ourselves in the course of mater-
ial achievement, and by our own effort and energy present to the world those
forces by which the progress of man is judged.
A Nation and Country
The Negro needs a nation and a country of his own, where he can best show evi-
dence of his own ability in the art of human progress. Scattered as an unmixed
and unrecognized part of alien nations and civilizations is but to demonstrate his
imbecility, and point him out as an unworthy derelict, fit neither for the society of
Greek, Jew nor Gentile.
It is unfortunate that we should so drift apart, as a race, as not to see that we
are but perpetuating our own sorrow and disgrace in failing to appreciate the first
great requisite of all peoples—organization.
Organization is a great power in directing the affairs of a race or nation toward
a given goal. To properly develop the desires that are uppermost, we must first
concentrate through some system or method, and there is none better than orga-
nization. Hence, the Universal Negro Improvement Association appeals to each
and every Negro to throw in his lot with those of us who, through organization,
2 4 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 280 ---
MARCUS GARVEY AND THE UNIA 2 4 9
are working for the universal emancipation of our race and the redemption of our
common country, Africa.
No Negro, let him be American, European, West Indian or African, shall be
truly respected until the race as a whole has emancipated itself through self-
achievement and progress, from universal prejudice. The Negro will have to build
his own government, industry, art, science, literature and culture, before the
world will stop to consider him. Until then, we are but wards of a superior race
and civilization, and the outcasts of a standard social system.
The race needs workers at this time, not plagiarists, copyists and mere imita-
tors; but men and women who are able to create, to originate and improve, and
thus make an independent racial contribution to the world and civilization.
Monkey Apings of “Leaders”
The unfortunate thing about us is that we take the monkey apings of our “so-
called leading men” for progress. There is no progress in aping white people and
telling us that they represent the best in the race, for in that respect any dressed
monkey would represent the best of its species, irrespective of the creative mat-
ter of the monkey instinct. The best in a race is not reflected through or by the
action of its apes, but by its ability to create of and by itself. It is such a creation
that the Universal Negro Improvement Association seeks.
Let us not try to be the best or worst of others, but let us make the effort to be
the best of ourselves. Our own racial critics criticise us as dreamers and “fanat-
ics,” and call us “benighted” and “ignorant,” because they lack racial backbone.
They are unable to see themselves creators of their own needs. The slave instinct
has not yet departed from them. They still believe that they can only live or exist
through the good graces of their “masters.” The good slaves have not yet thrown
off their shackles; thus, to them, the Universal Negro Improvement Association
is an “impossibility.”
It is the slave spirit of dependence that causes our “so-called leading men”
(apes) to seek the shelter, leadership, protection and patronage of the “master” in
their organization and so-called advancement work. It is the spirit of feeling
secured as good servants of the master, rather than as independents, why our
modern Uncle Toms take pride in laboring under alien leadership and becoming
surprised at the audacity of the Universal Negro Improvement Association in pro-
claiming for racial liberty and independence.
But the world of white and other men, deep down in their hearts, have much
more respect for those of us who work for our racial salvation under the banner
of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, than they could ever have in all
eternity for a group of helpless apes and beggars who make a monopoly of under-
mining their own race and belittling themselves in the eyes of self-respecting peo-
ple, by being “good boys” rather than able men.
Surely there can be no good will between apes, seasoned beggars and inde-
pendent minded Negroes who will at least make an effort to do for themselves.
Surely, the “dependents” and “wards” (and may I not say racial imbeciles?) will


--- PAGE 281 ---
rave against and plan the destruction of movements like the Universal Negro
Improvement Association that expose them to the liberal white minds of the
world as not being representative of the best in the Negro, but, to the contrary,
the worst. The best of a race does not live on the patronage and philanthropy 
of others, but makes an effort to do for itself. The best of the great white race
doesn’t fawn before and beg black, brown or yellow men; they go out, create for
self and thus demonstrate the fitness of the race to survive; and so the white race
of America and the world will be informed that the best in the Negro race is not
the class of beggars who send out to other races piteous appeals annually for
donations to maintain their coterie, but the groups within us that are honestly
striving to do for themselves with the voluntary help and appreciation of that class
of other races that is reasonable, just and liberal enough to give to each and every
one a fair chance in the promotion of those ideals that tend to greater human
progress and human love.
The work of the Universal Negro Improvement Association is clear and clean-
cut. It is that of inspiring an unfortunate race with pride in self and with the deter-
mination of going ahead in the creation of those ideals that will lift them to the
unprejudiced company of races and nations. There is no desire for hate or mal-
ice, but every wish to see all mankind linked into a common fraternity of progress
and achievement that will wipe away the odor of prejudice, and elevate the
human race to the height of real godly love and satisfaction.
Sources: (1) Excerpt from “Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World,” August
1920, originally published in Amy Jacques Garvey, ed., Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus
Garvey, Vol. 2 (New York: Universal Publishing House, 1925), pp. 135–42; and (2) “An
Appeal to the Conscience of the Black Race to See Itself,” in Philosophy and Opinions of
Marcus Garvey.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Randall K. Burkett, Garveyism as a Religious Movement: The Institutionalization of a Black
Civil Religion (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1978).
Amy Jacques Garvey, Garvey and Garveyism(Kingston, Jamaica: A. Jacques Garvey, 1963).
Claudrena N. Harold, The Rise and Fall of the Garvey Movement in the Urban South,
1918–1942 (London: Routledge, 2007).
Robert A. Hill and Association Universal Negro Improvement, eds., The Marcus Garvey and
Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers , 10 vols. (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1983).
Rupert Lewis, Marcus Garvey: Anti-Colonial Champion(Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press,
1988).
Mary G. Rolinson, Grassroots Garveyism: The Universal Negro Improvement Association in
the Rural South, 1920–1927(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
Jeannette Smith-Irvin, Footsliders of the Universal Negro Improvement Association: Their
Own Words (Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1989).
Emory J. Tolbert, The UNIA and Black Los Angeles: Ideology and Community in the Ameri-
can Garvey Movement (Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, University of
California Press, 1980).
Theodore G. Vincent, Black Power and the Garvey Movement (Berkeley, Ca.: Ramparts
Press, 1971).
2 5 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 282 ---
A.E.J. GARVEY, “WOMEN AS LEADERS” 2 5 1
O5 O
“Women as Leaders,” Amy Euphemia Jacques Garvey, 1925
Amy Euphemia Jacques Garvey (1896–1973) was one of the key political leaders,
archivists, and interpreters of the Garvey movement. As Garvey’s second wife, she
frequently represented her husband at public meetings and events. She was a reg-
ular columnist in the UNIA’s newspaper, The Negro World. Garvey was a forceful
advocate of women’s rights and participated in the famous Fifth Pan-African Con-
gress held in Manchester, England, in 1945. Her 1963 book Garvey and Garvey-
ism was partially responsible for reviving interest in the UNIA and the Garvey
movement.
O
The exigencies of this present age require that women take their places beside
their men. White women are rallying all their forces and uniting regardless of
national boundaries to save their race from destruction, and preserve its ideals for
posterity. . . . White men have begun to realize that as women are the backbone
of the home, so can they, by their economic experience and their aptitude for
details, participate effectively in guiding the destiny of nation and race.
No line of endeavor remains closed for long to the modern woman. She agi-
tates for equal opportunities and gets them; she makes good on the job and gains
the respect of men who heretofore opposed her. She prefers to be a bread-
winner than a half-starved wife at home. She is not afraid of hard work, and by
being independent she gets more out of the present-day husband than her grand-
mother did in the good old days.
The women of the East, both yellow and black, are slowly but surely imitating
the women of the Western world, and as the white women are bolstering up a
decaying white civilization, even so women of the darker races are sallying forth
to help their men establish a civilization according to their own standards, and to
strive for world leadership.
Women of all climes and races have as great a part to play in the development
of their particular group as the men. Some readers may not agree with us on this
issue, but do they not mould the minds of their children the future men and
women? Even before birth a mother can so direct her thoughts and conduct as
to bring into the world either a genius or an idiot. Imagine the early years of con-
tact between mother and child, when she directs his form of speech, and is
responsible for his conduct and deportment. Many a man has risen from the
depths of poverty and obscurity and made his mark in life because of the advices
and councils of a good mother whose influence guided his footsteps throughout
his life.
Women therefore are extending this holy influence outside the realms of the
home, softening the ills of the world by their gracious and kindly contact.
Some men may argue that the home will be broken up and women 
will become coarse and lose their gentle appeal. We do not think so, because


--- PAGE 283 ---
everything can be done with moderation. . . . The doll-baby type of woman is
a thing of the past, and the wide-awake woman is forging ahead prepared for
all emergencies, and ready to answer any call, even if it be to face the cannons
on the battlefield.
New York has a woman Secretary of State. Two States have women Governors,
and we would not be surprised if within the next ten years a woman graces the
White House in Washington, D.C. Women are also filling diplomatic positions,
and from time immemorial women have been used as spies to get information for
their country.
White women have greater opportunities to display their ability because of the
standing of both races, and due to the fact that black men are less appreciative of
their women than white men. The former will more readily sing the praises of
white women than their own; yet who is more deserving of admiration than the
black woman, she who has borne the rigors of slavery, the deprivations conse-
quent on a pauperized race, and the indignities heaped upon a weak and defense-
less people? Yet she has suffered all with fortitude, and stands ever ready to help
in the onward march to freedom and power.
Be not discouraged black women of the world, but push forward, regardless of
the lack of appreciation shown you. A race must be saved, a country must be
redeemed, and unless you strengthen the leadership of vacillating Negro men, we
will remain marking time until the Yellow race gains leadership of the world, and
we be forced to subserviency under them, or extermination.
We are tired of hearing Negro men say, “There is a better day coming,” while
they do nothing to usher in the day. We are becoming so impatient that we are
getting in the front ranks, and serve notice on the world that we will brush aside
the halting, cowardly Negro men, and with prayer on our lips and arms prepared
for any fray, we will press on and on until victory is over.
Africa must be for Africans, and Negroes everywhere must be independent,
God being our guide. Mr. Black man, watch your step! Ethiopia’s queens will
reign again, and her Amazons protect her shores and people. Strengthen your
shaking knees, and move forward, or we will displace you and lead on to victory
and to glory.
Source: “Women as Leaders,” from The Negro World(October 25, 1925).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Karen Adler, “‘Always Leading Our Men in Service and Sacrifice’: Amy Jacques Garvey,
Feminist Black Nationalist,” Gender & Society6, no. 3 (September 1992), pp. 346–75.
Amy Jacques Garvey, Garvey and Garveyism(Kingston, Jamaica: A. Jacques Garvey, 1963).
Mark D. Matthews, “Our Women and What They Think, Amy Jacques Garvey and the
Negro World,” Black Scholar10, nos. 8–9 (1979), pp. 2–18.
Ula Yvette Taylor, “The Veiled Garvey: The Life and Times of Amy Jacques Garvey” (Ph.D.
diss., University of California, Santa Barbara, 1992).
2 5 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 284 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 5 3
O6 O
Langston Hughes and the Harlem Renaissance
The rise of Harlem as a cultural and social center for black America created the
context for a new black intelligentsia. Writers, musicians, and artists came to
Harlem, attempting to redefine the parameters of Negro aesthetics and creativ-
ity. These “New Negroes” saw themselves as products of a modern age, breaking
with established traditions and celebrating black life and culture. The Harlem
Renaissance represents the artistic and cultural production of this generation,
defined roughly from the Red Summer of 1919 through the early years of the
Great Depression.
Along with Countee Cullen, Claude McKay, Nella Larsen, and Zora Neale
Hurston, Langston Hughes (1902–1967) was a leading light of the Harlem Renais-
sance. Sometimes called “The Shakespeare of Harlem,” Hughes studied at Colum-
bia University and rose to prominence with his first collection of poetry, Weary
Blues (1926). In addition to poetry, Hughes published plays, novels, stories, essays,
and an autobiography. At the start of his career, Hughes’s work often centered
upon the daily lives of African Americans, and he employed black working-class
vernacular drawn from African-American musical traditions (mainly blues). With
the advent of the Great Depression, however, his work became more overtly polit-
ical, reflecting his interest in Marxism. By World War II, Hughes’s reputation as
black America’s most popular poet was firmly established.
O
THE NEGRO ARTIST AND THE RACIAL MOUNTAIN
One of the most promising of the young Negro poets said to me once, “I want to
be a poet—not a Negro poet,” meaning, I believe, “I want to write like a white
poet”; meaning subconsciously, “I would like to be a white poet”; meaning behind
that, “I would like to be white.” And I was sorry the young man said that, for no
great poet has ever been afraid of being himself. And I doubted then that, with
his desire to run away spiritually from his race, this boy would ever be a great
poet. But this is the mountain standing in the way of any true Negro art in
America this urge within the race toward whiteness, the desire to pour racial indi-
viduality into the mold of American standardization, and to be as little Negro and
as much American as possible.
But let us look at the immediate background of this young poet. His family is
of what I suppose one would call the Negro middle class: people who are by no
means rich yet never uncomfortable nor hungry—smug, contented, respectable
folk, members of the Baptist church. The father goes to work every morning. He
is a chief steward at a large white club. The mother sometimes does fancy sewing


--- PAGE 285 ---
or supervises parties for the rich families of the town. The children go to a mixed
school. In the home they read white papers and magazines. And the mother often
says “Don’t be like niggers” when the children are bad. A frequent phrase from
the father is, “Look how well a white man does things.” And so the word white
comes to be unconsciously a symbol of all the virtues. It holds for the children
beauty, morality, and money. The whisper of “I want to be white” runs silently
through their minds. This young poet’s home is, I believe, a fairly typical home of
the colored middle class. One sees immediately how difficult it would be for an
artist born in such a home to interest himself in interpreting the beauty of his own
people. He is never taught to see that beauty. He is taught rather not to see it, or
if he does, to be ashamed of it when it is not according to Caucasian patterns.
For racial culture the home of a self-styled “high-class” Negro has nothing
better to offer. Instead there will perhaps be more aping of things white than in
a less cultured or less wealthy home. The father is perhaps a doctor, lawyer,
landowner, or politician. The mother may be a social worker, or a teacher, or she
may do nothing and have a maid. Father is often dark but he has usually married
the lightest woman he could find. The family attend a fashionable church where
few really colored faces are to be found. And they themselves draw a color line.
In the North they go to white theaters and white movies. And in the South they
have at least two cars and a house “like white folks.” Nordic manners, Nordic
faces, Nordic hair, Nordic art (if any), and an Episcopal heaven. A very high
mountain indeed for the would-be racial artist to climb in order to discover him-
self and his people.
But then there are the low-down folks, the so-called common element, and
they are the majority—may the Lord be praised! The people who have their nip
of gin on Saturday nights and are not too important to themselves or the com-
munity, or too well fed, or too learned to watch the lazy world go round. They live
on Seventh Street in Washington or State Street in Chicago and they do not par-
ticularly care whether they are like white folks or anybody else. Their joy runs,
bang! into ecstasy. Their religion soars to a shout. Work maybe a little today, rest
a little tomorrow. Play awhile. Sing awhile. O, let’s dance! These common people
are not afraid of spirituals, as for a long time their more intellectual brethren
were, and jazz is their child. They furnish a wealth of colorful, distinctive mater-
ial for any artist because they still hold their own individuality in the face of
American standardizations. And perhaps these common people will give to the
world its truly great Negro artist, the one who is not afraid to be himself. Whereas
the better-class Negro would tell the artist what to do, the people at least let him
alone when he does appear. And they are not ashamed of him—if they know he
exists at all. And they accept what beauty is their own without question.
Certainly there is, for the American Negro artist who can escape the restric-
tions the more advanced among his own group would put upon him, a great field
of unused material ready for his art. Without going outside his race, and even
among the better classes with their “white” culture and conscious American man-
ners, but still Negro enough to be different, there is sufficient matter to furnish a
2 5 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 286 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 5 5
black artist with a lifetime of creative work. And when he chooses to touch on the
relations between Negroes and whites in this country with their innumerable
overtones and undertones, surely, and especially for literature and the drama,
there is an inexhaustible supply of themes at hand. To these the Negro artist can
give his racial individuality, his heritage of rhythm and warmth, and his incongru-
ous humor that so often, as in the Blues, becomes ironic laughter mixed with
tears. But let us look again at the mountain.
A prominent Negro clubwoman in Philadelphia paid eleven dollars to hear
Raquel Meller sing Andalusian popular songs. But she told me a few weeks
before she would not think of going to hear “that woman,” Clara Smith, a great
black artist, sing Negro folksongs. And many an upper-class Negro church, even
now, would not dream of employing a spiritual in its services. The drab melodies
in white folks’ hymnbooks are much to be preferred. “We want to worship the
Lord correctly and quietly. We don’t believe in ‘shouting.’ Let’s be dull like the
Nordics,” they say, in effect.
The road for the serious black artist, then, who would produce a racial art is
most certainly rocky and the mountain is high. Until recently he received almost
no encouragement for his work from either white or colored people. The fine
novels of Chesnutt go out of print with neither race noticing their passing. The
quaint charm and humor of Dunbar’s dialect verse brought to him, in his day,
largely the same kind of encouragement one would give a side-show freak (A col-
ored man writing poetry! How odd!) or a clown (How amusing!).
The present vogue in things Negro, although it may do as much harm as good
for the budding colored artist, has at least done this: it has brought him forcibly
to the attention of his own people among whom for so long, unless the other race
had noticed him beforehand, he was a prophet with little honor. I understand that
Charles Gilpin acted for years in Negro theaters without any special acclaim from
his own, but when Broadway gave him eight curtain calls, Negroes, too, began to
beat a tin pan in his honor. I know a young colored writer, a manual worker by
day, who had been writing well for the colored magazines for some years, but it
was not until he recently broke into the white publications and his first book was
accepted by a prominent New York publisher that the “best” Negroes in his city
took the trouble to discover that he lived there. Then almost immediately they
decided to give a grand dinner for him. But the society ladies were careful to
whisper to his mother that perhaps she’d better not come. They were not sure she
would have an evening gown.
The Negro artist works against an undertow of sharp criticism and misunder-
standing from his own group and unintentional bribes from the whites. “O, be
respectable, write about nice people, show how good we are,” say the Negroes.
“Be stereotyped, don’t go too far, don’t shatter our illusions about you, don’t
amuse us too seriously. We will pay you,” say the whites. Both would have told
Jean Toomer not to write “Cane.” The colored people did not praise it. The white
people did not buy it. Most of the colored people who did read “Cane” hate it.
They are afraid of it. Although the critics gave it good reviews the public


--- PAGE 287 ---
remained indifferent. Yet (excepting the work of Du Bois) “Cane” contains the
finest prose written by a Negro in America. And like the singing of Robeson, it is
truly racial.
But in spite of the Nordicized Negro intelligentsia and the desires of some
white editors we have an honest American Negro literature already with us. Now
I await the rise of the Negro theater. Our folk music, having achieved world-wide
fame, offers itself to the genius of the great individual American Negro composer
who is to come. And within the next decade I expect to see the work of a grow-
ing school of colored artists who paint and model the beauty of dark faces and cre-
ate with new technique the expressions of their own soul-world. And the Negro
dancers who will dance like flame and the singers who will continue to carry our
songs to all who listen—they will be with us in even greater numbers tomorrow.
Most of my own poems are racial in theme and treatment, derived from the
life I know. In many of them I try to grasp and hold some of the meanings and
rhythms of jazz. I am sincere as I know how to be in these poems and yet after
every reading I answer questions like these from my own people: Do you think
Negroes should always write about Negroes? I wish you wouldn’t read some of
your poems to white folks. How do you find anything interesting in a place like a
cabaret? Why do you write about black people? You aren’t black. What makes you
do so many jazz poems?
But jazz to me is one of the inherent expressions of Negro life in America: the
eternal tom-tom beating in the Negro soul—the tom-tom of revolt against weari-
ness in a white world, a world of subway trains, and work, work, work; the tom-
tom of joy and laughter, and pain swallowed in a smile. Yet the Philadelphia club-
woman is ashamed to say that her race created it and she does not like me to write
about it. The old subconscious “white is best” runs through her mind. Years of
study under white teachers, a life-time of white books, pictures, and papers, and
white manners, morals, and Puritan standards made her dislike the spirituals. And
now she turns up her nose at jazz and all its manifestations—likewise almost
everything else distinctly racial. She doesn’t care for the Winold Reiss portraits of
Negroes because they are “too Negro.” She does not want a true picture of her-
self from anybody. She wants the artist to flatter her, to make the white world
believe that all Negroes are as smug and as near white in soul as she wants to be.
But, to my mind, it is the duty of the younger Negro artist, if he accepts any duties
at all from outsiders, to change through the force of his art that old whispering “I
want to be white,” hidden in the aspirations of his people, to “Why should I want
to be white? I am a Negro—and beautiful!”
So I am ashamed for the black poet who says, “I want to be a poet, not a Negro
poet,” as though his own racial world were not as interesting as any other world.
I am ashamed, too, for the colored artist who runs from the painting of Negro
faces to the painting of sunsets after the manner of the academicians because he
fears the strange un-whiteness of his own features. An artist must be free to
choose what he does, certainly, but he must also never be afraid to do what he
might choose.
2 5 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 288 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 5 7
Let the blare of Negro jazz bands and the bellowing voice of Bessie Smith
singing Blues penetrate the closed ears of the colored near-intellectuals until they
listen and perhaps understand. Let Paul Robeson singing Water Boy, and Rudolph
Fisher writing about the streets of Harlem, and Jean Toomer holding the heart of
Georgia in his hands, and Aaron Douglas drawing strange black fantasies cause
the smug Negro middle class to turn from their white, respectable, ordinary books
and papers to catch a glimmer of their own beauty. We younger Negro artists who
create now intend to express our individual dark-skinned selves without fear or
shame. If white people are pleased we are glad. If they are not, it doesn’t matter.
We know we are beautiful. And ugly too. The tom-tom cries and the tom-tom
laughs. If colored people are pleased we are glad. If they are not, their displeasure
doesn’t matter either. We build our temples for tomorrow, strong as we know how,
and we stand on top of the mountain, free within ourselves.
O
MY AMERICA
This is my land, America. Naturally, I love it—it is home—and I am vitally con-
cerned about its mores, its democracy, and its well-being. I try now to look at it
with clear, unprejudiced eyes. My ancestry goes back at least four generations on
American soil and, through Indian blood, many centuries more. My background
and training is purely American—the schools of Kansas, Ohio, and the East. I am
old stock as opposed to recent immigrant blood.
Yet many Americans who cannot speak English—so recent is their arrival on
our shores—may travel about our country at will securing food, hotel, and rail
accommodations wherever they wish to purchase them. I may not. These Ameri-
cans, once naturalized, may vote in Mississippi or Texas, if they live there. I may
not. They may work at whatever job their skills command. But I may not. They
may purchase tickets for concerts, theatres, lectures wherever they are sold
throughout the United States. Often I may not. They may repeat the Oath of
Allegiance with its ringing phrase of “Liberty and justice for all,” with a deep faith
in its truth—as compared with the limitations and oppressions they have experi-
enced in the Old World. I repeat the oath, too, but I know that the phrase about
“liberty and justice” does not fully apply to me. I am an American—but I am a
colored American.
I know that all these things I mention are not all true for all localities all
over America. Jim Crowism varies in degree from North to South, from the
mixed schools and free franchise of Michigan to the tumbledown colored
schools and open terror at the polls of Georgia and Mississippi. All over
America, however, against the Negro there has been an economic color line of
such severity that since the Civil War we have been kept most effectively, as a
racial group, in the lowest economic brackets. Statistics are not needed to
prove this. Simply look around you on the Main Street of any American town
or city. There are no colored clerks in any of the stores—although colored peo-


--- PAGE 289 ---
ple spend their money there. There are practically never any colored street-car
conductors or bus drivers—although these public carriers run over streets for
which we pay taxes. There are no colored girls at the switchboards of the tele-
phone company—but millions of Negroes have phones and pay their bills.
Even in Harlem, nine times out of ten, the man who comes to collect your rent
is white. Not even that job is given to a colored man by the great corporations
owning New York real estate. From Boston to San Diego, the Negro suffers
from job discrimination.
Yet America is a land where, in spite of its defects, I can write this article. Here
the voice of democracy is still heard—Wallace, Willkie, Agar, Pearl Buck, Paul
Robeson, Lillian Smith. America is a land where the poll tax still holds in the
South—but opposition to the poll tax grows daily. America is a land where lynch-
ers are not yet caught—but Bundists are put in jail, and majority opinion con-
demns the Klan. America is a land where the best of all democracies has been
achieved for some people—but in Georgia, Roland Hayes, world-famous singer,
is beaten for being colored and nobody is jailed—nor can Mr. Hayes vote in the
State where he was born. Yet America is a country where Roland Hayes cancome
from a log cabin to wealth and fame—in spite of the segment that still wishes to
maltreat him physically and spiritually, famous though he is.
This segment, the South, is not all of America. Unfortunately, however, the war
with its increased flow of white Southern workers to Northern cities, has caused
the Jim Crow patterns of the South to spread all over America, aided and abetted
by the United States Army. The Army, with its policy of segregated troops, has
brought Jim Crow into communities where it was but little, if at all, in existence
before Pearl Harbor. From Camp Custer in Michigan to Guadalcanal in the
South Seas, the Army has put its stamp upon official Jim Crow, in imitation of the
Southern states where laws separating Negroes and whites are as much a part of
government as are Hitler’s laws segregating Jews in Germany. Therefore, any con-
sideration of the current problems of the Negro people in America must concern
itself seriously with the question of what to do about the South.
The South opposes the Negro’s right to vote, and this right is denied us in most
Southern states. Without the vote a citizen has no means of protecting his consti-
tutional rights. For Democracy to approach its full meaning, the Negro all over
America must have the vote. The South opposes the Negro’s right to work in
industry. Witness the Mobile shipyard riots, the Detroit strikes fomented by
Southern whites against the employment of colored people, the Baltimore strikes
of white workers who objected to Negroes attending a welding school which
would give them the skill to rate upgrading. For Democracy to achieve its mean-
ing, the Negro like other citizens must have the right to work, to learn skilled
trades, and to be upgraded.
The South opposes the civil rights of Negroes and their protection by law.
Witness lynchings where no one is punished, witness the Jim Crow laws that deny
the letter and spirit of the Constitution. For Democracy to have real meaning, the
Negro must have the same civil rights as any other American citizen. These three
2 5 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 290 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 5 9
simple principles of Democracy—the vote, the right to work, and the right to pro-
tection by law—the South opposes when it comes to me. Such procedure is dan-
gerous for all America. That is why, in order to strengthen Democracy, further the
war effort, and achieve the confidence of our colored allies, we must institute a
greater measure of Democracy for the eight million colored people of the South.
And we must educate the white Southerners to an understanding of such democ-
racy, so they may comprehend that decency toward colored peoples will lose
them nothing, but rather will increase their own respect and safety in the modern
world.
I live on Manhattan Island. For a New Yorker of color, truthfully speaking, the
South begins at Newark. A half hour by tube from the Hudson Terminal, one
comes across street-corner hamburger stands that will not serve a hamburger to
a Negro customer wishing to sit on a stool. For the same dime a white pays, a
Negro must take his hamburger elsewhere in a paper bag and eat it, minus a
plate, a napkin, and a glass of water. Sponsors of the theory of segregation claim
that it can be made to mean equality. Practically, it never works out that way. Jim
Crow always means less for the one Jim Crowed and an unequal value for his
money—no stool, no shelter, merely the hamburger, in Newark.
As the colored traveller goes further South by train, Jim Crow increases.
Philadelphia is ninety minutes from Manhattan. There the all-colored grammar
school begins its separate education of the races that Talmadge of Georgia so
highly approves. An hour or so further down the line is Baltimore where segre-
gation laws are written in the state and city codes. Another hour by train, Wash-
ington. There the conductor tells the Negro traveller, be he soldier or civilian, to
go into the Jim Crow coach behind the engine, usually half a baggage car, next to
trunks and dogs.
That this change to complete Jim Crow happens at Washington is highly sig-
nificant of the state of American democracy in relation to colored peoples today.
Washington is the capital of our nation and one of the great centers of the Allied
war effort toward the achievement of the Four Freedoms. To a southbound
Negro citizen told at Washington to change into a segregated coach the Four
Freedoms have a hollow sound, like distant lies not meant to be the truth.
The train crosses the Potomac into Virginia, and from there on throughout the
South life for the Negro, by state law and custom, is a hamburger in a sack with-
out a plate, water, napkin, or stool—but at the same price as the whites pay—to
be eaten apart from the others without shelter. The Negro can do little about this
because the law is against him, he has no vote, the police are brutal, and the citi-
zens think such caste-democracy is as it should be.
For his seat in the half-coach of the crowded Jim Crow car, a colored man must
pay the same fare as those who ride in the nice air-cooled coaches further back in
the train, privileged to use the diner when they wish. For his hamburger in a sack
served without courtesy the Southern Negro must pay taxes but refrain from
going to the polls, and must patriotically accept conscription to work, fight, and
perhaps die to regain or maintain freedom for people in Europe or Australia


--- PAGE 291 ---
when he himself hasn’t got it at home. Therefore, to his ears most of the war
speeches about freedom on the radio sound perfectly foolish, unreal, high-flown,
and false. To many Southern whites, too, this grand talk so nobly delivered, so
poorly executed, must seem like play-acting.
Liberals and persons of good will, North and South, including, no doubt, our
President himself, are puzzled as to what on earth to do about the South—the
poll-tax South, the Jim Crow South—that so shamelessly gives the lie to Democ-
racy. With the brazen frankness of Hitler’s Mein Kampf, Dixie speaks through
Talmadge, Rankin, Dixon, Arnall, and Mark Ethridge.
In a public speech in Birmingham, Mr. Ethridge says: “All the armies of the
world, both of the United States and the Axis, could not force upon the South an
abandonment of racial segregation.” Governor Dixon of Alabama refused a gov-
ernment war contract offered Alabama State Prison because it contained an anti-
discrimination clause which in his eyes was an “attempt to abolish segregation of
races in the South.” He said: “We will not place ourselves in a position to be
attacked by those who seek to foster their own pet social reforms.” In other
words, Alabama will not reform. It is as bull-headed as England in India, and its
governor is not ashamed to say so.
As proof of Southern intolerance, almost daily the press reports some new
occurrence of physical brutality against Negroes. Former Governor Talmadge
was “too busy” to investigate when Roland Hayes and his wife were thrown into
jail, and the great tenor beaten, on complaint of a shoe salesman over a dispute
as to what seat in his shop a Negro should occupy when buying shoes. Nor did the
governor of Mississippi bother when Hugh Gloster, professor of English at
Morehouse College, riding as an inter-state passenger, was illegally ejected from
a train in his state, beaten, arrested, and fined because, being in an overcrowded
Jim Crow coach, he asked for a seat in an adjacent car which contained only two
white passengers.
Legally, the Jim Crow laws do not apply to inter-state travellers, but the FBI
has not yet gotten around to enforcing that Supreme Court ruling. En route from
San Francisco to Oklahoma City, Fred Wright, a county probation officer of color,
was beaten and forced into the Texas Jim Crow coach on a transcontinental train
by order of the conductor in defiance of federal law. A seventy-six-year-old clergy-
man, Dr. Jackson of Hartford, Connecticut, going South to attend the National
Baptist Convention, was set upon by white passengers for merely passing through
a white coach on the way to his own seat. There have been many similar attacks
upon colored soldiers in uniform on public carriers. One such attack resulted in
death for the soldier, dragged from a bus and killed by civilian police. Every day
now, Negro soldiers from the North, returning home on furlough from Southern
camps, report incident after incident of humiliating travel treatment below the
Mason-Dixon line.
It seems obvious that the South does not yet know what this war is all about.
As answer Number One to the question, “What shall we do about the South?” I
would suggest an immediate and intensive government-directed program of pro-
2 6 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 292 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 6 1
democratic education, to be put into the schools of the South from the first grades
of the grammar schools to the universities. As part of the war effort, this is
urgently needed. The Spanish Loyalist Government had trench schools for its sol-
diers and night schools for civilians even in Madrid under siege. America is not
under siege yet. We still have time (but not too much) to teach our people what
we are fighting for, and to begin to apply those teachings to race relations at
home. You see, it would be too bad for an emissary of color from one of the Latin
American countries, say Cuba or Brazil, to arrive at Miami Airport and board a
train for Washington, only to get beaten up and thrown off by white Southerners
who do not realize how many colored allies we have—nor how badly we need
them—and that it is inconsiderate and rude to beat colored people, anyway.
Because transportation in the South is so symbolic of America’s whole racial
problem, the Number Two thing for us to do is study a way out of the Jim Crow
car dilemma at once. Would a system of first, second, and third class coaches
help? In Europe, formerly, if one did not wish to ride with peasants and trades-
people, one could always pay a little more and solve that problem by having a first
class compartment almost entirely to oneself. Most Negroes can hardly afford
parlor car seats. Why not abolish Jim Crow entirely and let the whites who wish
to do so, ride in coaches where few Negroes have the funds to be? In any case,
our Chinese, Latin American, and Russian allies are not going to think much of
our democratic pronunciamentos as long as we keep compulsory Jim Crow cars
on Southern rails.
Since most people learn a little through education, albeit slowly, as Number
Three, I would suggest that the government draft all the leading Negro intellec-
tuals, sociologists, writers, and concert singers from Alain Locke of Oxford and 
W. E. B. Du Bois of Harvard to Dorothy Maynor and Paul Robeson of Carnegie
Hall and send them into the South to appear before white audiences, carrying
messages of culture and democracy, thus off-setting the old stereotypes of the
Southern mind and the Hollywood movie, and explaining to the people without
dialect what the war aims are about. With each, send on tour a liberal white
Southerner like Paul Green, Erskine Caldwell, Pearl Buck, Lillian Smith, or
William Seabrook. And, of course, include soldiers to protect them from the fas-
cist-minded among us.
Number Four, as to the Army—draftees are in sore need of education on how
to behave toward darker peoples. Just as a set of government suggestions has been
issued to our soldiers on how to act in England, so a similar set should be given
them on how to act in Alabama, Georgia, Texas, Asia, Mexico, and Brazil—wher-
ever there are colored peoples. Not only printed words should be given them, but
intensive training in the reasons for being decent to everybody. Classes in democ-
racy and the war aims should be set up in every training camp in America and
every unit of our military forces abroad. These forces should be armed with under-
standing as well as armament, prepared for friendship as well as killing.
I go on the premise that most Southerners are potentially reasonable people,
but that they simply do not know nowadays what they are doing to America, or


--- PAGE 293 ---
how badly their racial attitudes look toward the rest of the civilized world. I know
their politicians, their schools, and the Hollywood movies have done their best to
uphold prevailing reactionary viewpoints. Heretofore, nobody in America except
a few radicals, liberals, and a handful of true religionists have cared much about
either the Negroes or the South. Their sincere efforts to effect a change have
been but a drop in a muddy bucket. Basically, the South needs universal suffrage,
economic stabilization, a balanced diet, and vitamins for children. But until those
things are achieved, on a lesser front to ameliorate—not solve—the Negro prob-
lem (and to keep Southern prejudice from contaminating all of America) a few
mild but helpful steps might be taken.
It might be pointed out to the South that the old bugaboo of sex and social
equality doesn’t mean a thing. Nobody as a rule sleeps with or eats with or dances
with or marries anybody else except by mutual consent. Millions of people of var-
ious races in New York, Chicago, and Seattle go to the same polls and vote with-
out ever co-habiting together. Why does the South think it would be otherwise
with Negroes were they permitted to vote there? Or to have a decent education?
Or to sit on a stool in a public place and eat a hamburger? Why they think simple
civil rights would force a Southerner’s daughter to marry a Negro in spite of her-
self, I have never been able to understand. It must be due to some lack of instruc-
tion somewhere in their schooling.
A government-sponsored educational program of racial decency could, fur-
thermore, point out to its students that cooperation in labor would be to the
advantage of all—rather than to the disadvantage of anyone, white or black. It
could show quite clearly that a million unused colored hands barred out of war
industries might mean a million weapons lacking in the hands of our soldiers on
some foreign front—therefore a million extra deaths—including Southern white
boys needlessly dying under Axis fire—because Governor Dixon of Alabama and
others of like mentality need a little education. It might also be pointed out that
when peace comes and the Southerners go to the peace table, if they take there
with them the traditional Dixie racial attitudes, there is no possible way for them
to aid in forming any peace that will last. China, India, Brazil, Free French Africa,
Soviet Asia and the whole Middle East will not believe a word they say.
Peace only to breed other wars is a sorry peace indeed, and one that we
must plan now to avoid. Not only in order to win the war then, but to create
peace along decent lines, we had best start now to educate the South—and all
America—in racial decency. That education cannot be left to well-meaning but
numerically weak civilian organizations. The government itself should take
over—and vigorously. After all, Washington is the place where the conductor
comes through every southbound train and tells colored people to change to
the Jim Crow car ahead.
That car, in these days and times, has no business being “ahead” any longer.
War’s freedom train can hardly trail along with glory behind a Jim Crow coach.
No matter how streamlined the other cars may be, that coach endangers all
humanity’s hopes for a peaceful tomorrow. The wheels of the Jim Crow car are
about to come off and the walls are going to burst wide open. The wreckage of
2 6 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 294 ---
LANGSTON HUGHES AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE 2 6 3
Democracy is likely to pile up behind that Jim Crow car, unless America learns
that it is to its own self-interest to stop dealing with colored peoples in so anti-
quated a fashion. I do not like to see my land, America, remain provincial and
unrealistic in its attitudes toward color. I hope the men and women of good will
here of both races will find ways of changing conditions for the better.
Certainly it is not the Negro who is going to wreck our Democracy. (What we
want is more of it, not less.) But Democracy is going to wreck itself if it continues
to approach closer and closer to fascist methods in its dealings with Negro citi-
zens—for such methods of oppression spread, affecting other whites, Jews, the
foreign born, labor, Mexicans, Catholics, citizens of Oriental ancestry—and, in
due time, they boomerang right back at the oppressor. Furthermore, American
Negroes are now Democracy’s current test for its dealings with the colored peo-
ples of the whole world of whom there are many, many millions— too many to be
kept indefinitely in the position of passengers in Jim Crow cars.
O
POEMS
“I, Too”
I, too, sing America.
I am the darker brother.
They send me to eat in the kitchen
When company comes,
But I laugh,
And eat well,
And grow strong.
Tomorrow, I’ll be at the table
When company comes.
Nobody’ll dare
Say to me,
“Eat in the kitchen,”
Then.
Besides,
They’ll see how beautiful I am
And be ashamed—
I, too, am America.
1925, 1959
“Harlem”
What happens to a dream deferred?
Does it dry up


--- PAGE 295 ---
like a raisin in the sun?
Or fester like a sore—
And then run?
Does it stink like rotten meat?
Or crust and sugar over—
like a syrupy sweet?
Maybe it just sags
like a heavy load.
Or does it explode?
1951, 1959
Sources: (1) “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain,” Nation 122 (June 23, 1926),
reprinted with permission; (2) “My America,” from What the Negro Wants by Rayford W.
Logan (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944), pp. 299–307. Copyright 1944
by the University of North Carolina Press, renewed 1974 by Rayford W. Logan. Used by per-
mission of the publisher; and (3) “I, Too” and “Harlem,” from Collected Poems by Langston
Hughes (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994). Copyright 1994 by the Estate of Langston
Hughes. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. For subscription information to
the Nation, call 1-800-333-8536. Portions of each week’s Nation magazine can be accessed at
www.thenation.com.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Donald C. Dickinson, A Bio-Bibliography of Langston Hughes, 1902–1967 (Hamden,
Conn.: Archon Books, 1967).
Henry Louis Gate, Jr. and K. A. Appiah, eds., Langston Hughes: Critical Perspectives Past
and Present (New York: Amistad [distributed by Penguin, USA], 1998).
Nathan I. Huggins, Harlem Renaissance(New York: Oxford University Press, 1971).
David L. Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue(New York: Knopf, 1981).
Arnold Rampersad, The Life of Langston Hughes, Vol. 1, 1902–1941 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986).
Arnold Rampersad, The Life of Langston Hughes, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2002).
Jonathan Scott, Socialist Joy in the Writing of Langston Hughes (Columbia: University of
Missouri Press, 2006).
O7 O
“The Negro Woman and the Ballot,” Alice Moore Dunbar-Nelson, 1927
Alice Dunbar-Nelson (1875–1935) was born Alice Ruth Moore in New Orleans,
Louisiana, and attended both the University of Pennsylvania and Cornell Univer-
sity before becoming a well-known writer. At age twenty she published her first
book of poetry, Violet and Other Tales (1895). She moved to Brooklyn, where she
taught school and gave classes at Victoria Earle Matthews’s White Rose Mission.
2 6 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 296 ---
A. M. DUNBAR-NELSON, “THE NEGRO WOMAN . . .” 2 6 5
For several years she was married to poet Paul Laurence Dunbar. After Dunbar’s
death in 1906, she married a journalist, Robert John Nelson. Dunbar-Nelson and
her husband published the Wilmington Advocate newspaper in the 1920s, and
were active in black Republican Party politics. During the Harlem Renaissance,
her work received renewed critical attention by a younger generation of African-
American writers and poets. Dunbar-Nelson was an insightful political analyst,
and was for decades widely read in black publications. With the publication of
Dunbar-Nelson’s diary in 1984, the existence of an active African-American les-
bian network in the 1920s and her relationships with other women became known
to scholars.
O
It has been six years since the franchise as a national measure has been granted
women. The Negro woman has had the ballot in conjunction with her white sis-
ter, and friend and foe alike are asking the question, What has she done with it?
Six years is a very short time in which to ask for results from any measure or
condition, no matter how simple. In six years a human being is barely able to make
itself intelligible to listeners; is a feeble, puny thing at best, with undeveloped
understanding, no power of reasoning, with a slight contributory value to the
human race, except in a sentimental fashion. Nations in six years are but the begin-
nings of an idea. It is barely possible to erect a structure of any permanent value
in six years, and only the most ephemeral trees have reached any size in six years.
So perhaps it is hardly fair to ask with a cynic’s sneer, What has the Negro
woman done with the ballot since she has had it? But, since the question contin-
ues to be hurled at the woman, she must needs be nettled into reply.
To those colored women who worked, fought, spoke, sacrificed, traveled,
pleaded, wept, cajoled, all but died for the right of suffrage for themselves and
their peers, it seemed as if the ballot would be the great objective of life. That
with its granting, all the economic, political, and social problems to which the race
had been subject would be solved. They did not hesitate to say—those militantly
gentle workers for the vote—that with the granting of the ballot the women
would step into the dominant place, politically, of the race. That all the mistakes
which the men had made would be rectified. The men have sold their birthright
for a mess of pottage, said the women. Cheap political office and little political
preferment had dazzled their eyes so that they could not see the great issues
affecting the race. They had been fooled by specious lies, fair promises and large-
sounding works. Pre-election promises had inflated their chests, so that they
could not see the post-election failures at their feet.
And thus on and on during all the bitter campaign of votes for women.
One of the strange phases of the situation was the rather violent objection of
the Negro man to the Negro woman’s having the vote. Just what his objection
racially was, he did not say, preferring to hide behind the grandiloquent platitude
of his white political boss. He had probably not thought the matter through; if he


--- PAGE 297 ---
had, remembering how precious the ballot was to the race, he would have hesi-
tated at withholding its privilege from another one of his own people.
But all that is neither here nor there. The Negro woman got the vote along with
some tens of million other women in the country. And has it made any apprecia-
ble difference in the status of the race? . . . The Negro woman was going to be
independent, she had averred. She came into the political game with a clean slate.
No Civil War memories for her, and no deadening sense of gratitude to influence
her vote. She would vote men and measures, not parties. She could scan each can-
didate’s record and give him her support according to how he had stood in the past
on the question of race. She owed no party allegiance. The name of Abraham
Lincoln was not synonymous with her for blind G.O.P . allegiance. She would show
the Negro man how to make his vote a power, and not a joke. She would break up
the tradition that one could tell a black man’s politics by the color of his skin.
And when she got the ballot she slipped quietly, safely, easily, and conserva-
tively into the political party of her male relatives.
Which is to say, that with the exception of New York City, and a sporadic break
here and there, she became a Republican. Not a conservative one, however. She
was virulent and zealous. Prone to stop speaking to her friends who might dis-
agree with her findings on the political issue, and vituperative in campaigns.
In other words the Negro woman has by and large been a disappointment in
her handling of the ballot. She has added to the overhead charges of the political
machinery, without solving racial problems.
One of two bright lights in the story hearten the reader. In the congressional cam-
paign of 1922 the Negro woman cut adrift from party allegiance and took up the cud-
gel (if one may mix metaphors) for the cause of the Dyer Bill. The Anti-Lynching
Crusaders, led by Mrs. Mary B. Talbot, found in several states—New Jersey,
Delaware, and Michigan particularly—that its cause was involved in the congres-
sional election. Sundry gentlemen had voted against the Dyer Bill in the House and
had come up for re-election. They were properly castigated by being kept at home.
The women’s votes unquestionably had the deciding influence in the three states
mentioned, and the campaign conducted by them was of a most commendable kind.
School bond issues here and there have been decided by the colored woman’s
votes—but so slight is the ripple on the smooth surface of conservatism that it has
attracted no attention from the deadly monotony of the blind faith in the “Party
of Massa Linkun.”
As the younger generation becomes of age it is apt to be independent in
thought and in act. But it is soon whipped into line by the elders, and by the
promise of plums of preferment or of an amicable position in the community or
of easy social relations—for we still persecute socially those who disagree with us
politically. What is true of the men is true of the women. The very young is apt to
let father, sweetheart, brother, or uncle decide her vote. . . .
Whether women have been influenced and corrupted by their male relatives
and friends is a moot question. Were I to judge by my personal experience I
would say unquestionably so. I mean a personal experience with some hundreds
of women in the North Atlantic, Middle Atlantic, and Middle Western States.
2 6 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 298 ---
J. W. JOHNSON AND HARLEM IN THE 1920s 2 6 7
High ideals are laughed at, and women confess with drooping wings how they
have been scoffed at for working for nothing, for voting for nothing, for support-
ing a candidate before having first been “seen.” In the face of this sinister influ-
ence it is difficult to see how the Negro woman could have been anything else but
“just another vote.”
All this is rather a gloomy presentment of a well-known situation. But it is not
altogether hopeless. The fact that the Negro woman CAN be roused when some-
thing near and dear to her is touched and threatened is cheering. Then she throws
off the influence of her male companion and strikes out for herself. Whatever the
Negro may hope to gain for himself must be won at the ballot box, and quiet
“going along” will never gain his end. When the Negro woman finds that the
future of her children lies in her own hands—if she can be made to see this—she
will strike off the political shackles she has allowed to be hung upon her, and win
the economic freedom of her race.
Perhaps some Joan of Arc will lead the way.
Source: “The Negro Woman and the Ballot,” Messenger 9 (April 1927), p. 111.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Eleanor Alexander, Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow: The Tragic Courtship and Marriage
of Paul Laurence Dunbar and Alice Ruth Moore: A History of Love and Violence among
the African American Elite (New York: New York University Press, 2001).
Bruce D. Dickson, Jr., Black American Writing from the Nadir: The Evolution of a Literary
Tradition(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1989).
Alice Dunbar-Nelson, An Alice Dunbar-Nelson Reader, ed. R. Ora Williams (Washington,
D.C.: University Press of America, 1979).
———, The Works of Alice Dunbar-Nelson, Vols. 1–3, ed. Gloria T. Hull (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1988).
Addison Gayle, Jr., Oak and Ivy(New York: Doubleday, 1971).
Gloria T. Hull, ed., Give Us Each Day: The Diary of Alice Dunbar-Nelson (New York:
Norton, 1984).
O8 O
James Weldon Johnson and Harlem in the 1920s
Born in Jacksonville, Florida, James Weldon Johnson (1871–1938) had a multi-
faceted career as a poet, novelist, lyricist, civil rights leader, diplomat, lawyer, and
teacher. Among his considerable accomplishments, he is remembered as the lyri-
cist of “Lift Every Voice and Sing” (the “Negro National Anthem”), and as the
author of the enormously influential novel, The Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured
Man, first published anonymously in 1912. Early in his public career Johnson was
closely associated with Booker T. Washington’s Tuskegee Machine. After Wash-
ington’s death, Johnson and other black moderates gravitated toward the


--- PAGE 299 ---
reformist politics of Du Bois and the NAACP . Johnson served as the first black
national secretary of the NAACP , from 1920 to 1930. He was tragically killed in
an automobile accident in 1938.
O
HARLEM: THE CULTURE CAPITAL
In the history of New York, the significance of the name Harlem has changed
from Dutch to Irish to Jewish to Negro. Of these changes, the last has come most
swiftly. Throughout colored America, from Massachusetts to Mississippi, and
across the continent to Los Angeles and Seattle, its name, which as late as fifteen
years ago had scarcely been heard, now stands for the Negro metropolis. Harlem
is indeed the great Mecca for the sight-seer, the pleasure-seeker, the curious, the
adventurous, the enterprising, the ambitious and the talented of the whole Negro
world; for the lure of it has reached down to every island of the Carib Sea and has
penetrated even into Africa.
In the make-up of New York, Harlem is not merely a Negro colony or com-
munity, it is a city within a city, the greatest Negro city in the world. It is not a
slum or a fringe, it is located in the heart of Manhattan and occupies one of the
most beautiful and healthful sections of the city. It is not a “quarter” of dilapidated
tenements, but is made up of new-law apartments and handsome dwellings, with
well-paved and well-lighted streets. It has its own churches, social and civic cen-
ters, shops, theaters and other places of amusement. And it contains more
Negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth. A stranger who rides up
magnificent Seventh Avenue on a bus or in an automobile must be struck with
surprise at the transformation which takes place after he crosses One Hundred
and Twenty-fifth Street. Beginning there, the population suddenly darkens and
he rides through twenty-five solid blocks where the passers-by, the shoppers,
those sitting in restaurants, coming out of theaters, standing in doorways and
looking out of windows are practically all Negroes; and then he emerges where
the population as suddenly becomes white again. There is nothing just like it in
any other city in the country, for there is no preparation for it; no change in the
character of the houses and streets; no change, indeed, in the appearance of the
people, except their color.
Negro Harlem is practically a development of the past decade, but the story
behind it goes back a long way. There have always been colored people in New
York. In the middle of the last century they lived in the vicinity of Lispenard,
Broome and Spring Streets. When Washington Square and lower Fifth Avenue
was the center of aristocratic life, the colored people, whose chief occupation was
domestic service in the homes of the rich, lived in a fringe and were scattered in
nests to the south, east and west of the square. As late as the 80s the major part
of the colored population lived in Sullivan, Thompson, Bleecker, Grove, Minetta
Lane and adjacent streets. It is curious to note that some of these nests still per-
sist. In a number of the blocks of Greenwich Village and Little Italy may be found
2 6 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 300 ---
J. W. JOHNSON AND HARLEM IN THE 1920s 2 6 9
small groups of Negroes who have never lived in any other section of the city. By
about 1890 the center of colored population had shifted to the upper Twenties
and lower Thirties west of Sixth Avenue. Ten years later another considerable
shift northward had been made to West Fifty-third Street.
The West Fifty-third Street settlement deserves some special mention because
it ushered in a new phase of life among colored New Yorkers. . . .
The move to Fifty-third Street was the result of the opportunity to get into
newer and better houses. About 1900 the move to Harlem began, and for the
same reason. Harlem had been overbuilt with large, new-law apartment houses,
but rapid transportation to that section was very inadequate—the Lenox Avenue
Subway had not yet been built—and landlords were finding difficulty in keeping
houses on the east side of the section filled. Residents along and near Seventh
Avenue were fairly well served by the Eighth Avenue Elevated. A colored man,
in the real estate business at this time, Philip A. Payton, approached several of
these landlords with the proposition that he would fill their empty or partially
empty houses with steady colored tenants. The suggestion was accepted, and one
or two houses on One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Street east of Lenox Avenue
were taken over. Gradually other houses were filled. The whites paid little atten-
tion to the movement until it began to spread west of Lenox Avenue; they then
took steps to check it. They proposed through a financial organization, the
Hudson Realty Company, to buy in all properties occupied by colored people and
evict the tenants. The Negroes countered by similar methods. Payton formed the
Afro-American Realty Company, a Negro corporation organized for the purpose
of buying and leasing houses for occupancy by colored people. Under this counter
stroke the opposition subsided for several years.
But the continually increasing pressure of colored people to the west over the
Lenox Avenue dead line caused the opposition to break out again, but in a new
and more menacing form. Several white men undertook to organize all the white
people of the community for the purpose of inducing financial institutions not to
lend money or renew mortgages on properties occupied by colored people. In
this effort they had considerable success, and created a situation which has not
yet been completely overcome, a situation which is one of the hardest and most
unjustifiable the Negro property owner in Harlem has to contend with. The Afro-
American Realty Company was now defunct, but two or three colored men of
means stepped into the breach. Philip A. Payton and J. C. Thomas bought two
five-story apartments, dispossessed the white tenants and put in colored. J. B.
Nail bought a row of five apartments and did the same thing. St. Philip’s Church
bought a row of thirteen apartment houses on One Hundred and Thirty-fifth
Street, running from Seventh Avenue almost to Lenox.
The situation now resolved itself into an actual contest. Negroes not only con-
tinued to occupy available apartment houses, but began to purchase private
dwellings between Lenox and Seventh Avenues. Then the whole movement, in
the eyes of the whites, took on the aspect of an “invasion”; they became panic-
stricken and began fleeing as from a plague. The presence of one colored family


--- PAGE 301 ---
in a block, no matter how well bred and orderly, was sufficient to precipitate a
flight. House after house and block after block was actually deserted. It was a
great demonstration of human beings running amuck. None of them stopped to
reason why they were doing it or what would happen if they didn’t. The banks and
lending companies holding mortgages on these deserted houses were compelled
to take them over. For some time they held these houses vacant, preferring to do
that and carry the charges than to rent or sell them to colored people. But values
dropped and continued to drop until at the outbreak of the war in Europe prop-
erty in the northern part of Harlem had reached the nadir.
In the meantime the Negro colony was becoming more stable; the churches
were being moved from the lower part of the city; social and civic centers were
being formed; and gradually a community was being evolved. Following the out-
break of the war in Europe Negro Harlem received a new and tremendous impe-
tus. Because of the war thousands of aliens in the United States rushed back to
their native lands to join the colors and immigration practically ceased. The result
was a critical shortage in labor.This shortage was rapidly increased as the United
States went more and more largely into the business of furnishing munitions and
supplies to the warring countries. To help meet this shortage of common labor
Negroes were brought up from the South. The government itself took the first
steps, following the practice in vogue in Germany of shifting labor according to
the supply and demand in various parts of the country. The example of the gov-
ernment was promptly taken up by the big industrial concerns, which sent hun-
dreds, perhaps thousands, of labor agents into the South who recruited Negroes
by wholesale. I was in Jacksonville, Fla., for a while at that time, and I sat one day
and watched the stream of migrants passing to take the train. For hours they
passed steadily, carrying flimsy suit cases, new and shiny, rusty old ones, bursting
at the seams, boxes and bundles and impedimenta of all sorts, including banjos,
guitars, birds in cages and what not. Similar scenes were being enacted in cities
and towns all over that region. The first wave of the great exodus of Negroes from
the South was on. Great numbers of these migrants headed for New York or even-
tually got there, and naturally the majority went up into Harlem. But the Negro
population of Harlem was not swollen by migrants from the South alone; the
opportunity for Negro labor exerted its pull upon the Negroes of the West Indies,
and those islanders in the course of time poured into Harlem to the number of
twenty-five thousand or more. . . .
The question naturally arises, “Are the Negroes going to be able to hold
Harlem?” If they have been steadily driven northward for the past hundred years
and out of less desirable sections, can they hold this choice bit of Manhattan
Island? It is hardly probable that Negroes will hold Harlem indefinitely, but when
they are forced out it will not be for the same reasons that forced them out of for-
mer quarters in New York City. The situation is entirely different and without
precedent. When colored people do leave Harlem, their homes, their churches,
their investments and their businesses, it will be because the land has become so
valuable they can no longer afford to live on it. But the date of another move
northward is very far in the future. What will Harlem be and become in the
2 7 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 302 ---
J. W. JOHNSON AND HARLEM IN THE 1920s 2 7 1
meantime? Is there danger that the Negro may lose his economic status in New
York and be unable to hold his property? Will Harlem become merely a famous
ghetto, or will it be a center of intellectual, cultural and economic forces exerting
an influence throughout the world, especially upon Negro peoples? Will it
become a point of friction between the races in New York?
I think there is less danger to the Negroes of New York of losing out econom-
ically and industrially than to the Negroes of any large city in the North. In most
of the big industrial centers Negroes are engaged in gang labor. They are
employed by thousands in the stockyards in Chicago, by thousands in the auto-
mobile plants in Detroit; and in those cities they are likely to be the first to be let
go, and in thousands, with every business depression. In New York there is hardly
such a thing as gang labor among Negroes, except among the longshoremen, and
it is in the longshoremen’s unions, above all others, that Negroes stand on an
equal footing. Employment among Negroes in New York is highly diversified; in
the main they are employed more as individuals than as non-integral parts of 
a gang. Furthermore, Harlem is gradually becoming more and more a self-
supporting community. Negroes there are steadily branching out into new busi-
nesses and enterprises in which Negroes are employed. So the danger of great
numbers of Negroes being thrown out of work at once, with a resulting economic
crisis among them, is less in New York than in most of the large cities of the North
to which Southern migrants have come.
These facts have an effect which goes beyond the economic and industrial sit-
uation.They have a direct bearing on the future character of Harlem and on the
question as to whether Harlem will be a point of friction between the races in
New York. It is true that Harlem is a Negro community, well defined and stable;
anchored to its fixed homes, churches, institutions, business and amusement
places; having its own working, business and professional classes. It is experienc-
ing a constant growth of group consciousness and community feeling. Harlem is,
therefore, in many respects, typically Negro. It has many unique characteristics.
It has movement, color, gayety, singing, dancing, boisterous laughter and loud
talk. One of its outstanding features is brass band parades. Hardly a Sunday
passes but that there are several of these parades of which many are gorgeous
with regalia and insignia. Almost any excuse will do—the death of an humble
member of the Elks, the laying of a cornerstone, the “turning out” of the order of
this or that. In many of these characteristics it is similar to the Italian colony. But
withal, Harlem grows more metropolitan and more a part of New York all the
while. Why is it then that its tendency is not to become a mere “quarter”?
I shall give three reasons that seem to me to be important in their order. First,
the language of Harlem is not alien; it is not Italian or Yiddish; it is English.
Harlem talks American, reads American, thinks American. Second, Harlem is not
physically a “quarter.” It is not a section cut off. It is merely a zone through which
four main arteries of the city run. Third, the fact that there is little or no gang
labor gives Harlem Negroes the opportunity for individual expansion and indi-
vidual contacts with the life and spirit of New York. A thousand Negroes from
Mississippi put to work as a gang in a Pittsburgh steel mill will for a long time


--- PAGE 303 ---
remain a thousand Negroes from Mississippi. Under the conditions that prevail in
New York they would all within six months become New Yorkers. The rapidity
with which Negroes become good New Yorkers is one of the marvels to observers.
These three reasons form a single reason why there is small probability that
Harlem will ever be a point of race friction between the races in New York. One
of the principal factors in the race riot in Chicago in 1919 was the fact that at that
time there were 12,000 Negroes employed in gangs in the stockyards. There was
considerable race feeling in Harlem at the time of the hegira of white residents
due to the “invasion,” but that feeling, of course, is no more. Indeed, a number of
the old white residents who didn’t go and could not get away before the housing
shortage struck New York are now living peacefully side by side with colored res-
idents. In fact, in some cases white and colored tenants occupy apartments in the
same house. Many white merchants still do business in thickest Harlem. On the
whole, I know of no place in the country where the feeling between the races is
so cordial and at the same time so matter-of-fact and taken for granted. One of
the surest safeguards against an outbreak in New York such as took place in so
many Northern cities in the summer of 1919 is the large proportion of Negro
police on duty in Harlem.
To my mind, Harlem is more than a Negro community; it is a large scale lab-
oratory experiment in the race problem. The statement has often been made that
if Negroes were transported to the North in large numbers the race problem with
all of its acuteness and with new aspects would be transferred with them. Well,
175,000 Negroes live closely together in Harlem, in the heart of New York—
75,000 more than live in any Southern city—and do so without any race friction.
Nor is there any unusual record of crime. I once heard a captain of the 38th
Police Precinct (the Harlem precinct) say that on the whole it was the most law-
abiding precinct in the city. New York guarantees its Negro citizens the funda-
mental rights of American citizenship and protects them in the exercise of those
rights. In return the Negro loves New York and is proud of it, and contributes in
his way to its greatness. He still meets with discriminations, but possessing the
basic rights, he knows that these discriminations will be abolished.
I believe that the Negro’s advantages and opportunities are greater in Harlem
than in any other place in the country, and that Harlem will become the intellec-
tual, the cultural and the financial center for Negroes of the United States, and
will exert a vital influence upon all Negro peoples.
Source: Excerpt from “Harlem: The Culture Capital,” originally written in 1925 and pub-
lished in Alain Locke, ed., The New Negro (New York: Albert and Charles Boni, 1925), pp.
301–11.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Robert E. Fleming, James Weldon Johnson(Boston: Twayne, 1987).
James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured Man (Garden City, N.Y.:
Garden City Publishing Co., 1912).
———, Along This Way: The Autobiography of James Weldon Johnson(New York: Viking,
1933; reprinted, Viking Penguin, 1990).
2 7 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 304 ---
BLACK WORKERS IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION 2 7 3
———, Complete Poems, ed. by Sondra K. Wilson (New York: Penguin Books, 2000).
———, ed., God’s Trombones: Seven Negro Sermons in Verse (New York: Viking, 1927;
reprinted, Viking Penguin, 1990).
Eugene Levy, James Weldon Johnson: Black Leaders, Black Voice (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1973).
Kenneth M. Price, and Lawrence J. Oliver, eds., Critical Essays on James Weldon Johnson,
Critical Essays on American Literature (New York; London: G. K. Hall; Prentice Hall
International, 1997).
O9 O
     
            
              
   
         
           
          
            
            
             
            
           
  
  
             
          
             
         
           
           
         
             
          
           
  
            
           
            
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 305 ---
2 7 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 306 ---
BLACK WORKERS IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION 2 7 5
             
            
          
            
  
               
             
              
            
           
              
          
           
          
               
           
            
      
            
           
          
            
          
         
        
          
         
         
           
         
        
         
            
            
            
           
             
           
             
              
              
             
            
             
          
          
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 307 ---
2 7 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 308 ---
BLACK WORKERS IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION 2 7 7
            
          
            
         
            
              
          
               
             
          
         
         
            
          
            
          
          
          
         
            
          
      
     
               
          
              
            
            
            
  
           
           
           
           
            
       
             
              
         
             
            
            
        
              
            
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 309 ---
2 7 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 310 ---
THE SCOTTSBORO TRIALS, 1930s 2 7 9
            
           
            
        
       
             
           
             
             
            
               
             
        
 
            
    
           
 
              
   
              
          
              
          
   
           
            
      
              
     
O10 O
The Scottsboro Trials, 1930s
The Scottsboro case became an international scandal in the early 1930s, when
nine African Americans (some of whom were children) from Scottsboro, Ala-
bama, were charged with raping a white woman on a freight train. Yet both con-
temporary observers and historians have found that these charges were fraudu-
lent and that there was little possibility the “Scottsboro boys” might receive a fair
trial in Alabama’s racist, Jim Crow courts. In 1931, eight of the defendants were
found guilty and sentenced to death.
The case received attention from various civil rights organizations and the
American Communist Party, and appeals on behalf of the Scottsboro boys were
twice presented before the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1932, the high court set
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 311 ---
aside their convictions on grounds that they did not have adequate counsel.
Subsequently, two of the original defendants were tried and convicted again. In
1935 the Supreme Court overturned these convictions as well, ruling that
African Americans had been arbitrarily excluded from Alabama’s jury pools.
Thus, in addition to exposing the injustice of Alabama’s courts, the Scottsboro
case also helped establish important legal precedents for African Americans.
However, it was not until the 1950s that all of the Scottsboro boys were freed.
O
SCOTTSBORO BOYS APPEAL FROM DEATH CELLS
TO THE TOILERS OF THE WORLD
From the death cells in Kilby Prison, where they have been held under conditions
of the most ghastly torture ever since the mock trials in the lower court at
Scottsboro, Ala., the eight Scottsboro boys send the following appeal to the work-
ers of the whole world to rally to the mass fight to smash the hideous frame-up
and lynch murder verdicts:
From the death cell here in Kilby Prison, eight of us Scottsboro boys is writ-
ing this to you.
We have been sentenced to die for something we ain’t never done. Us poor
boys been sentenced to burn up on the electric chair for the reason that we is
workers—and the color of our skin is black. We like any one of you workers is
none of us older than 20. Two of us is 14 and one is 13 years old.
What we guilty of? Nothing but being out of a job. Nothing but looking for work.
Our kinfolk was starving for food. We wanted to help them out. So we hopped a
freight—just like any one of you workers might a done—to go down to Mobile to
hunt work. We was taken off the train by a mob and framed up on rape charges.
At the trial they give us in Scottsboro we could hear the crowds yelling, “Lynch
the Niggers.” We could see them toting those big shotguns. Call ’at a fair trial?
And while we lay here in jail, the boss-man make us watch ’em burning up
other Negroes on the electric chair. “This is what you’ll get,” they say to us.
What for? We ain’t done nothing to be in here at all. All we done was to look
for a job. Anyone of you might have done the same thing—and got framed up on
the same charge just like we did.
Only ones helped us down here been the International Labor Defense and the
League of Struggle for Negro Rights. We don’t put no faith in the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People. They give some of us boys
eats to go against the other boys who talked for the I.L.D. But we wouldn’t split.
Nohow. We know our friends and our enemies.
Working class boys, we asks you to save us from being burnt on the electric chair.
We’s only poor working class boys whose skin is black. We shouldn’t die for that.
We hear about working people holding meetings for us all over the world. We
asks for more big meetings. It’ll take a lot of big meetings to help the I.L.D. and
2 8 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 312 ---
A. HERNDON, “YOU CANNOT KILL THE WORKING CLASS” 2 8 1
the L.S.N.R to save us from the boss-man down here.
Help us boys. We ain’t done nothing wrong. We are only workers like you are.
Only our skin is black.
(Signed) Andy Wright, Olen Montgomery, Ozie Powell, Charlie Weems, Clar-
ence Norris, Haywood Patterson, Eugene Williams, Willie Robertson.
Source: “Scottsboro Boys Appeal from Death Cells to the Toilers of the World,” originally
published in The Negro Worker2, no. 5 (May 1932), pp. 8–9.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Dan T. Carter, Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1979).
Gabriel J.  Chin, “A White Woman’s Word: The Scottsboro Case (1931),” in Race on Trial:
Law and Justice in American History , ed. by Annette Gordon-Reed (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002).
James E. Goodman, Stories of Scottsboro(New York: Pantheon Books, 1994).
Kwando M. Kinshasa, The Man from Scottsboro: Clarence Norris and the Infamous 1931
Alabama Rape Trial, in His Own Words(Jefferson; London: McFarland, 2003).
Clarence Norris and Sybil Washington, The Last of the Scottsboro Boys: An Autobiography
(New York: Putnam, 1979).
Lita Sorensen, The Scottsboro Boys Trial: A Primary Source Account , 1st ed. (New York:
Rosen Pub. Group, 2004).
O11 O
“You Cannot Kill the Working Class,” Angelo Herndon, 1933
Angelo Herndon (1913– ) was an African-American Communist organizer who,
after working on behalf of poor and unemployed blacks and whites in Atlanta,
Georgia, was charged with “insurrection” in 1932. In his defense, Herndon spoke
directly to the all-white jury and, though he was found guilty, the jurors recom-
mended mercy. Still, the court sentenced Herndon to eighteen to twenty years in
prison. However, Herndon was finally released in 1936, after his case drew inter-
national attention.
O
ANGELO HERNDON’S SPEECH TO THE JURY, JANUARY 17, 1933
Gentlemen of the Jury: I would like to explain in detail the nature of my case and
the reason why I was locked up. I recall back about the middle of June 1932,
when the Relief Agencies of the City of Atlanta, the County Commission and the
city government as a whole, were cutting both Negro and white workers off relief.


--- PAGE 313 ---
We all know that there were citizens who suffered from unemployment. There
were hundreds and thousands of Negroes and whites who were each day looking
for work, but in those days there was no work to be found.
The Unemployment Council, which has connection with the Unemployed
Committees of the United States, after 23,000 families had been dropped from
the relief rolls, started to organize the Negro and white workers of Atlanta on the
same basis, because we know that their interests are the same. The Unemploy-
ment Council understood that in order to get relief, both races would have to
organize together and forget about the question whether those born with a white
skin are “superior” and those born with a black skin are “inferior.” They both were
starving and the capitalist class would continue to use this weapon to keep them
further divided. The policy of the Unemployment Council is to organize Negroes
and whites together on the basis of fighting for unemployment relief and unem-
ployment insurance at the expense of the state. The Unemployment Council of
Atlanta issued those leaflets after the relief had been cut off, which meant star-
vation for thousands of people here in Atlanta. The leaflets called upon the Negro
and white workers to attend a meeting at the court house building on a Thursday
morning. I forget the exact date. This action was initiated as the result of state-
ments handed out to the local press by County Commissioners who said that
there was nobody in the City of Atlanta starving, and if there were, those in need
should come to the offices of the Commissioners and the matter would be looked
into. That statement was made by Commissioner Hendrix.
The Unemployment Council pointed out in its circulars that there were thou-
sands of unemployed workers in the City of Atlanta who faced hunger and star-
vation. Therefore, they were called upon to demonstrate in this court house
building, about the middle part of June. When the Committee came down to the
court house, it so happened that Commissioner Hendrix was not present that
morning. There were unemployed white women with their babies almost naked
and without shoes to go on their feet, and there were also Negro women with
their little babies actually starving for the need of proper nourishment, which had
been denied them by the county of Fulton and State of Georgia and City of
Atlanta as well.
Well, the Negro and white workers came down to the Commissioners’ office
to show that there was starvation in the City of Atlanta and that they were in
actual need of food and proper nourishment for their kids, which they never did
receive. I think Commissioner Stewart was in the office at that time. The white
workers were taken into his room and the Negroes had the door shut in their
faces. This was done with the hope of creating racial animosity in order that they
would be able to block the fight that the Negro and white workers were carrying
on—a determined fight to get relief. The white workers were told: “Well, the
county hasn’t any money, and of course, you realize the depression and all that but
we haven’t got the money.” We knew that the county did have money, but were
using it for their own interest, and not for the interest of the Negro workers or
white workers, either way. They talked to the white workers some considerable
2 8 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 314 ---
A. HERNDON, “YOU CANNOT KILL THE WORKING CLASS” 2 8 3
time, but when the white workers came out, they had just about as much results
as the Negroes did—only a lot of hot air blown over them by the Commissioners,
which didn’t put any shoes on their little babies’ feet and no milk in their stom-
achs to give them proper nourishment. No one disputed the fact they did keep
the Negroes on the outside, but the white workers were in the same condition
that their Negro brothers were in. In spite of the fact that the County Commis-
sioners had published statements to the effect that there was no money in the
county treasury to provide unemployment relief for the Negro and white work-
ers, still the next day after the demonstration the County Commissioners voted
$6,000 for relief, mainly because it was shown that for the first time in the history
of Atlanta and the State of Georgia, Negro and white workers did join together
and did go to the Commissioners and demand unemployment insurance. Have
not they worked in the City of Atlanta, in different industries, different shops and
other industrial concerns located in Atlanta for all their years, doing this work,
building up the city where it is at the present time? And now, when they were in
actual need of food to hold their bodies together, and when they came before the
state and county officials to demand something to hold their bodies together, they
were denied it. The policy of the Unemployment Council is to organize these
workers and demand those things that are denied them. They have worked as
slaves, and are entitled to a decent living standard. And, of course, the workers
will get it if you ever organize them.
After the successful demonstration, the solicitor’s office had two detectives sta-
tioned at the post office to arrest anyone who came to take mail out of box 339.
On Monday, July 11, 1932, I went to the post office to get mail from this box and
was arrested by detectives, Mr. Watson and Mr. Chester. I had organized unem-
ployed workers, Negro and white, of Atlanta, and forced the County Commis-
sioners to kick in $6,000 for unemployment relief. For this I was locked up in the
station house and held eleven days without even any kind of charges booked
against me. I was told at the station house that I was being held on “suspicion.”
Of course, they knew what the charges were going to be, but in order to hold me
in jail and give me the dirtiest kind of inhuman treatment that one could describe,
they held me there eleven days without any charge whatsoever until my attorney
filed a writ of habeas corpus demanding that they place charges against me or
turn me loose. It was about the 22nd of July, and I still hadn’t been indicted; there
had been three sessions of the grand jury, and my case had been up before them
each time, but still there was no indictment. This was a deliberate plot to hold me
in jail. At the habeas corpus hearing, the judge ordered that if I wasn’t indicted
by the next day by 2:30, I should be released. Solicitor Hudson assured the judge
that there would be an indictment, which, of course, there was. Ever since then
I have been cooped up in Fulton County Tower, where I have spent close to six
months—I think the exact time was five months and three weeks. . . .
They knew that the workers of Atlanta were starving, and by arresting Angelo
Herndon on a charge of attempting to incite insurrection the unity of Negro and
white workers that was displayed in the demonstration that forced the County


--- PAGE 315 ---
Commissioners to kick in with $6,000 would be crushed forever. They locked
Angelo Herndon up on such charges. But I can say this quite clearly, if the State
of Georgia and the City of Atlanta think that by locking up Angelo Herndon, the
question of unemployment will be solved, I say you are deadly wrong. If you really
want to do anything about the case, you must go out and indict the social system.
I am sure that if you would do this, Angelo Herndon would not be on trial here
today, but those who are really guilty of insurrection would be here in my stead.
But this you will not do, for your role is to defend the system under which the toil-
ing masses are robbed and oppressed. There are thousands of Negro and white
workers who, because of unemployment and hunger, are organizing. If the state
wants to break up this organization, it cannot do it by arresting people and placing
them on trial for insurrection, insurrection laws will not fill empty stomachs. Give
the people bread. The officials knew then that the workers were in need of relief,
and they know now that the workers are going to organize and get relief. . . .
[I]t is to the interest of the capitalist class that the workers be kept down all of
the time so they can make as much profit as they possibly can. So, on the other
hand, it is to the interest of Negro and white workers to get as much for their work
as they can—that is, if they happen to have any work. Unfortunately, at the pre-
sent time there are millions of workers in the United States without work, and the
capitalist class, the state government, city government and all other governments,
have taken no steps to provide relief for those unemployed. And it seems that this
question is left up to the Negro and white workers to solve, and they will solve it
by organizing and demanding the right to live, a right that they are entitled to.
They have built up this country, and are therefore entitled to some of the things
that they have produced. Not only are they entitled to such things, but it is their
right to demand them. . . .
O
EXCERPTS FROM YOU CANNOT KILL THE WORKING CLASS
They say that once a miner, always a miner. I don’t know if that’s so, but I do know
that my father never followed any other trade. His sons never doubted that they
would go down into the mines as soon as they got old enough. The wail of the
mine whistle morning and night, and the sight of my father coming home with his
lunch-pail, grimy from the day’s coating of coal-dust, seemed a natural and eter-
nal part of our lives.
Almost every working-class family, especially in those days, nursed the idea
that one of its members, anyway, would get out of the factory, and wear clean
clothes all the time and sit at a desk. My family was no exception. They hoped that
I would be the one to leave the working-class. They were ready to make almost
any sacrifices to send me through high-school and college. They were sure that if
a fellow worked hard and had intelligence and grit, he wouldn’t have to be a
worker all his life.
I haven’t seen my mother or most of my family for a long time—but I wonder
what they think of that idea now!
2 8 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 316 ---
A. HERNDON, “YOU CANNOT KILL THE WORKING CLASS” 2 8 5
My father died of miner’s pneumonia when I was very small, and left my mother
with a big family to care for. Besides myself, there were six other boys and two girls.
We all did what we could. Mother went out to do housework for rich white folks.
An older brother got a job in the steel mills. I did odd jobs, working in stores, run-
ning errands, for $2 and $3 a week. They still had the idea they could scrimp and
save and send me through college. But when I was 13, we saw it wouldn’t work.
So one fine morning in 1926, my brother Leo and I started off for Lexington,
KY. It was just across the border, and it had mines, and we were miner’s kids.
A few miles outside of Lexington, we were taken on at a small mine owned by
the powerful DeBardeleben Coal Corporation. . . .
One day the company put up a notice that due to large overhead expenses,
they would have to cut our pay from 42 to 31 cents a ton. We were sore as hell.
But there wasn’t any union in the mine, and practically none of us had any expe-
rience at organization, and though we grumbled plenty we didn’t take any action.
We were disgusted, and some of us quit. Whites and Negroes both.
I was one of those who quit. My contact with unions, and with organization,
and the Communist Party, and unity between black and white miners—all that
was still in the future. The pay-cut and the rotten conditions got my goat, and I
walked off, because as yet I didn’t know of anything else to do. . . .
I wish I could remember the exact date when I first attended a meeting of the
Unemployment Council, and met up with a couple of members of the
Commun¬ist Party. That date means a lot more to me than my birthday, or any
other day in my life.
The workers in the South, mostly deprived of reading-matter, have developed
a wonderful grapevine system for transmitting news. It was over this grapevine
that we first heard that there were “reds” in town.
The foremen—when they talked about it—and the newspapers, and the big-
shot Negroes in Birmingham, said that the “reds” were foreigners, and Yankees,
and believed in killing people, and would get us in a lot of trouble. But out of all
the talk I got a few ideas clear about the Reds. They believed in organizing and
sticking together. They believed that we didn’t have to have bosses on our backs.
They believed that Negroes ought to have equal rights with whites. It all sounded
O.K. to me. But I didn’t meet any of the Reds for a long time.
One day in June, 1930, walking home from work, I came across some handbills
put out by the Unemployment Council in Birmingham. They said: “Would you
rather fight—or starve?” They called on the workers to come to a mass meeting
at 3 o’clock.
Somehow I never thought of missing that meeting. I said to myself over and
over: “It’s war! It’s war! And I might as well get into it right now!” I got to the meet-
ing while a white fellow was speaking. I didn’t get everything he said, but this much
hit me and stuck with me: that the workers could only get things by fighting for
them, and that the Negro and white workers had to stick together to get results.
The speaker described the conditions of the Negroes in Birmingham, and I kept
saying to myself: “That’s it.” Then a Negro spoke from the same platform, and
somehow I knew that this was what I’d been looking for all my life.


--- PAGE 317 ---
At the end of the meeting I went up and gave my name. From that day to this,
every minute of my life has been tied up with the workers’ movement.
I joined the Unemployment Council, and some weeks later the Communist
Party. I read all the literature of the movement that I could get my hands on, and
began to see my way more clearly.
. . . The Unemployment Council opened a fight for cash relief, and aid for sin-
gle men, and equal relief for Negro and white. They called for a meeting in
Capitol Park, and we gathered about the Confederate Monument, about 500 of
us, white and Negro, and then we marched on the Community Chest headquar-
ters. There were about 100 cops there. The officials of the Community Chest
spoke, and said that the best thing for the Negroes to do was to go back to the
farms. They tried very hard to give the white workers there the idea that if the
Negroes went back to the farms, the whites would get a lot more relief.
Of course our leaders pointed out that the small farmers and share-croppers
and tenants on the cotton-lands around Birmingham were starving, and losing
their land and stock, and hundreds were drifting into the city in the hope of get-
ting work.
Then Oscar Adams spoke up. He was the editor of the Birmingham Reporter,
a Negro paper. What he said opened my eyes—but not in the way he expected.
He said we shouldn’t be misled by the leaders of the Unemployment Council,
that we should go politely to the white bosses and officials and ask them for what
they wanted, and do as they said.
Adams said: “We Negroes don’t want social equality.” I was furious. I said
inside of myself: “Oscar Adams, we Negroes want social and every other kind of
equality. There’s no reason on God’s green earth why we should be satisfied with
anything less.”
That was the end of any ideas I had that the big-shots among the recognized
Negro leaders would fight for us, or really put up any struggle for equal rights. I
knew that Oscar Adams and the people like him were among our worst enemies,
especially dangerous because they work from inside our ranks and a lot of us get
the idea that they are with us and of us.
I look back over what I’ve written about those days since I picked up the leaflet
of the Unemployment Council, and wonder if I’ve really said what I mean. I don’t
know if I can get across to you the feeling that came over me whenever I went to
a meeting of the Council, or of the Communist Party, and heard their speakers
and read their leaflets. All my life I’d been sweated and stepped on and Jim-
Crowed. I lay on my belly in the mines for a few dollars a week, and saw my pay
stolen and slashed, and my buddies killed. I lived in the worst section of town, and
rode behind the “Colored” signs on streetcars, as though there was something dis-
gusting about me. I heard myself called “nigger” and “darky,” and I had to say
“Yes, sir” to every white man, whether he had my respect or not.
I had always detested it, but I had never known that anything could be done
about it. And here, all of a sudden, I had found organizations in which Negroes
and whites sat together, and worked together, and knew no difference of race or
2 8 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 318 ---
A. HERNDON, “YOU CANNOT KILL THE WORKING CLASS” 2 8 7
color. Here were organizations that weren’t scared to come out for equality for
the Negro people, and for the rights of the workers. The Jim-Crow system, the
wage-slave system, weren’t everlasting after all! . . .
We organized a number of block committees of the Unemployment Councils,
and got rent and relief for a large number of families. We agitated endlessly for
unemployment insurance.
In the middle of June, 1932, the state closed down all the relief stations. A
drive was organized to send all the jobless to the farms.
We gave out leaflets calling for a mass demonstration at the courthouse to
demand that the relief be continued. About 1000 workers came, 600 of them
white. We told the commissioners we didn’t intend to starve. We reminded them
that $800,000 had been collected in the Community Chest drive. The commis-
sioners said there wasn’t a cent to be had.
But the very next day the commission voted $6,000 for relief to the jobless!
On the night of July 11, I went to the Post Office to get my mail. I felt myself
grabbed from behind and turned to see a police officer.
I was placed in a cell, and was shown a large electric chair, and told to spill
everything I knew about the movement. I refused to talk, and was held incom-
municado for eleven days. Finally I smuggled out a letter through another pris-
oner, and the International Labor Defense got on the job.
Assistant Solicitor John Hudson rigged up the charge against me. . . .
The trial was set for January 16, 1933. The state of Georgia displayed the lit-
erature that had been taken from my room, and read passages of it to the jury.
They questioned me in great detail. Did I believe that the bosses and government
ought to pay insurance to unemployed workers? That Negroes should have com-
plete equality with white people? Did I believe in the demand for the self-deter-
mination of the Black Belt—that the Negro people should be allowed to rule the
Black Belt territory, kicking out the white landlords and government officials?
Did I feel that the working-class could run the mills and mines and government?
That it wasn’t necessary to have bosses at all?
I told them I believed all of that—and more. . . .
The state held that my membership in the Communist Party, my possession of
Communist literature, was enough to send me to the electric chair. They said to
the jury: “Stamp this damnable thing out now with a conviction that will auto-
matically carry with it a penalty of electrocution.”
And the hand-picked lily-white jury responded:
“We, the jury, find the defendant guilty as charged, but recommend that mercy
be shown and fix his sentence at from 18 to 20 years.”
I had organized starving workers to demand bread, and I was sentenced to live
out my years on the chain-gang for it. But I knew that the movement itself would
not stop. I spoke to the court and said:
“They can hold this Angelo Herndon and hundreds of others, but it will never
stop these demonstrations on the part of Negro and white workers who demand
a decent place to live in and proper food for their kids to eat.”


--- PAGE 319 ---
I said: “You may do what you will with Angelo Herndon. You may indict him.
You may put him in jail. But there will come thousands of Angelo Herndons. If
you really want to do anything about the case, you must go out and indict the
social system. But this you will not do, for your role is to defend the system under
which the toiling masses are robbed and oppressed.
“You may succeed in killing one, two, even a score of working-class organizers.
But you cannot kill the working class.” . . .
Sources: (1) Angelo Herndon’s Speech to the Jury, January 17, 1933; and (2) excerpt from
Angelo Herndon, You Cannot Kill the Working Class (New York: International Labor
Defense and League of Struggle for Negro Rights, 1937–?).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
F. T. Griffiths, “Ralph Ellison, Richard Wright, and the Case of Angelo Herndon,” African
American Review 35, no. 4 (Winter 2001), pp. 615–36.
Elizabeth Lawson, Twenty Years on the Chain Gang? Angelo Herndon Must Go Free(New
York: International Labor Defense, 1935).
Charles H. Martin, The Angelo Herndon Case and Southern Justice(Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press, 1976).
———, “Communists and Blacks: The ILD and the Angelo Herndon Case,” Journal of
Negro History 64, no. 2 (Spring 1979), pp. 131–41.
O12 O
Hosea Hudson, Black Communist Activist
Hosea Hudson (1889–1988) was born in rural Wilkes County, Georgia, and he
joined the Communist Party in 1931 in the wake of the Scottsboro and Camp Hill
cases. In 1932 his political affiliations caused him to be fired from his job as an
iron molder. Hudson subsequently worked on the Works Progress Administration
(WPA), served as vice president of the Birmingham and Jefferson County locals
of the Workers Alliance, was president of Steel Local 2815, and vice president of
the Alabama Political Education Association. Hudson used several aliases and
often worked underground, especially during the 1950s when he was a Commun-
ist organizer in the South. In 1971 he visited the Soviet Union for the first time.
Hudson’s moving account of his lifelong involvement in the Communist move-
ment is presented in Black Worker in the Deep South (1972), and in Nell Irvin
Painter’s 1979 book, The Narrative of Hosea Hudson.
O
I found this Party, a party of the working class, gave me rights equal with all oth-
ers regardless of color, sex, or age or educational standards. I with my uneduca-
2 8 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 320 ---
HOSEA HUDSON, BLACK COMMUNIST ACTIVIST 2 8 9
tion could express myself, without being made fun of by others who could read
well and fast, using big words. I was treated with high respect. I had a right to
help make the policy. At every convention, maybe some policy question would
change at the convention and we have a discussion from the floor. After a thor-
ough discussion, decisions are arrived at by majority vote. Then all members,
including those who disagree, are duty bound to explain, fight for, and carry out
such decisions. When that decision is made, everybody got to fall into line.
I’ve been to many Party conventions. The first one I went to was an extraordi-
nary plenary session called in New York by Earl Browder. That was in 1933, the
4th of July. That was the first time I got out of the South.
We left at night on a Monday, left out of Birmingham in a old piece of car,
went over to Atlanta, me and Don and the rest of them. They taken me in the
car from Birmingham to Atlanta. When we all got to Atlanta, we put down their
car and we all got in Ben Davis’ car and pulled out for New York. We went up
with Ben Davis. That was the first time I met him. Ben Davis was in Atlanta, he
was then involved in the Angelo Herndon case. We drove to New York from
Atlanta. I don’t know what model of Ford it was, but ’twas seven of us packed up
in that Ford. All the way from Atlanta to New York City. It was hot! That was the
worst trip I ever had in my life. Seven people, seven grown people—wont no
children in the crowd—it was seven people. ’twas three Negroes: me, Ben, and
Al Murphy. We went up in the front seat together. In the back seat was the D.O.
of the time, Don, and his wife, and another guy from Texas name of Lee, and
another guy name of Ted Mebber. All four of them was white. Now you know
that was some ride. . . .
I didn’t get to know Ben Davis too much on the trip. We’s going up, riding. I
know he was a lawyer, and I felt at that time that he was superior. I wasn’t used
to being around that kind of people, Negro lawyers. And everybody was talking.
Him and Al Murphy, they done a lot of discussing about everything, the country
and the conditions. Ben Davis was a friendly guy, he was friendly to me, but he
was driving the car, and Murphy sitting between me and him. I’m over on the side
and the whites back here talking. Everybody talking and riding, try to keep
encouragement. I was just listening, because at that time my development was
very low, practically zero. I wont doing no talking.
We went on, got to New York, and we all got off. Some went in different
places. Ben didn’t go to that extraordinary plenary session. He didn’t attend Party
conferences. I presume, I never did know, I never questioned, but I presume he
was up there to discuss with Patterson and them something about the ILD and
the Herndon case in Atlanta, and also the Scottsboro case, which he wasn’t
involved in, but he did play a part in the Scottsboro case in Alabama.
That was the first big conference, first big meeting of the Party I was in. They
had fraternal delegates at that particular meeting. They were there from Chile,
and they had fraternal delegates there from Germany. The guy that Hitler killed—
I can’t think of his name right now—but he was the leader of the Party and Hitler
killed him.
1 His name was very familiar with me. He was at that meeting. He


--- PAGE 321 ---
spoke. About four or five fraternal delegates was there. I didn’t meet them per-
sonally, I just was there when they spoke. It was a lot being said I didn’t under-
stand. I was still in the learning stage. I was just sitting quiet, listening. Some I
understood what they said, and some I didn’t.
After the meeting was over, it was a Negro woman there at the convention from
North Carolina, and she was living in a big housing project there in New York, call
it the Coop. I forgotten her name. She taken me on the trolley down to the water-
front down on Broadway, we rid all the way down there. It was real cold. It was on
July 4th, and it was cold enough to have on a overcoat. It was real chilly like the fall
of the year. I seen a big ship there with peep holes and they was playing the music
and everybody around right there at the water. That was the first time I seen ships.
I didn’t see Ben anymore until we got ready to come back to Atlanta, and we
all came back in the car together. Murphy stayed in New York, but all the whites
came back. Lee sat in the front with us coming back, so it was still a question of
I was looking for some one to stop us. It wasn’t worse, though, cause Lee was
smaller than Murphy was and it wasn’t quite as tight up. . . .
The coal miners and the ore miners was the first ones begin to organize in the
NRA days. I never did know the whole thing, but in that period, the NRA, it was
something worked out between John L. Lewis and Roosevelt, I think. That’s my
thinking. And whatever the agreement was, when they come out with the NRA,
John L. Lewis came out organizing the coal miners.
We began to build the Party among the coal miners and the ore miners when
they began to reorganize their UMW locals. Many of the miners were living in
Birmingham, particularly the Negroes. We had some big struggles.
The bosses had all the coal mine communities guarded. They had deputy sher-
iffs in the coal mine areas. We didn’t call them deputy sheriffs, we called them
company dicks. Now out there in that Sareyton mine, out in North Birmingham,
the guy out there, his name was Self. If a guy would be sick and he wouldn’t go
in to work, Self would go around “shack rousting.” He go around, knock on those
doors, see who all at home, who all in, who all out. If someone didn’t go to work,
Self want to know what’s wrong. He’d tell the Negroes, “By God, if you ain’t sick,
when I get through with you, you will be sick.” He was the shack rouster hisself,
called hisself deputy sheriff of the company. Any stranger going in the mine quar-
ters, especially through the week days, would be questioned, stopped and ques-
tioned by the company dicks. . . .
In Birmingham in the month of November of ’33, we Party members call a
meeting of workers from some of the mines and steel plants and iron foundries
one Sunday afternoon, to organize a committee to begin to build rank and file
committees in some of the coal and ore mine union locals around Birmingham
and Bessemer. What these committees was doing was bombarding some of the
unions, the top leaders, calling for industrial unions, industrial unions.
2 Because
our Party position was the onliest way you going to get out of this present oppres-
sion, you got to organize the industrial unions and organize the unorganized
workers, organize the Negro. The Negro hadn’t been organized in unions before.
2 9 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 322 ---
HOSEA HUDSON, BLACK COMMUNIST ACTIVIST 2 9 1
They was all lily white unions. They wouldn’t take Negroes in. This meeting, we
had planned to hold it in the old Negro Penny Saving Bank, down on 2nd
Avenue and somewhere between 15th or 16th Street. (Since that time this bank
been torn down.)
Some of us had just began to go into that hall and arrange the chairs, early
waiting for the other workers to come. Only nine of us had got into that hall, four
white and five Negroes. A young white worker, Ward Turner, was to chair that
meeting. Ted Welbaum, a young white YCL member from New York, was there
with us and two other white workers. (That was the whites.) Then Joe Howard,
myself, Homer Martin, and Sol Norman, and another young Negro coal miner by
the name of Mosley was there. Mosley and I went down on the next floor below
our floor, the third floor, to the men’s room. When we got to the second floor, we
found city detective Mosley, the head of the Red Squad, and three other police
standing down there questioning the Negro who was in charge of that building.
The young coal miner Mosley just kept walking on down to the ground floor, right
past that group of officers, and I turn around and went back up to our hall and
told the rest of the boys that was up there that the police was down on the floor
below, asking that Negro a lots of rough questions.
Ward Turner told everybody to get them a seat and sit down, and we sat down
in the different places in the hall. Turner took his seat at the table where the
chairman was to sit at. After a while, all of that bunch of police began to rush up
the stairway, headed for our hall. Detective Mosley walk over to Turner and
asked him what kind of meeting is that. Turner told him that this is a Socialist
Party meeting. Mosley pick up all of the notes of paper that Turner had on the
table and told all of us to get out of this hall. We all headed down to the ground
floor. When we got down to the door at the sidewalk, the police had backed a
paddy wagon up to the curb and form themselves into a line from that door to
that police wagon. And we all walk right straight into that police wagon from that
building.
As we were hauled away from that hall we could see several of our people stand-
ing on the corner who was headed to the meeting. But by the police hurrying into
that hall to break up that meeting as they did, they saved many of those workers
their jobs.
The police took us eight to the southside jail and lodged us Negroes there in a
cell with other Negroes that was in there for that Sunday night. We didn’t know
what was going to happen to us, cause it had been the custom when they arrest
any of the members of the ILD or the Party to take them out after a certain time
of night—so we were told—and whip them. We didn’t know whether they was
going to whip us or not. We were just there. So I didn’t throw my clothes off all
that night. I just laid on the bunk, on the old bunk they had there, in my clothes.
That was Sunday night.
The next morning the four white workers who was placed in a different cell
and all us Negroes was hauled down to the city hall separate and placed into a dif-
ferent room and mugged one by one. Our pictures was taken and we was finger-
printed. They kept all four there until late that afternoon. Then they put us in


--- PAGE 323 ---
what they call the “bull pen” where all the misdemeanors was, like you arrested
for drunk or something like that. Not no bad crime. Everybody put out here in
one big old place together. You sit around, sit on bunks, anywhere you can find.
Ain’t none of them decent, but you ain’t got no particular place to sleep, just bunk
up and do the best you can on the cots. That was where I seed a crap game for
the first time in my life. A old man there had some dice and playing craps for a
penny. He’d take them dice and work his hand around and shake them and
“crack, crack, crack!” and throw them dice. When he throw them and the dice
turn up, every time they turn up, he’d hit. He was a real dice shooter. He was a
old man. We just set there and looked at him.
Didn’t nobody bother me, nobody asked anybody what they was there for.
We four, me, Sol, Homer Martin, and Joe Howard, we four was together. And
quite naturally we sit around together, but we didn’t talk. We always was told
not to do no talking in jail, cause you never know when the walls are bugged
or not, so we didn’t talk about none of our affairs. They kept us there till
Tuesday.
Now Sol, they tried to hold Sol for a while, cause Sol when they first arrest
him, they asked him what his name was, he wouldn’t tell them what his name. Old
Detective Mosley hit Sol in the face around his eye. He had a red, very bad
bruised face. I didn’t see him when he got hit. All I seen was afterwards, and he
had a big bloody place on the side of his face and his eye was all bloodshot.
Tuesday they taken us back for trial, put us in separate cells, except me and
Homer Martin in a cell to ourselves. I don’t know what time they had Joe Howard
or the white guys’ trial.
I had heard that whenever we was arrested that we were not to ever plead
guilty when we went before a judge. I had told Homer Martin that we were not
to plead guilty when we were asked by the judge. We was all lined up in a long
line of Negroes. Some of them had been picked up by the police for drunk that
Saturday afternoon. As they march up, they were asked the question by the judge,
“You are charge of being drunk, are you guilty or not guilty?”
In most cases these Negroes would say, “Guilty, Judge.”
And the judge would say, “$13 or 13 days.” Most of them would be led off by
the police to jail to begin serve that 13 days.
When Homer Martin and I got up before him, I was in the front of Homer. We
were told what our charges was—that was meeting to overthrow the government.
“Are you guilty or not guilty?”
I said, “Not guilty, Judge.”
He said to me, “Stand aside.”
Homer Martin told him the same thing, and he was told to stand aside. We
were finally taken back into a room and the door was locked. And we sat there all
the rest of that afternoon until just about night, from early that morning without
any water or food. Finally they call us out and took us back to the southside jail,
and then we were given water and some of that lousy black-eyed peas and hard
cornbread with all of the corn husks and other filth in it. But we had to eat it
2 9 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 324 ---
HOSEA HUDSON, BLACK COMMUNIST ACTIVIST 2 9 3
because that was all that we could get until the next morning.
About 1 o’clock Wednesday the key-boy come to the bull pen and call us and
told us to get ready, we were wanted down at the warden’s desk. We walked out
and we all walk down to the desk sergeant. He had a great big double forehead,
a great big wide double forehead and smoked a pipe. I guess he might of been a
Irishman, he had big feet. (He was called to be the good police among the
Negroes there in Birmingham after that time. They said, “He’s a good man, that
boy, he’s a good man.” The Negroes called him nice cause when he caught them
in their misdemeanors, he’d give them a little break.) This sergeant told the key-
boy to unlock the outside iron gate and he said to us four Negroes: “You God
damn niggers get out of that gate and get out of town. You damn Reds better not
be caught in Birmingham any more. If you do, it will not be good for you.”
3 We
all walked out and went to our various homes. (Joe Howard passed from this life
in Birmingham some time in 1939. I stayed there and built steel local 2815.
Homer Martin passed there in 1974.)
Sol Norman left Birmingham. I heard that he went back to Selma, Alabama.
That was his home, down Selma. He worked with the sharecroppers union, but
something happen to him there in around ’35. Down in 19 and 65 I was talking
to some people and they was around the area of Selma the time of that terror in
1935. It was a husband and wife, and the husband said they had some rough times
down there, “but down in our part, where we live, they didn’t never come down
there and bother us cause we was so well organized together till they was afraid
to try and come in there to mess with us. We was just too hot for them down
there.” The deputy sheriffs and the Ku Klux and them didn’t come in there, but
it was up in some other place where they was terrorizing and beating and arrest-
ing Negroes. Negroes was coming up missing.
Then I was talking to a preacher in 1953, Reverend Rivers (he’s dead now).
This preacher was a pastor down there in Selma at that time, and 'twas a white
man, a merchant, had a blacksmith shop. He took this preacher out in his yard
and showed him eight or nine things that was made out of concrete that looked
like bears standing up. They had a solid bottom, and the top was a lid, was a piece
of sheet iron with a lock on it, to lock it. They was just the size enough to put a
man in.
Reverend Rivers kept asking this white man, talking like a preacher, said,
“Boss, what is this? I just like this thing. This is a pretty, pretty thing. I just like to
have one of them.”
The white man said, “No, Reverend, you don’t want that. That’s for these peo-
ple that won’t listen at you and won’t listen at us. That’s made for these kind of
people.”
Reverend Rivers, he said it made him so sick that he went home and went to
bed, had to have a doctor. He could just see all these people he knowed done
come up missing, and they done put them in them concrete things and dropped
them in the Alabama River. And he couldn’t tell nobody. So when he got able,
when he got well enough to move out, he left there and come to Birmingham. His


--- PAGE 325 ---
wife said, “I bet you that’s what happened to Willie Foster.” He was one of the
local leaders of the ILD there in Birmingham, and they sent him down there to
see about some arrests. He never did come back. “They about put him in them
barrels and dropped him in the river, cause he turn up missing and we never did
hear from him.”
We didn’t never know what happened to Sol Norman to know the truth about
it. It was hard to say if he left out of there or not, because we none of us at that
time used our regular names when we went to a new different place. He might of
left and used a new name someplace else. Or they might of put him in one of
them concrete barrels Reverend Rivers was looking at. . . .
Notes: 1. Ernest Thaelmann. 2. All the unions was craft unions. 3. That was what he had
to say to us Negroes knowing that we was considered to be Reds. He showed his real col-
ors with us.
Source: Excerpts, reprinted by permission of the publisher, from The Narrative of Hosea
Hudson: His Life as a Negro Communist in the South, edited by Neil Irvin Painter (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979). Copyright 1979 by the President and Fellows
of Harvard College.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Hosea Hudson, Black Worker in the Deep South: A Personal Record (New York: Inter-
national Publishers, 1972).
Robin D.G. Kelley, Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990).
Nell Irvin Painter, Southern History across the Color Line(Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2002).
Mark Solomon, The Cry Was Unity: Communists and African Americans, 1917–1936
(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1999).
O13 O
“Breaking the Bars to Brotherhood,” Mary McLeod Bethune, 1935
Mary McLeod Bethune (1875–1955) was one of seventeen children born to ex-
slave parents in South Carolina. She worked as a teacher in her early adult life and
in 1904 founded the Daytona Normal and Industrial School. In 1920 Bethune was
elected vice president of the National Urban League. She was active for many
years in the National Association of Colored Women, and was elected as its pres-
ident in 1924. Bethune came to national prominence, however, during the Great
Depression. She was the leading African-American figure within the administra-
tion of Franklin D. Roosevelt, serving as the director of the Negro Division of the
National Youth Administration. In 1935 she was given the NAACP’s Springarn
Award, and in that same year was named president of the newly formed National
2 9 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 326 ---
M.M. BETHUNE, “BREAKING THE BARS TO BROTHERHOOD” 2 9 5
Council of Negro Women. Bethune was an adviser to the U.S. delegation at the
1945 founding conference of the United Nations in San Francisco.
O
Mr. Chairman, My Fellow Citizens, Members and Officers of the National Assoc-
iation for the Advancement of Colored People: There is a great happiness in my
heart tonight—not a selfish, personal happiness, but a happiness and satisfaction
that come to one who has labored in the heat of the day for the common good,
and now as the shadows of life begin to lengthen comes to receive a “Well Done,”
a signal of recognition of one’s life work. And with this happiness comes a hum-
ble gratitude for the distinguished approval of this organization dedicated to the
cause of social justice and human welfare. To be worthy of being included in the
illustrious group of Spingarn medalists, who by their intelligence, courage, devo-
tion, faith and work have helped to shape and build a better world, one must
respond to the stimulus of this occasion with a spirit of rededication to service, of
reconsecration to the needs of the people. This spirit of rededication and recon-
secration permeates me now as I stand before you.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has for the
past twenty-six years accepted the challenge of the times and has ventured forth
upon its task, high endeavor for human understanding, and the world has
responded to this endeavor. I seem to hear this call, coming from the pioneers of
this great movement:
Come, Clear the way; then, clear the way.
Blind kings and creeds have had their day.
Break the dead branches from the path.
Our hope is in the aftermath.
Our hope is in heroic man.
Star-led to build the world again.
To this event all ages ran;
Make way for brotherhood;
Make way for man.
This dauntless organization has spent its efforts almost wholly in clearing the way
for a race, in breaking dead branches from the paths of liberty and the pursuit of
happiness. The success of the early clearers of the way is but an indication of what
is yet to be done by those who follow in their train. The dead branches hewn away
by those stalwart pioneers left plain and straight the highway which the youths are
travelling. That way brought us hope. That is the song which the past has taught us.
Now we keep faith with that hope to sing the song which the present challenges.
If I have merited the honor of receiving the Spingarn medal, it is because my
life has been dedicated to the task of breaking the bars to brotherhood.
Brotherhood is not an ideal. It is but a state or a condition attendant upon
achievement of an ideal. It is one of the components of an ideal. I believe that


--- PAGE 327 ---
brotherhood depends upon and follows achievement. In the light of this belief, I
wish to indicate and develop briefly those fundamental principles and issues
involved in bringing about a state of brotherhood.
The law of life is the law of cooperation, and unless we learn thoroughly this
fundamental tenet of social organization I fear that the historian of the future,
when he attempts to record the history of the black man in America, will write “a
people possessed of tremendous possibilities, potentialities and resources, men-
tal and physical, but a people unable to capitalize [on] them because of their racial
non-cohesiveness.” If we would make way for social and political justice and a
larger brotherhood, we must cooperate. Racial cohesion means making a road of
all of the achievements of those who have educational advantages until we reach
the lowest man, the lowest strata of the masses; that mass that is standing so help-
lessly waiting for you and for me to administer the human touch.
Unless the people have vision, they perish. What can we see; and, having seen,
are we willing to venture? Do we see our large opportunity for the race to pro-
duce? Do we see an intellectual interpretation of our religious thought unham-
pered by superstitious belief, or limited by too great a satisfaction? Do we see the
brotherhood of the peoples of the world working out an abundant life in their
activities, of duty, of art, of business, of every day living?
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has always
sought men of vision to lead the way. Today we pray for the expansion of that
vision from a few to an ever increasing group of prepared men and women and
of youths of all races to guide and direct the mass. The veil of ignorance and
superstition is not yet lifted. Broad vision, zeal and preparedness will do much to
lift it. Social group understanding and appreciation are necessary to brotherhood.
The dead branches of misunderstanding and lack of appreciation have kept our
existence clouded with prejudice. Human understanding is the key to brother-
hood. The march of racial advancement is continually hindered by misunder-
standing. Misunderstandings clutter up the highways of life which make for true
harmonious relations.
But right must triumph and prejudice must be done away with. In this
staunch belief, men and women of this organization continue to struggle toward
the goal of social justice and to strive for worthy and proper consideration for
every man in his right to live, to be, to do, to possess, and to pursue happiness.
Now is the time for thinking men and women, for thinking youths of every race,
to stand up with those who have labored for years and be counted, in their par-
ticipation in this great forward march of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People. No greater crime can there be than that one
in which a man should be unfair to his neighbor and interferes with his right to
develop harmonious relationships and realize the highest attainment of his abil-
ities. The great unrest in the world today, the great doubts which assail men, the
enormous amount of mistrust entangles our lives and makes us look askance at
our brothers, all are the products of injustice, wrought by one man upon
another.
2 9 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 328 ---
M.M. BETHUNE, “BREAKING THE BARS TO BROTHERHOOD” 2 9 7
Equality of opportunity is necessary to brotherhood. We stand in adoration of
those who, regardless of the section of the country in which they live, have been big
enough, courageous enough, to stand for social justice and equality of opportunity,
even at the risk of their lives. The National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People has proven the necessity for breaking the bars to brotherhood
through their advocacy of the destruction of blind kings and creeds which have
been rulers in the lives of humanity. The creeds of selfishness, self-centered ideas,
have led to narrow leadership. The creed of over-ambition and self domination has
led to unfair publicity. Let us cease to give allegiance to such unmoral kinship in our
lives. Above all, let us cease now to render allegiance to the creed of belief in the
inherent superiority of white and the inherent inferiority of black. Let us rest with
confidence on the creed of larger development in our narrow selves; greater scope
of opportunity to work out our ambitions; sure and certain belief in all convictions
which are ours; and towering over all, our belief in becoming free men.
The creed of freedom has not yet been written. Humanity is yet a slave to her
desires, her fears, her intelligence, her social standing, her craving for power. Let
us as workers under this banner make free men spread truth about economic
adjustment; truth about moral obligation; truth about segregation; truth about cit-
izenship; truth about home building; yes, truth wherever truth is needed. Then our
lives may be lived with freedom and we shall be what ourselves demand us to be.
Who shall disseminate this truth? I would call tonight upon those who are star-
led, who have clearly in mind a purpose in life; who do not fear the struggle and
the work which must needs be the lot of those who dare to live above the cloud
of popular thought and limited desires.
My fellow citizens, in the light of this dream, in the light of this firm hope, in
the belief that brotherhood is the desired end in life, in accordance with God’s
plan, and with a rededication to share in the responsibility of rebuilding and
inspiring vision, to keep faith with the ideals and purposes of the National Assoc-
iation for the Advancement of Colored People, I, in the name of the womanhood
of America, accept this medal. I accept it with gratitude for the opportunity for
God-given service. I accept it as a badge which will mark me before all men as an
advocate of respect and justice for all mankind. The brightness which we saw so
many years ago has become a light, a star. May we challenge ourselves anew and
follow in its radiance, ever thoughtful, ever courageous, ever enduring, in mold-
ing lives with highest principles. And may those who follow after us gain inspira-
tion because we dare to stand at a time like this.
Mr. Chairman, my fellow citizens, I am grateful.
Source: Excerpts from speech located in the Mary McLeod Bethune Papers, Amistad
Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Mary McLeod Bethune, Mary McLeod Bethune: Building a Better World: Essays and
Selected Documents, ed. by Audrey T. McCluskey and Elaine M. Smith (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1999).


--- PAGE 329 ---
Bettye Collier-Thomas, N.C.N.W., 1935–1980 (Washington, D.C.: National Council of
Negro Women, 1981).
Paula Giddings, When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women and Sex in America
(New York: William Morrow, 1984).
Eloise Greenfield, Mary McLeod Bethune(New York: Crowell, 1977).
Joyce Ann Hanson, Mary McLeod Bethune & Black Women’s Political Activism(Columbia:
University of Missouri Press, 2003).
———, “The Ties that Bind: Mary McLeod Bethune and the Political Mobilization of
African-American Women” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Connecticut, 1997).
Nancy Ann Zrinyi Long, The Life and Legacy of Mary McLeod Bethune (Boston: Pearson
Custom Pub., 2006).
Elaine Smith, “Mary McLeod Bethune and the National Youth Administration,” in Clio Was
a Woman: Studies in the History of American Women, ed. Mabel E. Deutrich and Vir-
ginia C. Purdy (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1980).
O14 O
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., and the Fight for Black Employment in Harlem
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. (1908–1972) was raised in New York City. He earned
his bachelor’s degree at Colgate University, and completed advanced studies at
the Union Theological Seminary and Columbia University. During the Great
Depression, Powell emerged as an important protest figure in Harlem, leading
“don’t buy where you can’t work” campaigns against white-owned businesses. In
1937, Powell assumed his father’s post as minister of Harlem’s Abyssinian Baptist
Church, where he quickly became an influential voice on behalf of civil rights.
Powell’s flamboyant style and confrontational rhetoric attracted a popular follow-
ing within the national black community. Serving in Congress for a quarter cen-
tury, Powell helped to pass major educational and civil rights legislation. Toward
the end of Powell’s career, his mishandling of public funds and long absences
from Congress eroded his base of support in Harlem. Narrowly defeated by Char-
les Rangel for Harlem’s congressional seat, Powell retired in 1970 and died two
years later.
O
THE FIGHT FOR JOBS
The Coordinating Committee for Employment is beginning a serious business in
Harlem. It is beginning a fight for jobs. It has asked for work. It has pleaded for
work. It has held work conferences. It has utilized every means at its disposal to
get the employers of New York City to stop starving the Negroes of New York.
These means have failed.
2 9 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 330 ---
THE FIGHT FOR BLACK EMPLOYMENT IN HARLEM 2 9 9
The Committee is now inaugurating a mass boycott and picketing of every
enterprise in Greater New York that refuses to employ Negroes. The Gas and
Electric Company has seen the light, the telephone company must also. The big
department stores must follow suit. If Negroes can work at Ovington’s, Wana-
maker’s, Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s, then an appreciable percentage must work
at Gimbel’s, Klein’s, Hearn’s, Saks and other stores.
The milk companies are next. No more subterfuges, no more passing the buck,
but black faces must appear on Harlem milk wagons immediately or the milk con-
cerns shall be boycotted.
Three hundred and fifty thousand consumers are not anything to be sneezed
at and if anyone dares try to sneeze, we are killing him with the worst cold he ever
had. The same thing goes for the Metropolitan Life. As long as we have Negro
insurance companies there is no reason why Negroes should pay one cent to any
other insurance company that refuses to employ Negroes.
O
PLATFORM FOR JOB CAMPAIGN
1. AIMS: To provide a greater measure of employment for Negro workers in
the institutions and establishments which are sustained by the purchasing power
of the Negro.
2. All jobs obtained must provide for a standard living wage equal to that pre-
vailing at the time of employment.
3. Wherever Negroes obtain jobs and union conditions prevail, the Negro
workers must be, or must become members of the established union.
4. Workers are to be hired on the qualifying standards set by the employer.
5. Applicants for employment shall not be confined to any organization, or
individual.
6. Employment of Negroes outside of the Harlem area must not be sacrificed
for any possible local increases.
7. Any increase in employment of Negroes in Harlem must be accomplished
without the victimization of white for black workers.
8. The Harlem Job Committee shall charge no fee or in any way exact profit
of any kind from any employer or employee.
9. In pursuance of the above objectives the Committee will secure and utilize
the cooperation and support of all responsible institutions and organizations in
Harlem.
10. The Harlem Job Committee will cooperate with those employers recog-
nizing the justice of the Committee’s objectives. The Committee will, however,
utilize every legal and recognized means to obtain its aims, in cases where
employers either fail or are unwilling to cooperate.
Sources: “Soap Box,” Amsterdam News, May 7, 1938; and “Platform for Job Campaign,”
Amsterdam News, May 14, 1938.


--- PAGE 331 ---
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Charles V . Hamilton, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.: The Political Biography of an American
Dilemma (New York: Atheneum, 1991).
Wil Haygood, King of the Cats: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.(New York:
Amistad, 2006).
Neil Hickey and Ed Edwin, Adam Clayton Powell and the Politics of Race(New York: Fleet
Publishing, 1965).
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., The Autobiography of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.(New York: Dial
Press, 1971).
O15 O
Black Women Workers during the Great Depression
Throughout the Great Depression, African-American women typically had to
work full time and often faced discrimination, poor pay, and oppressive labor
conditions. The documents below illustrate the views of black women who
worked during this era.
O
 
            
           
               
             
            
      
            
           
            
          
             
             
                
                
 
           
            
             
            
             
3 0 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 332 ---
BLACK WOMEN WORKERS DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION 3 0 1
  
              
             
             
         
        
       
             
              
             
       
             
             
            
             
            
            
        
         
            
           
    
          
            
             
            
             
         
           
                
             
                
            
                
            
              
             
              
                
                   
                
                
                  
    
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 333 ---
O
I AMA DOMESTIC, NAOMI WARD
They just can’t be as bad as they seem to me—these women I have worked for as
a domestic. After all, I knew many fine women in various capacities before I was
forced, as a penniless widow of forty, to go out to service in order to earn a living
for my child and myself.
No, she can’t be as bad as she seems, this average woman who hires a maid—
so overbearing, so much a slavedriver, so unwilling to grant us even a small mea-
sure of human dignity. But I have had three years of experience in at least a dozen
households to bear eloquent witness to the contrary.
3 0 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 334 ---
BLACK WOMEN WORKERS DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION 3 0 3
Of course I am speaking of the average woman. There must be many excep-
tions. But in my experience the only exception I encountered was a woman whose
friends thought her a trifle crazy.
It was true that she employed me by way of astrology—that is, of all the many
applicants she figured that my date of birth showed that we would get on well
together. I cooked for her one week by astrology and by a color chart the next.
That is, our dinner would be entirely purple one day—eggplant, purple cabbage,
and beets; and next it would consist of golden corn, yellow squash, carrots, and
oranges. And sometimes, poor dear, she would ask me to sit by her bed and talk
to her all night to keep her awake because she feared dying in her sleep.
Take this matter of inconsiderateness, of downright selfishness. No other
women workers have the slave hours we domestics have. We usually work from
twelve to fourteen hours a day, seven days a week, except for our pitiful little
“Thursday afternoon off.” The workday itself is often nerve-racking. Try broil-
ing a steak to a nice turn in the kitchen while a squalling baby in the next room,
in need of a dry diaper, tries to protect himself from his brother, aged two, who
insists on experimenting on the baby’s nose with a hammer. See how your legs
can ache after being on them from 7:00 
A.M. until 9:00 P.M., when you are 
finishing that last mountain of dishes in the pantry! Know how little you care
for that swell dinner you cooked when it comes to you, cold, from the table at
8:00 
P.M.
Our wages are pitifully small. I doubt if wages for domestics average higher
anywhere than in New York City; and here $45 a month is good for a “refined
woman, good cook, and fond of children.” I often wonder just what they mean by
“refined.” I remember one woman to whom I applied saying: “Say—Wadda ya
mean? Usin’ better English ’an I do askin’ me fer a job! Git out.”
Then there was the old lady in “reduced circumstances” whose sick husband
tried to earn a living as a door-to-door salesman. I’m sure she could not afford a
maid, even a part time one at $6 a week. She was unhappy, had little to do, and
took it out by standing over me at each little task.
One day I was glad to see she had borrowed a book from a lending library. I
thought that now, engrossed in her book, she would leave me alone. Unwisely I
said: “I see you are reading — —. I read it last year and enjoyed it.” Mrs. S—
looked at me forbiddingly and merely grunted. Later she followed me to the
kitchen and whispered: “Naomi, do you read?” I looked at her bewildered.
“Read? Why, of course I read!” Then the point of the question dawned on me. I
had to laugh. “You mean, Mrs. S—, do I read instead of getting on with my work
when you are out? No, I don’t do that.”
Then there was the grandma in the household of Southern folk, a fat old lady
who would call me away from anything I was doing to help her dress. “Naomi,
please fasten my garters—I can’t reach,” or “Tie my shoes—I hate leaning over!”
After I had been in that household a week I found the three-year-old calling me
“Naomi Noble” instead of my own name. Grandma explained: “Down South we
always call our niggers by our own last name, so here we’ll call you ‘Naomi
Noble.’”


--- PAGE 335 ---
These women are so contradictory. They want someone “good with children”;
yet when we turn out to be really good—that is, interested, kindly, and intelligent
in our handling of their spoiled offspring—they are likely as not to resent the fact
that we have succeeded where they failed. They hate the feeling that a “low”
domestic worker can do anything better than they.
It is not only the long hours, the small pay, and the lack of privacy—we often
have to share a room with the children—that we maids find hardest to bear. It is
being treated most of the time as though we are completely lacking in human dig-
nity and self-respect. During my first year at this work I was continually hopeful.
But now I know that when I enter that service elevator I should park my self-
respect along with the garbage that clutters it. Self-respect is a luxury I cannot
retain and still hold my job. My last one was a good example of this.
As such jobs go, it was a good one. It was “part time.” That is, I worked as cook
nine instead of the customary twelve to fourteen hours per day. My Sundays
were free. My wage was $40 per month, and I “slept out.” After my last ride
down with the garbage I could hurry home to the furnished room I shared with
my schoolgirl daughter. My employer, Mrs. B—, was the wife of a fashionable
doctor. And another person worked with me as a chambermaid. She was a little
French girl, new in America, and just learning our language. We two got along
splendidly.
Mrs. B—’s apartment was huge. But Lucille and I together kept it immaculate.
However, no matter how much we scoured and dusted on hands and knees Mrs.
B— could always find imaginary dust. “Now Naomi,” or “Lucille—you know
you’re lying when you say you cleaned under that settee!” Mrs. B— was a
hypochondriac who drank too much. One day she would be maudlin, the next vin-
dictive. “Now you know I’m no slavedriver and you know there’s little work to do
around here—why can’t you do it well instead of just trying to get by?” Or,
“What’s happened to all that butter I got yesterday?” The idea being that I had
stolen some of it. And I would answer respectfully, minutely accounting for the
disposal of the butter. We domestics, whatever our background, are supposed to
be natural born thieves. “Lucille! You took my box of candy!”
“No, madame!” with a flash of peasant temper, banging open several bureau
drawers, “here is your candy where you yourself put it, madame!”
No apology. Why apologize. We needed our jobs, didn’t we?
Mrs. B— was forever giving me orders as to just how many minutes to cook a
certain dish—corned beef, for instance! Of course the only way to get around this
was to listen respectfully, say: “Yes, Mrs. B—,” and then go ahead and cook it as
it should be cooked. I had learned early that Mrs. B— would tolerate no discus-
sion on such matters. That was “talking back” or “impudence.” She was always
talking about a legendary Negro cook she had once had for six, eight, or ten years
(the time varied according to the low or high of the whisky bottle) who in all that
time had never “answered back.”
“Mrs. B— is the one beeg liar,” Lucille would whisper at such times. Lucille,
by the way, in learning English, had also acquired some fine cusswords. She
3 0 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 336 ---
BLACK WOMEN WORKERS DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION 3 0 5
enjoyed muttering, when Mrs. B— had been especially trying: “Son o’ de beech!
Son o’ de beech!”
Healthy Lucille came down with a heavy cold, and finally, after trying to con-
ceal her misery had to go to bed for three days. Mr. B— berated her soundly for
not having told her. The truth was Lucille knew that when I had been sick for two
days my pay had been docked, and she feared the same thing happening to her.
While she was ill I did her work as well as my own; but there was no extra pay in
my envelope at the end of the month.
When Mrs. B— had hired me my hours were to be from noon until after dinner.
Dinner was to be at seven. But soon dinner was set ahead to seven-thirty and then
to eight. Which meant that I did not get through till nine or ten. Mrs. B— would say:
“Now, Naomi, don’t rush yourself to have dinner just on the dot—it doesn’t matter
to us whether it’s at eight or eight-thirty. We like to sit around and sip our cocktails.”
We dared not say: “But it matters a lot to us whether we finish at eight or ten!”
Lucille and I both met our Waterloo in the following fashion. I had cooked a huge
dinner for many guests—we always had company besides the ordinary family of
five—and it was 9:00 
P.M. before we two sat down to our meal, both too tired to eat.
Suddenly the bell rang furiously and Lucille came back, flushed with anger.
“She say to put the cake right on the ice!”
Soon the bell rang again. “Is that cake on the ice?” called out Mrs. B—.
I sang out. “We’ve just started our dinner, Mrs. B—.”
Later I said to Lucille: “Does she think we’re horses or dogs that we can eat in
five minutes—either a coltie or a Kiltie?” (Kiltie was the dog.) Lucille, who loved
such infantile jokes, broke into peals of laughter.
In a second Mrs. B— was at our side, very angry. She had been eavesdropping
in the pantry. “I heard every word you said!”
“Well, Mrs. B—, we’re not horses or dogs, and we have been eating only five
minutes!”
“You’ve been a disturbing influence in this house ever since you’ve been here!”
Mrs. B— thundered. “Before you came Lucille thought I was a wonderful woman
to work for—and tonight you may take your wages and go. Tomorrow, Lucille,
your aunt is to come, and we shall see whether you go too!”
I wanted to tell her what I thought of her, but for Lucille’s sake I kept quiet.
At last at the door I offered my hand to Lucille, saying: “Here is my address.”
“I am not interested!” she cried dramatically, throwing the paper to the floor.
I felt suddenly slapped. But from the pleading look in Lucille’s eyes, I under-
stood. Mrs. B— was still in the pantry, and poor Lucille was thinking of her stern
French aunt and that she would get no references after ten months’ work.
They have us there! For a petty whim they can withhold that precious bit of
paper without which it is hard for us to obtain another ticket to slavery. I knew, in
my case, I would never get a reference from Mrs. B—. So I did not ask for one,
but rode on down for the last time with the garbage.
Jobless, and with only $15 between us and starvation, I still felt a wild sense of
joy. For just a few days I should be free and self-respecting!


--- PAGE 337 ---
Sources: (1) Elaine Ellis, “Women of the Cotton Fields,” Crisis 45 (October 1938), pp. 333,
342, reprinted by permission; and (2) Naomi Ward, “I Am a Domestic,” New Masses35 (June
25, 1940), pp. 20–21. The editors wish to thank the Crisis Publishing Co., Inc., the publisher
of the magazine of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for the
use of the material from The Crisis.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Sharon Harley and the Black Women and Work Collective, eds., Sister Circle: Black Women
and Work (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2002).
Jacqueline Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family from
Slavery to the Present(New York: Basic Books, 1985).
Harvard Sitkoff, A New Deal for Blacks: The Emergence of Civil Rights as a National Issue
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1978).
Leslie M. Swann, “African American Women in the World War II Defense Industry” (Ph.D.
diss., Temple University, 2004).
O16 O
Southern Negro Youth Conference, 1939
Foreshadowing the critical role that African-American students played in the
modern civil rights movement, Southern Negro Youth Conferences were held
in such places as Virginia, Tennessee, and Alabama in the era before World
War II. Participants aimed to promote the economic status of African
Americans, improve educational opportunities, and agitate on behalf of civil
rights causes.
O
CALL TO THIRD ALL-SOUTHERN NEGRO YOUTH CONFERENCE
“Hands locked together and with heads erect, we march into the future, fearless
and unafraid. We are Americans. We are the hope of our people. We have the
right to live.” With these words 534 young men and women, assembled in
Richmond, Virginia for the First All-Southern Negro Youth Conference, con-
cluded their sessions in February, 1937. These youth then set out to improve the
conditions under which they and theirs live and labor.
Since that day in February, 1937, when 534 representatives of Negro youth
organizations resolved to join their efforts for the achievement of equal opportu-
nities, the Second All-Southern Negro Youth Conference convened in Chatta-
nooga, Tennessee in April, 1938. We could seek no better time than the present
to assess the progress we have made and to memorialize ourselves, our friends
and our national representatives, of our plans for moving onward with the task we
have begun. For this purpose, we invite the Negro youth of the South, and all who
love democracy well, to the Third All-Southern Negro Youth Conference, Bir-
mingham, Alabama, April 28, 29, 30, 1939.
3 0 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 338 ---
SOUTHERN NEGRO YOUTH CONFERENCE, 1939 3 0 7
At this conference we will have an opportunity to accomplish certain well-
defined objectives:
1. To consider the mutual problems and aspirations of Southern Negro Youth.
a. Our economic status: the National Youth Administration, the Civilian Conser-
vation Corps, vocational guidance, apprenticeship training, Negro business,
labor movement.
b. Citizenship rights: voting, anti-lynching legislation, the national defense pro-
gram.
c. Education: equality in educational opportunities, the content of Negro educa-
tion, federal aid to education.
d. The role of religion in the life of Negro youth.
e. The special problems of rural youth.
f. The development of a cooperative relationship with Southern white youth.
g. Peace: the preservation of democracy, protection of the rights of racial and
religious minorities at home and abroad.
h. Special problems: marriage and home life, crime and juvenile delinquency,
housing, recreation, health.
2. To provide a medium for cooperative planning and action in meeting our prob-
lems.
3. To develop a greater appreciation for the contributions of the Negro to our cul-
tural life, through holding an All-Southern Art Exhibit and a Festival of Music in
connection with the conference.
As the Third All-Southern Negro Youth Conference convenes, we recall that
the history of the past few years has been filled with new currents of progress. We
have just begun to estimate the importance of the growing movement of orga-
nized labor which marches apace with the rapid industrialization of the South. Its
presence where feudal conditions once reigned supreme, gives assurance of a ris-
ing standard of living for all working men and women.
In addition, the special attention extended by the national administration has
lent great impetus to the sober consideration of the South’s problems. Not many
weeks ago, the Supreme Court rendered a momentous decision. It held that
Lloyd Gaines had an inalienable right, which the State must enforce, to enter the
law school of the University of Missouri. What new horizons for winning com-
plete equality in educational opportunities does this decision offer to Southern
Negro Youth!
Of great significance as a sign of the times have been the recent efforts of
Southerners from all walks of life, to think and work unitedly for the advancement
of the South. Such an effort has given rise to the historic Southern Conference
for Human Welfare.
The low economic status of our youth constantly reminds us of the urgent need
of securing decent living standards. Five boys who languish in jail—the
Scottsboro boys—call for our help, and are grim witnesses to the fact that our civil
liberties are still to be achieved. The growing incidence of crime and delinquency
among our youth; their scant educational play facilities; the presence among us of


--- PAGE 339 ---
scores of thousands who toil in penury and degradation as tenant-farmers and
share-croppers; the denial of our right to vote and participate in the ordinary
affairs of government—these conditions fairly cry out for adequate remedy.
We invite Southern men and women to seek a solution to these problems
through participating in the Third All-Southern Negro Youth Conference. The
youth are the guardians of tomorrow’s world. Let us assemble in Birmingham
over the week-end of April 28th. Let us achieve the full blessings of true democ-
racy for ourselves, our people and our nation!
Source: “Call to Third All-Southern Negro Youth Conference,” issued in March 1939.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Johnetta Richards, “The Southern Negro Youth Conferences” (Ph.D. diss., University of
Cincinnati, 1987).
Earl Smith, “Images and Accomplishments of the Southern Negro Nation Youth Confer-
ences,” in Gerald McWorter, ed., Black Liberation Movement: Papers Presented at 6th
National Council for Black Studies Conference (Urbana: Afro-American Studies and
Research Program, University of Illinois, 1983).
O17 O
A. Philip Randolph and the Negro March on Washington Movement, 1941
Asa Philip Randolph (1889–1979) had a long and controversial career as a civil
rights activist. Born in Florida and educated in New York, Randolph began earn-
ing his credentials as a radical labor activist when he helped found the Brother-
hood of Sleeping Car Porters in 1925. Later he became influential in trade union
politics and was a pioneer of nonviolent direct-action protest tactics. In 1940 he
was elected to the National Board of Directors of the NAACP and became its vice
president in 1946. In 1955 he was elected vice president of the AFL-CIO.
One of Randolph’s most notable achievements involved his work on behalf of
the March on Washington Movement of 1941. Randolph objected to anti-black
discrimination in defense industries and issued a stirring call for a “thundering
march on Washington” that would “shake up white America.” When massive
African-American support began to grow for the march, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt agreed to establish a Fair Employment Practices Committee. In
response, the march was called off.
O
CALL TO THE MARCH
We call upon you to fight for jobs in National Defense.
We call upon you to struggle for the integration of Negroes in the armed
forces, such as the Air Corps, Navy, Army and Marine Corps of the Nation.
3 0 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 340 ---
A.P . RANDOLPH AND THE NEGRO MARCH ON WASHINGTON 3 0 9
We call upon you to demonstrate for the abolition of Jim-Crowism in all
Government departments and defense employment.
This is an hour of crisis. It is a crisis of democracy. It is a crisis of minority
groups. It is a crisis of Negro Americans.
What is this crisis?
To American Negroes, it is the denial of jobs in Government defense projects.
It is racial discrimination in Government departments. It is widespread Jim-
Crowism in the armed forces of the Nation.
While billions of the taxpayers’ money are being spent for war weapons, Negro
workers are being turned away from the gates of factories, mines and mills—
being flatly told, “NOTHING DOING.” Some employers refuse to give Negroes
jobs when they are without “union cards,” and some unions refuse Negro work-
ers union cards when they are “without jobs.”
What shall we do?
What a dilemma!
What a runaround!
What a disgrace!
What a blow below the belt!
’Though dark, doubtful and discouraging, all is not lost, all is not hopeless.
’Though battered and bruised, we are not beaten, broken or bewildered.
Verily, the Negroes’ deepest disappointments and direst defeats, their tragic
trials and outrageous oppressions in these dreadful days of destruction and disas-
ter to democracy and freedom, and the rights of minority peoples, and the dignity
and independence of the human spirit, is the Negroes’ greatest opportunity to
rise to the highest heights of struggle for freedom and justice in Government, in
industry, in labor unions, education, social service, religion and culture.
With faith and confidence of the Negro people in their own power for self-lib-
eration, Negroes can break down the barriers of discrimination against employ-
ment in National Defense. Negroes can kill the deadly serpent of race hatred in
the Army, Navy, Air and Marine Corps, and smash through and blast the Govern-
ment, business and labor-union red tape to win the right to equal opportunity in
vocational training and re-training in defense employment.
Most important and vital to all, Negroes, by the mobilization and coordination
of their mass power, can cause PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT TO ISSUE AN
EXECUTIVE ORDER ABOLISHING DISCRIMINATIONS IN ALL GOV-
ERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, ARMY, NAVY, AIR CORPS AND NATIONAL
DEFENSE JOBS.
Of course, the task is not easy. In very truth, it is big, tremendous and difficult.
It will cost money.
It will require sacrifice.
It will tax the Negroes’ courage, determination and will to struggle. But we
can, must and will triumph.
The Negroes’ stake in national defense is big. It consists of jobs, thousands of
jobs. It may represent millions, yes, hundreds of millions of dollars in wages. It
consists of new industrial opportunities and hope. This is worth fighting for.


--- PAGE 341 ---
But to win our stakes, it will require an “all-out,” bold and total effort and
demonstration of colossal proportions.
Negroes can build a mammoth machine of mass action with a terrific and
tremendous driving and striking power that can shatter and crush the evil fortress
of race prejudice and hate, if they will only resolve to do so and never stop, until
victory comes.
Dear fellow Negro Americans, be not dismayed in these terrible times. You
possess power, great power. Our problem is to harness and hitch it up for action
on the broadest, daring and most gigantic scale.
In this period of power politics, nothing counts but pressure, more pressure,
and still more pressure, through the tactic and strategy of broad, organized,
aggressive mass action behind the vital and important issues of the Negro. To this
end, we propose that ten thousand Negroes MARCH ON WASHINGTON FOR
JOBS IN NATIONAL DEFENSE AND EQUAL INTEGRATION IN THE
FIGHTING FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES.
An “all-out” thundering march on Washington, ending in a monster and huge
demonstration at Lincoln’s Monument will shake up white America.
It will shake up official Washington.
It will give encouragement to our white friends to fight all the harder by our
side, with us, for our righteous cause.
It will gain respect for the Negro people.
It will create a new sense of self-respect among Negroes.
But what of national unity?
We believe in national unity which recognizes equal opportunity of black and
white citizens to jobs in national defense and the armed forces, and in all other
institutions and endeavors in America. We condemn all dictatorships, Fascist,
Nazi and Communist. We are loyal, patriotic Americans, all.
But, if American democracy will not defend its defenders; if American
democracy will not protect its protectors; if American democracy will not give
jobs to its toilers because of race or color; if American democracy will not
insure equality of opportunity, freedom and justice to its citizens, black and
white, it is a hollow mockery and belies the principles for which it is supposed
to stand.
To the hard, difficult and trying problem of securing equal participation in
national defense, we summon all Negro Americans to march on Washington. We
summon Negro Americans to form committees in various cities to recruit and
register marchers and raise funds through the sale of buttons and other legitimate
means for the expenses of marchers to Washington by buses, train, private auto-
mobiles, trucks, and on foot.
We summon Negro Americans to stage marches on their City Halls and Councils
in their respective cities and urge them to memorialize the President to issue an
executive order to abolish discrimination in the Government and national defense.
However, we sternly counsel against violence and ill-considered and intem-
3 1 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 342 ---
A.P . RANDOLPH AND THE NEGRO MARCH ON WASHINGTON 3 1 1
perate action and the abuse of power. Mass power, like physical power, when mis-
directed is more harmful than helpful.
We summon you to mass action that is orderly and lawful, but aggressive and
militant, for justice, equality and freedom.
Crispus Attucks marched and died as a martyr for American independence.
Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey, Gabriel Prosser, Harriet Tubman and Frederick
Douglass fought, bled and died for the emancipation of Negro slaves and the
preservation of American democracy.
Abraham Lincoln, in times of the grave emergency of the Civil War, issued the
Proclamation of Emancipation for the freedom of Negro slaves and the preserva-
tion of American democracy.
Today, we call upon President Roosevelt, a great humanitarian and idealist, to
follow in the footsteps of his noble and illustrious predecessor and take the sec-
ond decisive step in this world and national emergency and free American Negro
citizens of the stigma, humiliation and insult of discrimination and Jim-Crowism
in Government departments and national defense.
The Federal Government cannot with clear conscience call upon private
industry and labor unions to abolish discrimination based upon race and color as
long as it practices discrimination itself against Negro Americans.
O
WHY SHOULD WE MARCH?
Though I have found no Negroes who want to see the United Nations lose this
war, I have found many who, before the war ends, want to see the stuffing
knocked out of white supremacy and of empire over subject peoples. American
Negroes, involved as we are in the general issues of the conflict, are confronted
not with a choice but with the challenge both to win democracy for ourselves at
home and to help win the war for democracy the world over.
There is no escape from the horns of this dilemma. There ought not to be
escape. For if the war for democracy is not won abroad, the fight for democracy
cannot be won at home. If this war cannot be won for the white peoples, it will
not be won for the darker races.
Conversely, if freedom and equality are not vouchsafed the peoples of color,
the war for democracy will not be won. Unless this double-barreled thesis is
accepted and applied, the darker races will never wholeheartedly fight for the vic-
tory of the United Nations. That is why those familiar with the thinking of the
American Negro have sensed his lack of enthusiasm, whether among the edu-
cated or uneducated, rich or poor, professional or non-professional, religious or
secular, rural or urban, north, south, east or west.
That is why questions are being raised by Negroes in church, labor union and
fraternal society; in poolroom, barbershop, schoolroom, hospital, hair-dressing
parlor; on college campus, railroad, and bus. One can hear such questions asked


--- PAGE 343 ---
as these: What have Negroes to fight for? What’s the difference between Hitler
and that “cracker” Talmadge of Georgia? Why has a man got to be Jim-Crowed
to die for democracy? If you haven’t got democracy yourself, how can you carry
it to somebody else?
What are the reasons for this state of mind? The answer is: discrimination, seg-
regation, Jim Crow. Witness the navy, the army, the air corps; and also govern-
ment services at Washington. In many parts of the South, Negroes in Uncle Sam’s
uniform are being put upon, mobbed, sometimes even shot down by civilian and
military police, and on occasion lynched. Vested political interests in race preju-
dice are so deeply entrenched that to them winning the war against Hitler is sec-
ondary to preventing Negroes from winning democracy for themselves. This is
worth many divisions to Hitler and Hirohito. While labor, business, and farm are
subjected to ceilings and floors and not allowed to carry on as usual, these inter-
ests trade in the dangerous business of race hate as usual.
When the defense program began and billions of the taxpayers’ money were
appropriated for guns, ships, tanks and bombs, Negroes presented themselves
for work only to be given the cold shoulder. North as well as South, and despite
their qualifications, Negroes were denied skilled employment. Not until their
wrath and indignation took the form of a proposed protest march on
Washington, scheduled for July 1, 1941, did things begin to move in the form of
defense jobs for Negroes. The march was postponed by the timely issuance
(June 25, 1941) of the famous Executive Order No. 8802 by President Roosevelt.
But this order and the President’s Committee on Fair Employment Practice,
established thereunder, have as yet only scratched the surface by way of elimi-
nating discriminations on account of race or color in war industry. Both man-
agement and labor unions in too many places and in too many ways are still
drawing the color line.
It is to meet this situation squarely with direct action that the March on
Washington Movement launched its present program of protest mass meetings.
Twenty thousand were in attendance at Madison Square Garden, June 16; sixteen
thousand in the Coliseum in Chicago, June 26; nine thousand in the City Auditor-
ium of St. Louis, August 14. Meetings of such magnitude were unprecedented
among Negroes. The vast throngs were drawn from all walks and levels of Negro
life—businessmen, teachers, laundry workers, Pullman porters, waiters, and red
caps; preachers, crapshooters, and social workers; jitterbugs and Ph.D.’s. They
came and sat in silence, thinking, applauding only when they considered the truth
was told, when they felt strongly that something was going to be done about it.
The March on Washington Movement is essentially a movement of the people.
It is all Negro and pro-Negro, but not for that reason anti-white or anti-Semitic,
or anti-Catholic, or anti-foreign, or anti-labor. Its major weapon is the nonviolent
demonstration of Negro mass power. Negro leadership has united back of its
drive for jobs and justice. “Whether Negroes should march on Washington, and
if so, when?” will be the focus of a forthcoming national conference. For the plan
of a protest march has not been abandoned. Its purpose would be to demonstrate
3 1 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 344 ---
A.P . RANDOLPH AND THE NEGRO MARCH ON WASHINGTON 3 1 3
that American Negroes are in deadly earnest, and all out for their full rights. No
power on earth can cause them today to abandon their fight to wipe out every ves-
tige of second-class citizenship and the dual standards that plague them.
A community is democratic only when the humblest and weakest person can
enjoy the highest civil, economic, and social rights that the biggest and most pow-
erful possess. To trample on these rights of both Negroes and poor whites is such
a commonplace in the South that it takes readily to anti-social, anti-labor, anti-
Semitic and anti-Catholic propaganda. It was because of laxness in enforcing the
Weimar constitution in republican Germany that Nazism made headway.
Oppression of the Negroes in the United States, like suppression of the Jews in
Germany, may open the way for a fascist dictatorship.
By fighting for their rights now, American Negroes are helping to make
America a moral and spiritual arsenal of democracy. Their fight against the poll
tax, against lynch law, segregation, and Jim Crow, their fight for economic, polit-
ical, and social equality, thus becomes part of the global war for freedom.
Program of the March on Washington Movement
1. We demand, in the interest of national unity, the abrogation of every law
which makes a distinction in treatment between citizens based on religion, creed,
color, or national origin. This means an end to Jim Crow in education, in housing,
in transportation and in every other social, economic, and political privilege; and
especially, we demand, in the capital of the nation, an end to all segregation in
public places and in public institutions.
2. We demand legislation to enforce the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments
guaranteeing that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without
due process of law, so that the full weight of the national government may be used
for the protection of life and thereby may end the disgrace of lynching.
3. We demand the enforcement of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments
and the enactment of the Pepper Poll Tax bill so that all barriers in the exercise
of the suffrage are eliminated.
4. We demand the abolition of segregation and discrimination in the army,
navy, marine corps, air corps, and all other branches of national defense.
5. We demand an end to discrimination in jobs and job training. Further, we
demand that the F.E.P .C. be made a permanent administrative agency of the U.S.
Government and that it be given power to enforce its decisions based on its findings.
6. We demand that federal funds be withheld from any agency which practices
discrimination in the use of such funds.
7. We demand colored and minority group representation on all administrative
agencies so that these groups may have recognition of their democratic right to
participate in formulating policies.
8. We demand representation for the colored and minority racial groups on all
missions, political and technical, which will be sent to the peace conference so
that the interests of all people everywhere may be fully recognized and justly pro-
vided for in the post-war settlement.


--- PAGE 345 ---
Sources: (1) Excerpt from “Call to the March, July 1, 1941,” originally published in The Black
Worker, May 1941; and (2) “Why Should We March?” Survey Graphic31 (November 1942),
pp. 488–89.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph: A Biographical Portrait (New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanvich, 1973).
William Harris, Keeping the Faith: A. Philip Randolph, Milton P. Webster, and the Brother-
hood of Sleeping Car Porters, 1925–1937(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977).
Andrew Edmund Kersten, A. Philip Randolph: A Life in the Vanguard (Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2007).
Manning Marable, Black American Politics: From the Washington Marches to Jesse Jackson
(London: Verso, 1985).
Paula Pfeffer, A. Philip Randolph: Pioneer of the Civil Rights Movement (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1990).
Jack Santino, Miles of Smiles, Years of Struggle: Stories of Black Pullman Porters (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1989).
Joseph F. Wilson, ed., Tearing down the Color Bar: An Analysis and Documentary History
of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters(New York: Columbia University Press, 1989).
O18 O
Charles Hamilton Houston and the War Effort among African Americans, 1944
Charles Hamilton Houston (1895–1950) was born in Washington, D.C., and in
1922 he graduated cum laude from Harvard Law School, where he was also the
first African American ever elected to be an editor of the Harvard Law Review.
Houston later taught at Howard University, where Thurgood Marshall was one of
his students, and argued a number of important cases before the U.S. Supreme
Court. His primary legacy, however, lay in his work as a key strategist in the legal
assault against racial discrimination. Though the Supreme Court’s famous Brown
decision to abolish compulsory segregation in public schools did not occur until
four years after Houston’s death, he helped shape many of the important legal
precedents that led up to this decision. Even a half century after his death,
Houston’s reputation as the principal architect of the legal campaign against Jim
Crow has continued to grow.
O
THE NEGRO SOLDIER
I want to speak particularly on the subject of the armed forces. Here, after nearly
three years of war, Negroes are still insulted by the Navy’s barring all Negro
women, except those now passing for white, from the Waves, the Marines, and
the Spars. We have officers in the Army and the Navy; but there is still not a sin-
3 1 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 346 ---
C.H. HOUSTON AND THE WAR EFFORT 3 1 5
gle Negro lieutenant in the United States Marines. The Army puts Negroes in
uniform, transports them South and then leaves them to be kicked, cuffed and
even murdered with impunity by white civilians. In places, Negro service men do
not have as many civil rights as prisoners of war. In at least one Army camp down
South for a time there was one drinking fountain for white guards and German
prisoners, and a segregated fountain for Negro soldiers. And Negroes know that
just as soon as the shooting stops many Americans will give the same Germans,
Austrians, Italians, Rumanians and others who were trying to kill them preference
over Negroes who were defending them, simply because these Germans and oth-
ers are white.
Many white service men are talking about what they are going to do to put the
Negro in his place as soon as they get back home. Many Negroes are getting to the
point of disgust and desperation where they had just as soon die fighting one place
as another. Meanwhile enemy propaganda is carrying the stories of racial dissen-
sion in the United States to all corners of the earth, and the colored peoples of
Asia, Africa and India are getting an eyeful of how white Americans act abroad.
I advocate immediate enlistment of Negro women as Waves, Spars and
Marines; assignment and promotion of Negroes in all the armed forces strictly
according to service, experience and merit; and the organization of non-segre-
gated combat units on a volunteer basis. The administration of the G.I. Bill of
Rights and all other veteran rehabilitation programs must be administered impar-
tially with absolutely no discrimination.
The American color bar unless speedily removed will be the rock on which our
international Good Neighbor policy and our pious claim to moral leadership will
founder. The moment the peoples of Asia, Africa and India become convinced
that our true war aims are to perpetuate the old colonial system with the white
man’s heel on the colored man’s neck, and that we are fighting Japan merely to
substitute European imperialism in place of Japanese imperialism—that moment
we might as well begin preparing for World War III, and World War III will not
necessarily be to America’s advantage. The Negro problem gives the United
States the opportunity to practice what it preaches, and it is time the country
awakens to the fact it is guaranteeing its own salvation by making a substantial
down payment on the Four Freedoms at home.
Source: “The Negro Soldier,” reprinted with permission from the Nation 159 (October 21,
1944), pp. 496–97. For subscription information to the Nation, call 1-800-333-8536. Portions
of each week’s Nationmagazine can be accessed at www.thenation.com.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Steven H. Hobbs, “From the Shoulders of Houston: A Vision for Social and Economic
Justice,” Howard Law Journal 32 (1989).
Richard Kluger, Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and Black
America’s Struggle for Equality(New York: Knopf, 1975).
Genna Rae McNeil, Groundwork: Charles Hamilton Houston and the Struggle for Civil
Rights (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983).


--- PAGE 347 ---
O19 O
“An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro Woman!” 
Claudia Jones, 1949
Claudia Jones (1915–1965) was born in Trinidad and moved to Harlem in 1924.
At age eighteen, Jones joined the Young Communist League and by 1940 had
risen to become the national chair of the organization. Jones earned the admira-
tion and respect of many groups for her activities concerning issues of civil rights,
labor, and gender equality. In 1951 she was found guilty of violating the Smith Act
(which made it illegal to advocate Marxism) and was expelled from the United
States. Relocating to London, Jones quickly became a major political figure
within the black emigrant community. Angela Davis and others cite Jones’s writ-
ings and political activism as critical in the development of black feminist thought.
Her essay below, “An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro Woman,”
presents an analysis of gender within the African-American community from a
Marxist perspective.
O
An outstanding feature of the present stage of the Negro liberation movement is
the growth in the militant participation of Negro women in all aspects of the
struggle for peace, civil rights, and economic security. Symptomatic of this new
militancy is the fact that Negro women have become symbols of many present-
day struggles of the Negro people. This growth of militancy among Negro women
has profound meaning, both for the Negro liberation movement and for the
emerging anti-fascist, anti-imperialist coalition.
To understand this militancy correctly, to deepen and extend the role of Negro
women in the struggle for peace and for all interests of the working class and the
Negro people, means primarily to overcome the gross neglect of the special prob-
lems of Negro women. This neglect has too long permeated the ranks of the labor
movement generally, of Left-progressives, and also of the Communist Party. The
most serious assessment of these shortcomings by progressives, especially by
Marxist-Leninists, is vitally necessary if we are to help accelerate this develop-
ment and integrate Negro women in the progressive and labor movement and in
our own Party.
The bourgeoisie is fearful of the militancy of the Negro woman, and for good
reason. The capitalists know, far better than many progressives seem to know, that
once Negro women undertake action, the militancy of the whole Negro people,
and thus of the anti-imperialist coalition, is greatly enhanced.
Historically, the Negro woman has been the guardian, the protector, of the
Negro family. From the days of the slave traders down to the present, the Negro
woman has had the responsibility of caring for the needs of the family, of mili-
tantly shielding it from the blows of Jim-Crow insults, of rearing children in an
atmosphere of lynch terror, segregation, and police brutality, and of fighting for
3 1 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 348 ---
C. JONES, “AN END TO THE NEGLECT . . .” 3 1 7
an education for the children. The intensified oppression of the Negro people,
which has been the hallmark of the postwar reactionary offensive, cannot there-
fore but lead to an acceleration of the militancy of the Negro woman. As mother,
as Negro, and as worker, the Negro woman fights against the wiping out of the
Negro family, against the Jim-Crow ghetto existence which destroys the health,
morale, and very life of millions of her sisters, brothers, and children.
Viewed in this light, it is not accidental that the American bourgeoisie has inten-
sified its oppression, not only of the Negro people in general, but of Negro women
in particular. Nothing so exposes the drive to fascization in the nation as the cal-
lous attitude which the bourgeoisie displays and cultivates toward Negro women.
The vaunted boast of the ideologist of Big Business that American women possess
“the greatest equality” in the world is exposed in all its hypocrisy when one sees
that in many parts of the world, particularly in the Soviet Union, the New
Democracies, and the formerly oppressed land of China, women are attaining new
heights of equality. But above all else, Wall Street’s boast stops at the water’s edge
where Negro and working-class women are concerned. Not equality, but degrada-
tion and super-exploitation: this is the actual lot of Negro women!
Consider the hypocrisy of the Truman Administration, which boasts about
“exporting democracy throughout the world” while the state of Georgia keeps a
widowed Negro mother of twelve children under lock and key. Her crime? She
defended her life and dignity—aided by her two sons—from the attacks of a “white
supremacist.” Or ponder the mute silence with which the Department of Justice
has greeted Mrs. Amy Mallard, widowed Negro school teacher, since her husband
was lynched in Georgia because he had bought a new Cadillac and become, in the
opinion of the “white supremacists,” “too uppity.” Contrast this with the crocodile
tears shed by the U.S. delegation to the United Nations for Cardinal Mindszenty,
who collaborated with the enemies of the Hungarian People’s Republic and sought
to hinder the forward march to fuller democracy by the formerly oppressed work-
ers and peasants of Hungary. Only recently, President Truman spoke solicitously
in a Mother’s Day Proclamation about the manifestation of “our love and rever-
ence” for all mothers of the land. The so-called “love and reverence” for the moth-
ers of the land by no means includes Negro mothers who, like Rosa Lee Ingram,
Amy Mallard, the wives and mothers of the Trenton Six, or the other countless vic-
tims, dare to fight back against lynch law and “white supremacy” violence.
E
CONOMIC HARDSHIPS
Very much to the contrary, Negro women—as workers, as Negroes, and as
women—are the most oppressed stratum of the whole population.
In 1940, two out of every five Negro women, in contrast to two out of every eight
white women, worked for a living. By virtue of their majority status among the
Negro people, Negro women not only constitute the largest percentage of women
heads of families, but are the main breadwinners of the Negro family. The large
proportion of Negro women in the labor market is primarily a result of the low-scale
earnings of Negro men. This disproportion also has its roots in the treatment and
position of Negro women over the centuries.


--- PAGE 349 ---
Following emancipation, and persisting to the present day, a large percentage
of Negro women—married as well as single—were forced to work for a living.
But despite the shift in employment of Negro women from rural to urban areas,
Negro women are still generally confined to the lowest-paying jobs. . . . The
super-exploitation of the Negro woman worker is thus revealed not only in that
she receives, as woman, less than equal pay for equal work with men, but in that
the majority of Negro women get less than half the pay of white women. Little
wonder, then, that in Negro communities the conditions of ghetto-living—low
salaries, high rents, high prices, etc.—virtually become an iron curtain hemming
in the lives of Negro children and undermining their health and spirit! Little won-
der that the maternity death rate for Negro women is triple that of white women!
Little wonder that one out of every ten Negro children born in the United States
does not grow to manhood or womanhood!
The low scale of earnings of the Negro woman is directly related to her almost
complete exclusion from virtually all fields of work except the most menial and
underpaid, namely, domestic service. . . .
During the anti-Axis war, Negro women for the first time in history had an
opportunity to utilize their skills and talents in occupations other than domestic
and personal service. They became trail blazers in many fields. Since the end of
the war, however, this has given way to growing unemployment, to the wholesale
firing of Negro women, particularly in basic industry.
This process has been intensified with the development of the economic cri-
sis. Today, Negro women are being forced back into domestic work in great num-
bers. . . .
Inherently connected with the question of job opportunities where the Negro
woman is concerned, is the special oppression she faces as Negro, as woman, and
as worker. She is the victim of the white chauvinist stereotype as to where her
place should be. In the film, radio, and press, the Negro woman is not pictured
in her real role as breadwinner, mother, and protector of the family, but as a tra-
ditional “mammy” who puts the care of children and families of others above her
own. This traditional stereotype of the Negro slave mother, which to this day
appears in commercial advertisements, must be combatted and rejected as a
device of the imperialists to perpetuate the white chauvinist ideology that Negro
women are “backward,” “inferior,” and the “natural slaves” of others.
H
ISTORICAL ASPECTS
Actually, the history of the Negro woman shows that the Negro mother under
slavery held a key position and played a dominant role in her own family group-
ing. This was due primarily to two factors: the conditions of slavery, under which
marriage, as such, was non-existent, and the Negro’s social status was derived
from the mother and not the father; and the fact that most of the Negro people
brought to these shores by the slave traders came from West Africa where the
position of women, based on active participation in property control, was rela-
tively higher in the family than that of European women.
3 1 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 350 ---
C. JONES, “AN END TO THE NEGLECT . . .” 3 1 9
Early historians of the slave trade recall the testimony of travelers indicating that
the love of the African mother for her child was unsurpassed in any part of the world.
There are numerous stories attesting to the self-sacrificial way in which East African
mothers offered themselves to the slave traders in order to save their sons, and
Hottentot women refused food during famines until after their children were fed.
It is impossible within the confines of this article to relate the terrible suffer-
ings and degradation undergone by Negro mothers and Negro women generally
under slavery. Subject to legalized rape by the slaveowners, confined to slave
pens, forced to march for eight to fourteen hours with loads on their backs and to
perform back-breaking work even during pregnancy, Negro women bore a burn-
ing hatred for slavery, and undertook a large share of the responsibility for
defending and nurturing the Negro family.
The Negro mother was mistress in the slave cabin, and despite the interfer-
ence of master or overseer, her wishes in regard to mating and in family matters
were paramount. During and after slavery, Negro women had to support them-
selves and the children. Necessarily playing an important role in the economic
and social life of her people, the Negro woman became schooled in self-reliance,
in courageous and selfless action.
1
There is documentary material of great interest which shows that Negro fam-
ily life and the social and political consciousness of Negro men and women under-
went important changes after emancipation. One freedman observed, during the
Civil War, that many men were exceedingly jealous of their newly acquired
authority in family relations and insisted upon a recognition of their superiority
over women. After the Civil War, the slave rows were broken up and the tenant
houses scattered all over the plantation in order that each family might carry on
an independent existence. The new economic arrangement, the change in the
mode of production, placed the Negro man in a position of authority in relation
to his family. Purchase of homesteads also helped strengthen the authority of the
male.
Thus, a former slave, who began life as a freedman on a “one-horse” farm, with
his wife working as a laundress, but who later rented land and hired two men,
recalls the pride which he felt because of his new status: “In my humble palace
on a hill in the woods beneath the shade of towering pines and sturdy oaks, I felt
as a king whose supreme commands were ‘law and gospel’ to my subjects.”
One must see that a double motive was operative here. In regard to his wife
and children, the Negro man was now enabled to assume economic and other
authority over the family; but he also could fight against violation of women of his
group where formerly he was powerless to interfere.
The founding of the Negro church, which from the outset was under the dom-
ination of men, also tended to confirm the man’s authority in the family. Sanction
for male ascendancy was found in the Bible, which for many was the highest
authority in such matters.
Through these and other methods, the subordination of Negro women devel-
oped. In a few cases, instead of legally emancipating his wife and children, the


--- PAGE 351 ---
husband permitted them to continue in their status of slaves. In many cases, state
laws forbade a slave emancipated after a certain date to remain in the state.
Therefore, the only way for many Negro wives and children to remain in the state
was to become “enslaved” to their relatives. Many Negro owners of slaves were
really relatives of their slaves.
In some cases, Negro women refused to become subject to the authority of the
men. In defiance of the decisions of their husbands to live on the places of their
former masters, many Negro women took their children and moved elsewhere.
N
EGRO WOMEN IN MASS ORGANIZATIONS
This brief picture of some of the aspects of the history of the Negro woman, seen
in the additional light of the fact that a high proportion of Negro women are
obliged today to earn all or part of the bread of the family, helps us understand why
Negro women play a most active part in the economic, social, and political life of
the Negro community today. Approximately 2,500,000 Negro women are orga-
nized in social, political, and fraternal clubs and organizations. The most prominent
of their organizations are the National Association of Negro Women, the National
Council of Negro Women, the National Federation of Women’s Clubs, the
Women’s Division of the Elks’ Civil Liberties Committee, the National Association
of Colored Beauticians, National Negro Business Women’s League, and the
National Association of Colored Graduate Nurses. Of these, the National Assoc-
iation of Negro Women, with 75,000 members, is the largest membership organi-
zation. There are numerous sororities, church women’s committees of all denomi-
nations, as well as organizations among women of West Indian descent. In some
areas, N.A.A.C.P . chapters have Women’s Divisions, and recently the National
Urban League established a Women’s Division for the first time in history.
Negro women are the real active forces—the organizers and workers—in all
the institutions and organizations of the Negro people. These organizations play
a many-sided role, concerning themselves with all questions pertaining to the
economic, political, and social life of the Negro people, and particularly of the
Negro family. Many of these organizations are intimately concerned with the
problems of Negro youth, in the form of providing and administering educational
scholarships, giving assistance to schools and other institutions, and offering com-
munity service. . . .
T
HE NEGRO WOMAN WORKER
The negligible participation of Negro women in progressive and trade-union cir-
cles is thus all the more startling. In union after union, even in those unions where
a large concentration of workers are Negro women, few Negro women are to be
found as leaders or active workers. The outstanding exceptions to this are the
Food and Tobacco Workers’ Union and the United Office and Professional
Workers’ Union.
But why should these be exceptions? Negro women are among the most mili-
tant trade unionists. The sharecroppers’ strikes of the ’30s were sparkplugged by
Negro women. Subject to the terror of the landlord and white supremacist, they
3 2 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 352 ---
C. JONES, “AN END TO THE NEGLECT . . .” 3 2 1
waged magnificent battles together with Negro men and white progressives in
that struggle of great tradition led by the Communist Party. Negro women played
a magnificent part in the pre-C.I.O. days in strikes and other struggles, both as
workers and as wives of workers, to win recognition of the principle of industrial
unionism, in such industries as auto, packing, steel, etc. More recently, the mili-
tancy of Negro women unionists is shown in the strike of the packinghouse work-
ers, and even more so, in the tobacco workers’ strike—in which such leaders as
Moranda Smith and Velma Hopkins emerged as outstanding trade unionists. The
struggle of the tobacco workers led by Negro women later merged with the polit-
ical action of Negro and white which led to the election of the first Negro in the
South (in Winston-Salem, N.C.) since Reconstruction days.
It is incumbent on progressive unionists to realize that in the fight for equal
rights for Negro workers, it is necessary to have a special approach to Negro
women workers, who, far out of proportion to other women workers, are the main
breadwinners in their families. The fight to retain the Negro woman in industry
and to upgrade her on the job, is a major way of struggling for the basic and spe-
cial interests of the Negro woman worker. Not to recognize this feature is to miss
the special aspects of the effects of the growing economic crisis, which is penal-
izing Negro workers, particularly Negro women workers, with special severity.
T
HE DOMESTIC WORKER
One of the crassest manifestations of trade-union neglect of the problems of the
Negro woman worker has been the failure, not only to fight against relegation of
the Negro woman to domestic and similar menial work, but to organize the
domestic worker. It is merely lip-service for progressive unionists to speak of
organizing the unorganized without turning their eyes to the serious plight of the
domestic worker, who, unprotected by union standards, is also the victim of exclu-
sion from all social and labor legislation. Only about one in ten of all Negro
women workers is covered by present minimum-wage legislation, although about
one-fourth of all such workers are to be found in states having minimum-wage
laws. All of the arguments heretofore projected with regard to the real difficulties
of organizing the domestic workers—such as the “casual” nature of their employ-
ment, the difficulties of organizing day workers, the problem of organizing peo-
ple who work in individual households, etc.—must be overcome forthwith. There
is a danger that Social-Democratic forces may enter this field to do their work of
spreading disunity and demagogy, unless progressives act quickly.
The lot of the domestic worker is one of unbearable misery. Usually, she has
no definition of tasks in the household where she works. Domestic workers may
have “thrown in,” in addition to cleaning and scrubbing, such tasks as washing
windows, caring for the children, laundering, cooking, etc., and all at the lowest
pay. The Negro domestic worker must suffer the additional indignity, in some
areas, of having to seek work in virtual “slave markets” on the streets where bids
are made, as from a slave block, for the hardiest workers. Many a domestic
worker, on returning to her own household, must begin housework anew to keep
her own family together. . . .


--- PAGE 353 ---
It is incumbent on the trade unions to assist the Domestic Workers’ Union in
every possible way to accomplish the task of organizing the exploited domestic
workers, the majority of whom are Negro women. Simultaneously, a legislative
fight for the inclusion of domestic workers under the benefits of the Social
Security Law is vitally urgent and necessary. Here, too, recurrent questions
regarding “administrative problems” of applying the law to domestic workers
should be challenged and solutions found.
The continued relegation of Negro women to domestic work has helped to
perpetuate and intensify chauvinism directed against all Negro women. Despite
the fact that Negro women may be grandmothers or mothers, the use of the chau-
vinist term “girl” for adult Negro women is a common expression. The very eco-
nomic relationship of Negro women to white women, which perpetuates “madam
–maid” relationships, feeds chauvinist attitudes and makes it incumbent on white
women progressives, and particularly Communists, to fight consciously against all
manifestations of white chauvinism, open and subtle.
Chauvinism on the part of progressive white women is often expressed in their
failure to have close ties of friendship with Negro women and to realize that this
fight for equality of Negro women is in their own self-interest, inasmuch as the
super-exploitation and oppression of Negro women tends to depress the standards
of all women. Too many progressives, and even some Communists, are still guilty of
exploiting Negro domestic workers, of refusing to hire them through the Domestic
Workers’ Union (or of refusing to help in its expansion into those areas where it
does not yet exist), and generally of participating in the vilification of “maids” when
speaking to their bourgeois neighbors and their own families. Then, there is the
expressed “concern” that the exploited Negro domestic worker does not “talk” to,
or is not “friendly” with, her employer, or the habit of assuming that the duty of the
white progressive employer is to “inform” the Negro woman of her exploitation and
her oppression which she undoubtedly knows quite intimately. Persistent challenge
to every chauvinist remark as concerns the Negro woman is vitally necessary, if we
are to break down the understandable distrust on the part of Negro women who are
repelled by the white chauvinism they often find expressed in progressive circles.
M
ANIFESTATIONS OF WHITE CHAUVINISM
Some of the crassest expressions of chauvinism are to be found at social affairs,
where, all too often, white men and women and Negro men participate in danc-
ing, but Negro women are neglected. The acceptance of white ruling-class stan-
dards of “desirability” for women (such as light skin), the failure to extend cour-
tesy to Negro women and to integrate Negro women into organizational
leadership, are other forms of chauvinism.
Another rabid aspect of the Jim-Crow oppression of the Negro woman is
expressed in the numerous laws which are directed against her as regards prop-
erty rights, intermarriage (originally designed to prevent white men in the South
from marrying Negro women)—and laws which hinder and deny the right of
choice, not only to Negro women, but Negro and white men and women.
3 2 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 354 ---
C. JONES, “AN END TO THE NEGLECT . . .” 3 2 3
For white progressive women and men, and especially for Communists, the
question of social relations with Negro men and women is above all a question of
strictly adhering to social equality. This means ridding ourselves of the position
which sometimes finds certain progressives and Communists fighting on the eco-
nomic and political issues facing the Negro people, but “drawing the line” when
it comes to social intercourse or intermarriage. To place the question as a “per-
sonal” and not a political matter, when such questions arise, is to be guilty of the
worst kind of Social-Democratic, bourgeois-liberal thinking as regards the Negro
question in American life; it is to be guilty of imbibing the poisonous white-chau-
vinist “theories” of a Bilbo or a Rankin. Similarly, too, with regard to guarantee-
ing the “security” of children. This security will be enhanced only through the
struggle for the liberation and equality of all nations and peoples, and not by
shielding children from the knowledge of this struggle. This means ridding our-
selves of the bourgeois-liberal attitudes which “permit” Negro and white children
of progressives to play together at camps when young, but draw the line when the
children reach teen-age and establish boy–girl relationships.
The bourgeois ideologists have not failed, of course, to develop a special ideo-
logical offensive aimed at degrading Negro women, as part and parcel of the gen-
eral reactionary ideological offensive against women of “kitchen, church, and chil-
dren.” They cannot, however, with equanimity or credibility, speak of the Negro
woman’s “place” as in the home; for Negro women are in other peoples’ kitchens.
Hence, their task has been to intensify their theories of male “superiority” as
regards the Negro woman by developing introspective attitudes which coincide
with the “new school” of “psychological inferiority” of women. The whole intent of
a host of articles, books, etc., has been to obscure the main responsibility for the
oppression of Negro women by spreading the rotten bourgeois notion about a
“battle of the sexes” and “ignoring” the fight of both Negro men and women—the
whole Negro people—against their common oppressors, the white ruling class.
Chauvinist expressions also include paternalistic surprise when it is learned
that Negroes are professional people. Negro professional women-workers are
often confronted with such remarks as “Isn’t your family proud of you?” Then,
there is the reverse practice of inquiring of Negro women professionals whether
“someone in the family” would like to take a job as a domestic worker.
The responsibility for overcoming these special forms of white chauvinism rests,
not with the “subjectivity” of Negro women, as it is often put, but squarely on the
shoulders of white men and white women. Negro men have a special responsibility
particularly in relation to rooting out attitudes of male superiority as regards women
in general. There is need to root out all “humanitarian” and patronizing attitudes
toward Negro women. In one community, a leading Negro trade unionist, the trea-
surer of her Party section, would be told by a white progressive woman after every
social function: “Let me have the money; something may happen to you.” In
another instance, a Negro domestic worker who wanted to join the Party was told
by her employer, a Communist, that she was “too backward” and “wasn’t ready” to
join the Party. In yet another community, which since the war has been populated


--- PAGE 355 ---
in the proportion of sixty percent Negro to forty percent white, white progressive
mothers maneuvered to get their children out of the school in this community. To
the credit of the initiative of the Party section organizer, a Negro woman, a strug-
gle was begun which forced a change in arrangements which the school principal,
yielding to the mothers’ and to his own prejudices, had established. These arrange-
ments involved a special class in which a few white children were isolated with
“selected Negro kids” in what was termed an “experimental class in race relations.”
These chauvinist attitudes, particularly as expressed toward the Negro
woman, are undoubtedly an important reason for the grossly insufficient partic-
ipation of Negro women in progressive organizations and in our Party as mem-
bers and leaders.
The American bourgeoisie, we must remember, is aware of the present and even
greater potential role of the masses of Negro women, and is therefore not loathe to
throw plums to Negroes who betray their people and do the bidding of imperialism.
Faced with the exposure of their callous attitude to Negro women, faced with
the growing protests against unpunished lynching and the legal lynchings
“Northern style,” Wall Street is giving a few token positions to Negro women.
Thus, Anna Arnold Hedgeman, who played a key role in the Democratic National
Negro Committee to Elect Truman, was rewarded with the appointment as
Assistant to Federal Security Administrator Ewing. Thus, too, Governor Dewey
appointed Irene Diggs to a high post in the New York State Administration.
Another straw in the wind showing attempts to whittle down the militancy of
Negro women was the State Department’s invitation to a representative of the
National Council of Negro Women—the only Negro organization so desig-
nated—to witness the signing of the Atlantic Pact.
K
EY ISSUES OF STRUGGLE
There are many key issues facing Negro women around which struggles can and
must be waged. . . .
American history is rich in examples of the cost—to the democratic rights of
both women and men—of failure to wage this fight. The suffragists, during their
first jailings, were purposely placed on cots next to Negro prostitutes to “humili-
ate” them. They had the wisdom to understand that the intent was to make it so
painful, that no woman would dare to fight for her rights if she had to face such
consequences. But it was the historic shortcoming of the women’s suffrage lead-
ers, predominantly drawn as they were from the bourgeoisie and the petty-bour-
geoisie, that they failed to link their own struggles to the struggles for the full
democratic rights of the Negro people following emancipation.
A developing consciousness on the woman question today, therefore, must not
fail to recognize that the Negro question in the United States is prior to, and not
equal to, the woman question; that only to the extent that we fight all chauvinist
expressions and actions as regards the Negro people and fight for the full equal-
ity of the Negro people, can women as a whole advance their struggle for equal
rights. For the progressive women’s movement, the Negro woman, who combines
3 2 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 356 ---
C. JONES, “AN END TO THE NEGLECT . . .” 3 2 5
in her status the worker, the Negro, and the woman, is the vital link to this height-
ened political consciousness. To the extent, further, that the cause of the Negro
woman worker is promoted, she will be enabled to take her rightful place in the
Negro proletarian leadership of the national liberation movement, and by her
active participation contribute to the entire American working class, whose his-
toric mission is the achievement of a Socialist America—the final and full guar-
antee of woman’s emancipation. . . .
The struggle for jobs for Negro women is a prime issue. The growing eco-
nomic crisis, with its mounting unemployment and wage-cuts and increasing evic-
tions, is making its impact felt most heavily on the Negro masses. In one Negro
community after another, Negro women, the last to be hired and the first to be
fired, are the greatest sufferers from unemployment. Struggles must be devel-
oped to win jobs for Negro women in basic industry, in the white-collar occupa-
tions, in the communities, and in private utilities. . . .
T
HE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE
Winning the Negro women for the struggle for peace is decisive for all other
struggles. Even during the anti-Axis war, Negro women had to weep for their sol-
dier-sons, lynched while serving in a Jim-Crow army. Are they, therefore, not
interested in the struggle for peace? . . .
Our Party, based on its Marxist-Leninist principles, stands foursquare on a pro-
gram of full economic, political, and social equality for the Negro people and of
equal rights for women. Who, more than the Negro woman, the most exploited
and oppressed, belongs in our Party? Negro women can and must make an enor-
mous contribution to the daily life and work of the Party. Concretely, this means
prime responsibility lies with white men and women comrades. Negro men com-
rades, however, must participate in this task. Negro Communist women must
everywhere now take their rightful place in Party leadership on all levels.
The strong capacities, militancy, and organizational talents of Negro women,
can, if well utilized by our Party, be a powerful lever for bringing forward Negro
workers—men and women—as the leading forces of the Negro people’s libera-
tion movement, for cementing Negro and white unity in the struggle against Wall
Street imperialism, and for rooting the Party among the most exploited and
oppressed sections of the working class and its allies.
In our Party clubs, we must conduct an intensive discussion of the role of the
Negro women, so as to equip our Party membership with clear understanding for
undertaking the necessary struggles in the shops and communities. We must end
the practice, in which many Negro women who join our Party, and who, in their
churches, communities, and fraternal groups are leaders of masses, with an
invaluable mass experience to give to our Party, suddenly find themselves viewed
in our clubs, not as leaders, but as people who have “to get their feet wet” orga-
nizationally. We must end this failure to create an atmosphere in our clubs in
which new recruits—in this case Negro women—are confronted with the “silent


--- PAGE 357 ---
treatment” or with attempts to “blueprint” them into a pattern. In addition to the
white-chauvinist implications in such approaches, these practices confuse the
basic need for Marxist-Leninist understanding which our Party gives to all work-
ers, and which enhances their political understanding, with chauvinist disdain for
the organizational talents of new Negro members, or for the necessity to promote
them into leadership.
To win the Negro women for full participation in the anti-fascist, anti-imperialist
coalition, to bring her militancy and participation to even greater heights in the cur-
rent and future struggles against Wall Street imperialism, progressives must acquire
political consciousness as regards her special oppressed status.
It is this consciousness, accelerated by struggles, that will convince increasing
thousands that only the Communist Party, as the vanguard of the working class,
with its ultimate perspective of Socialism, can achieve for the Negro women—for
the entire Negro people—the full equality and dignity of their stature in a
Socialist society in which contributions to society are measured, not by national
origin, or by color, but a society in which men and women contribute according
to ability, and ultimately under Communism receive according to their needs.
Note: 1. Today, in the rural sections of the South, especially on the remnants of the old plan-
tations, one finds households where old grandmothers rule their daughters, sons, and grand-
children with a matriarchal authority.
Source: Essay originally published in Political Affairs(1949).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Carole Boyce Davies, “Deportable Subjects: U.S. Immigration Laws and the Criminalizing
of Communism,” South Atlantic Quarterly100, no. 4 (Fall 2001), pp. 949–66.
———, Left of Karl Marx: The Political Life of Black Communist Claudia Jones (Durham:
Duke University Press, 2007).
Buzz Johnson, I Think of My Mother: Notes on the Life and Times of Claudia Jones(London:
Karia Press, 1985).
Mark D. Naison, The Communist Party in Harlem: 1928–1936(Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1983).
Marika Sherwood, Claudia Jones: A Life in Exile(London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1999).
O20 O
“The Negro Artist Looks Ahead,” Paul Robeson, 1951
Born in Princeton, New Jersey, Paul Robeson (1898–1976) studied and played foot-
ball at Rutgers College (now University), where he was an All-American athlete and
valedictorian. In 1923 he earned a degree from Columbia Law School and was
admitted to the Bar of New York. Yet Robeson gained most of his fame as an actor
and singer and later as a civil rights activist, scholar, and author. Throughout the
3 2 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 358 ---
P . ROBESON, “THE NEGRO ARTIST LOOKS AHEAD” 3 2 7
1930s and 1940s he was arguably the most popular and influential black public fig-
ure in the United States and the world. While living in London during the
Depression, he became involved in a wide variety of progressive networks and orga-
nizations, working on behalf of labor, African liberation, and other issues. He trav-
eled to Spain during its Civil War to express solidarity with the republican forces
combating fascism. However, it was Robeson’s affinity for the Soviet Union’s model
of socialism and for the Russian people that made him a prime target for political
attacks inside the United States during the Cold War. Concert promoters were
pressured to cancel his performances, and his income plummeted to almost noth-
ing. In 1950 the State Department seized his passport, revoking his right to travel
abroad for eight years. Vindicated by the courts after a long legal battle to win back
his passport, Robeson immediately left the country for several years. Poor health
made it difficult for him to revive his acting and singing career. Retiring from pub-
lic life, Robeson died of a stroke in 1976. Despite the vigorous attempts by the U.S.
government to destroy Robeson’s reputation and name, new generations of activists
and artists continue to be inspired by his example of personal courage and integrity.
O
We are here today to work out ways and means of finding jobs for colored actors
and colored musicians, to see that the pictures and statues made by colored
painters and sculptors are sold, to see that the creations of Negro writers are
made available to the vast American public. We are here to see that colored sci-
entists and professionals are placed in leading schools and universities, to open up
opportunities for Negro technicians, to see that the way is open for colored
lawyers to advance to judgeships—yes, to the Supreme Court of these United
States, if you please.
It is not just a question of jobs, of positions, of commercial sales. No—the
questions at hand cannot be resolved without the resolution of deeper problems
involved here. We are dealing with the position in this society of a great people—
of fifteen million closely-bound human beings, of whom ten millions in the cot-
ton and agricultural belt of the South form a kind of nation based upon common
oppression, upon a magnificent common heritage, upon unified aspiration for full
freedom and full equality in the larger democratic society.
The Negro people today are saying all up and down this nation (when you get
on the streets, into the churches, into the bars to talk to them): “We will not suf-
fer the genocide that might be visited upon us. We are prepared to fight to the
death for our rights.”
One great creation, modern popular music, whether it be in theatre, film,
radio, records—wherever it may be—is almost completely based upon the Negro
idiom. There is no leading American singer, performer of popular songs, whether
it be a Crosby, a Sinatra, a Shore, a Judy Garland, an Ella Logan, who has not lis-
tened (and learned) by the hour to Holiday, Waters, Florence Mills, to Bert
Williams, to Fitzgerald, and to the greatest of all, Bessie Smith. Without these
models, who would ever have heard of a Tucker, a Jolson, a Cantor?


--- PAGE 359 ---
Go into the field of the dance. Where could there have come an Astaire, an
Eleanor Powell and a James Barton without a Bill Robinson, a Bert Williams, an
Eddie Rector, a Florence Mills? How could Artie Shaw and Bennie Goodman
have appeared but for a Teddy Wilson, Turner Latan, Johnny Dunn, Hall Johnson,
Will Marion Cook? Whence stems even Gershwin? From the music of Negro
America joined with the ancient Hebrew idiom. Go and listen to some of the great
melodies. Here again is a great American composer, deeply rooted, whether he
knew it or not, in an African tradition, a tradition very close to his own heritage.
I speak very particularly of this popular form. This is very important to the
Negro artists, because billions, literally billions of dollars, have been earned and
are being earned from their creation, and the Negro people have received almost
nothing.
At another stage of the arts there is no question, as one goes about the world,
of the contribution of the Negro folk songs, of the music that sprang from my
forefathers in their struggle for freedom—not songs of contentment—but songs
like “Go Down, Moses” that inspired Harriet Tubman, John Brown, and Sojour-
ner Truth to the fight for emancipation.
I think of Larry Brown who went abroad, heard Moussorgsky, heard the great
folk music of other lands and dedicated himself, as did Harry Burleigh before
him, to showing that this was a great music, not just “plantation songs.”
One perhaps forgets my own career, and that for five years I would sing noth-
ing but the music of my people. Later, when it was established as a fine folk
music, I began to learn of the folk music of other peoples. This has been one of
the bonds that have drawn me so close to the peoples of the world, bonds through
this likeness in music that made me understand the political growth of many peo-
ples, the struggles of many peoples, and brought me back to you to fight here in
this land, as I shall continue to do. . . .
So we are dealing with a people who come from great roots. There is no need
to quote the names of an Anderson or a Hayes and many more; or of the great sci-
entists—of a Julian, of a Carver. No need today for the Negro people to prove any
more that they have a right to full equality. They have proven it again and again.
The roots of this great outpouring we are talking about today in the cultural
expression of my people, is a great culture from a vast continent. If these origins
are somewhat blurred in this America of ours, they are clear in Brazil where Villa-
Lobos joins Bach with African rhythms and melodies; in Cuba and Haiti a whole
culture, musical and poetic, is very deep in the Africa of its origins—an African
culture quite comparable to the ancient culture of the Chinese—similar in reli-
gious concepts, in language, in poetry, in its sculpture, in its whole esthetic—a
culture which has deeply influenced the great artists of our time—a Picasso, a
Modigliani, a Brancusi, an Epstein, a deFalla, a Milhaud.
As I have said, in spite of all these contributions to our culture, the fruits have
been taken from us. Think of Handy, one of the creators of the Blues; think of
Count Basie, playing to half-filled houses at the Apollo; colored arrangers
receiving a pittance while white bands reap harvests. What heartbreak for every
Negro composer! Publishing houses taking his songs for nothing and making
3 2 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 360 ---
P . ROBESON, “THE NEGRO ARTIST LOOKS AHEAD” 3 2 9
fortunes. Theatres in the heart of the Negro communities dictating to Negro
performers what they shall act, arrogantly telling Negro audiences what they
shall see. . . .
Let us touch for a moment on radio and television. We all know the difficul-
ties—no major hours with Negro talent, an occasional guest appearance eagerly
awaited by the Negro audience. Why this discrimination? Well, these mass media
are based on advertising, commercialism at its worst, and the final answer is very
simple. It goes to the root of all that has been said. The final answer is: “The South
won’t take it.”
Now, I had a program myself in the ’40s, all set up by one of the biggest adver-
tising agencies, a very fine program, a dignified program in which I would have
been doing Othello and many other things. One morning they said, “We made
some inquiries and the South just won’t have it. You can come on once in a while
and sing with Mr. Voorhees, and so forth, but no possibility of a Negro artist hav-
ing his own program.” Not that dignity. And so we have allowed the South with
its patterns to determine for all America how, when and where the Negro will be
denied an opportunity.
I think that public opinion could be aroused on this issue. This is a matter of
national protest, of national pressure. These media happen to be under the control
of Federal Communications. We are dealing here with matters as serious as the pas-
sage of an Anti-Lynch Bill, Anti-Poll Tax and Free Voting Legislation, of F.E.P .C.,
of the whole issue of Federal and States rights. We can demand a change in the
public interest in the pursuance of democratic procedures. Added to this, of course,
can be pressure on the advertisers who wax fat today from the purchases of Negro
customers. These latter, plus their allies, could have very decisive influence.
The films today are of vast significance and influence. Here, too, the South
determines the attempts to camouflage, to pass off so-called progressive films, to
find new approaches to the treatment of the Negro. They have been very thor-
oughly analyzed and exposed for what they are by V . J. Jerome in his exhaustive
pamphlet on “The Negro in Hollywood Films.” Here, too, the mounting of the
right kind of campaign could shake Hollywood to its foundations, and help would
be forthcoming from all over the world. Their markets everywhere in the world
could be seriously affected, if the lead came from here.
The struggle on this front could have been waged with some real measure of
success at any time, but today conditions insure the careful heeding of the col-
lective wrath of the Negro people and their allies. For today, in the struggle
extending all over the world, all pronouncements of our wonderful democracy
ring hollow and clearly false as soon as one points the finger at the oppression of
fifteen million second- and third-class citizens of this land. . . .
The Government can be pressured in this time and it certainly can be pressured
on this issue. Most important for us here is the recognition of the Negro’s rights to
all kinds of jobs in the arts, not only the rights of the artists, but technical jobs for
engineers, all sorts of opportunities in production, in scenic design, at all levels. I am
very much interested in that: I’ve got a son, Paul, who studied engineering at
Cornell, majored in Communications. I’d like to see him get a good job in television.


--- PAGE 361 ---
And so in the case of Actors Equity—we who are members of Equity must
fight not only for the rights of Negro actors, we must see that the stagehands are
there. We must fight within the AFL, Equity’s parent organization, for the right
of Negroes to work in everyfield. And so in the American Guild of Musical Artists
and in the American Federation of Radio Artists—they are shouting an awful lot
these days about how democratic and American they are: Let them show it!
The final problem concerns new ways, new opportunities based upon a deep
sense of responsibility in approaching the problem of the Negro people in its
totality. There are despoilers abroad in our land, akin to these who attempted to
throttle our Republic at its birth. Despoilers who would have kept my beloved
people in unending serfdom, a powerful few who blessed Hitler as he destroyed
a large segment of a great people. . . .
And let us learn how to bring to the great masses of the American people our
culture and our art. For in the end, what are we talking about when we talk about
American culture today? We are talking about a culture that is restricted to the
very, very few. How many workers ever get to the theatre? I was in concerts for
20 years, subscription concerts, the two thousand seats gone before any Negro in
the community, any worker, could even hear about a seat. Even then, the price
was $12.00 for six concerts. How could working people ever hear these concerts?
Only by my going into the trade unions and singing on the streets and on the
picket lines and in the struggles for the freedom of our people—only in this way
could the workers of this land hear me.
We are talking about a culture which as yet has no relationship to the great
masses of the American people. I remember an experience in England. I sang not
only in Albert Hall, the concert halls, but also in the picture theatres, and one
night I came out and a young woman was standing there with her mother, an aged
lady. “My grandmother wants to thank you very much. She always wanted to hear
you in person. She heard you tonight and she’s going home. She just had sixpence
above her bus fare.” So she was able to hear me. Later, that was so in the Unity
Theatre in London—now a theatre which has stretched all over England. Here in
America, in 1948 in the Deep South, I remember standing singing to white work-
ers in Memphis, workers who had come out on strike that Negro workers might
get equal wages.
In the theatre I felt this years ago and it would interest you to know that the
opening night of Othello in New York, in Chicago, in San Francisco (I never told
this to the Guild), I told Langner he could have just one-third of the house for the
elite. I played the opening night of Othello to the workers from Fur, from
Maritime, from Local 65.
Just the other night I sang at the Rockland Palace in the Bronx, to this people’s
audience. We speak to them every night. To thousands. Somewhere, with the
impetus coming from the arts, sciences and professions, there are literally mil-
lions of people in America who would come to hear us, the Negro artists. This can
be very important. Marion Anderson, Roland Hayes, all of us started in the
Baptist Churches. I’m going right back there very soon. If you want to talk about
3 3 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 362 ---
THURGOOD MARSHALL: THE BROWN DECISION 3 3 1
audiences, I defy any opera singer to take those ball parks like Sister Tharpe or
Mahalia Jackson. . . .
Haydn with his folk songs—the people made it up in the first place. The lan-
guage of Shakespeare—this was the creation of the English-speaking people; the
language of Pushkin, the creation of the Russian people, of the Russian peasants.
That is where it came from—a little dressed up with some big words now and
then which can be broken down into very simple images.
So, in the end, the culture with which we deal comes from the people. We have
an obligation to take it back to the people, to make them understand that in fight-
ing for their cultural heritage they fight for peace. They fight for their own rights,
for the rights of the Negro people, for the rights of all in this great land. All of this
is dependent so much upon our understanding the power of this people, the
power of the Negro people, the power of the masses of America, of a world where
we can all walk in complete dignity.
Source: Excerpt from “The Negro Artist Looks Ahead,” originally published in Masses and
Mainstream (January 1952), pp. 7–14.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Sheila Tully Boyle and Andrew Bunie, Paul Robeson: The Years of Promise and Achievement
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001).
Lenwood G. Davis, A Paul Robeson Research Guide: A Selected, Annotated Bibliography
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1982).
Joseph Dorinson and William Pencak, eds., Paul Robeson: Essays on His Life and Legacy
(Jefferson: McFarland, 2004).
Martin Duberman, Paul Robeson(New York: Knopf, 1988).
Philip S. Foner, Paul Robeson Speaks: Writings, Speeches, Interviews, 1918–1974 (Larch-
mont, N.Y.: Bruner/Mazel, 1978).
Paul Robeson, Here I Stand(Boston: Beacon Press, 1958).
Paul Robeson, Jr., The Undiscovered Paul Robeson: An Artist’s Journey, 1898–1939 (New
York: Wiley, 2001).
O21 O
Thurgood Marshall: The Brown Decision 
and the Struggle for School Desegregation
Thurgood Marshall (1908–1993) was born in Maryland, and studied at Lincoln
University and Howard Law School. In 1938, he joined the staff of the NAACP ,
where he helped the organization establish its Legal Defense and Education
Fund. Marshall rose to national attention when he acted as counsel before the
U.S. Supreme Court on the famous Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,
Kansas case, which made discrimination in education unconstitutional. The case


--- PAGE 363 ---
was monumental because the court held that segregation deprived children of
equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution,
thereby overturning the “separate but equal” doctrine established in Plessy v.
Ferguson. Marshall then went on to serve as a federal judge and as Solicitor
General of the United States, before becoming the first African American to be
appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court, in 1967. For more than two decades,
Marshall represented the voice of civil rights and social justice on the high court,
which had become increasingly conservative due to the judicial appointments
under Presidents Nixon and Reagan.
O
SEGREGATION AND DESEGREGATION
. . . There had been much discussion during recent years concerning the question
of the removal in this country of dual citizenship based solely on race and color.
The primary emphasis has been on the elimination of racial segregation. No one
denies that progress is being made. There are, however, some who say that the
progress is too slow and others who say that the progress is too rapid. The impor-
tant thing to remember is that progress is being made. We are moving ahead. We
have passed the crossroads. We are moving toward a completely integrated soci-
ety, North and South.
Those who doubt this and those who are afraid of complete integration are vic-
tims of a background based upon long indoctrination of only one side of the con-
troversy in this country. They know only of one side of the controversy in this
country. They know only of one side of slavery. They know only the biased reports
about Reconstruction and the long-standing theory which seems to support the
“legality” of the separate-but-equal doctrine.
In order to adequately appraise the situation, we must first understand the
problem in relation to our history—legal and political. Secondly, we must give
proper weight to progress that has been made with and without legal pressure,
and thirdly, we must look to the future.
Our government is based on the principle of the equality of man the individ-
ual, not the group. All of us can quote the principle that “All men are created
equal.” Our basic legal document, the Constitution of the United States, guaran-
tees equal protection of the laws to all of us. Many state constitutions have simi-
lar provisions. We even have a “Bill of Rights” in the Constitution of Louisiana.
These high-sounding principles we preach and teach. However, in the eyes of the
world we stand convicted of violating these principles day in and day out.
Today, one hundred and seventy-seven years after the signing of the Declara-
tion of Independence and eighty-six years after the Fourteenth Amendment was
adopted, we have a society where, in varying degrees throughout the country, but
especially in the South, Negroes, solely because they are Negroes, are segregated,
ostracized and set apart from all other Americans. This discrimination extends
from the cradle to the graveyard. (And I emphasize graveyard, rather than grave.)
3 3 2 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 364 ---
THURGOOD MARSHALL: THE BROWN DECISION 3 3 3
Or, to put it even more bluntly, in many areas of this country, a white paroled
murderer would be welcome in places which would at the same time exclude
such people as Ralph Bunche, Marian Anderson, Jackie Robinson, and many oth-
ers. Constitutionally protected individual rights have been effectively destroyed
by outmoded theories of racial or group inferiority. Why is this true? How long
can we afford the luxury of segregation and discrimination?
One reason this condition of dual citizenship exists is because we have been
conditioned to an acceptance of this theory as a fact. We are the products of a mis-
understanding of history. As a matter of fact, only in recent years have accurate
studies of the pre–Civil War period and the Reconstruction period of our history
been published.
Our position today is tied up with our past history—at least as far back as the
1820s. At that time the antislavery movement was beginning to take permanent
form. It should be borne in mind that those people in New England, Ohio and
other areas, who started this movement became dedicated to a principle which
has become known as the Judaeo-Christian ethic. This principle was carried forth
in their determination to remove slavery from our society, and to remove the
badges of caste and inferiority whereby an American could be ostracized or set
apart from fellow Americans solely because of race. Of course, slavery per se was
the immediate objective—the abolition of slavery—but the ultimate goal was the
same as the unfinished business we have before us today, namely, to remove race
and caste from the American life.
These people in the 1820 period—1820 to 1865—sought to translate their
moral theories and principles into law. They started by pamphleteering and
speechmaking. They recognized that equal protection of the laws must always be,
in part, an ethical and moral concept, rather than a law. They sought to constitu-
tionalize this moral argument or ideal. Slavery—with its theories of racial damna-
tion, racial inferiority and racial discrimination—was inherently repugnant to the
American creed and Christian ethics. They sought to support their moral theories
by use of the Declaration of Independence and certain sections of the Constitu-
tion as it existed at that time. In so far as public meetings were concerned, speak-
ers were barred from such meetings in the South—brutally beaten or killed, and
many were run out of similar meetings in Northern cities and towns. It was,
therefore, impossible to get behind the original iron curtain to get public support
for much of the program.
In their legal attack they were thwarted by the decision of the United States
Supreme Court in the Dred Scott case, which held that no person of African
descent, slave or free, had any rights that a white man was bound to respect. The
important thing to remember throughout this period is that the opponents of slav-
ery were seeking a Constitutional basis—a legal platform—for the democratic
principle of the equality of man.
After the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, many states passed Black
Codes and other infamous statutes, effectively returning the emancipated slaves to
their inferior status. Consequently, the same people who fought to abolish slavery


--- PAGE 365 ---
had to take the lead in Congress in writing the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth
amendments.
This short period of intense legislation was followed by the Reconstruction
period. Much of that which we have read concerning this period has emphasized,
overstated and exaggerated the errors of judgment made in trying to work out the
“Negro problem” in such fashion as to give real meaning to these Civil War
amendments [but these amendments] were actually thwarted by the conspiracy
between Northern capitalists and others to bring “harmony” by leaving the Negro
and his problem to the tender mercies of the South. This brought about the sep-
arate-but-equal pattern, which spread not only throughout the South but
extended and now exists in many Northern and Western areas.
Despite the distortion of this historical background, which has become firmly
embedded in our minds, is the “understanding” that racial segregation is legal and
valid even if in violation of our moral principles. The fallacy of this reasoning is
that the equal protection of the laws was intended to be the constitutionalization
of the ethic and moral principle of the absolute equality of man—the right of an
individual neither to be circumscribed or conditioned by group, race or color.
It should, therefore, be remembered that our society is the victim of the fol-
lowing periods of history: the period of slavery, when the slaveholders defended
slavery by repeating over and over again the myth that slavery was not only a pos-
itive good for the nation but was absolutely beneficial and necessary for the
Negroes themselves. Consequently, even free Negroes were denied the right of
citizenship and subjected to all manner of abuse without legal redress. Immedi-
ately following the Civil War, and indeed up to the 1930s, is the period when
Negroes were no longer slaves but were certainly not yet full citizens. Having
passed through this laissez-faire period in so far as asserting our Constitutional
rights is concerned, Negroes began in the thirties the all-out fight to secure the
right to vote and at the same time to break down discrimination and segregation.
In so far as securing the right to vote, beginning with the registration cases and
the white-primary cases and others, much progress has been made to the end that
as of the 1948 national elections, at least 1,300,000 Negroes voted in the deep
South. We have seen Negroes elected to the city council in Richmond, Virginia,
Nashville, Tennessee, and many cities in North Carolina. We have seen Negroes
elected to the governing board of the Democratic party in Atlanta, Georgia. We
have also seen Negroes elected to school boards in cities such as Atlanta, Georgia,
Lynchburg, Virginia, and Winston-Salem, North Carolina. There are still, how-
ever, several small areas in Alabama, Mississippi, and at least four parishes in
Louisiana where Negroes are still prevented from registering as qualified voters.
(But these are distinctly local problems, which are being attended to and can be
pushed aside on that basis.)
In the North we have seen the drive for protection of the right to work with-
out regard to race and color—the drive for F.E.P .C. legislation. We have seen
such legislation passed in at least eight states in the North, leaving forty states and
the District of Columbia to go, before we have the necessary safeguards to pro-
3 3 4 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 366 ---
THURGOOD MARSHALL: THE BROWN DECISION 3 3 5
tect man’s right not to be deprived of an opportunity to earn a livelihood because
of race, religion or ancestry.
We have also seen the breaking-down of the legal barriers to owning and occu-
pying real property without regard to race or color. Today, as a result of several
Supreme Court decisions, any American any place in the United States, regard-
less of race or color, may own and occupy property wherever he can find a will-
ing seller, has the money to purchase the property and courage to live on it. We
still, however, have residential segregation throughout the country, not by law, not
by the courts, but by a combination of circumstances, such as, the reactionary
policies of mortgage companies and real-estate boards, public-housing agencies,
including F.H.A., and other governmental agencies. We also find an unwillingness
on the part of many Negroes to exercise their rights in this field. In recent years
instead of progress toward an integrated community, we find that the Negro
ghetto is merely expanding into a larger and more glorified and gilded ghetto.
This unwillingness to exercise our own rights is due in part to the long indoctri-
nation that we are different from or inferior to others and therefore should vol-
untarily segregate ourselves.
As of the present time, the paramount issue in so far as Americanism is concerned
is the ending of all racial distinctions in American life. The reasons for this are many.
A weighty factor, of course, is the recognition by more and more people in high
places that the world situation in regard to the sensitive areas throughout the world
depends on how well we can handle our race problem in this country. Our country
can no longer tolerate an Achilles heel of discriminatory practices toward its darker
citizens. Even more important is the realization that the equality of man as a princi-
ple and the equal protection of the laws as a Constitutional concept are both based
upon the moral principle of individual responsibility rather than racial identity.
Racial segregation in our country is immoral, costly, and damaging to the
nation’s prestige. Segregation and discrimination violate the Judaeo-Christian
ethic, and the democratic creed on which our national morality is based is soundly
established in the minds of most men. But in addition, it has been shown that the
costs of segregation and discrimination to the nation are staggering. Elmo Roper,
social scientist and pollster of American public opinion, has stated, “The resultant
total of the cost of discrimination comes to roughly $10 out of every $75 pay-
check, or, in total, $30 billion lost every year.” This figure alone would amount to
a cost of $2,000 per year to every individual in America. But perhaps even more
damaging to the nation is the current effect of America’s racial practices on
America’s role in international affairs and world leadership. According to a recent
statement by our State Department experts, nearly half of the recent Russian pro-
paganda about America has been concentrated on race, linking Communist germ-
warfare charges with alleged racial brutality in this country. In addition, Ameri-
cans returning from abroad consistently report having been questioned over and
over about racial problems in this country.
This concern about American racial practices seems especially strong among
the two-thirds of the world that is darker-skinned. Our former ambassador to


--- PAGE 367 ---
India, Chester Bowles, wrote the following statement, after attending an Indian
press conference: “As I later discovered is almost invariably the case in any Asian
press conference or forum, the Number One question was, ‘What about Amer-
ica’s treatment of the Negro?’”
Shortly after returning from a tour of Asian and Pacific areas, Vice-President
Nixon made this statement:
Americans must create a better understanding of American ideals abroad by prac-
ticing and thinking tolerance and respect for human rights every day of the year.
Every act of racial discrimination or prejudice in the United States hurts Americans
as much as an espionage agent who turns over a weapon to a foreign enemy.
Historically, we have to ask whether or not, even as we stand today, our coun-
try can afford to continue in practicing notwhat they preach. Historically, the seg-
regation patterns in the United States are carry-overs from the principles of slav-
ery. They are based on the exploded theory of the inferiority of the minority
group. Segregation is recognized as resulting from the decision of the majority
group without even consulting, less known in seeking, the consent of the segre-
gated group. All of us know that segregation traditionally results in unequal facil-
ities for the segregated group. Duplication of facilities is expensive, diverts funds
from the economy which could be utilized to improve facilities for all groups.
Finally, segregation leads to the blockage of real communication between the two
groups. In turn, this blockage increases mutual suspicion, distrust, hostility,
stereotypes and prejudice; and these, all together, result in a social climate of ten-
sion favorable to aggressive behavior and social disorganization which sometimes
culminate in race riots. Even where we do not have race riots, the seeds of ten-
sion are ever present in a segregated system.
The harm done to the individual begins with the child’s earliest years, when he
becomes aware of status differences among groups in society and begins to react
to patterns of segregation. Prejudice and discrimination are potentially damaging
to the personalities of all children. The children of the majority group are affected
differently from those of the minority group. This potential psychological damage
is crystallized by segregation practices sanctioned by public law—and it is the
same whether in the North, the East, the West, or the South. Damage to the
immediate community is inevitable. This is followed by damage to the state, our
federal government and, finally, the world today. The only answer is the complete
removal of all racial distinctions that lay at the basis of all this. . . .
. . . Perhaps the most noticeable and the most complete example of desegre-
gation involving millions of persons is found in the armed forces. At the beginning
of World War II, the Army policy was one of almost complete segregation of
Negro troops, the Air Force was just beginning an “experiment” in the training of
Negro flyers in the face of a widespread belief that Negroes could not be taught
to fly airplanes, the Navy confined Negroes almost exclusively to the Messmen’s
Branch, and the Marines excluded Negroes entirely. But soon cracks began to
appear in the wall. The Army’s Officers Candidate School and a few other service
3 3 6 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 368 ---
THURGOOD MARSHALL: THE BROWN DECISION 3 3 7
schools became integrated; the Air Forces regarded its experiment with a Negro
pursuit squadron as a success and expanded it to a fighter group; the Navy in 1942
allowed Negroes to enlist in branches other than the Messmen’s service (although
they were still segregated and barred from seagoing vessels); and, in 1942, the
Marine Corps admitted its first Negroes, in strictly segregated units, as laborers,
antiaircraft gunners and ammunition handlers.
Subsequently, the pressures for integration increased. The armed forces found
that they had serious morale problems in some of the segregated Negro units.
They also found that the picture of a segregated American Army of Occupation,
attempting to teach democracy to the people of Germany and Japan, was a ridicu-
lous experiment. So, in a series of careful and unpublicized moves, the armed
forces began a gradual program of racial desegregation. In 1953, the Secretary of
the Army reported that at least ninety percent of the Negroes in the Army were
serving in nonsegregated units (the number continues to increase), and added:
“The Army policy is one of complete integration, and it is to be accomplished as
soon as possible.”
In the European Army Command, a battalion commander from the deep
South is quoted as saying: “We got the order. We got detailed instructions for car-
rying it out and a time limit to do it in. And that was it.”
And in our armed forces all over the globe, Negro servicemen were brought
into previously all-white units rapidly and with no trouble by officers who gave
white servicemen such terse instructions as these: “Some Negro men are joining
our unit. These men are soldiers. Treat them as such.”
This is the problem that everybody says is such a “horrible” thing to face up to.
What is the picture today? According to Lee Nichols’ exciting new book
Breakthrough on the Color Front, the Army reports that less than 10,000 Negroes
are still serving in all-Negro units out of some 200,000 Negroes in the Army.
Assistant Defense Secretary John A. Hannah estimates that by June, 1954, there
will be no remaining segregated Army units. The Air Force, which had moved
more rapidly, stated that Negro servicemen who were in the Air Force in August,
1953, had been integrated into all of its units throughout the world. Of the 23,000
Negroes serving in the Navy in 1953, about half were still in the Messmen’s or
Steward’s Branch. The rest were integrated and scattered through nearly every
job classification that the Navy has. The Marine Corps, last of all the services to
take Negroes, reports that its last two all-Negro units were integrated “some
time” before the summer of 1952.
Today, Negro and white draftees from the most poverty-stricken parts of the
deep South, as well as the rest of the nation, are inducted into a completely inte-
grated command, and the typical report from commanders who had previously
held fears was that “the frictions and antagonisms that lay behind previous race
conflicts have been substantially reduced, and that so far there has not been a sin-
gle major incident traceable to integration.”
What about segregation in the nation’s capital? Many Americans have
expressed disgust, and foreign visitors have stated their amazement, at the fact


--- PAGE 369 ---
that public and private facilities in the capital of our democracy were almost com-
pletely segregated—restaurants, schools, housing projects, theaters, and so forth.
Though there is still much to be done in Washington, there have been several
recent examples of progress. On June 3, 1953, the National Capital Housing
Authority announced the adoption of a policy of opening all present and future
public low-rent housing properties in the District of Columbia to low-income
families, without regard to race. Around that same time, the Supreme Court
handed down a decision preventing discrimination in Washington restaurants. All
the restaurants have abided by the decision, and no incident of any kind has been
reported. Hotel accommodations now are available to Negroes in most of the
larger hotels, although the policy of many smaller hotels is still uncertain. Negroes
are now admitted to the three legitimate theaters of Washington, and to at least
four—and probably more—of the downtown movie theaters. The majority of the
city’s private schools have opened their doors to Negroes, and the Catholic
parochial schools have also become integrated. A recent bulletin reports that the
nation’s capital has even agreed to desegregate the jails. Washington is slowly
moving toward a position where it can command the respect of the world where
race relations are involved.
Why have people decided to desegregate? Members of American communi-
ties have tried to integrate their institutions for an extremely varied number of
reasons. The pressures to desegregate have come from several forces—some-
times from an aroused Negro community, sometimes from administrative rulings
of local authorities, sometimes from rulings by a national body, sometimes from
voluntary decision by a majority of concerned community members. It now
appears that the success or failure of the desegregation effort is not related to the
reason for desegregating, since the reasons are so varied.
The success of racial desegregation has been shown to be related not so much
to the type of community that is involved or the prejudice of its members as to
the close adherence to a set of specific principles. We have reached the stage
where scientists, sociologists and others, have agreed upon rules which when fol-
lowed bring about smooth desegregation whether in Illinois or Louisiana. The
main point is that once the state law preventing intergroup communication in
institutional life is removed, it is then up to the local community to work out its
own salvation, with the understanding that it must be done within the American
framework.
The accomplishment of effective and efficient desegregation with a minimum
of social disturbance depends on the following five things:
1. There must be a clear and unequivocal statement of policy by leaders with
prestige, and by authority officials.
2. There must be firm enforcement and persistent execution of the nonsegre-
gation policy in the face of initial resistance.
3. Authorities and law enforcement officials must show a willingness to deal
with violations, attempted violations or incitement to violations, by applying
the law and backing it up with strong enforcement action.
3 3 8 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 370 ---
THURGOOD MARSHALL: THE BROWN DECISION 3 3 9
4. Authorities must refuse to employ, engage in or tolerate subterfuges, gerry-
mandering or other devices for evading the principle and the fact of deseg-
regation.
5. The accomplishment of desegregation must be accompanied by continual
interpretation of the reasons for the action, and appealing to the democratic
and moral values of all persons involved.
In conclusion, racial segregation is grounded upon the myth of inherent racial
superiority. This myth has been completely exploded by all scientific studies. It
now stands exposed as a theory which can only be explained as a vehicle for per-
petuating racial prejudice. History reveals that racial segregation is a badge of
slavery, is just as unscientifically supported, immoral and un-American as slavery.
Recent history shows that it can be removed, and that it can be done effectively
when approached intelligently.
There is no longer any justification for segregation. There is no longer any
excuse for it. There is no longer any reason under the sun why intelligent people
should continue to find excuses for not ending segregation in their own commu-
nity, in the South as well as in the North.
Source: Excerpt from the Edwin Rogers Embree Memorial Lectures of Thurgood Marshall
at Dillard University, New Orleans, Spring 1954.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Howard Ball, A Defiant Life: Thurgood Marshall and the Persistence of Racism in America
(New York: Crown Publishers, 1999).
Roger Goldman, Thurgood Marshall: Justice for All(New York: Carroll and Graf, 1992).
Michael J. Klarman, Brown V. Board of Education and the Civil Rights Movement(Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007).
Thurgood Marshall, Supreme Justice Speeches and Writings: Thurgood Marshall, ed. by J.
Clay Smith (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003).
———, Thurgood Marshall: His Speeches, Writings, Arguments, Opinions, and Reminis-
cences, ed. by Mark V . Tushnet, The Library of Black America (Chicago: Lawrence Hill
Books, 2001).
Emma Gleders Sterne, “Hammer of Justice: Thurgood Marshall,” in I Have a Dream(New
York: Knopf, 1965).
Mark V . Tushnet, Making Civil Rights Law: Thurgood Marshall and the Supreme Court,
1936–1961 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
”Race and Place—An African-American Community in Jim Crow: Charlottesville, VA,”
www.vcdh.virginia.edu/afam/raceandplace/index.html.
Jane Elizabeth Dailey, Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore, and Bryant Simon, eds., Jumpin’ Jim
Crow:  Southern Politics from Civil War to Civil Rights(Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2000).
William Greaves, From These Roots, New York: William Greaves Productions, 2005. DVD
Video.
Darlene Clark Hine, Black Women in the Nursing Profession: A Documentary History, The
History of American Nursing(New York: Garland, 1985).


--- PAGE 371 ---
———, Black Women in White:  Racial Conflict and Cooperation in the Nursing Profession,
1890–1950 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989).
Gilbert Jonas and with a forward by Julian Bond, Freedom’s Sword: The NAACP and the
Struggle against Racism in America, 1909–1969(London: Routledge, 2007).
Isaac Julien, Looking for Langston:  A Meditation on Langston Hughes (1902–1907), New
York: Water Bearer Films, 1988. DVD Video.
Michael J. Klarman, From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle
for Racial Equality(Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
Christopher Moore, Fighting for America: Black Soldiers—The Unsung Heroes of World
War II (New York: Presidio Press/Ballantine Books, 2006).
Blaise N’Djehoya, Africa to America to Paris: The Migration of Black Writers , Princeton:
Films for the Humanities & Sciences 2005. DVD Video.
James T. Patterson, Brown V. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled
Legacy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Nina Rosenblum and William Miles, Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II,
Santa Monica: Direct Cinema Ltd., 2006. DVD Video.
Lorraine Toussaint, Inc Faith Project, and Inc Blackside, This Far by Faith: African
American Spiritual Journeys, Boston: PBS 2003. DVD Video.
Robert Whitaker, On the Laps of Gods: The Red Summer of 1919 and the Struggle for Justice
That Remade a Nation (New York: Crown Publishers, 2008).
3 4 0 FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO: 1915–1954


--- PAGE 372 ---
WE SHALL OVERCOME:
THE SECOND RECONSTRUCTION, 
1954–1975
– SECTION FOUR –


--- PAGE 373 ---



--- PAGE 374 ---
INTRODUCTION
W
ith the Brown vs. Board of Education decision of May 1954, the
Supreme Court unanimously overturned the “separate but equal”
policy that had sanctioned racially segregated schools for six decades.
This legal victory was the culmination of a long campaign led by the
NAACP and liberal integrationist leaders such as A. Philip Randolph
and Walter White to outlaw segregation throughout the federal government and
in all publicly funded institutions. The long-term goal, however, was the complete
dismantling of racial segregation in all aspects of public life—at restaurants and
hotels, in transportation, within both organized labor and business, at banks and
financial-lending institutions, and with real estate companies. This would require
something more than a courtroom victory over the defenders of Jim Crow. It
would mean the social and political restructuring of American life, insomuch as
its entire structure reflected and perpetuated the ideas of white supremacy and
black subordination.
Historians of the Black Freedom movement of 1955–1966—the period
between the Montgomery bus boycott and the Meredith march across Mississippi
in the summer of 1966—sometimes present these years as a series of public
events, mass campaigns, and demonstrations, which inevitably culminated into
the successful desegregation of U.S. society. The political victories achieved in
Montgomery, Birmingham, and Selma, however, were only one very dramatic
aspect of the larger socioeconomic, cultural, and political metamorphosis of
American race relations between World War II and the Vietnam War. At first, the
racial shifts seemed more symbolic than substantive: the left-wing movement to
desegregate professional baseball in 1947, the deracialization of popular music
and the growing recognition of jazz as America’s true classical music, the popu-
larity of black poets and novelists such as Gwendolyn Brooks, Richard Wright,
and Ralph Ellison, and the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to black American diplo-
mat Ralph Bunche.
But the presence of black people in literally all aspects of American life began
to become clearly measurable. In the labor force, African Americans represented


--- PAGE 375 ---
over 10 percent of all U.S. workers, and comprised over 20 percent in key manu-
facturing and industrial areas. Under Randolph’s leadership, blacks began exert-
ing greater influence inside organized labor. In local and state politics, black vot-
ers became pivotal to Democratic Party organizations. In the presidential
elections of 1948 and 1960, African-American voters were the crucial margin of
victory for Democratic candidates Harry S. Truman and John F. Kennedy, respec-
tively. Perhaps the greatest clout that black Americans began to assert, which
inevitably contributed to destroying the rationale for Jim Crow, was inside the
U.S. economy. By 1960, the black American consumer market—the total amount
of goods and services purchased—exceeded $30 billion annually. Nationally
based corporations with southern subsidiaries and affiliates began to question the
continued utility of legal segregation. Large corporations began to develop mar-
keting strategies specifically for black consumers and began advertising in the
black media. Small numbers of blacks slowly began to be hired in mid-level cor-
porate management. As in the similar case of dismantling South African apartheid
a generation later, the corporate establishment was somewhat more advanced
than the parochial southern white political establishment in recognizing the
inevitability of legal desegregation. All that was needed was massive social pres-
sure from below that would force the state to carry out racial reforms that were
by now long overdue.
From the standpoint of those in power, the American racial dilemma also
began to be considered within a global context. With the establishment of the
United Nations, the United States desperately sought to present itself and its
interests as being supportive of decolonization in the Third World. The newly
independent nations of Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean were both lucrative
potential markets and political allies in the global struggle against communism.
By contrast, the Soviets could point to their long-standing political and material
support for democratic revolutionary movements throughout the world, high-
lighted by the triumph of Fidel Castro in Cuba, and their close relationships with
Patrice Lumumba in the Congo and Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana. Communists
effectively attacked the U.S. political hypocrisy of refusing to grant basic civil
rights and the elective franchise to millions of its citizens. Thus the ancien régime
of legal white supremacy was no longer tenable or useful to the geopolitical inter-
ests of the U.S. state. By the 1960s Jim Crow policies and practices placed U.S.
corporations at a competitive disadvantage in the pursuit of global markets and
the employment of multinational, multiracial workers. Change had to come. It
was only a question of how much, and how soon.
This section documents the social pressure from mass movements that finally
destroyed the legal apparatus for racial segregation. It may be helpful, however,
to consider that the Black Freedom movement, especially in the decade follow-
ing the Montgomery bus boycott, was a very broad-based united front. Politics
and ideology, more than personalities, defined the racial and social composition
of each constituency inside the popular coalition. In perhaps overly simplistic
terms, the desegregationist united front had a moderate or conservative wing, a
centrist group, and a left wing. On the right stood the NAACP and the National
3 4 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 376 ---
INTRODUCTION 3 4 5
Urban League, which in the 1960s were headed, respectively, by Roy Wilkins and
Whitney M. Young. Wilkins’s 1956 speech cited here (document 2) calls upon the
South to recognize “Negro citizenship,” and then engage in negotiations “begin-
ning more than half way, with understanding and good will.” This moderate
approach to integration was combined with a curious attack on communism.
Wilkins equates the repressive actions of southern policemen “knocking on doors
and taking men away” with “the Soviet Communist method.” The real point of
Wilkins’s argument was to place the interests and objectives of the desegregation
movement into a context that was acceptable by the liberal white establishment,
corporations, and the national Democratic Party.
The moderate or liberal integrationists were not social revolutionaries. They
did not want to destroy the system—they wanted to become fully assimilated
within it. They sought full participation for Negroes across the board, in politics,
the courts, media, the arts, in business, and all professions. It would not become
apparent until some years later that the objectives pursued by liberal integra-
tionists were inherently flawed. On one hand, the political mantra of the NAACP
and its Legal Defense Fund was the pursuit of “color blindness”: that African
Americans should not be treated differently on the basis of their racialized ethnic
status. Conversely, there was also the necessity of putting into place corrective
measures within the state and civil society that provided minimal guarantees that
blacks and other racialized groups would achieve significantly greater opportuni-
ties and access to resources, employment, credit, and capital. Hence, these cor-
rective steps or affirmative action, initiated first by presidential executive orders,
had to use tools such as quotas and timetables to measure the progress of deseg-
regation within specific universities, companies, or within government agencies.
The paradox, of course, is that to abolish race as a social category of significance,
one must utilize racial correctives that reduce the historic preferences and privi-
leges that nearly all white Americans have exercised for centuries over black peo-
ple. The liberal integrationists understood this inherent contradiction. However,
they hoped that once Jim Crow was finally outlawed, mainstream middle America
would ultimately embrace these racial reforms without a political backlash.
The centrists within the civil rights coalition included the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC) and the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE).
The SCLC had been organized in 1957 by Martin Luther King, Jr., in the after-
math of the Montgomery bus boycott victory. The SCLC’s program (document
3) clearly defines its objectives of “achieving full citizenship rights, equality, and
the integration of the Negro in all aspects of American life.” SCLC’s political
action “revolves around two main focal points: the use of nonviolent philosophy
as a means of creative protest; and securing the right of the ballot for every cit-
izen.” Like the NAACP , the SCLC declared itself “firmly opposed to segrega-
tion in any form that it takes.” But the SCLC’s core strategy was much more
committed to social protest “even when this means going to jail,” and the use of
“imaginative, bold constructive action to end the demoralization caused by the
legacy of slavery and segregation—inferior schools, slums, and second-class cit-
izenship.”


--- PAGE 377 ---
CORE had been founded in 1941 in Chicago and was led by James Farmer.
Unlike SCLC, which had a predominantly southern black religious membership,
CORE was interracial and largely middle class from the beginning. It was a net-
work of affiliated local organizations that were engaged in protests of all kinds,
including civil disobedience, voter-registration efforts, and economic boycotts.
CORE inspired and initiated the freedom rides of 1961, the tactic of placing black
and white desegregation activists on southern buses to challenge Jim Crow restric-
tions on public transportation. CORE also initiated a number of important civil
rights demonstrations in the North during the early 1960s, effectively making the
point that institutional racism was a national problem, not just a southern one.
Although the center of the Black Freedom movement’s united front contained
a number of influential leaders, including Ralph David Abernathy, Septima Clark,
Wyatt T. Walker, Hosea Williams, Ella Baker, Fred Shuttlesworth, and Andrew
Young—the charismatic, visionary spokesperson of this group, and indeed for the
movement as a whole, was Martin Luther King, Jr. In his 1957 statement
reprinted here, “Nonviolence and Racial Justice,” King draws parallels between
the domestic struggle against segregation with the “quest for freedom and human
dignity on the part of people who have long been victims of colonialism” in Africa
and Asia. “Privileged groups rarely give up their privileges without strong resis-
tance,” King observed. “But when oppressed people rise up against oppression
there is no stopping point short of full freedom” (document 7). After Mont-
gomery, King traveled extensively throughout the United States and the world,
building the SCLC as a political force and carrying the message of nonviolent
social change. Following the outbreak of the student-led sit-in demonstrations,
King and the SCLC launched direct-action campaigns at schools, restaurants,
department stores, and public transportation facilities throughout the South.
There were inevitably some political reverses and defeats for King and the SCLC,
notably the failure to pressure law-enforcement and city officials in Albany,
Georgia, during 1961–1962 to desegregate that city’s public accommodations and
services. But the disappointments in Albany yielded invaluable lessons about
organizing, which helped build a successful campaign to desegregate Birming-
ham, Alabama, in 1963. King’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech, delivered at the
1963 March on Washington, summarizes his moral philosophy and political goals
(document 7).
At the left wing of the Black Freedom movement were the ideological heirs of
Henry Highland Garnet, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, William Monroe Trotter, and Paul
Robeson—the transformationists, or black radicals. They favored the destruction
of Jim Crow, but were intensely critical of the social and economic system that had
long perpetuated racial inequality. Integration was a means, not the end, to the
realization of black freedom. This radical perspective was most clearly represented
by the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), several of whose
mentors had learned organizing skills in radical movements of the 1930s, such as
the Southern Negro Youth Congress. SNCC’s “Statement of Purpose,” drafted in
May 1960 by the Reverend James Lawson, reflects King’s general philosophy of
3 4 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 378 ---
INTRODUCTION 3 4 7
embracing nonviolence that “seeks a social order of justice permeated by love”
(document 4). However, the steps necessary to achieve that beloved community
were radically different from those that King had suggested. First, SNCC saw
itself as a catalyst for social change, not as a leadership caste that would enforce its
ideas and interests on black communities. As Ella Baker’s article of June 1960 sug-
gested, the Black Freedom movement should move “toward group-centered lead-
ership, rather than toward a leader-centered group pattern of organization . . .”
(document 6). The desegregation activists should try to motivate the development
of organic, grassroots leadership at local levels, providing them with the tactical
weapons and resources necessary to help fight to achieve their own objectives and
then move out of their way. In this manner, SNCC refused to see itself as some
kind of permanent bureaucracy or well-meaning but controlling political elite. The
masses would make history, not charismatic preachers and politicians. John Lewis’s
censored speech at the 1963 Washington March (document 8) reflects this radical
orientation: “The revolution is at hand, and we must free ourselves of the chains
of political and economic slavery. . . . We all recognize the fact that if any radical
social, political, and economic changes are to take place in our society, the people,
the masses must bring them about.”
SNCC’s militant analysis was complemented by other radical currents dealing
with issues of gender and racial oppression. Inside SNCC itself, women activists
began to critique the male chauvinism and sexist behavior of their own comrades.
The “SNCC Position Paper: Women in the Movement,” drafted in November
1964, extensively criticized the systematic gender discrimination at every level of
the organization. Perhaps “some women will begin to recognize day-to-day dis-
criminations. And maybe sometime in the future the whole of the women in this
movement will become so alert as to force the rest of the movement to stop the
discrimination and start the slow process of changing values and ideas so that all
of us gradually come to understand that this is no more a man’s world than it is a
white world” (document 11).
Black nationalists had traditionally stood apart from efforts to achieve inte-
gration, specifically because they were convinced that whites lacked either the
capacity or interest in ending racism, and that African Americans would be bet-
ter off concentrating on building their own separate communities. The Nation
of Islam, under the direction of Elijah Muhammad, espoused a conservative,
separatist creed that condemned all whites as “devils” and favored the estab-
lishment of “a state or territory of our own” that was to be exclusively black
(document 12). It was from this deeply conservative religious sect that the most
influential voice of black radicalism in the 1960s would emerge: Malcolm X.
Even while he was associated with the Nation of Islam, Malcolm X’s public
attacks against white racism and colonialism won the attention and support of
activists in SNCC and CORE. After his break with Elijah Muhammad in March
1964, Malcolm’s ideology evolved rapidly toward the left. He embraced Third
World revolutions and strongly denounced the Vietnam War. In his “Ballot or the
Bullet” speech of April 1964, Malcolm extended his support for the desegregation


--- PAGE 379 ---
campaigns throughout the South, stating, “We will work with you against the seg-
regated school system because it’s criminal, because it is absolutely destructive, in
every way imaginable, to the minds of the children. . . .” He advised African
Americans to purchase “rifles and shotguns” and to defend themselves “in areas
where the government has proven itself either unwilling or unable to defend the
lives and the property of Negroes . . .” (document 13). Malcolm also advocated
socialism and a fundamental redivision of resources between “the haves vs. the
have nots.” Although his revolutionary trajectory was brutally cut short when he
was assassinated at age thirty-nine on February 21, 1965, Malcolm X left a pow-
erful legacy that would at once reconfigure the entire shape and philosophy of the
Black Freedom movement.
With the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights and the 1965 Voting Rights Acts, the
desegregationist united front had largely achieved its major legislative objectives.
But the legislative victories did not transform the fundamental structure of eco-
nomic and political inequality. Urban rebellions, began sporadically in the sum-
mer of 1964, then spread into the fiery insurrections of Watts in 1965 and Detroit
in 1967, indicating that black discontent and rage against racial injustice was a
national issue. When the new leader of SNCC, Stokely Carmichael (later Kwame
Ture), announced his support for the slogan “Black Power,” the conservative and
moderate groups within the movement denounced him. In September 1966,
Bayard Rustin, the chief organizer of the 1963 March on Washington, character-
ized the Black Power debate as “the most bitter the community has experienced
since the days of Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois, and one which
threatens to ravage the entire civil rights movement.” Rustin equated Black
Power with “affording the same emotional release as ‘Back to Africa’ and ‘Buy
Black’ did in earlier periods of frustration and hopelessness.” Black Power’s new-
found popularity reflects “in short, the growing conviction that the Negroes can-
not win” (document 14).
Rustin correctly predicted that the old desegregationist coalition would come
apart over issues like Black Power and the war in Vietnam. But what he could not
have anticipated, given his deep ideological and political commitment to liberal
integrationism, was how widespread and popular Black Power quickly became
across black America, and how profoundly this concept would redefine African-
American politics, culture, music, and social relations. Both SNCC and CORE
soon ousted their white members. Within the span of two years, “Negroes” would
become “black” or “Afro-American”; afros, dashikis, and kente cloth came into
fashion; thousands of names were changed to reflect African culture—from
LeRoi Jones to Amiri Baraka, from Don L. Lee to Haki Madhubuti, from Arthur
Lee Smith to Molefi Asante; in popular music, “We Shall Overcome” gave way to
James Brown’s “Say it Loud, I’m Black and I’m Proud!”
For nearly a decade, Black Power replaced liberal integrationism as the dom-
inant political ideology and discourse for many African Americans. Despite its
popularity as a public slogan, however, Black Power never consolidated itself as a
coherent social philosophy or strategy. When people engaged in sit-ins and boy-
3 4 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 380 ---
INTRODUCTION 3 4 9
cotts against Jim Crow, everyone knew what the “goal” was: abolishing legal seg-
regation and removing the obscenity of “colored” and “white” signs that were
omnipresent across the South. What was the goal of Black Power? If “power” was,
in theory, the capacity of any group to realize its specific interests, then what were
the specific interests of the African-American people? Historically, for more than
a century, the black nationalists had a standard answer: build separate black insti-
tutions, reject alliances with whites, oppose racial assimilation, and develop a cul-
ture and value system based on African traditions. But even as the old integra-
tionist coalition unraveled, multiple interpretations for what Black Power was, or
should be, exploded on the political scene.
In retrospect, one can identify at least five major, yet overlapping, tendencies
that characterized the contradictory movement of Black Power: conservative
black nationalism or black capitalism; cultural nationalism; religious nationalism;
revolutionary nationalism; and black electoral political activism. Conservative
black nationalism was the strategy advanced by CORE’s Floyd McKissick and Roy
Innis, and by a number of black entrepreneurs and black executives with ties to
corporations, foundations, and the Republican Party. Drawing heavily on the ear-
lier ideas of Booker T. Washington, these new black conservatives insisted that
African Americans should establish their own businesses, employ other blacks,
and sell their goods and services to black consumers. The only racial integration
they sought was within the capital markets. Blacks should look toward themselves,
not the federal government, to uplift their own communities. McKissick used this
approach to develop an all-black planned community located in North Carolina,
called “Soul City.” The interpretation of Black Power as “Black Capitalism” was
so conservative that even Richard M. Nixon endorsed it during his 1968 presi-
dential campaign.
Cultural nationalism focused on the African identity of black Americans,
emphasizing the need for African Americans to transform their names, clothing
apparel, diet, hairstyles, cultural rituals, and family structures to conform with the
imagined reality of the continent. Theorist Maulana Karenga conceived “Kwan-
zaa,” a seven-day celebration of African culture, which was soon observed regu-
larly among millions of black Americans. For a time, the most influential cultural
nationalist was poet/playwright Amiri Baraka. From his base in Newark, New
Jersey, Baraka was mentor to the “Black Arts Movement,” a renaissance of black
performing and creative artists. Baraka’s Congress of African People called upon
African Americans to separate themselves “from assimilation or brainwashing or
subjugation by the mind of the white nation. . . . As nationalists and Pan-
Africanists we must understand that we must move to have self-determination,
self-sufficiency, self-respect, and self-defense wherever we exist in large num-
bers—whether it is Chicago or Johannesburg” (document 23).
The black religious nationalists were in many ways the protégés of Henry
Highland Garnet and Henry McNeal Turner. They sought to merge the rituals of
black spirituality and faith with the political movement of African-American
empowerment. Black theologians such as James Cone theorized the existence of


--- PAGE 381 ---
a black Christ, and the transformation of Christianity into a revolutionary praxis
on the side of the oppressed. Reverend Albert Cleage in Detroit established the
Church of the Black Madonna, its adherents quickly spreading across the coun-
try. The Nation of Islam also experienced something of an organizational
rebound, due to the emergence of a charismatic new national spokesman, Louis
Farrakhan. Farrakhan had some of the personal qualities and speaking ability that
had made Malcolm X so attractive, but he also held deeply conservative beliefs
that were radically at odds with building a popular democratic movement within
black communities.
The revolutionary nationalist tendency of the Black Power movement was per-
haps the most theoretically and politically rich group that emerged in the 1960s.
The most prominent and widely studied formation among this group was the
Black Panther Party, founded by Huey P . Newton and Bobby Seale in October
1966. At their height, the Panthers probably had fewer than 5,000 formal mem-
bers. Yet their armed confrontations with the police and the free educational and
health-care programs they sponsored for poor urban communities conferred
upon the Panthers an almost legendary status. The Black Panther Party Platform
and Program reprinted here, “What We Want, What We Believe,” is one of the
clearest and most elegant statements of the goals of the Black Freedom move-
ment that African-American people have produced throughout their history (doc-
ument 17). The Panthers developed local organizations across the United States,
attracting gifted community activists such as Fred Hampton in Chicago. In his
speech excerpted here (document 18), Hampton states forcefully that historically,
racism in America was a product of capitalism: “We have to understand very
clearly that there’s a man in our community called a capitalist. Sometimes he’s
Black and sometimes he’s white. But that man has to be driven out of our com-
munity because anybody who comes into the community to make profit off of
people by exploiting them can be defined as a capitalist.” Speeches such as these
may help to explain why the FBI launched a massive and illegal campaign to
destroy the Black Panther Party and its supporters.
Politically similar yet independent of the Panthers were the black activists
within the Communist Party. After decades of severe government repression and
the imprisonment of most of its leaders, the party made significant gains among
African Americans by the late 1960s. After his release from prison in 1961,
Henry Winston, who became the National Chairman of the Communist Party,
was an inspiration to many African Americans (document 24). The formation of
the Che-Lumumba club in Los Angeles gave some African-American revolu-
tionaries their own political home within the broader Communist movement,
and the youth organization (the Young Workers Liberation League) attracted
black youth around the country. The most prominent black American Com-
munist was Angela Y. Davis, who was imprisoned for nearly two years (document
19). A massive international movement calling for her freedom contributed to
her legal vindication and release in 1972. Freedomways, a journal founded in
1961, amplified the voice of radicalism in the African-American community.
3 5 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 382 ---
INTRODUCTION 3 5 1
One of the most dynamic expression of Black Power inside the labor move-
ment was the League of Revolutionary Black Workers. The League was a network
of working-class organizations created largely in automobile plants in Detroit, and
later in other cities. The League’s “General Program (Here’s Where We’re
Coming From)” presents a synthesis of Marxism and revolutionary nationalism:
“United States society is racist, capitalist, and imperialist by nature. It is aggres-
sively expansive, exploitative, and oppressive . . . the direction of our organization
is clear. We’re not talking about dealing with a single issue as the only factor, nor
are we talking about reforms in the system; but we are talking about the seizure
of state power” (document 20).
Finally, the Black Power group with the greatest influence, at least by the mid-
1970s, were the black elected officials. The number of black officials grew dra-
matically in the years after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, from less than
200 in 1965 to 3,500 a decade later. The number of African Americans in
Congress tripled, and in 1971 the Congressional Black Caucus was established.
Elected officials soon learned the public discourse of black-is-beautiful, and
employed the rhetoric of cultural, religious, and even revolutionary nationalism
to win elections. Baraka joined the influential Detroit Congressman Charles
Diggs and Gary, Indiana, Mayor Richard Hatcher to sponsor the National Black
Political Convention in March 1972. The Gary Convention was in many respects
the high point of the Black Power movement, a moment when competing ver-
sions of black nationalism were largely hegemonic within the national black com-
munity. Black politicians were forced to embrace a progressive agenda passed by
the convention, which presented a profoundly radical perspective on the future
of American society (document 22):
We come to Gary in an hour of great crisis and tremendous promise for Black
America. While the white nation hovers on the brink of chaos, while its politi-
cians offer no hope of real change, we stand on the edge of history and are faced
with an amazing and frightening choice: We may choose in 1972 to slip back into
the decadent white politics of American life, or we may press forward, moving
relentlessly from Gary to the creation of our own Black life. The choice is large,
but the time is very short. . . . A Black political convention, indeed all truly Black
politics must begin from this truth: The American system does not work for the
masses of our people, and it cannot be made to work without radical fundamen-
tal change.
The aftermath of the Gary convention fell far short of its visionary goals. As
more African-American activists went into electoral politics, many became
largely disconnected from the social-protest movements and the black nation-
alist community groups from which they had come. As America staggered
through the Watergate scandal and the end of the war in Vietnam, black politi-
cal aspirations had begun to be fully assimilated into the mainstream.
Affirmative action programs and minority economic set-asides helped produce
a rapidly growing, affluent, black middle class. Black activists who only fifteen
years before had been arrested in civil disobedience demonstrations with King,


--- PAGE 383 ---
or for weapons charges with the Panthers, now found themselves inside
Congress, state legislatures, or corporate management. The Black Freedom
movement in both of its ten-year-long phases—the campaign for desegregation
and the struggle for Black Power—had largely transformed the political con-
tours of U.S. society. But much as the first Reconstruction had been defeated,
the second Reconstruction’s very successes would create new contradictions
and unanticipated detours, as African Americans now searched to define new
meanings for the concept of freedom.
O1 O
Rosa Parks, Jo Ann Robinson, and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955–1956
Many historians have dated the beginning of the modern civil rights movement
to the Montgomery bus boycott of 1955–1956, which drew national attention
and effectively ended segregation on city buses in Montgomery, Alabama.
Though this boycott is often remembered because it led to the emergence of
Martin Luther King, Jr., more importantly it was a wide-ranging, grassroots
protest movement. To a considerable degree, it was initiated by two women in
the Montgomery community, Jo Ann Gibson Robinson (1912–1992) and Rosa
Parks (1913–2005).
Robinson was born in Georgia and earned an M.A. in English at Atlanta
University before she moved to Montgomery and accepted a post as a professor
at Alabama State College. Later she joined the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church,
and became president of the Women’s Political Council of Montgomery. Like
many African-American residents of her community, Robinson suffered abuse
and humiliation on city buses, and she repeatedly demanded that city authorities
rectify the situation. In May 1954—more than a year before most Americans had
ever heard of Rosa Parks or Martin Luther King, Jr.—Robinson penned a letter
to Montgomery’s mayor threatening a large-scale boycott of the city bus system.
Later, as an active member of the Montgomery Improvement Association, she
played an important role in organizing and sustaining the protest. In the early
1960s Robinson relocated to Los Angeles, where she taught in the public schools
until her retirement in 1976.
Rosa Parks was born in Tuskegee, Alabama. She was a well-respected seam-
stress and an active member of the NAACP when she broke a local segregation
ordinance, on December 1, 1955, by refusing to give up her seat on a Mont-
gomery bus to a white man who had boarded after her. Her subsequent arrest
helped spark the famous boycott and led her to earn the title “Mother of the Civil
Rights Movement.” Parks subsequently was employed by the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC) in Detroit, Michigan, and later worked for
Congressman John Conyers, Jr.
3 5 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 384 ---
THE MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT 3 5 3
O
“TO KEEP FROM BEING INSULTED”
Honorable Mayor W. J. Gayle
City Hall
Montgomery, Alabama
Dear Sir:
The Women’s Political Council is very grateful to you and the City Commis-
sioners for the hearing you allowed our representatives during the month of
March, 1954, when the “city-bus-fare-increase case” was being reviewed.
There were several things the Council asked for:
1. A city law that would make it possible for Negroes to sit from back toward
front, and whites from front toward back until all the seats are taken:
2. That Negroes not be asked or forced to pay fare at front and go to the rear
of the bus to enter:
3. That buses stop at every corner in residential sections occupied by Negroes
as they do in communities where whites reside.
We are happy to report that busses have begun stopping at more corners now
in some sections where Negroes live than previously. However, the same practices
seating and boarding the bus continue.
Mayor Gayle, three-fourths of the riders of these public conveyances are
Negroes. If Negroes did not patronize them, they could not possibly operate.
More and more of our people are already arranging with neighbors and friends
to ride to keep from being insulted and humiliated by bus drivers.
There has been talk from twenty-five or more local organizations of planning
a city-wide boycott of busses. We, sir, do not feel that forceful measures are nec-
essary in bargaining for a convenience which is right for all bus passengers. We,
the Council, believe that when this matter has been put before you and the
Commissioners, that agreeable terms can be met in a quiet and sensible manner
to the satisfaction of all concerned.
Many of our Southern cities in neighboring states have practiced the policies
we seek without incident whatsoever. Atlanta, Macon and Savannah in Georgia
have done this for years. Even Mobile, in our own state, does this and all the pas-
sengers are satisfied.
Please consider this plea, and if possible, act favorably upon it, for even now
plans are being made to ride less, or not at all, on our busses. We do not want this.
Respectfully yours,
The Women’s Political Council
Jo Ann Robinson, President
O
INTERVIEW WITH ROSA PARKS
I had left my work at the men’s alteration shop, a tailor shop in the Montgomery
Fair department store, and as I left work, I crossed the street to a drugstore to


--- PAGE 385 ---
pick up a few items instead of trying to go directly to the bus stop. And when I
had finished this, I came across the street and looked for a Cleveland Avenue bus
that apparently had some seats on it. At that time it was a little hard to get a seat
on the bus. But when I did get to the entrance of the bus, I got in line with a num-
ber of other people who were getting on the same bus.
As I got up on the bus and walked to the seat I saw there was only one vacancy
that was just back of where it was considered the white section. So this was the seat
that I took, next to the aisle, and a man was sitting next to me. Across the aisle there
were two women, and there were a few seats at this point in the very front of the
bus that was called the white section. I went on to one stop and I didn’t particularly
notice who was getting on the bus, didn’t particularly notice the other people get-
ting on. And on the third stop there were some people getting on, and at this point
all of the front seats were taken. Now in the beginning, at the very first stop I had
got on the bus, the back of the bus was filled up with people standing in the aisle
and I don’t know why this one vacancy that I took was left, because there were quite
a few people already standing toward the back of the bus. The third stop is when all
the front seats were taken, and this one man was standing and when the driver
looked around and saw he was standing, he asked the four of us, the man in the seat
with me and the two women across the aisle, to let him have those front seats.
At his first request, didn’t any of us move. Then he spoke again and said, “You’d
better make it light on yourselves and let me have those seats.” At this point, of
course, the passenger who would have taken the seat hadn’t said anything. In fact,
he never did speak to my knowledge. When the three people, the man who was in
the seat with me and the two women, stood up and moved into the aisle, I
remained where I was. When the driver saw that I was still sitting there, he asked
if I was going to stand up. I told him, no, I wasn’t. He said, “Well, if you don’t stand
up, I’m going to have you arrested.” I told him to go on and have me arrested.
He got off the bus and came back shortly. A few minutes later, two policemen
got on the bus, and they approached me and asked if the driver had asked me to
stand up, and I said yes, and they wanted to know why I didn’t. I told them I did-
n’t think I should have to stand up. . . . They placed me under arrest then and had
me to get in the police car, and I was taken to jail and booked on suspicion, I
believe. . . . They had to determine whether or not the driver wanted to press
charges or swear out a warrant, which he did. Then they took me to jail and I was
placed in a cell. In a little while I was taken from the cell, and my picture was
made and fingerprints taken. I went back to the cell then, and a few minutes later
I was called back again, and when this happened I found out that Mr. E. D. Nixon
and Attorney and Mrs. Clifford Durr had come to make bond for me.
O
EXCERPTS FROM JO ANN ROBINSON’S ACCOUNT OF THE BOYCOTT
In October 1955, Mary Louise Smith, an eighteen-year-old black girl, was
arrested and fined for refusing to move to the rear of the bus. Her case was
unpublicized and no one knew about it until after her arrest and conviction. She,
3 5 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 386 ---
THE MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT 3 5 5
too, was found guilty; she paid her fine and kept on riding the bus.
Intermittently, twenty to twenty-five thousand black people in Montgomery
rode city buses, and I would estimate that, up until the boycott of December 5,
1955, about three out of five had suffered some unhappy experience on the pub-
lic transit lines. But the straw that broke the camel’s back came on Thursday,
December 1, 1955, when an incident occurred which was almost a repeat perfor-
mance of the Claudette Colvin case.
In the afternoon of Thursday, December 1, a prominent black woman named
Mrs. Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to vacate her seat for a white man. Mrs.
Parks was a medium-sized, cultured mulatto woman; a civic and religious worker;
quiet, unassuming, and pleasant in manner and appearance; dignified and
reserved; of high morals and a strong character. She was—and still is, for she lives
to tell the story—respected in all black circles. By trade she was a seamstress,
adept and competent in her work.
Tired from work, Mrs. Parks boarded a bus. The “reserved seats” were partially
filled, but the seats just behind the reserved section were vacant, and Mrs. Parks
sat down in one. It was during the busy evening rush hour. More black and white
passengers boarded the bus, and soon all the reserved seats were occupied. The
driver demanded that Mrs. Parks get up and surrender her seat to a white man,
but she was tired from her work. Besides, she was a woman, and the person wait-
ing was a man. She remained seated. In a few minutes, police summoned by the
driver appeared, placed Mrs. Parks under arrest, and took her to jail.
It was the first time the soft-spoken, middle-aged woman had been arrested.
She maintained decorum and poise, and the word of her arrest spread. Mr. E. D.
Nixon, a longtime stalwart of our NAACP branch, along with liberal white attor-
ney Clifford Durr and his wife Virginia, went to jail and obtained Mrs. Parks’s
release on bond. Her trial was scheduled for Monday, December 5, 1955.
The news traveled like wildfire into every black home. Telephones jangled;
people congregated on street corners and in homes and talked. But nothing was
done. A numbing helplessness seemed to paralyze everyone. Very few stayed off
the buses the rest of that day or the next. There was fear, discontent, and uncer-
tainty. Everyone seemed to wait for someone to do something, but nobody made
a move. For that day and a half, black Americans rode the buses as before, as if
nothing had happened. They were sullen and uncommunicative, but they rode
the buses. There was a silent, tension-filled waiting. For blacks were not talking
loudly in public places—they were quiet, sullen, waiting. Just waiting! Thursday
evening came and went.
Thursday night was far spent, when, at about 11:30 
P.M., I sat alone in my peace-
ful single-family dwelling on a quiet street. I was thinking about the situation. Lost
in thought, I was startled by the telephone’s ring. Black attorney Fred Gray, who
had been out of town all day, had just gotten back and was returning the phone
message I had left for him about Mrs. Parks’s arrest. Attorney Gray, though a very
young man, had been one of my most active colleagues in our previous meetings
with bus company officials and Commissioner Birmingham. A Montgomery native
who had attended Alabama State and been one of my students, Fred Gray had


--- PAGE 387 ---
gone on to law school in Ohio before returning to his home town to open a prac-
tice with the only other black lawyer in Montgomery, Charles Langford.
Fred Gray and his wife Bernice were good friends of mine, and we talked
often. In addition to being a lawyer, Gray was a trained, ordained minister of the
gospel, actively serving as assistant pastor of Holt Street Church of Christ.
Tonight his voice on the phone was very short and to the point. Fred was
shocked by the news of Mrs. Parks’s arrest. I informed him that I already was
thinking that the WPC should distribute thousands of notices calling for all bus
riders to stay off the buses on Monday, the day of Mrs. Parks’s trial. “Are you
ready?” he asked. Without hesitation, I assured him that we were. With that he
hung up, and I went to work.
I made some notes on the back of an envelope: “The Women’s Political
Council will not wait for Mrs. Parks’s consent to call for a boycott of city buses.
On Friday, December 2, 1955, the women of Montgomery will call for a boycott
to take place on Monday, December 5.”
Some of the WPC officers previously had discussed plans for distributing thou-
sands of notices announcing a bus boycott. Now the time had come for me to
write just such a notice. I sat down and quickly drafted a message and then called
a good friend and colleague, John Cannon, chairman of the business department
at the college, who had access to the college’s mimeograph equipment. When I
told him that the WPC was staging a boycott and needed to run off the notices,
he told me that he too had suffered embarrassment on the city buses. Like myself,
he had been hurt and angry. He said that he would happily assist me. Along with
two of my most trusted senior students, we quickly agreed to meet almost imme-
diately, in the middle of the night, at the college’s duplicating room. We were able
to get three messages to a page, greatly reducing the number of pages that had to
be mimeographed in order to produce the tens of thousands of leaflets we knew
would be needed. By 4 
A.M. Friday, the sheets had been duplicated, cut in thirds,
and bundled. Each leaflet read:
Another Negro woman has been arrested and thrown in jail because she refused to
get up out of her seat on the bus for a white person to sit down. It is the second time
since the Claudette Colvin case that a Negro woman has been arrested for the same
thing. This has to be stopped. Negroes have rights, too, for if Negroes did not ride
the buses, they could not operate. Three-fourths of the riders are Negroes, yet we
are arrested, or have to stand over empty seats. If we do not do something to stop
these arrests, they will continue. The next time it may be you, or your daughter, or
mother. This woman’s case will come up on Monday. We are, therefore, asking every
Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest of the arrest and trial. Don’t ride the
buses to work, to town, to school, or anywhere on Monday. You can afford to stay
out of school for one day if you have no other way to go except by bus. You can also
afford to stay out of town for one day. If you work, take a cab, or walk. But please,
children and grown-ups, don’t ride the bus at all on Monday. Please stay off of all
buses Monday.
Between 4 and 7 A.M., the two students and I mapped out distribution routes
for the notices. Some of the WPC officers previously had discussed how and
3 5 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 388 ---
THE MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT 3 5 7
where to deliver thousands of leaflets announcing a boycott, and those plans now
stood me in good stead. We outlined our routes, arranged the bundles in
sequences, stacked them in our cars, and arrived at my 8 
A.M. class, in which both
young men were enrolled, with several minutes to spare. We weren’t even tired
or hungry. Just like me, the two students felt a tremendous sense of satisfaction
at being able to contribute to the cause of justice.
After class my two students and I quickly finalized our plans for distributing
the thousands of leaflets so that one would reach every black home in
Montgomery. I took out the WPC membership roster and called the former pres-
ident, Dr. Mary Fair Burks, then the Pierces, the Glasses, Mrs. Mary Cross, Mrs.
Elizabeth Arrington, Mrs. Josie Lawrence, Mrs. Geraldine Nesbitt, Mrs. H.
Councill Trenholm, Mrs. Catherine N. Johnson, and a dozen or more others. I
alerted all of them to the forthcoming distribution of the leaflets, and enlisted
their aid in speeding and organizing the distribution network. Each would have
one person waiting at a certain place to take a package of notices as soon as my
car stopped and the young men could hand them a bundle of leaflets.
Then I and my two student helpers set out. Throughout the late morning and
early afternoon hours we dropped off tens of thousands of leaflets. Some of our
bundles were dropped off at schools, where both students and staff members
helped distribute them further and spread the word for people to read the notices
and then pass them on to neighbors. Leaflets were also dropped off at business
places, storefronts, beauty parlors, beer halls, factories, barber shops, and every
other available place. Workers would pass along notices both to other employees
as well as to customers.
During those hours of crucial work, nothing went wrong. Suspicion was never
raised. The action of all involved was so casual, so unconcerned, so nonchalant,
that suspicion was never raised, and neither the city nor its people ever suspected
a thing! We never missed a spot. And no one missed a class, a job, or a normal
routine. Everything was done by the plan, with perfect timing. By 2 o’clock, thou-
sands of the mimeographed handbills had changed hands many times. Practically
every black man, woman, and child in Montgomery knew the plan and was pass-
ing the word along. No one knew where the notices had come from or who had
arranged for their circulation, and no one cared. Those who passed them on did
so efficiently, quietly, and without comment. But deep within the heart of every
black person was a joy he or she dared not reveal. . . .
Before Monday was half gone, Negroes had made history. Never before had
they united in such a manner. There was open respect and admiration in the eyes
of many whites who had looked on before, dubious and amused. Even clerks in
dime stores, all white, were more cordial. They were heard to add, after a pur-
chase by a black customer, “Y’all come back to see us,” which was a very unusual
occurrence. The black customers held their heads higher. They felt reborn,
important for the first time. A greater degree of race pride was exhibited. Many
were themselves surprised at the response of the masses, and could not explain,
if they had wanted to, what had changed them overnight into fearless, coura-
geous, proud people, standing together for human dignity, civil rights, and, yes,


--- PAGE 389 ---
self-respect! There was a stick-togetherness that drew them like a magnet. They
showed a genuine fondness for one another. They were really free—free inside!
They felt it! Acted it! Manifested it in their entire beings! They took great pride
in being black.
The Monday Night Meeting at Holt Street Church
Six thousand black people, along with local reporters, packed Holt Street Baptist
Church that night, December 5, 1955, for the first mass meeting of the bus boy-
cott. In the main auditorium, the balcony, the basement, the aisles, steps, the
front, side, and back yards, and for three blocks up and down Holt Street, people
crowded near to hear what was said. Loudspeakers were set up so that crowds
who sat in parked cars two blocks away could hear. Police cars patrolling the area
warned those inside the church to turn down the volume, which was disturbing
the people outside, but no one paid any attention. The volume stayed loud.
White journalists from Montgomery and other nearby places were on hand to
report the news of the boycott. Cameras flashed repeatedly, taking pictures of the
thousands gathered in the church. So intent were the people on what was being
said that the photographers went unnoticed.
The pulpit was jammed with Baptist, Methodist, Congregational, Catholic, and
other ministers, and with organization officials. They conducted a spirited devo-
tion of prayer and hymns. Prayers were offered for “endurance, tolerance, faith
in God.” There were prayers for the city commissioners; for “misguided whites”;
for the weak; and for all races and nations. People felt the spirit. Their enthusi-
asm inundated them, and they overflowed with “powerful emotion.”
Reverend Ralph Abernathy, presiding, said the boycott was not a one-man
show, nor a preacher’s show, but the show of 45,000 black Montgomerians. It was
also a show of black Americans all over America and all over the world and of
freedom-loving people everywhere. When one ministerial spokesman after
another told of the tremendous success of the one-day boycott, cries of joy and
thunderous applause pealed forth and “ascended the heavens to God Almighty,”
as one present was heard to say.
The leaders reiterated that the protest had been and would be kept Christian,
non-violent, legal. Even Joe Azbell, city editor of the Montgomery Advertiser,
seemed impressed, for in his article on Wednesday, December 7, he confessed
that “there was discipline among Negroes which whites were not aware of.”
When the question was posed as to whether the people would end the one-day
bus boycott, thousands of voices shouted the same word, “No! No!” One lone
voice cried out in clear tones, “This is just the beginning!” Thunderous applause
was the response.
Those on the podium agreed, without one dissenting vote, that the protest
must continue. Ministers pledged themselves and their congregations to remain
off the buses until legal steps were taken that would insure fair, unbiased, equal
treatment of all bus passengers. Mr. E. D. Nixon received an ovation when he
observed that “Negroes stopped riding the bus because they were arrested, and
now they are being arrested for not riding them.”
3 5 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 390 ---
THE MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT 3 5 9
As the Alabama Journal reported the next day, the Negroes passed a four-part
resolution urging:
1. All citizens of Montgomery “regardless of race, color, or creed” to refrain
from riding buses owned and operated by the City Lines Bus Company
“until some arrangement has been worked out between said citizens and the
bus company.”
2. That every person owning or who has access to automobiles will use them in
assisting other persons to get to work “without charge.”
3. That employers of persons who live a great distance from their work, “as
much as possible” provide transportation for them.
4. That the Negro citizens of Montgomery are ready and willing to send a del-
egation to the bus company to discuss their grievances and to work out a
solution for the same.
At these times, after almost two months had passed and with no end in sight,
groups of widely-read pedestrians, picked up along the way and carried home,
would get into deep conversations when their faith wavered in the balance.
Indeed, one must wonder about the peculiar turns that things take sometimes,
and about the controlling force that may compel them. Call it fate, destiny, a trick
of nature, or the will of God, there is an inexplicable something, a force or power
that seems to direct men’s lives and twist them into some particular shape.
Sometimes that shape is good, sometimes not so good.
During such periods of intense suffering—and people did suffer, mentally, spir-
itually, and financially—there were those weary souls who began to question God’s
presence, to wonder where God was and if God was really with the whites on seg-
regation. Even the white man’s religion, some said, seemed to be based to a great
extent on segregation and white supremacy. Then some mused, “Is God white?”
So they would reason as we drove along, going home from a hard day’s work.
“Whites were born into, and have lived a lifetime enjoying the role of the supe-
rior, feasting their egos on the belief in racial supremacy. To these people, blacks
are not equal.”
“Yes, those folks don’t believe in racial equality, and because of that belief, they
think that black people can exist on less than the whites can.”
“Separate but equal is right, but it’s this separate but unequal that is killing us.”
“In the separate schools, libraries, recreational parks, types of employment,
salaries, waiting rooms, drinking fountains—no matter what—there has not been
equality.”
Many of these people had become disillusioned with life itself and wondered
at the hypocrisy of it all. How could one set of human beings be so cruel and inhu-
man to another set, just because of the color of their skin and the texture of their
hair? Was it because the side in control was superior? Or were whites afraid that,
if the other side was given a chance, it would prove superior? Was the white man
really afraid of the black man?
Most of the drivers who picked up pedestrians as they walked along, tired and
hungry, would find a way to bring them out of such moods. We would tell a joke on
“whitey” that showed him in a less exalted position than someone had just pictured


--- PAGE 391 ---
him in, and everybody would laugh. In no time they would have forgotten the ugly
mood they were in and begin all over again. . . .
The Last Mile
Almost four months had passed since December 5, 1955. Every plan the City
Fathers had proposed to end the boycott had failed. Most of Montgomery’s buses
stood dusty and empty where they had been parked at Christmas. The MIA had
developed its own free transportation service. There was a general belief that the
situation could and would go on indefinitely.
The MIA continued to receive funds from all parts of the U.S. and many
places abroad. People from across the world still came to see and write about the
situation.
Each Monday night thousands of people attended the weekly mass meetings.
Collections were always taken, and every person who could contributed reli-
giously and generously of her or his earnings to operate the transportation ser-
vices. All of us who had steady jobs continued to give a percentage of our earn-
ings each week, as we had since the beginning of the boycott. Drivers were paid
regularly and were satisfied with their salaries. The station wagons had to be kept
in good repair; fuel bills were enormous. The more money we needed, the more
people, locally and elsewhere, seemed to give. The giving, the sharing, the serv-
ing continued on throughout the spring, summer, and fall of 1956. By April it was
clear that the bus company and Montgomery’s City Fathers had realized that
black Americans meant it when they said they would never return to the buses
except on an integrated basis, for all other efforts to get city buses rolling again
had failed. Then our case in the federal courts began to move forward.
On May 11, a three-judge federal court, sitting in the federal courthouse in
downtown Montgomery, heard arguments in the MIA’s suit seeking a declaration
that racially segregated seating on city buses violated the 14th Amendment’s guar-
antee of equal government treatment of all citizens, irrespective of race, as the
Supreme Court already had ruled on with regard to schools in its 1954 landmark
opinion in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.
Several weeks later, on June 5, the judges announced that they had voted two
to one against the constitutionality of segregated seating on Montgomery’s city
buses. Relegating black riders to the rear of city buses, or forcing them to stand
over empty seats reserved for whites, or making them surrender seats to white
passengers, were all unconstitutional practices.
Judge Richard T. Rives wrote the 2-to-1 majority decision. U.S. District Court
Judge Frank M. Johnson joined him in the majority opinion. Their opinion struck
down as unconstitutional the statutes requiring racially segregated seating on city
buses.
After their opinion, the two judges were deluged for months with hate mail, abu-
sive telephone calls, and threats from segregationists for the stand they took and the
opinion they gave that helped to wipe out segregation. Old friends no longer spoke
to them. Black Montgomerians, however, will never forget either Rives or Johnson.
Montgomery city officials, though, did not celebrate or welcome Rives’ and
3 6 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 392 ---
THE MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT 3 6 1
Johnson’s ruling. Instead, they announced they would appeal the decision to the
U.S. Supreme Court. Five months passed without any resolution of the matter.
The city’s buses remained segregated, and the MIA’s transportation system contin-
ued to function most effectively. Then, in mid-November, just as the City Com-
mission, under prodding from local segregationists, moved in state court to enjoin
the operation of our carpool system, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a brief but
decisive order, upholding Rives’ and Johnson’s ruling that Montgomery’s buses had
to be integrated. We thought at first that the change would take effect immediately,
but then learned, to our dismay, that the order would be effective only when for-
mally served on Montgomery officials. The City Commission, however, seeking to
postpone as long as possible the arrival of that order, petitioned the Supreme Court
to reconsider its ruling. The court rejected that request, but the legal maneuvering
delayed matters for several weeks, and it was not until Thursday, December 20,
that U.S. marshals formally served the Supreme Court order on city officials. That
night the MIA held two mass meetings, and the next morning Montgomery City
Lines resumed full service on all routes. Among its first passengers of the day were
Mrs. Parks, Dr. King, and Reverend Abernathy, who boarded an early morning bus
and took seats in what had once been the reserved, whites-only section as news
photographers snapped pictures of the historic event. . . .
Sources: (1) Letter from Jo Ann Robinson to W.J. Gayle, May 21, 1954, reprinted by per-
mission of the University of Tennessee Press. From The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the
Women Who Made It: The Memoir of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, edited, with a foreword, by
David J. Garrow (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1987). Copyright 1987 by the
University of Tennessee Press; (2) interview with Rosa L. Parks My Soul is Rested: Movement
Days in the Deep South Remembered by Howell Raines (New York: Putnam’s, 1977).
Copyright 1977 by Howell Raines. Used by permission of Putnam/Berkley, a division of
Penguin/Putnam Inc.; and (3) excerpts from an account by Jo Ann Robinson, from David J.
Garrow, ed., The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Made It: The Memoir of Jo
Ann Gibson Robinson. Copyright 1987 by the University of Tennessee Press, pp. 43–47,
61–63, 112–13, 161–63.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Douglas Brinkley, Rosa Parks(New York: Viking, 2000).
Stewart Burns, ed., Daybreak of Freedom: The Montgomery Bus Boycott (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1997).
Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Burton Woods, Women in the Civil Rights
Movement, 1941–1965 (Brooklyn: Carlson Publishing, 1990).
David J. Garrow, The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Made It: The Memoir
of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1987).
———, ed., The Walking City: The Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955–1956(Brooklyn: Carl-
son Publishing, 1989).
Martin Luther King, Jr., Stride toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story (New York:
Harpers, 1958).
Brian Ward and Tony Badger, The Making of Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Move-
ment (New York: New York University Press, 1996).
Donnie Williams and Wayne Greenhaw, The Thunder of Angels: The Montgomery Bus
Boycott and the People Who Broke the Back of Jim Crow(Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books,
2006).


--- PAGE 393 ---
O2 O
    
            
        
  
            
              
            
            
            
             
          
             
         
             
               
 
      
          
             
             
        
             
          
                   
        
           
             
              
             
         
              
               
             
              
             
               
            
    
           
             
3 6 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 394 ---
ROY WILKINS AND THE NAACP 3 6 3
             
           
            
 
   
 
               
               
            
             
  
               
           
             
              
         
         
                 
              
    
             
              
       
            
            
          
            
           
         
          
          
     
 
           
                
             
          
          
              
            
           
           
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 395 ---
3 6 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 396 ---
ROY WILKINS AND THE NAACP 3 6 5
          
          
   
           
          
            
          
      
            
  
          
              
              
         
 
        
          
              
       
         
          
           
         
             
            
              
               
          
 
           
          
          
             
             
                 
   
             
   
  
            
            
           
              
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 397 ---
3 6 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 398 ---
THE SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE 3 6 7
             
          
  
   
              
            
            
             
       
           
              
             
             
            
           
           
   
               
             
             
           
        
               
            
      
           
         
      
 
           
 
            
      
            
     
           
    
O3 O
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1957
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) was established in 1957
by Martin Luther King, Jr., as an off-shoot of the Montgomery Improvement
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 399 ---
Association, the organizing coalition that helped coordinate the 1955–1956
Montgomery bus boycott. During the Black Freedom movement of the 1960s,
the SCLC was in many respects situated ideologically and politically at the cen-
ter of the broad desegregationist coalition. It was to the left of the NAACP and
National Urban League in its use of civil disobedience tactics and nonviolent
grassroots organizing. But it was frequently more moderate and programmatic
than the activists in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the
Congress of Racial Equality. King led the SCLC until his assassination in 1968,
and the organization continues to operate out of Atlanta, Georgia. Though the
SCLC is interracial and nonsectarian, its board is largely made up of African-
American ministers and is presently led by the Rev. Joseph Lowery.
O
PROGRAM OF THE SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE
Aims and Purposes of SCLC
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference has the basic aim of achieving
full citizenship rights, equality, and the integration of the Negro in all aspects of
American life. SCLC is a service agency to facilitate coordinated action of local
community groups within the frame of their indigenous organizations and natural
leadership. SCLC activity revolves around two main focal points: the use of non-
violent philosophy as a means of creative protest; and securing the right of the
ballot for every citizen.
Philosophy of SCLC
The basic tenets of Hebraic-Christian tradition, coupled with the Gandhian con-
cept of satyagraha—truth force—is at the heart of SCLC’s philosophy. Christian
nonviolence actively resists evil in any form. It never seeks to humiliate the oppo-
nent, only to win him. Suffering is accepted without retaliation. Internal violence
of the spirit is as much to be rejected as external physical violence. At the center
of nonviolence is redemptive love. Creatively used, the philosophy of nonviolence
can restore the broken community in America. SCLC is convinced that nonvio-
lence is the most potent force available to an oppressed people in their struggle
for freedom and dignity.
SCLC and Nonviolent Mass Direct Action
SCLC believes that the American dilemma in race relations can best and most
quickly be resolved through the action of thousands of people, committed to the
philosophy of nonviolence, who will physically identify themselves in a just and
moral struggle. It is not enough to be intellectually dissatisfied with an evil sys-
tem. The true nonviolent resister presents his physical body as an instrument to
defeat the system. Through nonviolent mass direct action, the evil system is cre-
atively dramatized in order that the conscience of the community may grapple
with the rightness or wrongness of the issue at hand. . . .
3 6 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 400 ---
THE SOUTHERN CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE 3 6 9
SCLC and Voter-Registration
The right of the ballot is basic to the exercise of full citizenship rights. All across
the South, subtle and flagrant obstacles confront the Negro when he seeks to
register and vote. Poll taxes, long form questionnaires, harassment, economic
reprisal, and sometimes death, meet those who dare to seek this exercise of the
ballot. In areas where there is little or no attempt to block the voting attempts
of the Negro, apathy generally is deeply etched upon the habits of the commu-
nity. SCLC, with its specialized staff, works on both fronts: aiding local commu-
nities through every means available to secure the right to vote (e.g., filing com-
plaints with the Civil Rights Commission) and arousing interest through
voter-registration workshops to point up the importance of the ballot. Periodi-
cally, SCLC, upon invitation, conducts a voter-registration drive to enhance a
community’s opportunity to free itself from economic and political servitude.
SCLC believes that the most important step the Negro can take is that short
walk to the voting booth.
SCLC and Civil Disobedience
SCLC sees civil disobedience as a natural consequence of nonviolence when the
resister is confronted by unjust and immoral laws. This does not imply that SCLC
advocates either anarchy or lawlessness. The Conference firmly believes that all
people have a moral responsibility to obey laws that are just. It recognizes, how-
ever, that there also are unjust laws. From a purely moral point of view, an unjust
law is one that is out of harmony with the moral law of the universe, or as the reli-
gionist would say, out of harmony with the Law of God. More concretely, an
unjust law is one in which the minority is compelled to observe a code which is
not binding on the majority. An unjust law is one in which people are required to
obey a code that they had no part in making because they were denied the right
to vote. In the face of such obvious inequality, where difference is made legal, the
nonviolent resister has no alternative but to disobey the unjust law. In disobeying
such a law, he does so peacefully, openly and nonviolently. Most important, he
willingly accepts the penalty for breaking the law. This distinguishes SCLC’s posi-
tion on civil disobedience from the “uncivil disobedience” of the racist opposition
in the South. In the face of laws they consider unjust, they seek to defy, evade,
and circumvent the law. BUT they are unwilling to accept the penalty for break-
ing the law. The end result of their defiance is anarchy and disrespect for the law.
SCLC, on the other hand, believes that civil disobedience involves the highest
respect for the law. He who openly disobeys a law that conscience tells him is
unjust and willingly accepts the penalty is giving evidence that he so respects the
law that he belongs in jail until it is changed. . . .
SCLC and Segregation
SCLC is firmly opposed to segregation in any form that it takes and pledges
itself to work unrelentingly to rid every vestige of its scars from our nation


--- PAGE 401 ---
through nonviolent means. Segregation is an evil and its presence in our nation
has blighted our larger destiny as a leader in world affairs. Segregation does as
much harm to the segregator as it does to the segregated. The segregated devel-
ops a false sense of inferiority and the segregator develops a false sense of supe-
riority, both contrary to the American ideal of democracy. America must rid her-
self of segregation not alone because it is politically expedient, but because it is
morally right!
SCLC and Constructive Program
SCLC’s basic program fosters nonviolent resistance to all forms of racial injustice,
including state and local laws and practices, even when this means going to jail;
and imaginative, bold constructive action to end the demoralization caused by the
legacy of slavery and segregation—inferior schools, slums, and second-class citi-
zenship. Thus, the Conference works on two fronts. On the one hand it resists
continuously the system of segregation which is the basic cause of flagging stan-
dards; on the other hand, it works constructively to improve the standards them-
selves. There MUST be a balance between attacking the causes and healing the
effects of segregation.
SCLC and the Beloved Community
The ultimate aim of SCLC is to foster and create the “beloved community” in
America where brotherhood is a reality. It rejects any doctrine of black
supremacy for this merely substitutes one kind of tyranny for another. The
Conference does not foster moving the Negro from a position of disadvantage
to one of advantage for this would thereby subvert justice. SCLC works for
integration. Our ultimate goal is genuine intergroup and interpersonal living—
integration. Only through nonviolence can reconciliation and the creation of
the beloved community be effected. The international focus on America and
her internal problems against the dread prospect of a hot war, demand our
seeking this end.
Source: “This is SCLC,” pamphlet printed as mimeograph by the SCLC in Atlanta, Georgia,
in 1957.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Randolph H. Boehm, Records of the SCLC: 1954–1970(Bethesda, Md.: University Publica-
tions of America, 1995).
Adam Fairclough, To Redeem the Soul of America: The Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference and Martin Luther King, Jr.(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1978).
David Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference(New York: Morrow, 1986).
Thomas R. Peake, Keeping the Dream Alive: A History of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference from King to the Nineteen-Eighties(New York: Lang, 1987).
Emilie Schmeidler, “Shaping Ideas and Actions: CORE, SCLC, and SNCC in the Struggle
for Equality, 1960–1966” (Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1980).
3 7 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 402 ---
STUDENT NONVIOLENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE 3 7 1
O4 O
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the Sit-In Movement, 1960
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) emerged in 1960 at
Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina, with the aid of one of the SCLC’s most
important leaders, Ella Baker. Initially, the group was closely affiliated with the
SCLC, and they focused primarily on voter-registration drives. Though the organi-
zation experienced success in this capacity, many SNCC workers also grew disen-
chanted with both the organized white violence they encountered and the lack of
federal support for their efforts. By the middle of the decade many SNCC leaders
began to rethink the philosophy of racial integration, and they questioned the con-
tinuing viability of tactical nonviolence. Whites were largely forced out of the orga-
nization in 1966, and many of the group’s early leaders—including Julian Bond,
Diane Nash, James Lawson, and John Lewis—were replaced by more outspoken,
militant activists such as Stokely Carmichael and H. Rap Brown, who identified
with the emerging Black Power movement. SNCC was the smallest of the major
desegregation organizations in the 1960s, but in many respects left a greater legacy
than any other civil rights group. The “True Believers” or dedicated activists within
SNCC were deeply idealistic and sought through their personal sacrifices and col-
lective struggles to dismantle the institutions of racial inequality and social injustice.
O
STUDENT NONVIOLENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
We affirm the philosophical or religious ideal of nonviolence as the foundation of
our purpose, the pre-supposition of our faith, and the manner of our action. Non-
violence as it grows from Judaic-Christian traditions seeks a social order of justice
permeated by love. Integration of human endeavor represents the crucial first
step towards such a society.
Through nonviolence, courage displaces fear; love transforms hate. Accep-
tance dissipates prejudice; hope ends despair. Peace dominates war; faith recon-
ciles doubt. Mutual regard cancels enmity. Justice for all overthrows injustice.
The redemptive community supersedes systems of gross social immorality.
Love is the central motif of nonviolence. Love is the force by which God binds
man to himself and man to man. Such love goes to the extreme; it remains loving
and forgiving even in the midst of hostility. It matches the capacity of evil to inflict
suffering with an even more enduring capacity to absorb evil, all the while per-
sisting in love.
By appealing to conscience and standing on the moral nature of human exis-
tence, nonviolence nurtures the atmosphere in which reconciliation and justice
become actual possibilities.
Source: “Statement of Purpose,” drafted for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit-
tee by the Rev. James Lawson, May 14, 1960, mimeographed document.


--- PAGE 403 ---
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981).
Cynthia Griggs Fleming, Soon We Will Not Cry: The Liberation of Ruby Doris Smith
Robinson (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000).
Cheryl Lynn Greenberg, A Circle of Trust: Remembering SNCC (New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press, 1998).
Wesley C. Hogan, Many Minds, One Heart: SNCC’s Dream for a New America(Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
John Lewis and Michael D’Orso, Walking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement(New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1998).
Cleveland Sellers, The River of No Return: The Autobiography of a Black Militant and the
Life and Death of SNCC (New York: William and Morrow, 1973).
Emily Stoper, The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee: The Growth of Radicalism
in a Civil Rights Organization(Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989).
Miles Wolff, Lunch at the Five and Ten, the Greensboro Sit-Ins: A Contemporary History
(New York: Stein and Day, 1970).
Howard Zinn, SNCC: The New Abolitionists(Boston: Beacon Press, 1964).
O5 O
Freedom Songs, 1960s
Music, folklore, and poetry have always been important windows in understand-
ing the political culture and history of African Americans. During the civil rights
movement of the 1950s and 1960s, “freedom songs” served many functions: they
promoted solidarity, increased faith, expressed sorrow, and strengthened the wills
of movement activists. Many of these songs were traditional songs of protest,
whereas others were adaptations of spirituals or labor union songs. Marchers
adopted “We Shall Overcome” as the unofficial theme song for the movement,
and “Ain’t Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me ’Round” was widely sung, in slightly dif-
ferent versions, across the terrain of the Black Freedom movement.
O
“We Shall Overcome”
We shall overcome, we shall overcome,
We shall overcome someday.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
We are not afraid, we are not afraid,
We are not afraid today.
3 7 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 404 ---
FREEDOM SONGS, 1960 S 373
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
We are not alone, we are not alone,
We are not alone today.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We are not alone today.
The truth will make us free, the truth will make us free,
The truth will make us free someday.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
We’ll walk hand in hand, we’ll walk hand in hand,
We’ll walk hand in hand someday.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
The Lord will see us through, the Lord will see us through,
The Lord will see us through someday.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
Black and white together, black and white together,
Black and white together now.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
We shall all be free, we shall all be free,
We shall all be free someday.
Oh, deep in my heart, I do believe,
We shall overcome someday.
O
“Ain’t Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me ’Round”
Ain’t gonna let nobody turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let nobody turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let Nervous Nelly turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let Nervous Nelly turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.


--- PAGE 405 ---
Ain’t gonna let Chief Pritchett turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let Chief Pritchett turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let Mayor Kelly turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let Mayor Kelly turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let segregation turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let segregation turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let Z. T. turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let Z. T. turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let no jailhouse turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let no jailhouse turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Ain’t gonna let no injunction turn me ’round,
turn me ’round, turn me ’round,
Ain’t gonna let no injunction turn me ’round,
I’m gonna keep on a walkin’, keep on a talkin’,
Marching up to freedom land.
Source: Traditional songs: “We Shall Overcome” and “Ain’t Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me
’Round.”
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Guy and Candie Carawan, Sing for Freedom: The Story of the Civil Rights Movement
Through Its Songs (Bethlehem, Pa.: A Sing Out Publication, 1990).
Tom Glazer, Songs of Peace, Freedom, and Protest(New York: McKay, 1970).
Movement Soul: Sounds of the Freedom Movement in the South, 1963–1964 , Washington,
D.C.: Folkways, 2000. Sound Recording.
Kerran L. Sanger, “When the Spirit Says Sing!”: The Role of Freedom Songs in the Civil
Rights Movement (New York: Garland, 1995).
Voices of the Civil Rights Movement: Black American Freedom Songs, 1960–1966,
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Folkways, 1997. Sound Recording.
3 7 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 406 ---
E. BAKER, “WE NEED GROUP-CENTERED LEADERSHIP” 3 7 5
O6 O
“We Need Group-Centered Leadership,” Ella Baker
Ella Baker (1903–1986) played an instrumental role in the development of the
civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Baker was born in Norfolk,
Virginia, and grew up in rural Littleton, North Carolina. After graduating from
Shaw University, she organized consumer cooperatives in New York and worked
on consumer affairs for the Works Progress Administration (WPA). In the 1940s
Baker became a national field secretary of the NAACP , traveling throughout the
country organizing branches and developing membership drives. Increasingly,
Baker became disaffected with the NAACP’s leadership, because decision-mak-
ing occurred primarily in the national office rather than in the branch organiza-
tions. In 1957 Baker joined King to help found the SCLC. She directed the SCLC
national office and was instrumental in coordinating major civil disobedience
actions. She became critical of the SCLC because of its emphasis on charismatic
leadership. In 1960 Baker was the principal organizer in helping student protest-
ers establish the SNCC. She solicited funds for SNCC and assisted in planning
strategies for voter registration drives and desegregation campaigns. Baker even-
tually broke with the SCLC after she disagreed with ministers who felt that
SNCC should simply be an arm of the SCLC, rather than an independent orga-
nization. Although she preferred working behind the scenes to playing a public
leadership role, she is widely regarded by scholars as one of the central leaders in
the Black Freedom movement.
O
“BIGGER THAN A HAMBURGER”
Raleigh, N.C.—The Student Leadership Conference made it crystal clear that
current sit-ins and other demonstrations are concerned with something much
bigger than a hamburger or even a giant-sized Coke.
Whatever may be the difference in approach to their goal, the Negro and white
students, North and South, are seeking to rid America of the scourge of racial seg-
regation and discrimination—not only at lunch counters, but in every aspect of life.
In reports, casual conversations, discussion groups, and speeches, the sense and
the spirit of the following statement that appeared in the initial newsletter of the
students at Barber-Scotia College, Concord, N.C., were re-echoed time and again:
We want the world to know that we no longer accept the inferior position of second-
class citizenship. We are willing to go to jail, be ridiculed, spat upon and even suffer
physical violence to obtain First Class Citizenship.
By and large, this feeling that they have a destined date with freedom, was not lim-
ited to a drive for personal freedom, or even freedom for the Negro in the South.


--- PAGE 407 ---
Repeatedly it was emphasized that the movement was concerned with the moral
implications of racial discrimination for the “whole world” and the “Human Race.”
This universality of approach was linked with a perceptive recognition that “it
is important to keep the movement democratic and to avoid struggles for personal
leadership.”
It was further evident that desire for supportive cooperation from adult lead-
ers and the adult community was also tempered by apprehension that adults
might try to “capture” the student movement. The students showed willingness to
be met on the basis of equality, but were intolerant of anything that smacked of
manipulation or domination.
This inclination toward group-centered leadership, rather than toward a leader-
centered group pattern of organization, was refreshing indeed to those of the older
group who bear the scars of the battle, the frustrations and the disillusionment that
come when the prophetic leader turns out to have heavy feet of clay.
However hopeful might be the signs in the direction of group-centeredness,
the fact that many schools and communities, especially in the South, have not
provided adequate experience for young Negroes to assume initiative and think
and act independently accentuated the need for guarding the student movement
against well-meaning, but nevertheless unhealthy, over-protectiveness.
Here is an opportunity for adult and youth to work together and provide gen-
uine leadership—the development of the individual to his highest potential for
the benefit of the group.
Many adults and youth characterized the Raleigh meeting as the greatest or
most significant conference of our period.
Whether it lives up to this high evaluation or not will, in a large measure, be
determined by the extent to which there is more effective training in and under-
standing of non-violent principles and practices, in group dynamics, and in the re-
direction into creative channels of the normal frustrations and hostilities that
result from second-class citizenship.
Source: “Bigger than a Hamburger,” Southern Patriot 18 (June 1960).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Ellen Cantarow, Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change(Old Westbury,
N.Y.: Feminist Press, 1980).
Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981).
Joanne Grant, Ella Baker: Freedom Bound(New York: Wiley, 1998).
Joy James, “Ella Baker, ‘Black Women’s Work’ and Activist Intellectuals,” Black Scholar 24,
no. 2 (1994), pp. 8–15.
Peter J. Ling and Sharon Monteith, eds., Gender and the Civil Rights Movement (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2004).
Shyrlee Pallard, Ella Baker: A Leader behind the Scenes (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Silver
Burdett Press, 1990).
Joanne Grant, Ella Baker: Freedom Bound(New York: Wiley, 1999).
Barbara Ransby, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005).
3 7 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 408 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND NONVIOLENCE 3 7 7
O7 O
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Nonviolence, 1957 and 1963
Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968) was the political and moral leader of the Black
Freedom movement in the mid-twentieth century. King graduated from Moorhouse
College in 1948, and received an M.A. from Crozier Theological Seminary in 1951
and a doctorate from Boston University in 1955. King emerged as an important voice
for civil rights during the Montgomery bus boycott in 1955, and he was the found-
ing president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957.
Drawing inspiration from Mohandas Gandhi, the black church, and various theolo-
gians, King advocated an ethic of nonviolence, not simply as an organizing tactic but
as a way of life. In addition to helping organize several major campaigns of civil dis-
obedience in such diverse places as Albany, Birmingham, Selma, and Chicago, King
won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964. Although he was subjected to illegal surveillance
and harassment by the FBI, King became increasingly radical in his critique of U.S.
society. On economic issues King gravitated toward democratic socialism, advocat-
ing full-employment and social-welfare legislation. At the time of his death in April
1968 he was planning to launch a major Poor People’s Campaign in Washington,
D.C. King was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee.
O
EXCERPT FROM NONVIOLENCE AND RACIAL JUSTICE
It is commonly observed that the crisis in race relations dominates the arena of
American life. This crisis has been precipitated by two factors: the determined
resistance of reactionary elements in the south to the Supreme Court’s momen-
tous decision outlawing segregation in the public schools, and the radical change
in the Negro’s evaluation of himself. While southern legislative halls ring with
open defiance through “interposition” and “nullification,” while a modern version
of the Ku Klux Klan has arisen in the form of “respectable” white citizens’ coun-
cils, a revolutionary change has taken place in the Negro’s conception of his own
nature and destiny, once he thought of himself as an inferior and patiently
accepted injustice and exploitation. Those days are gone.
This new self-respect and sense of dignity on the part of the Negro under-
mined the south’s negative peace, since the white man refused to accept the
change. The tension we are witnessing in race relations today can be explained in
part by this revolutionary change in the Negro’s evaluation of himself and his
determination to struggle and sacrifice until the walls of segregation have been
finally crushed by the battering rams of justice.
The determination of Negro Americans to win freedom from every form of
oppression springs from the same profound longing for freedom that motivates
oppressed peoples all over the world. The rhythmic beat of deep discontent in
Africa and Asia is at the bottom a quest for freedom and human dignity on the part


--- PAGE 409 ---
of people who have long been victims of colonialism. The struggle for freedom on
the part of oppressed people in general and of the American Negro in particular
has developed slowly and is not going to end suddenly. Privileged groups rarely
give up their privileges without strong resistance. But when oppressed people rise
up against oppression there is no stopping point short of full freedom. Realism
compels us to admit that the struggle will continue until freedom is a reality for all
the oppressed peoples of the world.
Hence the basic question which confronts the world’s oppressed is: How is the
struggle against the forces of injustice to be waged? There are two possible
answers. One is resort to the all too prevalent method of physical violence and
corroding hatred. The danger of this method is its futility. Violence solves no
social problems; it merely creates new and more complicated ones. Through the
vistas of time a voice still cries to every potential Peter, “Put up your sword!” The
shores of history are white with the bleached bones of nations and communities
that failed to follow this command. If the American Negro and other victims of
oppression succumb to the temptation of using violence in the struggle for jus-
tice, unborn generations will live in a desolate night of bitterness, and their chief
legacy will be an endless reign of chaos.
The alternative to violence is nonviolent resistance. This method was made
famous in our generation by Mohandas K. Gandhi, who used it to free India from
the domination of the British empire. Five points can be made concerning non-
violence as a method in bringing about better racial conditions.
First, this is not a method for cowards; it does resist. The nonviolent resister is
just as strongly opposed to the evil against which he protests as is the person who
uses violence. His method is passive or nonaggressive in the sense that he is not
physically aggressive toward his opponent. But his mind and emotions are always
active, constantly seeking to persuade the opponent that he is mistaken. This
method is passive physically but strongly active spiritually; it is nonaggressive
physically but dynamically aggressive spiritually.
A second point is that nonviolent resistance does not seek to defeat or humili-
ate the opponent, but to win his friendship and understanding. The nonviolent
resister must often express his protest through noncooperation or boycotts, but
he realizes that noncooperation and boycotts are not ends themselves; they are
merely means to awaken a sense of moral shame in the opponent. The end is
redemption and reconciliation. The aftermath of nonviolence is the creation of
the beloved community, while the aftermath of violence is tragic bitterness.
A third characteristic of this method is that the attack is directed against forces
of evil rather than against persons who are caught in those forces. It is evil we are
seeking to defeat, not the persons victimized by evil. Those of us who struggle
against racial injustice must come to see that the basic tension is not between
races. As I like to say to the people in Montgomery, Alabama: “The tension in this
city is not between white people and Negro people. The tension is at bottom
between justice and injustice, between the forces of light and the forces of dark-
ness. And if there is a victory it will be a victory not merely for 50,000 Negroes,
but a victory for justice and the forces of light. We are out to defeat injustice and
not white persons who may happen to be unjust.”
3 7 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 410 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND NONVIOLENCE 3 7 9
A fourth point that must be brought out concerning nonviolent resistance is
that it avoids not only external physical violence but also internal violence of
spirit. At the center of nonviolence stands the principle of love. In struggling
for human dignity the oppressed people of the world must not allow them-
selves to become bitter or indulge in hate campaigns. To retaliate with hate
and bitterness would do nothing but intensify the hate in the world. Along the
way of life, someone must have sense enough and morality enough to cut off
the chain of hate. This can be done only by projecting the ethics of love to the
center of our lives.
In speaking of love at this point, we are not referring to some sentimental emo-
tion. It would be nonsense to urge men to love their oppressors in an affection-
ate sense. “Love” in this connection means understanding good will. There are
three words for love in the Greek New Testament. First, there is eros. In Platonic
philosophy eros meant the yearning of the soul for the realm of the divine. It has
come now to mean a sort of aesthetic or romantic love. Second, there is philia. It
meant intimate affectionateness between friends. Philia denotes a sort of recip-
rocal love: the person loves because he is loved. When we speak of loving those
who oppose us we refer to neither eros nor philia; we speak of a love which is
expressed in the Greek word agape. Agape means nothing sentimental or basi-
cally affectionate; it means understanding, redeeming good will for all men, an
overflowing love which seeks nothing in return. It is the love of God working in
the lives of men. When we love on the agape level we love men not because we
like them, not because their attitudes and ways appeal to us, but because God
loves them. Here we rise to the position of loving the person who does the evil
deed while hating the deed he does.
Finally, the method of nonviolence is based on the conviction that the universe
is on the side of justice. It is this deep faith in the future that causes the non-
violent resister to accept suffering without retaliation. He knows that in his strug-
gle for justice he has cosmic companionship. This belief that God is on the side
of truth and justice comes down to us from the long tradition of our Christian
faith. There is something at the very center of our faith which reminds us that
Good Friday may reign for a day, but ultimately it must give way to the tri-
umphant beat of the Easter drums. Evil may so shape events that Caesar will
occupy a palace and Christ a cross, but one day that same Christ will rise up and
split history into 
A.D. and B.C., so that even the life of Caesar must be dated by his
name. So in Montgomery we can walk and never get weary, because we know that
there will be a great camp meeting in the promised land of freedom and justice.
This, in brief, is the method of nonviolent resistance. It is a method that chal-
lenges all people struggling for justice and freedom. God grant that we wage the
struggle with dignity and discipline. May all who suffer oppression in this world
reject the self-defeating method of retaliatory violence and choose the method
that seeks to redeem. Through using this method wisely and courageously we will
emerge from the bleak and desolate midnight of man’s inhumanity to man into
the bright daybreak of freedom and justice.
O


--- PAGE 411 ---
I HAVE A DREAM
Five score years ago a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we stand,
signed the Emancipation Proclamation. This momentous decree came as a great
beacon light of hope to millions of Negro slaves who had been seared in the
flames of withering injustice. It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night
of captivity.
But one hundred years later, we must face the tragic fact that the Negro is still
not free. One hundred years later, the life of the Negro is still sadly crippled by
the manacles of segregation and the chains of discrimination. One hundred years
later, the Negro lives on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of
material prosperity. One hundred years later the Negro still languishes in the cor-
ners of American society and finds himself an exile in his own land. So we have
come here today to dramatize an appalling condition.
In a sense we have come to our nation’s capital to cash a check. When the
architects of our republic wrote the magnificent words of the Constitution and
the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which
every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men would be
guaranteed the unalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
It is obvious today that America has defaulted on this promissory note insofar
as her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation,
America has given the Negro people a bad check; a check which has come back
marked “insufficient funds.” But we refuse to believe that the bank of justice is
bankrupt. We refuse to believe that there are insufficient funds in the great vaults
of opportunity of this nation. So we have come to cash this check—a check that
will give us upon demand the riches of freedom and the security of justice. We
have also come to this hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgency of
now. This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tran-
quilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises of
democracy. Now is the time to rise from the dark and desolate valley of segrega-
tion to the sunlit path of racial justice. Now is the time to open the doors of oppor-
tunity to all of God’s children. Now is the time to lift our nation from the quick-
sands of racial injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood.
It would be fatal for the nation to overlook the urgency of the moment and to
underestimate the determination of the Negro. This sweltering summer of the
Negro’s legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an invigorating autumn
of freedom and equality. Nineteen sixty-three is not an end, but a beginning.
Those who hope that the Negro needed to blow off steam and will now be con-
tent will have a rude awakening if the nation returns to business as usual. There
will be neither rest nor tranquillity in America until the Negro is granted his cit-
izenship rights. The whirlwinds of revolt will continue to shake the foundations of
our nation until the bright day of justice emerges.
But there is something that I must say to my people who stand on the warm
threshold which leads into the palace of justice. In the process of gaining our
rightful place we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy
3 8 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 412 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND NONVIOLENCE 3 8 1
our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. We must
forever conduct our struggle on the high plane of dignity and discipline. We must
not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence. Again and
again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul
force. The marvelous new militancy which has engulfed the Negro community
must not lead us to a distrust of all white people, for many of our white brothers,
as evidenced by their presence here today, have come to realize that their destiny
is tied up with our destiny and their freedom is inextricably bound to our free-
dom. We cannot walk alone.
And as we walk, we must make the pledge that we shall march ahead. We can-
not turn back. There are those who are asking the devotees of civil rights, “When
will you be satisfied?” We can never be satisfied as long as the Negro is the vic-
tim of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality. We can never be satisfied as
long as our bodies, heavy with the fatigue of travel, cannot gain lodging in the
motels of the highways and the hotels of the cities. We cannot be satisfied as long
as the Negro’s basic mobility is from a smaller ghetto to a larger one. We can
never be satisfied as long as a Negro in Mississippi cannot vote and a Negro in
New York believes he has nothing for which to vote. No, no, we are not satisfied,
and we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness
like a mighty stream.
I am not unmindful that some of you have come here out of great trials and
tribulations. Some of you have come fresh from narrow jail cells. Some of you
have come from areas where your quest for freedom left you battered by the
storms of persecution and staggered by the winds of police brutality. You have
been the veterans of creative suffering. Continue to work with the faith that
unearned suffering is redemptive.
Go back to Mississippi, go back to Alabama, go back to South Carolina, go back
to Georgia, go back to Louisiana, go back to the slums and ghettos of our modern
cities, knowing that somehow this situation can and will be changed. Let us not
wallow in the valley of despair.
I say to you today, my friends, that in spite of the difficulties and frustrations
of the moment I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American
dream.
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning
of its creed: “We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal.”
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former
slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the
table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a desert state swel-
tering with the heat of injustice and oppression, will be transformed into an oasis
of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where
they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their
character.


--- PAGE 413 ---
I have a dream today.
I have a dream that one day the state of Alabama, whose governor’s lips are
presently dripping with the words of interposition and nullification, will be trans-
formed into a situation where little black boys and black girls will be able to join
hands with little white boys and white girls and walk together as sisters and
brothers.
I have a dream today.
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, every hill and moun-
tain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plains, and the crooked
places will be made straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all
flesh shall see it together.
This is our hope. This is the faith with which I return to the South. With this
faith we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope. With
this faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a
beautiful symphony of brotherhood. With this faith we will be able to work
together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up
for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one day.
This will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to sing with new mean-
ing, “My country ’tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing. Land where my
fathers died, land of the pilgrim’s pride, from every mountainside, let freedom ring.”
And if America is to be a great nation this must become true. So let freedom
ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire. Let freedom ring from the
mighty mountains of New York. Let freedom ring from the heightening
Alleghenies of Pennsylvania!
Let freedom ring from the snowcapped Rockies of Colorado!
Let freedom ring from the curvaceous peaks of California!
But not only that; let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia!
Let freedom ring from Lookout Mountain of Tennessee!
Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi. From every
mountainside, let freedom ring.
When we let freedom ring, when we let it ring from every village and every
hamlet, from every state and every city, we will be able to speed up that day when
all of God’s children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants
and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old Negro
spiritual, “Free at last! Free at last! Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!”
Sources: (1) Excerpts from “Nonviolence and Racial Justice,” copyright 1957 by Martin
Luther King, Jr., copyright renewed 1985 by Coretta Scott King; and (2) “I Have a Dream”
speech delivered at the March on Washington, August 28, 1963, copyright 1963 by Martin
Luther King, Jr., copyright renewed 1991 by Coretta Scott King. Both are reprinted by
arrangement with The Heirs to the Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., c/o Writers House,
Inc., as agent for the proprietor.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Taylor Branch, At Canaan’s Edge: America in the King Years, 1965–1968(New York: Simon
& Schuster Paperbacks, 2007).
3 8 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 414 ---
J.R. LEWIS, “THE REVOLUTION IS AT HAND” 3 8 3
———, Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–1963 (New York: Simon &
Schuster Paperbacks, 2005).
———, Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years, 1963–1965(New York: Simon & Schuster,
1999).
Clayborne Carson, ed., The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., 6 vols. (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1992).
David Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King and the Southern Christian Leader-
ship Conference (New York: Morrow, 1988).
Martin Luther King, Jr., Stride toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story(New York: Harper
and Row, 1958).
———, Strength to Love (New York: Harper and Row, 1964).
———, Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community?(New York: Harper and Row,
1967).
David L. Lewis, King: A Critical Biography(New York: Praeger, 1970).
James Melvin Washington, ed., A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings of Martin
Luther King, Jr.(San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1968).
O8 O
“The Revolution Is at Hand,” John R. Lewis, 1963
John R. Lewis (1940– ) was born in poverty in Troy, Alabama, and received a
bachelor’s degree from Fisk University in 1963. As a student in Nashville, Lewis
firmly believed in nonviolent social protest, and was involved in a wide array of
sit-ins, freedom rides, and marches. He also served as chairman of SNCC from
1963 to 1966. In 1963, Lewis gave an address at the March on Washington that
stirred controversy when some of the march organizers insisted that aspects of his
speech that forcefully criticized the Kennedy administration be deleted at the last
minute. (The passage below reprints the original text, before it was censored.) In
the 1970s, Lewis launched a successful political career in Atlanta. In 1986 Lewis
upset the highly favored candidacy of Julian Bond to become a Democratic con-
gressman from Georgia in the U.S. House of Representatives. In 1991 Lewis was
appointed as one of three chief deputy whips in the House, thereby becoming
one of the most influential politicians in Congress. Lewis’s long history within the
Black Freedom movement has given him a moral authority that many other
elected officials lack.
O
We march today for jobs and freedom, but we have nothing to be proud of, for
hundreds and thousands of our brothers are not here—for they have no money
for their transportation, for they are receiving starvation wages . . . or no wages
at all.


--- PAGE 415 ---
In good conscience, we cannot support the administration’s civil-rights bill, for
it is too little, and too late. There’s not one thing in the bill that will protect our
people from police brutality.1
The voting section of this bill will not help the thousands of citizens who want
to vote; will not help the citizens of Mississippi, of Alabama and Georgia who are
qualified to vote, who are without a sixth-grade education. “One Man, One Vote,”
is the African cry. It is ours, too.
People have been forced to move for they have exercised their right to regis-
ter to vote. What is in the bill that will protect the homeless and starving people
of this nation? What is there in this bill to insure the equality of a maid who earns
five dollars a week in the home of a family whose income is a hundred thousand
dollars a year?
This bill will not protect young children and old women from police dogs and
fire hoses for engaging in peaceful demonstrations. This bill will not protect the
citizens in Danville, Virginia, who must live in constant fear in a police state.
2 This
bill will not protect the hundreds of people who have been arrested on trumped-
up charges, like those in Americus, Georgia, where four young men are in jail,
facing a death penalty, for engaging in peaceful protest.
For the first time in a hundred years this nation is being awakened to the fact
that segregation is evil and it must be destroyed in all forms. Our presence today
proves that we have been aroused to the point of action.
We are now involved in a serious revolution. This nation is still a place of cheap
political leaders allying themselves with open forms of political, economic and
social exploitation.
In some parts of the South we have worked in the fields from sun-up to sun-
down for twelve dollars a week. In Albany, Georgia, we have seen our people
indicted by the federal government for peaceful protest, while the Deputy Sheriff
beat Attorney C. B. King and left him half-dead; while local police officials kicked
and assaulted the pregnant wife of Slater King, and she lost her baby.
It seems to me that the Albany indictment is part of a conspiracy on the part
of the federal government and local politicians for political expediency.
I want to know, Which side is the federal government on?
The revolution is at hand, and we must free ourselves of the chains of political
and economic slavery. The nonviolent revolution is saying, “We will not wait for the
courts to act, for we have been waiting hundreds of years. We will not wait for the
President, nor the Justice Department, nor Congress, but we will take matters into
our own hands, and create a great source of power, outside of any national struc-
ture that could and would assure us victory.” For those who have said, “Be patient
and wait!” we must say, “Patience is a dirty and nasty word.” We cannot be patient,
we do not want to be free gradually, we want our freedom, and we want it now. We
cannot depend on any political party, for both the Democrats and the Republicans
have betrayed the basic principles of the Declaration of Independence.
We all recognize the fact that if any radical social, political and economic
changes are to take place in our society, the people, the masses must bring them
3 8 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 416 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS, “SALVATION OF AMERICAN NEGROES . . .” 3 8 5
about. In the struggle we must seek more than mere civil rights; we must work
for the community of love, peace and true brotherhood. Our minds, souls and
hearts cannot rest until freedom and justice exist for all the people.
The revolution is a serious one. Mr. Kennedy is trying to take the revolution
out of the streets and put it in the courts. Listen, Mr. Kennedy, listen, Mr.
Congressman, listen, fellow citizens—the black masses are on the march for jobs
and freedom, and we must say to the politicians that there won’t be a “cooling-off
period.”
We won’t stop now. All of the forces of Eastland, Barnett and Wallace won’t
stop this revolution. The next time we march, we won’t march on Washington, but
we will march through the South, through the Heart of Dixie, the way Sherman
did. We will make the action of the past few months look petty. And I say to you,
Wake up America!!
All of us must get in the revolution—get in and stay in the streets of every city,
village and hamlet of this nation, until true freedom comes, until the revolution is
complete. The black masses in the Delta of Mississippi, in Southwest Georgia,
Alabama, Harlem, Chicago, Philadelphia and all over this nation are on the
march.
Notes: 1. This was changed to read: “True, we support the administration’s civil-rights bill,
but this bill will not protect young children and old women from police dogs and fire hoses.
. . .” 2. In Danville, Virginia, policemen, armed with submachine guns and in armored cars,
regularly broke up mass demonstrations by Negroes. After each demonstration, scores of
Negroes were taken to hospitals with fractured skulls and lacerations.
Source: Speech by John Lewis, delivered at the March on Washington, August 28, 1963,
courtesy of U.S. Representative John Lewis.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–1963(New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1988).
Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1981).
John Lewis, Walking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1998).
O9 O
“The Salvation of American Negroes Lies in Socialism,” W. E. B. Du Bois
For two generations, Du Bois was the premier voice of reform within the Black
Freedom movement. In the early 1930s he began to study Marxism seriously for
the first time. He visited the Soviet Union and was generally impressed with its


--- PAGE 417 ---
cultural and socioeconomic gains under socialism. In 1944, Du Bois returned to
the NAACP as the director of research, but was dismissed from the organization
four years later, largely because of his increasingly radical political views. During
the Cold War Du Bois was subjected to intense political harassment and surveil-
lance by the U.S. government. His passport was seized and his ability to earn a
living virtually disappeared. Du Bois’s books were deemed subversive, and even
the NAACP national leadership isolated itself from his plight.
Du Bois courageously fought against McCarthyism and challenged the cen-
sorship of radical ideas inside the United States. By the 1950s he had long since
rejected the concept of the “Talented Tenth” as the vanguard for social change
within the black community. An extensive visit to the People’s Republic of China
in 1959 profoundly influenced Du Bois, and he came to the conclusion that “cap-
italism cannot reform itself; it is doomed to self-destruction.” Four days after he
formally applied for admission to join the Communist Party, he left the United
States to live and work in Ghana. Less than two years later, on the eve of the 1963
March on Washington, D.C., Du Bois died at the age of ninety-five.
O
THE NEGRO AND SOCIALISM
The United States, which would like to be regarded as a democracy devoted to
peace, finds itself today making the greatest preparations for war of any nation on
earth and holding elections where citizens have no opportunity to vote for the
policies which they prefer.
What are the causes of this contradictory situation? First, we know that our
main reason in preparing for war is the fact that slowly but surely socialism has
spread over the world and become a workable form of government. Today for
the first time in history the majority of mankind live under socialist regimes,
either complete socialism as in the Soviet Union and China, or partial socialism
as in India and Scandinavia. Most Americans profess to believe that this spread
of socialism is mainly the result of a conspiracy led by the Soviet Union and
abetted by a section of American citizens. For fear of this group, we have cur-
tailed democratic government, limited civil liberties, and planned war on a
gigantic scale.
The spread of socialism in the last one hundred years is unquestionably a fact.
It stemmed from growing protest against that tremendous expansion of business
enterprise which followed the French revolution. This private initiative and eco-
nomic anarchy resulted in the factory system, which stemmed from the American
slave trade, the sugar empire and the cotton kingdom. All this was concurrent
with such suffering and degradation among the laboring masses that by the end
of the nineteenth century there was hardly a man of thought and feeling, scarcely
a scientist nor an artist, who did not believe that socialism must eventually sup-
plant unbridled private capitalism, or civilization would die.
All over the earth since the Civil War in America, socialism has grown and
spread and become more and more definite. It has emerged from dream and doc-
3 8 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 418 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS, “SALVATION OF AMERICAN NEGROES . . .” 3 8 7
trinaire fantasy such as characterized Fourier and St. Simon into the rounded
doctrine of Karl Marx and finally into the socialist states of Lenin and Mao Tse-
tung. In all this struggling advance lay the central idea that men must work for a
living, but that the results of their work must not mainly be to support privileged
persons and concentrate power in the hands of the owners of wealth; that the wel-
fare of the mass of people should be the main object of government.
To ensure this end the conviction grew that government must increasingly be
controlled by the governed: that the mass of people, increasing in intelligence,
with incomes sufficient to live a good and healthy life, should control all govern-
ment, and that they would be able to do this by the spread of science and scien-
tific technique, access to truth, the use of reason, and freedom of thought and of
creative impulse in art and literature.
The difficulty of accomplishing this lay in the current culture patterns—in
repressive religious dogmas, and in the long inculcated belief that nothing better
than private ownership and control of capital could be planned, with human
nature as it is.
Democratic control, therefore, while it increased, tended to be narrowly polit-
ical rather than economic. It had to do with the selection of officials rather than
with work and income. Discovery of new natural forces and of increased use of
machines with intricate industrial techniques tended to put land, labor, and the
ownership of capital and wealth into control of the few who were fortunate or
aggressive or unscrupulous and to emphasize a belief that, while the mass of cit-
izens might share in government by electing officials to administer law, and legis-
lators might make laws in certain areas of government, the people could not con-
trol industry or limit income.
As science increased its mastery of nature and as industry began to use world
trade to expand markets, an entirely new problem of government arose. Industry
realized that, unless industrial organization largely controlled government, it
could not control land and labor, monopolize materials, set prices in the world
market, and regulate credit and currency. For this purpose new and integrated
world industry arose called “Big Business”—a misleading misnomer. Its signifi-
cance lay not simply in its size. It was not just little shops grown larger. It was an
organized super-government of mankind in matters of work and wages, directed
with science and skill for the private profit of individuals. It could not be con-
trolled by popular vote unless that vote was intelligent, experienced, and cast by
persons essentially equal in income and power. The overwhelming majority of
mankind was still ignorant, sick and poverty stricken.
Repeated and varying devices for keeping and increasing democratic control
over industry and wealth were regularly rendered useless by the superior training
and moral unscrupulousness of the owners of wealth, as against the ignorance and
inexperience of the voters. Bribery of the poorer voters; threats and even violence;
fear of the future and organized conspiracy of the interested few against the unor-
ganized many; lying and deftly spread propaganda used race hate, religious dogma
and differing family and class interests to ruin democracy. In our own day we have
seen that the income tax, designed to place the burden of government expense on


--- PAGE 419 ---
property owners in ratio to income, actually lays the heaviest weight of taxation on
the low income classes, while the rich individuals and corporations escape with the
least proportion of taxes.
When the American farmers and workers revolted against the beginnings of
the British colonial system and set out to establish a republic of free and equal cit-
izens, it seemed to most thinking people that a new era in the development of
western civilization had begun. Here, beyond the privilege of titled Europe,
beyond the deep-seated conditioning of the masses to hereditary inequality and
subservience to luxury and display, was to arise a nation of equal men. That equal-
ity was to be based on economic opportunity, which, as Karl Marx later preached,
was the only real equality.
But unfortunately while the United States proclaimed, it never adopted com-
plete equality. First, it prolonged the European recognition of property as more
significant than manhood. Then it discovered that theft of land from the Indians
was not murder but a method of progress. Next, America reduced the African
labor, which rising British commerce had forced on her, to slave status and gained
thereby such fabulous income from tobacco, sugar and cotton that Europe
became the center of triumphant private capitalism, and the United States its
handmaid to furnish free land and cheap labor.
This nation had to fight a Civil War to prevent all American labor from becom-
ing half enslaved. Thus, from 1620 when the Puritans landed until 1865 when
slavery was abolished, there was no complete democracy in the United States.
This was not only because a large part of the laboring class was enslaved, but also
because white labor was in competition with slaves and thus itself not really free.
In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, while socialism advanced in the
leading European nations and in North America, in most of the world European
monopoly of wealth and technique—strengthened by theories of the natural infe-
riority of most human beings—led to the assumed right of western Europe to rule
the world for the benefit and amusement of white people. This theory of world
domination was hidden behind the rise of the western working classes, and
helped keep democracy and social progress from eastern Europe, Asia, and
Africa; from Central and South America, and the islands of the seven seas.
In Western Europe a labor movement, and popular education kept forcing
increasing numbers of the workers and of the middle classes into a larger share of
economic power. But on the other hand, the mass of colored labor, and white
labor in backward Latin and Slavic lands, were reduced to subordinate social sta-
tus so that increased profit from their land and labor helped to maintain the high
profits and high wages of industry in Western Europe and North America. Also it
was easy there to hire white soldiers to keep “niggers,” “chinks,” “dagoes,” and
“hunkies” in their places. This was the essence of colonial imperialism. It was
industry organized on a world scale, and holding most of mankind in such eco-
nomic subjection as would return the largest profit to the owners of wealth.
Meantime, the new effort to achieve socialism, fathered by Karl Marx and his
successors, increased. It declared that even before the mass of workers were
intelligent and experienced enough themselves to conduct modern industry,
3 8 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 420 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS, “SALVATION OF AMERICAN NEGROES . . .” 3 8 9
industrial guidance might be furnished them by a dictatorship of their own intel-
ligent and devoted leaders. As knowledge and efficiency increased, democracy
would spread among the masses and they would become capable of conducting a
modern welfare state. This social program the world governed by owners of cap-
ital regarded as impossible without the dictatorship falling out of their well-mean-
ing hands and into the hands of demagogues. Every sort of force was employed
to stop even the attempt to set up such states. Yet the first World War, caused by
rivalry over the ownership of colonies, resulted in the effort to start a complete
socialist state in Russia; and after the second World War, arising from the same
causes as the first, a similar attempt was made in China.
Despite wide and repeated opposition, which used every despicable and crim-
inal method possible, both of these states have become so successful and strong
that their overthrow by outside force or inner revolt does not today seem at all
likely. Also and meantime, in all leading countries, socialistic legislation steadily
increased. It did not creep. It advanced with powerful strides.
This development has emphasized the fight between beleaguered private cap-
italism and advancing socialism, the Communists pointing out the unnecessary
lag of socialization in western lands and the capitalists accusing communism of
undemocratic dictatorship.
In order to fight socialism, super Big Business, as contrasted with ordinary small
business enterprise, had to become itself socialism in reverse. If public welfare
instead of private profit became its object, if public officials supplanted private
owners, socialistic government would be in control of industry. However, those
Americans who hope that the welfare state will thus be realized under a system of
private capital are today having the carpet pulled from beneath their feet by the
recession of democracy in the United States. This has come about by the repudi-
ation of socialism by organized labor and the consequent refusal of the labor vote
to follow even the goals of the New Deal. This surrender of labor has been led by
the new industrial South, with favorable climate, cheap labor, and half that labor
disfranchised and most of it unorganized. The mass of Southerners do not vote. In
the Congressional District where the black boy [Emmett] Till was murdered,
there live 400,000 Negroes and 300,000 whites. Yet only 7,000 voters went to the
polls to elect the present Congressman. The disfranchisement of the black half of
the labor vote in the South keeps Negroes poor, sick, and ignorant. But it also hurts
white labor by making democratic government unworkable so long as the South
has from three to ten times the voting power of the North and West.
Because of this systematic and illegal disfranchisement, a majority of American
voters can often be outvoted by a minority. Laws like the McCarran and Smith
Acts can become illegal statutes, because a minority of voters can prevail over a
majority. Figures to prove this are easy to adduce, but I only mention now the fact
that former Senator Lehman of New York represented the vote of 5 million citi-
zens who went to the polls, while Senator Eastland of Mississippi represented less
than 150 thousand voters. Yet Eastland was far more powerful than Lehman.
This loss of democratic control of the government of our nation can be even
more clearly demonstrated. There was no effective candidate for the Presidency


--- PAGE 421 ---
in the last national election who stood pledged for peace, disarmament, abolition
of the draft, lower taxes, recognition of the right of the Soviet Union and China
to have the government which they choose and for stopping our effort to force
other nations to do as we want them to do. Not only did we have no chance to
decide our foreign policy, but we were equally helpless in deciding our course in
domestic affairs. Our system of education is falling to pieces. We need teachers
and school houses by the millions, but we cannot have them if we continue mak-
ing weapons at the present rate and setting our youth to learning death and
destruction instead of building, healing, and teaching.
Is this curtailment of democracy the result of knowledge and discussion? On
the contrary, knowledge and discussion are today so far curtailed that most men
do not even attempt to express their opinions, lest they be accused of treason or
conspiracy.
Why is this?
At the very time when the colonial peoples were trying desperately to have food
and freedom, powerful Americans became obsessed by the ambition to have North
America replace Britain as the empire upon which the sun never dared to set. They
demanded high profits and high wages even if the rest of the world starved. In
order to restore world rule of organized industry, shaken by war and depression,
the United States prefers preparation for universal and continuous world war, until
a colonial imperialism in some form is restored under our leadership.
To this program most people of the United States have submitted. How was
such submission brought about? Such a national policy found unexpected support
in our long encouraged prejudice against people with black or colored skins and
against all groups of foreign-born who were not of Anglo-Saxon descent. This
provincial point of view, repudiated by science and religion, still remains in Amer-
ica a living and powerful motive guiding our lives and likes. This support of the
colonial system by American race prejudice has resulted in our present program
of war. How was this accomplished? How have the majority of American people
been convinced that preparation for war, suspension of civil liberties and curtail-
ment of democracy are our best paths to progress?
America is an intelligent nation, despite large illiterate groups and the lack of
an integrated background of culture. We still have large numbers of the poor and
sick, but our average income is far higher than that of most nations. This nation
wants to do right, as evidenced by a plethora of churches and a wide and loud pro-
fession of religion. If any country is ready for increase of democracy, it is the
United States. Yet we are preparing our sons for war, because we actually have
been induced to believe that the Soviet Union is behind a world-wide criminal
conspiracy to destroy the United States and that socialism is the result. The state-
ment is so fantastic that most foreign peoples cannot conceive how it can be true
that we really accept this fairy tale.
To restore our lost opportunity to make huge profit on private investment in
Russia, the Balkans, and particularly in China, Big Business has restricted and
guided public access to truth. It has dominated news gathering, monopolized the
3 9 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 422 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS, “SALVATION OF AMERICAN NEGROES . . .” 3 9 1
press and limited publishing. By fear of losing employment, by secret police and
high pay to informers, often confessed liars; by control of education and limita-
tion of radio and television and censorship of the drama—by all these methods
and others, the public opinion of the nation has been forced into one iron chan-
nel of disaster.
In order to let the nation return to normal sanity we must realize that social-
ism is not a crime nor a conspiracy, but the path of progress toward which the feet
of all mankind are set. Some of the greatest intellectual leaders of our era have
been advocates of socialism: Charles Kingsley, Leo Tolstoi, Edward Bellamy,
William Morris, Henry George, Robert Owen, Bernard Shaw, Sidney and
Beatrice Webb, Kier Hardie, H. G. Wells, Harold Laski. The footsteps of the long
oppressed and staggering masses are not always straight and sure, but their mis-
takes can never cause the misery and distress which the factory system caused in
Europe, colonial imperialism caused in Asia and Africa, and which slavery, lynch-
ing, disfranchisement, and Jim Crow legislation have caused in the United States.
Our way out of this impasse is straight and clear and as old as the struggle of
freedom for the mind of man: Americans must face the facts at all costs. Walking
with determination through a morass of deliberate distortion, we must insist on
the right to know the truth, to discuss it and to listen to its interpretation by men
of intelligence and honesty; we must restore to all citizens their civil rights and
the right to vote, no matter whether they are Negroes, Communists, or natural-
ized foreign-born. We must insist that our foreign policy as well as our domestic
problems and especially our problem of industry, be subjects on which we shall
have the right to vote.
Meantime, we are prisoners of propaganda. The people of the United States
have become completely sold to that method of conducting industry which has
been so powerful and triumphant in the world for two centuries that Americans
regard it as the only normal way of life. We regard the making of things and their
purchase and sale for private profit as the chief end of living. We look on paint-
ing and poetry as harmless play. We regard literature as valuable only as hand-
maiden to industry. We teach Business as a science when it is only an art of legal
theft. We regard advertising as a profession even when it teaches the best way to
lie. We consider the unselfish sacrifice of one to the progress of all as wasted
effort. Wealth is the height of human ambition even when we have no idea of how
to spend it, except to make more wealth or to waste it in harmful or useless osten-
tation. We want high profits and high wages even if most of the world starves.
Putting aside questions of right, and suspecting all our neighbors of being as
selfish as we ourselves are, we have adopted a creed of wholesale selfishness. We
believe that, if all people work for their own selfish advantage, the whole world
will be the best of possible worlds. This is the rat race upon which we are set, and
we are suspicious and afraid of folk who oppose this program and plead for the
old kindliness, the new use of power and machine for the good of the unfortunate
and the welfare of all the world of every race and color. We can and do give char-
ity abundantly, particularly when we are giving away money or things which we


--- PAGE 423 ---
cannot ourselves use. We give to beggars but we hate the beggars who recoil from
begging. This is what stands back of our murderous war preparation as well as
back of our endless itch to be rich. At any cost, or in any way, this is our reason
for living, gambling on radio, on stock exchange or on race track is our way of life.
The power of wealth and private industry extends itself over education, litera-
ture and art and we live in fear, with a deliberately low standard of culture, lest
democracy displace monopoly of wealth in the control of the state.
One of the devastating effects of our current education on our youth is the
training of them by military officials. They are indoctrinated by propaganda
against socialism, by ridicule for their attachment to their mothers, and with dis-
respect for all women. They learn to kill and destroy, and force as a social method
of progress is extolled. Small wonder that what we call “juvenile delinquency”
increases among us.
One of the contradictions of our day is our argument about the distribution of
property and the relative size of incomes, at a time when secrecy as to the truth
about these matters is a matter of official compulsion, and most carefully guarded
on the ground that a man’s income is his private business and the ownership of
property concerns the owner primarily. These propositions are false and ridicu-
lous. The distribution of income is a public affair since it is increasingly the result
of public function. Property is a matter of state control, permitted to rest in pri-
vate hands only so long as it is of public benefit that it should so rest. For any rea-
sonable thought or action concerning property, there should come first open
information as to its ownership. Without that, no science or ethic of wealth is pos-
sible. We can only guess madly and conclude erroneously. Taking the meager
guesswork of the United States census, as some approximation of the truth: it is
clear that the poor are still with us in this rich land.
There are nearly 40 percent of our families who receive less than $2,000 a year
and over six million of our 46
1/2 million families receive less than $500. In addi-
tion to this there is a psychological poverty, in some ways more frightening than
actual lack of income: there is the great number of artisans, white-collar workers
and professional men who could live plainly on their incomes but who skimp and
borrow and gamble, and sometimes steal to “keep up with the Joneses”; who drive
a car and spend too little on food and medicine; who buy fur coats and crowd into
one room. American culture is made uneasy and insane by the millions among us
who expect in some way to get flamboyantly rich and cannot be satisfied with that
simple life which all experience teaches is the finest and best.
Especially must American Negroes, awaking from their present fear and
lethargy, reassert that leadership in the American world of culture which Phillis
Wheatly began in the eighteenth century, Frederick Douglass led in the nine-
teenth, and James Weldon Johnson and Carter Woodson advanced in the twenti-
eth. American Negroes must study socialism, its rise in Europe and Asia, and its
peculiar suitability for the emancipation of Africa. They must realize that no sys-
tem of reform offers the American Negro such real emancipation as socialism.
The capitalism which so long ruled Europe and North America was founded on
3 9 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 424 ---
W.E.B. DU BOIS, “SALVATION OF AMERICAN NEGROES . . .” 3 9 3
Negro slavery in America, and that slavery will never completely disappear so
long as private capitalism continues to survive.
The fight to preserve racial segregation along the color line in the United
States only helps to drive the American Negro that much faster into the arms of
socialism. The movement of the whole nation toward the welfare state, and away
from the concept of private profit as the only object of industry, is bound to show
itself sooner or later in the whole nation. But if the Negro tenth of the nation is
forced ahead by color discrimination, the socialization of the nation will come that
much sooner. Consider the situation: there are today about 16 million Americans
of admitted Negro descent. They are by reason of this descent subjected to pub-
lic insult, loss of opportunity to work according to ability or to receive wages level
with white workers; most of these people are disfranchised and segregated in
education, travel, civil rights and public recreation. Ten million of these Negroes
are poor, receiving less than $50 a week per family. Half of them cannot read or
write. They live mostly in the rural districts and small towns of the former slave
states, whence their efforts to escape are hindered by law, mob violence, and
scarcity of places of refuge which welcome or give them work or places to live.
Above this depressed 10 million are 4 million Negroes who are economically
insecure and on the edge of poverty. They work as laborers and servants in the
towns and cities. They can read and write, but among them are a class of crimi-
nals. Next come 1
1/2 million middle-class Negroes living in cities. They have edu-
cation and property and are engaged in semiskilled work and white-collar jobs.
Many are trained in the better-paid work of personal service, some are teachers
and ministers of religion. Out of this group have come the leading intelligentsia.
At the economic apex of this middle economic group are a half million Negroes
who are well-to-do, receiving at least $10,000 a year. They are professional and
business men, civil servants and public entertainers. They have good, sometimes
elaborate homes, motor cars and servants. They live mostly in the larger cities.
When discussing American Negroes, one must distinguish among these
classes. Southerners raving about the degradation of Negroes are usually talking
about their disfranchised and exploited serfs. Negroes talking of their progress
are usually referring to their bourgeoisie. But the Negro intelligentsia must ask
how it happens that in free, rich America so many Negroes must be poor, sick and
ignorant while in Communist Russia, peasants who were emancipated at nearly
the same time as Negroes, live without poverty, with universal education and with
national attack on disease? Why is it that the Chinese coolie, who recently was as
low as the Negro slave, is today a man in his own country, with the blood-sucking
whites driven out? Every effort is made in America to suppress this line of
thought among Negroes; but as thought in America regains its lost freedom, as
democracy begins to replace plutocracy, the social thought of the nation will find
increasing support from Negroes.
Even before such freedom comes, the segregated Negro group will increasingly
be forced toward socialistic methods to solve their inner problems. They will unite
in boycotts as in Montgomery, Alabama; they will turn to consumers’ cooperation;


--- PAGE 425 ---
a new Negro literature must soon burst out of prison bonds and it will find in
socialism practically its only voice. Negro schools and colleges, so long as students
are excluded from public education, will become centers of thought where the
Soviet Union and China cannot escape intelligent discussion.
The modern rise of Africans in the twentieth century to self-expression and
organized demand for autonomy and freedom was due in large part to the Pan-
African movement started by American Negroes. Today every part of Africa has
a national congress fighting for the ends which the Pan-American movement
started in 1919. Further leadership of Africa by black America has been stopped
—but too late. Already the Africans have their own leaders, and these leaders like
Nkrumah and Azikiwe are quite aware of the Soviet Union and China and are
building their new nations on socialist lines.
Moreover as the mass of the colored peoples of the world move toward social-
ism in Asia and Africa, it is inevitable that they influence American Negroes. I had
long hoped that American Negroes would lead this procession because of their
chances for education. But “philanthropy,” disguised in bribes, and “religion”
cloaked in hypocrisy, strangled Negro education and stilled the voices of prophets.
The yellow, brown and black thinkers of Asia have forged ahead. But nevertheless
the black folk of America will hear their voices and, what is more compelling, will
see their outstanding success. On March 6, 1957, when ancient Ghana was reborn
in West Africa, American Negroes realized how far toward socialism this group of
black folk had gone. Soon, too, socialism in the black Sudan, in East Africa, the
Belgian Congo and South Africa will place the Black world in the train of Soviet
Russia, China, and India and tear loose from the allegiance, which American
Negroes try now to profess, to the dictatorship of wealth in the United States.
One thing and one alone keeps socialism from growing even more rapidly than
it is—that is fear of war and especially of attack by the Soviet Union and China.
Most of our vast national income is being spent for preparation for such war and
we have but small funds left for education, health and water development and
control which we so sorely need. The frantic and continual cultivation of the
national fear goes on just as the danger of war decreases. The class structure of
our nation grows tremendously at the very time that our propagandists are
fiercely denying it. We have a privileged class of men with more income than they
can possibly spend and more power than they can hire brains to use. In the guise
of idle rich, with trained executives and with a vast and useless military organiza-
tion throwing away the taxes piled on the workers, this ruling clique outrivals the
aristocracy of George III or Louis XIV . We have a middle class of white-collar
workers, technicians, artisans, artists, professional men and teachers able to live
in comfort so long as they restrict their thought and planning, and deceive them-
selves in thinking they will sometime join the “independently” rich.
Our last presidential election was a farce. We had no chance to vote for the
questions in which we were really interested: Peace, Disarmament, the Draft,
unfair taxation, race bias, education, social medicine, and flood control. On the
contrary we had before us one ticket under two names and the nominees shadow-
boxed with false fanfare and advertisement for the same policies, with infinitesi-
3 9 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 426 ---
F .L. HAMER, “PLIGHT AND ROLE OF BLACK WOMEN” 3 9 5
mal shades of difference and with spurious earnestness. Small wonder that half of
the American voters stayed home.
Thus it is clear today that the salvation of American Negroes lies in socialism.
They should support all measures and men who favor the welfare state; they
should vote for government ownership of capital in industry; they should favor
strict regulation of corporations or their public ownership; they should vote to
prevent monopoly from controlling the press and the publishing of opinions.
They should favor public ownership and control of water, electric, and atomic
power; they should stand for a clean ballot, the encouragement of third parties,
independent candidates, and the elimination of graft and gambling on television
and even in churches.
The question of the method by which the socialist state can be achieved must
be worked out by experiment and reason and not by dogma. Whether or not
methods which were right and clear in Russia and China fit our circumstances is
for our intelligence to decide. The atom bomb has revolutionized our thought.
Peace is not only preferable today, it is increasingly inevitable. Passive resistance
is not the end of action, but the beginning. After refusing to fight, there is the
question how to live. The Negro church which stops discrimination against bus
riders must next see how those riders can earn a decent living and not remain
helplessly exploited by those who own busses and make Jim Crow laws. This may
well be a difficult program, but it is the only one.
Sources: Excerpt from “The Negro and Socialism,” in Helen Alfred, ed., Toward a Socialist
America (New York: Peace Publications, 1958), pp. 179–91.
O10 O
“The Special Plight and the Role of Black Women,” Fannie Lou Hamer
Born Fannie Lou Townsend (1917–1977), Hamer was the youngest of twenty
children in a family of sharecroppers, and she left school in the sixth grade in
order to work full time on a Mississippi plantation. She toiled for most of her life
in rural poverty and became involved in civil rights activism, when she began
working with the SNCC in 1962. As an SNCC organizer in Sunflower County,
Mississippi, she assisted local black residents in registering to vote. Hamer
became vice chair of the insurgent Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP) in 1964, and campaigned for Congress from Mississippi’s second con-
gressional district. As a leader of the MFDP , Hamer participated in a widely pub-
licized challenge to the all-white Mississippi delegation at the 1964 National
Democratic Convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey. In a moving public presen-
tation, Hamer testified before the convention’s credentials committee about how
she had been severely beaten when she and other civil rights activists attempted


--- PAGE 427 ---
to challenge Jim Crow laws in Winona, Mississippi. Hamer subsequently estab-
lished the Freedom Farm Cooperative and was instrumental in building a low-
income daycare center and two hundred units of low-income housing for her
Mississippi community. Hamer consistently fought for women’s rights, economic
justice, and black empowerment, and her deep influence among a generation of
black activists cannot be overemphasized.
O
The special plight and the role of black women is not something that just hap-
pened three years ago. We’ve had a special plight for 350 years. My grandmother
had it. My grandmother was a slave. She died in 1960. She was 136 years old. She
died in Mount Bayou, Mississippi.
It’s been a special plight for the black woman. I remember my uncles and some
of my aunts—and that’s why it really tickled me when you talked about integra-
tion. Because I’m very black, but I remember some of my uncles and some of my
aunts was as white as anybody in here, and blue-eyed, and some kind of green-
eyed—and my grandfather didn’t do it, you know. So what the folks is fighting at
this point is what they started. They started unloading the slave ships of Africa,
that’s when they started. And right now, sometimes, you know I work for the lib-
eration of all people, because when I liberate myself, I’m liberating other people.
But you know, sometimes I really feel more sorrier for the white woman than I
feel for ourselves because she been caught up in this thing, caught up feeling very
special, and folks, I’m going to put it on the line, because my job is not to make
people feel comfortable—[drowned out by applause]. You’ve been caught up in
this thing because, you know, you worked my grandmother, and after that you
worked my mother, and then finally you got hold of me. And you really thought,
people—you might try and cool it now, but I been watching you, baby. You
thought that you was more because you was a woman, and especially a white
woman, you had this kind of angel feeling that you were untouchable. You know
that? There’s nothing under the sun that made you believe that you was just like
me, that under this white pigment of skin is red blood, just like under this black
skin of mine. So we was used as black women over and over and over. You know,
I remember a time when I was working around white people’s house, and one
thing that would make me mad as hell, after I would be done slaved all day long,
this white woman would get on the phone, calling some of her friends, and said,
“You know, I’m tired, because we have been working,” and I said, “That’s a damn
lie.” You’re not used to that kind of language, honey, but I’m gone tell you where
it’s at. So all of these things was happening because you had more. You had been
put on a pedestal, and then not only put on a pedestal, but you had been put in
something like a ivory castle. So what happened to you, we have busted the cas-
tle open and whacking like hell for the pedestal. And when you hit the ground,
you’re gone have to fight like hell, like we’ve been fighting all this time.
In the past, I don’t care how poor this white woman was, in the South she still
felt like she was more than us. In the North, I don’t care how poor or how rich
3 9 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 428 ---
F .L. HAMER, “PLIGHT AND ROLE OF BLACK WOMEN” 3 9 7
this white woman has been, she still felt like she was more than us. But coming
to the realization of the thing, her freedom is shackled in chains to mine, and she
realizes for the first time that she is not free until I am free. The point about it,
the male influence in this country—you know the white male, he didn’t go and
brainwash the black man and the black woman, he brainwashed his wife too. . . .
He made her think that she was a angel. You know the reason I can say it, folks,
I been watching. And there’s a lot of people been watching. That’s why it’s such a
shock wherever we go throughout this country, it’s a great blow. White Americans
today don’t know what in the world to do because when they put us behind them,
that’s where they made their mistake. If they had put us in front, they wouldn’t
have let us look back. But they put us behind them, and we watched every move
they made. . . .
And this is the reason I tell the world, as I travel to and fro, I’m not fighting
for equal rights. What do I want to be equal to [Senator] Eastland for? Just tell
me that. But we are not only going to liberate ourselves. I think it’s a responsibil-
ity. I think we’re special people, God’s children is going to help in the survival of
this country if it’s not too late. We’re a lot sicker than people realize we are. And
what we are doing now in the South, in politics, in gaining seats for black people
and concerned whites in the state of Mississippi, is going to have an effect on what
happens throughout this country. You know, I used to think that if I could go
North and tell people about the plight of the black folk in the state of Mississippi,
everything would be all right. But traveling around, I found one thing for sure: it’s
up-South and down-South, and it’s no different. The man shoot me in the face in
Mississippi, and you turn around he’ll shoot you in the back here [in New York].
We have a problem, folks, and we want to try to deal with the problem in the only
way that we can deal with the problem as far as black women. And you know, I’m
not hung up on this about liberating myself from the black man, I’m not going to
try that thing. I got a black husband, six feet three, two hundred and forty pounds,
with a 14 shoe, that I don’t want to be liberated from. But we are here to work
side by side with this black man in trying to bring liberation to all people.
Sunflower County is one of the poorest counties, one of the poorest counties on
earth, while Senator James O. Eastland—you know, people tells you, don’t talk
politics, but the air you breathe is polluted air, it’s political polluted air. The air you
breathe is politics. So you have to be involved. You have to be involved in trying to
elect people that’s going to help do something about the liberation of all people.
Sunflower County, the county where I’m from, is Senator Eastland’s county
that owns 5,800 acres of some of the richest black fertile soil in Mississippi, and
where kids, there in Sunflower County, suffer from malnutrition. But I want to
tell you one of the things that we’re doing, right now in Sunflower County. In
1969 I founded the Freedom Farm Coop. We started off with 40 acres of land.
Nineteen-seventy in Sunflower County, we fed 1,500 people from this 40 acres of
land. Nineteen-seventy I’ve become involved with Y.W.D.—Young World
Developers. On the 14th of January 1971, we put $85,400 on 640 acres of land,
giving us the total of 680 acres of land. We also have 68 houses. We hope some-
time in ’71 we will build another hundred houses on a hundred of the 640 acres.


--- PAGE 429 ---
This coming Saturday . . . young people will be walking throughout the world
against hunger and poverty. It will be forty countries walking, millions of people
throughout the world. In the United States it will be over 377 walks. These walk-
ers are young people that really care about what’s going on. . . . And out of this
walk—people will pay so much per mile for the kids that’ll be walking—and out
of this walk we hope to get a million dollars for Sunflower County. . . . If we get
the kind of economic support that we need in Sunflower County, in two more
years . . . we’ll have the tools to produce food ourselves.
A couple of weeks ago, we moved the first poor white family into Freedom
Farm in the history of the state of Mississippi. A white man came to me and said,
“I got five children and I don’t have nowhere to live. I don’t have food. I don’t
have anything. And my children, some of them, is sick.” And we gave this man a
house. . . .
We have a job as black women, to support whatever is right, and to bring in
justice where we’ve had so much injustice. Some people say, well, I work for $24
per week. That’s not true in my case, I work sometimes for $15 per week. I
remember my mother working for 25 and 30 cents per day. But we are organiz-
ing ourselves now, because we don’t have any other choice. Sunflower County is
one of the few counties in the state of Mississippi where in that particular area we
didn’t lose one black teacher. Because . . . I went in and told the judge, I said,
“Judge, we’re not going to stand by and see you take a man with a master’s degree
and bring him down to janitor help. So if we don’t have the principal . . . there
ain’t gonna beno school, private or public.” These are the kinds of roles.
A few years ago throughout the country the middle-class black woman—I used
to say not really black women, but the middle-class colored women, c-u-l-l-u-d,
didn’t even respect the kind of work that I was doing. But you see now, baby,
whether you have a Ph.D., D.D., or no D, we’re in this bag together. And whether
you’re from Morehouse or Nohouse, we’re still in this bag together. Not to fight
to try to liberate ourselves from the men—this is another trick to get us fighting
among ourselves—but to work together with the black man, then we will have a
better chance to just act as human beings, and to be treated as human beings in
our sick society.
I would like to tell you in closing a story of an old man. This old man was very
wise, and he could answer questions that was almost impossible for people to
answer. So some people went to him one day, two young people, and said, “We’re
going to trick this guy today. We’re going to catch a bird, and we’re going to carry
it to this old man. And we’re going to ask him, ‘This that we hold in our hands
today, is it alive or is it dead?’ If he says ‘Dead,’ we’re going to turn it loose and
let it fly. But if he says, ‘Alive,’ we’re going to crush it.” So they walked up to this
old man, and they said, “This that we hold in our hands today, is it alive or is it
dead?” He looked at the young people and he smiled. And he said, “It’s in your
hands.”
Source: Excerpt from a speech delivered at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund Institute, New
York City, May 7, 1971, pp. 609–14.
3 9 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 430 ---
“SNCC POSITION PAPER: WOMEN IN THE MOVEMENT” 3 9 9
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Christopher Myers Asch, “No Compromise: The Freedom Struggles of James O. Eastland
and Fannie Lou Hamer” (Ph.D. diss., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2005).
Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, Women in the Civil Rights
Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers, 1941–1965(Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publish-
ing, 1990).
Chana Kai Lee, For Freedom’s Sake: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer, Women in American
History (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Kay Mills, This Little Light of Mine: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer(New York: Dutton, 1993).
O11 O
“SNCC Position Paper: Women in the Movement,” 1964
Women activists were central to the entire work of SNCC, but they were sub-
jected to the practices of gender subordination that unfortunately were evident
throughout the Black Freedom movement. By 1964 a number of SNCC women
had begun to criticize the sexist behaviors and policies of the organization’s mostly
male leadership. This statement was written in November 1964 by two white
members of the SNCC.
O
1. Staff was involved in crucial constitutional revisions at the Atlanta staff
meeting in October. A large committee was appointed to present revisions
to the staff. The committee was all men.
2. Two organizers were working together to form a farmers league. Without
asking any questions, the male organizer immediately assigned the clerical
work to the female organizer although both had had equal experience in
organizing campaigns.
3. Although there are some women in Mississippi project who have been
working as long as some of the men, the leadership group in COFO is all
men.
4. A woman in a field office wondered why she was held responsible for day-
to-day decisions, only to find out later that she had been appointed project
director but not told.
5. A fall 1964 personnel and resources report on Mississippi projects lists the
number of people on each project. The section on Laurel, however, lists not
the number of persons, but “three girls.”
6. One of SNCC’s main administrative officers apologizes for appointment of
a woman as interim project director in a key Mississippi project area.
7. A veteran of two years’ work for SNCC in two states spends her day typing
and doing clerical work for other people in her project.


--- PAGE 431 ---
8. Any woman in SNCC, no matter what her position or experience, has been
asked to take minutes in a meeting when she and other women are out-
numbered by men.
9. The names of several new attorneys entering a state project this past sum-
mer were posted in a central movement office. The first initial and last name
of each lawyer was listed. Next to one name was written: (girl).
10. Capable, responsible, and experienced women who are in leadership posi-
tions can expect to have to defer to a man on their project for final decision-
making.
11. A session at the recent October staff meeting in Atlanta was the first large
meeting in the past couple of years where a woman was asked to chair.
Undoubtedly this list will seem strange to some, petty to others, laughable to
most. The list could continue as far as there are women in the movement. Except
that most women don’t talk about these kinds of incidents, because the whole
subject is [not] discussible—strange to some, petty to others, laughable to most.
The average white person finds it difficult to understand why the Negro resents
being called “boy,” or being thought of as “musical” and “athletic,” because the
average white person doesn’t realize that he assumes he is superior. And natu-
rally he doesn’t understand the problem of paternalism. So too the average
SNCC worker finds it difficult to discuss the woman problem because of the
assumptions of male superiority. Assumptions of male superiority are as wide-
spread and deep rooted and every much as crippling to the woman as the
assumptions of white supremacy are to the Negro. Consider why it is in SNCC
that women who are competent, qualified, and experienced, are automatically
assigned to the “female” kinds of jobs such as typing, desk work, telephone work,
filing, library work, cooking, and the assistant kind of administrative work but
rarely the “executive” kind.
The woman in SNCC is often in the same position as that token Negro hired
in a corporation. The management thinks that it has done its bit. Yet, every day
the Negro bears an atmosphere, attitudes and actions which are tinged with con-
descension and paternalism, the most telling of which are when he is not pro-
moted as the equally or less-skilled whites are. This paper is anonymous. Think
about the kinds of things the author, if made known, would have to suffer because
of raising this kind of discussion. Nothing so final as being fired or outright exclu-
sion, but the kinds of things which are killing to the insides—insinuations,
ridicule, over-exaggerated compensations.
This paper is presented anyway because it needs to be made know[n] that
many women in the movement are not “happy and contented” with their status.
It needs to be made known that much talent and experience are being wasted by
this movement when women are not given jobs commensurate with their abili-
ties. It needs to be known that just as Negroes were the crucial factor in the
economy of the cotton South, so too in SNCC are women the crucial factor that
keeps the movement running on a day-to-day basis. Yet they are not given equal
4 0 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 432 ---
ELIJAH MUHAMMAD AND THE NATION OF ISLAM 4 0 1
say-so when it comes to day-to-day decisionmaking. What can be done? Probably
nothing right away. Most men in this movement are probably too threatened by
the possibility of serious discussion on this subject. Perhaps this is because they
have recently broken away from a matriarchal framework under which they may
have grown up. Then too, many women are as unaware and insensitive to this
subject as men, just as there are many Negroes who don’t understand they are
not free or who want to be part of white America. They don’t understand that
they have to give up their souls and stay in their place to be accepted. So too,
many women, in order to be accepted by men, on men’s terms, give themselves
up to that caricature of what a woman is—unthinking, pliable, an ornament to
please the man.
Maybe the only thing that can come out of this paper is discussion—amidst the
laughter—but still discussion. (Those who laugh the hardest are often those who
need the crutch of male supremacy the most.) And maybe some women will
begin to recognize day-to-day discriminations. And maybe sometime in the future
the whole of the women in this movement will become so alert as to force the rest
of the movement to stop the discrimination and start the slow process of chang-
ing values and ideas so that all of us gradually come to understand that this is no
more a man’s world than it is a white world.
November, 1964
Source: “Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Position Paper: Women in the
Movement,” text made available through the Institute of Advanced Technology in the
Humanities, University of Virginia at Charlottesville, April 18, 1998.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Sara Evans, Personal Politics: The Roots of Women’s Liberation in the Civil Rights Movement
and the New Left (New York: Knopf, 1979).
Peter J. Ling and Sharon Monteith, eds., Gender and the Civil Rights Movement (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2004).
Doug McAdam, Freedom Summer(New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
O12 O
Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam
Born Elijah Poole, Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) changed his name sometime
around 1931, after he came under the influence of Wallace D. Fard, the founder
and charismatic leader of the Nation of Islam (NOI). After Fard disappeared in
1934, Muhammad claimed leadership of the group and set up a new headquar-
ters for the NOI in Chicago.


--- PAGE 433 ---
The NOI became the most prominent conservative black-nationalist formation
from World War II until the emergence of Black Power. According to
Muhammad’s teachings, black people were the descendants of the original race of
humankind, and the white race was a genetic mutation created by an evil scien-
tist named Yakub. The NOI preached strict standards of discipline, obedience of
authority, and patriarchy. The Fruit of Islam, an internal security force within the
sect, was fiercely loyal to Muhammad, who was termed the “Messenger of Allah.”
The explosive growth of the NOI in the 1950s and early 1960s was chiefly due to
Malcolm X, who at this time was the national spokesman of the religious sect and
a devoted follower of Muhammad. After Malcolm X’s break with the NOI and his
subsequent assassination, Muhammad’s influence among black nationalists
sharply declined. Following Muhammad’s death in 1975, his son Wallace came
into the leadership of the NOI and soon repudiated many of the central tenets
and separatist policies of his father.
O
  
        
           
      
    
          
            
   
            
            
      
                
            
   
             
               
           
             
           
  
  
          
               
               
             
       
4 0 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 434 ---
ELIJAH MUHAMMAD AND THE NATION OF ISLAM 4 0 3
            
          
           
          
         
             
   
             
     
               
            
             
            
          
             
            
             
        
           
         
            
     
            
          
    
              
      
     
      
 
            
    
            
     
          
        
            
 
              
               
       
          
          
  
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 435 ---
O13 O
Malcolm X and Revolutionary Black Nationalism
Born Malcolm Little, Malcolm X (1925–1965) grew up in Michigan under difficult
circumstances after his father was murdered by racists. He then worked as a small-
time hustler and drug dealer in Boston and Harlem until he was arrested for rob-
bery in 1946. Malcolm converted to the Nation of Islam (NOI) in 1948. Following
his release, he quickly established his reputation as a brilliant, fiery-tongued orator,
and through his tenure as an NOI minister in Harlem the organization enjoyed a
marked increase in its membership. By 1962, however, Elijah Muhammad and
other prominent NOI leaders had become privately critical of Malcolm and jealous
of his growing national prominence outside their organization. After a controver-
sial remark made by Malcolm following the assassination of President John F.
Kennedy, Muhammad seized the opportunity to “silence” his protégé. Malcolm left
the NOI in March 1964, first establishing the religious Muslim Mosque, Inc., and
several months later, the Organization of Afro-American Unity. In his last year of
life, Malcolm made a well-publicized pilgrimage to Mecca  and traveled extensively
throughout Africa. Politically and ideologically, he was rapidly changing, embracing
a revolutionary black nationalist, internationalist perspective. Malcolm’s close iden-
tification with socialism and Third World liberation led to his extensive surveillance
by the FBI. On February 21, 1965, Malcolm was assassinated in the Audubon
Ballroom in Harlem. In death, his influence within the black world became far
greater than his political stature during his own lifetime.
O
“THE BALLOT OR THE BULLET”
Mr. Moderator, brothers and sisters, friends and enemies: I just can’t believe
everyone in here is a friend and I don’t want to leave anybody out. The question
tonight, as I understand it, is “The Negro Revolt, and Where Do We Go from
Here?” or “What Next?” In my little humble way of understanding it, it points
toward either the ballot or the bullet.
Before we try and explain what is meant by the ballot or the bullet, I would like
to clarify something concerning myself. I’m still a Muslim, my religion is still
Islam. That’s my personal belief. Just as Adam Clayton Powell is a Christian min-
ister who heads the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York, but at the same time
takes part in the political struggles to try and bring about rights to the black peo-
ple in this country; and Dr. Martin Luther King is a Christian minister down in
Atlanta, Georgia, who heads another organization fighting for the civil rights of
black people in this country; and Reverend Galamison—I guess you’ve heard of
him—is another Christian minister in New York who has been deeply involved in
the school boycotts to eliminate segregated education; well, I myself am a minis-
ter, not a Christian minister, but a Muslim minister; and I believe in action on all
fronts by whatever means necessary.
4 0 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 436 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 0 5
Although I’m still a Muslim, I’m not here tonight to discuss my religion. I’m
not here to try and change your religion. I’m not here to argue or discuss anything
that we differ about, because it’s time for us to submerge our differences and real-
ize that it is best for us to first see that we have the same problem, a common
problem—a problem that will make you catch hell whether you’re a Baptist, or a
Methodist, or a Muslim, or a nationalist. Whether you’re educated or illiterate,
whether you live on the boulevard or in the alley, you’re going to catch hell just
like I am. We’re all in the same boat and we all are going to catch the same hell
from the same man. He just happens to be a white man. All of us have suffered
here, in this country, political oppression at the hands of the white man, economic
exploitation at at the hands of the white man, and social degradation at the hands
of the white man.
Now in speaking like this, it doesn’t mean that we’re anti-white, but it does
mean we’re anti-exploitation, we’re antidegradation, we’re antioppression. And if
the white man doesn’t want us to be anti-him, let him stop oppressing and exploit-
ing and degrading us. Whether we are Christians or Muslims or nationalists or
agnostics or atheists, we must first learn to forget our differences. If we have dif-
ferences, let us differ in the closet; when we come out in front, let us not have
anything to argue about until we get finished arguing with the man. If the late
President Kennedy could get together with Khrushchev and exchange some
wheat, we certainly have more in common with each other than Kennedy and
Khrushchev had with each other.
If we don’t do something real soon, I think you’ll have to agree that we’re going
to be forced either to use the ballot or the bullet. It’s one or the other in 1964. It
isn’t that time is running out—time has run out! Nineteen sixty-four threatens to
be the most explosive year America has ever witnessed. The most explosive year.
Why? It’s also a political year. It’s the year when all of the white politicians will be
back in the so-called Negro community jiving you and me for some votes. The year
when all of the white political crooks will be right back in your and my community
with their false promises, building up our hopes for a letdown, with their trickery
and their treachery, with their false promises which they don’t intend to keep. As
they nourish these dissatisfactions, it can only lead to one thing, an explosion; and
now we have the type of black man on the scene in America today—I’m sorry,
Brother Lomax
1—who just doesn’t intend to turn the other cheek any longer.
Don’t let anybody tell you anything about the odds are against you. If they draft
you, they send you to Korea and make you face 800 million Chinese. If you can be
brave over there, you can be brave right here. These odds aren’t as great as those
odds. And if you fight here, you will at least know what you’re fighting for.
I’m not a politician, not even a student of politics; in fact, I’m not a student of
much of anything. I’m not a Democrat, I’m not a Republican, and I don’t even
consider myself an American. If you and I were Americans, there’d be no prob-
lem. Those Hunkies that just got off the boat, they’re already Americans; Polacks
are already Americans; the Italian refugees are already Americans. Everything
that came out of Europe, every blue-eyed thing, is already an American. And as
long as you and I have been over here, we aren’t Americans yet.


--- PAGE 437 ---
Well, I am one who doesn’t believe in deluding myself. I’m not going to sit at your
table and watch you eat, with nothing on my plate, and call myself a diner. Sitting at
the table doesn’t make you a diner, unless you eat some of what’s on that plate. Being
here in America doesn’t make you an American. Being born here in America does-
n’t make you an American. Why, if birth made you American, you wouldn’t need any
legislation, you wouldn’t need any amendments to the Constitution, you wouldn’t be
faced with civil-rights filibustering in Washington, D.C., right now. They don’t have
to pass civil-rights legislation to make a Polack an American.
No, I’m not an American. I’m one of the twenty-two million black people who
are the victims of democracy, nothing but disguised hypocrisy. So, I’m not standing
here speaking to you as an American, or a patriot, or a flag-saluter, or a flag-waver—
no, not I. I’m speaking as a victim of this American system. And I see America
through the eyes of the victim. I don’t see any American dream; I see an American
nightmare.
These twenty-two million victims are waking up. Their eyes are coming open.
They’re beginning to see what they used to only look at. They’re becoming polit-
ically mature. They are realizing that there are new political trends from coast to
coast. As they see these new political trends, it’s possible for them to see that
every time there’s an election the races are so close that they have to have a
recount. They had to recount in Massachusetts to see who was going to be gov-
ernor, it was so close. It was the same way in Rhode Island, in Minnesota, and in
many other parts of the country. And the same with Kennedy and Nixon when
they ran for President. It was so close they had to count all over again. Well, what
does this mean? It means that when white people are evenly divided, and black
people have a bloc of votes of their own, it is left up to them to determine who’s
going to sit in the White House and who’s going to be in the dog house.
It was the black man’s vote that put the present administration in Washington,
D.C. Your vote, your dumb vote, your ignorant vote, your wasted vote put in an
administration in Washington, D.C., that has seen fit to pass every kind of legis-
lation imaginable, saving you until last, then filibustering on top of that. And your
and my leaders have the audacity to run around clapping their hands and talk
about how much progress we’re making. And what a good President we have. If
he wasn’t good in Texas, he sure can’t be good in Washington, D.C. Because Texas
is a lynch state. It is in the same breath as Mississippi, no different; only they
lynch you in Texas with a Texas accent and lynch you in Mississippi with a Missis-
sippi accent. And these Negro leaders have the audacity to go and have some cof-
fee in the White House with a Texan, a Southern cracker—that’s all he is—and
then come out and tell you and me that he’s going to be better for us because,
since he’s from the South, he knows how to deal with the Southerners. What kind
of logic is that? Let Eastland be President, he’s from the South too. He should be
better able to deal with them than Johnson.
2
In this present administration they have in the House of Representatives 257
Democrats to only 177 Republicans. They control two-thirds of the House vote.
Why can’t they pass something that will help you and me? In the Senate, there
are 67 Senators who are of the Democratic party. Only 33 of them are Repub-
4 0 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 438 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 0 7
licans. Why, the Democrats have got the government sewed up, and you’re the
one who sewed it up for them. And what have they given you for it? Four years
in office, and just now getting around to some civil-rights legislation. Just now,
after everything else is gone, out of the way, they’re going to sit down now and
play with you all summer long—the same old giant con game that they call fili-
buster.
3 All those are in cahoots together. Don’t you ever think they’re not in
cahoots together, for the man that is heading the civil-rights filibuster is a man
from Georgia named Richard Russell. When Johnson became President, the first
man he asked for when he got back to Washington, D.C., was “Dicky”—that’s
how tight they are. That’s his boy, that’s his pal, that’s his buddy. But they’re play-
ing that old con game. One of them makes believe he’s for you, and he’s got it
fixed where the other one is so tight against you, he never has to keep his
promise.
So it’s time in 1964 to wake up. And when you see them coming up with that
kind of conspiracy, let them know your eyes are open. And let them know you got
something else that’s wide open too. It’s got to be the ballot or the bullet. The bal-
lot or the bullet. If you’re afraid to use an expression like that, you should get on
out of the country, you should get back in the cotton patch, you should get back
in the alley. They get all the Negro vote, and after they get it, the Negro gets noth-
ing in return. All they did when they got to Washington was give a few big Negroes
big jobs. Those big Negroes didn’t need big jobs, they already had jobs. That’s
camouflage, that’s trickery, that’s treachery, window-dressing. I’m not trying to
knock out the Democrats for the Republicans, we’ll get to them in a minute. But
it is true—you put the Democrats first and the Democrats put you last.
Look at it the way it is. What alibis do they use, since they control Congress
and the Senate? What alibi do they use when you and I ask, “Well, when are you
going to keep your promise?” They blame the Dixiecrats. What is a Dixiecrat? A
Democrat. A Dixiecrat is nothing but a Democrat in disguise. The titular head of
the Democrats is also the head of the Dixiecrats, because the Dixiecrats are a part
of the Democratic Party. The Democrats have never kicked the Dixiecrats out of
the party. The Dixiecrats bolted themselves once, but the Democrats didn’t put
them out. Imagine, these low-down Southern segregationists put the Northern
Democrats down. But the Northern Democrats have never put the Dixiecrats
down. No, look at that thing the way it is. They have got a con game going on, a
political con game, and you and I are in the middle. It’s time for you and me to
wake up and start looking at it like it is, and trying to understand it like it is; and
then we can deal with it like it is. . . .
So, what I’m trying to impress upon you, in essence, is this: You and I in
America are faced not with a segregationist conspiracy, we’re faced with a gov-
ernment conspiracy. Everyone who’s filibustering is a Senator—that’s the govern-
ment. Everyone who’s finagling in Washington, D.C., is a Congressman—that’s
the government. You don’t have anybody putting blocks in your path but people
who are a part of the government. The same government that you go abroad to
fight for and die for is the government that is in a conspiracy to deprive you of
your voting rights, deprive you of your economic opportunities, deprive you of


--- PAGE 439 ---
decent housing, deprive you of decent education. You don’t need to go to the
employer alone, it is the government itself, the government of America, that is
responsible for the oppression and exploitation and degradation of black people
in this country. And you should drop it in their lap. This government has failed
the Negro. This so-called democracy has failed the Negro. And all these white lib-
erals have definitely failed the Negro.
So, where do we go from here? First, we need some friends. We need some
new allies. The entire civil-rights struggle needs a new interpretation, a broader
interpretation. We need to look at this civil-rights thing from another angle—
from the inside as well as from the outside. To those of us whose philosophy is
black nationalism, the only way you can get involved in the civil-rights struggle is
to give it a new interpretation. That old interpretation excluded us. It kept us out.
So, we’re giving a new interpretation to the civil-rights struggle, an interpretation
that will enable us to come into it, take part in it. And these handkerchief-heads
who have been dillydallying and pussyfooting and compromising—we don’t
intend to let them pussyfoot and dillydally and compromise any longer.
How can you thank a man for giving you what’s already yours? How then can
you thank him for giving you only part of what’s already yours? You haven’t even
made progress, if what’s being given to you, you should have had already. That’s
not progress. And I love my Brother Lomax, the way he pointed out we’re right
back where we were in 1954. We’re not even as far up as we were in 1954. We’re
behind where we were in 1954. There’s more segregation now than there was in
1954. There’s more racial animosity, more racial hatred, more racial violence
today in 1964, than there was in 1954. Where is the progress?
And now you’re facing a situation where the young Negro’s coming up. They
don’t want to hear that “turn-the-other-cheek” stuff, no. In Jacksonville, those
were teenagers, they were throwing Molotov cocktails. Negroes have never done
that before. But it shows you there’s a new deal coming in. There’s new thinking
coming in. There’s new strategy coming in. It’ll be Molotov cocktails this month,
hand grenades next month, and something else next month. It’ll be ballots, or it’ll
be bullets. It’ll be liberty, or it will be death. The only difference about this kind
of death—it’ll be reciprocal. You know what is meant by “reciprocal”? That’s one
of Brother Lomax’s words, I stole it from him. I don’t usually deal with those big
words because I don’t usually deal with big people. I deal with small people. I find
you can get a whole lot of small people and whip hell out of a whole lot of big peo-
ple. They haven’t got anything to lose, and they’ve got everything to gain. And
they’ll let you know in a minute: “It takes two to tango; when I go, you go.”
The black nationalists, those whose philosophy is black nationalism, in bring-
ing about this new interpretation of the entire meaning of civil rights, look upon
it as meaning, as Brother Lomax has pointed out, equality of opportunity. Well,
we’re justified in seeking civil rights, if it means equality of opportunity, because
all we’re doing there is trying to collect for our investment. Our mothers and
fathers invested sweat and blood. Three hundred and ten years we worked in this
country without a dime in return—I mean without a dime in return. You let the
white man walk around here talking about how rich this country is, but you never
stop to think how it got rich so quick. It got rich because you made it rich.
4 0 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 440 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 0 9
You take the people who are in this audience right now. They’re poor, we’re all
poor as individuals. Our weekly salary individually amounts to hardly anything.
But if you take the salary of everyone in here collectively it’ll fill up a whole lot of
baskets. It’s a lot of wealth. If you can collect the wages of just these people right
here for a year, you’ll be rich—richer than rich. When you look at it like that,
think how rich Uncle Sam had to become, not with this handful, but millions of
black people. Your and my mother and father, who didn’t work an eight-hour
shift, but worked from “can’t see” in the morning until “can’t see” at night, and
worked for nothing, making the white man rich, making Uncle Sam rich. . . .
By ballot I only mean freedom. Don’t you know—I disagree with Lomax on
this issue—that the ballot is more important than the dollar? Can I prove it? Yes.
Look in the U.N. There are poor nations in the U.N.; yet those poor nations can
get together with their voting power and keep the rich nations from making a
move. They have one nation, one vote—everyone has an equal vote. And when
those brothers from Asia, and Africa and the darker parts of this earth get
together, their voting power is sufficient to hold Sam in check. Or Russia in check.
Or some other section of the earth in check. So, the ballot is most important.
Right now, in this country, if you and I, twenty-two million African-Ameri-
cans—that’s what we are—Africans who are in America. In fact, you’d get farther
calling yourself African instead of Negro. Africans don’t catch hell. You’re the only
one catching hell. They don’t have to pass civil-rights bills for Africans. An African
can go anywhere he wants right now. All you’ve got to do is tie your head up.
That’s right, go anywhere you want. Just stop being a Negro. Change your name
to Hoogagagooba. That’ll show you how silly the white man is. You’re dealing with
a silly man. A friend of mine who’s very dark put a turban on his head and went
into a restaurant in Atlanta before they called themselves desegregated. He went
into a white restaurant, he sat down, they served him, and he said, “What would
happen if a Negro came in here?” And there he’s sitting, black as night, but
because he had his head wrapped up the waitress looked back at him and says,
“Why, there wouldn’t no nigger dare come in here.”
So, you’re dealing with a man whose bias and prejudice are making him lose his
mind, his intelligence, every day. He’s frightened. He looks around and sees what’s
taking place on this earth, and he sees that the pendulum of time is swinging in
your direction. The dark people are waking up. They’re losing their fear of the
white man. No place where he’s fighting right now is he winning. Everywhere he’s
fighting, he’s fighting someone your and my complexion. And they’re beating him.
He can’t win any more. He’s won his last battle. He failed to win the Korean War.
He couldn’t win it. He had to sign a truce. That’s a loss. Any time Uncle Sam, with
all his machinery for warfare, is held to a draw by some rice-eaters, he’s lost the
battle. He had to sign a truce. America’s not supposed to sign a truce. She’s sup-
posed to be bad. But she’s not bad any more. She’s bad as long as she can use her
hydrogen bomb, but she can’t use hers for fear Russia might use hers. Russia can’t
use hers, for fear that Sam might use his. So, both of them are weaponless. They
can’t use the weapon, because each’s weapon nullifies the other’s. So the only place
where action can take place is on the ground. And the white man can’t win another
war fighting on the ground. Those days are over. The black man knows it, the


--- PAGE 441 ---
brown man knows it, the red man knows it, and the yellow man knows it. So they
engage him in guerrilla warfare. That’s not his style. You’ve got to have heart to be
a guerrilla warrior, and he hasn’t got any heart. I’m telling you now. . . .
The political philosophy of black nationalism means that the black man should
control the politics and the politicians in his own community; no more. The black
man in the black community has to be reeducated into the science of politics so
he will know what politics is supposed to bring him in return. Don’t be throwing
out any ballots. A ballot is like a bullet. You don’t throw your ballots until you see
a target, and if that target is not within your reach, keep your ballot in your
pocket. The political philosophy of black nationalism is being taught in the
Christian church. It’s being taught in the N.A.A.C.P . It’s being taught in CORE
meetings. It’s being taught in S.N.C.C. meetings. It’s being taught in Muslim
meetings. It’s being taught where nothing but atheists and agnostics come
together. It’s being taught everywhere. Black people are fed up with the dillydal-
lying, pussyfooting, compromising approach that we’ve been using toward getting
our freedom. We want freedom now, but we’re not going to get it saying “We
Shall Overcome.” We’ve got to fight until we overcome.
The economic philosophy of black nationalism is pure and simple. It only
means that we should control the economy of our community. Why should white
people be running all the stores in our community? Why should white people be
running the banks of our community? Why should the economy of our commu-
nity be in the hands of the white man? Why? If a black man can’t move his store
into a white community, you tell me why a white man should move his store into
a black community. The philosophy of black nationalism involves a reeducation
program in the black community in regard to economics. Our people have to be
made to see that any time you take your dollar out of your community and spend
it in a community where you don’t live, the community where you live will get
poorer and poorer, and the community where you spend your money will get
richer and richer. Then you wonder why where you live is always a ghetto or a
slum area. And where you and I are concerned, not only do we lose it when we
spend it out of the community, but the white man has got all our stores in the
community tied up; so that though we spend it in the community, at sundown
the man who runs the store takes it over across town somewhere. He’s got us in
a vise.
So the economic philosophy of black nationalism means in every church, in
every civic organization, in every fraternal order, it’s time now for our people to
become conscious of the importance of controlling the economy of our commu-
nity. If we own the stores, if we operate the businesses, if we try and establish
some industry in our own community, then we’re developing to the position
where we are creating employment for our own kind. Once you gain control of
the economy of your own community, then you don’t have to picket and boycott
and beg some cracker downtown for a job in his business.
The social philosophy of black nationalism only means that we have to get
together and remove the evils, the vices, alcoholism, drug addiction, and other
evils that are destroying the moral fiber of our community. We ourselves have to
4 1 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 442 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 1 1
lift the level of our community, the standard of our community to a higher level,
make our own society beautiful so that we will be satisfied in our own social cir-
cles and won’t be running around here trying to knock our way into a social circle
where we’re not wanted.
So I say, in spreading a gospel such as black nationalism, it is not designed to
make the black man reevaluate the white man—you know him already—but to
make the black man reevaluate himself. Don’t change the white man’s mind; you
can’t change his mind. And that whole thing about appealing to the moral con-
science of America—America’s conscience is bankrupt. She lost all conscience a
long time ago. Uncle Sam has no conscience. They don’t know what morals are.
They don’t try and eliminate an evil because it’s evil, or because it’s illegal, or
because it’s immoral; they eliminate it only when it threatens their existence. So
you’re wasting your time appealing to the moral conscience of a bankrupt man
like Uncle Sam. If he had a conscience, he’d straighten this thing out with no
more pressure being put upon him. So it is not necessary to change the white
man’s mind. We have to change our own mind. You can’t change his mind about
us. We’ve got to change our own minds about each other. We have to see each
other with new eyes. We have to see each other as brothers and sisters. We have
to come together with warmth so we can develop unity and harmony that’s nec-
essary to get this problem solved ourselves. How can we do this? How can we
avoid jealousy? How can we avoid the suspicion and the divisions that exist in the
community? I’ll tell you how. . . .
Our gospel is black nationalism. We’re not trying to threaten the existence of
any organization, but we’re spreading the gospel of black nationalism. Anywhere
there’s a church that is also preaching and practicing the gospel of black nation-
alism, join that church. If the N.A.A.C.P . is preaching and practicing the gospel
of black nationalism, join the N.A.A.C.P . If CORE is spreading and practicing the
gospel of black nationalism, join CORE. Join any organization that has a gospel
that’s for the uplift of the black man. And when you get into it and see them
pussyfooting or compromising, pull out of it because that’s not black nationalism.
We’ll find another one. . . .
It’s time for you and me to stop sitting in this country, letting some cracker
Senators, Northern crackers and Southern crackers, sit there in Washington,
D.C., and come to a conclusion in their mind that you and I are supposed to have
civil rights. There’s no white man going to tell me anything about my rights.
Brothers and sisters, always remember, if it doesn’t take Senators and Congress-
men and Presidential proclamations to give freedom to the white man, it is not
necessary for legislation or proclamation or Supreme Court decisions to give free-
dom to the black man. You let that white man know, if this is a country of free-
dom, let it be a country of freedom; and if it’s not a country of freedom, change it.
We will work with anybody, anywhere, at any time, who is genuinely interested
in tackling the problem head-on, nonviolently as long as the enemy is nonviolent,
but violent when the enemy gets violent. We’ll work with you on the voter-regis-
tration drive, we’ll work with you on rent strikes, we’ll work with you on school
boycotts—I don’t believe in any kind of integration; I’m not even worried about


--- PAGE 443 ---
it because I know you’re not going to get it anyway; you’re not going to get it
because you’re afraid to die; you’ve got to be ready to die if you try and force your-
self on the white man, because he’ll get just as violent as those crackers in
Mississippi, right here in Cleveland. But we will work with you on the school boy-
cotts, because we’re against a segregated school system. A segregated school sys-
tem produces children who, when they graduate, graduate with crippled minds.
But this does not mean that a school is segregated because it’s all black. A segre-
gated school means a school that is controlled by people who have no real inter-
est in it whatsoever.
Let me explain what I mean. A segregated district or community is a commu-
nity in which people live, but outsiders control the politics and the economy of
that community. They never refer to the white section as a segregated commu-
nity. It’s the all-Negro section that’s a segregated community. Why? The white
man controls his own school, his own bank, his own economy, his own politics, his
own everything, his own community—but he also controls yours. When you’re
under someone else’s control, you’re segregated. They’ll always give you the low-
est or the worst that there is to offer, but it doesn’t mean you’re segregated just
because you have your own. You’ve got to control your own. Just like the white
man has control of his, you need to control yours.
You know the best way to get rid of segregation? The white man is more
afraid of separation than he is of integration. Segregation means that he puts you
away from him, but not far enough for you to be out of his jurisdiction; separa-
tion means you’re gone. And the white man will integrate faster than he’ll let
you separate. So we will work with you against the segregated school system
because it’s criminal, because it is absolutely destructive, in every way imagin-
able, to the minds of the children who have to be exposed to that type of crip-
pling education.
Last but not least, I must say this concerning the great controversy over rifles
and shotguns. The only thing that I’ve ever said is that in areas where the gov-
ernment has proven itself either unwilling or unable to defend the lives and the
property of Negroes, it’s time for Negroes to defend themselves. Article number
two of the Constitutional amendments provides you and me the right to own a
rifle or a shotgun.
4 It is constitutionally legal to own a shotgun or a rifle. This
doesn’t mean you’re going to get a rifle and form battalions and go out looking for
white folks, although you’d be within your rights—I mean, you’d be justified; but
that would be illegal and we don’t do anything illegal. If the white man doesn’t
want the black man buying rifles and shotguns, then let the government do its job.
That’s all. And don’t let the white man come to you and ask you what you think
about what Malcolm says—why, you old Uncle Tom. He would never ask you if
he thought you were going to say, “Oh, man!” No, he is making a Tom out of you.
So, this doesn’t mean forming rifle clubs and going out looking for people, but
it is time, in 1964, if you are a man, to let that man know. If he’s not going to do
his job in running the government and providing you and me with the protection
that our taxes are supposed to be for, since he spends all those billions for his
defense budget, he certainly can’t begrudge you and me spending $12 or $15 for
4 1 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 444 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 1 3
a single-shot, or double-action. I hope you understand. Don’t go out shooting peo-
ple, but any time, brothers and sisters, and especially the men in this audience—
some of you wearing Congressional Medals of Honor, with shoulders this wide,
chests this big, muscles that big—any time you and I sit around and read where
they bomb a church and murder in cold blood, not some grownups, but four little
girls while they were praying . . . if you never see me another time in your life, if I
die in the morning, I’ll die saying one thing: the ballot or the bullet, the ballot or
the bullet.
If a Negro in 1964 has to sit around and wait for some cracker Senator to fili-
buster when it comes to the rights of black people, why, you and I should hang
our heads in shame. You talk about a march on Washington in 1963, you haven’t
seen anything. There’s some more going down in ’64. And this time they’re not
going like they went last year. They’re not going singing “We Shall Overcome.”
They’re not going with white friends. They’re not going with placards already
painted for them. They’re not going with round-trip tickets. They’re going with
one-way tickets.
And if they don’t want that non-nonviolent army going down there, tell them
to bring the filibuster to a halt. The black nationalists aren’t going to wait. Lyndon
B. Johnson is the head of the Democratic party. If he’s for civil rights, let him go
into the Senate next week and declare himself. Let him go in there right now and
declare himself. Let him go in there and denounce the Southern branch of his
party. Let him go in there right now and take a moral stand—right now, not later.
Tell him, don’t wait until election time. If he waits too long, brothers and sisters,
he will be responsible for letting a condition develop in this country which will
create a climate that will bring seeds up out of the ground with vegetation on the
end of them looking like something these people never dreamed of. In 1964, it’s
the ballot or the bullet. Thank you.
O
STATEMENT OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AFRO-AMERICAN UNITY
The Organization of Afro-American Unity, organized and structured by a cross-
section of the Afro-American people living in the U.S.A., has been patterned after
the letter and spirit of the Organization of African Unity established at Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, May, 1963.
We, the members of the Organization of Afro-American Unity gathered
together in Harlem, New York:
Convinced that it is the inalienable right of all people to control their own des-
tiny;
Conscious of the fact that freedom, equality, justice and dignity are essential
objectives for the achievement of the legitimate aspirations of the people of
African descent here in the Western Hemisphere, we will endeavor to build a
bridge of understanding and create the basis for Afro-American unity;
Conscious of our responsibility to harness the natural and human resources of
our people for their total advancement in all spheres of human endeavor;


--- PAGE 445 ---
Inspired by a common determination to promote understanding among our
people and co-operation in all matters pertaining to their survival and advance-
ment, we will support the aspirations of our people for brotherhood and solidar-
ity in a larger unity transcending all organizational differences;
Convinced that, in order to translate this determination into a dynamic force
in the cause of human progress, conditions of peace and security must be estab-
lished and maintained;
Determined to unify the Americans of African descent in their fight for human
rights and dignity, and being fully aware that this is not possible in the present
atmosphere and condition of oppression, we dedicate ourselves to the building of
a political, economic, and social system of justice and peace;
Dedicated to the unification of all people of African descent in this hemisphere
and to the utilization of that unity to bring into being the organizational structure
that will project the black people’s contributions to the world;
Persuaded that the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Constitution of the U.S.A. and the Bill of Rights are the
principles in which we believe and these documents if put into practice represent
the essence of mankind’s hopes and good intentions;
Desirous that all Afro-American people and organizations should henceforth
unite so that the welfare and well-being of our people will be assured;
Resolved to reinforce the common bond of purpose between our people by
submerging all of our differences and establishing a non-religious and non-sec-
tarian constructive program for human rights;
Do hereby present this charter.
I. Establishment
The Organization of Afro-American Unity shall include all people of African
descent in the Western Hemisphere, as well as our brothers and sisters on the
African Continent.
II. Self-Defense
Since self-preservation is the first law of nature, we assert the Afro-American’s
right of self-defense.
The Constitution of the U.S.A. clearly affirms the right of every American cit-
izen to bear arms. And as Americans, we will not give up a single right guaranteed
under the Constitution. The history of the unpublished violence against our peo-
ple clearly indicates that we must be prepared to defend ourselves or we will con-
tinue to be a defenseless people at the mercy of a ruthless and violent racist mob.
We assert that in those areas where the government is either unable or unwill-
ing to protect the lives and property of our people, that our people are within
their rights to protect themselves by whatever means necessary. A man with a
rifle or club can only be stopped by a person who defends himself with a rifle or
club.
Tactics based solely on morality can only succeed when you are dealing with
basically moral people or a moral system. A man or system which oppresses a man
4 1 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 446 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 1 5
because of his color is not moral. It is the duty of every Afro-American and every
Afro-American community throughout this country to protect its people against
mass murderers, bombers, lynchers, floggers, brutalizers and exploiters.
III. Education
Education is an important element in the struggle for human rights. It is the
means to help our children and people rediscover their identity and thereby
increase self-respect. Education is our passport to the future, for tomorrow
belongs to the people who prepare for it today.
Our children are being criminally shortchanged in the public school system of
America. The Afro-American schools are the poorest run schools in New York
City. Principals and teachers fail to understand the nature of the problems with
which they work and as a result they cannot do the job of teaching our children.
The textbooks tell our children nothing about the great contributions of Afro-
Americans to the growth and development of this country.
The Board of Education’s integration program is expensive and unworkable;
and the organization of principals and supervisors in the New York City school
system has refused to support the Board’s plan to integrate the schools, thus
dooming it to failure. The Board of Education has said that even with its plan
there are 10 percent of the schools in the Harlem-Bedford-Stuyvesant commu-
nity they cannot improve. This means that the Organization of Afro-American
Unity must make the Afro-American community a more potent force for educa-
tional self-improvement.
A first step in the program to end the existing system of racist education is to
demand that the 10 percent of the schools the Board of Education will not include
in its plan be turned over to and run by the Afro-American community. We want
Afro-American principals to head these schools. We want Afro-American teachers
in these schools. We want textbooks written by Afro-Americans that are acceptable
to us to be used in these schools.
The Organization of Afro-American Unity will select and recommend people
to serve on local school boards where school policy is made and passed on to the
Board of Education.
Through these steps we will make the 10 percent of schools we take over edu-
cational showplaces that will attract the attention of people all over the nation.
If these proposals are not met, we will ask Afro-American parents to keep their
children out of the present inferior schools they attend. When these schools in
our neighborhood are controlled by Afro-Americans, we will return to them.
The Organization of Afro-American Unity recognizes the tremendous impor-
tance of the complete involvement of Afro-American parents in every phase of
school life. Afro-American parents must be willing and able to go into the schools
and see that the job of educating our children is done properly.
We call on all Afro-Americans around the nation to be aware that the conditions
that exist in the New York City public school system are as deplorable in their cities
as they are here. We must unite our effort and spread our program of self-
improvement through education to every Afro-American community in America.


--- PAGE 447 ---
We must establish all over the country schools of our own to train our children
to become scientists and mathematicians. We must realize the need for adult edu-
cation and for job retraining programs that will emphasize a changing society in
which automation plays the key role. We intend to use the tools of education to
help raise our people to an unprecedented level of excellence and self-respect
through their own efforts.
IV. Politics—Economics
Basically, there are two kinds of power that count in America: economic and polit-
ical, with social power deriving from the two. In order for the Afro-Americans to
control their destiny, they must be able to control and affect the decisions which
control their destiny: economic, political and social. This can only be done
through organization.
The Organization of Afro-American Unity will organize the Afro-American
community block by block to make the community aware of its power and poten-
tial; we will start immediately a voter-registration drive to make every unregis-
tered voter in the Afro-American community an independent voter; we propose
to support and/or organize political clubs, to run independent candidates for
office, and to support any Afro-American already in office who answers to and is
responsible to the Afro-American community.
Economic exploitation in the Afro-American community is the most vicious
form practiced on any people in America; twice as much rent for rat-infested,
roach-crawling, rotting tenements; the Afro-American pays more for foods, cloth-
ing, insurance rates and so forth. The Organization of Afro-American Unity will
wage an unrelenting struggle against these evils in our community. There shall be
organizers to work with the people to solve these problems, and start a housing
self-improvement program. We propose to support rent strikes and other activi-
ties designed to better the community.
V. Social
This organization is responsible only to the Afro-American people and commu-
nity and will function only with their support, both financially and numerically.
We believe that our communities must be the sources of their own strength polit-
ically, economically, intellectually and culturally in the struggle for human rights
and dignity.
The community must reinforce its moral responsibility to rid itself of the
effects of years of exploitation, neglect and apathy, and wage an unrelenting strug-
gle against police brutality.
The Afro-American community must accept the responsibility for regaining
our people who have lost their place in society. We must declare an all-out war on
organized crime in our community; a vice that is controlled by policemen who
accept bribes and graft, and who must be exposed. We must establish a clinic,
whereby one can get aid and cure for drug addiction; and create meaningful, cre-
ative, useful activities for those who were led astray down the avenues of vice.
The people of the Afro-American community must be prepared to help each
4 1 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 448 ---
MALCOLM X AND REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM 4 1 7
other in all ways possible; we must establish a place where unwed mothers can
get help and advice; a home for the aged in Harlem and an orphanage in Harlem.
We must set up a guardian system that will help our youth who get into trou-
ble and also provide constructive activities for our children. We must set a good
example for our children and must teach them to always be ready to accept the
responsibilities that are necessary for building good communities and nations. We
must teach them that their greatest responsibilities are to themselves, to their
families and to their communities.
The Organization of Afro-American Unity believes that the Afro-American
community must endeavor to do the major part of all charity work from within the
community. Charity, however, does not mean that to which we are legally entitled
in the form of government benefits. The Afro-American veteran must be made
aware of all the benefits due him and the procedure for obtaining them. These
veterans must be encouraged to go into business together, using G.I. loans, etc.
Afro-Americans must unite and work together. We must take pride in the Afro-
American community, for it is home and it is power.
What we do here in regaining our self-respect, manhood, dignity and freedom
helps all people everywhere who are fighting against oppression.
VI. Culture
“A race of people is like an individual man; until it uses its own talent, takes pride
in its own history, expresses its own culture, affirms its own selfhood, it can never
fulfill itself.”
Our history and our culture were completely destroyed when we were forcibly
brought to America in chains. And now it is important for us to know that our his-
tory did not begin with slavery’s scars. We come from Africa, a great continent and
a proud and varied people, a land which is the new world and was the cradle of
civilization. Our culture and our history are as old as man himself and yet we
know almost nothing of it. We must recapture our heritage and our identity if we
are ever to liberate ourselves from the bonds of white supremacy. We must launch
a cultural revolution to unbrainwash an entire people.
Our cultural revolution must be the means of bringing us closer to our African
brothers and sisters. It must begin in the community and be based on community
participation. Afro-Americans will be free to create only when they can depend
on the Afro-American community for support and Afro-American artists must
realize that they depend on the Afro-American for inspiration. We must work
toward the establishment of a cultural center in Harlem, which will include peo-
ple of all ages, and will conduct workshops in all the arts, such as film, creative
writing, painting, theater, music, Afro-American history, etc.
This cultural revolution will be the journey to our rediscovery of ourselves.
History is a people’s memory, and without a memory man is demoted to the lower
animals.
Armed with the knowledge of the past, we can with confidence charter a
course for our future. Culture is an indispensable weapon in the freedom strug-
gle. We must take hold of it and forge the future with the past.


--- PAGE 449 ---
When the battle is won, let history be able to say to each one of us: “He was a ded-
icated patriot: Dignitywas his country, Manhoodwas his government, and Freedom
was his land” (from And Then We Heard the Thunder, by John Oliver Killens).
Notes: 1. The reference is to Louis E. Lomax, author of The Negro Revolt, published in 1962.
2. President Johnson was from Texas and had represented the state in the Senate. 3. To pre-
vent passage of a civil rights bill in 1964, southerners in Congress began a long filibuster. The
bill was finally passed in a modified form. 4. The reference is to the Second Amendment of
the Constitution. The first ten amendments, known collectively as the Bill of Rights, were
ratified December 15, 1791. The Second Amendment reads: “A well-regulated militia being
necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall
not be infringed.”
Sources: (1) “The Ballot or the Bullet” speech delivered in Cleveland, Ohio, April 3, 1964,
reprinted in Malcolm X Speaks (New York: Merit Publishers, 1965), pp. 23–44. Copyright
1965, 1989 by Betty Shabazz and Pathfinder Press, reprinted by permission; and (2)
“Statement of the Basic Aims and Objectives of the Organization of Afro-American Unity,”
June 28, 1964, reprinted in George Breitman, ed., The Last Year of Malcolm X: The Evol-
ution of a Revolutionary (New York: Merit Publishers, 1967), pp. 105–11. Copyright
Pathfinder Press, reprinted by permission.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
George Breitman, The Last Year of Malcolm X(New York: Merit Publishers, 1967).
John Hendrick Clarke, Malcolm X: The Man and His Times(New York: Macmillan, 1970).
James Cone, Martin and Malcolm: A Dream or a Nightmare?(Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books,
1991).
Michael Eric Dyson, The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995).
Peter R. Goldman, The Death and Life of Malcolm X(New York: Harper and Row, 1973).
Robert L. Jenkins and Mfanya Donald Tryman, eds., The Malcolm X Encyclopedia
(Westport: Greenwood Press, 2002).
Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements , ed. George Breitman
(New York: Merit Publishers, 1965).
O14 O
Black Power
When “Black Power” suddenly emerged as a controversial slogan in the summer
of 1966, it reflected the growing dissatisfaction of the more militant wing of the
Black Freedom movement that had lost its faith in nonviolent direct action and
the politics of the white liberal establishment. The most prominent and charis-
matic spokesperson for this new expression of black nationalism was Stokely
Carmichael (1941–1998). Born in Trinidad, Carmichael moved to New York
when he was eleven. He received a B.A. in philosophy from Howard University
4 1 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 450 ---
BLACK POWER 419
in 1964 and throughout the early 1960s maintained a high level of activism. In
1966 he replaced John Lewis as head of the SNCC and began to push the slogan
“Black Power,” which argued that integration was not, by itself, an adequate solu-
tion to the problems of African Americans. In 1967, Carmichael expanded on his
philosophy with his important primer, coauthored with Charles Hamilton, Black
Power: The Politics of Liberation in America. By the early 1970s Carmichael had
become profoundly influenced by revolutionary Pan-Africanist thought, repre-
sented by African leaders such as Kwame Nkrumah. Changing his name to
Kwame Ture, he created the All-African Peoples Revolutionary Party, a small,
radical black formation inside the United States. Ture was widely respected and
admired even by those who did not share his political perspectives for his life-long
dedication to the struggle for black freedom.
Bayard Rustin (1910–1987) was born in West Chester, Pennsylvania, and stud-
ied at Wilberforce University, Cheney State Teacher’s College, and the City College
of New York. A member of the Young Communist League in the mid-1930s and a
conscientious objector during World War II, Rustin became one of the principal
organizers within the Black Freedom movement. He helped establish the SCLC,
worked as a special assistant to Dr. King for seven years, and was the primary archi-
tect behind the 1963 March on Washington. Like many of the older, more moder-
ate black leaders of the 1960s, Rustin was disconcerted by the Black Power slogan
and was concerned about the backlash it caused among many whites. Rustin’s pol-
itics increasingly became conservative, even criticizing King for his vigorous oppo-
sition to the Vietnam War. Toward the end of his life Rustin publicly acknowledged
his homosexuality and openly supported the struggle for lesbian and gay rights.
O
“WHAT WE WANT”
By Stokely Carmichael
One of the tragedies of the struggle against racism is that up to now there has
been no national organization which could speak to the growing militancy of
young black people in the urban ghetto. There has been only a civil rights move-
ment, whose tone of voice was adapted to an audience of liberal whites. It served
as a sort of buffer zone between them and angry young blacks. None of its so-
called leaders could go into a rioting community and be listened to. In a sense, I
blame ourselves—together with the mass media—for what has happened in
Watts, Harlem, Chicago, Cleveland, Omaha. Each time the people in those cities
saw Martin Luther King get slapped, they became angry; when they saw four lit-
tle black girls bombed to death, they were angrier; and when nothing happened,
they were steaming. We had nothing to offer that they could see, except to go out
and be beaten again. We helped to build their frustration.
For too many years, black Americans marched and had their heads broken and
got shot. They were saying to the country, “Look, you guys are supposed to be
nice guys and we are only going to do what we are supposed to do—why do you
beat us up, why don’t you give us what we ask, why don’t you straighten yourselves


--- PAGE 451 ---
out?” After years of this, we are at almost the same point—because we demon-
strated from a position of weakness. We cannot be expected any longer to march
and have our heads broken in order to say to whites: come on, you’re nice guys.
For you are not nice guys. We have found you out.
An organization which claims to speak for the needs of a community—as does
the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee—must speak in the tone of that
community, not as somebody else’s buffer zone. This is the significance of black
power as a slogan. For once, black people are going to use the words they want
to use—not just the words whites want to hear. And they will do this no matter
how often the press tries to stop the use of the slogan by equating it with racism
or separatism.
An organization which claims to be working for the needs of a community—as
SNCC does—must work to provide that community with a position of strength
from which to make its voice heard. This is the significance of black power
beyond the slogan.
Black power can be clearly defined for those who do not attach the fears of
white America to their questions about it. We should begin with the basic fact that
black Americans have two problems: they are poor and they are black. All other
problems arise from this two-sided reality: lack of education, the so-called apathy
of black men. Any program to end racism must address itself to that double reality.
Almost from its beginning, SNCC sought to address itself to both conditions
with a program aimed at winning political power for impoverished Southern
blacks. We had to begin with politics because black Americans are a propertyless
people in a country where property is valued above all. We had to work for power,
because this country does not function by morality, love, and nonviolence, but by
power. Thus we determined to win political power, with the idea of moving on
from there into activity that would have economic effects. With power, the masses
could make or participate in making the decisions which govern their destinies,
and thus create basic change in their day-to-day lives.
But if political power seemed to be the key to self-determination, it was also
obvious that the key had been thrown down a deep well many years earlier.
Disenfranchisement, maintained by racist terror, makes it impossible to talk
about organizing for political power in 1960. The right to vote had to be won, and
SNCC workers devoted their energies to this from 1961 to 1965. They set up
voter registration drives in the Deep South. They created pressure for the vote by
holding mock elections in Mississippi in 1963 and by helping to establish the Mis-
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) in 1964. That struggle was eased,
though not won, with the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act. SNCC workers
could then address themselves to the question: “Who can we vote for, to have our
needs met—how do we make our vote meaningful?”
SNCC had already gone to Atlantic City for recognition of the Mississippi
Freedom Democratic Party by the Democratic convention and been rejected; it
had gone with the MFDP to Washington for recognition by Congress and been
rejected. In Arkansas, SNCC helped thirty Negroes to run for School Board elec-
tions; all but one were defeated, and there was evidence of fraud and intimida-
4 2 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 452 ---
BLACK POWER 421
tion sufficient to cause their defeat. In Atlanta, Julian Bond ran for the state leg-
islature and was elected—twice—and unseated—twice. In several states, black
farmers ran in elections for agricultural committees which make crucial decisions
concerning land use, loans, etc. Although they won places on a number of com-
mittees, they never gained the majorities needed to control them.
All of the efforts were attempts to win black power. Then, in Alabama, the
opportunity came to see how blacks could be organized on an independent party
basis. An unusual Alabama law provides that any group of citizens can nominate
candidates for county office and, if they win 20 percent of the vote, may be rec-
ognized as a county political party. The same then applies on a state level. SNCC
went to organize in several counties such as Lowndes, where black people—who
form 80 per cent of the population and have an average annual income of $943—
felt they could accomplish nothing within the framework of the Alabama
Democratic Party because of its racism and because the qualifying fee for this
year’s elections was raised from $50 to $500 in order to prevent most Negroes
from becoming candidates. On May 3, five new county “freedom organizations”
convened and nominated candidates for the offices of sheriff, tax assessor, mem-
bers of the school boards. These men and women are up for election in
November—if they live until then. Their ballot symbol is the black panther: a
bold, beautiful animal, representing the strength and dignity of black demands
today. A man needs a black panther on his side when he and his family must
endure—as hundreds of Alabamians have endured—loss of job, eviction, starva-
tion, and sometimes death, for political activity. He may also need a gun and
SNCC reaffirms the right of black men everywhere to defend themselves when
threatened or attacked. As for initiating the use of violence, we hope that such
programs as ours will make that unnecessary; but it is not for us to tell black com-
munities whether they can or cannot use any particular form of action to resolve
their problems. Responsibility for the use of violence by black men, whether in
self-defense or initiated by them, lies with the white community.
This is the specific historical experience from which SNCC’s call for “black
power” emerged on the Mississippi march last July. But the concept of “black
power” is not a recent or isolated phenomenon: It has grown out of the ferment of
agitation and activity by different people and organizations in many black commu-
nities over the years. Our last year of work in Alabama added a new concrete pos-
sibility. In Lowndes County, for example, black power will mean that if a Negro is
elected sheriff, he can end police brutality. If a black man is elected tax assessor,
he can collect and channel funds for the building of better roads and schools serv-
ing black people—thus advancing the move from political power into the eco-
nomic arena. In such areas as Lowndes, where black men have a majority, they will
attempt to use it to exercise control. This is what they seek: control. Where
Negroes lack a majority, black power means proper representation and sharing of
control. It means the creation of power bases from which black people can work
to change statewide or nationwide patterns of oppression through pressure from
strength—instead of weakness. Politically, black power means what it has always
meant to SNCC: the coming-together of black people to elect representatives and


--- PAGE 453 ---
to force those representatives to speak to their needs . It does not mean merely
putting black faces into office. A man or woman who is black and from the slums
cannot be automatically expected to speak to the needs of black people. Most of
the black politicians we see around the country today are not what SNCC means
by black power. The power must be that of a community, and emanate from there.
SNCC today is working in both North and South on programs of voter registra-
tion and independent political organizing. In some places, such as Alabama, Los
Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, and New Jersey, independent organizing under
the black panther symbol is in progress. The creation of a national “black panther
party” must come about: it will take time to build, and it is much too early to pre-
dict its success. We have no infallible master plan and we make no claim to exclu-
sive knowledge of how to end racism; different groups will work in their own dif-
ferent ways. SNCC cannot spell out the full logistics of self-determination but it can
address itself to the problem by helping black communities define their needs, real-
ize their strength, and go into action along a variety of lines which they  must choose
for themselves. Without knowing all the answers, it can address itself to the basic
problem of poverty: to the fact that in Lowndes County, 86 white families own 90
percent of the land. What are black people in that county going to do for jobs,
where are they going to get money? There must be reallocation of land and money.
Ultimately, the economic foundations of this country must be shared if black
people are to control their lives. The colonies of the United States—and this
includes the black ghettoes within its borders, north and south—must be liber-
ated. For a century, this nation has been like an octopus of exploitation, its tenta-
cles stretching from Mississippi and Harlem to South America, the Middle East,
southern Africa, and Vietnam; the form of exploitation varies from area to area but
the essential result has been the same—a powerful few have been maintained and
enriched at the expense of the poor and voiceless colored masses. This pattern
must be broken. As its grip loosens here and there around the world, the hopes of
black Americans become more realistic. For racism to die, a totally different
America must be born.
This is what the white society does not wish to face; this is why that society
prefers to talk about integration. But integration speaks not at all to the problem
of poverty, only to the problem of blackness. Integration today means the man
who “makes it,” leaving his black brothers behind in the ghetto as fast as his new
sports car will take him. It has no relevance to the Harlem wino or to the cotton-
picker making three dollars a day. As a lady I know in Alabama once said, “the
food that Ralph Bunche eats doesn’t fill my stomach.”
Integration, moreover, speaks to the problem of blackness in a despicable way.
As a goal, it has been based on complete acceptance of the fact that in order to
have a decent house or education, blacks must move into a white neighborhood
or send their children to a white school. This reinforces, among both black and
white, the idea that “white” is automatically better and “black” is by definition
inferior. This is why integration is a subterfuge for the maintenance of white
supremacy. It allows the nation to focus on a handful of Southern children who
4 2 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 454 ---
BLACK POWER 423
get into white schools, at great price, and to ignore the 94 percent who are left
behind in unimproved all-black schools. Such situations will not change until
black people have power—to control their own school boards, in this case. Then
Negroes become equal in a way that means something, and integration ceases to
be a one-way street. Then integration doesn’t mean draining skills and energies
from the ghetto into white neighborhoods; then it can mean white people mov-
ing from Beverly Hills into Watts, white people joining the Lowndes County
Freedom Organization. Then integration becomes relevant. . . .
To most whites, black power seems to mean that the Mau Mau are coming to
the suburbs at night. The Mau Mau are coming, and whites must stop them.
Articles appear about plots to “get Whitey,” creating an atmosphere in which “law
and order must be maintained.” Once again, responsibility is shifted from the
oppressor to the oppressed. Other whites chide, “Don’t forget—you’re only 10 per-
cent of the population; if you get too smart, we’ll wipe you out.” If they are liber-
als, they complain, “what about me?—don’t you want my help any more?” These
are people supposedly concerned about black Americans, but today they think first
of themselves, of their feelings of rejection. Or they admonish, “you can’t get any-
where without coalitions,” without considering the problems of coalition with
whom?; on what terms (coalescing from weakness can mean absorption, betrayal)?;
when? Or they accuse us of “polarizing the races” by our calls for black unity, when
the true responsibility for polarization lies with whites who will not accept their
responsibility as the majority power for making the democratic process work. . . .
Whites will not see that I, for example, as a person oppressed because of my
blackness, have common cause with other blacks who are oppressed because of
blackness. This is not to say that there are no white people who see things as I do,
but that it is black people I must speak to first. It must be the oppressed to whom
SNCC addresses itself primarily, not to friends from the oppressing group.
From birth, black people are told a set of lies about themselves. We are told
that we are lazy—yet I drive through the Delta area of Mississippi and watch
black people picking cotton in the hot sun for fourteen hours. We are told, “If you
work hard, you’ll succeed”—but if that were true, black people would own this
country. We are oppressed because we are black—not because we are ignorant,
not because we are lazy, not because we’re stupid (and got good rhythm), but
because we’re black. . . .
The need for psychological equality is the reason why SNCC today believes
that blacks must organize in the black community. Only black people can convey
the revolutionary idea that black people are able to do things themselves. Only
they can help create in the community an aroused and continuing black con-
sciousness that will provide the basis for political strength. In the past, white allies
have furthered white supremacy without the whites involved realizing it—or
wanting it, I think. Black people must do things for themselves; they must get
poverty money they will control and spend themselves, they must conduct tutor-
ial programs themselves so that black children can identify with black people.
This is one reason Africa has such importance: The reality of black men ruling


--- PAGE 455 ---
their own nations gives blacks elsewhere a sense of possibility, of power, which
they do not now have.
This does not mean we don’t welcome help, or friends. But we want the right
to decide whether anyone is, in fact, our friend. In the past, black Americans have
been almost the only people whom everybody and his momma could jump up and
call their friends. We have been tokens, symbols, objects—as I was in high school
to many young whites, who liked having “a Negro friend.” We want to decide who
is our friend, and we will not accept someone who comes to us and says: “If you
do X, Y, and Z, then I’ll help you.” We will not be told whom we should choose as
allies. We will not be isolated from any group or nation except by our own choice.
We cannot have the oppressors telling the oppressed how to rid themselves of the
oppressor. . . .
There is a vital job to be done among poor whites. We hope to see, eventually,
a coalition between poor blacks and poor whites. That is the only coalition which
seems acceptable to us, and we see such a coalition as the major internal instru-
ment of change in American society. SNCC has tried several times to organize
poor whites; we are trying again now, with an initial training program in
Tennessee. It is purely academic today to talk about bringing poor blacks and
whites together, but the job of creating a poor-white power bloc must be
attempted. The main responsibility for it falls upon whites. Black and white can
work together in the white community where possible; it is not possible, however,
to go into a poor Southern town and talk about integration. Poor whites every-
where are becoming more hostile—not less—partly because they see the nation’s
attention focussed on black poverty and nobody coming to them. Too many young
middle-class Americans, like some sort of Pepsi generation, have wanted to come
alive through the black community; they’ve wanted to be where the action is—
and the action has been in the black community.
Black people do not want to “take over” this country. They don’t want to “get
whitey”; they just want to get him off their backs, as the saying goes. It was for
example the exploitation by Jewish landlords and merchants which first created
black resentment toward Jews—not Judaism. The white man is irrelevant to
blacks, except as an oppressive force. Blacks want to be in his place, yes, but not
in order to terrorize and lynch and starve him. They want to be in his place
because that is where a decent life can be had. . . .
As for white America, perhaps it can stop crying out against “black supremacy,”
“black nationalism,” “racism in reverse,” and begin facing reality. The reality is
that this nation, from top to bottom, is racist; that racism is not primarily a prob-
lem of “human relations” but of an exploitation maintained—either actively or
through silence—by the society as a whole. Camus and Sartre have asked, can a
man condemn himself? Can whites, particularly liberal whites, condemn them-
selves? Can they stop blaming us, and blame their own system? Are they capable
of the shame which might become a revolutionary emotion?
We have found that they usually cannot condemn themselves, and so we have
done it. But the rebuilding of this society, if at all possible, is basically the respon-
4 2 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 456 ---
BLACK POWER 425
sibility of whites—not blacks. We won’t fight to save the present society, in
Vietnam or anywhere else. We are just going to work, in the way we see fit, and
on goals we define, not for civil rights but for all our human rights.
O
POSITION PAPER ON BLACK POWER
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
The myth that the Negro is somehow incapable of liberating himself, is lazy, etc.,
came out of the American experience. In the books that children read, whites are
always “good” (good symbols are white), blacks are “evil” or seen as savages in
movies, their language is referred to as a “dialect,” and black people in this coun-
try are supposedly descended from savages.
Any white person who comes into the movement has these concepts in his
mind about black people if only subconsciously. He cannot escape them because
the whole society has geared his subconscious in that direction.
Miss America coming from Mississippi has a chance to represent all of
America, but a black person from either Mississippi or New York will never rep-
resent America. So that white people coming into the movement cannot relate to
the black experience, cannot relate to the word “black,” cannot relate to the “nitty
gritty,” cannot relate to the experience that brought such a word into being, can-
not relate to chitterlings, hog’s head cheese, pig feet, hamhocks, and cannot relate
to slavery, because these things are not a part of their experience. They also can-
not relate to the black religious experience, nor to the black church unless, of
course, this church has taken on white manifestations.
Negroes in this country have never been allowed to organize themselves
because of white interference. As a result of this, the stereotype has been rein-
forced that blacks cannot organize themselves. The white psychology that blacks
have to be watched, also reinforces the stereotype. Blacks, in fact, feel intimi-
dated by the presence of whites, because of their knowledge of the power that
whites have over their lives. One white person can come into a meeting of black
people and change the complexion of that meeting, whereas one black person
would not change the complexion of that meeting unless he was an obvious Uncle
Tom. People would immediately start talking about “brotherhood,” “love,” etc.;
race would not be discussed.
If people must express themselves freely, there has to be a climate in which they
can do this. If blacks feel intimidated by whites, then they are not liable to vent the
rage that they feel about whites in the presence of whites—especially not the black
people whom we are trying to organize, i.e., the broad masses of black people. A
climate has to be created whereby blacks can express themselves. The reason that
whites must be excluded is not that one is anti-white, but because the efforts that
one is trying to achieve cannot succeed because whites have an intimidating effect.
Ofttimes the intimidating effect is in direct proportion to the amount of degrada-
tion that black people have suffered at the hands of white people.


--- PAGE 457 ---
It must be offered that white people who desire change in this country should
go where that problem (of racism) is most manifest. The problem is not in the black
community. The white people should go into white communities where the whites
have created power for the express [purpose] of denying blacks human dignity and
self-determination. Whites who come into the black community with ideas of
change seem to want to absolve the power structure of its responsibility of what it
is doing, and saying that change can come only through black unity, which is only
the worst kind of paternalism. This is not to say that whites have not had an impor-
tant role in the movement. In the case of Mississippi, their role was very key in that
they helped give blacks the right to organize, that role is now over, and it should be.
People now have the right to picket, the right to give out leaflets, the right to
vote, the right to demonstrate, the right to print.
These things which revolve around the right to organize have been accom-
plished mainly because of the entrance of white people into Mississippi, in the
summer of ’64. Since these goals have now been accomplished, their (whites’)
role in the movement has now ended. What does it mean if black people, once
having the right to organize, are not allowed to organize themselves? It means
that blacks’ ideas about inferiority are being reinforced. Shouldn’t people be able
to organize themselves? Blacks should be given this right. Further (white partic-
ipation) means in the eyes of the black community that whites are the “brains”
behind the movement and blacks cannot function without whites. This only
serves to perpetuate existing attitudes within the existing society, i.e., blacks are
“dumb,” “unable to take care of business,” etc. Whites are “smart,” the “brains”
behind everything.
How do blacks relate to other blacks as such? How do we react to Willie Mays
as against Mickey Mantle? What is our response to Mays hitting a home run against
Mantle performing the same deed? One has to come to the conclusion that it is
because of black participation in baseball. Negroes still identify with the Dodgers
because of Jackie Robinson’s efforts with the Dodgers. Negroes would instinctively
champion all-black teams if they opposed all-white or predominantly white teams.
The same principle operates for the movement as it does for baseball: a mystique
must be created whereby Negroes can identify with the movement.
Thus an all-black project is needed in order for the people to free themselves.
This has to exist from the beginning. This relates to what can be called “coalition
politics.” There is no doubt in our minds that some whites are just as disgusted
with this system as we are. But it is meaningless to talk about coalition if there is
no one to align ourselves with, because of the lack of organization in the white
communities. There can be no talk of “hooking up” unless black people organize
blacks and white people organize whites. If these conditions are met then perhaps
at some later date—and if we are going in the same direction—talks about
exchange of personnel, coalition, and other meaningful alliances can be discussed.
In the beginning of the movement, we had fallen into a trap whereby we
thought that our problems revolved around the right to eat at certain lunch coun-
ters or the right to vote or to organize our communities. We have seen, however,
4 2 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 458 ---
BLACK POWER 427
that the problem is much deeper. The problem of this country, as we had seen it,
concerned all blacks and all whites (and therefore) if decisions were left to the
young people, then solutions would be arrived at. But this negates the history of
black people and whites. We have dealt stringently with the problem of “Uncle
Tom,” but we have not yet gotten around to Simon Legree. We must ask ourselves
who is the real villain? Uncle Tom or Simon Legree? Everybody knows Uncle
Tom but who knows Simon Legree?
So what we have now (in S.N.C.C.) is a closed society. A clique. Black people
cannot relate to S.N.C.C., because of its unrealistic, nonracial atmosphere; deny-
ing their experiences of America as a racist society. In contrast, S.C.L.C. [the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference] has a
staff that at least maintains a black facade. The front office is virtually all black,
but nobody accuses S.C.L.C. of being racist.
If we are to proceed toward true liberation, we must cut ourselves off from
white people. We must form our own institutions, credit unions, co-ops, political
parties, write our own histories.
To proceed further, let us make some comparisons between the Black move-
ment of the (early) 1900s and the movement of the 1960s—the N.A.A.C.P . [the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with S.N.C.C.
Whites subverted the Niagara movement [the fore-runner of the N.A.A.C.P .]
which, at the outset, was an all-black movement. The name of the new organiza-
tion was also very revealing, in that it pre-supposed blacks have to be advanced to
the level of whites. We are now aware that the N.A.A.C.P . has grown reactionary,
is controlled by the black power structure itself, and stands as one of the main
roadblocks to black freedom. S.N.C.C., by allowing the whites to remain in the
organization, can have its efforts subverted in the same manner, i.e., through hav-
ing them play important roles such as community organizers, etc. Indigenous
leadership cannot be built with whites in the positions they now hold.
These facts do not mean that whites cannot help. They can participate on a vol-
untary basis. We can contract work out to them, but in no way can they partici-
pate on a policy-making level.
The charge may be made that we are “racists,” but whites who are sensitive to
our problems will realize that we must determine our own destiny.
In an attempt to find a solution to our dilemma, we propose that our organiza-
tion (S.N.C.C.) should be black-staffed, black-controlled and black-financed. We
do not want to fall into a similar dilemma that other civil rights organizations have
fallen. If we continue to rely upon white financial support we will find ourselves
entwined in the tentacles of the white power complex that controls this country. It
is also important that a black organization (devoid of cultism) be projected to our
people, so that it can be demonstrated that such organizations are viable.
More and more, we see black people in this country being used as a tool of the
white liberal establishment. Liberal whites have not begun to address themselves
to the real problem of black people in this country; witness their bewilderment,
fear and anxiety when nationalism is mentioned concerning black people. An


--- PAGE 459 ---
analysis of their (white liberal) reaction to the word alone (nationalism) reveals a
very meaningful attitude of whites of any ideological persuasion toward blacks in
this country. It means previous solutions to black problems in this country have
been made in the interests of those whites dealing with these problems and not
in the best interests of black people in this country. Whites can only subvert our
true search and struggle for self-determination, self-identification, and liberation
in this country. Re-evaluation of the white and black roles must NOW take place
so that whites no longer designate roles that black people play but rather black
people define white people’s roles.
Too long have we allowed white people to interpret the importance and mean-
ing of the cultural aspects of our society. We have allowed them to tell us what
was good about our Afro-American music, art and literature. How many black
critics do we have on the “jazz” scene? How can a white person who is not a part
of the black psyche (except in the oppressor’s role) interpret the meaning of the
blues to us who are manifestations of the songs themselves?
It must also be pointed out that on whatever level of contact that blacks and
whites come together, that meeting or confrontation is not on the level of the
blacks but always on the level of the whites. This only means that our everyday
contact with whites is a reinforcement of the myth of white supremacy. Whites
are the ones who must try to raise themselves to our humanistic level. We are not,
after all, the ones who are responsible for a genocidal war in Vietnam; we are not
the ones who are responsible for neocolonialism in Africa and Latin America; we
are not the ones who held a people in animalistic bondage over 400 years. We
reject the American dream as defined by white people and must work to con-
struct an American reality defined by Afro-Americans.
One of the criticisms of white militants and radicals is that when we view the
masses of white people we view the over-all reality of America, we view the racism,
the bigotry, and the distortion of personality, we view man’s inhumanity to man: we
view in reality 180 million racists. The sensitive white intellectual and radical who
is fighting to bring about change is conscious of this fact but does not have the
courage to admit this. When he admits this reality, then he must also admit his
involvement because he is a part of the collective white America. It is only to the
extent that he recognizes this that he will be able to change this reality.
Another concern is how does the white radical view the black community and
how does he view the poor white community in terms of organizing. So far, we
have found that most white radicals have sought to escape the horrible reality of
America by going into the black community and attempting to organize black
people while neglecting the organization of their own people’s racist communi-
ties. How can one clean up someone else’s yard when one’s own yard is untidy?
Again we feel that S.N.C.C. and the civil-rights movement in general is in many
aspects similar to the anticolonial situations in the African and Asian countries.
We have the whites in the movement corresponding to the white civil servants
and missionaries in the colonial countries who have worked with the colonial peo-
ple for a long period of time and have developed a paternalistic attitude toward
4 2 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 460 ---
BLACK POWER 429
them. The reality of the colonial people taking over their own lives and control-
ling their own destiny must be faced. Having to move aside and letting this nat-
ural process of growth and development take place must be faced.
These views should not be equated with outside influence or outside agitation
but should be viewed as the natural process of growth and development within a
movement; so that the move by the black militants and S.N.C.C. in this direction
should be viewed as a turn toward self-determination.
It is very ironic and curious how aware whites in this country can champion
anticolonialism in other countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, but when
black people move toward similar goals of self-determination in this country they
are viewed as racists and anti-white by these same progressive whites. In pro-
ceeding further, it can be said that this attitude derives from the overall point of
view of the white psyche as it concerns the black people. This attitude stems from
the era of the slave revolts when every white man was a potential deputy or sher-
iff or guardian of the state. Because when black people got together among them-
selves to work out their problems, it became a threat to white people, because
such meetings were potential slave revolts.
It can be maintained that this attitude or way of thinking has perpetuated
itself to this current period and that it is part of the psyche of white people in
this country whatever their political persuasion might be. It is part of the white
fear-guilt complex resulting from the slave revolts. There have been examples of
whites who stated that they can deal with black fellows on an individual basis but
become threatened or menaced by the presence of groups of blacks. It can be
maintained that this attitude is held by the majority of progressive whites in this
country.
A thorough re-examination must be made by black people concerning the con-
tributions that we have made in shaping this country. If this re-examination and
re-evaluation is not made, and black people are not given their proper due and
respect, then the antagonisms and contradictions are going to become more and
more glaring, more and more intense until a national explosion may result.
When people attempt to move from these conclusions it would be faulty rea-
soning to say they are ordered by racism, because, in this country and in the West,
racism has functioned as a type of white nationalism when dealing with black peo-
ple. We all know the habit that this has created throughout the world and partic-
ularly among nonwhite people in this country.
Therefore any re-evaluation that we must make will, for the most part, deal
with identification. Who are black people, what are black people; what is their
relationship to America and the world?
It must be repeated that the whole myth of “Negro citizenship,” perpetuated
by the white elite, has confused the thinking of radical and progressive blacks
and whites in this country. The broad masses of black people react to American
society in the same manner as colonial peoples react to the West in Africa, and
Latin America, and had the same relationship—that of the colonized toward the
colonizer.


--- PAGE 461 ---
O
“BLACK POWER” AND COALITION POLITICS
By Bayard Rustin
There are two Americas—black and white—and nothing has more clearly
revealed the divisions between them than the debate currently raging around the
slogan of “black power.” Despite—or perhaps because of—the fact that this slo-
gan lacks any clear definition, it has succeeded in galvanizing emotions on all
sides, with many whites seeing it as the expression of a new racism and many
Negroes taking it as a warning to white people that Negroes will no longer toler-
ate brutality and violence. But even within the Negro community itself, “black
power” has touched off a major debate—the most bitter the community has expe-
rienced since the days of Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois, and one
which threatens to ravage the entire civil-rights movement. Indeed, a serious split
has already developed between advocates of “black power” like Floyd McKissick
of CORE and Stokely Carmichael of SNCC on the one hand, and Dr. Martin
Luther King of SCLC, Roy Wilkins of the NAACP , and Whitney Young of the
Urban League on the other.
There is no question, then, that great passions are involved in the debate over
the idea of “black power”; nor, as we shall see, is there any question that these pas-
sions have their roots in the psychological and political frustrations of the Negro
community. Nevertheless, I would contend that “black power” not only lacks any
real value for the civil-rights movement, but that its propagation is positively harm-
ful. It diverts the movement from a meaningful debate over strategy and tactics, it
isolates the Negro community, and it encourages the growth of anti-Negro forces.
In its simplest and most innocent guise, “black power” merely means the effort
to elect Negroes to office in proportion to Negro strength within the population.
There is, of course, nothing wrong with such an objective in itself, and nothing
inherently radical in the idea of pursuing it. But in Stokely Carmichael’s extrava-
gant rhetoric about “taking over” in districts of the South where Negroes are in the
majority, it is important to recognize that Southern Negroes are only in a position
to win a maximum of two congressional seats and control of eighty local counties.
(Carmichael, incidentally, is in the paradoxical position of screaming at liberals—
wanting only to “get whitey off my back”—and simultaneously needing their sup-
port: after all, he can talk about Negroes taking over Lowndes County only because
there is a fairly liberal federal government to protect him should Governor Wallace
decide to eliminate this pocket of black power.) Now there might be a certain value
in having two Negro congressmen from the South, but obviously they could do
nothing by themselves to reconstruct the face of America. Eighty sheriffs, eighty
tax assessors, and eighty school-board members might ease the tension for a while
in their communities, but they alone could not create jobs and build low-cost hous-
ing; they alone could not supply quality integrated education.
The relevant question, moreover, is not whether a politician is black or white,
but what forces he represents. Manhattan has had a succession of Negro borough
presidents, and yet the schools are increasingly segregated. Adam Clayton Powell
4 3 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 462 ---
BLACK POWER 431
and William Dawson have both been in Congress for many years; the former is
responsible for a rider on school integration that never gets passed, and the latter
is responsible for keeping the Negroes of Chicago tied to a mayor who had to see
riots and death before he would put eight-dollar sprinklers on water hydrants in
the summer. I am not for one minute arguing that Powell, Dawson, and Mrs.
Motley should be impeached. What I am saying is that if a politician is elected
because he is black and is deemed to be entitled to a “slice of the pie,” he will
behave in one way; if he is elected by a constituency pressing for social reform,
he will, whether he is white or black, behave in another way.
Southern Negroes, despite exhortations from SNCC to organize themselves into
a Black Panther party, are going to stay in the Democratic party—to them it is the
party of progress, the New Deal, the New Frontier, and the Great Society—and
they are right to stay. For SNCC’s Black Panther perspective is simultaneously
utopian and reactionary—the former for the by now obvious reason that one-
tenth of the population cannot accomplish much by itself, the latter because such
a party would remove Negroes from the main area of political struggle in this
country (particularly in the one-party South, where the decisive battles are fought
out in Democratic primaries), and would give priority to the issue of race pre-
cisely at a time when the fundamental questions facing the Negro and American
society alike are economic and social. . . .
The winning of the right of Negroes to vote in the South insures the eventual
transformation of the Democratic party, now controlled primarily by Northern
machine politicians and Southern Dixiecrats. The Negro vote will eliminate the
Dixiecrats from the party and from Congress, which means that the crucial ques-
tion facing us today is who will replace them in the South. Unless civil-rights lead-
ers (in such towns as Jackson, Mississippi; Birmingham, Alabama; and even to a
certain extent Atlanta) can organize grass-roots clubs whose members will have a
genuine political voice, the Dixiecrats might well be succeeded by black moder-
ates and black Southern-style machine politicians, who would do little to push for
needed legislation in Congress and little to improve local conditions in the South.
While I myself would prefer Negro machines to a situation in which Negroes have
no power at all, it seems to me that there is a better alternative today—a lib-
eral–labor–civil-rights coalition which would work to make the Democratic party
truly responsive to the aspirations of the poor, and which would develop support
for programs (specifically those outlined in A. Philip Randolph’s $100 billion
Freedom Budget) aimed at the reconstruction of American society in the inter-
ests of greater social justice. The advocates of “black power” have no such pro-
grams in mind; what they are in fact arguing for (perhaps unconsciously) is the
creation of a new black establishment.
Nor, it might be added, are they leading the Negro people along the same
road which they imagine immigrant groups traveled so successfully in the past.
Proponents of “black power”—accepting a historical myth perpetrated by
moderates—like to say that the Irish and the Jews and the Italians, by sticking


--- PAGE 463 ---
together and demanding their share, finally won enough power to overcome
their initial disabilities. But the truth is that it was through alliances with other
groups (in political machines or as part of the trade-union movement) that the
Irish and the Jews and the Italians acquired the power to win their rightful
place in American society. They did not “pull themselves up by their own boot-
straps”—no group in American society has ever done so; and they most cer-
tainly did not make isolation their primary tactic. . . .
“Black power” is, of course, a somewhat nationalistic slogan and its sudden rise
to popularity among Negroes signifies a concomitant rise in nationalist sentiment
(Malcolm X’s autobiography is quoted nowadays in Grenada, Mississippi, as well
as in Harlem). We have seen such nationalistic turns and withdrawals back into
the ghetto before, and when we look at the conditions which brought them about,
we find that they have much in common with the conditions of Negro life at the
present moment: conditions which lead to despair over the goal of integration and
to the belief that the ghetto will last forever.
It may, in the light of the many juridical and legislative victories which have
been achieved in the past few years, seem strange that despair should be so
widespread among Negroes today. But anyone to whom it seems strange should
reflect on the fact that despite these victories Negroes today are in worse eco-
nomic shape, live in worse slums, and attend more highly segregated schools than
in 1954. Thus—to recite the appalling, and appallingly familiar, statistical litany
once again—more Negroes are unemployed today than in 1954; the gap
between the wages of the Negro worker and the white worker is wider; while the
unemployment rate among white youths is decreasing, the rate among Negro
youths has increased to 32 percent (and among Negro girls the rise is even more
startling). Even the one gain which has been registered, a decrease in the unem-
ployment rate among Negro adults, is deceptive, for it represents men who have
been called back to work after a period of being laid off. In any event, unem-
ployment among Negro men is still twice that of whites, and no new jobs have
been created.
So too with housing, which is deteriorating in the North (and yet the housing
provisions of the 1966 civil-rights bill are weaker than the anti-discrimination laws
in several states which contain the worst ghettos even with these laws on their
books). And so too with schools: according to figures issued recently by the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 65 percent of first-grade Negro
students in this country attend schools that are from 90 to 100 percent black. (If
in 1954, when the Supreme Court handed down the desegregation decision, you
had been the Negro parent of a first-grade child, the chances are that this past
June you would have attended that child’s graduation from a segregated high
school).
To put all this in the simplest and most concrete terms: the day-to-day lot of
the ghetto Negro has not been improved by the various judicial and legislative
measures of the past decade. . . .
Then there is the war in Vietnam, which poses many ironies for the Negro
community. On the one hand, Negroes are bitterly aware of the fact that more
4 3 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 464 ---
BLACK POWER 433
and more money is being spent on the war, while the anti-poverty program is
being cut, on the other hand, Negro youths are enlisting in great numbers, as
though to say that it is worth the risk of being killed to learn a trade, to leave a
dead-end situation, and to join the only institution in this society which seems
really to be integrated. . . .
The Vietnam war is also partly responsible for the growing disillusion with
non-violence among Negroes. The ghetto Negro does not in general ask whether
the United States is right or wrong to be in Southeast Asia. He does, however,
wonder why he is exhorted to non-violence when the United States has been wag-
ing a fantastically brutal war, and it puzzles him to be told that he must turn the
other cheek in our own South while we must fight for freedom in South Vietnam.
Thus, as in roughly similar circumstances in the past—circumstances, I repeat,
which in the aggregate foster the belief that the ghetto is destined to last forever—
Negroes are once again turning to nationalistic slogans, with “black power” afford-
ing the same emotional release as “Back to Africa” and “Buy Black” did in earlier
periods of frustration and hopelessness. This is not only the case with the ordinary
Negro in the ghetto; it is also the case with leaders like McKissick and Carmichael,
neither of whom began as a nationalist or was at first cynical about the possibilities
of integration. It took countless beatings and 24 jailings—that, and the absence of
strong and continual support from the liberal community—to persuade Carmi-
chael that his earlier faith in coalition politics was mistaken, that nothing was to be
gained from working with whites, and that an alliance with the black nationalists
was desirable. In the areas of the South where SNCC has been working so nobly,
implementation of the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965 has been slow and inef-
fective. Negroes in many rural areas cannot walk into the courthouse and register
to vote. Despite the voting-rights bill, they must file complaints and the Justice
Department must be called to send federal registrars. Nor do children attend inte-
grated schools as a matter of course. There, too, complaints must be filed and the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare must be notified. Neither depart-
ment has been doing an effective job of enforcing the bills. The feeling of isolation
increases among SNCC workers as each legislative victory turns out to be only a
token victory—significant on the national level, but not affecting the day-to-day
lives of Negroes. Carmichael and his colleagues are wrong in refusing to support
the 1966 bill, but one can understand why they feel as they do.
It is, in short, the growing conviction that the Negroes cannot win—a conviction
with much grounding in experience—which accounts for the new popularity of
“black power.” So far as the ghetto Negro is concerned, this conviction expresses
itself in hostility first toward the people closest to him who have held out the most
promise and failed to deliver (Martin Luther King, Roy Wilkins, etc.), then toward
those who have proclaimed themselves his friends (the liberals and the labor move-
ment), and finally toward the only oppressors he can see (the local storekeeper and
the policeman on the corner). On the leadership level, the conviction that the
Negroes cannot win takes other forms, principally the adoption of what I have
called a “no-win” policy. Why bother with programs when their enactment results
only in “sham”? Why concern ourselves with the image of the movement when


--- PAGE 465 ---
nothing significant has been gained for all the sacrifices made by SNCC and
CORE? Why compromise with reluctant white allies when nothing of consequence
can be achieved anyway? Why indeed have anything to do with whites at all?
On this last point, it is extremely important for white liberals to understand—
as, one gathers from their references to “racism in reverse,” the President and the
Vice President of the United States do not—that there is all the difference in the
world between saying, “If you don’t want me, I don’t want you” (which is what
some proponents of “black power” have in effect been saying) and the statement,
“Whatever you do, I don’t want you” (which is what racism declares). It is, in
other words, both absurd and immoral to equate the despairing response of the
victim with the contemptuous assertion of the oppressor. It would, moreover, be
tragic if white liberals allowed verbal hostility on the part of Negroes to drive
them out of the movement or to curtail their support for civil rights. The issue was
injustice before “black power” became popular, and the issue is still injustice.
In any event, even if “black power” had not emerged as a slogan, problems
would have arisen in the relation between whites and Negroes in the civil-rights
movement. In the North, it was inevitable that Negroes would eventually wish to
run their own movement and would rebel against the presence of whites in posi-
tions of leadership as yet another sign of white supremacy. In the South, the well-
intentioned white volunteer had the cards stacked against him from the beginning.
Not only could he leave the struggle any time he chose to do so, but a higher value
was set on his safety by the press and the government—apparent in the differing
degrees of excitement generated by the imprisonment or murder of whites and
Negroes. The white person’s importance to the movement in the South was thus
an ironic outgrowth of racism and was therefore bound to create resentment. . . .
Nevertheless, pride, confidence, and a new identity cannot be won by glorify-
ing blackness or attacking whites; they can only come from meaningful action,
from good jobs, and from real victories such as were achieved on the streets of
Montgomery, Birmingham, and Selma. When SNCC and CORE went into the
South, they awakened the country, but now they emerge isolated and demoral-
ized, shouting a slogan that may afford a momentary satisfaction but that is cal-
culated to destroy them and their movement. Already their frustrated call is being
answered with counter-demands for law and order and with opposition to police-
review boards. Already they have diverted the entire civil-rights movement from
the hard task of developing strategies to realign the major parties of this country,
and embroiled it in a debate that can only lead more and more to politics by frus-
tration. . . .
We must see, therefore, in the current debate over “black power,” a fantastic
challenge to American society to live up to its proclaimed principles in the area of
race by transforming itself so that all men may live equally and under justice. We
must see to it that in rejecting “black power,” we do not also reject the principle
of Negro equality. Those people who would use the current debate and/or the
riots to abandon the civil-rights movement leave us no choice but to question
their original motivation. . . .
4 3 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 466 ---
F.  M C KISSICK, “CORE ENDORSES BLACK POWER” 4 3 5
Sources: (1) Stokely Carmichael, excerpt from “What We Want,” New York Review of
Books 7, no. 4 (September 22, 1966), pp. 5–6, 8; (2) SNCC, “Position Paper on Black
Power,” published in the New York Times, August 5, 1966; and (3) Bayard Rustin,
excerpt from “‘Black Power’ and Coalition Politics,” Commentary 42 (September 1966),
pp. 35–40.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Jervis Anderson, Bayard Rustin: Troubles I’ve Seen: A Biography(New York: HarperCollins,
1997).
Stokely Carmichael, Stokely Speaks: Black Power Back to Pan-Africanism (New York:
Random House, 1971).
Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in
America (New York: Random House, 1967).
Stokely Carmichael, with Ekwueme Michael Thelwell, Ready for Revolution: The Life and
Struggles of Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture)(New York: Scribner, 2005).
Clayborne Carson, In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981).
John D’Emilio, Lost Prophet: The Life and Times of Bayard Rustin(Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2004).
Peniel E. Joseph, ed., Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights-Black Power Era
(London: Routledge, 2006).
———, Waiting ’Til the Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black Power in America
(New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2006).
William Van DeBurg, New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American Cul-
ture, 1965–1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
O15 O
“CORE Endorses Black Power,” Floyd McKissick, 1967
Floyd McKissick (1922–1991) was born in Asheville, North Carolina. He was
denied admission into the University of North Carolina Law School because of
his race, and with the aid of NAACP lawyer Thurgood Marshall he successfully
sued the university. Upon gaining admission, he became the first African
American to earn an L.L.B. there. McKissick became active in the Congress of
Racial Equality (CORE) and replaced James Farmer as the head of the organi-
zation in 1966. Under his influence, CORE began to closely identify with the
Black Power movement. In 1968, McKissick left CORE and moved to Warren
County, North Carolina, where he attempted to launch “Soul City,” an all-black,
planned community. Through the Nixon administration, McKissick successfully
secured a $14- million bond issue guarantee from the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The quid pro quo for federal backing, however, was
that McKissick had to publicly endorse Nixon for reelection to the presidency
in 1972. McKissick’s strategy of “Black Capitalism” inevitably collapsed, and


--- PAGE 467 ---
with it so did the dream of Soul City. McKissick died of lung cancer in April
1991.
O
WHY THE NEGRO MUST REBEL
We are given rhetoric about power sharing: “The Land of the Free. Home of the
Brave.” “With liberty and justice for all.” I could name dozens of others that
sound beautiful, but mean absolutely nothing for black people, here or on any
other continent.
They were never intended to mean anything for black people. They were writ-
ten when we were still slaves.
There are black people starving in Mississippi, millions of colored people
starving in India while white Americans bask in luxury, spending millions to go
to the moon, billions on a war in Vietnam which pits yellow people against yel-
low people.
There are rebellions throughout the United States—black people demanding
that they no longer be exploited, that they be free—free to live in dignity. . . .
In America, as we have seen, the belief in white superiority runs deep. It was
a dominant factor in the slave trade. The black African wasn’t recognized as a
human being.
A belief ferocious enough to allow human slavery cannot be dissipated by a
mere century and, in America, it has been quietly reinforced.
Although slavery as a recognized legal institution has been abolished, eco-
nomic slavery, economic exploitation, has not. Black people in this country have
never been allowed to share in the economic riches of America. A few get in—
here and there—a few get rich, but their success has no effect on the masses of
black people.
White landlords, white storekeepers, white corporate managers and a white,
Anglo-Saxon Wall Street, conspire to keep the black man in his place.
As whites quietly exit to the comfortable suburbs, they do not relinquish the
economic control of the ghetto; they maintain control of the city agencies and
the political scene. They determine what opportunities will be available and
what will be reserved for whites only—and, occasionally, one or two good
“Negroes.”
With the climate existing in the United States, we would be foolish, as leaders, to
think that black people are not being politically oppressed. If black people got polit-
ical power, they might be able to merge their values with the values of the dominant
culture. And the white man wants to protect his values—particularly his economic
values. The materialism which has distorted his dealings with the entire world. . . .
Placing the Blame
And who is to blame for the rebellions? This point we need not argue. The
white man is the judge, jury and the executioner in his system and he first made
the law so as to control us. We are called the violators of his “law and order”—
“criminals.”
4 3 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 468 ---
F.  M C KISSICK, “CORE ENDORSES BLACK POWER” 4 3 7
Yet he knows that the white racist society is to blame for all of the conditions
which force a man to rebel. His concept of “law and order” means the legal meth-
ods of exploiting blacks. We object and we resist.
Some so-called Negro leaders even have the audacity to join the man—by call-
ing a liberation struggle a riot—his brothers hoodlums and criminals—and damn-
ing his brothers who seek to overthrow the yoke of oppression. . . .
In this country, the ghetto is not defined by barbed wire: the ghetto follows the
black man wherever he goes. . . .
Yes, black people know fear and live with it each and every day of their lives—
in deadly fear of the white man’s potential. We know he can kill, we know he
will—because of his hurt pride—we know that his personality demands that he
control whatever he sees, we know that normal dissent is treason in his blue eyes.
“He Will Kill Us”
In fact, we know the man better than he knows himself. We know him for what
he is. We know he will kill us if he can—one by one or all at once. . . .
Even our friends in the peace movement find it too easy to look thousands of
miles away from home and, with much indignation, see the extermination of the
Vietnamese.
On the other hand, they cannot see 10 blocks away, where many black people
are the walking dead—dead in mind and spirit, because of lack of hope and lack
of chance.
We cannot look elsewhere for help. We cannot lean on the crutch of religion.
We cannot depend on phony “coalitions.” We must work out our own methods.
We must draw our own conclusions.
To those queasy individuals who are afraid of the resolutions presented here,
let me state my unequivocal opinion: The right of revolution is a constitutional
right, condoned by the creation of the American Constitution itself. When we
assert the right of revolution, we are asserting a constitutional right.
Revolution in America is justified by all standards of morality—religious and
ethical: It is required to fulfill the basic, natural rights of man.
Even white men recognized the need for revolution when, in 1776, they
revolted because they were oppressed. And today—1967—black people are more
oppressed than any white man has ever been—in the history of the world.
This is the time when we must unite—brothers and sisters. We must join in
making plans. . . .
Source: Excerpts from speech delivered at the “National Conference of Black Power,”
Newark, New Jersey, July 20–23, 1967. Originally published in the New York Times, July 30,
1967.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Inge Powell Bell, CORE and the Strategy of Nonviolence(New York: Random House, 1968).
Floyd B. McKissick, Three-Fifths of a Man(New York: Macmillan, 1969).
August Meier and Elliott Rudwick, CORE: A Study in the Civil Rights Movement (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1973).


--- PAGE 469 ---
O16 O
“To Atone for Our Sins and Errors in Vietnam,” Martin Luther King, Jr., 1967
Though Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968) is frequently remembered for his “I
Have a Dream” speech at the 1963 March on Washington, in the last several years
of his life his politics moved to the left and he began to focus greater attention on
entrenched patterns of economic exploitation inside U.S. society. America, he
said, needed a “revolution in values,” and on many occasions he suggested that
there must be a fundamental change in the way that society was organized. King
also spoke out against U.S. militarism in Vietnam—a move for which he was
widely criticized in the mainstream press. However, given King’s long-standing
commitment to nonviolence and the fact that he held a Nobel Peace Prize, his
condemnation of the war carried a great deal of moral authority and was a great
boost to the antiwar movement. In the aftermath of the creation of a federal hol-
iday celebrating King’s birthday, there has been a tendency within popular culture
to concentrate almost exclusively on his pre-1966 public career. This is not only
historically dishonest, but an attempt to “mainstream” King to conform to more
conservative standards. If we listen to his words delivered at New York City’s
Riverside Church exactly one year before his assassination, a strikingly different
and more radical King emerges from the text.
O
I come to this magnificent house of worship tonight, because my conscience
leaves me no other choice. I join with you in this meeting because I am in deep-
est agreement with the aims and work of the organization which has brought us
together: Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam. The recent statement
of your executive committee is the sentiment of my own heart, and I found myself
in full accord when I read its opening lines: “A time comes when silence is
betrayal.” That time has come for us in relation to Vietnam.
The truth of these words is beyond doubt, but the mission to which they call
us is a most difficult one. Even when pressed by the demands of inner truth, men
do not easily assume the task of opposing their government’s policy, especially in
time of war. Nor does the human spirit move without great difficulty against all
the apathy of conformist thought within one’s own bosom and in the surrounding
world. Moreover, when the issues at hand seem as perplexed as they often do in
the case of this dreadful conflict, we are always on the verge of being mesmerized
by uncertainty; but we must move on.
Some of us who have already begun to break the silence of the night have
found that the calling to speak is often a vocation of agony, but we must speak.
We must speak with all the humility that is appropriate to our limited vision, but
we must speak. And we must rejoice as well, for surely this is the first time in our
nation’s history that a significant number of its religious leaders have chosen to
4 3 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 470 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND VIETNAM 4 3 9
move beyond the prophesying of smooth patriotism to the high grounds of a firm
dissent based upon the mandates of conscience and the reading of history.
Perhaps a new spirit is rising among us. If it is, let us trace its movements well and
pray that our own inner being may be sensitive to its guidance, for we are deeply
in need of a new way beyond the darkness that seems so close around us.
Over the past two years, as I have moved to break the betrayal of my own
silences and to speak the burnings of my own heart, as I have called for radical
departures from the destruction of Vietnam, many persons have questioned me
about the wisdom of my path. At the heart of their concerns this query has often
loomed large and loud: Why are you speaking about the war, Dr. King? Why are
you joining the voices of dissent? Peace and civil rights don’t mix, they say. Aren’t
you hurting the cause of your people? they ask. And when I hear them, though I
often understand the source of their concern, I am nevertheless greatly saddened,
for such questions mean that the inquirers have not really known me, my com-
mitment or my calling. Indeed, their questions suggest that they do not know the
world in which they live.
In the light of such tragic misunderstanding, I deem it of signal importance to
try to state clearly, and I trust concisely, why I believe that the path from Dexter
Avenue Baptist Church—the church in Montgomery, Alabama, where I began
my pastorate—leads clearly to this sanctuary tonight.
I come to this platform tonight to make a passionate plea to my beloved nation.
This speech is not addressed to Hanoi or to the National Liberation Front. It is
not addressed to China or to Russia.
Nor is it an attempt to overlook the ambiguity of the total situation and the
need for a collective solution to the tragedy of Vietnam. Neither is it an attempt
to make North Vietnam or the National Liberation Front paragons of virtue, nor
to overlook the role they can play in a successful resolution of the problem. While
they both may have justifiable reason to be suspicious of the good faith of the
United States, life and history give eloquent testimony to the fact that conflicts
are never resolved without trustful give and take on both sides.
Tonight, however, I wish not to speak with Hanoi and the N.L.F., but rather to
my fellow Americans who, with me, bear the greatest responsibility in ending a
conflict that has exacted a heavy price on both continents.
Since I am a preacher by trade, I suppose it is not surprising that I have seven
major reasons for bringing Vietnam into the field of my moral vision. There is at
the outset a very obvious and almost facile connection between the war in
Vietnam and the struggle I and others have been waging in America. A few years
ago there was a shining moment in that struggle. It seemed as if there was a real
promise of hope for the poor—both black and white—through the Poverty
Program. There were experiments, hopes, new beginnings. Then came the
buildup in Vietnam and I watched the program broken and eviscerated as if it
were some idle political plaything of a society gone mad on war, and I knew that
America would never invest the necessary funds or energies in rehabilitation of
its poor so long as adventures like Vietnam continued to draw men and skills and


--- PAGE 471 ---
money like some demonic destructive suction tube. So I was increasingly com-
pelled to see the war as an enemy of the poor and to attack it as such.
Perhaps the more tragic recognition of reality took place when it became clear
to me that the war was doing far more than devastating the hopes of the poor at
home. It was sending their sons and their brothers and their husbands to fight
and to die in extraordinarily high proportions relative to the rest of the popula-
tion. We were taking the black young men who had been crippled by our society
and sending them eight thousand miles away to guarantee liberties in Southeast
Asia which they had not found in Southwest Georgia and East Harlem. So we
have been repeatedly faced with the cruel irony of watching Negro and white
boys on TV screens as they kill and die together for a nation that has been unable
to seat them together in the same schools. So we watch them in brutal solidarity
burning the huts of a poor village, but we realize that they would never live on
the same block in Detroit. I could not be silent in the face of such cruel manip-
ulation of the poor.
My third reason moves to an even deeper level of awareness, for it grows out
of my experience in the ghettos of the North over the last three years—especially
the last three summers. As I have walked among the desperate, rejected and
angry young men I have told them that Molotov cocktails and rifles would not
solve their problems. I have tried to offer them my deepest compassion while
maintaining my conviction that social change comes most meaningfully through
nonviolent action. But they asked—and rightly so—what about Vietnam? They
asked if our own nation wasn’t using massive doses of violence to solve its prob-
lems, to bring about the changes it wanted. Their questions hit home, and I knew
that I could never again raise my voice against the violence of the oppressed in
the ghettos without having first spoken clearly to the greatest purveyor of violence
in the world today—my own government. For the sake of those boys, for the sake
of this government, for the sake of the hundreds of thousands trembling under
our violence, I cannot be silent.
For those who ask the question, “Aren’t you a civil-rights leader?” and thereby
mean to exclude me from the movement for peace, I have this further answer. In
1957 when a group of us formed the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
we chose as our motto: “To save the soul of America.” We were convinced that we
could not limit our vision to certain rights for black people, but instead affirmed the
conviction that America would never be free or saved from itself unless the descen-
dants of its slaves were loosed completely from the shackles they still wear. . . .
Now, it should be incandescently clear that no one who has any concern for the
integrity and life of America today can ignore the present war. If America’s soul
becomes totally poisoned, part of the autopsy must read Vietnam. It can never be
saved so long as it destroys the deepest hopes of men the world over. So it is that
those of us who are yet determined that America will be are led down the path of
protest and dissent, working for the health of our land. . . .
. . . [A]s I ponder the madness of Vietnam and search within myself for ways
to understand and respond to compassion my mind goes constantly to the people
of that peninsula. I speak now not of the soldiers of each side, not of the junta in
4 4 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 472 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND VIETNAM 4 4 1
Saigon, but simply of the people who have been living under the curse of war for
almost three continuous decades now. I think of them too because it is clear to
me that there will be no meaningful solution there until some attempt is made to
know them and hear their broken cries.
They must see Americans as strange liberators. The Vietnamese people pro-
claimed their own independence in 1945 after a combined French and Japanese
occupation, and before the Communist revolution in China. They were led by Ho
Chi Minh. Even though they quoted the American Declaration of Independence
in their own document of freedom, we refused to recognize them.
1 Instead, we
decided to support France in its reconquest of her former colony.
Our government felt then that the Vietnamese people were not “ready” for
independence, and we again fell victim to the deadly Western arrogance that has
poisoned the international atmosphere for so long. With that tragic decision we
rejected a revolutionary government seeking self-determination, and a govern-
ment that had been established not by China (for whom the Vietnamese have no
great love) but by clearly indigenous forces that included some Communists. For
the peasants this new government meant real land reform, one of the most impor-
tant needs in their lives.
For nine years following 1945 we denied the people of Vietnam the right of
independence. For nine years we vigorously supported the French in their
abortive effort to recolonize Vietnam.
Before the end of the war we were meeting 80 percent of the French war costs.
Even before the French were defeated at Dien Bien Phu, they began to despair
of the reckless action, but we did not. We encouraged them with our huge finan-
cial and military supplies to continue the war even after they had lost the will. Soon
we would be paying almost the full costs of this tragic attempt at recolonization.
After the French were defeated it looked as if independence and land reform
would come again through the Geneva agreements.
2 But instead there came the
United States, determined that Ho should not unify the temporarily divided
nation, and the peasants watched again as we supported one of the most vicious
modern dictators—our chosen man, Premier Diem. The peasants watched and
cringed as Diem ruthlessly routed out all opposition, supported their extortionist
landlords and refused even to discuss reunification with the North. The peasants
watched as all this was presided over by United States influence and then by
increasing numbers of United States troops who came to help quell the insur-
gency that Diem’s methods had aroused. When Diem was overthrown they may
have been happy, but the long line of military dictatorships seemed to offer no
real change—especially in terms of their need for land and peace.
The only change came from America as we increased our troop commitments
in support of governments which were singularly corrupt, inept and without pop-
ular support. All the while the people read our leaflets and received regular
promises of peace and democracy—and land reform. Now they languish under
our bombs and consider us—not their fellow Vietnamese—the real enemy. They
move sadly and apathetically as we herd them off the land of their fathers into
concentration camps where minimal social needs are rarely met. They know they


--- PAGE 473 ---
must move or be destroyed by our bombs. So they go—primarily women and chil-
dren and the aged.
They watch as we poison their water, as we kill a million acres of their crops.
They must weep as the bulldozers roar through their areas preparing to destroy
the precious trees. They wander into the hospitals, with at least twenty casualties
from American firepower for one Vietcong-inflicted injury. So far we may have
killed a million of them—mostly children. They wander into the towns and see
thousands of the children, homeless, without clothes, running in packs on the
streets like animals. They see the children degraded by our soldiers as they beg
for food. They see the children selling their sisters to our soldiers, soliciting for
their mothers.
What do the peasants think as we ally ourselves with the landlords and as we
refuse to put any action into our many words concerning land reform? What do
they think as we test out our latest weapons on them, just as the Germans tested
out new medicine and new tortures in the concentration camps of Europe?
Where are the roots of the independent Vietnam we claim to be building? Is it
among these voiceless ones?
We have destroyed their two most cherished institutions: the family and the
village. We have destroyed their land and their crops. We have cooperated in
the crushing of the nation’s only non-Communist revolutionary political force—
the unified Buddhist Church. We have supported the enemies of the peasants
of Saigon. We have corrupted their women and children and killed their men.
What liberators!
Now there is little left to build on—save bitterness. Soon the only solid physi-
cal foundations remaining will be found at our military bases and in the concrete
of the concentration camps we call fortified hamlets. The peasants may well won-
der if we plan to build our new Vietnam on such grounds as these? Could we
blame them for such thoughts? We must speak for them and raise the questions
they cannot raise. These too are our brothers.
Perhaps the more difficult, but no less necessary, task is to speak for those who
have been designated as our enemies. What of the National Liberation Front—
that strangely anonymous group we call V .C. or Communists? What must they
think of us in America when they realize that we permitted the repression and
cruelty of Diem which helped to bring them into being as a resistance group in
the South? What do they think of our condoning the violence which led to their
own taking-up of arms? How can they believe in our integrity when now we speak
of “aggression from the North” as if there were nothing more essential to the war?
How can they trust us when now we charge them with violence after the mur-
derous reign of Diem and charge them with violence while we pour every new
weapon of death into their land? Surely we must understand their feelings even
if we do not condone their actions. Surely we must see that the men we supported
pressed them to their violence. Surely we must see that our own computerized
plans of destruction simply dwarf their greatest acts.
4 4 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 474 ---
M.L. KING, JR., AND VIETNAM 4 4 3
How do they judge us when our officials know that their membership is less
than 25 percent Communist and yet insist on giving them the blanket name?
What must they be thinking when they know that we are aware of their control of
major sections of Vietnam and yet we appear to allow national elections in which
this highly organized political parallel government will have no part? They ask
how we can speak of free elections when the Saigon press is censored and con-
trolled by the military junta. And they are surely right to wonder what kind of new
government we plan to help form without them—the only party in real touch with
the peasants. They question our political goals and they deny the reality of a peace
settlement from which they will be excluded. Their questions are frighteningly
relevant. Is our nation planning to build on political myth again and then shore it
up with the power of new violence?
Here is the true meaning and value of compassion and nonviolence when it
helps us to see the enemy’s point of view, to hear his questions, to know his assess-
ment of ourselves. For from his view we may indeed see the basic weaknesses of
our own condition, and if we are mature, we may learn and grow and profit from
the wisdom of the brothers who are called the opposition.
So, too, with Hanoi. In the North, where our bombs now pummel the land and
our mines endanger the waterways, we are met by a deep but understandable
mistrust. To speak for them is to explain this lack of confidence in Western words,
and especially their distrust of American intentions now. In Hanoi are the men
who led the nation to independence against the Japanese and the French, the
men who sought membership in the French commonwealth and were betrayed
by the weakness of Paris and the willfulness of the colonial armies. It was they
who led a second struggle against French domination at tremendous costs, and
then were persuaded to give up the land they controlled between the 13th and
17th parallels as a temporary measure at Geneva. After 1954 they watched us con-
spire with Diem to prevent elections which would have surely brought Ho Chi
Minh to power over a United Vietnam,
3 and they realized they had been betrayed
again. . . .
At this point I should make it clear that while I have tried in these last few min-
utes to give a voice to the voiceless on Vietnam and to understand the arguments
of those who are called enemy, I am as deeply concerned about our own troops
there as anything else. For it occurs to me that what we are submitting them to
in Vietnam is not simply the brutalizing process that goes on in any war where
armies face each other and seek to destroy. We are adding cynicism to the process
of death, for they must know after a short period there that none of the things we
claim to be fighting for are really involved. Before long they must know that their
government has sent them into a struggle among Vietnamese, and the more
sophisticated surely realize that we are on the side of the wealthy and the secure,
while we create a hell for the poor.
Somehow this madness must cease. We must stop now. I speak as a child of
God and brother to the suffering poor of Vietnam. I speak for those whose land is


--- PAGE 475 ---
being laid waste, whose homes are being destroyed, whose culture is being sub-
verted. I speak for the poor of America who are paying the double price of
smashed hopes at home and death and corruption in Vietnam. I speak as a citizen
of the world, for the world as it stands aghast at the path we have taken. I speak
as an American to the leaders of my own nation. The great initiative in this war
is ours. The initiative to stop it must be ours. . . .
If we continue there will be no doubt in my mind and in the mind of the
world that we have no honorable intentions in Vietnam. It will become clear
that our minimal expectation is to occupy it as an American colony and men will
not refrain from thinking that our maximum hope is to goad China into a war so
that we may bomb her nuclear installations. If we do not stop our war against
the people of Vietnam immediately the world will be left with no other alterna-
tive than to see this as some horribly clumsy and deadly game we have decided
to play.
The world now demands a maturity of America that we may not be able to
achieve. It demands that we admit that we have been wrong from the beginning
of our adventure in Vietnam, that we have been detrimental to the life of the
Vietnamese people. The situation is one in which we must be ready to turn
sharply from our present ways.
In order to atone for our sins and errors in Vietnam, we should take the initia-
tive in bringing a halt to this tragic war. I would like to suggest five concrete things
that our government should do immediately to begin the long and difficult
process of extricating ourselves from this nightmarish conflict. . . .
Meanwhile we in the churches and synagogues have a continuing task while we
urge our government to disengage itself from a disgraceful commitment. We
must continue to raise our voices if our nation persists in its perverse ways in
Vietnam. We must be prepared to match actions with words by seeking out every
creative means of protest possible.
Notes: 1. In September 1945, the Republic of Vietnam was established. The Constitution
proclaimed its independence from all colonial rule and incorporated the famous princi-
ple of the American Declaration of Independence—the “self-evident” truths that “all
men are created equal,” and are endowed with “certain inalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” 2. The Geneva Conference ended the
war between France and the Republic of Vietnam. At Geneva, Vietnam was clearly estab-
lished as a single sovereign nation, temporarily divided into regrouping zones for truce
purposes. While the United States refused to sign the Agreement, it did pledge that it
would “refrain from use of force to upset the agreement,” and it acknowledged its U.N.
obligation to respect Vietnam’s territorial integrity and independence. 3. With the back-
ing of the United States, President Ngo Dihn Diem of South Vietnam refused to allow
the people of South Vietnam to vote in the elections scheduled under the Geneva
Agreement to be held in 1956. The reason was clear to all. As President Eisenhower later
conceded, “possibly 80 percent of the population would have voted for the Communist
Ho Chi Minh.”
4 4 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 476 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 4 5
Source: Excerpt from “Testament of Hope” speech delivered at Riverside Church, New York
City, April 4, 1967, copyright 1967 by Martin Luther King, Jr., copyright renewed by the
Martin Luther King, Jr. Estate. Reprinted by arrangement with The Heirs to the Estate of
Martin Luther King, Jr., c/o Writers House, Inc., as agent for the proprietor.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Taylor Branch, At Canaan’s Edge: America in the King Years, 1965–1968(New York: Simon
& Schuster, 2007).
David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference(New York: Morrow, 1986).
Vincent Harding, Martin Luther King: The Inconvenient Hero (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis
Books, 1996).
Michael K. Honey, Going Down Jericho Road: The Memphis Strike, Martin Luther King’s
Last Campaign (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 2007).
Thomas F. Jackson, From Civil Rights to Human Rights: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the
Struggle for Economic Justice(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007).
Martin Luther King, Jr., Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (New York:
Harper and Row, 1967).
———, The Measure of a Man (Philadelphia: Pilgrim Press, 1968).
O17 O
Huey P . Newton and the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
Along with Bobby Seale, Huey P . Newton (1942–1989) helped found the Black
Panther Party for Self-Defense in October 1966, in Oakland, California, and he
quickly became known as the organization’s chief theoretician. To many, Newton
represented the revolutionary vanguard of the Black Liberation movement. The
Panthers gained widespread support within black urban communities for their
free breakfast programs for children and their public health services. The group
came to national attention when they marched onto the floor of the California
state legislature carrying arms. The Black Panthers patrolled Oakland streets to
safeguard black residents against police brutality. In October 1967, Newton was
involved in an altercation in which a police officer was shot and killed. Newton
was charged with the killing and his case quickly became a cause célèbre. He was
found guilty of involuntary manslaughter, but his case was eventually overturned.
Yet by the time of his release the Black Panthers had already begun to decline as
a political formation, largely due to the systematic repression by local law-
enforcement agencies and coordinated through COINTELPRO (the Counter-
Intelligence Program) of the FBI. Newton successfully continued his education,
achieving a doctorate from the University of California at Santa Cruz in 1980.


--- PAGE 477 ---
However, Newton increasingly fell victim to a series of personal demons, includ-
ing drug dependency and violently antisocial behavior. In 1989 Newton was mur-
dered in Oakland by a member of a local street gang.
O
OCTOBER 1966 BLACK PANTHER PARTY PLATFORM AND PROGRAM
What We Want, What We Believe
1. We want freedom. We want power to determine the destiny of our Black
Community.
We believe that black people will not be free until we are able to determine
our destiny.
2. We want full employment for our people.
We believe that the federal government is responsible and obligated to give
every man employment or a guaranteed income. We believe that if the white
American businessmen will not give full employment, then the means of produc-
tion should be taken from the businessmen and placed in the community so that
the people of the community can organize and employ all of its people and give
a high standard of living.
3. We want an end to the robbery by the white man of our Black Community.
We believe that this racist government has robbed us and now we are demand-
ing the overdue debt of forty acres and two mules. Forty acres and two mules was
promised 100 years ago as restitution for slave labor and mass murder of black
people. We will accept the payment in currency which will be distributed to our
many communities. The Germans are now aiding the Jews in Israel for the geno-
cide of the Jewish people. The Germans murdered six million Jews. The Ameri-
can racist has taken part in the slaughter of over fifty million black people; there-
fore, we feel that this is a modest demand that we make.
4. We want decent housing, fit for shelter of human beings.
We believe that if the white landlords will not give decent housing to our black
community, then the housing and the land should be made into cooperatives so
that our community, with government aid, can build and make decent housing for
its people.
5. We want education for our people that exposes the true nature of this deca-
dent American society. We want education that teaches us our true history and
our role in the present-day society.
We believe in an educational system that will give to our people a knowledge
of self. If a man does not have knowledge of himself and his position in society
and the world, then he has little chance to relate to anything else.
6. We want all black men to be exempt from military service.
We believe that Black people should not be forced to fight in the military ser-
vice to defend a racist government that does not protect us. We will not fight and
kill other people of color in the world who, like black people, are being victimized
by the white racist government of America. We will protect ourselves from the
4 4 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 478 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 4 7
force and violence of the racist police and the racist military, by whatever means
necessary.
7. We want an immediate end to POLICE BRUTALITY and MURDER of
black people.
We believe we can end police brutality in our black community by organizing
black self-defense groups that are dedicated to defending our black community
from racist police oppression and brutality. The Second Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States gives a right to bear arms. We therefore believe
that all black people should arm themselves for self-defense.
8. We want freedom for all black men held in federal, state, county and city
prisons and jails.
We believe that all black people should be released from the many jails and
prisons because they have not received a fair and impartial trial.
9. We want all black people when brought to trial to be tried in court by a jury
of their peer group or people from their black communities, as defined by the
Constitution of the United States.
We believe that the courts should follow the United States Constitution so that
black people will receive fair trials. The 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitu-
tion gives a man a right to be tried by his peer group. A peer is a person from a
similar economic, social, religious, geographical, environmental, historical and
racial background. To do this the court will be forced to select a jury from the
black community from which the black defendant came. We have been, and are
being tried by all-white juries that have no understanding of the “average reason-
ing man” of the black community.
10. We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace. And
as our major political objective, a United Nations–supervised plebiscite to be held
throughout the black colony in which only black colonial subjects will be allowed
to participate, for the purpose of determining the will of black people as to their
national destiny.
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dis-
solve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume,
among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the laws of
nature and nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind
requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That, to secure these rights, governments
are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the gov-
erned; that, whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends,
it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute a new govern-
ment, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such
form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established should not be
changed for light and transient causes; and, accordingly, all experience hath shown,


--- PAGE 479 ---
that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right
themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But, when a
long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces
a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
O
RULES OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY
Every member of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY throughout this country of
racist America must abide by these rules as functional members of this party.
CENTRAL COMMITTEE members, CENTRAL STAFFS, and LOCAL
STAFFS, including all captains subordinate to either national, state, and local
leadership of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY will enforce these rules. Length of
suspension or other disciplinary action necessary for violation of these rules will
depend on national decisions by national, state or state area, and local committees
and staffs where said rule or rules of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY WERE
VIOLATED.
Every member of the party must know these verbatim by heart. And apply
them daily. Each member must report any violation of these rules to their lead-
ership or they are counter-revolutionary and are also subjected to suspension by
the BLACK PANTHER PARTY.
The rules are:
1. No party member can have narcotics or weed in his possession while doing
party work.
2. Any party member found shooting narcotics will be expelled from this party.
3. No party member can be DRUNK while doing daily party work.
4. No party member will violate rules relating to office work, general meetings
of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY, and meetings of the BLACK PANTHER
PARTY ANYWHERE.
5. No party member will USE, POINT, or FIRE a weapon of any kind unnec-
essarily or accidentally at anyone.
6. No party member can join any other army force other than the BLACK
LIBERATION ARMY.
7. No party member can have a weapon in his possession while DRUNK or
loaded off narcotics or weed.
8. No party member will commit any crimes against other party members or
BLACK people at all, and cannot steal or take from the people, not even a nee-
dle or a piece of thread.
9. When arrested BLACK PANTHER MEMBERS will give only name,
address, and will sign nothing. Legal first aid must be understood by all Party
members.
10. The Ten-Point Program and platform of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY
must be known and understood by each Party member.
11. Party Communications must be National and Local.
4 4 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 480 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 4 9
12. The 10-10-10 program should be known by all members and also under-
stood by all members.
13. All Finance officers will operate under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Finance.
14. Each person will submit a report of daily work.
15. Each Sub-Section Leaders, Section Leaders, and Lieutenants, Captains
must submit Daily reports of work.
16. All Panthers must learn to operate and service weapons correctly.
17. All Leadership personnel who expel a member must submit this informa-
tion to the Editor of the Newspaper, so that it will be published in the paper and
will be known by all chapters and branches.
18. Political Education Classes are mandatory for general membership.
19. Only office personnel assigned to respective offices each day should be
there. All others are to sell papers and do Political work out in the community,
including Captains, Section Leaders, etc.
20. COMMUNICATIONS—all chapters must submit weekly reports in writ-
ing to the National Headquarters.
21. All Branches must implement First Aid and/or Medical Cadres.
22. All Chapters, Branches, and components of the BLACK PANTHER
PARTY must submit a monthly Financial Report to the Ministry of Finance, and
also the Central Committee.
23. Everyone in a leadership position must read no less than two hours per day
to keep abreast of the changing political situation.
24. No chapter or branch shall accept grants, poverty funds, money or any
other aid from any government agency without contacting the National Head-
quarters.
25. All chapters must adhere to the policy and the ideology laid down by the
CENTRAL COMMITTEE of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY.
26. All Branches must submit weekly reports in writing to their respective
Chapters.
8 Points of Attention
1) Speak politely.
2) Pay fairly for what you buy.
3) Return everything you borrow.
4) Pay for anything you damage.
5) Do not hit or swear at people.
6) Do not damage property or crops of the poor, oppressed masses.
7) Do not take liberties with women.
8) If we ever have to take captives do not ill-treat them.
3 Main Rules of Discipline
1) Obey orders in all your actions.
2) Do not take a single needle or a piece of thread from the poor and
oppressed masses.
3) Turn in everything captured from the attacking enemy.


--- PAGE 481 ---
O
ON THE DEFECTION OF ELDRIDGE CLEAVER
FROM THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY AND THE DEFECTION
OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY FROM THE BLACK COMMUNITY
By Huey P. Newton
The Black Panther Party bases its ideology and philosophy on a concrete analysis
of concrete conditions, using dialectical materialism as our analytical method. As
dialectical materialists we recognize that contradictions can lead to development.
The internal struggle of opposites based upon their unity causes matter to have
motion as a part of the process of development. We recognize that nothing in
nature stands outside of dialectics, even the Black Panther Party. But we welcome
these contradictions, because they clarify and advance our struggle. We had a
contradiction with our former Minister of Information, Eldridge Cleaver. But we
understand this as necessary to our growth. Out of this contradiction has come
new growth and a new return to the original vision of the Party.
Early in the development of the Black Panther Party I wrote an essay titled
“The Correct Handling of a Revolution.” This was in response to another contra-
diction—the criticisms raised against the Party by the Revolutionary Action
Movement (RAM). At that time RAM criticized us for our above-ground action—
openly displaying weapons and talking about the necessity for the community to
arm itself for its own self-defense. RAM said that they were underground, and
saw this as the correct way to handle a revolution. I responded to them by point-
ing out that you must establish your organization above ground so that the peo-
ple will relate to it in a way that will be positive and progressive to them. When
you go underground without doing this, you bury yourself so deeply that the peo-
ple can neither relate to nor contact you. Then the terrorism of the underground
organization will be just that—striking fear into the hearts of the very people
whose interest the organization claims to be defending—because the people can-
not relate to them and there is nobody there to interpret their actions. You have
to set up a program of practical action and be a model for the community to fol-
low and appreciate.
The original vision of the Party was to develop a lifeline to the people, by
serving their needs and defending them against their oppressors who come to
the community in many forms—from armed police to capitalist exploiters. We
knew that this strategy would raise the consciousness of the people and also
give us their support. Then, if we were driven underground by the oppressors,
the people would support us and defend us. They would know that, in spite of
the oppressor’s interpretations, that our only desire was to serve their true
interests; and they would defend us. In this manner we might be forced under-
ground, but there would be a lifeline to the community which would always
sustain us, because the people would identify with us and not with our com-
mon enemy.
For a time the Black Panther Party lost its vision and defected from the com-
munity. With the defection of Eldridge Cleaver, however, we can move again to a
4 5 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 482 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 5 1
full-scale development of our original vision and come out of the twilight zone
which the Party has been in during the recent past.
The only reason that the Party is still in existence at this time, and the only rea-
son that we have been able to survive the repression of the Party and murders of
some of our most advanced comrades is because of the Ten-Point Program—our
survival program. Our programs would be meaningless and insignificant if they
were not community programs. This is why it is my opinion that as long as the
Black community and oppressed people are found in North America the Black
Panther Party will last. The Party will survive as a structured vehicle, because it
serves the true interests of oppressed people and administers to their needs—this
was the original vision of the Party. The original vision was not structured by
rhetoric nor by ideology. It was structured by the practical needs of the people,
and its dreamers were armed with an ideology which provided a systematic
method of analysis of how best to meet those needs.
When Bobby Seale and I came together to launch the Black Panther Party, we
had been through many groups. Most of them were so dedicated to rhetoric and
artistic rituals that they had withdrawn from living in the Twentieth Century.
Sometimes their analyses were beautiful, but they had no practical programs
which would deliver their understandings to the people. When they did try to
develop practical programs, they often failed, because they lacked a systematic
ideology which would help them do concrete analyses of concrete conditions to
gain a full understanding of the community and its needs. When I was in Donald
Warden’s Afro-American Association, I watched him try to make a reality of com-
munity control through Black Capitalism. But Warden did not have a systematic
ideology, and his attempts to initiate his program continually frustrated him and
the community too. They did not know why capitalism would not work for them,
even though it had worked for other ethnic groups.
When we formed the Party, we did so because we wanted to put theory and
practice together, in a systematic manner. We did this through our basic Ten Point
Program. In actuality it was a 20-Point Program, with the practice expressed in
“What We Want” and the theory expressed in “What We Believe.” This program
was designed to serve as a basis for a structured political vehicle.
The actions we engaged in at that time were strictly strategic actions, for polit-
ical purposes. They were designed to mobilize the community. Any action which
does not mobilize the community toward the goal is not a revolutionary action.
The action might be a marvelous statement of courage, but if it does not mobilize
the people toward the goal of a higher manifestation of freedom, it is not making
a political statement and could even be counter-revolutionary.
We realized at a very early point in our development, that revolution is a
process. It is not a particular action, nor is it a conclusion. It is a process. This is
why when feudalism wiped out slavery, feudalism was revolutionary. This is why
when capitalism wiped out feudalism, capitalism was revolutionary. The concrete
analysis of concrete conditions will reveal the true nature of the situation and
increase our understanding. This process moves in a dialectical manner and we
understand the struggle of the opposites based upon their unity.


--- PAGE 483 ---
Many times people say that our Ten-Point Program is reformist; but they
ignore the fact that revolution is a process. We left the program open-ended, so
that it could develop and people could identify with it. We did not offer it to them
as a conclusion; we offered it as a vehicle to move them to a higher level. In their
quest for freedom, and in their attempts to prevent the oppressor from stripping
them of all the things they need to exist, the people see things as moving from A
to B to C; they do not see things as moving from A to Z. In other words they have
to see first some basic accomplishments, in order to realize that major successes
are possible. Much of the time the revolutionary will have to guide them into this
understanding. But he can never take them from A to Z in one jump, because it
is too far ahead. Therefore, when the revolutionary begins to indulge in Z, or final
conclusions, the people do not relate to him. Therefore he is no longer a revolu-
tionary, if revolution is a process. This makes any action or function which does
not promote the process—non-revolutionary.
When the Party went to Sacramento, when the Party faced down the police-
men in front of the office of Ramparts magazine, and when the Party patrolled
the police with arms, we were acting (in 1966) at a time when the people had
given up the philosophy of non-violent direct action and were beginning to deal
with sterner stuff. We wanted them to see the virtues of disciplined and organized
armed self-defense, rather than spontaneous and disorganized outbreaks and
riots. There were Police Alert Patrols all over the country, but we were the first
armed police patrol. We called ourselves the Black Panther Party for Self-
Defense. In all of this we had political and revolutionary objectives in mind, but
we knew that we could not succeed without the support of the people.
Our strategy was based on a consistent ideology, which helped us to under-
stand the conditions around us. We knew that the law was not prepared for what
we were doing and policemen were so shocked that they didn’t know what to do.
We saw that the people felt a new pride and strength because of the example we
set for them; and they began to look toward the vehicle we were building for
answers.
Later we dropped the term “Self-Defense” from our name and just became
the Black Panther Party. We discouraged actions like Sacramento and police
observations because we recognized that these were not the things to do in every
situation or on every occasion. We never called these revolutionary actions. The
only time an action is revolutionary is when the people relate to it in a revolu-
tionary way. If they will not use the example you set, then no matter how many
guns you have, your action is not revolutionary.
The gun itself is not necessarily revolutionary, because the fascists carry
guns—in fact they have more guns. A lot of so-called revolutionaries simply do
not understand the statement by Chairman Mao that “Political power grows out
of the barrel of a gun.” They thought Chairman Mao said political power is the
gun, but the emphasis is on grows. The culmination of political power is the own-
ership and control of the land and the institutions thereon, so that you can then
get rid of the gun. That is why Chairman Mao makes the statement that, “We are
4 5 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 484 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 5 3
advocates of the abolition of war, we do not want war; but war can only be abol-
ished through war, and in order to get rid of the gun, it is necessary to take up the
gun.” He is always speaking of getting rid of it. If he did not look at it in those
terms, then he surely would not be revolutionary. In other words, the gun by all
revolutionary principles is a tool to be used in our strategy; it is not an end in
itself. This was a part of the original vision of the Black Panther Party.
I had asked Eldridge Cleaver to join the Party a number of times. But he did
not join until after the confrontation with the police in front of the office of
Ramparts magazine, where the police were afraid to go for their guns. Without
my knowledge, he took this as the Revolution and the Party. But in our basic pro-
gram it was not until Point 7 that we mentioned the gun, and this was intentional.
We were trying to build a political vehicle through which the people could express
their revolutionary desires. We recognized that no party or organization can make
the revolution, only the people can. All we could do was act as a guide to the peo-
ple. Because revolution is a process, and because the process moves in a dialecti-
cal manner. At one point one thing might be proper, but the same action could be
improper at another point. We always emphasized a concrete analysis of concrete
conditions, and then an appropriate response to these conditions as a way of
mobilizing the people and leading them to higher levels of consciousness.
People constantly thought that we were security guards and community police
or something like this. This is why we dropped the term “Self-Defense” from our
name and directed the attention of the people to the fact that the only way they
would get salvation is through their control of the institutions which serve the
community. This would require that they organize a political vehicle which would
keep their support and endorsement through its survival programs of service.
They would look to it for answers and guidance. It would not be an organization
which runs candidates for political office, but it would serve as a watchman over
the administrators whom the people have placed in office.
Because the Black Panther Party grows out of the conditions and needs of
oppressed people, we are interested in everything the people are interested in,
even though we may not see these particular concerns as the final answers to our
problems. We will never run for political office, but we will endorse and support
those candidates who are acting in the true interests of the people. We may even
provide campaign workers for them and do voter registration and basic precinct
work. This would not be out of a commitment to electoral politics, however. It
would be our way of bringing the will of the people to bear on situations in which
they are interested. We will also hold such candidates responsible to the commu-
nity, no matter how far removed their offices may be from the community. So we
lead the people by following their interests, with a view toward raising their con-
sciousness to see beyond particular goals.
When Eldridge joined the Party it was after the police confrontation, which
left him fixated with the “either-or” attitude. This was that either the community
picked up the gun with the Party or else they were cowards and there was no
place for them. He did not realize that if the people did not relate to the Party,


--- PAGE 485 ---
then there was no way that the Black Panther Party could make any revolution,
because the record shows that the people are the makers of the revolution and of
world history.
Sometimes there are those who express personal problems in political terms,
and if they are eloquent, then these personal problems can sound very political.
We charge Eldridge Cleaver with this. Much of it is probably beyond his control,
because it is so personal. But we did not know that when he joined the Party, he
was doing so only because of that act in front of Ramparts. We weren’t trying to
prove anything to ourselves, all we were trying to do, at that particular point, was
defend Betty Shabazz. But we were praised by the people.
Under the influence of Eldridge Cleaver the Party gave the community no
alternative for dealing with us, except by picking up the gun. This move was reac-
tionary simply because the community was not at that point. Instead of being a
cultural cult group, we became, by that act, a revolutionary cult group. But this is
a basic contradiction, because revolution is a process, and if the acts you commit
do not fall within the scope of the process then they are non-revolutionary.
What the revolutionary movement and the Black community needs is a very
strong structure. This structure can only exist with the support of the people and
it can only get its support through serving them. This is why we have the service
to the people program—the most important thing in the Party. We will serve their
needs, so that they can survive through this oppression. Then when they are ready
to pick up the gun, serious business will happen. Eldridge Cleaver influenced us
to isolate ourselves from the Black community, so that it was war between the
oppressor and the Black Panther Party, not war between the oppressor and the
oppressed community.
The Black Panther Party defected from the community long before Eldridge
defected from the Party. Our hook-up with white radicals did not give us access
to the white community, because they do not guide the white community. The
Black community does not relate to them, so we were left in a twilight zone,
where we could not enter the community with any real political education pro-
grams; yet we were not doing anything to mobilize whites. We had no influence
in raising the consciousness of the Black community and that is the point where
we defected.
We went through a free-speech movement in the Party, which was not neces-
sary, and only further isolated us from the Black community. We had all sorts of
profanity in our paper and every other word which dropped from our lips was
profane. This did not happen before I was jailed, because I would not stand for
it. But Eldridge’s influence brought this about. I do not blame him altogether; I
blame the Party because the Party accepted it.
Eldridge was never fully in the leadership of the Party. Even after Bobby was
snatched away from us, I did not place Eldridge in a position of leadership,
because he was not interested in that. I made David Hilliard administrator of pro-
grams. I knew that Eldridge would not do anything to lift the consciousness of the
comrades in the Party. But I knew that he could make a contribution; and I
4 5 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 486 ---
H.P . NEWTON AND THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY 4 5 5
pressed him to do so. I pressed him to write and edit the paper, but he wouldn’t
do it. The paper did not even come out every week until after Eldridge went to
jail. But Eldridge Cleaver did make great contributions to the Black Panther
Party with his writing and speaking. We want to keep this in mind, because there
is a positive and negative side to everything.
The correct handling of a revolution is not to offer the people an “either-or”
ultimatum. We must instead gain the support of the people through serving their
needs. Then when the police or any other agency of repression tries to destroy the
program, the people will move to a higher level of consciousness and action. Then
the organized structure can guide the people to the point where they are pre-
pared to deal in many ways. This was the strategy we used in 1966 when we were
related to in a positive way.
So the Black Panther Party has reached a contradiction with Eldridge Cleaver
and he has defected from the Party, because we would not order everyone into
the streets tomorrow to make a revolution. We recognize that this is impossible
because our dialectics or ideology, our concrete analysis of concrete conditions
say that it is a fantasy, because the people are not at that point now. This contra-
diction and conflict may seem unfortunate to some, but it is a part of the dialec-
tical process. The resolution of this contradiction has freed us from incorrect
analyses and emphases.
We are now free to move toward the building of a community structure which
will become a true voice of the people, promoting their interests in many ways. We
can continue to push our basic survival program. We can continue to serve the peo-
ple as advocates of their true interests. We can truly become a political revolu-
tionary vehicle which will lead the people to a higher level of consciousness, so that
they will know what they must really do in their quest for freedom, and they will
have the courage to adopt any means necessary to seize the time and obtain that
freedom.
Huey P. Newton
Minister of Defense
Black Panther Party
Servant of the People
Sources: (1) “The Black Panther Program: What We Want, What We Believe,” October
1966; (2) “Rules of the Black Panther Party,” Central Headquarters, Oakland, California; and
(3) Excerpt from Huey P . Newton, “On the Defection of Eldridge Cleaver from the Black
Panther Party and the Defection of the Black Panther Party from the Black Community,”
Black Panther Intercommunal News Service, April 17, 1971.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Paul Alkebulan, Survival Pending Revolution: The History of the Black Panther Party
(Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2007).
Elaine Brown, A Taste of Power: A Black Woman’s Story(New York: Pantheon Books, 1992).
Philip S. Foner, ed., The Black Panthers Speak(Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1970).


--- PAGE 487 ---
David Hilliard and Lewis Cole, This Side of Glory: The Autobiography of David Hilliard and
the Story of the Black Panther Party(Boston: Little, Brown, 1993).
David Hilliard and Donald Weise, eds., The Huey P. Newton Reader (New York: Seven
Stories Press, 2002).
J. L. Jeffries, Huey P. Newton: The Radical Theorist(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi,
2002).
Jama Lazerow and Yohuru R. Williams, eds., In Search of the Black Panther Party: New
Perspectives on a Revolutionary Movement(Durham: Duke University Press, 2006).
Huey P . Newton, To Die for the People: The Writings of Huey P. Newton, Intro. Franz
Schurmann (New York: Random House, 1972).
———, Revolutionary Suicide(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973).
Hugh Pearson, The Shadow of the Panther: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in
America (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1994).
Jane Rhodes, Framing the Black Panthers: The Spectacular Rise of a Black Power Icon(New
York: New Press, 2007).
Bobby Seale, Seize the Time: The Story of the Black Panther Party and Huey Newton(New
York: Random House, 1970).
O18 O
“The People Have to Have the Power,” Fred Hampton
By 1969, Black Panther chapters had been established throughout the United
States, from North Carolina to Nebraska. That same year, 27 Panthers were killed
by local police and law-enforcement agencies and 749 members were arrested.
Perhaps the most influential chapter outside of the Bay Area was headed by
activist Fred Hampton (1948–1969) in Chicago. Hampton was an outstanding
organizer and charismatic speaker. In 1969, the Chicago police launched a care-
fully planned raid against the Panther headquarters and murdered Hampton. In
this excerpt, Hampton presents in a popular style a synthesis of Marxian theory
within the framework of Black Power.
O
A lot of people get the word revolution mixed up and they think revolution’s a bad
word. Revolution is nothing but like having a sore on your body and then you put
something on that sore to cure that infection. I’m telling you that we’re living in
a sick society. We’re involved in a society that produces ADC victims. We’re
involved in a society that produces criminals, thieves and robbers and rapers.
Whenever you are in a society like that, that is a sick society.
. . . We’re gonna organize and dedicate ourselves to revolutionary political
power and teach ourselves the specific needs of resisting the power structure, arm
ourselves, and we’re gonna fight reactionary pigs with international proletarian
revolution. That’s what it has to be. The people have to have the power—it
belongs to the people.
4 5 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 488 ---
F . HAMPTON, “THE PEOPLE HAVE TO HAVE THE POWER” 4 5 7
. . . Unless people show us through their social practice that they relate to the
struggle in Babylon, that means that they’re not internationalists, that means that
they’re not revolutionaries. And when you’re marchin’ on this cruel war in
Washington, all you radicals . . . we need to have some moratoriums on Babylon.
We need to have some moratoriums on the Black community in Babylon and all
oppressed communities in Babylon.
. . . We have to understand very clearly that there’s a man in our community called
a capitalist. Sometimes he’s Black and sometimes he’s white. But that man has to be
driven out of our community because anybody who comes into the community to
make profit off of people by exploiting them can be defined as a capitalist.
Any program that’s brought into our community should be analyzed by the
people of that community. It should be analyzed to see that it meets the relevant
needs of that community.
. . . That’s what the Breakfast for Children Program is. A lot of people think it’s
charity. But what does it do? It takes people from a stage to a stage to another stage.
Any program that’s revolutionary is an advancing program. Revolution is change.
. . . We say that the Breakfast for Children Program is a socialistic program. It
teaches the people basically that—by practice. We thought up and let them prac-
tice that theory and inspect that theory. What’s more important?
. . . And a woman said, “I don’t know if I like communism, and I don’t know if
I like socialism. But I know that the Breakfast for Children Program feeds my
kids. And if you put your hands on that Breakfast for Children Program . . .”
. . . You know, a lot of people have hang-ups with the Party because the Party
talks about a class struggle. . . . We say primarily that the priority of this struggle is
class. That Marx and Lenin and Che Guevara and Mao Tse-tung and anybody else
that has ever said or knew or practiced anything about revolution always said that
a revolution is a class struggle. It was one class—the oppressed, and that other
class—the oppressor. And it’s got to be a universal fact. Those that don’t admit to
that are those that don’t want to get involved in a revolution, because they know as
long as they’re dealing with a race thing, they’ll never be involved in a revolution.
. . . We never negated the fact that there was racism in America, but we said
that the by-product, what comes off of capitalism, that happens to be racism . . .
that capitalism comes first and next is racism. That when they brought slaves over
here, it was to make money. So first the idea came that we want to make money,
then the slaves came in order to make that money. That means, through histori-
cal fact, that racism had to come from capitalism. It had to be capitalism first and
racism was a by-product of that.
. . . We may be in the minority, but this minority is gonna keep on shouting
loud and clear: We’re not gonna fight fire with fire, we’re gonna fight fire with
water. We’re not gonna fight racism with racism, we’re gonna fight racism with
solidarity. We’re not gonna fight capitalism with Black capitalism . . . we’re gonna
fight capitalism with socialism.
. . . We know that Black people are most oppressed. And if we didn’t know that,
then why in the hell would we be running around talking about the Black libera-
tion struggle has to be the vanguard for all liberation struggles?


--- PAGE 489 ---
Any theory you got, practice it. And when you practice it, you make some mis-
takes. When you make a mistake, you correct that theory, and then it will be cor-
rected theory that will be able to be applied and used in any situation. That’s what
we’ve got to be able to do.
. . . A lot of us read and read and read, but we don’t get any practice. We have a
lot of knowledge in our heads, but we’ve never practiced it; and made any mistakes
and corrected those mistakes so that we will be able to do something properly. So
we come up with, like we say, more degrees than a thermometer but we are not able
to walk across the street and chew gum at the same time. Because we have all that
knowledge but it’s never been exercised, it’s never been practiced. We never tested
it with what’s really happening. We call it testing it with objective reality. You might
have any kind of thought in your mind, but you’ve got to test it with what’s out there.
You see what I mean?
. . . The only way that anybody can tell you the taste of a pear is if he himself
has tasted it. That’s the only way. That’s objective reality. That’s what the Black
Panther Party deals with. We’re not into metaphysics, we’re not idealists, we’re
dialectical materialists. And we deal with what reality is, whether we like it or not.
A lot of people can’t relate to that because everything they do is gauged by the
way they like things to be. We say that’s incorrect. You look and see how things
are, and then you deal with that.
. . . We some Marxist-Leninist cussin’ niggers. And we gonna continue to cuss,
goddammit. ’Cause that’s what we relate to. That’s what’s happening in Babylon.
That’s objective reality.
. . . You’re dealing in subjectivity, because you’re not testing it with objective
reality. And what’s wrong is that you don’t go test it. Because if you test it, you’ll
get objective. Because as soon as you walk out there, a whole lot of objective real-
ity will vamp down upon your ass. . . .
. . . You can jail a revolutionary, but you can’t jail the revolution. You can lock
up a freedom fighter like Huey P . Newton, but you can’t lock up freedom fight-
ing. . . . Because if you do, you come up with answers that don’t answer, explana-
tions that don’t explain, conclusions that don’t conclude.
If you think about me and you think about me, niggers, and you ain’t gonna do no
revolutionary act, then forget about me. I don’t want myself on your mind if
you’re not going to work for the people.
Like I always said, if you’re asked to make a commitment at the age of 20, and
you say I don’t want to make no commitment only because of the simple reason
that I’m too young to die, I want to live a little bit longer. What you did is . . .
you’re dead already.
You have to understand that people have to pay the price for peace. You dare
to struggle, you dare to win. If you dare not struggle, then goddammit you don’t
deserve to win. Let me say to you peace if you’re willing to fight for it.
Let me say in the spirit of liberation—I been gone for a little while, at least my
body’s been gone for a little while. But I’m back now, and I believe I’m back to stay.
I believe I’m going to do my job. I believe I was born not to die in a car wreck.
I don’t believe I’m going to die in a car wreck. I don’t believe I going to die slip-
4 5 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 490 ---
A.Y. DAVIS, “I AM A REVOLUTIONARY BLACK WOMAN” 4 5 9
ping on a piece of ice. I don’t believe I going to die because I have a bad heart. I
don’t believe I’m going to die because I have lung cancer.
I believe I’m going to be able to die doing the things I was born for. I believe
I’m going to die high off the people. I believe I’m going to die a revolutionary in
the international revolutionary proletarian struggle. I hope each one of you will
be able to die [in] the international revolutionary proletarian struggle, or you’ll be
able to live in it. And I think that struggle’s going to come.
Why don’t you live for the people.
Why don’t you struggle for the people.
Why don’t you die for the people.
Source: Excerpts from “Fred Speaks”: Fred Hampton 20th Commemoration (Chicago:
December 4th Committee, 1989).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Artists United, When One of Us Falls, a Thousand Will Take His Place (Chicago: Artists
United, 1970).
Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall, Agents of Repression: The FBI’s Secret Wars Against
the Black Panther Party and the American Indian Movement(Boston: South End Press,
1988).
Commission of Inquiry into Black Panthers and the Police, Ramsey Clark and Roy Wilkins,
chairmen, Search and Destroy: A Report (New York: Metropolitan Applied Research
Center, 1973).
O19 O
“I Am a Revolutionary Black Woman,” Angela Y. Davis, 1970
Born in Birmingham, Alabama, Angela Y. Davis (1944– ) studied at the Sorbonne
in Paris, graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis, and did graduate work at
both the University of Frankfurt in Germany and University of California at San
Diego. In 1969, Davis was subject to a gross violation of academic freedom when
she was fired from her professorship at the University of California at Los Angeles
after her membership in the Communist Party came to the attention of then-
governor Ronald Reagan. When guns she had purchased for self-defense were
used by the Black Panthers in a courtroom shooting in San Marino County,
California, the FBI placed her on its “Ten Most Wanted” list. She was captured
in New York, jailed for two years and tried for kidnapping, conspiracy, and mur-
der. The Communist Party and the National Alliance Against Racist and Political
Repression organized a mass international struggle to win her freedom, and a jury
finally acquitted her of the charges. Since her release in 1972 Davis has contin-
ued to struggle on behalf of numerous progressive causes, including gender and
racial equality, the eradication of the prison-industrial complex, and socialism.
Davis’s 1981 book Women, Race and Classwas pivotal in the development of the
political and social criticism termed “black feminist thought.” In the early 1990s


--- PAGE 491 ---
Davis left the U.S. Communist Party and helped to found the Committees of
Correspondence, a national organization committed to socialism and democracy.
In her most recent books, Are Prisons Obsolete? (2003) and Abolition
Democracy: Beyond Empire, Prisons, and Torture (2005), Davis continues her
critique of the prison-industrial complex. Davis is currently a professor in the
History of Consciousness program at the University of California at Santa Cruz
and holds a distinguished appointment as the University of California Presidential
Chair in African-American and Feminist Studies.
O
Before anything else I am a black woman. I dedicated my life to the struggle for
the liberation of black people—my enslaved, imprisoned people.
I am a Communist because I am convinced that the reason we have been
forcefully compelled to eke out an existence at the very lowest level of American
society has to do with the nature of capitalism. If we are going to rise out of our
oppression, our poverty, if we are going to cease being the targets of the racist-
minded mentality of racist policemen, we will have to destroy the American cap-
italist system. We will have to obliterate a system in which a few wealthy capital-
ists are guaranteed the privilege of becoming richer and richer, whereas the
people who are forced to work for the rich, and especially Black people, never
take any significant step forward.
I am a Communist because I believe that black people, with whose labor and
blood this country was built, have a right to a great deal of wealth that has been
hoarded in the hands of the Hugheses, the Rockefellers, the Kennedys, the
DuPonts, all the superpowerful white capitalists of America.
Further, I am a Communist because I believe Black men should not be
coerced into fighting a racist, imperialist war in Southeast Asia, where the United
States government is violently denying a nonwhite people the right to control
their own lives, just as they violently suppressed us for hundreds of years.
My decision to join the Communist party emanated from my belief that the
only true path of liberation for black people is the one that leads toward a com-
plete and total overthrow of the capitalist class in this country and all its manifold
institutional appendages which insure its ability to exploit the masses and enslave
black people. Convinced of the need to employ Marxist-Leninist principles in the
struggle for liberation, I joined the Che-Lumumba Club, which is a militant, all-
black collective of the Communist party in Los Angeles committed to the task of
rendering Marxism-Leninism relevant to black people. But mindful of the fact
that once we as black people set out to destroy the capitalist system we would be
heading in a suicidal direction if we attempted to go at it alone. The whole ques-
tion of allies was crucial. And furthermore aside from students, we need impor-
tant allies at the point of production. I do not feel that all white workers are going
to be inveterate conservatives. Black leadership in working-class struggles is
needed to radicalize necessary sectors of the working class.
4 6 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 492 ---
A.Y. DAVIS, “I AM A REVOLUTIONARY BLACK WOMAN” 4 6 1
The practical perspective of the Che-Lumumba Club is based on an awareness
of the need to emphasize the national character of our people’s struggle and to
struggle around the specific forms of oppression which have kept us at the very
lowest levels of American society for hundreds of years, but at the same time to
place ourselves as black people in the forefront of a revolution involving masses
of people to destroy capitalism, to eventually build a socialist society and thus to
liberate not only our own people but all the downtrodden in this country. And fur-
ther, recognizing the international character of the revolution especially in this
period when the battle against our home-grown capitalists is being carried out all
over the world, in Indochina, Africa and Latin America. My decision to join the
Communist party was predicated in part on the ties the party has established with
revolutionary movements throughout the world. . . .
The American judicial system is bankrupt. In so far as black people are con-
cerned, it has proven itself to be one more arm of a system carrying out the sys-
tematic oppression of our people. We are the victims, not the recipients of justice.
It is obvious that democracy in America is hopelessly deteriorated, when the
courts, allegedly guardians of the rights of the people, have been enlisted to play
an active role in the genocidal war against black people.
We must reject the right of the courts to further oppress us. The only way we
can get justice is demand it and to create a mass movement which will give notice
to our enemy that we will use all means at our disposal to secure justice for our
people. This is the only way we can expect to free all our brothers and sisters held
captive in America’s dungeons. This is the only way we can expect to ultimately
gain total liberation.
. . . no revolutionary should fail to understand the underlying significance of the
dictum that the success or failure of a revolution can almost always be gauged by
the degree to which the status of women is altered in a radical, progressive direc-
tion. After all, Marx and Engels contended that there are two basic facts around
which the history of mankind revolves: production and reproduction. The way in
which people obtain their means of subsistence on one hand, and the way in
which the family is organized on the other hand.
Further, if it is true the outcome of a revolution will reflect the manner in which
it is waged, we must unremittingly challenge anachronistic bourgeois family struc-
tures and also the oppressive character of women’s role in American society in gen-
eral. Of course, this struggle is part and parcel of a total revolution. Led by women,
the fight for the liberation of women must be embraced by men as well. The bat-
tle for women’s liberation is especially critical with respect to the effort to build an
effective black liberation movement. For there is no question about the fact that
as a group, black women constitute the most oppressed sector of society.
Historically we were constrained not only to survive on an economic level as
slaves, but our sexual status was that of a breeder of property for the white slave
master as well as being the object of his perverse sexual desires. Our enemies have


--- PAGE 493 ---
attempted to mesmerize us, to mesmerize black people, by propounding a whole
assortment of myths with respect to the black woman. We are inveterate matri-
archs, implying we have worked in collusion with the white oppressor to insure the
emasculation of our men. Unfortunately, some black women have accepted these
myths without questioning their origin and without being aware of the counter-
revolutionary content and effect. They’re consequently falling into behind-the-
scenes positions in the movement and refuse to be aggressive and take leadership
in our struggle for fear of contributing to the oppression of the black male.
As black women, we must liberate ourselves and provide the impetus for the
liberation of black men from this whole network of lies around the oppression of
black women, which serve only to divide us, thus impeding the advance of our
total liberation struggle. . . .
I think it is important to link up the struggle for my freedom with the fight to
free other black political prisoners . . . I maintain that the fight should call for the
freedom of all black men and women. For few of us have received fair trials. We
certainly have not been judged by juries from among our peers.
Even if I am eventually allowed to leave the dungeon, I will not consider
myself free. My freedom will become a reality when we as a people have
destroyed our enemies, when we black people have broken the yokes of our
oppression and can freely erect a society which reflects our needs and our
dreams. I will not be free until all black people are free.
As a preface to my brief remarks I now declare publicly before the court, before
the people of this country that I am innocent of all charges which have been lev-
eled against me by the State of California. I am innocent and therefore maintain
that my presence in this courtroom today is unrelated to any criminal act.
I stand before this court as a target of a political frame-up which, far from
pointing to my culpability, implicates the State of California as an agent of politi-
cal repression. Indeed the state reveals its own role by introducing as evidence
against me my participation in the struggles of my people—black people—against
the many injustices of society. Specifically my involvement with the “Soledad
Brothers Defense Committee.” The American people have been led to believe
that such involvement is Constitutionally protected.
In order to insure that these political questions are not obscured, I feel com-
pelled to play an active role in my own defense as the defendant, as a black woman
and as a Communist. It is my duty to assist all those directly involved in the pro-
ceedings, as well as the people of this state and the American people in general, to
thoroughly comprehend the substantive issues at stake in my case. These have to
do with my political beliefs, affiliations and my day-to-day efforts to fight all the
conditions which have economically and politically paralyzed black America.
No one can better represent my political beliefs and activities than I. A system
of justice which virtually condemns to silence the one person who stands to lose
most would seem to be self-defeating.
It is particularly crucial to black people to combat this contradiction inherent
in the judicial system, for we have accumulated a wealth of historical experience
which confirms our belief that the scales of American justice are out of balance.
4 6 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 494 ---
THE LEAGUE OF REVOLUTIONARY BLACK WORKERS 4 6 3
In order to enhance the possibility of being granted a fair trial, of which at pre-
sent I am extremely doubtful, it is imperative that I be allowed to represent
myself. I might add that my request is not without legal precedent.
If this court denies our motion to include me as co-counsel in this case, it will
be aligning itself with the forces of racism and reaction which threaten to push
this country into the throes of fascism, and the many people who have become
increasingly disillusioned with the court system in this country will have a further
reason to solidify their contention that it is no longer possible to get a fair trial in
America.
Source: Excerpts from “I Am a Revolutionary Black Woman,” published originally in
Muhammad Speaks (December 1970).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Bettina Aptheker, The Morning Breaks: The Trial of Angela Davis(New York: International
Publishers, 1975).
Angela Y. Davis, If They Come in the Morning(New York: Okpaku, 1971).
———, Angela Davis: An Autobiography(New York: Random House, 1988).
———, Women, Culture and Politics(New York: Random House, 1989).
———, Women, Race and Class(New York: Random House, 1989).
Joy James, ed., The Angela Y. Davis Reader(Malden: Blackwell, 1998).
O20 O
“Our Thing Is DRUM!” The League of Revolutionary Black Workers
The most important Black Power group to emerge with a working-class con-
stituency was the League of Revolutionary Black Workers. The League was a net-
work of independent black militant workers’ organizations including Detroit’s
DRUM (Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement), FRUM (Ford Revolutionary
Union Movement), and the United Black Brothers of Mahwah, New Jersey.
Although the League had disappeared by the mid-1970s, it left a vibrant political
legacy that merged Marxist theory with the black militancy of industrial factory
workers.
O
GENERAL PROGRAM (HERE’S WHERE WE’RE COMING FROM)
The League of Revolutionary Black Workers is dedicated to waging a relentless
struggle against racism, capitalism, and imperialism. We are struggling for the lib-
eration of black people in the confines of the United States as well as to play a
major revolutionary role in the liberation of all oppressed people in the world.
In U.S. society, a small class owns the basic means of production. There aren’t
any black people in this class, nor are the masses of whites; however, they are not
in the same position as blacks.


--- PAGE 495 ---
Our black community is virtually a black working class, because of our relation-
ship to the basic means of production. Black workers comprise the backbone of the
productive process in this country. Since slavery, we have been the major produc-
ers of goods and services. In addition, we’ve produced goods under the most inhu-
mane conditions. Our black community is comprised of industrial workers, social
service workers, our gallant youth, and many ad hoc community groups.
The racist subordination of black people and black workers creates a privileged
status for white people and white workers. While the imperialist oppression and
exploitation of the world creates a privileged status for the people and workers of
the U.S., the white labor movement has failed to deal with the worsening condi-
tions of black workers and the key role of black workers in the economy and the
working class. The white labor movement has turned its back on black worker
problems such as less job security, speed-up, less pay, bad health (silicosis, in par-
ticular), the worst kind of jobs, and in most cases, exclusion from skilled trades.
These two systems of privilege become the basis for the aristocracy of white
labor which gives white labor a huge stake in the imperialist system and renders
white labor unable and unfit to lead the working class in the U.S.
United States society is racist, capitalist, and imperialist by nature. It is aggres-
sively expansive, exploitative, and oppressive. The expansion of U.S. imperialism
is primarily by means of worldwide financial penetration, backed up by a world-
wide military regime. This gives a monopoly control of the resources, wealth and
labor of the capitalist world to U.S. finance capital. They use the most barbarous
methods of warfare and subversion to maintain its billions of dollars in profit.
U.S. imperialism supports every reactionary and fascist regime in the world by
means of subversion, CIA assassinations, invasions, terror bombings, and criminal
means of warfare. U.S. imperialism also resorts to nuclear blackmail, to intimidate
the revolutionary peoples of the world. Imperialism faces its inevitable destruc-
tion as the national liberation struggles, currently focused in Southeast Asia,
become worldwide. This involves the rest of Asia, including populous India, along
with the emerging struggles in Latin America and the developing struggles in
Africa. The workers and peoples of Europe are also drawn into the anti-imperial-
ist struggle as the grip of U.S. imperialism loosens on Europe as the result of the
struggles waged in the rest of the world.
The oppressive, imperialist nature of U.S. society is evidenced at home in the
suppression of the black liberation struggle, workers’ struggles, and anti-war strug-
gles, in an increasingly militaristic fashion. One of the essential domestic props of
U.S. imperialism is the white labor aristocracy which shares in the spoils of the
plunder of the world and is based in the domestic subordination of black workers.
The white labor aristocracy collaborates with the U.S. imperialist government
in its aggressive wars, its CIA subversion and supports its political line. It also col-
ludes with monopoly corporations at home to allow speed-up and unsafe working
conditions, inflation that outstrips any wage gains, leaves most workers unorga-
nized, and supports the brutal subordination of black workers.
The League of Revolutionary Black Workers emerged specifically, out of the
failure of the white labor movement to address itself to the racist work conditions
and to the general inhumane conditions of black people.
4 6 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 496 ---
THE LEAGUE OF REVOLUTIONARY BLACK WORKERS 4 6 5
Our strength comes from the historical and heroic struggles of our people, our
inspiration comes from the revolutionary upsurges of the international struggles,
and our convictions are guided by the principles of Marxism-Leninism.
The League of Revolutionary Black Workers is a political organization. We
relate to the total black community. Our actual practice involves us with indus-
trial and service workers, youth, and several ad hoc groups; these categories
make up the League of Revolutionary Black Workers. Our duty is to plan the
most feasible means to insure freedom and justice for the liberation of black
people based on the concrete conditions we relate to. In addition, we have the
task of training our people for leadership and other special capacities that make
a viable organization. Most importantly, the direction of our organization is
clear. We’re not talking about dealing with a single issue as the only factor, nor
are we talking about reforms in the system; but we are talking about the seizure
of state power.
It is clear to us that the development of our struggle based on concrete reali-
ties, dictates the need for black peoples’ liberation political party. We state,
unequivocally, that this must be a black Marxist-Leninist party, designed to liber-
ate black people, dedicated to leading the workers’ struggles in this country, and
resolved to wage a relentless struggle against imperialism.
The League’s program for building a black Marxist-Leninist party is as follows:
1. Organizing of black workers on the broadest possible scale into the League
and its component parts.
2. Politicizing and educating the masses of black people to the nature of
racism, capitalism, and imperialism, to further outline the solution to these
problems in League programs and documents.
3. Supporting the efforts of our people to develop a broad economic base
within the community to aid the revolutionary struggle.
4. Developing a broad based self-defense organization in the community.
5. Carrying on unceasing struggles on behalf of black workers and the total
community.
6. Forming principled alliances and coalitions, on the broadest possible base, with
other oppressed minorities, organizations, movements, and forces, black or
white, which struggle against the evils of racism, capitalism and imperialism.
Our short-range objective is to secure state power with the control of the
means of production in the hands of the workers under the leadership of the most
advanced section of the working class, the black working-class vanguard.
Our long-range objective is to create a society free of race, sex, class, and
national oppression, founded on the humanitarian principle of from each accord-
ing to his ability, to each according to his needs. . . .
Deep in the gloom
of the firefilled pit
Where the Dodge rolls down the line,
We challenge the doom
of dying in shit
While strangled by a swine. . . .


--- PAGE 497 ---
. . . For hours and years
we’ve sweated tears
Trying to break our chain—
But we broke our backs
and died in packs
To find our manhood slain. . . .
But now we stand—
For DRUM’s at hand
To lead our Freedom fight,
and from now til then
we’ll unite like men—
For now we know our might—
and damn the plantation
and the whole Dodge nation
For DRUM has dried our tears. . . .
and now as we die
we’ve a different cry—
For now we hold our spears!
U.A.W. is scum—
OUR THING IS DRUM!!!!!
Source: “General Program (Here’s Where We’re Coming From),” General Policy
Statement and Labor Program (Highland Park, MI: League of Revolutionary Black
Workers, 1970).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Dan Georgakas and Marvin Surkin, Detroit: I Do Mind Dying? (New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1975); Updated ed. (Boston: South End Press, 1998).
James A. Geschwender, Class, Race, and Worker Insurgency: The League of Revolutionary
Black Workers(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1977).
Jim Jacobs, “Our Thing Is DRUM!”(Boston: New England Free Press, 1970).
O21 O
Attica: “The Fury of Those Who Are Oppressed,” 1971
In September 1971, African-American and Latino prisoners in the maximum-
security correctional facility located in Attica, New York, seized control of the
prison. Despite efforts to reach a negotiated settlement, New York Governor
Nelson Rockefeller authorized law-enforcement agencies to storm the prison,
leaving scores of inmates and captive guards dead or seriously injured. The
4 6 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 498 ---
ATTICA: “THE FURY OF THOSE WHO ARE OPPRESSED” 4 6 7
demands cited below express the political objectives of Attica’s prisoners.
O
THE FIVE DEMANDS
To the people of America
The incident that has erupted here at Attica is not a result of the dastardly
bushwacking of the two prisoners Sept. 8, 1971 but of the unmitigated oppression
wrought by the racist administration network of the prison, throughout the year.
WE are MEN! We are not beasts and do not intend to be beaten or driven as
such. The entire prison populace has set forth to change forever the ruthless bru-
talization and disregard for the lives of the prisoners here and throughout the
United States. What has happened here is but the sound before the fury of those
who are oppressed.
We will not compromise on any terms except those that are agreeable to us.
We call upon all the conscientious citizens of America to assist us in putting an
end to this situation that threatens the lives of not only us, but each and everyone
of us as well.
We have set forth demands that will bring closer to reality the demise of these
prisons, institutions that serve no useful purpose to the People of America but to
those who would enslave and exploit the People of America.
Our Demands Are Such:
1. We want complete amnesty, meaning freedom from any physical, mental
and legal reprisals.
2. We want now, speedy and safe transportation out of confinement, to a non-
imperialistic country.
3. We demand that the FEDERAL GOVERNMENT intervene, so that we
will be under direct FEDERAL JURISDICTION.
4. We demand the reconstruction of ATTICA PRISON to be done by inmates
and/or inmate supervision.
5. We urgently demand immediate negotiation thru Wm. M. Kunstler,
Attorney-at-Law, 588 Ninth Ave., NYC, Assemblyman Arthur O. Eve, of
Buffalo, the Solidarity Committee, Minister Farrakhan of MUHAMMAD
SPEAKS, Palante, The Young Lord’s Party Paper, the Black Panther Party,
Clarence Jones of the Amsterdam News, Tom Wicker of NY Times, Richard
Roth of the Courier Express, the Fortune Society, David Anderson of the
Urban League of Rochester, Blond-Eva Bond of NICAP , and Jim Ingram of
Democrat Chronicle of Detroit, Mich. We guarantee the safe passage of all
people to and from this institution. We invite all the peopleto come here and
witness this degradation, so that they can better know how to bring this
degradation to an end.
The Inmates of Attica Prison


--- PAGE 499 ---
THE FIFTEEN PRACTICAL PROPOSALS
Practical Proposals:
1. Apply the New York State minimum wage law to all state institutions. STOP
SLAVE LABOR.
2. Allow all New York State prisoners to be politically active, without intimida-
tion or reprisals.
3. Give us true religious freedom.
4. End all censorship of newspapers, magazines, letters and other publications
coming from the publisher.
5. Allow all inmates, at their own expense, to communicate with anyone they
please.
6. When an inmate reaches conditional release date, give him a full release
without parole.
7. Cease administrative resentencing of inmates returned for parole violations.
8. Institute realistic rehabilitation programs for all inmates according to their
offense and personal needs.
9. Educate all correctional officers to the needs of the inmates, i.e., under-
standing rather than punishment.
10. Give us a healthy diet, stop feeding us so much pork, and give us some fresh
fruit daily.
11. Modernize the inmate education system.
12. Give us a doctor that will examine and treat all inmates that request treat-
ment.
13. Have an institutional delegation comprised of one inmate from each com-
pany authorized to speak to the institution administration concerning griev-
ances (QUARTERLY).
14. Give us less cell time and more recreation with better recreational equip-
ment and facilities.
15. Remove inside walls, making one open yard, and no more segregation or
punishment.
Source: “The Five Demands: To the people of America,” reprinted from A Time to Die: The
Attica Prison Revolt by Tom Wicker by permission of the University of Nebraska Press.
Copyright 1975 by Tom Wicker.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Malcolm Bell, The Turkey Shoot: Tracking the Attica Cover-Up (New York: Grove Press,
1985).
New York State Special Commission on Attica, The Official Report of the New York State
Special Commission on Attica(New York: Bantam Books, 1972).
Russell G. Oswald, Attica: My Story(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972).
Tom Wicker, A Time to Die: The Attica Prison Revolt (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1994).
Richard Andrew Featherstone, and Stephen H. Paschen, Narratives from the 1971 Attica
Prison Riot: Toward a New Theory of Correctional Disturbances (Lewiston: Edwin
Mellen Press, 2005).
4 6 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 500 ---
THE NATIONAL BLACK POLITICAL CONVENTION 4 6 9
O22 O
The National Black Political Convention, Gary, Indiana, March 1972
By the early 1970s, more than one thousand African Americans had been elected to
public office, and Black Power formations and community-based activist groups
flourished in hundreds of cities and towns. The attempt to consolidate these diverse
currents into a national political force led to the National Black Political Convention,
held in March 1972 in Gary, Indiana. The principal organizers of the convention
were Gary Mayor Richard Hatcher, Detroit Congressman Charles Diggs, and then-
cultural nationalist and Black Arts Movement founder Amiri Baraka, formerly LeRoi
Jones. The meeting attracted nearly three thousand delegates and more than four
thousand observers and was in many respects the zenith of the Black Power move-
ment. Speakers at the convention aimed to increase blacks’ political power in a num-
ber of arenas, demanding a government response to the pressing need for child care,
a guaranteed annual wage, increased funds for community development, the cre-
ation of new public-service jobs, and the end of the death penalty.
O
THE GARY DECLARATION: BLACK POLITICS AT THE CROSSROADS
Introduction
The Black Agenda is addressed primarily to Black people in America. It rises nat-
urally out of the bloody decades and centuries of our people’s struggle on these
shores. It flows from the most recent surgings of our own cultural and political
consciousness. It is our attempt to define some of the essential changes which
must take place in this land as we and our children move to self-determination
and true independence.
The Black Agenda assumes that no truly basic change for our benefit takes
place in Black or white America unless we Black people organize to initiate that
change. It assumes that we must have some essential agreement on overall goals,
even though we may differ on many specific strategies.
Therefore, this is an initial statement of goals and directions for our own gen-
eration, some first definitions of crucial issues around which Black people must
organize and move in 1972 and beyond. Anyone who claims to be serious about
the survival and liberation of Black people must be serious about the implemen-
tation of the Black Agenda.
What Time Is It?
We come to Gary in an hour of great crisis and tremendous promise for Black
America. While the white nation hovers on the brink of chaos, while its politicians
offer no hope of real change, we stand on the edge of history and are faced with
an amazing and frightening choice: We may choose in 1972 to slip back into the


--- PAGE 501 ---
decadent white politics of American life, or we may press forward, moving relent-
lessly from Gary to the creation of our own Black life. The choice is large, but the
time is very short.
Let there be no mistake. We come to Gary in a time of unrelieved crisis for our
people. From every rural community in Alabama to the high-rise compounds of
Chicago, we bring to this Convention the agonies of the masses of our people.
From the sprawling Black cities of Watts and Nairobi in the West to the decay of
Harlem and Roxbury in the East, the testimony we bear is the same. We are the
witnesses to social disaster.
Our cities are crime-haunted dying grounds. Huge sectors of our youth—and
countless others—face permanent unemployment. Those of us who work find our
paychecks able to purchase less and less. Neither the courts nor the prisons con-
tribute to anything resembling justice or reformation. The schools are unable—
or unwilling—to educate our children for the real world of our struggles. Mean-
while, the officially approved epidemic of drugs threatens to wipe out the minds
and strength of our best young warriors.
Economic, cultural, and spiritual depression stalk Black America, and the
price for survival often appears to be more than we are able to pay. On every side,
in every area of our lives, the American institutions in which we have placed our
trust are unable to cope with the crises they have created by their single-minded
dedication to profits for some and white supremacy above all.
Beyond These Shores
And beyond these shores there is more of the same. For while we are pressed down
under all the dying weight of a bloated, inwardly decaying white civilization, many of
our brothers in Africa and the rest of the Third World have fallen prey to the same
powers of exploitation and deceit. Wherever America faces the unorganized, politi-
cally powerless forces of the non-white world, its goal is domination by any means
necessary—as if to hide from itself the crumbling of its own systems of life and work.
But Americans cannot hide. They can run to China and the moon and to the
edges of consciousness, but they cannot hide. The crises we face as Black people
are the crises of the entire society. They go deep, to the very bones and marrow,
to the essential nature of America’s economic, political, and cultural systems.
They are the natural end-product of a society built on the twin foundations of
white racism and white capitalism.
So, let it be clear to us now: The desperation of our people, the agonies of our
cities, the desolation of our countryside, the pollution of the air and the water—
these things will not be significantly affected by new faces in the old places in
Washington, D.C. This is the truth we must face here in Gary if we are to join our
people everywhere in the movement forward toward liberation.
White Realities, Black Choice
A Black political convention, indeed all truly Black politics must begin from this
truth: The American system does not work for the masses of our people, and it
cannot be made to work without radical fundamental change . (Indeed, this sys-
tem does not really work in favor of the humanity of anyone in America.)
4 7 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 502 ---
THE NATIONAL BLACK POLITICAL CONVENTION 4 7 1
In light of such realities, we come to Gary and are confronted with a choice.
Will we believe the truth that history presses into our face—or will we, too, try
to hide? Will the small favors some of us have received blind us to the larger suf-
ferings of our people, or open our eyes to the testimony of our history in
America?
For more than a century we have followed the path of political dependence on
white men and their systems. From the Liberty Party in the decades before the
Civil War to the Republican Party of Abraham Lincoln, we trusted in white men
and white politics as our deliverers. Sixty years ago, W. E. B. Du Bois said he
would give the Democrats their “last chance” to prove their sincere commitment
to equality for Black people—and he was given white riots and official segrega-
tion in peace and in war.
Nevertheless, some twenty years later we became Democrats in the name of
Franklin Roosevelt, then supported his successor Harry Truman, and even tried
a “non-partisan” Republican General of the Army named Eisenhower. We were
wooed like many others by the superficial liberalism of John F. Kennedy and the
make-believe populism of Lyndon Johnson. Let there be no more of that.
Both Parties Have Betrayed Us
Here at Gary, let us never forget that while the times and the names and the par-
ties have continually changed, one truth has faced us insistently, never changing:
Both parties have betrayed us whenever their interests conflicted with ours
(which was most of the time), and whenever our forces were unorganized and
dependent, quiescent and compliant. Nor should this be surprising, for by now
we must know that the American political system, like all other white institutions
in America, was designed to operate for the benefit of the white race: It was never
meant to do anything else.
That is the truth that we must face at Gary. If white “liberalism” could have
solved our problems, then Lincoln and Roosevelt and Kennedy would have done
so. But they did not solve ours nor the rest of the nation’s. If America’s problems
could have been solved by forceful, politically skilled and aggressive individuals,
then Lyndon Johnson would have retained the presidency. If the true “American
Way” of unbridled monopoly capitalism, combined with a ruthless military impe-
rialism could do it, then Nixon would not be running around the world, or mak-
ing speeches comparing his nation’s decadence to that of Greece and Rome.
If we have never faced it before, let us face it at Gary: The profound crisis of
Black people and the disaster of America are not simply caused by men nor will
they be solved by men alone. These crises are the crises of basically flawed eco-
nomics and politics, and of cultural degradation. None of the Democratic candi-
dates and none of the Republican candidates—regardless of their vague promises
to us or to their white constituencies—can solve our problems or the problems of
this country without radically changing the systems by which it operates.
The Politics of Social Transformation
So we come to Gary confronted with a choice. But it is not the old convention
question of which candidate shall we support, the pointless question of who is to


--- PAGE 503 ---
preside over a decaying and unsalvageable system. No, if we come to Gary out of
the realities of the Black communities of this land, then the only real choice for
us is whether or not we will live by the truth we know, whether we will move to
organize independently, move to struggle for fundamental transformation, for the
creation of new directions, towards a concern for the life and the meaning of
Man. Social transformation or social destruction, those are our only real choices.
If we have come to Gary on behalf of our people in America, in the rest of this
hemisphere, and in the Homeland—if we have come for our own best ambi-
tions—then a new Black Politics must come to birth. If we are serious, the Black
Politics of Gary must accept major responsibility for creating both the atmos-
phere and the program for fundamental, far-ranging change in America. Such
responsibility is ours because it is our people who are most deeply hurt and rav-
aged by the present systems of society. That responsibility for leading the change
is ours because we live in a society where few other men really believe in the
responsibility of a truly humane society for anyone anywhere.
We Are the Vanguard
The challenge is thrown to us here in Gary. It is the challenge to consolidate and
organize our own Black role as the vanguard in the struggle for a new society. To
accept that challenge is to move independent Black politics. There can be no
equivocation on that issue. History leaves us no other choice. White politics has
not and cannot bring the changes we need.
We come to Gary and are faced with a challenge. The challenge is to transform
ourselves from favor-seeking vassals and loud-talking, “militant” pawns, and to
take up the role that the organized masses of our people have attempted to play
ever since we came to these shores: That of harbingers of true justice and human-
ity, leaders in the struggle for liberation.
A major part of the challenge we must accept is that of redefining the functions
and operations of all levels of American government, for the existing governing
structures—from Washington to the smallest county—are obsolescent. That is part
of the reason why nothing works and why corruption rages throughout public life.
For white politics seeks not to serve but to dominate and manipulate.
We will have joined the true movement of history if at Gary we grasp the
opportunity to press Man forward as the first consideration of politics. Here at
Gary we are faithful to the best hopes of our fathers and our people if we move
for nothing less than a politics which places community before individualism, love
before sexual exploitation, a living environment before profits, peace before war,
justice before unjust “order,” and morality before expediency.
This is the society we need, but we delude ourselves here at Gary if we think
that change can be achieved without organizing the power, the determined
national Black power, which is necessary to insist upon such change, to create
such change, to seize change.
Towards a Black Agenda
So when we turn to a Black Agenda for the seventies, we move in the truth of his-
tory, in the reality of the moment. We move recognizing that no one else is going
4 7 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 504 ---
A. BARAKA, “THERE IS NO REVOLUTION . . .” 4 7 3
to represent our interests but ourselves. The society we seek cannot come unless
Black people organize to advance its coming. We lift up a Black Agenda recog-
nizing that white America moves towards the abyss created by its own racist arro-
gance, misplaced priorities, rampant materialism, and ethical bankruptcy. There-
fore, we are certain that the Agenda we now press for in Gary is not only for the
future of Black humanity, but is probably the only way the rest of America can
save itself from the harvest of its criminal past.
So, Brothers and Sisters of our developing Black nation, we now stand at Gary
as people whose time has come. From every corner of Black America, from all
liberation movements of the Third World, from the graves of our fathers and the
coming world of our children, we are faced with a challenge and a call: Though
the moment is perilous we must not despair. We must seize the time, for the time
is ours.
We begin here and now in Gary. We begin with an independent Black politi-
cal movement, an independent Black Political Agenda, an independent Black
spirit. Nothing less will do. We must build for our people. We must build for our
world. We stand on the edge of history. We cannot turn back.
Source: “The Gary Declaration,” from “The National Black Political Agenda” (Washington,
D.C.: National Black Political Convention, 1972).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Manning Marable, Race, Reform and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction in Black
America, 1945–1990 (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1991).
Komozi Woodard, A Nation within a Nation: Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones) and Black Power
Politics (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999).
O23 O
“There Is No Revolution Without the People,” Amiri Baraka, 1972
Amiri Baraka (1934–  ), born Everett Leroi Jones, was one of the most gifted and
influential African-American artists and writers of the twentieth century. Born in
Newark, New Jersey, he briefly attended Howard University. In the late 1950s,
Baraka became part of the “Beat” literary and countercultural movement in
Greenwich Village. Baraka soon established himself as a prominent poet, play-
wright, and music critic. With the rise of Black Power, Baraka transformed him-
self and his art, relocating first to Harlem and subsequently back to Newark. He
was the central leader of the Black Arts Movement in the 1960s and 1970s, as well
as a powerful voice for the politics of black cultural nationalism. Baraka was the
founder of the Congress of African People in 1970, and one of the key organizers
of the Gary Black Political Convention held in March 1972. In the mid-1970s,


--- PAGE 505 ---
Baraka experienced another ideological transformation, identifying himself with
a Maoist interpretation of Marxism. In recent years, Baraka has continued to be
highly productive, challenging institutions of power and privilege artistically and
politically.
O
THE PAN-AFRICAN PARTY AND THE BLACK NATION
. . . The Congress of African People should be used not only as a formulator of
the theoretical structure of such a party, but also as an initiating element and the
actual beginning of the party itself. Even though we are representatives of many
different, fragmented understandings of nationalist and quasi-nationalist, as well
as varieties of Pan-Africanist, ideologies, still the Congress must begin to put the
process of operational unity into motion, for Africans of any persuasion. That is,
we must understand through achievement of practical projects that theoretical
ideology must be subservient to the commonality of our experience, and by work-
ing together the gap between so-called ideologies will disappear and strong work-
ing relationships will develop among black people of seemingly widely divergent
theoretical political ideologies.
Among three of the most common ideas relating to Nationalism and Pan-
Africanism are what can be called:
1—Back to Africa (or Repatriation)
2—Separation (to another part of America)
3—Instant Revolution
We feel that repatriation people must understand and to a certain extent the
separation (meaning to remove to Africa or another part of U.S.) people must
understand that black people, circa 1970, ain’t going anywhere. It is very difficult,
as you well know, to get them to go up the street to a meeting. Garvey’s thought
is best interpreted as a movement to re-create the power of the African State, but
finally, as a precursor to contemporary Pan-Africanism, along with brothers like
Blyden, Padmore, Nkrumah and others.
To create Africa as a unified power base to demand respect for black people
the world over—this is Pan-Africanism, because wherever we are we have a com-
monality based on our common struggle.
But “Back to Africa” for certain, in all our ways we can re-establish contact,
since we understand our connection racially, historically, culturally, politically and
emotionally. But it is necessary to raise the level of our people’s political con-
sciousness, so that all of us are aware of our commonality and readied to con-
sciously wage a common struggle.
The South may be the great strategic battleground of the African in America,
perhaps; it has the food and space to allow a people to survive against great odds,
but whatever we would do with the people, with ourselves, actually we must first
organize. And if the struggle is raised and of such a nature that we must all go into
4 7 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 506 ---
A. BARAKA, “THERE IS NO REVOLUTION . . .” 4 7 5
the South, or that we migrate constantly because of the mounting pressures that
force people to that action, then it will still be a raised level of political con-
sciousness that permits that move.
In the meantime, we must separate the mind, win the mind, wage the revolu-
tion to win the black man’s mind so we will begin to move together as a people
conscious that we are a people, struggling for national liberation. Separation must
come mentally before any physical movement can begin—separation away from
assimilation or brainwashing or subjugation by the mind of the white nation. And
that separation from white control must be a prerequisite for the mental and
emotional trip “Back to Africa,” i.e., to realization that we are an African people,
meaning black, of a common color, culture and consciousness. And whether we
call ourselves Arabs, Saudis, Sudanese, Ethiopians, Egyptians, Kamites, Hamitic,
we have only said black a number of different ways.
As nationalists and Pan-Africanists we must understand that we must move to
have self-determination, self-sufficiency, self-respect and self-defense wherever
we exist in large numbers—whether it is Chicago or Johannesburg. And the
process of “gaining, maintaining and using power” is basically connected, what-
ever the specific local method.
A political party is an organ of consciousness. It must bring consciousness to
black people in whatever context is necessary. All the different ways men express
their lives must be understood and shaped by the party, which is the nation
becoming. Whether it is religion or history or economics, social organization, arts,
or the national ethos, and of course politics, the community organization of sig-
nificance and potential in the struggle for national liberation will be able to make
ideological input in all the areas of black people’s lives, and hence give direction.
A people’s way of life gives them Identity, Purpose and Direction. Identity: who
you are and therefore who your enemy is. Purpose: what is to be done in rela-
tionship to that identity, i.e., nation building. Direction: how it is to be done, by
any means necessary. A black-skinned man living a cracker way of life has for all
intents and purposes the identity, purpose and direction of a cracker. The politi-
cal party must have an ideology that provides the mass of black people with alter-
natives to the Identity, Purpose and Direction of the white boy.
There is no revolution without the people. It is the organized community that
is our only chance of self-defense or self-determination. The larger the commu-
nity involvement, the quicker change will come. No so-called vanguard organiza-
tion can bring a revolution, only the people themselves can do this. An organiza-
tion moving without the community or alienating the community will soon be
isolated, and very soon eliminated.
The United States is not China or nineteenth-century Russia, or even Cuba or
Vietnam. It is the most highly industrialized nation ever to exist, a place where the
slaves ride in Cadillacs and worship their master’s image, as God. American power
over Africans around the world must be broken before the other colonial powers are
completely broken. Also, it should never be forgotten that we are a different people,
want a different nation, than our slavemasters. In the Lenin revolution, the masses,


--- PAGE 507 ---
the majority, theoretically1 overthrew the minority, almost overnight. In America the
“minority,” i.e., oppressors, are the majority, or think they benefit by oppression.
We must think of our struggle as one for national liberation just as colored peo-
ple are fighting wars of national liberation all around the world. We are fighting
alien colonialists and enslavers, we are not making “revolution” against our own
people. It is important to understand this. We must not be coopted by talk of
instant revolution, into being the peasant army, the first slaughtered wave, for
another people’srise to political power.
An organization for world African liberation, the developing prototype for the
much-needed national/international political party, must be an organic manifes-
tation of that people’s determination to struggle. It must have an ideology based
on its own history and ethos, on its traditions and the immediate contemporary
context in which it finds itself.
We are not the Chinese. Mao raised an army, a state within a state, then separated
from the main and waged war on it until it capitulated. (But they were all Chinese!)
But even today the Chinese are just emerging from the almost constantly continu-
ing cultural revolution, which seeks to win the minds of the people, so that the over-
all development of the Chinese nation can continue without being interrupted by
externally and internally inspired coups such as toppled Kwame Nkrumah!
But the American situation offers only few usable parallels. We are controlled
largely by the ideas of our oppressors. The political party must build alternative
systems, values, institutions that will move us and raise us. How we build such
alternative forms is what the Congress of African People is about.
It seems obvious that the only places the developing prototype vehicle-
organization for the national/international African political party can exist
healthily or with any relevance is in areas of the most intense black population,
wherever in the world. In the U.S., the cities of major black population and the
black intensely populated rural areas in the South must be the first areas of
organization.
The community organization is always the kernel for the political party. Thus,
because of a structure like the Congress of African People, it is possible to set up
offices to begin organizing on the level of a political party more directly.
The areas of political power should be in the areas of organization: Public
Office (elected or appointed)—the local C.A.P . offices must be prepared to con-
duct voter registration. Money can be raised for “voter registration” from national
political parties and other groups interested in the black vote. The reason for
voter registration drives is twofold; first, obviously to try to move on local politi-
cal power and try to get hold of the goods and services that can accrue to even the
smallest political office. These goods and services, and the monies available
because of them, become the energizing elements of a growing local party struc-
ture. This is very important because in the rush of fantasy-producing revolution-
ary talk, it is not understood that whatever the level of the struggle, goods and ser-
vices and, of course, finances will be needed.
The other obvious use of voter registration is voter education, which becomes
financed projects for raising the African political consciousness. Getting into the
4 7 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 508 ---
A. BARAKA, “THERE IS NO REVOLUTION . . .” 4 7 7
homes of black people every day, organizing from strictly local, to regional, to
state, while the C.A.P . superstructure works to create the national and interna-
tional cohesion and development.
But the local C.A.P . organization must not only conduct voter registration,
actually voter education, drives but also run candidates in all elections. Again, it
is a basic level of political power! Goods, services, finances and two other impor-
tant ingredients, the gradual development of a sympathetic area in which to work,
and hopefully expand, and the “legitimate” areas of political (and gradually
through an association with actual, rather than rhetorical) power.
When the most conscious black activists do not move in “electoral” politics,
the area is left to stooges, thieves and toms. They become the local power fig-
ures and, like it or not, have some allegiance from the community, based on their
ability to supply goods and services (e.g., jobs) and their association with legiti-
mate areas of power. (When we say “legitimate,” we mean association with sym-
bols given legitimacy by white people, who, we should not forget, still control the
symbolism and imagery in most black areas and, of course, the power which is
the reason for the so-called legitimacy in the first place.) We must get beyond
idle neophyte militancy to effective political organizing and build allegiance
from our people by coopting all so-called or seemingly legitimate political
processes in the black communities.
All political candidates must run against nationalists in the black community,
and finally nationalists, Pan-Africanists, must organize sufficiently to win. The
nationalist Pan-Africanist political party must begin to represent some degree of
actual power, not just frustrated rhetoric, and the local political area is one clear
way in which to move. It is one level of political consciousness, and the African
community’s mind must be moved from where it is. That is, you can talk about
black mayors to black people with more credibility than you can talk about black
nations, where we believe it must finally get. But you must build where you are,
and through such building and continuous development through association and
acquisition of some actual power, finally make talk of nation legitimate.
Community organization is necessary even if the base of any so-called community
organization is the local party office. This means that the C.A.P . office must offer a
wide divergence of community programs, or at least see to their initiation: health,
welfare, education, arts, and any programs that are needed in black communities
around the world. Free health-care programs in the community move black people
into it who might never come into anything “political.” As such, the community orga-
nization is a clear area of political power. Also any kind of antipoverty money must
be controlled by the local party office. All monies used against black people must be
diverted into the hands of the actual builders of the community and the money used
to expand the development of Nationalist Pan-Africanist ideas. This means moving
to control the local community organizations by merely mastering the numbers and
nonsense (actually by being better organizers) that go with so-called democratic
processes in the election of community organization officials, etc.
In other words, whatever funds or potential power is available in the African
community must be controlled by the nationalist Pan-Africanist political party.


--- PAGE 509 ---
Alliances and coalitions are another area of political power. We can make
alliances with all peoples of color (and certainly our brothers), developing as we
said a certain level of operational unity, however diverse we might seem. But this
whole area of political power must be approached formally and consistently as an
important area of political organization. Alliances must be made with other black
organizations, with black student groups, professionals, church, community, busi-
ness men, politicians, but also Third World alliances, so that actually we will all be
fighting the same battle at the same time to liberate ourselves, concentrating on
our own areas while providing one another with a cross-fertilization of ideas and
resources. The truly Pan-African international organization has yet to come into
existence, and this is precisely what world Africans need—an international Pan-
Africanist party capable of dealing not only with the international problems of
Africans by means of international alliances and international exchange of infor-
mation and resources, but also a party able to function on the lowest level: to win
municipal elections. Many times bloods want to deal internationally or Pan-
Africanistically and cannot even win a local councilmanic election. To do the large
you must learn by doing the small. . . .
There is no instant revolution probable in America. What must be done by
Africans in America and around the world is to organize actual systems capable of
surviving America and its white domination of the world. “Murder mouthing” will
only get you murdered. The military aspect of national liberation is important,
make no mistake. But to speak of self-defense without being able to put it into
practice is not revolutionary, it is slave-stupid.
The process of organizing in all the areas of political power is the one constant
of our survival. All areas! But we must be really organized, really trained, and
practice a value system that will constantly remind us who our real enemies are.
In the last area of political power, survival techniques are desperately needed,
and these must be exchanged. Just as brothers in Angola need those Green Beret
boots, we in the United States with access to those boots need things the Angolan
troops possess. Where is the political structure to put this kind of exchange in
motion?
We cannot be so ready to die that we forget that the purpose of our struggle is
life! We must train to live, we must study and work to live. We must train in all
the areas of gaining political power and become as skilled at voter registration and
canvassing as we must become at disruption. But we must really become experts
at both. We are not fighting a child, but the strongest nation on the planet. One
reason it is the strongest is that many of our own brothers and sisters are part of
its mind and muscle.
The first step is the creation of the organization (party) that can move on all
levels, with a value system (morality) superior to the one that enslaves us. . . .
O
“A Poem for Black Hearts”
For Malcolm’s eyes, when they broke
the face of some dumb white man, For
4 7 8 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 510 ---
A. BARAKA, “THERE IS NO REVOLUTION . . .”” 4 7 9
Malcolm’s hands raised to bless us
all black and strong in his image
of ourselves, For Malcolm’s words
fire darts, the victor’s tireless
thrusts, words hung above the world
change as it may, he said it, and
for this he was killed, for saying,
and feeling, and being///change, all
collected hot in his heart, For Malcolm’s
heart, raising us above our filthy cities,
for his stride, and his beat, and his address
to the grey monsters of the world, For Malcolm’s
pleas for your dignity, black men, for your life,
black man, for the filling of your minds
with righteousness, For all of him dead and
gone and vanished from us, and all of him which
clings to our speech black god of our time.
For all of him, and all of yourself, look up,
black man, quit stuttering and shuffling, look up,
black man, quit whining and stooping, for all of him,
For Great Malcolm a prince of the earth, let nothing in us rest
until we avenge ourselves for his death, stupid animals
that killed him, let us never breathe a pure breath if
we fail, and white men call us faggots till the end of
the earth.
1969
Note: 1. And what happened to the Asian masses in “Russia” because of the Russian revolu-
tion? Or the black masses in Cuba because of the Cuban revolution?
Sources: (1) Excerpt from Baraka, “The Pan-African Party and the Black Nation,” in Robert
Chrisman and Nathan Hare, Pan-Africanism (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1974), pp. 114–
26; and (2) “A Poem for Black Hearts” reprinted by permission of Sterling Lord Literistic, as
agents for the author. Copyright by Amiri Baraka.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Amiri Baraka, The Autobiography of Leroi Jones(Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books, 1997).
———, Blues People: Negro Music in White America(New York: Morrow, 1963).
———, The Dead Lecturer (New York: Grove Press, 1964).
———, It’s Nation Time(Chicago: Third World Press, 1970).
Kimberly W. Benston, Imamu Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones): A Collection of Critical Essays
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1978).
William Harris, The Poetry and Politics of Amiri Baraka: The Jazz Aesthetic(Columbia: Uni-
versity of Missouri Press, 1985).
Werner Sollors, Amiri Baraka/LeRoi Jones: The Quest for a “Populist Modernism” (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1978).
Jerry Gafio Watts, Amiri Baraka: The Politics and Art of a Black Intellectual(New York: New
York University Press, 2001).


--- PAGE 511 ---
K. Komozi Woodard, A Nation within a Nation: Amiri Baraka (Leroi Jones) and Black Power
Politics (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999).
O24 O
“My Sight Is Gone But My Vision Remains,” Henry Winston
Henry Winston (1911–1986) played an important role in the Communist Party
of the United States (CPUSA) and in the U.S. anti-imperialist movement.
Winston grew up in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, and Kansas City, Missouri, and
although his family’s economic situation forced him to leave high school early,
his precocious intellect and outstanding organizational skills were evident
when he began working, at age nineteen, for Kansas City’s Unemployed
Council. Later, he joined the Young Communist League (YCL) and the
CPUSA and by 1936 he was the YCL’s national organizational secretary and a
member of the CPUSA’s central committee. During World War II Winston
helped to enlist thousands of Communists into the armed forces, and he him-
self fought in Europe and earned an honorable discharge. In 1947, however,
he was handed a five-year jail sentence under the Smith Act, which prohibited
advocating Marxism. Winston first went underground, but later surrendered
and served his time in the federal penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana. While
incarcerated, Winston developed a brain tumor but prison officials refused to
give him proper medical treatment, thereby causing him to go blind. In 1966
Winston was voted CPUSA chairman, and in this capacity helped defend
Angela Davis, opposed the Vietnam War, and wrote two books, Strategy for a
Black Agenda and Class, Race, and Black Liberation. Winston died in Moscow
in 1986.
O
“ON RETURNING TO THE STRUGGLE”
Upon my release by Presidential order on Friday, June 30, from the U.S. Public
Health Hospital at Staten Island after serving most of my time, I promised news-
papermen answers to their questions later. I am glad to answer those questions
today.
I am, of course, happy to be free and once more to be with my family and
friends. My joy is marred, however, by the fact that my good comrade and friend,
Gilbert Green, is still imprisoned in Leavenworth Prison, a victim, like myself and
others, of a political frameup under the viciously undemocratic thought control
law known as the Smith Act. He is due to be released July 29.
4 8 0 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 512 ---
H. WINSTON, “MY SIGHT IS GONE . . .” 4 8 1
I want to thank publicly all those who fought so hard for my release—my fam-
ily and my friends, and many, many others in various walks of life. I am deeply
grateful to the many Negro leaders in the ministry and elsewhere, who spoke up
for my freedom. I am deeply appreciative of the efforts of the Rev. Edler P .
Hawkins, moderator of the Presbyterian Church, Roger Baldwin and Norman
Thomas, who never permitted their political disagreement with me to stop their
fight for justice and humanity.
My present plans call for some rest and then a lengthy visit with my mother
and sisters who live in the Midwest.
Subsequently I plan to return to New York where I shall further retrain myself
to activity under the handicap of blindness—a disability brought on by callous and
criminal neglect of Federal officials. Had I been paroled in 1958, when I was eli-
gible for parole, I would not have had to undergo surgery in 1960 and would not
today be suffering from my affliction. Had prison officials and governmental
authorities, even as late as 1959, heeded my complaints, I might not be blind today.
However, despite my handicap, I intend to resume my part in the fight for an
America and a world of peace and security, free of poverty, disease, and race dis-
crimination.
In prison I followed with special pride the accounts of the magnificent strug-
gle of my people. I regard the Freedom Riders as heroes of our time who are
making a contribution not only to the cause of Negro freedom but of democratic
rights for all Americans.
I return from prison with the unshaken conviction that the people of our great
land, Negro and white, need a Communist Party fighting for the unity of the peo-
ple for peace, democracy, security, and socialism. I take my place in it again with
deep pride. My sight is gone but my vision remains.
O
“A LETTER TO MY BROTHERS AND SISTERS”
My Brothers and Sisters:
Pan-Africanism has become for us an all pervasive question. It has become the
subject of discussion at the breakfast table, the lunch counter and at dinner. The
fact is that wherever our folk gather—on the job, on the campus, the church and
trade unions—Pan-Africanism is talked about. The public media have brought this
subject into every home. The healthy feelings of our people for justice in the
U.S.A. and in Africa are distorted. The purveyors of this concept wrongly pose the
question. They consciously direct the discussion into one of Pan-Africanism versus
Communism, Pan-Africanism and reforms in the imperialist system, one world
government on the continent of Africa and many different variations of the same
theme: not struggle against fascism, not struggle against classical colonialism or
neo-colonialism, and certainly not revolutionary struggle to oust imperialism. They


--- PAGE 513 ---
do everything to prevent our people from discerning the main enemy of freedom
and the forces necessary to win that freedom.
These are times in which the souls of Black people are seriously being tried.
Black men and women, and especially Black youth, rightly declare that a correct
strategy must be put into operation to achieve unconditional equality in their eco-
nomic, political and social life.
The kind of equality the Black people demand in the United States must
embody in practice the actual exercise of that right which is characterized by
opportunities fully realized, free of discrimination on the job, in housing, educa-
tion, health, culture and unrestricted in their struggles in any area of democratic
and social advancement.
Imperialist Oppression
Our people seek complete freedom from imperialist oppression for our brothers
and sisters on the continent of Africa. The white imperialist minority from the
United States, Britain, France, Portugal, Belgium and increasingly West Ger-
many and Japan are doing everything to maintain imperialist domination. They
strive to maintain classical colonialism like that in the Portuguese colonies.
Powerful monopoly circles in the U.S. support the fascist imperialist regime of
Vorster in South Africa, who keeps the Black majority of Africans under condi-
tions of classical colonialism.
These same monopoly and banking interests are trying everything to halt and
turn back the wheels of history in Africa, where our brothers and sisters in the
majority of African countries have achieved political independence. They con-
sciously organize military coups against any anti-imperialist tendencies in African
governments. In the former Belgian Congo they murdered Patrice Lumumba
and overthrew his anti-imperialist government.
Perhaps the prime example of imperialist machinations in this respect was the
overthrow of the Nkrumah Government in Ghana. They did this at a time when
Ghana had taken steps to strengthen its economic ties with socialist countries. If
Ghana had been given a chance she would have been in a better position to
advance to the goal of full economic independence. That would have meant the
ouster of foreign imperialism from the soil of Ghana. The destiny of the country
would have been fully in the hands of the Ghanaian people and self-determina-
tion would have existed in fact.
Imperialism cannot use the same old methods in dominating Africa. They are
compelled to take into account the new world reality. What is this new world real-
ity? It is the fact that in October 1917, the great October Socialist Revolution took
place in Russia. This powerful development was a mighty blow against imperial-
ism, and placed on a new level the struggle for emancipation not alone of the
working class, peasants and oppressed nationalities of Russia. It was also an
achievement which exerted and was increasingly to exert profound influence
among the oppressed peoples on all continents, against imperialism. . . .
4 8 2 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 514 ---
H. WINSTON, “MY SIGHT IS GONE . . .” 4 8 3
U.S. Imperialism and Africa
Let us ponder this fact. Let us look at U.S. imperialism and its relations with
Africa. The dictates of the ruling class in the U.S. are followed; not only in spirit
but to the letter, by the Nixon Administration. U.S. imperialism will step up all
activities in the coming period to strengthen military; economic and political rela-
tions with Israel for basically three reasons: 1. To maintain imperialist control over
oil in the Middle East. 2. To retard the movement for political and economic
independence in the Arab countries. 3. To control the Mediterranean and use this
part of the world as a base of operations against the national liberation move-
ments and the Soviet Union.
U.S. imperialist policies also include economic and military support to the
Portuguese colonial regime and the maintenance of classical colonialism in the
colonies of Mozambique, Angola, Guinea-Bissau, etc. Of central importance for
U.S. imperialism will be its growing economic and military support of the Vorster
fascist regime in South Africa. The present government of South Africa is guided
by the following: “A people that fails to preserve the purity of its racial blood
thereby destroys the unity of the soul of the nation in all its manifestations.”
(From Mein Kampf by Adolf Hitler.)
This is the essence of apartheid. That is why the Black African majority in the
country lives under conditions of classical colonialism. The imperialists in the
U.S. will strive to use South Africa as a base to extend its control over the entire
continent of Africa. The prototype for the whole of Black Africa would then
become like the lot of the Black African majority in South Africa.
New Tactics of Oppression
Let us remember the following: Imperialism of yesterday needed missionaries to
fasten classical colonialism upon the people of Africa. They fought among them-
selves for spheres of influence and simultaneously waged bloody and genocidal
wars against the people of Africa, heroically fighting for their land and their inde-
pendence. Black people in the U.S. have been fighting for their equality since
1619. We cannot forget that our brothers and sisters on the continent of Africa
have been fighting for their freedom for hundreds of years earlier. They have
come a long way in unison with all anti-imperialist forces. They see the possibili-
ties of victory. They understand that neo-colonialism cannot use the same old
deceit, that it must make certain concessions and find new kinds of “missionaries”
if it is to defeat the cause of freedom and retain imperialist domination.
I would urge that you think deeply. It is important, if your hopes and dreams
are to be realized. It is especially important to examine carefully every theory that
is put forward and presented as being the answer. It seems to me that it is of great
importance to study carefully the many different concepts of Pan-Africanism. It
is necessary also to examine such propositions as “one world government,” as well
as the new call for mass migration, and the alleged panacea of an “All African
People’s Party.”


--- PAGE 515 ---
This is very important because of the tremendous riches in Africa. Consider
the following from African Progress, Magazine of African Political, Business and
Economic Affairs, July–August, 1972: “Africa is the world’s principal producer
of gold, manganese, radium, scandium, cesium, corundum, graphite. It also
dominates the world market in certain strategic minerals: cobalt, chrome,
lithium, beryllium, tantalum, germanium, iron ore, coal, nickel, vanadium, cop-
per, zinc, lead, bauxite, silver, platinum, columbium, cadmium, phosphates, tin,
uranium, etc.”
The fight for self-determination in each African country is a struggle to guar-
antee that these riches become the property of Africans, that the profits from
these riches are not taken out of Africa and find their way into the banks of Wall
Street, London, Paris and other imperialist states. The acquisition of these riches
by Africans is the only way that guarantees can be established for Africans to be
able to determine their own relationships to other states and determine their own
destiny. The Africans fight for, and we must support them in this effort, to guar-
antee that science and technology be made available to Africans for the develop-
ment of their countries.
It is against this effort of Africans that an expanding barrage of propaganda is
being consciously developed to win our people to support neo-colonialism. Why
is this so? If South Africa alone is considered, the following picture indicates the
importance attached to South Africa by U.S. corporations. Some of them are:
Ford, General Motors, Chrysler, Union Carbide, U.S. Steel, Standard Oil, Mobil,
Esso, Chase Manhattan Bank, First National City Bank. Fortune magazine, in its
July 1972 issue, notes that 292 corporations have established subsidiaries or affil-
iates there.
Black folk well know the discriminatory policies of these firms towards our
people in the U.S. It is clear that neo-colonialism in South Africa can only be a
support to imperialist oppression of the Black majority.
African Liberation and the U.S.A.
The national liberation movement of South Africa tells us that imperialism finds
the road against them easier to travel if their reactionary policies can be cloaked
and brought to them by successful Black men and women. They ask us not to fall
for this kind of trap. They appeal to us to do all in our power to bring about sanc-
tions against South Africa. Such international support will help them. If this is
done the possibilities exist for ending colonial rule in South Africa and helping
this Black majority to take its rightful place as the leading force in the nation.
Let us therefore examine every program that is put forward from the stand-
point of whether it assists this kind of struggle. If it does, it is a contribution to the
continent-wide struggle against imperialism. What then may be some points for
guidance? They can be summarized as follows:
1. No economic, political or military relations whatsoever with the Vorster
regime in the Republic of South Africa.
2. Congress shall tax and the Treasury shall collect taxes on all profits made in
South Africa at maximum rates without deductions for local taxes paid.
4 8 4 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 516 ---
LET NOBODY TURN US AROUND 4 8 5
3. The Overseas Private Investment Corporation shall refuse to insure any new
investments in South Africa and cancel all outstanding insurance on investments
in the Republic of South Africa.
4. The President shall instruct the Export-Import Bank and all other U.S.
credit agencies to refuse all credits for business with the Republic of South Africa
and instruct U.S. representatives of international lending agencies to oppose all
credits to the Republic of South Africa or companies operating therein.
5. The State Department shall denounce all existing investment, trade and
commercial treaties with the Union of South Africa and the President shall
remove most favored nation treatment from South African goods.
6. The immediate withdrawal of the sugar quota to the Republic of South
Africa.
I think that the reaction among African leaders on the firing line will be of ben-
efit. You will find in the pages of this booklet the greetings of many of them to the
Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held in
March–April, 1971.
Their views will be extremely helpful in understanding why we must give all-
out support to their liberation struggles.
May I extend to you a firm handshake in the struggle to achieve victory for our
people in the struggle against imperialism, in the U.S.A., in Africa, and through-
out the world.
Sincerely,
Henry Winston
National Chairman, C.P .U.S.A.
Sources: (1) “On Returning to the Struggle” published with permission from Political Affairs
40, no. 8 (August 1961), pp. 1–2; and (2) excerpt from “A Letter to my Brothers and Sisters”
with permission from Political Affairs52, no. 2 (February 1973), pp. 13–21.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Gilbert Green, Cold War Fugitive: A Personal Story of the McCarthy Years (New York:
International Publishers, 1984).
Henry Winston, Strategy for a Black Agenda: A Critique of New Theories of Liberation in
the United States and Africa (New York: International Publishers, 1973).
———, Class, Race, and Black Liberation(New York: International Publishers, 1977).
Nikolai Mostovets, Henry Winston, Profile of a U.S. Communist (Moscow: Progress
Publishers, 1983).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
Raymond Arsenault, Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice, Pivotal
Moments in American History(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
Kevin A. Beauchamp, The Untold Story of Emmett Louis Till, New York: Thinkfilm 2005.
DVD Video.
Winifred Breines, The Trouble between Us: An Uneasy History of White and Black Women
in the Feminist Movement(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
“The Civil Rights in Mississippi Digital Archive,” www.lib.usm.edu/legacy/spcol/crda/.
C-SPAN; National Cable Satellite Corp.; organized by the Georgetown University African
American Studies Program; cosponsored by the Georgetown University Women’s Center,


--- PAGE 517 ---
Black Women in the Civil Rights Movement, West Lafayette: C-SPAN Archives, 2006.
DVD Video.
Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, eds., Women in the Civil
Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers, 1941–1965. 1st pbk ed., Blacks in the
Diaspora (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993).
Eddie S. Glaude, ed., Is It Nation Time?: Contemporary Essays on Black Power and Black
Nationalism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
Horace Huntley and David Montgomery, eds., Black Workers’ Struggle for Equality in
Birmingham, The Working Class in American History (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 2007).
Gilbert Jonas and with a forward by Julian Bond, Freedom’s Sword: The NAACP and the
Struggle against Racism in America, 1909–1969(London: Routledge, 2007).
Michael J. Klarman, From Jim Crow to Civil Rights : The Supreme Court and the Struggle
for Racial Equality(Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
“The Malcolm X Project at Columbia University,” www.columbia.edu/cu/ccbh/mxp/courses
.html.
Charles M. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the
Mississippi Freedom Struggle(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007).
4 8 6 WE SHALL OVERCOME: 1954–1975


--- PAGE 518 ---
THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT:
CONTEMPORARY 
AFRICAN-AMERICAN THOUGHT,
1975 TO THE PRESENT
– SECTION FIVE –


--- PAGE 519 ---



--- PAGE 520 ---
INTRODUCTION
T
he successes of the modern Black Freedom Movement were largely accom-
plished by the existence of a strong black working class. In 1970, for exam-
ple, almost 40 percent of all African Americans in the paid labor force were
employed in blue-collar jobs, many in heavy industries such as steel, auto-
mobile production, food and tobacco manufacturing, and electrical and non-
electrical machinery. Most of these jobs were unionized, which provided pensions
and healthcare for workers and their families. The bulk of the well-paid workers
were located in the industrial heartland of the U.S. Midwest and Northeast. Blacks
had also significantly narrowed the historic wage gap they experienced with whites,
as their percentage of medium incomes compared to white incomes rose from
about 50 percent in 1958 to 63 percent in 1973. For African Americans with col-
lege degrees, under age thirty-five, the historic income gap between blacks and
whites virtually disappeared. The number of African Americans attending colleges
and professional schools soared, from about 400,000 in 1970 to 1.1 million only 10
years later. Policies such as affirmative action, combined with the enforcement of
equal opportunity laws established by the federal government, directly con-
tributed to the creation of the modern black middle class.
The economic foundations for black advancement began to change in the
1970s, due to the destructive processes of what economists termed “deindustrial-
ization.” Between 1973 and 1980, over 4 million jobs disappeared in the United
States, as hundreds of American corporations moved their operations outside the
country. New York City alone lost 40,000 to 50,000 jobs in the apparel and textile
industries. Corporations increasingly divested their profits from U.S.-based sub-
sidiaries and reinvested in operations abroad. In the 1970s, over 30 million total
jobs were eliminated through factory closings, relocations, and then phased elimi-
nation of operations. The shrinking of U.S.-based industries had a deep impact on
labor unions, as the percentage of union members within the American labor force
decreased by half in only two decades. Hardest hit were African-American blue-
collar workers, because in 1983, over 27 percent of all blacks in the U.S. labor force
were union members, a significantly higher percentage than for white workers.


--- PAGE 521 ---
Concurrent with the restructuring of the capitalist economy was a worldwide
trend to dismantle the welfare state. Beginning with the 1979 election of
Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom and the triumph of mass conservation
in the United States under Ronald Reagan the following year, an antistalist phi-
losophy began to exert hegemony affecting the ways in which governments func-
tioned all over the world. With the shift to the right, the government significantly
reduced or eliminated support for many of the liberal welfare programs that had
been instituted during the previous half-century: public housing, public educa-
tion, job training, food stamps and child nutrition, and support for the indigent
and disabled. As President Reagan succinctly put the matter, government was
“not the solution, government was the problem.” The difficulty confronting black
Americans here was twofold. Historically, for all of its limitations, as a result of
mass pressure the federal government has been the chief public guarantor of civil
rights and has at times even forced the abolition of the most extreme forms of
racial domination; for example, the adoption of the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution outlawing slavery and the passage of the Civil Rights Act and Voting
Rights Act ending Jim Crow segregation. Reducing federal power and bringing
about a return to “states rights” were, at face value, potentially damaging to
blacks’ interests. Secondly, African Americans in the 1980s were heavily over-
represented as employees of the public sector. Reducing the size of the state
inevitably would mean that African Americans would experience significantly
higher levels of unemployment. Black women were especially vulnerable to the
conservative assault on the public sector. Eighty-five percent of all professional
African-American women by the early 1990s, for example, worked in three major
industries dominated by government and nonprofit employment: social services,
health care, and education.
Another factor that had an impact on black politics was the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the international Communist movement during 1989–1991.
Since the end of World War II, international politics had been defined by the
Cold War struggle between the United States and the Soviet Union. The disso-
lution of the Soviet model instantly meant that the political space for a Third
World—those non-Western states strategically positioned between capitalism
and communism—also ceased to exist. In the 1980s the United States invaded
Grenada and installed its own puppet regime, and the leftist Sandinistas lost
power in Nicaragua. By the early 1990s, Asian, African, and Caribbean states
with long histories of socialist politics were pressured to adopt “neoliberal,” mar-
ket-oriented policies and austerity measures. Social-democratic parties world-
wide shifted significantly to the right. Although no widespread movement for
communism or socialism existed in the United States, these global political
developments were profoundly felt within African-American politics. With few
models to point to, some argued that socialism, however defined, no longer rep-
resented a viable alternative to capitalism. If black people had any future, it was
argued, it was to be found in the capitalist marketplace. The traditional discourse
of the black left—“socialism,” “anti-imperialism,” “cooperative economics”—
began to lose ground to the gospel of wealth, entrepreneurship, and black capi-
4 9 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 522 ---
INTRODUCTION 4 9 1
talism. The conservative ideology of Booker T. Washington resurfaced in the age
of cyberspace.
The erosion of the public sector and the loss of millions of urban jobs con-
tributed to a significant increase in class stratification within the national black
community. The African-American community was overwhelmingly working class
in composition in the 1970s. By the late 1990s, the socioeconomic profile of black
America had changed considerably. About 51 percent of all black employees six-
teen years old and over were classified as white-collar workers. Approximately 60
percent of these were white-collar sales and clerical personnel; many in this group
were nonunion workers with limited or nonexistent benefits and wages. However,
another 20 percent of the black labor force, nearly 3 million workers, was classi-
fied as professional and technical workers and administrators. The percentage of
blue-collar workers had declined to 28 percent of the black labor force. Black
farm laborers, farmers, and agricultural managers, who in 1940 had represented
one-third of the entire black workforce, had virtually disappeared, with only
about 80,000 jobs remaining. During this period, the black business sector had
mushroomed.
By 1992 the number of black-owned businesses had grown to 621,000. The
number of black-owned real estate, insurance, and financial lending companies
had quadrupled in only fifteen years, and this sector’s total gross receipts had
increased sixfold. By the late 1990s, a small number of African-American execu-
tives had become chief executive officers and presidents of major corporations,
such as Time Warner and American Express. An even smaller number of black
celebrities—such as television personalities Oprah Winfrey and Bill Cosby, pop
star Michael Jackson, and superstar athletes such as golfer Tiger Woods, and bas-
ketball stars Michael Jordan and Earvin “Magic” Johnson—were each worth hun-
dreds of millions of dollars. For the first time in U.S. history, a “black bourgeoisie”
had come to exist.
These economic changes had profound consequences for African Americans.
Deprived of their tax revenues from industries and manufacturing companies,
city governments reduced expenditures for public institutions of all kinds—
schools, hospitals, parks, libraries, public universities, and public housing. With
the election of Ronald Reagan as president in 1980, the new conservative admin-
istration quickly moved to reduce federal government spending on urban devel-
opment and social services. The Reagan administration terminated the
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act program, a successful job training
program that had been funded in 1982 at $3.1 billion; eliminated $2 billion from
the federal food stamps program; reduced federal support for child nutrition pro-
grams by $1.7 billion over a two-year period; and closed down the Neighborhood
Self Help and Planning Assistance programs, which provided technical and finan-
cial help to inner cities. In the first year of the Reagan administration, the real
median income of all black families fell by 5.2 percent.
Also in the 1980s, a strong white backlash against civil rights expressed itself
in opposition to school desegregation in the North and growing hostility to
increased racial integration in higher education and professional occupations


--- PAGE 523 ---
through affirmative action. Millions of white Americans became convinced that
“too much” had been given to blacks in recent years. Middle-class African
Americans also encountered more subtle, yet unmistakable, patterns of racial
discrimination that severely restricted their upward mobility. Sociologist
Lawrence Bobo has described this racial ceiling on group advancement as “lais-
sez faire racism.” The examples of “laissez faire racism,” which have been docu-
mented by numerous studies, are almost endless: white car dealerships that
charge blacks hundreds of dollars more for automobiles than they do whites;
hospitals that routinely provide substandard treatment for minorities; insurance
companies that systematically charge black consumers higher rates than whites
to insure homes of identical market value; grocery store chains that transport
older produce from white suburban shopping-mall markets to groceries in pre-
dominantly black communities; the denial of employment opportunities to
blacks at senior levels of management and administration in large companies and
institutions.
Many middle-class blacks, confronted with the steady deterioration of public
services, schools, and the elimination of jobs in central cities, relocated to the sub-
urbs. However, because white real estate firms, banks, and financial lending insti-
tutions continued informal policies of residential discrimination, many upper- to
middle-income blacks found themselves moving from segregated ghettoes to
racially segregated suburbs or planned communities. Black working-class families
without the material resources or credit to purchase homes outside economically
depressed areas found themselves living in what, at times, had become almost
urban wastelands.
In huge districts of America’s major cities, neighborhoods had become des-
perately poor—Chicago’s South Side, East New York in Brooklyn, the South
Bronx, South Central Los Angeles, East Oakland, and nearly all of Detroit.
Families attempting to upgrade their residences or start businesses in these
neighborhoods were forced to rely on “predatory lenders,” finance companies
charging outrageously high interest rates on borrowed money. In such inner city
communities, businesses of nearly every type, other than personal services such
as restaurants, barber shops, beauty salons, and funeral homes largely disap-
peared. By the 1990s in many inner cities, between one-third to one-half of a
neighborhood’s total adult population was no longer in the paid labor force.
Millions survived in the informal economy, generating a subsistence income
through activities as diverse as braiding hair, childcare, collecting and selling recy-
clable bottles and cans, catering food, auto repair, moving, producing and selling
crafts, and so on. For many who had once held stable blue-color jobs, low-wage
service jobs, such as in the fast-food industry, were among the few alternatives.
Such widespread poverty, such intense patterns of unemployment, hunger and
homelessness, as well as the growth of global markets in drugs and arms, fostered
the trafficking in illegal drugs. In the early 1980s, a new addictive product,
“crack,” a rock-type of cocaine, was introduced into inner-city neighborhoods.
Unlike powdered cocaine, the fashionable drug of choice of the wealthy, crack
4 9 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 524 ---
INTRODUCTION 4 9 3
was very inexpensive, readily available, and highly addictive. Within a few years,
several hundred thousand African Americans had become addicted to crack, and
relatively few drug treatment centers were available. With the decline in employ-
ment and educational opportunities, some young people saw selling drugs as the
only way to make a decent income, and violence, once relatively rare in black
working-class communities, increased significantly. Although several inner-city
communities became the marketplace for the lucrative international traffic in ille-
gal substances, the overwhelming bulk of the profits were reaped by those out-
side these communities, such as international crime cartels and the banks that
launder their money. Inner-city communities became the targets of police sweeps
and searches. Though a minority of young men were actively involved in criminal
activities connected with the drug traffic, virtually all black male youth were sub-
ject to being stigmatized as criminals by the police and media.
Federal and state governments responded by making the penalties for drug
sale and possession more severe, by eliminating parole, and by constructing a vast
network of new prisons. Legislatures passed new mandatory minimum sentenc-
ing laws, requiring convicted felons to serve lengthy prison terms before becom-
ing eligible for release. Juveniles were increasingly treated as adults, and were
subjected to many of the same penalties. Developments in New York State dur-
ing these years were typical of what occurred throughout the nation. Between
1817 and 1981, the state had constructed thirty-three prisons; between 1981 and
1999, it built thirty-eight new correctional facilities. New York’s prison population
grew in two decades from 13,500 to 74,000.
Throughout the country, the total population of prisoners reached 650,000 in
1983, 1 million in 1990, and 2 million by 2001. One-half of these prisoners were
African Americans. By 2000, one-third of all black males in their twenties were
under the control of the criminal justice system, either in prison or jail, on parole,
probation, or awaiting trial. The major reason for this disproportion in incarcera-
tion was the stark racism that pervaded the criminal justice system. Though
African Americans in 2002 constituted approximately 14 percent of all illegal drug
users, they comprised approximately one-third of all drug arrests and over 50 per-
cent of all drug convictions in federal and state courts. The socioeconomic and
political consequences of mass incarceration for the black community have been
profound. Several million black households have been destroyed; tens of thou-
sands of black children separated from their parents and raised in foster care. In
seven states as of 2005, convicted felons lost the right to vote for life, and as a
result, by 2000 over 1.4 million African Americans had been permanently disen-
franchised. For several million blacks with criminal records, better paying jobs
were no longer available even years after their release and rehabilitation. Inside
prisons, however, incarcerated African Americans organized a wide variety of
resistance activities (document 15).
Despite these unprecedented challenges, African Americans in the 1980s col-
lectively initiated a series of highly successful resistance movements. In electoral
politics at the local level, the most significant of these was represented by Harold


--- PAGE 525 ---
Washington. For nearly fifty years the Cook County Democratic Party machine
had controlled municipal government in Chicago by manipulating votes and using
corrupt patronage and graft. Under Chicago political boss Mayor Richard Daley
the black community was severely disadvantaged; schools were underfunded and
public services were unequally distributed. In 1982 a coalition of largely black
community organizations convinced Congressman Washington to challenge the
Democratic machine. Washington forged an unprecedented coalition of blacks,
Latinos, labor, progressive whites, and other constituencies, sometimes referred
to as a “rainbow coalition,” and, in a three-way race, Washington defeated incum-
bent mayor Jane Byrne, and Richard M. Daley, the son of the former mayor, to
win the Democratic Party’s nomination. In the general election on April 12, 1983,
Washington defeated Republican challenger Bernard Upton to become the first
African-American mayor of Chicago (see document 3). As mayor, Washington
tried to eliminate corruption, made city government more transparent, forged
coalitions with neighborhood groups, expanded city services in minority neigh-
borhoods, and restored the city’s financial health through a property tax increase.
Reelected in 1987, Washington died of a heart attack on November 25 of that
same year.
The advances achieved by politicians like Washington pressured local and
national politics to give greater priority to African-American issues, and set the
stage for the 1984 presidential campaign of Jesse Jackson. Becoming involved in
the civil rights movement first through CORE, Jackson had joined the SCLC and
soon became a protégé of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. After King’s assassination,
Jackson launched Operation PUSH (People United to Save Humanity), which
created “corporate covenants” and other business-related partnerships that pro-
duced jobs and expanded black entrepreneurship.
In 1983, Jackson announced his candidacy for the Democratic Party’s presi-
dential nomination. Many black elected officials and prominent civil rights lead-
ers, including Coretta Scott King and Andrew Young, opposed Jackson’s candi-
dacy. However, he successfully built an interracial coalition similar to Harold
Washington’s, which included blacks, Latinos, lesbians and gays, environmental-
ists, peace activists, progressives from organized labor, and many others. In 1984,
Jackson lost the three-way Democratic primary to Walter F. Mondale, but his
“Rainbow Coalition” won him 3.5 million popular votes, making him the first seri-
ous African-American challenger for the presidency.
The success of Jackson’s 1984 presidential campaign created widespread sup-
port for his second effort to capture the Democratic Party’s nomination four years
later. Jackson’s Rainbow Coalition called for federal initiatives to address unem-
ployment, health, education, housing, and urban problems. The campaign mobi-
lized an unprecedented interracial coalition and prompted hundreds of thousands
of new black voters to register. Jackson received over 7 million popular votes—
from 4 million African Americans and an additional 3 million whites, Asians, and
Latinos, and won a series of primary contests. Jackson narrowly lost the nomina-
tion, however, to Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis, who was subse-
4 9 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 526 ---
INTRODUCTION 4 9 5
quently defeated in the general election by Republican candidate George H. W.
Bush (document 7).
Another issue central to black activism in the 1980s and early 1990s was South
Africa. The Reagan administration initiated a policy of “constructive engagement”
with the apartheid regime of South Africa, encouraging American investment in
the country, thus providing economic support for the white-minority state. This
prompted demonstrations against apartheid and U.S. investment in South Africa.
Following Reagan’s reelection in 1984, several groups of black progressive—
nationalists, integrationists, and transformationalists—mapped out strategies to
attack the administration’s links with apartheid South Africa. The best known of
these groups was led by Randall Robinson, executive director of TransAfrica;
Mary Frances Berry, a civil rights commissioner; and District of Columbia con-
gressman Walter Fauntroy. The coalition leaders staged a small, symbolic demon-
stration in front of the South African embassy in late November 1984, and they
were “pleasantly surprised” when officials panicked and called the police. Their
arrests sparked hundreds of nonviolent demonstrations across the United States.
Within two weeks, protests involving hundreds of thousands of people were
staged at South African consulates in more than one dozen cities, including Salt
Lake City, Boston, Chicago, and Houston (see document 6).
On college campuses, hundreds of thousands of students demonstrated against
universities and corporations that did business inside South Africa. Divestment
legislation amounting to $400 million in public funds was secured in
Massachusetts, Connecticut, Michigan, Maryland, Philadelphia, and a dozen
other smaller cities in 1985. Jesse Jackson challenged the Democratic leadership
to demand immediate freedom for Nelson Mandela, the political spokesperson
for the African National Congress (ANC) and future South African president,
who had been imprisoned on Robben’s Island for over two decades. Other black
congressmen pressured for the release of other political prisoners as well.
Successful models of black political resistance also emerged from African-
American popular culture. In the 1970s a new urban-based cultural movement
popularly termed hip-hop emerged. The core elements of hip-hop culture
include graffiti, break dancing, emceeing, deejaying, and rap music, which is
based on the spoken word and its interplay with the musical beat. To many, rap’s
jarring style and frequent use of profanity was difficult to understand. However,
for many young blacks and Latinos born after the civil rights and Black Power
period, hip-hop embodied their own feelings and expressions about the nature of
contemporary society. Created in the context of poverty, high unemployment, and
the drug epidemic in inner cities, rap was a means through which to give voice to
a generation’s critique of their own marginalization from mainstream society.
Militant, edgy, and radical in their lyrics, hip-hop artists used their records as a
platform to address the inequities of the establishment. Such artists as Afrika
Bambataa and the Zulu Nation, Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, who
were later termed “old school rap” artists, were unscrupulously exploited by man-
agers and music business executives. In 1982, twenty-two-year-old rapper Chuck


--- PAGE 527 ---
D. (Clareton Ridenhower) formed the group Public Enemy, which signed a con-
tract with Def Jam Records. Public Enemy’s second album, It Takes a Nation of
Millions to Hold Us Back, was a bold and provocative statement of revolutionary
politics.
In the 1990s, progressive artists such as Public Enemy, KRS One, a Tribe
Called Quest, and Mos Def spoke about AIDS/HIV awareness, called for an end
to black-on-black violence, encouraged voter registration, and campaigned against
budget cuts in public schools. Black female rap artists such as Sister Souljah, Salt-
n-Pepa, and Queen Latifah provided powerful images of self-confidence and
activism for millions of young African-American women. Successful hip-hop entre-
preneur Russell Simmons, cofounder of Def Jam records, initiated campaigns to
promote voting among black youth and to oppose the privatization of public
schools and a public educational effort to debate the issue of “black reparations,”
the question of whether African Americans should finally be compensated for cen-
turies of enslavement and Jim Crow segregation (document 18).
By the mid-1990s, in response to the escalating prison industrial complex and
epidemic of police brutality, many African Americans concluded that a new kind
of social protest was necessary, to promote black pride, personal responsibility,
and collective empowerment. These efforts crystallized in 1994–1995 around
Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan’s call for a “Million Man March.” On
October 16, 1995, approximately one million participants poured into the
Washington Mall from all over the United States. It was without question the
largest single gathering of black people in U.S. history. Studies indicated that the
participants were mostly of the middle class, older, and had a proportionally
higher level of education than black men in general. The march was, for many, an
emotional event that symbolized the coming together of black men across gener-
ations, rededicated to a common social and political project of atonement, per-
sonal responsibility, and collective empowerment. Speakers who ranged from
religious leaders to community activists, addressed issues of education, racism,
welfare, and other community issues. This perhaps explains the popular slogan in
support of the mobilization: “Farrakhan may have called the March, but the
March belongs to us (document 13).”
Black feminists condemned the patriarchy and homophobia prevalent in much
of the mobilization’s literature. Others praised the objective of the March but crit-
icized Farrakhan for anti-Semitism and racism. Still others objected to the
emphasis on “atonement” at a time when the Republican-controlled Congress
was eliminating programs designed to help the black community. Nevertheless, it
had an important impact on raising awareness about the continued struggle
against structural inequalities. Within the next year, over 1.5 million additional
black men had registered to vote.
As the conservative nationalists briefly took center stage, the revolutionary
nationalists had become largely marginalized. With the government-sponsored
destruction of the Black Panthers and the demise of radical groups such as the
League of Revolutionary Black Workers, the revolutionary nationalists sought to
4 9 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 528 ---
INTRODUCTION 4 9 7
reconstitute themselves as a viable political force. In 1980, two progressive
nationalist groups emerged: in Brooklyn, the National Black United Front
(NBLU), led by the Reverend Herbert Daughtry, and in Philadelphia, the
National Black Independent Political Party (NBIPP), which included activists
Ronald Daniels and Benjamin Chavis. After attracting several thousand support-
ers but only achieving modest success, NBIPP disappeared in the mid-1980s, and
NBUF largely declined as a political force several years later. The two most
prominent revolutionary nationalists in this period were political prisoners who
had become internationally known. Assata Shakur, a former activist in the Black
Panther Party, escaped from prison and in the early 1980s found political asylum
in Cuba. Her moving portrait of the plight of African-American women prisoners
presented here gives some insights into her radical political philosophy (docu-
ment 2).
America’s most celebrated and controversial prisoner on death row in the
1990s was unquestionably Mumia Abu-Jamal. Also a former member of the Black
Panther Party, Jamal was convicted of the murder of a Philadelphia police officer.
Despite substantial evidence of witness tampering and illegal activities by prose-
cutors and police, Jamal was denied a new trial. Yet from the isolation of his
prison cell on death row, Jamal’s articulate voice and powerful prose found an
international audience (document 14).
Some of the most powerful and original critiques of racialized inequality dur-
ing these years were produced by African-American feminists. The Combahee
River Collective statement, originally written in the spring of 1977, reflected the
core ideas behind this new feminist movement. The statement envisioned a poli-
tics of black liberation that simultaneously challenged sexism, homophobia,
racism, and class exploitation at every level of society (document 1). The
Combahee River Collective Statement was soon followed by a series of black fem-
inist theoretical works and collections of social essays that powerfully reshaped
the entire black left. Some of the major works included Michele Wallace’s Black
Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman, bell hooks’s Ain’t I a Woman and
Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (see document 5), Patricia Hill Collins’s
Black Feminist Thought , Barbara Smith’s wonderfully titled anthology, All the
Women Are White, All the Blacks are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave: Black
Women’s Studies, and Angela Davis’s Women, Race and Class. One of the most
popular black feminist intellectuals was Audre Lorde. A lesbian, feminist, 
and revolutionary, Lorde wrote poetry and social essays with such grace and clar-
ity that she motivated and appealed to very diverse audiences (document 4). 
The development of black feminist thought in universities was paralleled by 
the growth of black women’s leadership in thousands of community-based, 
grassroots-oriented organizations at the neighborhood level throughout the
United States.
The transformationist, black-radical tradition had not disappeared, despite the
political defeats and losses in previous years. It has been evident in the militant
role played by African-American workers in bringing about significant changes in


--- PAGE 529 ---
the AFL-CIO, as well as in the successful struggle for a free South Africa. In the
late 1990s, it attempted to reconstitute itself as a vital political force once again.
In the aftermath of the Million Man March, a small group of African-American
political activists, intellectuals, and leaders from labor, lesbian-gay, feminist, rev-
olutionary nationalist, and Marxist organizations initiated a call for a Black Radical
Congress (BRC), a national gathering of black progressive forces. At the
Congress, which was held in Chicago on June 19–21, 1998, more than 2,000
activists who self-identified with radical anticapitalist politics came together. A
nationwide network of BRC local organizing committees was formed, involving
members in various local and national campaigns against police brutality, for full
employment, and in efforts to halt the execution of Mumia Abu-Jamal. The BRC’s
“Call to the Congress,” “Principles of Unity,” and “Freedom Agenda” presented
the basic political beliefs that could unify a broadly diverse group of activists (doc-
ument 16).
As the twenty-first century dawned, American politics took a sharp turn to the
right with two events: the narrow electoral victory of Republican George W. Bush
as president in 2000 (see document 17), and the terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon, on September 11, 2001 (see
document 20). The attacks on 9/11 prompted the U.S. government to pass laws
severely restricting civil liberties and constitutional rights. Many Americans who
were of Middle Eastern descent, or were identified as Muslims, were subjected
to harassment, surveillance, and even arrest. As the United States launched its
military invasion of Iraq in 2003, African-American opposition quickly became
overwhelming (document 20). In terms of racial relations, the campaign in Iraq
provoked waves of American xenophobia and intolerance. The “war on terror”
had created in the United States a new “Racialized Other”—who was Muslim or
Middle Eastern in background.
As many African Americans fought to end U.S. military involvement in Iraq
and to remove the Republican-controlled Congress, there continued to be
reminders that the United States remained a structurally racist society. The most
vivid example of this was provided by the Hurricane Katrina crisis of
August–September 2005. The areas most devastated by Hurricane Katrina were
Louisiana, Mississippi, and southwestern Alabama. By any standard, in terms of
tens of billions of dollars in property damage and over one thousand lives lost, it
was the largest natural disaster in U.S. history. The most heavily damaged major
urban center that the storm affected was New Orleans, a city with an unrivaled
historical tradition of black music and culture.
After the disaster struck New Orleans, President George W. Bush defensively
argued that no one could have possibly anticipated the flooding experienced
throughout much of the city, despite the fact that a number of scientists and
investigative reporters had, for years, predicted that such a catastrophe was
inevitable. But what made the New Orleans tragedy an “unnatural disaster” was
the federal government’s gross incompetence and indifference in taking the nec-
essary measures to preserve the lives and property of hundreds of thousands of its
citizens.
4 9 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 530 ---
INTRODUCTION 4 9 9
Even before Hurricane Katrina struck, it was obvious that the overwhelming
majority of New Orleans residents who would be trapped inside the city to face
the deluge would be poor and working-class African Americans, who comprised
nearly 70 percent of the city’s population. As the levees collapsed and the city’s
predominantly black Ninth Ward flooded, thousands of evacuees were herded
into the Superdome and Convention Center, where they were forced to endure
days without toilets and running water, food, electricity, and medical help.
Hundreds of black evacuees seeking escape on a bridge across the Mississippi
River were confronted and forcibly pushed back into the city. Much of the media
coverage cruelly manipulated racist stereotypes in its reports. The barrage of
racialized images of a terrorized crime-engulfed city prompted hundreds of white
ambulance drivers and emergency personnel to refuse to enter the New Orleans
disaster zone. Television reports locally and nationally quickly proliferated false
exposés about “babies in the Convention Center who got their throats cut” and
“armed hordes” hijacking ambulances and trucks.
Nationally, most African-American leaders, public officials, and intellectuals
were overwhelmed and outraged by the flood of racist stereotypes in the media,
and their government’s appalling inaction in the rescuing of poor black people.
African Americans were stunned and perplexed by white America’s general apa-
thy and denial about the racial implications of the Katrina catastrophe. But the
racial stigmatization of New Orleans’s outcasts forced many African Americans to
ponder whether their government and white institutions had become incapable
of expressing true compassion for the suffering of their people (document 23).
In 2007–2008, the presidential campaign of Democratic Illinois senator
Barack Obama represented one of the innovative challenges by people of African
descent to the structure of white privilege and power in America. Unlike Jackson’s
protest-oriented presidential campaigns of 1984 and 1988, the Obama campaign
was from the beginning both pragmatic and ideologically liberal-progressive.
Along with a new generation of African-American leaders—such as Massa-
chusetts governor Deval Patrick and Newark, New Jersey, mayor Corey Booker—
Obama espoused a race-neutral politics, minimizing discussions about blacks’
grievances while emphasizing the common ground shared by Americans regard-
less of race, ethnicity, class, or gender. Despite Obama’s relatively moderate pol-
itics, many conservative pundits sought to exploit Islamophobia and racial bigotry
from the beginning of his campaign. Because Obama’s father had been a Kenyan
of Muslim descent, critics falsely charged that Obama, a Christian, was secretly a
Muslim, and even a possible terrorist. Another controversy that nearly destroyed
Obama’s campaign was the provocative statements of the candidate’s former pas-
tor, the Reverend Jeremiah Wright. Obama’s response to the Wright controversy
was a brilliant address, “A More Perfect Union,” which critics praised as the most
powerful and thoughtful statement about the meaning of race in American life
since Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s, “I Have A Dream” speech, delivered at the
March on Washington, D.C. (document 25).
Defeating his major opponent, New York senator Hillary Rodham Clinton,
Obama captured the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in August 2008.


--- PAGE 531 ---
Many still doubted the ability of an African American to be elected to the U.S.
presidency, citing previous gubernatorial and mayoral elections in which African-
American candidates received far fewer votes from whites than voter surveys had
predicted. However, on November 4, 2008, the U.S. electorate made history by
electing the first African American, Barack Obama, as the nation’s chief executive.
Winning with a margin of nearly 53 percent—the largest vote of any Democratic
presidential candidate since Lyndon Johnson in 1964—Obama’s triumph was pro-
duced by a combination of old-fashioned coalition building and new age technol-
ogy. He captured between 95 and 97 percent of all African-American voters, as
well as a substantial share of the vote from other racialized minorities, including
67 percent of Latinos and 62 percent of Asian Americans. Jewish voters over-
whelmingly backed Obama with 78 percent of their votes. The charismatic can-
didate won 62 percent from young voters (ages 18–29) and 58 percent from
women voters. Supported by the major trade unions, Obama also appealed as well
to more educated affluent voters. He won a majority of voters earning over
$250,000 annually and held an 18-point margin over his Republican opponent,
senator John McCain, among voters with advanced academic and professional
degrees. Obama’s electoral victory sparked hundreds, and probably thousands, of
spontaneous celebrations and street parties across the country.
Less widely recognized was that a crucial dimension of Obama’s victory was his
ability to appeal to moderate Republicans and independents. Roughly one-sixth of
Americans who had voted for George W. Bush in 2000 and/or 2004 voted for Obama
in 2008. Throughout his presidential campaign, Obama explicitly refused to attack
the Republican Party, per se, focusing criticisms on either McCain, the Republican
right wing, or Republican policies. Obama’s campaign recognized that in the wake of
political disasters such as the unpopular Iraq War, and the federal mishandling of
Hurricane Katrina in 2005, many voters longed for a politics that transcended parti-
san divisions. Obama’s race-neutrality and demeanor of cool competency reassured
millions of white Americans, allowing them to vote for a “black candidate.”
Does the emergence of Barack Obama represent the possibility of a “post-
racial America,” a society that transcends its historic racial divide of structural
inequality? Despite this extraordinary accomplishment, it is imperative to distin-
guish between the elevation of individuals and the material realities of black daily
life in twenty-first-century America. In addition to support from a mass move-
ment, Obama’s victory was made possible, in part, by his brilliant oratory and his
ability to reframe issues in ways that brought diverse constituencies together. This
was clearly represented by Obama’s keynote address at the 2004 Democratic
Party National Convention, as well as his later address, “A More Perfect Union”
(document 25). Obama has assumed a historic role similar to that of Nelson
Mandela of South Africa, an inspirational, charismatic leader of African descent
who advances a politics of racial reconciliation, human rights, and color-blind
cooperation. One major concern is whether the extraordinary hopes and expecta-
tions of Obama’s millions of admirers can be addressed by an administration chal-
lenged by a severe economic recession and wars abroad.
5 0 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 532 ---
INTRODUCTION 5 0 1
It is sometimes stated that the only constant in politics is change. The African-
American people, now numbering over 42 million, represent a virtual nation
within a nation, possessing its own rich traditions of culture, social organization,
rituals and beliefs, and modes of political struggle. The history of black American
social and political thought is a history of vast change and transformation through
slavery, segregation, and ghettoization. Yet it is also a story of long memory, of
political cultures of continuity and institutional developments transcending gen-
erations. The ideologies of integration, black nationalism, and radical transforma-
tion have in different ways and over time spoken to a common project—the
achievement of full and unconditional freedom for black people. Throughout
each phase of struggle, through long storms of oppression, black folk have found
courage in the enduring belief that they would never be turned around, that the
struggle for freedom would continue, and that it could one day be won.
O1 O
Black Feminisms: Combahee River Collective Statement, 1977
The Combahee River Collective was formed by a group of black feminists in Boston
in 1974, and the organization lasted until about 1980. The following statement was
a reflection of collective thinking, drafted by Barbara Smith, a prominent black les-
bian feminist author and activist, with help from Demita Frazier and Beverly Smith.
Although the statement originally appeared in Zilla Eisenstein’s anthology,
Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism (1977), it has been
reprinted on several other occasions and remains among the most important artic-
ulations of black feminist theory and practice. The Combahee River Collective
addressed the ways that racism, sexism, classism, and heterosexism all work to per-
petuate each other and much of their work reflected the goals of other black femi-
nist groups such as the National Black Feminist Organization (NBFO) and Black
Women Organized for Action (BWOFA).
O
We are a collective of black feminists who have been meeting together since
1974. During that time we have been involved in the process of defining and
clarifying our politics, while at the same time doing political work within our
own group and in coalition with other progressive organizations and move-
ments. The most general statement of our politics at the present time would be
that we are actively committed to struggling against racial, sexual, heterosexual,
and class oppression and see as our particular task the development of inte-
grated analysis and practice based upon the fact that the major systems of


--- PAGE 533 ---
oppression are interlocking. The synthesis of these oppressions creates the con-
ditions of our lives. As black women we see black feminism as the logical polit-
ical movement to combat the manifold and simultaneous oppressions that all
women of color face.
We will discuss four major topics in the paper that follows: (1) The genesis of
contemporary black feminism; (2) what we believe, i.e., the specific province of
our politics; (3) the problems in organizing black feminists, including a brief her-
story of our collective; and (4) black feminist issues and practice.
1. The Genesis of Contemporary Black Feminism
Before looking at the recent development of black feminism, we would like to
affirm that we find our origins in the historical reality of Afro-American women’s
continuous life-and-death struggle for survival and liberation. Black women’s
extremely negative relationship to the American political system (a system of
white male rule) has always been determined by our membership in two
oppressed racial and sexual castes. As Angela Davis points out in “Reflections on
the Black Woman’s Role in the Community of Slaves,” black women have always
embodied, if only in their physical manifestation, an adversary stance to white
male rule and have actively resisted its inroads upon them and their communities
in both dramatic and subtle ways. There have always been black women
activists—some known, like Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Frances E. W.
Harper, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, and Mary Church Terrell, and thousands upon
thousands unknown—who had a shared awareness of how their sexual identity
combined with their racial identity to make their whole life situation and the
focus of their political struggles unique. Contemporary black feminism is the out-
growth of countless generations of personal sacrifice, militancy, and work by our
mothers and sisters.
A black feminist presence has evolved most obviously in connection with the sec-
ond wave of the American women’s movement beginning in the late 1960s. Black,
other Third World, and working women have been involved in the feminist move-
ment from its start, but both outside reactionary forces and racism and elitism within
the movement itself have served to obscure our participation. In 1973 black femi-
nists, primarily located in New York, felt the necessity of forming a separate black
feminist group. This became the National Black Feminist Organization (NBFO).
Black feminist politics also have an obvious connection to movements for black
liberation, particularly those of the 1960s and 1970s. Many of us were active in
those movements (civil rights, black nationalism, the Black Panthers), and all of
our lives were greatly affected and changed by their ideology, their goals, and the
tactics used to achieve their goals. It was our experience and disillusionment
within these liberation movements, as well as experience on the periphery of the
white male left, that led to the need to develop a politics that was antiracist, unlike
those of white women, and antisexist, unlike those of black and white men.
There is also undeniably a personal genesis for black feminism, that is, the
political realization that comes from the seemingly personal experiences of indi-
5 0 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 534 ---
COMBAHEE RIVER COLLECTIVE STATEMENT 5 0 3
vidual black women’s lives. Black feminists and many more black women who do
not define themselves as feminists have all experienced sexual oppression as a
constant factor in our day-to-day existence.
Black feminists often talk about their feelings of craziness before becoming
conscious of the concepts of sexual politics, patriarchal rule, and, most impor-
tantly, feminism, the political analysis and practice that we women use to struggle
against our oppression. The fact that racial politics and indeed racism are perva-
sive factors in our lives did not allow us, and still does not allow most black
women, to look more deeply into our own experiences and define those things
that make our lives what they are and our oppression specific to us. In the process
of consciousness-raising, actually life-sharing, we began to recognize the com-
monality of our experiences and, from that sharing and growing consciousness, to
build a politics that will change our lives and inevitably end our oppression.
Our development also must be tied to the contemporary economic and politi-
cal position of black people. The post–World War II generation of black youth was
the first to be able to minimally partake of certain educational and employment
options, previously closed completely to black people. Although our economic
position is still at the very bottom of the American capitalist economy, a handful of
us have been able to gain certain tools as a result of tokenism in education and
employment which potentially enable us to more effectively fight our oppression.
A combined antiracist and antisexist position drew us together initially, and as
we developed politically we addressed ourselves to heterosexism and economic
oppression under capitalism.
2. What We Believe
Above all else, our politics initially sprang from the shared belief that black
women are inherently valuable, that our liberation is a necessity not as an adjunct
to somebody else’s but because of our need as human persons for autonomy. This
may seem so obvious as to sound simplistic, but it is apparent that no other osten-
sibly progressive movement has ever considered our specific oppression a prior-
ity or worked seriously for the ending of that oppression. Merely naming the pejo-
rative stereotypes attributed to black women (e.g., mammy, matriarch, Sapphire,
whore, bulldagger), let alone cataloguing the cruel, often murderous, treatment
we receive, indicates how little value has been placed upon our lives during four
centuries of bondage in the Western hemisphere. We realize that the only people
who care enough about us to work consistently for our liberation is us. Our poli-
tics evolve from a healthy love for ourselves, our sisters, and our community
which allows us to continue our struggle and work.
This focusing upon our own oppression is embodied in the concept of identity
politics. We believe that the most profound and potentially the most radical poli-
tics come directly out of our own identity, as opposed to working to end some-
body else’s oppression. In the case of black women this is a particularly repugnant,
dangerous, threatening, and therefore revolutionary concept because it is obvious
from looking at all the political movements that have preceded us that anyone is


--- PAGE 535 ---
more worthy of liberation than ourselves. We reject pedestals, queenhood, and
walking ten paces behind. To be recognized as human, levelly human, is enough.
We believe that sexual politics under patriarchy is as pervasive in black
women’s lives as are the politics of class and race. We also often find it difficult to
separate race from class from sex oppression because in our lives they are most
often experienced simultaneously. We know that there is such a thing as racial-
sexual oppression which is neither solely racial nor solely sexual, e.g., the history
of rape of black women by white men as a weapon of political repression.
Although we are feminists and lesbians, we feel solidarity with progressive black
men and do not advocate the fractionalization that white women who are separatists
demand. Our situation as black people necessitates that we have solidarity around
the fact of race, which white women of course do not need to have with white men,
unless it is their negative solidarity as racial oppressors. We struggle together with
black men against racism, while we also struggle with black men about sexism.
We realize that the liberation of all oppressed peoples necessitates the destruc-
tion of the political-economic systems of capitalism and imperialism as well as
patriarchy. We are socialists because we believe the work must be organized for
the collective benefit of those who do the work and create the products and not
for the profit of the bosses. Material resources must be equally distributed among
those who create these resources. We are not convinced, however, that a socialist
revolution that is not also a feminist and antiracist revolution will guarantee our
liberation. We have arrived at the necessity for developing an understanding of
class relationships that takes into account the specific class position of black
women who are generally marginal in the labor force, while at this particular time
some of us are temporarily viewed as doubly desirable tokens at white-collar and
professional levels. We need to articulate the real class situation of persons who are
not merely raceless, sexless workers, but for whom racial and sexual oppression are
significant determinants in their working/economic lives. Although we are in
essential agreement with Marx’s theory as it applied to the very specific economic
relationships he analyzed, we know that this analysis must be extended further in
order for us to understand our specific economic situation as black women.
A political contribution which we feel we have already made is the expansion of
the feminist principle that the personal is political. In our consciousness-raising ses-
sions, for example, we have in many ways gone beyond white women’s revelations
because we are dealing with the implications of race and class as well as sex. Even
our black women’s style of talking/testifying in black language about what we have
experienced has a resonance that is both cultural and political. We have spent a great
deal of energy delving into the cultural and experiential nature of our oppression out
of necessity because none of these matters have ever been looked at before. No one
before has ever examined the multilayered texture of black women’s lives.
As we have already stated, we reject the stance of lesbian separatism because
it is not a viable political analysis or strategy for us. It leaves out far too much and
far too many people, particularly black men, women, and children. We have a
great deal of criticism and loathing for what men have been socialized to be in this
5 0 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 536 ---
COMBAHEE RIVER COLLECTIVE STATEMENT 5 0 5
society: what they support, how they act, and how they oppress. But we do not
have the misguided notion that it is their maleness, per se—i.e., their biological
maleness—that makes them what they are. As black women we find any type of
biological determinism a particularly dangerous and reactionary basis upon which
to build a politic. We must also question whether lesbian separatism is an ade-
quate and progressive political analysis and strategy, even for those who practice
it, since it so completely denies any but the sexual sources of women’s oppression,
negating the facts of class and race.
3. Problems in Organizing Black Feminists
During our years together as a black feminist collective we have experienced success
and defeat, joy and pain, victory and failure. We have found that it is very difficult to
organize around black feminist issues, difficult even to announce in certain contexts
that we are black feminists. We have tried to think about the reasons for our diffi-
culties, particularly since the white women’s movement continues to be strong and
to grow in many directions. In this section we will discuss some of the general rea-
sons for the organizing problems we face and also talk specifically about the stages
in organizing our own collective.
The major source of difficulty in our political work is that we are not just try-
ing to fight oppression on one front or even two, but instead to address a whole
range of oppressions. We do not have racial, sexual, heterosexual, or class privi-
lege to rely upon, nor do we have even the minimal access to resources and power
that groups who possess any one of these types of privilege have. . . .
Feminism is, nevertheless, very threatening to the majority of black people
because it calls into question some of the most basic assumptions about our exis-
tence, i.e., that gender should be a determinant of power relationships. Here is
the way male and female roles were defined in a black nationalist pamphlet from
the early 1970s.
We understand that it is and has been traditional that the man is the head of the
house. He is the leader of the house/nation because his knowledge of the world
is broader, his awareness is greater, his understanding is fuller and his application
of this information is wiser. . . . After all, it is only reasonable that the man be the
head of the house because he is able to defend and protect the development of
his home. . . . Women cannot do the same things as men—they are made by
nature to function differently. Equality of men and women is something that can-
not happen even in the abstract world. Men are not equal to other men, i.e., abil-
ity, experience, or even understanding. The value of men and women can be seen
as in the value of gold and silver—they are not equal but both have great value.
We must realize that men and women are a complement to each other because
there is no house/family without a man and his wife. Both are essential to the
development of any life.
The material conditions of most black women would hardly lead them to upset
both economic and sexual arrangements that seem to represent some stability in
their lives. Many black women have a good understanding of both sexism and


--- PAGE 537 ---
racism, but because of the everyday constrictions of their lives cannot risk strug-
gling against them both.
The reaction of black men to feminism has been notoriously negative. They are,
of course, even more threatened than black women by the possibility that black
feminists might organize around our own needs. They realize that they might not
only lose valuable and hard-working allies in their struggles but that they might also
be forced to change their habitually sexist ways of interacting with and oppressing
black women. Accusations that black feminism divides the black struggle are pow-
erful deterrents to the growth of an autonomous black women’s movement.
Still, hundreds of women have been active at different times during the three-
year existence of our group. And every black woman who came, came out of a
strongly felt need for some level of possibility that did not previously exist in her
life. . . .
4. Black Feminist Issues and Practice
During our time together we have identified and worked on many issues of par-
ticular relevance to black women. The inclusiveness of our politics makes us con-
cerned with any situation that impinges upon the lives of women, Third World,
and working people. We are of course particularly committed to working on those
struggles in which race, sex, and class are simultaneous factors in oppression. We
might, for example, become involved in workplace organizing at a factory that
employs Third World women or picket a hospital that is cutting back on already
inadequate health care to a Third World community, or set up a rape crisis cen-
ter in a black neighborhood. Organizing around welfare or daycare concerns
might also be a focus. The work to be done and the countless issues that this work
represents merely reflect the pervasiveness of our oppression.
Issues and projects that collective members have actually worked on are ster-
ilization abuse, abortion rights, battered women, rape, and health care. We have
also done many workshops and educationals on black feminism on college cam-
puses, at women’s conferences, and most recently for high school women.
One issue that is of major concern to us and that we have begun to publicly
address is racism in the white women’s movement. As black feminists we are
made constantly and painfully aware of how little effort white women have made
to understand and combat their racism, which requires among other things that
they have a more than superficial comprehension of race, color, and black history
and culture. Eliminating racism in the white women’s movement is by definition
work for white women to do, but we will continue to speak to and demand
accountability on this issue.
In the practice of our politics we do not believe that the end always justifies
the means. Many reactionary and destructive acts have been done in the name
of achieving “correct” political goals. As feminists we do not want to mess over
people in the name of politics. We believe in collective process and a nonhierar-
chical distribution of power within our own group and in our vision of a revolu-
tionary society. We are committed to a continual examination of our politics as
5 0 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 538 ---
A. SHAKUR, “WOMEN IN PRISON: HOW WE ARE” 5 0 7
they develop through criticism and self-criticism as an essential aspect of our
practice. As black feminists and lesbians we know that we have a very definite
revolutionary task to perform and we are ready for the lifetime of work and strug-
gle before us.
Source: “Combahee River Collective: A Black Feminist Statement,” copyright 1979 by Zilla
R. Eisenstein. Reprinted by permission of the Monthly Review Foundation.
O2 O
“Women in Prison: How We Are,” Assata Shakur, 1978
Born Joanne Chesimard, Assata Shakur (1947– ) was a Black Panther and a leader
in the Black Liberation Army (BLA) during the early 1970s. As a result, she was
subject to systematic surveillance, harassment, and attack by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation’s infamous COINTELPRO operation. Between 1971 and 1973
she was arraigned and tried seven different times for alleged crimes, ranging from
bank robbery to kidnapping to murder, and yet none of the charges led to convic-
tion. In 1973, however, she was captured on the New Jersey State Turnpike after
a shootout in which a state trooper and a Black Panther were killed. In 1977 she
was convicted of murder by an all-white jury in a highly disputed trial and handed
a life sentence. Shakur has always maintained her innocence. She escaped from
prison in 1979 and has been living in Cuba since 1986.
O
We sit in the bull pen. We are all black. All restless. And we are all freezing. When
we ask, the matron tells us that the heating system cannot be adjusted. All of us,
with the exception of a woman, tall and gaunt, who looks naked and ravished, have
refused the bologna sandwiches. The rest of us sit drinking bitter, syrupy tea. . . .
There are no criminals here at Riker’s Island Correctional Institution for
Women, (New York), only victims. Most of the women (over 95 percent) are black
and Puerto Rican. Many were abused children. Most have been abused by men
and all have been abused by “the system.”
There are no big-time gangsters here, no premeditated mass murderers, no
godmothers. There are no big-time dope dealers, no kidnappers, no Watergate
women. There are virtually no women here charged with white-collar crimes like
embezzling or fraud. Most of the women have drug-related cases. Many are
charged as accessories to crimes committed by men. The major crimes that
women here are charged with are prostitution, pickpocketing, shoplifting, rob-
bery and drugs. Women who have prostitution cases or who are doing “fine” time


--- PAGE 539 ---
make up a substantial part of the short-term population. The women see stealing
or hustling as necessary for the survival of themselves or their children because
jobs are scarce and welfare is impossible to live on. One thing is clear: amerikan
capitalism is in no way threatened by the women in prison on Riker’s Island.
One gets the impression, when first coming to Riker’s Island, that the architects
conceived of it as a prison modeled after a juvenile center. In the areas where vis-
itors usually pass there is plenty of glass and plenty of plants and flowers. The cell
blocks consist of two long corridors with cells on each side connected by a watch
room where the guards are stationed, called a bubble. Each corridor has a day
room with a TV , tables, multi-colored chairs, a stove that doesn’t work and a refrig-
erator. There’s a utility room with a sink and a washer and dryer that do not work.
Instead of bars the cells have doors which are painted bright, optimistic colors
with slim glass observation panels. The doors are controlled electronically by the
guards in the bubble. The cells are called rooms by everybody. They are furnished
with a cot, a closet, a desk, a chair, a plastic upholstered headboard that opens for
storage, a small book case, a mirror, a sink and a toilet. The prison distributes
brightly colored bedspreads and throw rugs for a homey effect. There is a school
area, a gym, a carpeted auditorium, two inmate cafeterias and outside recreation
areas that are used during the summer months only.
The guards have successfully convinced most of the women that Riker’s Island
is a country club. They say that it is a playhouse compared to some other prisons
(especially male): a statement whose partial veracity is not predicated upon the
humanity of correction officials at Riker’s Island, but, rather, by contrast to the
unbelievably barbaric conditions of other prisons. Many women are convinced
that they are, somehow, “getting over.” Some go so far as to reason that because
they are not doing hard time, they are not really in prison.
This image is further reinforced by the pseudo-motherly attitude of many of
the guards; a deception which all too often successfully reverts women to chil-
dren. The guards call the women inmates by their first names. The women
address the guards either as Officer, Miss —— or by nicknames (Teddy Bear,
Spanky, Aunt Louise, Squeeze, Sarge, Black Beauty, Nutty Mahogany, etc.).
Frequently, when a woman returns to Riker’s she will make rounds, gleefully
embracing her favorite guard: the prodigal daughter returns.
If two women are having a debate about any given topic the argument will
often be resolved by “asking the officer.” The guards are forever telling the
women to “grow up,” to “act like ladies,” to “behave” and to be “good girls.” If an
inmate is breaking some minor rule like coming to say “hi” to her friend on
another floor or locking in a few minutes late, a guard will say, jokingly, “don’t let
me have to come down there and beat your butt.” It is not unusual to hear a guard
tell a woman, “what you need is a good spanking.” The tone is often motherly,
“didn’t I tell you, young lady, to. . . .”; or, “you know better than that”; or, “that’s a
good girl.” And the women respond accordingly. Some guards and inmates “play”
together. One officer’s favorite “game” is taking off her belt and chasing her “girls”
down the hall with it, smacking them on the butt.
5 0 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 540 ---
A. SHAKUR, “WOMEN IN PRISON: HOW WE ARE” 5 0 9
But beneath the motherly veneer, the reality of guard life is ever present. Most
of the guards are black, usually from working-class, upward-bound, civil-service-
oriented backgrounds. They identify with the middle class, have middle-class val-
ues and are extremely materialistic. They are not the most intelligent women in
the world and many are extremely limited. Most are aware that there is no justice
in the amerikan judicial system and that blacks and Puerto Ricans are discrimi-
nated against in every facet of amerikan life. But, at the same time, they are con-
vinced that the system is somehow “lenient.” To them, the women in prison are
“losers” who don’t have enough sense to stay out of jail. Most believe in the boot-
strap theory—anybody can “make it” if they try hard enough. They congratulate
themselves on their great accomplishments. In contrast to themselves they see
the inmate as ignorant, uncultured, self-destructive, weak-minded and stupid.
They ignore the fact that their dubious accomplishments are not based on supe-
rior intelligence or effort, but only on chance and a civil service list.
Many guards hate and feel trapped by their jobs. The guard is exposed to a
certain amount of abuse from co-workers, from the brass as well as from inmates,
ass kissing, robotizing and mandatory overtime. (It is common practice for guards
to work a double shift at least once a week.) But no matter how much they hate
the military structure, the infighting, the ugliness of their tasks, they are very
aware of how close they are to the welfare lines. If they were not working as
guards most would be underpaid or unemployed. Many would miss the feeling
of superiority and power as much as they would miss the money, especially the
cruel, sadistic ones.
The guards are usually defensive about their jobs and indicate by their behav-
ior that they are not at all free from guilt. They repeatedly, compulsively say, as if
to convince themselves, “This is a job just like any other job.” The more they say
that the more preposterous it seems. . . .
The black liberation struggle is equally removed from the lives of women at
Riker’s. While they verbalize acute recognition that amerika is a racist country
where the poor are treated like dirt they, nevertheless, feel responsible for the
filth of their lives. The air at Riker’s is permeated with self-hatred. Many women
bear marks on their arms, legs and wrists from suicide attempts or self-mutilation.
They speak about themselves in self-deprecating terms. They consider them-
selves failures.
While most women contend that whitey is responsible for their oppression
they do not examine the cause or source of that oppression. There is no sense of
class struggle. They have no sense of communism, no definition of it, but they
consider it a bad thing. They do not want to destroy Rockefella. They want to be
just like him. Nicky Barnes, a major black dope seller, is discussed with reverence.
When he was convicted practically everyone was sad. Many gave speeches about
how kind, smart and generous he was. No one spoke about the sale of drugs to
our children.
Politicians are considered liars and crooks. The police are hated. Yet, during cop
and robber movies, some cheer loudly for the cops. One woman pasted photographs


--- PAGE 541 ---
of Farrah Fawcett Majors all over her cell because she “is a baad police bitch.” Kojak
and Barretta get their share of admiration.
A striking difference between women and men prisoners at Riker’s Island is
the absence of revolutionary rhetoric among the women. We have no study
groups. We have no revolutionary literature floating around. There are no groups
of militants attempting to “get their heads together.” The women at Riker’s seem
vaguely aware of what a revolution is but generally regard it as an impossible
dream. Not at all practical.
While men in prison struggle to maintain their manhood there is no compara-
ble struggle by women to preserve their womanhood. One frequently hears
women say, “Put a bunch of bitches together and you’ve got nothin but trouble”;
and, “Women don’t stick together, that’s why we don’t have nothin.” Men prison-
ers constantly refer to each other as brother. Women prisoners rarely refer to
each other as sister. Instead, “bitch” and “whore” are the common terms of ref-
erence. Women, however, are much kinder to each other than men, and any form
of violence other than a fist fight is virtually unknown. Rape, murder and stab-
bings at the women’s prison are non-existent.
For many, prison is not that much different from the street. It is, for some,
a place to rest and recuperate. For the prostitute prison is a vacation from
turning tricks in the rain and snow. A vacation from brutal pimps. Prison for
the addict is a place to get clean, get medical work done and gain weight.
Often, when the habit becomes too expensive, the addict gets herself busted
(usually subconsciously), so she can get back in shape, leave with a clean sys-
tem ready to start all over again. One woman claims that for a month or two
every year she either goes to jail or to the crazy house to get away from her
husband.
For many the cells are not much different from the tenements, the shooting
galleries and the welfare hotels they live in on the street. Sick call is no differ-
ent from the clinic or the hospital emergency room. The fights are the same
except they are less dangerous. The police are the same. The poverty is the
same. The alienation is the same. The racism is the same. The sexism is the
same. The drugs are the same and the system is the same. Riker’s Island is just
another institution. In childhood school was their prison, or youth houses or
reform schools or children shelters or foster homes or mental hospitals or drug
programs and they see all institutions as indifferent to their needs, yet neces-
sary to their survival.
The women at Riker’s Island come there from places like Harlem, Brownsville,
Bedford-Stuyvesant, South Bronx and South Jamaica. They come from places
where dreams have been abandoned like the buildings. Where there is no more
sense of community. Where neighborhoods are transient. Where isolated people
run from one fire trap to another. The cities have removed us from our strengths,
from our roots, from our traditions. They have taken away our gardens and our
sweet potato pies and given us McDonald’s. They have become our prisons, lock-
ing us into the futility and decay of pissy hallways that lead nowhere. They have
5 1 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 542 ---
A. SHAKUR, “WOMEN IN PRISON: HOW WE ARE” 5 1 1
alienated us from each other and made us fear each other. They have given us
dope and television as a culture.
There are no politicians to trust. No roads to follow. No popular progressive
culture to relate to. There are no new deals, no more promises of golden streets
and no place else to migrate. My sisters in the streets, like my sisters at Riker’s
Island, see no way out. “Where can I go?” said a woman on the day she was going
home. “If there’s nothing to believe in,” she said, “I can’t do nothin except try to
find cloud nine.”
What of our Past? What of our History? What of our Future?
I can imagine the pain and the strength of my great great grandmothers who
were slaves and my great great grandmothers who were Cherokee Indians
trapped on reservations. I remembered my great grandmother who walked every-
where rather than sit in the back of the bus. I think about North Carolina and my
home town and I remember the women of my grandmother’s generation: strong,
fierce women who could stop you with a look out the corners of their eyes.
Women who walked with majesty; who could wring a chicken’s neck and scale a
fish. Who could pick cotton, plant a garden and sew without a pattern. Women
who boiled clothes white in big black cauldrons and who hummed work songs and
lullabys. Women who visited the elderly, made soup for the sick and shortnin
bread for the babies.
Women who delivered babies, searched for healing roots and brewed medi-
cines. Women who darned sox and chopped wood and layed bricks. Women who
could swim rivers and shoot the head off a snake. Women who took passionate
responsibility for their children and for their neighbors’ children too.
The women in my grandmother’s generation made giving an art form. “Here,
gal, take this pot of collards to Sister Sue”; “Take this bag of pecans to school for
the teacher”; “Stay here while I go tend Mister Johnson’s leg.” Every child in the
neighborhood ate in their kitchens. They called each other sister because of feel-
ing rather than as the result of a movement. They supported each other through
the lean times, sharing the little they had.
The women of my grandmother’s generation in my home town trained their
daughters for womanhood. They taught them to give respect and to demand
respect. They taught their daughters how to churn butter; how to use elbow
grease. They taught their daughters to respect the strength of their bodies, to lift
boulders and how to kill a hog; what to do for colic, how to break a fever and how
to make a poultice, patchwork quilts, plait hair and how to hum and sing. They
taught their daughters to take care, to take charge and to take responsibility. They
would not tolerate a “lazy heifer” or a “gal with her head in the clouds.” Their
daughters had to learn how to get their lessons, how to survive, how to be strong.
The women of my grandmother’s generation were the glue that held family and
the community together. They were the backbone of the church. And of the
school. They regarded outside institutions with dislike and distrust. They were
determined that their children should survive and they were committed to a bet-
ter future.


--- PAGE 543 ---
I think about my sisters in the movement. I remember the days when,
draped in African garb, we rejected our foremothers and ourselves as castrators.
We did penance for robbing the brother of his manhood, as if we were the
oppressor. I remember the days of the Panther Party when we were “moder-
ately liberated.” When we were allowed to wear pants and expected to pick up
the gun. The days when we gave doe-eyed looks to our leaders. The days when
we worked like dogs and struggled desperately for the respect which they strug-
gled desperately not to give us. I remember the black history classes that did
mention women and the posters of our “leaders” where women were conspicu-
ously absent. We visited our sisters who bore the complete responsibility of the
children while the Brotha was doing his thing. Or had moved on to bigger and
better things.
Most of us rejected the white women’s movement. Miss ann was still Miss ann
to us whether she burned her bras or not. We could not muster sympathy for the
fact that she was trapped in her mansion and oppressed by her husband. We
were, and still are, in a much more terrible jail. We knew that our experiences as
black women were completely different from those of our sisters in the white
women’s movement. And we had no desire to sit in some consciousness-raising
group with white women and bare our souls.
Women can never be free in a country that is not free. We can never be liber-
ated in a country where the institutions that control our lives are oppressive. We
can never be free while our men are oppressed. Or while the amerikan govern-
ment and amerikan capitalism remain intact.
But it is imperative to our struggle that we build a strong black women’s
movement. It is imperative that we, as black women, talk about the experiences
that shaped us; that we assess our strengths and weaknesses and define our own
history. It is imperative that we discuss positive ways to teach and socialize our
children.
The poison and pollution of capitalist cities is choking us. We need the strong
medicine of our foremothers to make us well again. We need their medicines to
give us strength to fight and the drive to win. Under the guidance of Harriet
Tubman and Fannie Lou Hamer and all of our foremothers, let us rebuild a sense
of community. Let us rebuild the culture of giving and carry on the tradition of
fierce determination to move on closer to freedom.
Source: Excerpt from “Women in Prison: How We Are” with permission from Black Scholar
9, no. 7 (April 1978), pp. 50–57.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Assata Shakur, Assata: An Autobiography(Westport, Conn.: Lawrence Hill, 1987).
———, “The Continuity of Struggle,” Souls 1, no. 2 (Spring 1999), pp. 93–101.
Evelyn Williams, Inadmissible Evidence: The Story of the African-American Trial Lawyer
Who Defended the Black Liberation Army(Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books, 1993).
5 1 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 544 ---
H. WASHINGTON, “IT’S OUR TURN” 5 1 3
O3 O
“It’s Our Turn,” Harold Washington, 1983
Harold Washington (1922–1987) grew up in Chicago, studied at Roosevelt
University and Northwestern University Law School, held various local politi-
cal offices, and served in the U.S. House of Representatives before he finally
became the first African-American mayor of Chicago in 1983. Washington’s
campaign was waged outside of the political mainstream, and in vowing to
clean up the corruption left over from Richard J. Daly’s political machine, he
forged a successful political coalition among black, liberal white, and Latino
voters. Yet the strident opposition he faced also helped to expose the racism of
many ethnic whites in what is often considered to be the most segregated city
in the United States. As mayor, Washington faced legendary battles with
Chicago’s city council, although he still implemented many reforms. Partially
as a result of stress, overwork, and exhaustion, Washington died suddenly in
office in late 1987.
O
Chicago is a divided city. Chicago is a city where citizens are treated unequally
and unfairly. Chicago is a city in decline. Each year for the last decade, we have
lost 11,500 jobs, 3,500 housing units and nearly 36,000 people.
Since 1955, women, Latinos, Blacks, youth and progressive whites have been
left out of the Chicago government. Since 1979, the business, labor and intel-
lectual communities have been allowed but token involvement in Chicago gov-
ernment.
Sadly, we have learned what happens when there is no governmental stabil-
ity—and when the few rule over us. The results are that more people don’t have
jobs, more are out of food, out of their homes and out of hope.
Our businesses are failing at the highest rate since the Depression, in part
from high interest rates, and the only answer the city government provides is fat
consultant contracts for a few politically connected firms and jobs for a few
patronage workers.
We have a school system which does not educate, in which students continue
to lag far behind the rest of the country in tests of reading and math ability.
We have a continuing crime problem in the city. Despite a drop in crime sta-
tistics, it’s still not safe to walk the streets or run a business. Even at home,
Chicagoans are robbed, mugged and beaten.
We no longer have dependable housing in this city. There has been an epi-
demic of abandoned buildings and rents have skyrocketed. Subsidized housing is
no longer being built. And, with interest rates as they are, no one can afford to
buy their own home anymore.


--- PAGE 545 ---
Finally, “the city that works” doesn’t work anymore. City services cost more
than in any other city in America, and yet they just aren’t there—sewers are in dis-
repair, streets are marred with giant potholes. We have one of the highest infant
mortality rates in the country, and traffic appears to be permanently snarled.
We have these terrible problems in Chicago, partly because leadership has not
striven for unity and pointed boldly to the new directions. Instead, it has perpet-
uated outdated politics and pie-in-the-sky financing.
I have compassion for the terrible plight of people and a vision for its future: I
honestly believe that of those candidates mentioned, only I can rebuild Chicago
by rallying Chicagoans to create a city in which every individual will receive his or
her full measure of dignity. In the future, I see a Chicago of compassion; a city
where no one has to live with rats, where the sick can be cured and where no one
is overtaxed on property and burdened with other hidden taxes.
All the other candidates who have declared and who will be running for mayor
would perpetuate politics as usual. Those candidates will continue the shell game
of city financing at a time of crisis.
I would prefer not to run. But, there is a sense of urgency which moves me.
Chicago can only be rebuilt if all the people of Chicago and her leaders work
together. I was born, raised and educated in this city, and I have served it on three
levels of government. I love representing Chicago in Washington, where we need
courageous voices to speak out and act against Reagan and Reaganomics. But I
can’t watch the city of Chicago be destroyed by petty politics and bad government.
I have heard the earnest pleas of thousands of people to enter the race.
Therefore, I declare that I am a candidate for the mayor of Chicago. Not to do so
would be a mockery of my longstanding dedication to public service.
I see a Chicago that runs well, in which services are provided as a right, not as
a political favor.
I see a Chicago of educational excellence and equality of treatment in which
all children can learn to function in this evermore-complex society, in which jobs
and contracts are dispensed fairly to those that want and qualify for them, and in
which justice rains down like water.
Some may say this is visionary—I say they lack vision.
Already, a new day is dawning. The unprecedented voter registration and
voter turnout in Chicago in the last week is evidence of this. The people of Chi-
cago who have been neglected by the political bosses have announced their will-
ingness to become involved, to unify and to act. I invite them to join my cam-
paign. If I’m to be mayor, it would be as the spokesperson of this new movement
—not the mayor of just a political faction, but mayor of all Chicago. We devoutly
search for unity.
As mayor of this city, I would open the doors of City Hall. I would dig into that
untapped reservoir of talented whites, Latinos, women and Blacks and unleash
that ability for the benefit of this city.
Fairness will be our standard. On my first day in office, I will sign a freedom
of information order to open the secret files of City Hall to inspection by all citi-
5 1 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 546 ---
A. LORDE, “I AM YOUR SISTER” 5 1 5
zens. We seek accountability. As mayor, I shall gather the best talent of the city
to tackle the record of problems I have outlined. We shall strive for excellence.
Thousands of Chicagoans have beseeched me to undertake this task. Their
faith is not misplaced. . . .
Source: “Harold Washington’s Announcement of Candidacy for the Democratic Nomination
for Mayor of Chicago,” from Dempsey J. Travis, Harold: The People’s Mayor (Chicago:
Urban Research Press, 1989), used by permission of Ramon Price for the Washington Estate.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Paul Kleppner, Chicago Divided: The Making of a Black Mayor (Dekalb: Northern Illinois
University Press, 1985).
Manning Marable, “Harold Washington and the Politics of Race in Chicago,” Black Scholar
17, no. 6 (November–December 1986), pp. 14–23.
Alton Miller, Harold Washington: The Mayor, the Man(Chicago: Bonus Books, 1989).
O4 O
“I Am Your Sister,” Audre Lorde, 1984
Audre Lorde (1934–1992) was one of the key intellectuals in the feminist move-
ment in the late twentieth century. Born in New York City, Lorde studied at
Hunter College and Columbia University, where she earned an M.A. in library sci-
ence. Later, she worked as a college lecturer, founded the Kitchen Table–Women
of Color Press, and served on the editorial committee of the Black Scholar, but she
was most widely known as a lesbian feminist, political activist, and poet. Some of
her most important works are Uses of the Erotic (1978), which has become a sta-
ple of feminist literature, and Sister Outsider (1984), a collection of essays and
speeches that traces the development of many of her ideas. Lorde died of lung
cancer in 1992. Since her death, the beauty and the expressive power of her writ-
ings have become even more widely recognized by an international audience.
O
AGE, RACE, CLASS, AND SEX: WOMEN REDEFINING DIFFERENCE
Much of Western European history conditions us to see human differences in
simplistic opposition to each other: dominant/subordinate, good/bad, up/down,
superior/inferior. In a society where the good is defined in terms of profit rather
than in terms of human need, there must always be some group of people who,
through systematized oppression, can be made to feel surplus, to occupy the
place of the dehumanized inferior. Within this society, that group is made up of
black and Third-World people, working-class people, older people, and women.


--- PAGE 547 ---
As a forty-nine-year-old black lesbian feminist socialist mother of two, including
one boy, and a member of an interracial couple, I usually find myself a part of some
group defined as other, deviant, inferior, or just plain wrong. Traditionally, in
American society, it is the members of oppressed, objectified groups who are
expected to stretch out and bridge the gap between the actualities of our lives and
the consciousness of our oppressor. For in order to survive, those of us for whom
oppression is as American as apple pie have always had to be watchers, to become
familiar with the language and manners of the oppressor, even sometimes adopting
them for some illusion of protection. Whenever the need for some pretense of com-
munication arises, those who profit from our oppression call upon us to share our
knowledge with them. In other words, it is the responsibility of the oppressed to
teach the oppressors their mistakes. I am responsible for educating teachers who dis-
miss my children’s culture in school. Black and Third-World people are expected to
educate white people as to our humanity. Women are expected to educate men.
Lesbians and gay men are expected to educate the heterosexual world. The oppres-
sors maintain their position and evade responsibility for their own actions. There is
a constant drain of energy, which might be better used in redefining ourselves and
devising realistic scenarios for altering the present and constructing the future.
Institutionalized rejection of difference is an absolute necessity in a profit
economy which needs outsiders as surplus people. As members of such an econ-
omy, we have allbeen programmed to respond to the human differences between
us with fear and loathing and to handle that difference in one of three ways:
ignore it, and if that is not possible, copy it if we think it is dominant, or destroy
it if we think it is subordinate. But we have no patterns for relating across our
human differences as equals. As a result, those differences have been misnamed
and misused in the service of separation and confusion.
Certainly there are very real differences between us of race, age, and sex. But
it is not those differences between us that are separating us. It is rather our refusal
to recognize those differences, and to examine the distortions that result from our
misnaming them and their effects upon human behavior and expectation.
Racism, the belief in the inherent superiority of one race over all others and
thereby the right to dominance. Sexism, the belief in the inherent superiority of
one sex over the other and thereby the right to dominance. Ageism. Heterosexism.
Elitism. Classism.
It is a lifetime pursuit for each one of us to extract these distortions from our
living at the same time as we recognize, reclaim, and define those differences
upon which they are imposed. For we have all been raised in a society where
those distortions were endemic within our living. Too often, we pour the energy
needed for recognizing and exploring difference into pretending those differ-
ences are insurmountable barriers, or that they do not exist at all. This results
in a voluntary isolation, or false and treacherous connections. Either way, we do
not develop tools for using human difference as a springboard for creative
change within our lives. We speak not of human difference, but of human
deviance.
5 1 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 548 ---
A. LORDE, “I AM YOUR SISTER” 5 1 7
Somewhere, on the edge of consciousness, there is what I call a mythical
norm, which each one of us within our hearts knows “that is not me.” In
America, this norm is usually defined as white, thin, male, young, heterosexual,
Christian, and financially secure . It is with this mythical norm that the trap-
pings of power reside within this society. Those of us who stand outside that
power often identify one way in which we are different, and we assume that to
be the primary cause of all oppression, forgetting other distortions around dif-
ference, some of which we ourselves may be practicing. By and large within the
women’s movement today, white women focus upon their oppression as women
and ignore differences of race, sexual preference, class, and age. There is a pre-
tense to a homogeneity of experience covered by the word sisterhood that does
not in fact exist.
Unacknowledged class differences rob women of each others’ energy and cre-
ative insight. Recently a women’s magazine collective made the decision for one
issue to print only prose, saying poetry was a less “rigorous” or “serious” art form.
Yet even the form our creativity takes is often a class issue. Of all the art forms,
poetry is the most economical. It is the one that is the most secret, that requires
the least physical labor, the least material, and the one that can be done between
shifts, in the hospital pantry, on the subway, and on scraps of surplus paper. Over
the last few years, writing a novel on tight finances, I came to appreciate the enor-
mous differences in the material demands between poetry and prose. As we
reclaim our literature, poetry has been the major voice of poor, working-class, and
colored women. A room of one’s own may be a necessity for writing prose, but so
are reams of paper, a typewriter, and plenty of time. The actual requirements to
produce the visual arts also help determine, along class lines, whose art is whose.
In this day of inflated prices for material, who are our sculptors, our painters, our
photographers? When we speak of a broadly based women’s culture, we need to
be aware of the effect of class and economic differences on the supplies available
for producing art.
As we move toward creating a society within which we can each flourish,
ageism is another distortion of relationship that interferes without vision. By
ignoring the past, we are encouraged to repeat its mistakes. The “generation gap”
is an important social tool for any repressive society. If the younger members of a
community view the older members as contemptible or suspect or excess, they
will never be able to join hands and examine the living memories of the commu-
nity, nor ask the all important question, “Why?” This gives rise to a historical
amnesia that keeps us working to invent the wheel every time we have to go to
the store for bread.
We find ourselves having to repeat and relearn the same old lessons over and
over that our mothers did because we do not pass on what we have learned, or
because we are unable to listen. For instance, how many times has this all been
said before? For another, who would have believed that once again our daughters
are allowing their bodies to be hampered and purgatoried by girdles and high
heels and hobble skirts?


--- PAGE 549 ---
Ignoring the differences of race between women and the implications of those
differences presents the most serious threat to the mobilization of women’s joint
power.
As white women ignore their built-in privilege of whiteness and define woman
in terms of their own experience alone, then women of color become “other,” the
outsider whose experience and tradition is too “alien” to comprehend. An exam-
ple of this is the signal absence of the experience of women of color as a resource
for women’s studies courses. The literature of women of color is seldom included
in women’s literature courses and almost never in other literature courses, nor in
women’s studies as a whole. All too often, the excuse given is that the literatures
of women of color can only be taught by colored women, or that they are too dif-
ficult to understand, or that classes cannot “get into” them because they come out
of experiences that are “too different.” I have heard this argument presented by
white women of otherwise quite clear intelligence, women who seem to have no
trouble at all teaching and reviewing work that comes out of the vastly different
experiences of Shakespeare, Molière, Dostoyevski, and Aristophanes. Surely
there must be some other explanation.
This is a very complex question, but I believe one of the reasons white women
have such difficulty reading black women’s work is because of their reluctance to
see black women as women and different from themselves. To examine black
women’s literature effectively requires that we be seen as whole people in our
actual complexities—as individuals, as women, as human—rather than as one of
those problematic but familiar stereotypes provided in this society in place of gen-
uine images of black women. And I believe this holds true for the literatures of
other women of color who are not black.
The literatures of all women of color recreate the textures of our lives, and
many white women are heavily invested in ignoring the real differences. For as
long as any difference between us means one of us must be inferior, then the
recognition of any difference must be fraught with guilt. To allow women of color
to step out of stereotypes is too guilt-provoking, for it threatens the complacency
of those women who view oppression only in terms of sex.
Refusing to recognize difference makes it impossible to see the different prob-
lems and pitfalls facing us as women.
Thus, in a patriarchal power system where white skin privilege is a major prop,
the entrapments used to neutralize black women and white women are not the
same. For example, it is easy for black women to be used by the power structure
against black men, not because they are men, but because they are black. There-
fore, for black women, it is necessary at all times to separate the needs of the
oppressor from our own legitimate conflicts within our communities. This same
problem does not exist for white women. Black women and men have shared
racist oppression and still share it, although in different ways. Out of that shared
oppression we have developed joint defenses and joint vulnerabilities to each
other that are not duplicated in the white community, with the exception of the
relationship between Jewish women and Jewish men.
5 1 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 550 ---
A. LORDE, “I AM YOUR SISTER” 5 1 9
On the other hand, white women face the pitfall of being seduced into join-
ing the oppressor under the pretense of sharing power. This possibility does not
exist in the same way for women of color. The tokenism that is sometimes
extended to us is not an invitation to join power; our racial “otherness” is a visi-
ble reality that makes that quite clear. For white women there is a wider range
of pretended choices and rewards for identifying with patriarchal power and its
tools.
Today, with the defeat of ERA, the tightening economy, and increased conser-
vatism, it is easier once again for white women to believe the dangerous fantasy
that if you are good enough, pretty enough, sweet enough, quiet enough, teach
the children to behave, hate the right people, and marry the right men, then you
will be allowed to coexist with patriarchy in relative peace, at least until a man
needs your job or the neighborhood rapist happens along. And true, unless one
lives and loves in the trenches it is difficult to remember that the war against
dehumanization is ceaseless.
But black women and our children know the fabric of our lives is stitched with
violence and with hatred, that there is no rest. We do not deal with it only on the
picket lines, or in dark midnight alleys, or in the places where we dare to verbal-
ize our resistance. For us, increasingly, violence weaves through the daily tissues
of our living—in the supermarket, in the classroom, in the elevator, in the clinic
and the school yard, from the plumber, the baker, the saleswoman, the bus driver,
the bank teller, the waitress who does not serve us.
Some problems we share as women, some we do not. You fear your children
will grow up to join the patriarchy and testify against you; we fear our children
will be dragged from a car and shot down in the street, and you will turn your
backs upon the reasons they are dying.
The threat of difference has been no less blinding to people of color. Those
of us who are black must see that the reality of our lives and our struggle does
not make us immune to the errors of ignoring and misnaming difference. Within
black communities, where racism is a living reality, differences among us often
seem dangerous and suspect. The need for unity is often misnamed as a need for
homogeneity, and a black feminist vision mistaken for betrayal of our common
interests as a people. Because of the continuous battle against racial erasure that
black women and black men share, some black women still refuse to recognize
that we are also oppressed as women, and that sexual hostility against black
women is practiced not only by the white racist society, but implemented within
our black communities as well. It is a disease striking the heart of black nation-
hood, and silence will not make it disappear. Exacerbated by racism and the
pressures of powerlessness, violence against black women and children often
becomes a standard within our communities, one by which manliness can be
measured. But these woman-hating acts are rarely discussed as crimes against
black women.
As a group, women of color are the lowest-paid wage earners in America. We
are the primary targets of abortion and sterilization abuse, here and abroad. In


--- PAGE 551 ---
certain parts of Africa, small girls are still being sewed shut between their legs to
keep them docile and for men’s pleasure. This is known as female circumcision,
and it is not a cultural affair as the late Jomo Kenyatta insisted, it is a crime against
black women.
Black women’s literature is full of the pain of frequent assault, not only by a
racist patriarchy, but also by black men. Yet the necessity for and history of shared
battle have made us, black women, particularly vulnerable to the false accusation
that anti-sexist is anti-black. Meanwhile, womanhating as a recourse of the pow-
erless is sapping strength from black communities, and our very lives. Rape is on
the increase, reported and unreported, and rape is not aggressive sexuality, it is
sexualized aggression. As Kalamu ya Salaam, a black male writer points out, “As
long as male domination exists, rape will exist. Only women revolting and men
made conscious of their responsibility to fight sexism can collectively stop rape.”
Differences between ourselves as black women are also being misnamed and
used to separate us from one another. As a black lesbian feminist comfortable
with the many different ingredients of my identity, and a woman committed to
racial and sexual freedom from oppression, I find I am constantly being encour-
aged to pluck out some one aspect of myself and present this as the meaningful
whole, eclipsing or denying the other parts of self. But this is a destructive and
fragmenting way to live. My fullest concentration of energy is available to me only
when I integrate all the parts of who I am, openly, allowing power from particu-
lar sources of my living to flow back and forth freely through all my different
selves, without the restrictions of externally imposed definition. Only then can I
bring myself and my energies as a whole to the service of those struggles which I
embrace as part of my living.
A fear of lesbians, or of being accused of being a lesbian, has led many black
women into testifying against themselves. It has led some of us into destructive
alliances, and others into despair and isolation. In the white women’s communi-
ties, heterosexism is sometimes a result of identifying with the white patriarchy,
a rejection of that interdependence between women-identified women that
allows the self to be, rather than to be used in the service of men. Sometimes it
reflects a die-hard belief in the protective coloration of heterosexual relation-
ships, sometimes a self-hate, which all women have to fight against, taught us
from birth.
Although elements of these attitudes exist for all women, there are particular
resonances of heterosexism and homophobia among black women. Despite the
fact that woman-bonding has a long and honorable history in the African and
African-American communities, and despite the knowledge and accomplish-
ments of many strong and creative women-identified black women in the politi-
cal, social and cultural fields, heterosexual black women often tend to ignore or
discount the existence and work of black lesbians. Part of this attitude has come
from an understandable terror of black male attack within the close confines of
black society, where the punishment for any female self-assertion is still to be
5 2 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 552 ---
A. LORDE, “I AM YOUR SISTER” 5 2 1
accused of being a lesbian and therefore unworthy of the attention or support of
the scarce black male. But part of this need to misname and ignore black lesbians
comes from a very real fear that openly women-identified black women who are
no longer dependent upon men for their self-definition may well reorder our
whole concept of social relationships.
Black women who once insisted that lesbianism was a white woman’s problem
now insist that black lesbians are a threat to black nationhood, are consorting with
the enemy, are basically unblack. These accusations, coming from the very
women to whom we look for deep and real understanding, have served to keep
many black lesbians in hiding, caught between the racism of white women and
the homophobia of their sisters. Often, their work has been ignored, trivialized,
or misnamed, as with the work of Angelina Grimké, Alice Dunbar-Nelson,
Lorraine Hansberry. Yet women-bonded women have always been some part of
the power of black communities, from our unmarried aunts to the amazons of
Dahomey.
And it is certainly not black lesbians who are assaulting women and raping
children and grandmothers on the streets of our communities.
Across this country, as in Boston during the spring of 1979 following the
unsolved murders of twelve black women, black lesbians are spearheading move-
ments against violence against black women.
What are the particular details within each of our lives that can be scrutinized
and altered to help bring about change? How do we redefine difference for all
women? It is not our differences that separate women, but our reluctance to rec-
ognize those differences and to deal effectively with the distortions that have
resulted from the ignoring and misnaming of those differences.
As a tool of social control, women have been encouraged to recognize only one
area of human difference as legitimate, those differences that exist between
women and men. And we have learned to deal across those differences with the
urgency of all oppressed subordinates. All of us have had to learn to live or work
or coexist with men, from our fathers on. We have recognized and negotiated
these differences, even when this recognition only continued the old dominant/
subordinate mode of human relationship, where the oppressed must recognize
the masters’ difference in order to survive.
But our future survival is predicated upon our ability to relate within equality.
As women, we must root out internalized patterns of oppression within ourselves
if we are to move beyond the most superficial aspects of social change. Now we
must recognize differences among women who are our equals, neither inferior
nor superior, and devise ways to use each others’ difference to enrich our visions
and our joint struggles.
The future of our earth may depend upon the ability of all women to identify
and develop new definitions of power and new patterns of relating across differ-
ence. The old definitions have not served us, nor the earth that supports us. The
old patterns, no matter how cleverly rearranged to imitate progress, still condemn


--- PAGE 553 ---
us to cosmetically altered repetitions of the same old exchanges, the same old
guilt, hatred, recrimination, lamentation, and suspicion.
For we have, built into all of us, old blueprints of expectation and response, old
structures of oppression, and these must be altered at the same time as we alter
the living conditions which are a result of those structures. For the master’s tools
will never dismantle the master’s house.
As Paulo Freire shows so well in The Pedagogy of the Oppressed, the true
focus of revolutionary change is never merely the oppressive situations that 
we seek to escape, but that piece of the oppressor that is planted deep within
each of us, and that knows only the oppressors’ tactics, the oppressors’ rela-
tionships.
Change means growth, and growth can be painful. But we sharpen self-defin-
ition by exposing the self in work and struggle together with those whom we
define as different from ourselves, although sharing the same goals. For black and
white, old and young, lesbian and heterosexual women alike, this can mean new
paths to our survival.
Source: Reprinted by permission from Sister Outsider, by Audre Lorde. Copyright 1984,
2007 by Audre Lorde. Berkeley, Calif.: Crossing Press, www.tenspeed.com.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Toni Cade, ed., The Black Woman: An Anthology (New York: Mentor/New American
Library, 1970).
Alexis De Veaux, Warrior Poet: A Biography of Audre Lorde (New York: W. W. Norton,
2004).
Joan Wylie Hall, ed., Conversations with Audre Lorde (Jackson: University Press of
Mississippi, 2004).
Audre Lorde, The Collected Poems of Audre Lorde(New York: Norton, 1997).
———, Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power(Brooklyn, N.Y.: Out and Out Books, 1978).
———, Zami: A New Spelling of My Name(Trumansberg, N.Y.: Crossing Press, 1982).
———, Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches(Trumansberg, N.Y.: Crossing Press, 1984).
———, A Burst of Light: Essays(Ithaca, N.Y.: Firebrand Books, 1988).
O5 O
     
             
            
           
              
5 2 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 554 ---
B. HOOKS, “SHAPING FEMINIST THEORY” 5 2 3
        
      
     
           
           
          
          
    
             
          
         
               
           
           
           
            
            
            
          
           
             
             
             
               
             
              
           
              
                
 
            
           
           
            
           
            
               
           
             
     
           
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 555 ---
5 2 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 556 ---
B. HOOKS, “SHAPING FEMINIST THEORY” 5 2 5
            
            
             
            
            
          
         
           
            
            
          
          
         
           
                
           
           
            
         
             
          
          
           
          
           
              
             
            
           
   
            
          
           
           
           
           
          
           
         
        
            
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 557 ---
5 2 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 558 ---
B. HOOKS, “SHAPING FEMINIST THEORY” 5 2 7
            
            
         
             
            
           
    
         
             
              
           
   
       
            
           
          
                
           
           
            
            
          
           
         
         
         
           
            
  
           
            
            
            
             
          
            
             
          
              
               
 
              
             
              
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 559 ---
5 2 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT
This space left intentionally blank.


--- PAGE 560 ---
THE MOVEMENT AGAINST APARTHEID 5 2 9
O6 O
The Movement against Apartheid: Jesse Jackson and Randall Robinson
The single most important international issue confronting black America after the
end of the Vietnam War was apartheid. For nearly forty years, the white-minority
regime in South Africa had imposed a rigidly authoritarian form of racial oppres-
sion on millions of African people. Thousands of South Africans were executed,
imprisoned, or exiled. Mass organizations that led the movement against
apartheid, such as the African National Congress and the South African
Communist Party, were banned.
In the 1980s, President Ronald Reagan initiated a cordial bilateral policy
toward South Africa, termed “constructive engagement.” African Americans, out-
raged by the Reagan administration’s friendly initiatives toward apartheid, began
to mobilize a mass protest movement to pressure U.S. firms to “divest” their hold-
ings from South Africa. Many protest organizations mobilized black opposition to
apartheid. One of the coordinators of the anti-apartheid movement in the United
States during the 1980s was Randall Robinson, head of TransAfrica, a black
American lobbying agency for Africa and the Caribbean.
Robinson (1941–  ), born in Richmond Virginia, graduated from Virginia
Union University and earned a law degree from Harvard Law School. Robinson
has published numerous books whose subjects range from critiques of poverty
and crime in America to the demand for black reparations. After his departure
from TransAfrica, Robinson continued efforts to address the socioeconomic and
political problems of Africa and the Caribbean.
In the first document below, civil rights activist Reverend Jesse Jackson
addressed an antiapartheid conference held at the United Nations in 1984. In the
second document, political scientist and journalist Clarence Lusane interviewed
Robinson in October 1985.
O
DON’T ADJUST TO APARTHEID
. . . A great Afro-American, Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, long ago called attention to
“The African Roots of War,” as he revealed how the policies of plunder and
exploitation of the African continent led to war between the European and
American Powers who had developed at the Expense of Africa, and who often
went to war between themselves over a redivision of the spoils.
Our Africa policy in the United States, our relations and attitudes towards the
countries of the African continent, have always been in distinct contrast to our
policy and attitudes towards the nation-states of Europe. Europe, in our percep-
tion, has historically been seen as a source of immigrants and culture. While


--- PAGE 561 ---
Africa is perceived in our country as a source of cheap labor and raw materials to
be exploited for the benefit of a privileged class of European settlers.
This stereotype of Africa, as being without culture and civilization, a continent
to be subjugated by the advocates of “master race” politics, has led to a kind of
Tarzan, Jane, Boy relationship between the United States and Africa. This not only
reflects racial chauvinism, but a grossly unreal attitude which underplays the sig-
nificance of Africa to the world in general and to the United States in particular.
One of the tragedies of our own times that this history of negative attitudes has
produced, is the massive starvation and drought in huge areas of the African con-
tinent. We live in a scientific age that recognizes that what are viewed as natural
disasters are often the by-product of years of neglect and plunder. The hunger
and death that stalks wide areas of the African continent today must become the
concern of the entire international community because it is a threat to the human
family.
Poverty and injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. We, in North
America, blessed with one of the most fertile and productive agricultural lands in
the world, must cease being insensitive to the current suffering in Africa. We
must mobilize our abundant resources, through both government and non-gov-
ernmental organizations, to bring assistance and relief to our brothers and sisters
that are in Africa.
It is a measure of the callousness of the present administration in the United
States that it would pull 82 million acres of arable land out of production, while
5,000,000 people a year die of starvation in the Third World. This, too, is a dimen-
sion of United States Africa policy, when we, who have such abundant capacity to
feed the hungry, deny members of the human family access to this relief from
hunger and starvation.
This policy of cynicism and callousness has the United States in an official part-
nership with the racist apartheid regime in South Africa. Corporate greed, in the
search for the maximum return on investments, has found in the racist apartheid
system, with its brutal denial of human rights, a favorable climate guaranteeing
the highest profits in the world. An American government that pretends to be
outraged by the human rights situation in Poland is apparently quite satisfied with
the brutal denial of human rights in Pretoria.
This is measured in part by the deafening official silence in our country con-
cerning the plight of 8,000,000 Black Africans who have been stripped of their
South African citizenship and forcibly removed from the cities of South Africa
and relocated into Bantustans, thereby made refugees and aliens in their own
country. In the language of the apartheid regime, this is called “separate devel-
opment” and the United States southern Africa policy which supports this bar-
barism is called “constructive engagement.”
In the service of this policy, the Reagan administration has given the green
light for loans to South Africa from the International Monetary Fund. It has
allowed more South African consulates to open in the United States; expanded
military ties with the apartheid regime, which includes training the South African
5 3 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 562 ---
THE MOVEMENT AGAINST APARTHEID 5 3 1
Coast Guard; it has encouraged South Africa’s repeated military invasions in
Angola by withholding diplomatic recognition to the Angolan People’s Republic;
and has generally created a climate of official endorsement that has made the
United States South Africa’s number one trading partner.
It must be remembered that the flow of foreign capital into South Africa, from
the United States, Britain and other allies, is essential to the apartheid regime’s
economic growth, and economic growth in South Africa, as elsewhere, is essen-
tial to political stability.
Double Standard
In order to promote the political stability of the apartheid regime, United States
policy invariably adopts a double standard in matters of human rights. For exam-
ple, when a solidarity union in Poland is suppressed and a leader is jailed, our offi-
cial policy is to implement an economic boycott against Poland in response to this
violation of human rights. When the ANC in South Africa and the trade unions
affiliated to it are suppressed and abolished, and leaders like Nelson Mandela are
jailed, we respond to this violation of human rights by expanding economic, diplo-
matic and military ties with the regime.
Furthermore, the United States veto is repeatedly used in the United Nations
Security Council to frustrate every effort by the international community to effect
economic sanctions against South Africa. We, in the United States, must measure
human rights by one yardstick and free ourselves of this hypocrisy that increas-
ingly alienates us from the peoples of the world struggling for human dignity and
self-determination. Our national view of southern Africa must radically change
from seeing it as essentially a piece of geopolitical real estate to be used by the
United States for selfish ends, without regard to the aspirations of the people of
southern Africa.
This purely geopolitical approach has led to a dangerous situation in which
American nuclear technology has been made accessible to the apartheid regime.
Now that regime has acquired the technical capability of producing atomic
weapons. In this way, our Africa policy, together with that of Israel, has helped to
create a situation that is a threat to the sovereignty of every nation on the African
continent. The disarmament movement in our country must give far more atten-
tion to this particular nuclear threat than it has in the past.
Constructive Engagement
The Reagan administration’s “constructive engagement” policy is a multi-pronged
strategy designed to help South Africa gain acceptance and respectability in the
West and thereby break out of the isolation it has experienced in the international
community since the late 1960s. This support from the United States has embold-
ened the apartheid regime and encouraged its military aggressions.
This places a particularly heavy burden on the frontline States, who have
courageously maintained a principled opposition to apartheid in the face of ever-
mounting military and diplomatic pressures upon them to accommodate to
South Africa’s wishes. All of us have been inspired by the courageous struggles


--- PAGE 563 ---
and sacrifices being made by these newly-emancipated countries, in an effort to
overcome generations of economic and cultural deprivation that are the legacy
of colonialism. The fruits of these sacrifices are now being threatened by a new
form of subjugation coming from the most brutally racist regime on earth.
I need not tell you that we live in perilous times. I need not tell you that the vast
majority of humankind wants peace, economic and social justice and the right of
self-determination. This very institution was designed and built by the nations of
the world, including the United States, to implement these goals. We in the United
States have had a very special interest and mission in creating the United Nations.
Our people have come from all corners of the globe, from Africa, Europe, Asia
and the Americas. Our nation indeed is a mini–United Nations. I want to assure
you that as I travel around this country and talk to the people in the towns, cities
and factories, they tell me how important it is that we learn to live with the rest
of the world especially because we are fast becoming a genuinely interdependent
world.
The electronic media brings to our living rooms the wars in El Salvador,
Lebanon and Angola. The people of this country know and want a continuing dia-
logue with the rest of the world and they see the United Nations as a forum where
this dialogue can take place. I would like to assure you that the political gimmicks
to punish this or that international organization are nothing more than political
gimmickry. After all, it is somewhat humorous when a major power like ours
begins to punish an international organization devoted to uplifting the small farm-
ers of the world. The real American tradition is to stand by the seashore and wave
people to come in and share our bounty and not to wave them goodbye. . . .
O
STATE OF THE U.S. ANTI-APARTHEID MOVEMENT
The following interview with Randall Robinson of TransAfrica and the Free
South Africa movement was conducted for The Black Scholar on October 17,
1985.—Clarence Lusane
SCHOLAR: Approximately one year has passed since the U.S. anti-apartheid
movement surged forward. What is your assessment of the major achievement
over this period?
ROBINSON: We started the campaign with three major objectives to be pursued
in sequence. The first objective was to more broadly educate the American peo-
ple on South Africa, and to do that through civil disobedience and broad demon-
strations that would provoke the kind of press coverage that the issue has gotten
in the United States over the last eleven months.
The second objective growing out of that was to begin a dramatic change in
American policy toward South Africa. As a result, the Congress and the adminis-
tration found themselves in a posture of having to account to a newly informed and
invigorated American public. The Congress responded with legislation and
President Reagan with an inadequate Executive Order that nonetheless repudiated
5 3 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 564 ---
THE MOVEMENT AGAINST APARTHEID 5 3 3
his own policy of constructive engagement, but does little else in moving us signif-
icantly towards the kind of sanctions that the situation in South Africa warrants.
The third objective—yet to be realized, and that’s what we have to work on—
is that when American policy changes as substantially as it ought to, it begins to
influence policy in other Western countries. Then we will have South Africa in a
position to do nothing but respond to Western pressure and to negotiate with the
real leadership in South Africa. Now, progress toward that objective has been
made inasmuch as the unrest in South Africa, coupled with heightening pressure
and concern around the world, has produced a hemorrhage of money leaving
South Africa both in investment and in bank commitments, and that has caused
the South African government an unprecedented kind of concern about the tra-
ditional commitment of the West to support the regime.
So we are moving in the right direction and when the Congress comes back,
we’re going to push for tougher legislation in the next session of Congress. In the
meantime, we have to sustain the campaign with thoughtful projects and sustain
it with a pace, understanding that we have to have the resources to go for a long,
long period of time. It was with that thought that the demonstrations were
launched in the first place.
That kind of planning and that kind of expectation have given us the capacity to
have daily demonstrations at the South African Embassy and around the country
since November 21 of last year—demonstrations that have resulted in the arrest of
almost 5,000 people nationally, and over 3,500 at the embassy in Washington.
And we have every capacity to sustain and build on this kind of long-term
process of pressure application so that we are now beginning to reap fruit in the
middle of the country, since there is divestment legislation virtually under con-
sideration at every level of government, even in cities and towns and states that
previously had never even considered South Africa to be a major issue. So, this
issue has now reached every university; it has become an issue in supermarkets
selling goods and in winestores selling wines imported from South Africa. It has
become an issue that really has permeated the entire American society.
SCHOLAR: What have been the main problems and outstanding weaknesses of
the campaign?
ROBINSON: The problems are that the administration, along with the South
Africans, is attempting to counterattack by the use of the coarsest tactics, charac-
terizing leadership as Marxist; further, instead of frontally attempting to defend
apartheid, they are attacking the countries that South Africa would want to desta-
bilize—Angola, Mozambique—and the whole issue of American-Soviet contain-
ment in the region is being raised in a way that would have the American public
believe unrelated to the South Africa issue.
But it is very much related and is a part of South Africa’s strategy, taken with
right-wing conservatives here in the United States, to weaken the anti-apartheid
movement by mustering support for Jonas Savimbi’s UNITA in Angola and the
MNR in Mozambique, thereby buying South Africa time in Namibia, buying
their resources at home to be used in their repression at home. If America will


--- PAGE 565 ---
materially support Savimbi and others like him, it is really joining the South
African conspiracy to destabilize the region and to cement apartheid at home.
So I think that the counterattack is being waged in that way because they’ve
had diminishing success in their efforts to defend the domestic application of
apartheid in South Africa itself.
SCHOLAR: As you note, Botha and Reagan are attempting to buy time, but what
are their real options over the next couple of years since the anti-apartheid move-
ment in South Africa doesn’t seem to be abating at all?
ROBINSON: First of all, I think this upsurge has to be distinguished from
Sharpeville or even from Soweto. Since 1982, we’ve seen an unprecedented
increase in resistance to apartheid that is broad and deep all across South Africa.
The government’s State of Emergency has done nothing to diminish the black
commitment to destroy the apartheid system altogether. Nothing short of one
person, one vote in a unitary state will be favorably received by the black major-
ity and the black leaders in South Africa. So the South African government now
finds the ball in its court; it must decide how to respond.
Our job here is to make certain that the United States, in its private and pub-
lic sectors, no longer gives encouragement to whites to try to tough it out. So, we
have our work cut out for us in making sure that America is removed as a major
component of the underpinnings of that system and for white intransigence in
general.
SCHOLAR: How do you see the role of the Free South Africa Movement over the
next year and what are some of your plans?
ROBINSON: Right now we are working on a Freedom Letter Campaign. We are
sending a letter from the American people to Bishop Desmond Tutu signed by a
million Americans saying that we stand with black South Africans in their strug-
gle for justice. We are going to try to take that letter to Bishop Tutu in Soweto and
deliver it personally in December with as many as want to go in the delegation to
do that.
This is part of a continuing, consciousness-raising campaign that leads us into
next year where we will seek passage in the Congress of stronger legislation; rein-
troduction of Ronald Dellums’ bill calling for disinvestment of American invest-
ment so that we will ask for tougher sanctions.
We will also take our campaign to the private sector by giving Americans a bet-
ter sense of the extent to which American corporations are pivotally involved in
the repression of 22 million black South Africans, hopefully mustering enough
pressure on those corporations to accelerate their departure from South Africa.
All of this will be a part of the 1986 FSAM campaign.
SCHOLAR: What is your assessment on how soon change will come in South
Africa and is there any possibility for peaceful change?
ROBINSON: It’s hard to put a timetable on social change as a general rule since
it’s difficult to forecast with any accuracy. The thing of which one is certain is that
5 3 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 566 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 3 5
change is inevitable and that it will come in the foreseeable future, whether that
is five years, or ten years, or fifteen years, one can’t say. It could be within the next
few months.
You have variables that come together in combination to make the force for
change simply irresistible and have a lot to do with the continued development of
urban military capacity on the part of the African National Congress, the contin-
ued growth and political strength of black labor unions in South Africa; the con-
tinued deepening of consciousness and activity of young people throughout South
Africa, all coupled with increased pressure from without.
When these come together in a kind of requisite chemistry; then you will see
South Africa fundamentally changed. One can’t say with any preciseness when
that will happen. I’m confident having said that that we will see change in the
foreseeable future. We are closer to it now than we have ever been.
Sources: (1) Jesse L. Jackson, “Don’t Adjust to Apartheid,” with permission from Black
Scholar 16, no. 6 (November/December 1984), pp. 39–43; and (2) Clarence Lusane, “State
of the U.S. Anti-Apartheid Movement: An Interview with Randall Robinson,” with permis-
sion from Black Scholar17, no. 6 (November/December 1985), pp. 40–42.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Kevin Danaher, “South Africa, U.S. Policy, and the Anti-Apartheid Movement,” Review of
Radical Political Economics11, no. 3 (1997), pp. 42–59.
Janice Love, The U.S. Anti-Apartheid Movement: Local Activism in Global Politics (New
York: Praeger, 1995).
O7 O
“Keep Hope Alive,” Jesse Jackson, 1988
Born Jesse Burns in South Carolina, Jesse Jackson (1941–  ) took his stepfather’s
surname in 1956. While he was an undergraduate at North Carolina Agricultural
and Technical College, Jackson emerged as a leader of the civil rights demon-
strations in Greensboro, North Carolina. Jackson graduated from college in 1964,
and in the spring of 1966 he became head of the Chicago chapter of the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference’s (SCLC) Operation Breadbasket. A confidant
of Martin Luther King Jr., Jackson became an ordained minister in 1968. In the
1970s, Jackson created Operation PUSH (People United to Save Humanity), a
civil rights organization focusing on economic empowerment and social protest in
impoverished, urban areas. In 1983, Jackson announced his candidacy for the
Democratic Party’s presidential nomination, a decision that generated wide-
spread African-American support. Running under the slogan, “Rainbow
Coalition,” the civil rights leader attracted significant support from Latinos, Asian


--- PAGE 567 ---
Americans, and many whites around a liberal-left public policy agenda. By the
end of the 1984 Democratic primaries, Jackson’s efforts had received 3.5 million
popular votes. Four years later, Jackson revived his Rainbow Coalition campaign
for the presidency, this time winning over 7 million popular votes. Jackson’s pres-
idential campaigns illustrated that an African-American candidate could in prin-
ciple successfully compete for the nation’s highest office. Jackson’s 1988 address,
“Keep Hope Alive,” captures the idealism and the spirit behind his unsuccessful
presidential campaigns. Since the 1990s, Jackson has been extensively involved in
human rights efforts throughout the world, as well as social justice and antiracist
struggles in the United States as well.
O
COMMON GROUND AND COMMON SENSE
Tonight we pause and give praise and honor to God for being good enough to
allow us to be at this place at this time. When I look out at this convention, I see
the face of America, red, yellow, brown, black and white, we’re all precious in
God’s sight—the real rainbow coalition. All of us, all of us who are here and think
that we are seated. But we’re really standing on someone’s shoulders. Ladies and
gentlemen. Mrs. Rosa Parks.
The mother of the civil-rights movement.
I want to express my deep love and appreciation for the support my family has
given me over these past months.
They have endured pain, anxiety, threat and fear.
But they have been strengthened and made secure by a faith in God, in
America and in you.
Your love has protected us and made us strong.
To my wife, Jackie, the foundation of our family; to our five children whom you
met tonight; to my mother, Mrs. Helen Jackson, who is present tonight; and to my
grandmother, Mrs. Maltilda Burns; my brother Chuck and his family; my mother-
in-law, Mrs. Gertrude Brown, who just last month at age 61 graduated from
Hampton Institute, a marvelous achievement; I offer my appreciation to Mayor
Andrew Young who has provided such gracious hospitality to all of us this week.
And a special salute to President Jimmy Carter.
President Carter restored honor to the White House after Watergate. He gave
many of us a special opportunity to grow. For his kind words, for his unwavering
commitment to peace in the world and the voters that came from his family, every
member of his family, led by Billy and Amy, I offer him my special thanks, special
thanks to the Carter family.
My right and my privilege to stand here before you has been won—in my life-
time—by the blood and the sweat of the innocent.
Twenty-four years ago, the late Fanny Lou Hamer and Aaron Henry—who sits
here tonight from Mississippi—were locked out on the streets of Atlantic City, the
head of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.
5 3 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 568 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 3 7
But tonight, a black and white delegation from Mississippi is headed by Ed
Cole, a black man, from Mississippi, twenty-four years later.
Many were lost in the struggle for the right to vote. Jimmy Lee Jackson, a
young student, gave his life. Viola Luizzo, a white mother from Detroit, called
nigger lover, and brains blown out at point blank range.
Schwerner, Goodman and Chaney—two Jews and a black—found in a com-
mon grave, bodies riddled with bullets in Mississippi. The four darling little girls
in the church in Birmingham, Ala. They died that we might have a right to live.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. lies only a few miles from us tonight.
Tonight he must feel good as he looks down upon us. We sit here together, a
rainbow, a coalition—the sons and daughters of slave masters and the sons and
daughters of slaves sitting together around a common table, to decide the direc-
tion of our party and our country. His heart would be full tonight.
As a testament to the struggles of those who have gone before; as a legacy for
those who will come after; as a tribute to the endurance, the patience, the courage
of our forefathers and mothers; as an assurance that their prayers are being
answered, their work has not been in vain, and hope is eternal; tomorrow night my
name will go into nomination for the presidency of the United States of America.
We meet tonight at a crossroads, a point of decision.
Shall we expand, be inclusive, find unity and power; or suffer division and
impotence.
We come to Atlanta, the cradle of the old south, the crucible of the new South.
Tonight there is a sense of celebration because we are moved, fundamentally
moved, from racial battlegrounds by law, to economic common ground, tomorrow
we will challenge to move to higher ground.
Common ground!
Think of Jerusalem—the intersection where many trails met. A small village that
became the birthplace for three great religions—Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Why was this village so blessed? Because it provided a crossroads where dif-
ferent people met, different cultures, and different civilizations could meet and
find common ground.
When people come together, flowers always flourish and the air is rich with the
aroma of a new spring.
Take New York, the dynamic metropolis. What makes New York so special?
It is the invitation of the Statue of Liberty—give me your tired, your poor, your
huddled masses who yearn to breathe free.
Not restricted to English only.
Many people, many cultures, many languages—with one thing in common, the
yearn to breathe free.
Common ground!
Tonight in Atlanta, for the first time in this century we convene in the South.
A state where governors once stood in school-house doors. Where Julian Bond
was denied his seat in the state legislature because of his conscientious objection
to the Vietnam War.


--- PAGE 569 ---
A city that, through its five black universities, has graduated more black stu-
dents than any city in the world.
Atlanta, now a modern intersection of the new South.
Common ground!
That is the challenge to our party tonight.
Left wing. Right wing. Progress will not come through boundless liberalism
nor static conservatism, but at the critical mass of mutual survival. It takes two
wings to fly.
Whether you’re a hawk or a dove, you’re just a bird living in the same envi-
ronment, in the same world.
The Bible teaches that when lions and lambs lie down together, none will be
afraid and there will be peace in the valley. It sounds impossible. Lions eat lambs.
Lambs sensibly flee from lions. But even lions and lambs find common ground.
Why?
Because neither lions nor lambs want the forest to catch on fire. Neither lions
nor lambs want acid rain to fall. Neither lions nor lambs can survive nuclear war.
If lions and lambs can find common ground, surely, we can as well, as civilized
people.
The only time that we win is when we come together. In 1960, John Kennedy,
the late John Kennedy, beat Richard Nixon by only 112,000 votes—less than one
vote per precinct. He won by the margin of our hope. He brought us together. He
reached out. He had the courage to defy his advisors and inquire about Dr. King’s
jailing in Albany, Georgia. We won by the margin of our hope, inspired by coura-
geous leadership.
In 1964, Lyndon Johnson brought both wings together. The thesis, the antithe-
sis and to create a synthesis and together we won.
In 1976, Jimmy Carter unified us again and we won. When we do not come
together, we never win.
In 1968, division and despair in July led to our defeat in November.
In 1980, rancor in the spring and the summer led to Reagan in the fall. When
we divide, we cannot win. We must find common ground as a basis for survival
and development and change and growth.
Today when we debated, differed, deliberated, agreed to agree, agreed to dis-
agree, when we had the good judgment to argue our case and then not self-
destruct, George Bush was just a little further away from the White House and a
little closer to private life.
Tonight, I salute Governor Michael Dukakis.
He has run a well-managed and a dignified campaign. No matter how tired or
how tried, he always resisted the temptation to stoop to demagoguery.
I’ve watched a good mind fast at work, with steel nerves, guiding his campaign
out of the crowded field without appeal to the worst in us. I’ve watched his per-
spective grow as his environment has expanded. I’ve seen his toughness and
tenacity close up. I know his commitment to public service.
Mike Dukakis’s parents were a doctor and a teacher; my parents, a maid, a
beautician and a janitor.
5 3 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 570 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 3 9
There’s a great gap between Brookline, Massachusetts, and Haney Street, the
Fieldcrest Village housing projects in Greenville, South Carolina.
He studied law; I studied theology. There are differences of religion, region,
and race; differences in experiences and perspectives. But the genius of America
is that out of the many, we become one.
Providence has enabled our paths to intersect. His foreparents came to
America on immigrant ships; my foreparents came to America on slave ships. But
whatever the original ships, we’re in the same boat tonight.
Our ships could pass in the night if we have a false sense of independence, or
they could collide and crash. We would lose our passengers. But we can seek a
higher reality and a greater good apart. We can drift on the broken pieces of
Reaganomics, satisfy our baser instincts, and exploit the fears of our people. At
our highest, we can call upon noble instincts and navigate this vessel to safety. The
greater good is the common good.
As Jesus said, “Not my will, but thine be done.” It was his way of saying there’s
a higher good beyond personal comfort or position.
The good of our nation is at stake—its commitment to working men and
women, to the poor and the vulnerable, to the many in the world. With so many
guided missiles, and so much misguided leadership, the stakes are exceedingly
high. Our choice, full participation in a Democratic government, or more aban-
donment and neglect. And so this night, we choose not a false sense of indepen-
dence, not our capacity to survive and endure.
Tonight we choose interdependency in our capacity to act and unite for the
greater good. The common good is finding commitment to new priorities, to
expansion and inclusion. A commitment to expanded participation in the Demo-
cratic Party at every level. A commitment to a shared national campaign strategy
and involvement at every level. A commitment to new priorities that ensure that
hope will be kept alive. A common-ground commitment for a legislative agenda
by empowerment for the John Conyers bill, universal, on-site, same-day registra-
tion everywhere—and commitment to D.C. statehood and empowerment—D.C.
deserves statehood. A commitment to economic set-asides, a commitment to the
Dellums bill for comprehensive sanctions against South Africa, a shared commit-
ment to a common direction.
Common ground. Easier said than done. Where do you find common ground
at the point of challenge? This campaign has shown that politics need not be mar-
keted by politicians, packaged by pollsters and pundits. Politics can be a marvel
arena where people come together, define common ground.
We find common ground at the plant gate that closes on workers without
notice. We find common ground at the farm auction where a good farmer loses
his or her land to bad loans or diminishing markets. Common ground at the
schoolyard where teachers cannot get adequate pay, and students cannot get a
scholarship and can’t make a loan. Common ground, at the hospital admitting
room where somebody tonight is dying because they cannot afford to go upstairs
to a bed that’s empty, waiting for someone with insurance to get sick. We are a
better nation than that. We must do better.


--- PAGE 571 ---
Common ground. What is leadership if not present help in a time of crisis?
And so I met you at the point of challenge in Jay, Maine where paper workers
were striking for fair wages; in Greenfield, Iowa, where family farmers struggle
for a fair price; in Cleveland, Ohio, where working women seek comparable
worth; in McFarland, California, where the children of Hispanic farm workers
may be dying from poison land, dying in clusters with cancer; in the AIDS hos-
pice in Houston, Texas, where the sick support one another, twelve are rejected
by their own parents and friends.
Common ground.
America’s not a blanket woven from one thread, one color, one cloth. When I
was a child growing up in Greenville, S.C., and grandmother could not afford a
blanket, she didn’t complain and we did not freeze. Instead, she took pieces of old
cloth—patches, wool, silk, gabardine, crockersack on the patches—barely good
enough to wipe your shoes with.
But they didn’t stay that way very long. With sturdy hands and a strong cord,
she sewed them together into a quilt, a thing of beauty and power and culture.
Now, Democrats, we must build such a quilt. Farmers, you seek fair prices and
you are right, but you cannot stand alone. Your patch is not big enough. Workers,
you fight for fair wages. You are right. But your labor patch is not big enough.
Women, you seek comparable worth and pay equity. You are right. But your patch
is not big enough. Women, mothers, who seek Head Start and day care and pre-
natal care on the front side of life, rather than jail care and welfare on the back
side of life, you’re right, but your patch is not big enough.
Students, you seek scholarships. You are right. But your patch is not big
enough. Blacks and Hispanics, when we fight for civil rights, we are right, but our
patch is not big enough. Gays and lesbians, when you fight against discrimination
and a cure for AIDS, you are right, but your patch is not big enough. Conserv-
atives and progressives, when you fight for what you believe, right wing, left wing,
hawk, dove—you are right, from your point of view, but your point of view is not
enough.
But don’t despair. Be as wise as my grandmama. Pool the patches and the
pieces together, bound by a common thread. When we form a great quilt of unity
and common ground we’ll have the power to bring about health care and housing
and jobs and education and hope to our nation.
We the people can win. We stand at the end of a long dark night of reaction.
We stand tonight united in a commitment to a new direction. For almost eight
years, we’ve been led by those who view social good coming from private inter-
est, who viewed public life as a means to increase private wealth. They have been
prepared to sacrifice the common good of the many to satisfy the private interest
and the wealth of a few.
We believe in a government that’s a tool of our democracy in service to the
public, not an instrument of the aristocracy in search of private wealth. We
believe in government with the consent of the governed of, for, and by the peo-
ple. We must not emerge into a new day with a new direction. Reaganomics,
5 4 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 572 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 4 1
based on the belief that the rich had too much money—too little money, and the
poor had too much.
That’s classic Reaganomics. It believes that the poor had too much money and
the rich had too little money.
So, they engaged in reverse Robin Hood—took from the poor, gave to the rich,
paid for by the middle class. We cannot stand four more years of Reaganomics in
any version, in any disguise.
How do I document that case? Seven years later, the richest 1 percent of our
society pays 20 percent less in taxes; the poorest 10 percent pay 20 percent more.
Reaganomics.
Reagan gave the rich and the powerful a multibillion-dollar party. Now, the
party is over. He expects the people to pay for the damage. I take this principled
position—convention, let us not raise taxes on the poor and the middle class, but
those who had the party, the rich and the powerful, must pay for the party!
I just want to take common sense to high places. We’re spending $150 billion
a year defending Europe and Japan forty-three years after the war is over. We
have more troops in Europe tonight than we had seven years ago, yet the threat
of war is ever more remote. Germany and Japan are now creditor nations—that
means they’ve got a surplus. We are a debtor nation—it means we are in debt.
Let them share more of the burden of their own defense—use some of that
money to build decent housing!
Use some of that money to educate our children!
Use some of that money for long-term health care!
Use some of that money to wipe out these slums and put America back to work!
I just want to take common sense to high places. If we can bail out Europe and
Japan, if we can bail out Continental Bank and Chrysler—and Mr. Iacocca makes
$8,000 an hour, we can bail out the family farmer.
I just want to make common sense. It does not make sense to close down
650,000 family farms in this country while importing food from abroad subsidized
by the U.S. government.
Let’s make sense. It does not make sense to be escorting oil tankers up and
down the Persian Gulf paying $2.50 for every $1.00 worth of oil we bring out
while oil wells are capped in Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana. I just want to make
sense.
Leadership must meet the moral challenge of its day. What’s the moral chal-
lenge of our day? We have public accommodations. We have the right to vote. We
have open housing.
What’s the fundamental challenge of our day? It is to end economic violence.
Plant closing without notice, economic violence. Even the greedy do not profit
long from greed. Economic violence. Most poor people are not lazy. They’re not
black. They’re not brown. They’re mostly white, and female and young.
But whether white, black or brown, the hungry baby’s belly turned inside out
is the same color. Call it pain. Call it hurt. Call it agony. Most poor people are not
on welfare.


--- PAGE 573 ---
Some of them are illiterate and can’t read the want-ad sections. And when they
can, they can’t find a job that matches their address. They work hard every day, I
know. I live amongst them. I’m one of them.
I know they work. I’m a witness. They catch the early bus. They work every
day. They raise other people’s children. They work every day. They clean the
streets. They work every day. They drive vans with cabs. They work every day.
They change the beds you slept in these hotels last night and can’t get a union
contract. They work every day.
No more. They’re not lazy. Someone must defend them because it’s right, and
they cannot speak for themselves. They work in hospitals. I know they do. They
wipe the bodies of those who are sick with fever and pain. They empty their bed-
pans. They clean out their commode. No job is beneath them, and yet when they
get sick, they cannot lie in the bed they made up every day. America, that is not
right. We are a better nation than that. We are a better nation than that.
We need a real war on drugs. You can’t just say no. It’s deeper than that. You
can’t just get a palm reader or an astrologer; it’s more profound than that. We’re
spending $150 billion on drugs a year. We’ve gone from ignoring it to focusing on
the children. Children cannot buy $150 billion worth of drugs a year. A few high-
profile athletes—athletes are not laundering $150 billion a year—bankers are.
I met the children in Watts who are unfortunate in their despair. Their grapes
of hope have become raisins of despair, and they’re turning to each other and
they’re self-destructing—but I stayed with them all night long. I wanted to hear
their case. They said, “Jesse Jackson, as you challenge us to say no to drugs, you’re
right. And to not sell them, you’re right. And to not use these guns, you’re right.”
And, by the way, the promise of CETA—they displaced CETA. They did not
replace CETA. We have neither jobs nor houses nor services nor training—no
way out. Some of us take drugs as anesthesia for our pain. Some take drugs as a
way of pleasure—both short-term pleasure and long-term pain. Some sell drugs
to make money. It’s wrong, we know. But you need to know that we know. We can
go and buy the drugs by the boxes at the port. If we can buy the drugs at the port,
don’t you believe the federal government can stop it if they want to?
They say, “We don’t have Saturday-night specials any more.” They say, “We buy
AK-47s and Uzis, the latest lethal weapons. We buy them across the counter on
Long Beach Boulevard.” You cannot fight a war on drugs unless and until you are
going to challenge the bankers and the gun sellers and those who grow them.
Don’t just focus on the children, let’s stop drugs at the level of supply and
demand. We must end the scourge on the American culture.
Leadership. What difference will we make? Leadership cannot just go along to
get along. We must do more than change presidents. We must change direction.
Leadership must face the moral challenge of our day. The nuclear war build-up
is irrational. Strong leadership cannot desire to look tough, and let that stand in
the way of the pursuit of peace. Leadership must reverse the arms race.
At least we should pledge no first use. Why? Because first use begat first retal-
iation, and that’s mutual annihilation. That’s not a rational way out. No use at all—
5 4 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 574 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 4 3
let’s think it out, and not fight it out, because it’s an unwinnable fight. Why hold
a card that you can never drop? Let’s give peace a chance.
Leadership—we now have this marvelous opportunity to have a breakthrough
with the Soviets. Last year, 200,000 Americans visited the Soviet Union. There’s
a chance for joint ventures into space, not Star Wars and the war arms escalation,
but a space defense initiative. Let’s build in space together, and demilitarize the
heavens. There’s a way out.
America, let us expand. When Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev met, there was
a big meeting. They represented together one-eighth of the human race. Seven-
eighths of the human race was locked out of that room. Most people in the world
tonight—half are Asian, one-half of them are Chinese. There are twenty-two
nations in the Middle East. There’s Europe; forty million Latin Americans next
door to us; the Caribbean; Africa—a half-billion people. Most people in the world
today are yellow or brown or black, non-Christian, poor, female, young, and don’t
speak English—in the real world.
This generation must offer leadership to the real world. We’re losing ground in
Latin America, the Middle East, South Africa, because we’re not focusing on the
real world, that real world. We must use basic principles, support international law.
We stand the most to gain from it. Support human rights; we believe in that.
Support self-determination; we’ll build on that. Support economic development;
you know it’s right. Be consistent, and gain our moral authority in the world.
I challenge you tonight, my friends, let’s be bigger and better as a nation and
as a party. We have basic challenges. Freedom in South Africa—we’ve already
agreed as Democrats to declare South Africa to be a terrorist state. But don’t just
stop there. Get South Africa out of Angola. Free Namibia. Support the front-line
states. We must have a new, humane human-rights assistance policy in Africa.
I’m often asked, “Jesse, why do you take on these tough issues? They’re not
very political. We can’t win that way.”
If an issue is morally right, it will eventually be political. It may be political and
never be right. Fannie Lou Hamer didn’t have the most votes in Atlantic City, but
her principles have outlasted every delegate who voted to lock her out. Rosa
Parks did not have the most votes, but she was morally right. Dr. King didn’t have
the most votes about the Vietnam war, but he was morally right. If we’re princi-
pled first, our politics will fall in place.
Jesse, why did you take these big bold initiatives? A poem by an unknown
author went something like this: We mastered the air, we’ve conquered the sea,
and annihilated distance and prolonged life, we were not wise enough to live on
this earth without war and without hate.
As for Jesse Jackson, I’m tired of sailing by little boat, far inside the harbor bar.
I want to go out where the big ships float, out on the deep where the great ones
are. And should my frail craft prove too slight, the waves that sweep those billows
o’er, I’d rather go down in a stirring fight than drown to death in the sheltered
shore.
We’ve got to go out, my friends, where the big boats are.


--- PAGE 575 ---
And then, for our children, young America, hold your head high now. We can
win. We must not lose you to drugs and violence, premature pregnancy, suicide,
cynicism, pessimism and despair. We can win.
Wherever you are tonight, I challenge you to hope and to dream. Don’t sub-
merge your dreams. Exercise above all else, even on drugs, dream of the day
you’re drug-free. Even in the gutter, dream of the day that you’ll be up on your
feet again. You must never stop dreaming. Face reality, yes. But don’t stop with
the way things are; dream of things as they ought to be. Dream. Face pain, but
love, hope, faith, and dreams will help you rise above the pain.
Use hope and imagination as weapons of survival and progress, but you keep
on dreaming, young America. Dream of peace. Peace is rational and reasonable.
War is irrational in this age and unwinnable.
Dream of teachers who teach for life and not for living. Dream of doctors who are
concerned more about public health than private wealth. Dream of lawyers more
concerned about justice than a judgeship. Dream of preachers who are concerned
more about prophecy than profiteering. Dream on the high road of sound values.
And in America, as we go forth to September, October and November and
then beyond, America must never surrender to a high moral challenge.
Do not surrender to drugs. The best drug policy is a no first use. Don’t sur-
render with needles and cynicism. Let’s have no first use on the one hand, or clin-
ics on the other. Never surrender, young America.
Go forward. America must never surrender to malnutrition. We can feed the
hungry and clothe the naked. We must never surrender. We must go forward. We
must never surrender to illiteracy. Invest in our children. Never surrender; and
go forward.
We must never surrender to inequality. Women cannot compromise ERA or
comparable worth. Women are making 60 cents on the dollar to what a man
makes. Women cannot buy meat cheaper. Women cannot buy bread cheaper.
Women cannot buy milk cheaper. Women deserve to get paid for the work that
you do. It’s right and it’s fair.
Don’t surrender, my friends. Those who have AIDS tonight, you deserve our
compassion. Even with AIDS you must not surrender in your wheelchairs. I see
you sitting here tonight in those wheelchairs. I’ve stayed with you. I’ve reached
out to you across our nation. Don’t you give up. I know it’s tough sometimes.
People look down on you. It took you a little more effort to get here tonight.
And no one should look down on you, but sometimes mean people do. The
only justification we have for looking down on someone is that we’re going to stop
and pick them up. But even in your wheelchairs, don’t you give up. We cannot
forget fifty years ago when our backs were against the wall, Roosevelt was in a
wheelchair. I would rather have Roosevelt in a wheelchair than Reagan and Bush
on a horse. Don’t you surrender and don’t you give up.
Don’t surrender and don’t give up. Why can I challenge you this way? Jesse
Jackson, you don’t understand my situation. You be on television. You don’t
understand. I see you with the big people. You don’t understand my situation. I
5 4 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 576 ---
J. JACKSON, “KEEP HOPE ALIVE” 5 4 5
understand. You’re seeing me on TV but you don’t know the me that makes me,
me. They wonder why does Jesse run, because they see me running for the White
House. They don’t see the house I’m running from.
I have a story. I wasn’t always on television. Writers were not always outside my
door. When I was born late one afternoon, October 8th, in Greenville, S.C., no
writers asked my mother her name. Nobody chose to write down our address. My
mama was not supposed to make it. And I was not supposed to make it. You see,
I was born to a teen-age mother who was born to a teen-age mother.
I understand. I know abandonment and people being mean to you, and saying
you’re nothing and nobody, and can never be anything. I understand. Jesse
Jackson is my third name. I’m adopted. When I had no name, my grandmother
gave me her name. My name was Jesse Burns until I was 12. So I wouldn’t have
a blank space, she gave me a name to hold me over. I understand when nobody
knows your name. I understand when you have no name.
I understand. I wasn’t born in the hospital. Mama didn’t have insurance. I was
born in the bed at home. I really do understand. Born in a three-room house, bath-
room in the backyard, slop jar by the bed, no hot and cold running water. I under-
stand. Wallpaper used for decoration? No. For a windbreaker. I understand. I’m a
working person’s person, that’s why I understand you whether you’re black or white.
I understand work. I was not born with a silver spoon in my mouth. I had a
shovel programmed for my hand. My mother, a working woman. So many days
she went to work early with runs in her stockings. She knew better, but she wore
runs in her stockings so that my brother and I could have matching socks and not
be laughed at at school.
I understand. At 3 o’clock on Thanksgiving Day we couldn’t eat turkey because
mama was preparing someone else’s turkey at 3 o’clock. We had to play football
to entertain ourselves and then around 6 o’clock she would get off the Alta Vista
bus; then we would bring up the leftovers and eat our turkey—leftovers, the car-
cass, the cranberries around 8 o’clock at night. I really do understand.
Every one of these funny labels they put on you, those of you who are watch-
ing this broadcast tonight in the projects, on the corners, I understand. Call you
outcast, low down, you can’t make it, you’re nothing, you’re from nobody, sub-
class, underclass—when you see Jesse Jackson, when my name goes in nomina-
tion, your name goes in nomination.
I was born in the slum, but the slum was not born in me. And it wasn’t born in
you, and you can make it. Wherever you are tonight you can make it. Hold your
head high, stick your chest out. You can make it. It gets dark sometimes, but the
morning comes. Don’t you surrender. Suffering breeds character. Character
breeds faith. In the end faith will not disappoint.
You must not surrender. You may or may not get there, but just know that
you’re qualified and you hold on and hold out. We must never surrender. America
will get better and better. Keep hope alive. Keep hope alive. Keep hope alive. On
tomorrow night and beyond, keep hope alive.
I love you very much. I love you very much.


--- PAGE 577 ---
Source: “Common Ground and Common Sense,” address delivered July 20, 1988, reprinted
in Vital Speeches 54, no. 21 (August 15, 1988), pp. 649–53.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Lucius Barker and Ronald W. Walters, eds., Jesse Jackson’s 1984 Presidential Campaign:
Challenge and Change in American Politics(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989).
Sheila D. Collins, The Rainbow Challenge: The Jackson Campaign and the Future of U.S.
Politics (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1986).
Elizabeth O. Colton, The Jackson Phenomenon: The Man, the Power, the Message(New York:
Doubleday, 1989).
Marshall Frady,Jesse: The Life and Pilgrimage of Jesse Jackson(New York: Random House,
1996).
Roger D. Hatch, Beyond Opportunity: Jesse Jackson’s Vision for America (Philadelphia:
Fortress Press, 1988).
Manning Marable, Black American Politics: From the Washington Marches to Jesse Jackson
(London: Verso, 1985).
Adolph Reed, The Jesse Jackson Phenomenon and the Crisis of Purpose in African-American
Politics (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1986).
Barbara A. Reynolds, Jesse Jackson: America’s David (Washington, D.C.: JFJ Associates,
1985).
O8 O
“Afrocentricity,” Molefi Asante, 1991
Born Arthur Smith in Valdosta, Georgia, Molefi Kete Asante (1942–  ) holds a
Ph.D. from UCLA and is currently professor of African-American studies at
Temple University. Asante chaired the Department of African-American Studies
at Temple for many years, and was responsible for making the program one of the
most influential of its kind in the United States. A prolific author, Asante was
founding editor of the Journal of Black Studies (1969). Asante’s lasting influence
as an intellectual is chiefly derived from his theory of “Afrocentricity.” Asante’s
ideas about culture, education, and philosophy have had a profound impact on
the scholarship of black studies. In this essay, Asante discusses the differences
between what he describes as “Eurocentric education” versus multiculturalism.
O
THE AFROCENTRIC IDEA IN EDUCATION
Introduction
Many of the principles that govern the development of the Afrocentric idea in
education were first established by Carter G. Woodson in The Mis-education of
the Negro (1933). Indeed, Woodson’s classic reveals the fundamental problems
pertaining to the education of the African person in America. As Woodson con-
5 4 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 578 ---
M. ASANTE, “AFROCENTRICITY” 5 4 7
tends, African Americans have been educated away from their own culture and
traditions and attached to the fringes of European culture; thus dislocated from
themselves, Woodson asserts that African Americans often valorize European cul-
ture to the detriment of their own heritage (p. 7). Although Woodson does not
advocate rejection of American citizenship or nationality, he believed that assum-
ing African Americans hold the same position as European Americans vis-à-vis
the realities of America would lead to the psychological and cultural death of the
African-American population. Furthermore, if education is ever to be substantive
and meaningful within the context of American society, Woodson argues, it must
first address the African’s historical experiences, both in Africa and America (p.
7). That is why he places on education, and particularly on the traditionally
African-American colleges, the burden of teaching the African American to be
responsive to the long traditions and history of Africa as well as America.
Woodson’s alert recognition, more than 50 years ago, that something is severely
wrong with the way African Americans are educated provides the principal impe-
tus for the Afrocentric approach to American education.
. . . I will examine the nature and scope of this approach, establish its necessity,
and suggest ways to develop and disseminate it throughout all levels of education.
Two propositions stand in the background of the theoretical and philosophical
issues I will present. These ideas represent the core presuppositions on which I
have based most of my work in the field of education, and they suggest the direc-
tion of my own thinking about what education is capable of doing to and for an
already politically and economically marginalized people—African Americans:
1. Education is fundamentally a social phenomenon whose ultimate purpose is
to socialize the learner; to send a child to school is to prepare that child to
become part of a social group.
2. Schools are reflective of the societies that develop them (i.e., a White-
supremacist–dominated society will develop a White-supremacist educa-
tional system).
Definitions
. . . Afrocentricity is a frame of reference wherein phenomena are viewed from
the perspective of the African person. The Afrocentric approach seeks in every
situation the appropriate centrality of the African person (Asante, 1987). In edu-
cation this means that teachers provide students the opportunity to study the
world and its people, concepts, and history from an African world view. In most
classrooms, whatever the subject, Whites are located in the center perspective
position. How alien the African-American child must feel, how like an outsider!
The little African-American child who sits in a classroom and is taught to accept
as heroes and heroines individuals who defamed African people is being actively
de-centered, dislocated, and made into a nonperson, one whose aim in life might
be to one day shed that “badge of inferiority”: his or her Blackness. In Afrocentric
educational settings, however, teachers do not marginalize African-American chil-
dren by causing them to question their own self-worth because their people’s


--- PAGE 579 ---
story is seldom told. By seeing themselves as the subjects rather than the objects
of education—be the discipline biology, medicine, literature, or social studies—
African-American students come to see themselves not merely as seekers of
knowledge but as integral participants in it. Because all content areas are adapt-
able to an Afrocentric approach, African-American students can be made to see
themselves as centered in the reality of any discipline.
It must be emphasized that Afrocentricity is not a Black version of Eurocen-
tricity (Asante, 1987). Eurocentricity is based on White-supremacist notions
whose purposes are to protect White privilege and advantage in education, eco-
nomics, politics, and so forth. Unlike Eurocentricity, Afrocentricity does not con-
done ethnocentric valorization at the expense of degrading other groups’ per-
spectives. Moreover, Eurocentricity presents the particular historical reality of
Europeans as the sum total of the human experience (Asante, 1987). It imposes
Eurocentric realities as “universal”; i.e., that which is White is presented as apply-
ing to the human condition in general, while that which is non-White is viewed as
group-specific and therefore not “human.” This explains why some scholars and
artists of African descent rush to deny their Blackness; they believe that to exist
as a Black person is not to exist as a universal human being. They are the individ-
uals Woodson identified as preferring European art, language, and culture over
African art, language, and culture; they believe that anything of European origin
is inherently better than anything produced by or issuing from their own people.
Naturally, the person of African descent should be centered in his or her histori-
cal experiences as an African, but Eurocentric curricula produce such aberrations
of perspective among persons of color.
Multiculturalism in education is a nonhierarchical approach that respects and
celebrates a variety of cultural perspectives on world phenomena (Asante, 1991).
The multicultural approach holds that although European culture is the majority
culture in the United States, that is not sufficient reason for it to be imposed on
diverse student populations as “universal.” Multiculturalists assert that education,
to have integrity, must begin with the proposition that all humans have con-
tributed to world development and the flow of knowledge and information, and
that most human achievements are the result of mutually interactive, interna-
tional effort. Without a multicultural education, students remain essentially igno-
rant of the contributions of a major portion of the world’s people. A multicultural
education is thus a fundamental necessity for anyone who wishes to achieve com-
petency in almost any subject.
The Afrocentric idea must be the stepping-stone from which the multicultural
idea is launched. A truly authentic multicultural education, therefore, must be
based upon the Afrocentric initiative. If this step is skipped, multicultural curric-
ula, as they are increasingly being defined by White “resisters” (to be discussed
below) will evolve without any substantive infusion of African-American content,
and the African-American child will continue to be lost in the Eurocentric frame-
work of education. In other words, the African-American child will neither be
confirmed nor affirmed in his or her own cultural information. For the mutual
5 4 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 580 ---
M. ASANTE, “AFROCENTRICITY” 5 4 9
benefit of all Americans, this tragedy, which leads to the psychological and cul-
tural dislocation of African-American children, can and should be avoided.
The Revolutionary Challenge
Because it centers African-American students inside history, culture, science, and
so forth rather than outside these subjects, the Afrocentric idea presents the most
revolutionary challenge to the ideology of White supremacy in education during
the past decade. No other theoretical position stated by African Americans has
ever captured the imagination of such a wide range of scholars and students of
history, sociology, communications, anthropology, and psychology. The Afrocen-
tric challenge has been posed in three critical ways:
1. It questions the imposition of the White-supremacist view as universal
and/or classical (Asante, 1990).
2. It demonstrates the indefensibility of racist theories that assault multicul-
turalism and pluralism.
3. It projects a humanistic and pluralistic viewpoint by articulating Afrocentric-
ity as a valid, nonhegemonic perspective.
Suppression and Distortion: Symbols of Resistance
. . . Naturally, different adherents to a theory will have different views on its
meaning. While two discourses presently are circulating about multiculturalism,
only one is relevant to the liberation of the minds of African and White people in
the United States. That discourse is Afrocentricity: the acceptance of Africa as
central to African people. Yet, rather than getting on board with Afrocentrists to
fight against White hegemonic education, some Whites (and some Blacks as well)
have opted to plead for a return to the educational plantation. Unfortunately for
them, however, those days are gone, and such misinformation can never be pack-
aged as accurate, correct education again.
Ravitch (1990), who argues that there are two kinds of multiculturalism—
pluralist multiculturalism and particularist multiculturalism —is the leader of
those professors whom I call “resisters” or opponents to Afrocentricity and mul-
ticulturalism. Indeed, Ravitch advances the imaginary divisions in multicultural
perspectives to conceal her true identity as a defender of White supremacy. Her
tactics are the tactics of those who prefer Africans and other non-Whites to
remain on the mental and psychological plantation of Western civilization. In
their arrogance the resisters accuse Afrocentrists and multiculturalists of creat-
ing “fantasy history” and “bizarre theories” of non-White people’s contributions
to civilization. What they prove, however, is their own ignorance. Additionally,
Ravitch and others (Nicholson, 1990) assert that multiculturalism will bring
about the “tribalization” of America, but in reality America has always been a
nation of ethnic diversity. When one reads their works on multiculturalism, one
realizes that they are really advocating the imposition of a White perspective on
everybody else’s culture. Believing that the Eurocentric position is indisputable,
they attempt to resist and impede the progressive transformation of the


--- PAGE 581 ---
monoethnic curriculum. Indeed, the closets of bigotry have opened to reveal
various attempts by White scholars (joined by some Blacks) to defend White
privilege in the curriculum in much the same way as it has been so staunchly
defended in the larger society. It was perhaps inevitable that the introduction
of the Afrocentric idea would open up the discussion of the American school
curriculum in a profound way. . . .
The Condition of Eurocentric Education
Institutions such as schools are conditioned by the character of the nation in
which they are developed. Just as crime and politics are different in different
nations, so, too, is education. In the United States a “Whites-only” orientation has
predominated in education. This has had a profound impact on the quality of edu-
cation for children of all races and ethnic groups. The African-American child has
suffered disproportionately, but White children are also the victims of monocul-
turally diseased curricula. . . .
Afrocentricity and History. Most of America’s teaching force are victims of
the same system that victimizes today’s young. Thus, American children are not
taught the names of the African ethnic groups from which the majority of the
African-American population are derived; few are taught the names of any of the
sacred sites in Africa. Few teachers can discuss with their students the signifi-
cance of the Middle Passage or describe what it meant or means to Africans.
Little mention is made in American classrooms of either the brutality of slavery
or the ex-slaves’ celebration of freedom. American children have little or no
understanding of the nature of the capture, transport, and enslavement of
Africans. Few have been taught the true horrors of being taken, shipped naked
across twenty-five days of ocean, broken by abuse and indignities of all kinds, and
dehumanized into a beast of burden, a thing without a name. If our students only
knew the truth, if they were taught the Afrocentric perspective on the Great
Enslavement, and if they knew the full story about the events since slavery that
have served to constantly dislocate African Americans, their behavior would per-
haps be different. . . .
Enslavement was truly a living death. While the ontological onslaught caused
some Africans to opt for suicide, the most widespread results were dislocation,
disorientation, and misorientation—all of which are the consequences of the
African person being actively de-centered. The “Jim Crow” period of second-class
citizenship, from 1877 to 1954, saw only slight improvement in the lot of African
Americans. This era was characterized by the sharecropper system, disenfran-
chisement, enforced segregation, internal migration, lynchings, unemployment,
poor housing conditions, and separate and unequal educational facilities.
Inequitable policies and practices veritably plagued the race.
No wonder many persons of African descent attempt to shed their race and
become “raceless.” One’s basic identity is one’s self-identity, which is ultimately
one’s cultural identity; without a strong cultural identity, one is lost. Black chil-
5 5 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 582 ---
M. ASANTE, “AFROCENTRICITY” 5 5 1
dren do not know their people’s story and White children do not know the story,
but remembrance is a vital requisite for understanding and humility. This is why
the Jews have campaigned (and rightly so) to have the story of the European
Holocaust taught in schools and colleges. Teaching about such a monstrous
human brutality should forever remind the world of the ways in which humans
have often violated each other. Teaching about the African Holocaust is just as
important for many of the same reasons. Additionally, it underscores the enormity
of the effects of physical, psychological, and economic dislocation on the African
population in America and throughout the African diaspora. Without an under-
standing of the historical experiences of African people, American children can-
not make any real headway in addressing the problems of the present. . . .
Conclusion
The reigning initiative for total curricular change is the movement that is being
proposed and led by Africans, namely, the Afrocentric idea. When I wrote the
first book on Afrocentricity (Asante, 1980), now in its fifth printing, I had no idea
that in ten years the idea would both shake up and shape discussions in educa-
tion, art, fashion, and politics. Since the publication of my subsequent works, The
Afrocentric Idea (Asante, 1987) and Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge
(Asante, 1990) the debate has been joined in earnest. Still, for many White
Americans (and some African Americans) the most unsettling aspect of the dis-
cussion about Afrocentricity is that its intellectual source lies in the research and
writings of African-American scholars. Whites are accustomed to being in charge
of the major ideas circulating in the American academy. Deconstructionism,
Gestalt psychology, Marxism, structuralism, Piagetian theory, and so forth have all
been developed, articulated, and elaborated upon at length, generally by White
scholars. On the other hand, Afrocentricity is the product of scholars such as
Nobles (1986), Hilliard (1978), Karenga (1986), Keto (1990), Richards (1991),
and Myers (1989). There are also increasing numbers of young, impressively cre-
dentialed African-American scholars who have begun to write in the Afrocentric
vein (Jean, 1991). They, and even some young White scholars, have emerged with
ideas about how to change the curriculum Afrocentrically.
Afrocentricity provides all Americans an opportunity to examine the per-
spective of the African person in this society and the world. The resisters claim
that Afrocentricity is anti-White; yet, if Afrocentricity as a theory is against any-
thing it is against racism, ignorance, and monoethnic hegemony in the curricu-
lum. Afrocentricity is not anti-White; it is, however, pro-human. Further, the
aim of the Afrocentric curriculum is not to divide America, it is to make
America flourish as it ought to flourish. This nation has long been divided with
regard to the educational opportunities afforded to children. By virtue of the
protection provided by society and reinforced by the Eurocentric curriculum,
the White child is already ahead of the African American child by first grade.
Our efforts thus must concentrate on giving the African-American child greater


--- PAGE 583 ---
opportunities for learning at the kindergarten level. However, the kind of assis-
tance the African-American child needs is as much cultural as it is academic. If
the proper cultural information is provided, the academic performance will
surely follow suit.
When it comes to educating African-American children, the American educa-
tional system does not need a tune-up, it needs an overhaul. Black children have
been maligned by this system. Black teachers have been maligned. Black history
has been maligned. Africa has been maligned. Nonetheless, two truisms can be
stated about education in America. First, some teachers can and do effectively
teach African-American children; secondly, if some teachers can do it, others can,
too. We must learn all we can about what makes these teachers’ attitudes and
approaches successful, and then work diligently to see that their successes are
replicated on a broad scale. By raising the same questions that Woodson posed
more than fifty years ago, Afrocentric education, along with a significant reorien-
tation of the American educational enterprise, seeks to respond to the African
person’s psychological and cultural dislocation. By providing philosophical and
theoretical guidelines and criteria that are centered in an African perception of
reality and by placing the African-American child in his or her proper historical
context and setting, Afrocentricity may be just the “escape hatch” African
Americans so desperately need to facilitate academic success and “steal away”
from the cycle of miseducation and dislocation.
Source: “The Afrocentric Idea in Education,” Journal of Negro Education60, no. 2 (Spring
1991), pp. 170–80. Copyright 1991 by Howard University.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Molefi Asante, Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change(Buffalo, N.Y.: Amulefi Publish-
ing Company, 1980).
———, The Afrocentric Idea, rev. and expanded ed. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1998).
Molefi Asante, Eileen Newmar, and Cecil A. Blake, eds., Handbook of Intercultural
Communication (Beverly Hills, Ca.: Sage Publications, 1979).
Molefi Asante and Abdulani S. Vandi, eds., Contemporary Black Thought: Alternative
Analyses in Social and Behavioral Science(Beverly Hills, Ca.: Sage Publications, 1980).
Molefi Asante and Mark T. Mattson, eds., The African-American Atlas: Black History and
Culture: An Illustrated Reference(New York: Macmillan, 1998).
O9 O
The Anita Hill–Clarence Thomas Controversy, 1991
In 1991, President George Bush nominated Clarence Thomas, a conservative
black Republican who was at the time a judge on the United States Court of
5 5 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 584 ---
THE ANITA HILL–CLARENCE THOMAS CONTROVERSY 5 5 3
Appeals for the District of Columbia, to replace Thurgood Marshall as
Associate Judge on the U.S. Supreme Court. Thomas had previously served as
the head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission during the
Reagan administration. Anita Hill, an African-American attorney and law pro-
fessor, charged that Thomas had sexually harassed and abused her when she
worked as his assistant in the federal government. In highly publicized hearings
held by the Senate judiciary committee, Hill outlined her charges against
Thomas, which he vigorously denied. Despite major opposition from many
African Americans and liberal organizations, Thomas was confirmed by the
Senate for a seat on the Supreme Court.
The first document below was issued by a group of African-American female
scholars and activists who were outraged by the sexist and reactionary rhetoric
surrounding the media’s and political establishment’s defense of Thomas. The
statement was first published in an advertisement in the New York Times, and
was conceived and organized by black-feminist scholars Barbara Ransby, Elsa
Barkley Brown, and Deborah King. The second document is an excerpt from an
essay by scholar and poet June Jordan, which discusses the failure of many
African-American political organizations and leaders to support Hill and to
oppose both the sexist personal behavior and conservative political agenda of
Thomas.
O
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN IN DEFENSE OF OURSELVES
As women of African descent, we are deeply troubled by the recent nomina-
tion, confirmation and seating of Clarence Thomas as an Associate Justice of
the U.S. Supreme Court. We know that the presence of Clarence Thomas on
the Court will be continually used to divert attention from historic struggles for
social justice through suggestions that the presence of a Black man on the
Supreme Court constitutes an assurance that the rights of African Americans
will be protected. Clarence Thomas’ public record is ample evidence this will
not be true. Further, the consolidation of a conservative majority on the
Supreme Court seriously endangers the rights of all women, poor and working-
class people and the elderly. The seating of Clarence Thomas is an affront not
only to African-American women and men, but to all people concerned with
social justice.
We are particularly outraged by the racist and sexist treatment of Professor
Anita Hill, an African-American woman who was maligned and castigated for dar-
ing to speak publicly of her own experience of sexual abuse. The malicious
defamation of Professor Hill insulted all women of African descent and sent a
dangerous message to any woman who might contemplate a sexual harassment
complaint.
We speak here because we recognize that the media are now portraying the
Black community as prepared to tolerate both the dismantling of affirmative


--- PAGE 585 ---
action and the evil of sexual harassment in order to have any Black man on the
Supreme Court. We want to make clear that the media have ignored or distorted
many African-American voices. We will not be silenced.
Many have erroneously portrayed the allegations against Clarence Thomas as
an issue of either gender or race. As women of African descent, we understand
sexual harassment as both. We further understand that Clarence Thomas outra-
geously manipulated the legacy of lynching in order to shelter himself from Anita
Hill’s allegations. To deflect attention away from the reality of sexual abuse in
African-American women’s lives, he trivialized and misrepresented this painful
part of African-American people’s history. This country, which has a long legacy
of racism and sexism, has never taken the sexual abuse of Black women seriously.
Throughout U.S. history Black women have been sexually stereotyped as
immoral, insatiable, perverse; the initiators in all sexual contacts—abusive or oth-
erwise. The common assumption in legal proceedings as well as in the larger soci-
ety has been that Black women cannot be raped or otherwise sexually abused. As
Anita Hill’s experience demonstrates, Black women who speak of these matters
are not likely to be believed.
In 1991, we cannot tolerate this type of dismissal of any one Black woman’s
experience or this attack upon our collective character without protest, outrage,
and resistance. As women of African descent, we express our vehement opposi-
tion to the policies represented by the placement of Clarence Thomas on the
Supreme Court. The Bush administration, having obstructed the passage of civil-
rights legislation, impeded the extension of unemployment compensation, cut
student aid and dismantled social welfare programs, has continually demon-
strated that it is not operating in our best interests. Nor is this appointee. We
pledge ourselves to continue to speak out in defense of one another, in defense of
the African-American community and against those who are hostile to social jus-
tice no matter what color they are. No one will speak for us but ourselves.
O
CAN I GET A WITNESS?
I wanted to write a letter to Anita Hill. I wanted to say thanks. I wanted to con-
vey the sorrow and the bitterness I feel on her behalf. I wanted to explode the his-
tory that twisted itself around the innocence of her fate. I wanted to assail the
brutal ironies, the cruel consistencies that left her—at the moment of her utmost
vulnerability and public power—isolated, betrayed, abused, and not nearly as
powerful as those who sought and who seek to besmirch, ridicule, and condemn
the truth of her important and perishable human being. I wanted to reassure her
of her rights, her sanity, and the African beauty of her earnest commitment to do
right and to be a good woman: a good black woman in this America.
But tonight I am still too furious, I am still too hurt, I am still too astounded and
nauseated by the enemies of Anita Hill. Tonight my heart pounds with shame.
5 5 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 586 ---
THE ANITA HILL–CLARENCE THOMAS CONTROVERSY 5 5 5
Is there no way to interdict and terminate the traditional abusive loneliness of
black women in this savage country?
From those slavery times when African men could not dare to defend their sis-
ters, their mothers, their sweethearts, their wives, and their daughters—except at
the risk of their lives—from those times until today: Has nothing changed?
How is it possible that only John Carr—a young black corporate lawyer who
maintained a friendship with Anita Hill ten years ago (“It didn’t go but so far,” he
testified, with an engaging, handsome trace of a smile)—how is it possible that he,
alone among black men, stood tall and strong and righteous as a witness for her
defense?
What about spokesmen for the NAACP or the National Urban League?
What about spokesmen for the U.S. Congressional Black Caucus?
All of the organizational and elected black men who spoke aloud against a wrong
black man, Clarence Thomas, for the sake of principles resting upon decency and
concerns for fair play, equal protection, and affirmative action—where did they go
when, suddenly, a good black woman arose among us, trying to tell the truth?
Where did they go? And why?
Is it conceivable that a young white woman could be tricked into appearing
before twelve black men of the U.S. Senate?
Is it conceivable that a young white woman could be tricked into appearing
before a lineup of incredibly powerful and hypocritical and sneering and hellbent
black men freely insinuating and freely hypothesizing whatever lurid scenario
came into their heads?
Is it conceivable that such a young woman—such a flower of white woman-
hood—would, by herself, have to withstand the calumny and unabashed, unlaw-
ful bullying that was heaped upon Anita Hill?
Is it conceivable that this flower would not be swiftly surrounded by white
knights rallying—with ropes, or guns, or whatever—to defend her honor and the
honor, the legal and civilized rights, of white people, per se?
Anita Hill was tricked. She was set up. She had been minding her business at
the University of Oklahoma Law School when the Senators asked her to describe
her relationship with Clarence Thomas. Anita Hill’s dutiful answers disclosed that
Thomas had violated the trust of his office as head of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission. Sitting in that office of ultimate recourse for women
suffering from sexual harassment, Thomas himself harassed Anita Hill, repeat-
edly, with unwanted sexual advances and remarks.
Although Anita Hill had not volunteered this information and only supplied it
in response to direct, specific inquiries from the FBI,
And although Anita Hill was promised the protection of confidentiality as
regards her sworn statement of allegations,
And despite the fact that four witnesses—two men and two women, two black
and two white distinguished Americans, including a Federal judge and a profes-
sor of law—testified, under oath, that Anita Hill had told each of them about


--- PAGE 587 ---
these sordid carryings on by Thomas at the time of their occurrence or in the
years that followed,
And despite the fact that Anita Hill sustained a remarkably fastidious display
of exact recall and never alleged, for example, that Thomas actually touched her,
And despite the unpardonable decision by the U.S. Senate Judiciary Commit-
tee to prohibit expert testimony on sexual harassment,
Anita Hill, a young black woman born and raised within a black farm family of
thirteen children, a graduate of an Oklahoma public high school who later earned
honors and graduated from Yale Law School, a political conservative and, now, a
professor of law,
Anita Hill, a young black woman who suffered sexual harassment once in ten
years and, therefore, never reported sexual harassment to any of her friends
except for that once in ten years,
Anita Hill, whose public calm and dispassionate sincerity refreshed America’s
eyes and ears with her persuasive example of what somebody looks like and
sounds like when she’s simply trying to tell the truth,
Anita Hill was subpoenaed by the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee of four-
teen white men and made to testify and to tolerate interrogation on national tele-
vision.
1. Why didn’t she “do something” when Thomas allegedly harassed her?
The Senators didn’t seem to notice or to care that Thomas occupied the office
of last recourse for victims of sexual harassment. And had the Committee allowed
any expert on the subject to testify, we would have learned that it is absolutely typ-
ical for victims to keep silent.
2. Wasn’t it the case that she had/has fantasies and is delusional?
Remarkably, not a single psychiatrist or licensed psychologist was allowed to
testify. These slanderous suppositions about the psychic functionings of Anita Hill
were never more than malevolent speculations invited by one or another of the
fourteen white Senators as they sat above an assortment of character witnesses
hand-picked by White House staffers eager to protect the President’s nominee.
One loathsomely memorable item: John Doggett, a self-infatuated black attor-
ney and a friend of Clarence Thomas, declared that Thomas would not have jeop-
ardized his career for Anita Hill because Doggett, a black man, explained to the
Senate Committee of fourteen white men, “She is not worth it.”
3. Why was she “lying”?
It should be noted that Anita Hill readily agreed to a lie-detector test and that,
according to the test, she was telling the truth. It should also be noted that
Clarence Thomas refused even to consider taking such a test and that, further-
more, he had already established himself as a liar when, earlier in the Senate
hearings, he insisted that he had never discussed Roe v. Wade, and didn’t know
much about this paramount legal dispute.
Meanwhile, Clarence Thomas—who has nodded and grinned his way to glory
and power by denying systemic American realities of racism, on the one hand,
and by publicly castigating and lying about his own sister, a poor black woman, on
the other—this Thomas, this Uncle Tom calamity of mediocre abilities, at best,
5 5 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 588 ---
THE ANITA HILL–CLARENCE THOMAS CONTROVERSY 5 5 7
this bootstrap miracle of egomaniacal myth and self-pity, this choice of the very
same President who has vetoed two civil-rights bills and boasted about that, how
did he respond to the testimony of Anita Hill?
Clarence Thomas thundered and he shook. Clarence Thomas glowered and he
growled. “God is my judge!” he cried, at one especially disgusting low point in the
Senate proceedings. “God is my judge, Senator. And not you!” This candidate for the
Supreme Court evidently believes himself exempt from the judgments of mere men.
This Clarence Thomas—about whom an African-American young man in my
freshman composition class exclaimed, “He’s an Uncle Tom. He’s a hypocritical
Uncle Tom. And I don’t care what happens to his punk ass”—this Thomas vilified
the hearings as a “high-tech lynching.”
When he got into hot water for the first time (on public record, at any rate),
he attempted to identify himself as a regular black man. What a peculiar reaction
to the charge of sexual harassment!
And where was the laughter that should have embarrassed him out of that
chamber?
And where were the tears?
When and where was there ever a black man lynched because he was bother-
ing a black woman?
When and where was there ever a white man jailed or tarred and feathered
because he was bothering a black woman?
When a black woman is raped or beaten or mutilated by a black man or a white
man, what happens?
To be a black woman in this savage country: Is that to be nothing and no one
beautiful and precious and exquisitely compelling?
To be a black woman in this savage country: Is that to be nothing and no one
revered and defended and given our help and our gratitude?
The only powerful man to utter and to level the appropriate word of revulsion
as a charge against his peers—the word was “SHAME”—that man was U.S.
Senator Ted Kennedy, a white man whose ongoing, successful career illuminates
the unequal privileges of male gender, white race, and millionaire-class identity.
But Ted Kennedy was not on trial. He has never been on trial.
Clarence Thomas was supposed to be on trial but he was not: He is more pow-
erful than Anita Hill. And his bedfellows, from Senator Strom Thurmond to
President George Bush, persist—way more powerful than Clarence Thomas and
Anita Hill combined.
And so, at the last, it was she, Anita Hill, who stood alone, trying to tell the
truth in an arena of snakes and hyenas and dinosaurs and power-mad dogs. And
with this televised victimization of Anita Hill, the American war of violence
against women moved from the streets, moved from hip hop, moved from multi-
million-dollar movies into the highest chambers of the U.S. Government.
And what is anybody going to do about it?
I, for one, I am going to write a letter to Anita Hill. I am going to tell her that,
thank God, she is a black woman who is somebody and something beautiful and
precious and exquisitely compelling.


--- PAGE 589 ---
And I am going to say that if this Government will not protect and defend her,
and all black women, and all women, period, in this savage country—if this
Government will not defend us from poverty and violence and contempt—then
we will change the Government. We have the numbers to deliver on this warning.
And, as for those brothers who disappeared when a black woman rose up to
tell the truth, listen: It’s getting to be payback time. I have been speaking on
behalf of a good black woman. Can you hear me?
Can I get a witness?
Sources: (1) “African-American Women in Defense of Ourselves”; and (2) June Jordan, “Can
I Get a Witness?” Both are reprinted with permission from Black Scholar 22, nos. 1 and 2
(Winter/Spring 1991), pp. 56–58, 155.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Anita F. Hill and Emma C. Jordan, eds., Race, Gender and Power in America: The Legacy of
the Hill–Thomas Hearings(New York: Oxford University Press, 1995).
Toni Morrison, ed., Race-ing Justice, En-gendering Power: Essays on Anita Hill, Clarence
Thomas, and the Construction of Social Reality(New York: Pantheon, 1992).
O10 O
“Race Matters,” Cornel West, 1991
Cornel West (1953–  ) was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and raised in Sacramento,
California. He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard College and received
his doctorate from Princeton University in 1980. He quickly produced a series of
theoretically engaging texts in the fields of theology, philosophy, and Marxist
thought. West joined the Democratic Socialists of America in 1982, and for many
years served as its honorary chairperson. From 1989 to 1994 he was professor of
African-American studies at Princeton, and subsequently joined the faculty of
African-American Studies at Harvard University. After a public conflict with
Harvard’s president, West rejoined the faculty of Princeton University as a
University Professor. Considered one of the most influential intellectuals in
America, West published the widely read book, Race Matters (1991). In subse-
quent works such as Democracy Matters (2004), West advocates a fundamental
redistribution of wealth and resources, the reduction of the power of the market,
and the creation of a more equitable society in the United States.
O
NIHILISM IN BLACK AMERICA
Recent discussions about the plight of African Americans—especially those at the
bottom of the social ladder—tend to divide into two camps. On the one hand,
5 5 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 590 ---
C. WEST, “RACE MATTERS” 5 5 9
there are those who highlight the structural constraints on the life chances of
black people. This point of view involves a subtle historical and sociological analy-
sis of slavery, Jim Crowism, job and residential discrimination, skewed unem-
ployment rates, inadequate health care, and poor education. On the other hand,
there are those who stress the behavioral impediments to black upward mobility.
They focus on the waning of the Protestant ethic—hard work, deferred gratifica-
tion, frugality, and responsibility—in much of black America.
Those in the first camp—the liberal structuralists—call for full employment,
health, education and child-care programs, and broad affirmative-action prac-
tices. In short, a new, more sober version of the best of the New Deal and the
Great Society: more government money, better bureaucrats, and an active citi-
zenry. Those in the second camp—the conservative behaviorists—promote self-
help programs, black business expansion, and non-preferential job practices.
They support vigorous “free market” strategies that depend on fundamental
changes in how black people act and live. To put it bluntly, their projects rest
largely upon a cultural revival of the Protestant ethic in black America.
Unfortunately, these two camps have nearly suffocated the crucial debate that
should be taking place about the prospects for black America. This debate must
go far beyond the liberal and conservative positions in three fundamental ways.
First, we must acknowledge that structures and behavior are inseparable, that
institutions and values go hand in hand. How people act and live is shaped—
though in no way dictated or determined—by the larger circumstances in which
they find themselves. These circumstances can be changed, their limits attenu-
ated, by positive actions to elevate living conditions.
Second, we should reject the idea that structures are primarily economic and
political creatures—an idea that sees culture as an ephemeral set of behavioral
attitudes and values. Culture is quite as structural as the economy or politics; it is
rooted in institutions like families, schools, churches, synagogues, mosques, and
communication industries (television, radio, video, music). Similarly, the econ-
omy and politics are not only influenced by values, they also promote particular
cultural ideals of the good life and good society.
Third, and most important, we must delve into the depths where neither lib-
erals nor conservatives dare to tread, namely, into the murky waters of despair
and dread that now flood the streets of black America. To talk about the depress-
ing statistics of unemployment, infant mortality, incarceration, teenage preg-
nancy, and violent crime is one thing. But to face up to the monumental eclipse
of hope, the unprecedented collapse of meaning, the incredible disregard for
human (especially black) life and property in much of black America is some-
thing else.
The liberal-conservative discussion conceals the most basic issue now facing
black America: the nihilistic threat to its very existence. This threat is not simply a
matter of relative economic deprivation and political powerlessness—though eco-
nomic well-being and political clout are requisites for meaningful black progress. It
is primarily a question of speaking to the profound sense of psychological depres-
sion, personal worthlessness, and social despair so widespread in black America.


--- PAGE 591 ---
The liberal structuralists fail to grapple with this threat for two reasons. First,
their focus on structural constraints relates almost exclusively to the economy and
politics. They show no understanding of the structural character of culture. Why?
Because they tend to view people in egoistic and rationalist terms, according to
which they are motivated primarily by self-interest and self-preservation. Need-
less to say, this is partly true about most of us. Yet, people, especially degraded
and oppressed people, are also hungry for identity, meaning, and self-worth.
The second reason liberal structuralists overlook the nihilistic threat is a sheer
failure of nerve. They hesitate to talk honestly about culture, the realm of mean-
ings and values, because to do so may seem to lend itself too readily to conserva-
tive conclusions in the narrow way Americans discuss race. If there is a hidden
taboo among liberals, it is to resist talking about values too much because it takes
the focus away from structures, especially the positive role of government. But
this failure leaves the existential and psychological realities of black people in the
lurch. In this way, liberal structuralists neglect the battered identities rampant in
black America.
As for the conservative behaviorists, they not only misconstrue the nihilistic
threat, but inadvertently contribute to it. This is a serious charge, and it rests upon
three claims. First, conservative behaviorists talk about values and attitudes as if
political and economic structures hardly exist. They rarely, if ever, examine the
innumerable cases in which black people do act on the Protestant ethic and still
remain at the bottom of the social ladder. Instead, they highlight the few instances
in which blacks ascend to the top, as if such success is available to all blacks,
regardless of circumstances. Such a vulgar rendition of Horatio Alger in blackface
may serve as a source of inspiration to some—a kind of model for those already
on the right track. But it cannot serve as a substitute for serious historical and
social analysis of the predicaments of and prospects for all black people, especially
the grossly disadvantaged ones.
Second, conservative behaviorists discuss black culture as if acknowledging
one’s obvious victimization by white-supremacist practices (compounded by sex-
ism and class condition) is taboo. They tell black people to see themselves as
agents, not victims. And on the surface, this is comforting advice, a nice cliche for
downtrodden people. But inspirational slogans cannot substitute for substantive
historical and social analysis. Although black people have never been simply vic-
tims, wallowing in self-pity and begging for white giveaways, they have been—
and are—victimized. Therefore, to call on black people to be agents makes sense
only if we also examine the dynamics of this victimization against which their
agency will, in part, be exercised. What is particularly naive and peculiarly vicious
about the conservative behavioral outlook is that it tends to deny the lingering
effect of black history—a history inseparable from though not reducible to vic-
timization. In this way, crucial and indispensable themes of self-help and personal
responsibility are wrenched out of historical context and contemporary circum-
stances—as if it is all a matter of personal will.
This ahistorical perspective contributes to the nihilistic threat within black
America in that it can be used to justify right-wing cutbacks for poor people strug-
5 6 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 592 ---
C. WEST, “RACE MATTERS” 5 6 1
gling for decent housing, child care, health care, and education. And, as I pointed
out earlier, although liberals are deficient in important ways, they are right on tar-
get in their critique of conservative government cutbacks for services to the poor.
These ghastly cutbacks are one cause of the nihilistic threat to black America.
The proper starting point for the crucial debate about the prospects for black
America is the nihilism that increasingly pervades black communities. Nihilism is
to be understood here not as a philosophic doctrine that there are no rational
grounds for legitimate standards or authority; it is, far more, the lived experience
of coping with a life of horrifying meaninglessness, hopelessness, and (most
important) lovelessness. This usually results in a numbing detachment from oth-
ers and a self-destructive disposition toward the world. Life without meaning,
hope, and love breeds a coldhearted, mean-spirited-outlook that destroys both
the individual and others.
Nihilism is not new in black America. The first African encounter with the
New World was an encounter with a distinctive form of the Absurd. The initial
black struggle against degradation and devaluation in the enslaved circumstances
of the New World was, in part, a struggle against nihilism. In fact, the major
enemy of black survival in America has been, and is, neither oppression nor
exploitation but rather the nihilistic threat—that is, loss of hope and absence of
meaning. For as long as hope remains and meaning is preserved, the possibility
of overcoming oppression stays alive. The self-fulfilling prophecy of the nihilistic
threat is that without hope there can be no struggle.
The genius of our black foremothers and forefathers was to create powerful
buffers to ward off the nihilistic threat, to equip black folk with cultural armor to
beat back the demons of hopelessness, meaninglessness, and lovelessness. These
buffers consisted of cultural structures of meaning and feeling that created and sus-
tained communities; this armor constituted ways of life and struggle that embod-
ied values of service and sacrifice, love and care, discipline and excellence. In other
words, traditions for black surviving and thriving under usually adverse New World
conditions were major barriers against the nihilistic threat. These traditions consist
primarily of black religious and civic institutions that sustained familial and com-
munal networks of support. If cultures are, in part, what human beings create (out
of antecedent fragments of other cultures) in order to convince themselves not to
commit suicide, then black foremothers and forefathers are to be applauded. In
fact, until the early seventies black Americans had the lowest suicide rate in the
United States. But, now young black people lead the nation in suicides.
What has changed? What went wrong? The bitter irony of integration? The
cumulative effects of a genocidal conspiracy? The virtual collapse of rising expec-
tations after the optimistic sixties? None of us fully understands why the nihilistic
threat is mor powerful now than ever before. I believe that the commodification
of black life and the crisis of black leadership are two basic reasons. The recent
shattering of black civil society—black families, neighborhoods, schools,
churches, mosques—leaves more and more black people vulnerable to the nihilis-
tic threat. This shattering spawns a deracinated and denuded people with little
sense of self and few existential moorings.


--- PAGE 593 ---
Black people have always been in America’s wilderness in search of a promised
land. Yet many black folk now reside in a jungle with a cutthroat morality devoid
of any faith in deliverance or hope for freedom. Contrary to the superficial claims
of conservative behaviorists, these jungles are not primarily the result of patho-
logical behavior. Rather, this behavior is the tragic response of a people bereft of
resources to confront the workings of U.S. capitalist society. This does not mean
that individual black people are not responsible for their actions—black murder-
ers and rapists should go to jail. But it does mean that the nihilistic threat con-
tributes to criminal behavior—a threat that feeds on poverty and shattered cul-
tural institutions. The nihilistic threat is now more powerful than ever before
because the armor to ward against it is weaker.
But why this shattering of black civil society, this weakening of black cultural
institutions in asphalt jungles? Corporate market institutions have contributed
greatly to this situation. By corporate market institutions I mean that complex set
of interlocking enterprises that have a disproportionate amount of capital, power,
and influence on how our society is shaped. Needless to say, the primary motiva-
tion of these institutions is to make profits, and their basic strategy is to convince
the public to consume. These institutions have helped create a seductive way of
life, a culture of consumption that capitalizes on every opportunity to make
money. Market calculations and cost-benefit analyses hold sway in almost every
sphere of U.S. society.
The common denominator in these calculations and analyses is usually the pro-
vision, expansion, and intensification of pleasure. Pleasure is a multivalent term; it
means different things to many people. In our way of life it involves comfort, con-
venience, and sexual stimulation. This mentality pays little heed to the past, and
views the future as no more than a repetition of a hedonistically driven present.
This market morality stigmatizes others as objects for personal pleasure or bodily
stimulation. In this view, traditional morality is not undermined by radical femi-
nists, cultural radicals in the sixties, or libertarians, as alleged by conservative
behaviorists. Rather, corporate market institutions have greatly contributed to
undermining traditional morality in order to stay in business and make a profit.
This is especially evident in the culture industries—television, radio, video,
music—in which gestures of foreplay and orgiastic pleasure flood the marketplace.
Like all Americans, African Americans are influenced greatly by the images of
comfort, convenience, machismo, femininity, violence, and sexual stimulation
that bombard consumers. These seductive images contribute to the predomi-
nance of the market-inspired way of life over all others—and thereby edge out
nonmarket values—love, care, service to others—handed down by preceding
generations. The predominance of this way of life among those living in poverty-
ridden conditions, with a limited capacity to ward off self-contempt and self-
hatred, results in the possible triumph of the nihilistic threat in black America.
A major contemporary strategy for holding the nihilistic threat at bay is to
attack directly the sense of worthlessness and self-loathing in black America. The
angst resembles a kind of collective clinical depression in significant pockets of
black America. The eclipse of hope and collapse of meaning in much of black
5 6 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 594 ---
C. WEST, “RACE MATTERS” 5 6 3
America is linked to the structural dynamics of corporate market institutions that
affect all Americans. Under these circumstances, black existential angst derives
from the lived experience of ontological wounds and emotional scars inflicted by
white-supremacist beliefs and images permeating U.S. society and culture. These
wounds and scars attack black intelligence, black ability, black beauty, and black
character daily in subtle and not-so-subtle ways.
The accumulated effect of these wounds and scars produces a deep-seated
anger, a boiling sense of rage, and a passionate pessimism regarding America’s will
to justice. Under conditions of slavery and Jim Crow segregation, this anger, rage,
and pessimism remained relatively muted because of a well-justified fear of bru-
tal white retaliation. The major breakthroughs of the sixties—more psychically
than politically—swept this fear away. Sadly, the combination of the market way
of life, poverty-ridden conditions, black existential angst, and the lessening of fear
toward white authorities has directed most of the anger, rage, and despair toward
fellow black citizens, especially black women. Only recently has this nihilistic
threat—and its ugly inhumane outlook and actions—surfaced in the larger
American society. And it surely reveals one of the many instances of cultural
decay in a declining empire.
What is to be done about this nihilistic threat? Is there really any hope, given our
shattered civil society, market-driven corporate enterprises, and white suprema-
cism? If one begins with the threat of concrete nihilism, then one must talk about
some kind of politics of conversion. New models of collective black leadership must
promote a version of this politics. Like alcoholism and drug addiction, nihilism is a
disease of the soul. It can never be completely cured, and there is always the possi-
bility of relapse. But there is always a chance for conversion—a chance for people
to believe that there is hope for the future and a meaning to struggle. This chance
rests neither on an agreement about what justice consists of nor on an analysis of
how racism, sexism, or class subordination operate. Such arguments and analyses
are indispensable, but a politics of conversion requires more. Nihilism is not over-
come by arguments or analyses; it is tamed by love and care. Any disease of the soul
must be conquered by a turning of one’s soul. This turning is done by one’s own
affirmation of one’s worth—an affirmation fueled by the concern of others. This is
why a love ethic must be at the center of a politics of conversion.
This love ethic has nothing to do with sentimental feelings or tribal connections.
Rather it is a last attempt at generating a sense of agency among a downtrodden
people. The best exemplar of this love ethic is depicted on a number of levels in
Toni Morrison’s novel Beloved. Self-love and love of others are both modes toward
increasing self-valuation and encouraging political resistance in one’s community.
These modes of valuation and resistance are rooted in a subversive memory—the
best of one’s past without romantic nostalgia—and guided by a universal love ethic.
For my purposes here, Beloved can be construed as bringing together the loving
yet critical affirmation of black humanity found in the best of black nationalist
movements, the perennial hope against hope for transracial coalition in progres-
sive movements, and the painful struggle for self-affirming sanity in a history in
which the nihilistic threat seems insurmountable.


--- PAGE 595 ---
The politics of conversion proceed principally on the local level—in those
institutions in civil society still vital enough to promote self-worth and self-affir-
mation. It surfaces on the state and national levels only when grass-roots democ-
ratic organizations put forward a collective leadership that has earned the love
and respect of and, most important, that has proved itself accountable to these
organizations. This collective leadership must exemplify moral integrity, charac-
ter, and democratic statesmanship within itself and within its organizations.
Like liberal structuralists, the advocates of a politics of conversion never lose
sight of the structural conditions that shape the sufferings and lives of people. Yet,
unlike liberal structuralism, the politics of conversion meet the nihilistic threat
head-on. Like conservative behaviorism, the politics of conversion openly con-
fronts the self-destructive and inhumane actions of black people. Unlike conser-
vative behaviorists, the politics of conversion situates (not exonerates) these
actions within inhumane circumstances. The politics of conversion shuns the
limelight—a limelight that solicits status seekers and ingratiates egomaniacs.
Instead, it stays on the ground among the toiling everyday people, ushering forth
humble freedom fighters—both followers and leaders—who have the audacity to
take the nihilistic threat by the neck and turn back its deadly assaults.
The nihilistic threat to black America is inseparable from a crisis in black lead-
ership. This crisis is threefold. First, at the national level, the courageous yet
problematic example of Jesse Jackson looms large. On the one hand, his presi-
dential campaigns based on a progressive multiracial coalition were the major
left-liberal response to Reagan’s conservative policies. For the first time since the
last days of Martin Luther King, Jr.—with the grand exception of Harold Wash-
ington—the nearly de facto segregation in U.S. progressive politics was con-
fronted and surmounted. On the other hand, Jackson’s televisual style resists
grass-roots organizing and, most important, democratic accountability. His bril-
liance, energy, and charisma sustain his public visibility—but at the expense of
programmatic follow-through. We are approaching the moment in which this
style exhausts its progressive potential.
Other national nonelectoral black leaders—like Benjamin Hooks of the
NAACP and John Jacobs of the National Urban League—rightly highlight the
traditional problems of racial discrimination, racial violence, and slow racial pro-
gress. Yet their preoccupation with race—the mandate from their organizations—
downplays the crucial class, environmental, and patriarchal determinants of black
life chances. Black politicians—especially new victors like Mayor David Dinkins
of New York City and Governor Douglas Wilder of Virginia—are part of a larger,
lethargic electoral system riddled with decreasing revenues, loss of public confi-
dence, self-perpetuating mediocrity, and pervasive corruption. Like most
American elected officials, few black politicians can sidestep these seductive
traps. So black leadership at the national level tends to lack a moral vision that can
organize (not just periodically energize) subtle analyses that enlighten (not sim-
ply intermittently awaken), and exemplary practices that uplift (not merely con-
vey status that awes), black people.
5 6 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 596 ---
C. WEST, “RACE MATTERS” 5 6 5
Second, this relative failure in leadership creates vacuums to be filled by bold
and defiant black nationalist figures with even narrower visions, one-note racial
analyses, and sensationalist practices. Louis Farrakhan, Al Sharpton, and others
vigorously attempt to be protest leaders in this myopic mode—a mode often,
though not always, reeking of immoral xenophobia. This kind of black leadership
not only is symptomatic of black alienation and desperation in a country more and
more indifferent or hostile to the quality of life among black working and poor
people, it also reinforces the fragmentation of U.S. progressive efforts that could
reverse this deplorable plight. In this way, black nationalist leaders often inadver-
tently contribute to the very impasse they are trying to overcome: inadequate
social attention and action to change the plight of America’s “invisible people,”
especially disadvantaged black people.
Third, this crisis of black leadership contributes to political cynicism among
black people; it encourages the idea that we cannot really make a difference in
changing our society. This cynicism—already promoted by the larger political cul-
ture—dampens the fire of engaged local activists who have made a difference, yet
who also have little interest in being in the national limelight. Rather they engage
in protracted grass-roots organizing in principled coalitions that bring power and
pressure to bear on specific issues.
Without such activists there can be no progressive politics. Yet state, regional,
and national networks are also required for an effective progressive politics. That
is why local-based collective (and especially multigendered) models of black lead-
ership are needed. These models must shun the idea of one black national leader;
they also should put a premium on critical dialogue and democratic accountabil-
ity in black organizations.
Work must get done. Decisions must be made. But charismatic presence is no
legitimate substitute for collective responsibility. Only a charisma of humility and
accountability is worthy of a leadership grounded in a genuine democratic strug-
gle for greater freedom and equality. This indeed may be the best—and last—
hope to hold back the nihilistic threat to black America.
Source: Cornel West, “Nihilism in Black America,” Dissent(Spring 1991).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and Cornel West, The Future of the Race (New York: Knopf, 1996).
Cornel West, The American Evasion of Philosophy: A Genealogy of Pragmatism (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1989).
———, The Ethical Dimensions of Marxist Thought (New York: Monthly Review Press,
1991).
———, Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America(New York: Routledge, 1993).
———, Race Matters (Boston: Beacon Press, 1993).
———, Democracy Matters: Winning the Fight against Imperialism (New York: Penguin
Books, 2005).
———, and bell hooks, Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life (Boston: South
End Press, 1992).


--- PAGE 597 ---
O11 O
“Black Anti-Semitism,” Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 1992
Henry Louis Gates Jr. (1950–  ) was born and raised in West Virginia, and gradu-
ated Phi Beta Kappa and summa cum laude from Yale University. Currently the
W. E. B. Du Bois Professor of the Humanities and Director of the W. E. B. Du
Bois Institute for African and African American Research at Harvard University,
Gates is one of America’s most influential public intellectuals. Gates won a
MacArthur Fellowship in 1981, and in 1983 earned acclaim with his rediscovery
of Harriet E. Wilson’s 1859 novel, Our Nig. Gates also gained prominence as an
advocate of a black literary cannon to complement the traditional, Eurocentric
cannon. Perhaps Gates’s greatest scholarly achievement was the development of
Encarta Africana, a massive research project that, in some respects, completed
the unfinished Encyclopedia Africana project initiated by Du Bois almost a cen-
tury earlier. In this essay, originally published in the New York Times, Gates
sharply condemns expressions of anti-Semitism and social intolerance within the
African-American community.
O
BLACK DEMAGOGUES AND PSEUDO-SCHOLARS
During the past decade, the historic relationship between African Americans and
Jewish Americans—a relationship that sponsored so many of the concrete
advances of the civil rights era—showed another and less attractive face.
While anti-Semitism is generally on the wane in this country, it has been on the
rise among black Americans. A recent survey finds not only that blacks are twice
as likely as whites to hold anti-Semitic views but—significantly—that it is among
the younger and more educated blacks that anti-Semitism is most pronounced.
The trend has been deeply disquieting for many black intellectuals. But it is
something most of us, as if by unstated agreement, simply choose not to talk
about. At a time when black America is beleaguered on all sides, there is a strong
temptation simply to ignore the phenomenon or treat it as something strictly mar-
ginal. And yet to do so would be a serious mistake. As the African-American
philosopher Cornel West has insisted, attention to black anti-Semitism is crucial,
however discomfiting, in no small part because the moral credibility of our strug-
gle against racism hangs in the balance.
When the Rev. Jesse Jackson, in an impassioned address at a conference of the
World Jewish Congress on July 7, condemned the sordid history of anti-Semitism,
he not only went some distance toward retrieving the once abandoned mantle of
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s humane statesmanship, he also delivered a
stern rebuke—while not specifically citing black anti-Semitism—to those black
5 6 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 598 ---
H.L. GATES, JR., “BLACK ANTI-SEMITISM” 5 6 7
leaders who have sought to bolster their own strength through division. Mr.
Jackson and others have learned that we must not allow these demagogues to turn
the wellspring of memory into a renewable resource of enmity everlasting.
We must begin by recognizing what is new about the new anti-Semitism. Make
no mistake: This is anti-Semitism from the top down, engineered and promoted
by leaders who affect to be speaking for a larger resentment. This top-down anti-
Semitism, in large part the province of the better educated classes, can thus be
contrasted with the anti-Semitism from below common among African-American
urban communities in the 1930s and 40s, which followed in many ways a familiar
pattern of clientelistic hostility toward the neighborhood vendor or landlord.
In our cities, hostility of this sort is now commonly directed toward Korean shop
owners. But “minority” traders and shopkeepers elsewhere in the world—such as
the Indians of East Africa and the Chinese of Southeast Asia—have experienced
similar ethnic antagonism. Anti-Jewish sentiment can also be traced to Christian
anti-Semitism, given the historic importance of Christianity in the black community.
Unfortunately, the old paradigms will not serve to explain the new bigotry and
its role in black America. For one thing, its preferred currency is not the mum-
bled epithet or curse but the densely argued treatise; it belongs as much to the
repertory of campus lecturers as community activists. And it comes in wildly dif-
ferent packages.
A book popular with some in the “Afrocentric” movement, The Iceman Inher-
itance: Prehistoric Sources of Western Man’s Racism, Sexism, and Aggression, by
Michael Bradley, argues that white people are so vicious because they, unlike the
rest of mankind, are descended from the brutish Neanderthals. More to the
point, it speculates that the Jews may have been the “‘purest’ and oldest
Neanderthal-Caucasoids,” the iciest of the ice people; hence (he explains) the sin-
gularly odious character of ancient Jewish culture.
Crackpot as it sounds, the book has lately been reissued with endorsements
from two members of the Africana Studies Department of the City College of
New York, as well as an introduction by Dr. John Henrik Clarke, professor emer-
itus of Hunter College and the great paterfamilias of the Afrocentric movement.
Dr. Clarke recently attacked multiculturalism as the product of what he called
the “Jewish educational Mafia.” And while Dr. Leonard Jeffries’s views on sup-
posed Jewish complicity in the subjugation of blacks captured headlines, his intel-
lectual cohorts such as Conrad Muhammad and Khallid Muhammad address com-
munity gatherings and college students across the country purveying a similar
doctrine. College speakers and publications have played a disturbing role in legit-
imating the new creed. Last year, U.C.L.A.’s black newspaper, Nommo, defended
the importance of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, the notorious Czarist
canard that portrays a Jewish conspiracy to rule the world. (Those who took issue
were rebuked with an article headlined: “Anti-Semitic? Ridiculous—Chill.”)
Speaking at Harvard University earlier this year, Conrad Muhammad, the New
York representative of the Nation of Islam, neatly annexed environmentalism to


--- PAGE 599 ---
anti-Semitism, when he blamed the Jews for despoiling the environment and
destroying the ozone layer.
But the bible of the new anti-Semitism is The Secret Relationship Between
Blacks and Jews, an official publication of the Nation of Islam that boasts 1,275
footnotes in the course of 334 pages.
Sober and scholarly looking, it may well be one of the most influential books
published in the black community in the last twelve months. It is available in
black-oriented shops in cities across the nation, even those that specialize in
Kente cloth and beads rather than books. It can also can be ordered over the
phone, by dialing 1-800-48-TRUTH. Meanwhile, the book’s conclusions are, in
many circles, increasingly treated as damning historical fact. The book, one of
the most sophisticated instances of hate literature yet compiled, was prepared
by the historical research department of the Nation of Islam. It charges that the
Jews were “key operatives” in the historic crime of slavery, playing an “inordi-
nate” and “disproportionate” role and “carv[ing] out for themselves a monu-
mental culpability in slavery—and the black holocaust.” Among significant sec-
tors of the black community, this brief has become a credo of a new philosophy
of black self-affirmation.
To be sure, the book massively misrepresents the historical record, largely
through a process of cunningly selective quotation of often reputable sources. But
its authors could be confident that few of its readers would go to the trouble of
actually hunting down the works cited. For if readers actually did so, they might
discover a rather different picture.
They might find out—from the book’s own vaunted authorities—that, for
example, of all the African slaves imported into the New World, American Jewish
merchants accounted for less than 2 percent, a finding sharply at odds with the
Nation’s of Islam’s claim of Jewish “predominance” in this traffic.
They might find out that in the domestic trade it appears that all of the Jewish
slave traders combined bought and sold fewer slaves than the single gentile firm
of Franklin and Armfield. In short, they might learn what the historian Harold
Brackman has documented—that the book’s repeated insistence that the Jews
dominated the slave trade depends on an unscrupulous distortion of the historic
record. But the most ominous words in the book are found on the cover: “Volume
One.” More have been promised, to carry on the saga of Jewish iniquity to the
present day.
However shoddy the scholarship of works like The Secret Relationship, under-
lying it is something even more troubling: the tacit conviction that culpability is
heritable. For it suggests a doctrine of racial continuity, in which the racial evil of
a people is merely manifest (rather than constituted) by their historical misdeeds.
The reported misdeeds are thus the signs of an essential nature that is evil.
How does this theology of guilt surface in our everyday moral discourse? In
New York, earlier this spring, a forum was held at the Church of St. Paul and
Andrew to provide an occasion for blacks and Jews to engage in dialogue on such
5 6 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 600 ---
H.L. GATES, JR., “BLACK ANTI-SEMITISM” 5 6 9
issues as slavery and social injustice. Both Jewish and black panelists found com-
mon ground and common causes. But a tone-setting contingent of blacks in the
audience took strong issue with the proceedings. Outraged, they demanded to
know why the Jews, those historic malefactors, had not apologized to the “descen-
dants of African kings and queens.”
And so the organizer of the event, Melanie Kaye Kantrowitz, did. Her voice qua-
vering with emotion, she said: “I think I speak for a lot of people in this room when
I say ‘I’m sorry.’ We’re ashamed of it, we hate it, and that’s why we organized this
event.” Should the Melanie Kantrowitzes of the world, whose ancestors survived
Czarist pogroms and, latterly, the Nazi Holocaust, be the primary object of our
wrath? And what is yielded by this hateful sport of victimology, save the conver-
sion of a tragic past into a game of recrimination? Perhaps that was on the mind
of another audience member. “I don’t want an apology,” a dreadlocked woman
told her angrily. “I want reparations. Forty acres and a mule, plus interest.”
These are times that try the spirit of liberal outreach. In fact, Louis Farrakhan,
leader of the Nation of Islam, himself explained the real agenda behind his cam-
paign, speaking before an audience of 15,000 at the University of Illinois last fall.
The purpose of “The Secret Relationship,” he said, was to “rearrange a relation-
ship” that “has been detrimental to us.”
“Rearrange” is a curiously elliptical term here. If a relation with another group
has been detrimental, it only makes sense to sever it as quickly and unequivocally
as possible. In short, by “rearrange,” he means to convert a relation of friendship,
alliance and uplift into one of enmity, distrust and hatred. But why target the
Jews? Using the same historical methodology, after all, the researchers of the
book could have produced a damning treatise on the involvement of left-handers
in the “black holocaust.” The answer requires us to go beyond the usual shibbo-
leths about bigotry and view the matter, from the demagogues’ perspective,
strategically: as the bid of one black elite to supplant another. It requires us, in
short, to see anti-Semitism as a weapon in the raging battle of who will speak for
black America—those who have sought common cause with others or those who
preach a barricaded withdrawal into racial authenticity. The strategy of these
apostles of hate, I believe, is best understood as ethnic isolationism—they know
that the more isolated black America becomes, the greater their power. And
what’s the most efficient way to begin to sever black America from its allies? Bash
the Jews, these demagogues apparently calculate, and you’re halfway there.
I myself think that an aphorist put his finger on something germane when he
observed, “We can rarely bring ourselves to forgive those who have helped us.”
For sometimes it seems that the trajectory of black-Jewish relations is a pro-
tracted enactment of this paradox.
Many Jews are puzzled by the recrudescence of black anti-Semitism, in view
of the historic alliance. The brutal truth has escaped them that the new anti-


--- PAGE 601 ---
Semitism arises not in spite of the black-Jewish alliance but because of it. For pre-
cisely such trans-racial cooperation—epitomized by the historic partnership
between blacks and Jews—is what poses the greatest threat to the isolationist
movement.
In short, for the tacticians of the new anti-Semitism, the original sin of American
Jews was their involvement—truly “inordinate,” truly “disproportionate”—not in
slavery, but in the front ranks of the civil rights struggle.
For decent and principled reasons, many black intellectuals are loath to
criticize “oppositional” black leaders. Yet it has become apparent that to con-
tinue to maintain a comradely silence may be, in effect, to capitulate to the iso-
lationist agenda, to betray our charge and trust. And, to be sure, many black
writers, intellectuals, and religious leaders have taken an unequivocal stand on
this issue.
Cornel West aptly describes black anti-Semitism as “the bitter fruit of a pro-
found self-destructive impulse, nurtured on the vines of hopelessness and con-
cealed by empty gestures of black unity.”
After twelve years of conservative indifference, those political figures who
acquiesced, by malign neglect, to the deepening crisis of black America should
not feign surprise that we should prove so vulnerable to the demagogues rousing
messages of hate, their manipulation of the past and present.
Bigotry, as a tragic century has taught us, is an opportunistic infection, attack-
ing most virulently when the body politic is in a weakened state. Yet neither
should those who are about black America gloss over what cannot be condoned:
That much respect we owe to ourselves. For surely it falls to all of us to recapture
the basic insight that Dr. King so insistently expounded. “We are caught in an
inescapable network of mutuality,” he told us. “Whatever affects one directly
affects all indirectly.” How easy to forget this—and how vital to remember.
Source: “Black Demogogues and Pseudo-Scholars,” by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Copyright
1992 by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Originally published in the New York Times. Reprinted by
permission of the author.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., “Race,” in Writing, and Difference(Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1986).
———, The Signifying Monkey: Towards a Theory of Afro-American Literary Criticism
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
———, Colored People: A Memoir(New York: Knopf, 1994).
———, America Behind the Color Line: Dialogues with African Americans (New York:
Warner Books, 2005).
———, and Nellie Y. McKay, eds., The Norton Anthology of Afro-American Literature (New
York: Norton, 1996).
5 7 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 602 ---
J. TYNER, “CRIME—CAUSES AND CURES” 5 7 1
O12 O
“Crime—Causes and Cures,” Jarvis Tyner, 1994
Jarvis Tyner (1941– ) is the national vice chairman of the Communist Party, USA.
He was the founding chairman of the Young Workers Liberation League (YWLL)
in 1970 and has been active in struggles concerning civil rights, labor, peace, and
anti-imperialism. He has written extensively on political action, civil rights, the
struggle for peace, the fight against racism, and many other subjects. Tyner ran
for vice president on the Communist Party ticket in both 1972 and 1976. He is
currently a member of the Coordinating Committee of the Black Radical
Congress. In this essay, Tyner presents a Marxian analysis for the reasons for
crime in U.S. society.
O
The growing problem of crime and violence in our country has reached epidemic
proportions, as have demands that the government find real solutions.
It is a serious problem indeed. There were over 14 million crimes committed in
the U.S. in 1992. While 12 million of these were crimes of property, 1.9 million
were violent crimes, including 1.1 million aggravated assaults and 22,760 murders.
Over the past decade the number of violent crimes has grown dramatically.
There are over 200 million guns in the hands of civilian Americans. The odds of
getting murdered in the U.S. are one in 12,000—which is high by any standard.
The streets are not safe. Even children are carrying guns and many of the inno-
cent victims of violence are children and the elderly. Some senior citizens dare
not venture out of doors at night.
The growth of crime is one of the most dramatic examples of the general decay
of U.S. capitalism. While our government goes around the world boasting of a “sta-
ble,” “democratic” and “free” technologically advanced society, the tragic presence
of so many guns and drugs and the accompanying crime and violence show that
our country is facing a deep social and political crisis. We are a nation that is tech-
nologically advanced but moving backward in terms of social relations and stabil-
ity. The country is headed for greater chaos and suffering if the problem of crime
and violence is not addressed in an honest, humane and democratic way.
Sickness or Symptom?
Over the last decade there has been a massive campaign around the crime issue.
The mass media has spared no effort in sensationalizing this issue. Listening to
the evening news is like reading a police rap sheet. The sensationalized journal-
ism of the cheap supermarket tabloids is becoming the dominant style of U.S.
journalism—it is news designed to promote hysteria and panic. It is also designed
to promote racism, male supremacy and other anti-working-class sentiments so as


--- PAGE 603 ---
to rationalize repressive policies and sow greater division among the people. It is
news designed to lower the confidence among the masses in humanity, and
thereby promote hopelessness and powerlessness.
While the problem is very serious, and must be addressed, the U.S. ruling class
has been projecting it as the central issue confronting the country. Many voters in
the last elections said that crime is their main concern. This issue has to be care-
fully considered for it can divide and confuse more than any other. Clearly the
answer does not lie in simple calls to “get tough.” It is necessary to understand the
real source of the problem and act in a way that does not further victimize those
already victimized.
Crime presents a danger to society, but it must be understood as a symptom of
much bigger ailments.
Our nation is experiencing a prolonged, deep-going structural and systemic
crisis of its capitalist system. This is the main sickness which must be addressed if
crime and violence are to be seriously reduced.
While there has been a growth in the number of wealthy Americans over the
past two decades, the most dramatic growth has been in the number of people liv-
ing in poverty. Since 1970, 14 million have joined the ranks of the poor. We are a
nation where even by modest count, 37 million people live in poverty—one out
of every six persons.
Over 20 million are unemployed and underemployed. Millions of people have
never had a steady job. These are the long-term unemployed, including the
homeless and the millions who are hungry and without health care. With the clos-
ing down of many basic industrial plants in the ’70s and ’80s and the downsizing
of major corporations in the ‘90s, millions of working people have been locked out
of better-paying jobs and reduced to permanent unemployment and underem-
ployment. For most working people there is no job security. There is a major
decline in the standard of living of the entire working class. Most families need
two or more wage earners to make ends meet today.
Economic Racism
Hit hardest of all are the racially oppressed, the African American, Mexican
American, Puerto Rican, Asian and Pacific Island and Native American working
people. They are victims of economic racism.
The pro-corporate, racist policies of big business and government have led to
a situation where the racially and nationally oppressed experience more than dou-
ble the unemployment and poverty rates of white people. Forty percent of
African Americans and Latinos now live in poverty. And linked to the growth in
extreme poverty is the resurgence of super segregation.
The crisis is particularly sharp for African American and Latino youth who are
confined to the hard life in the cities—a life of drugs, bad housing, underfunded
schools, few recreation facilities and no jobs. These are youth whose unemploy-
ment rates range from 60 to 80 percent. Many have never worked, and if there is
no basic change in the economy and the political situation, most have no future.
5 7 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 604 ---
J. TYNER, “CRIME—CAUSES AND CURES” 5 7 3
At the bottom of this crisis lies the historic decline of U.S. capitalism. This sit-
uation has created many hopeless and desperate people who see no honest way
of surviving. Feeling that society has abandoned them, too many have concluded,
“Why not abandon society?”
Because of the systemic crisis, despite the ups and downs in the business cycle,
the economy has been going qualitatively downward. We now have a national
emergency of the most urgent kind requiring government action to provide jobs
and massive funding to rebuild cities and meet human needs. But the policy has
been building jails instead of providing jobs. This situation is a breeding ground
for unstable family life, drug addiction, street crime and many other serious prob-
lems. The crisis of capitalism is also breeding extreme greed, corruption and
thievery in government and industry. This is part of the crime problem as well.
Along with economic conditions, the factor that has driven crime figures dras-
tically up over the past decade has been the massive growth of drug abuse. Sixty-
two percent of all street crime is drug-related; most random shootings and “drive-
by” killings of innocent victims are related to the drug trade.
The drug epidemic has grown so severe because in fact the government’s pol-
icy is not to stop it. In fact, the government is part of the problem—it has allowed
the massive importation of narcotics and other drugs. This can be seen in the
Iran-contra conspiracy and in many new reports that show the CIA has for years
been working with drug smugglers, and is even importing drugs itself.
Role of Government and Police
On the community level, local police practice a policy called “selective
enforcement”—which is really a form of drug legalization. Selective enforce-
ment has been the chief law enforcement tactic on the nation’s streets, espe-
cially in low-income Black and Brown communities.
Selective enforcement allows drugs to be sold openly; it is responsible for the
streets being turned into war zones where people in hundreds of communities
dare not go outside for fear of being caught in the crossfire. Any 12-year-old can
tell you where drugs are being sold. Certainly the police know, yet they allow it to
go on and only periodically arrest the pushers. The government’s complicity can
also be seen in the many examples of direct involvement by local police in deal-
ing drugs and shaking down dealers. The authorities not only know where drugs
are coming from and are being sold—they are part of the process.
The drug problem did not start in the ghettos and barrios, contrary to what is
said in the media. The importation and distribution of drugs goes all the way up
to the high councils of the CIA, the government, the military, organized crime
and the banking industry.
African-American and Latino youth who are the prime victims of the drug epi-
demic are being arrested and jailed more than any other group. The prisons are
full to the point of overflowing. We live in a society where millions of youth—in
a special way African American youth—are tragically cast aside, oppressed and
neglected, then imprisoned and criminalized. It is the shame of our nation that,


--- PAGE 605 ---
by a wide margin, there are more African-American youth in jail or under the
jurisdiction of the courts than are in college. This is a basic failure of the U.S. cap-
italist system.
However there are other types of crime to which scant attention is paid. White-
collar crimes cost billions of dollars annually and cause massive human suffering
because the dollars stolen could be spent to benefit the people. The S&L bailout—
a multi-billion-dollar scandal that cost the American people dearly—is an example.
Studies show that crime—not to mention drug use—is also high amongst the
upper-middle class and the rich. One study showed that the amount of money
embezzled from banks was 6,000 times the amount robbed from banks (as cited
by A. Monteiro in 4/91 Political Affairs). If one were to add up the amount of
money lost because the rich, who are the biggest tax cheaters, are not paying their
share of taxes, including wealthy bankers laundering drug money, the sum comes
to hundreds of billions in cost to society, in effect many times more than the cost
of petty crime on the streets. As a rule, the rich steal larger amounts, more often,
and are punished less severely and less often.
In addition, the federal government is guilty of political crimes, like crimes
against the cities. Over the past decade, 50 percent of the aid to cities has been
cut—at a time when corruption in government has risen to an all-time high.
There is no major city that is not in financial straits. Almost every state faces cut-
backs and retrenchment as they try to avoid bankruptcy.
To this can be added the cost in human suffering and death caused by long-
term unemployment, homelessness and hunger, and the fact that the denial of
health care to 37 million is cause for a shorter life span and higher mortality rates.
These are crimes too—crimes rooted in capitalist greed, racism and anti-working-
class policies of government and big business. They are of a political and social
character but are crimes nonetheless.
These are all reasons why crime is growing and will continue to grow unless
the basic ailments of our society are addressed.
Anti-Crime Hysteria
Rather than addressing the social and economic roots of crime, drugs and vio-
lence, the government, over the past decade especially, continues to put its
emphasis on more cops, increased police brutality, more prisons, longer sentences
and expanding the death penalty.
The mass media, government and most capitalist politicians are creating a
hysteria—mainly a racist hysteria—about crime. This was most clearly revealed
with the Willie Horton ads that the Republicans used in the 1988 elections. This
policy continues under Clinton.
Typically the reason given for the rise in crime is that America has become too
lenient on criminals. The view is often expressed that “criminals are getting away
with crimes, and if arrested are given too short a sentence.” It is argued that the
absence of the death penalty, lenient sentencing and the parole system have made
committing crimes less risky. Similarly, it is alleged that the police are outgunned.
5 7 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 606 ---
J. TYNER, “CRIME—CAUSES AND CURES” 5 7 5
Most capitalist politicians are quick to blame crime on the criminal mind, lack
of character, etc., of individuals, while they do nothing about the prison system,
one of the most brutal and the worst in terms of rehabilitation.
Ignored by these views are the economic roots of crime. This school of
thought, which is dominant in government, media and industry, is based on the
notion that there is nothing basically wrong with the economic system but that
there is something wrong with the American people. The victims of poverty and
drugs are blamed rather than trying to eliminate the real causes.
Crime, Racism, and Male Supremacy
Linking crime with race and gender is the most prominent form of this anti-peo-
ple line of argument. Such ideas were very prominent in Pat Buchanan’s “family
values” speech at the 1992 Republican Convention and the campaign rhetoric of
ex-Vice President Dan Quayle during the presidential campaign.
Part of the move to the right by the Clinton Administration and other Demo-
crats can be seen precisely around these issues. President Clinton’s speeches in
Memphis and Los Angeles (November ’93) to promote his anti-crime bill had
much of the same message as Quayle and Buchanan. In fact, Clinton has been
promoting the right-wing “family values” issue openly, while heaping praise on
the likes of Dan Quayle.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has built his career around attacking female-
headed households, especially African American, as the prime causes of crime
and violence. He insists that poverty is not the reason for crime. In an article in
the winter 1993–94 issue of the American Educator, published by the American
Federation of Teachers, he writes
A community that allows a large number of young men to grow up in broken fami-
lies, dominated by women, never acquiring any stable relationship to male author-
ity, never acquiring any set of rational expectations about the future—that commu-
nity asks for and gets chaos.
Former New York City Mayor Edward Koch has for a long time put most of
his political energy into attacking non-whites. He has consistently raised the ques-
tion of “Black and minority crime.” In his column which appeared in the New
York Daily News (November 16, 1993), he hailed the Memphis and Los Angeles
speeches of Clinton as a breakthrough because Clinton was willing to attack
“minority crime.” Koch felt that the “dam of political correctness has been bro-
ken” and now one can discuss the question without being called a racist. To iden-
tify the African-American people with crime, according to Koch, is to honestly
deal with the problem. In a bare-faced defense of racist oppression and injustice
Koch put it this way: “. . . [the] lack of personal responsibility is the single most
important factor contributing to escalating minority crime rather than white
racism in all its manifestations.”
A widespread example of this approach is the chorus of blame directed at rap
artists for crime and violence among youth. Whether or not one agrees with the con-
tent of the music, blaming the rappers takes the government and the corporations


--- PAGE 607 ---
off the hook. It is the highly profitable record companies who are the main promot-
ers, and beneficiaries—making millions upon millions by promoting violence. . . .
Capitalism without Entitlements
Capitalism without entitlements means greater use of police state methods to con-
trol the enormous social problems that will result; it means more jails, not jobs.
When considered in light of Clinton’s pledge to arbitrarily throw people off
welfare, a picture emerges of an administration that actually plans to force new
hundreds of thousands into extreme destitution and ultimately prison—in order
to contain their dissatisfaction, anger and rebellion.
Like NAFTA, this bill is strongly supported by big business. They see it as nec-
essary for maintaining control over the victims of poverty and unemployment in
an era where they want to eliminate entitlements.
Basically, the anti-crime bill is designed to control poor folks and curb possible
political rebellion. It is not designed to stop crime—it’s designed to stop the peo-
ple. It is first and foremost an attack on the rights of the unemployed and under-
employed, primarily aimed at the ghettos and barrios, at the victims of economic
racism. The thinking that motivates this kind of draconian legislative assault on
democratic rights is racist and anti-working-class. It’s basically a defense of U.S.
capitalism on the decline. And it shows that Clinton is continuing the same think-
ing and policies of the capitalist class that Reagan and Bush promoted.
It is important to understand that despite the fact that organized crime is
behind much of the importation and the distribution of drugs, the proposed anti-
crime legislation is not aimed at them at all. This shows that the ruling class has
no intention of really attacking crime. There is a conscious racial, anti-working-
class political bias behind the entire effort.
It is necessary to fight against this bill and demand instead that the govern-
ment come up with a serious program that attacks the root causes of crime.
Unless there is a strong protest from the people, this bill will be made into law in
the early part of this year.
A Monumental Failure
While in 1992 the people voted to defeat George Bush and his policies, the new
crime bill is actually a continuation of the same old reactionary policies and worse.
The fact that the Clinton Administration is staying the course shows that the cap-
italist class is unified and the new repressive policy transcends the two main cap-
italist political parties.
During the Reagan–Bush administrations, record numbers were arrested and
imprisoned. The demand for prison space could not keep up with the rate of con-
victions. And the ’80s brought a new phenomenon: prisons for profit. Privately
owned and run prisons is now one of America’s biggest growth industries.
Lucrative profits are being made in this industry, over the misery of so many. And
there are even different levels of prison accommodations based on one’s ability to
pay—a new level of class differentiation in the prison system: horrible medieval-
type prisons for the poor and country club prisons for the rich.
5 7 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 608 ---
J. TYNER, “CRIME—CAUSES AND CURES” 5 7 7
During the 1980s, African Americans and Latinos were jailed at unprece-
dented rates. Under the cover of these policies, the government criminalized
hundreds of thousands, especially non-white youth. The United States has
achieved the dubious distinction of being the number one nation on the earth
when it comes to incarcerating its own population. By 1990 the inmate popula-
tion, according to the ACLU study, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later, had
reached 1,139,803, which is a rate of 455 per 100,000 population—considerably
higher than apartheid South Africa which is the second jailer-nation on earth with
311 per 100,000 population.
For African-American men, the rate is 3,370 per 100,000, which is ten times
the overall U.S. rate and five times the rate for African males in South Africa.
While the South African figures have gone down from 1989, the U.S. overall rate
of incarceration increased by 6.8 percent. With the U.S. population at 250 mil-
lion, by the end of the Reagan era 1 out of every 220 persons in the U.S. were in
jail and 2,600 people were on death row. For African-American men that’s 1 out
of every 28. The Reagan–Bush years were one of the worst periods of racist
repression in U.S. history.
If measured by its impact on lowering crime and violence—which after all was
the stated intent—this policy was a monumental failure. According to recent
studies, even after doubling the number of people put in prison, the crime rate
only dropped slightly and may actually have increased by 7 percent.
It is argued that the country cannot afford a federal jobs bill because the
“money is not there.” However, incarceration presently costs the federal, state
and local governments $20.3 billion a year. The absurdity and senselessness of this
waste is mind-boggling: it costs about $40,000 a year to send a youth to prison but
only $20,000 to send them to college.
The use of the death penalty has not worked either. Murder rates in states with
the death penalty are usually slightly higher than in non-death penalty states.
Reducing crime by increasing incarceration and through capital punishment has
been a costly failure.
An increase in the prison population, use of mandatory sentencing, the death
penalty, more cops with more lethal weapons and less rights for the people will
lead us in the direction of a police state and do further harm to public safety and
democratic rights. Based on the present policies, with more police there will be
more police brutality. Communities, especially inner-city communities need real
protection but that’s not what they get—bitter experience shows they get more
repression.
This will all negatively affect thousands of working-class people, their families
and their communities. And it won’t work. Any anti-crime bill that does not have
a strong massive job creation component is no anti-crime bill at all.
A Job: A Constitutional Right
Rather than eliminating entitlements, what is needed is a federal jobs bill to
rebuild the country and create millions of jobs. Offering free treatment to the
massive numbers of drug-addicted people and taking dangerous weapons out of


--- PAGE 609 ---
the hands of the population is the way to reduce crime. Strong gun control is
needed, starting with outlawing automatic weapons. Safe streets are possible only
with less access to firearms and greater economic security of the working class.
Jobs not jails has to be the starting point in attacking all of the problems that con-
tribute to the high crime rates; be they medical, social, cultural, psychological, etc.
A job should be a constitutional right. It should be guaranteed by the govern-
ment. When the private sector fails to provide the needed jobs, the government
should be required to provide them. Rather than cutting back on government ser-
vices and aid to the cities, the government should tax the rich and cut the military
budget to provide funding to meet those vital human needs. Rather than throw-
ing people off of welfare into starvation and homelessness, more welfare should
be provided until a decent good-paying job can be created. “Jobs or income”
needs to be the birthright of every American.
Rather than boot camps, what is needed is more money for education and mas-
sive job creation with union wages and affirmative action, and training. Rather
than jailing people addicted to drugs, there needs to be a massive effort to set up
free drug rehabilitation facilities all across the country.
A Stake in Society
When so many have been pushed into long-term joblessness and the depths of
poverty, it is understandable that some would reach the point of despair, the sense
of being defeated, without any hope. Lacking the necessary experience of work,
many develop total alienation from family, friends and, of course, from society as a
whole. When you add the ingredients of drug addiction, police brutality and racism,
that alienation can take on a dangerous dimension. Many have been pushed to the
limits of despair as a result of the crisis of capitalism and turn to crime and violence.
This system has created conditions that are forcing hundreds of thousands down the
path of self destruction; it is a form of entrapment, socioeconomic entrapment.
Some will argue that many have been so dehumanized that a job won’t be
enough to bring them back. In some cases that is true. But every person must be
fought for. We must keep in mind that this situation can be reversed. Most poor
people are not criminal. Most youth who live in severe poverty do not turn to
crime and drugs.
People are looking for real solutions. Many of them can be won to struggle and
indeed can be changed through struggle. The overwhelming majority want to
work and want to do the right thing. They have not lost all hope and can be won
to a healthy, contributing relationship to society. Instead of pacification they need
higher levels of class consciousness.
The first thing needed is to reverse the policies of government that are respon-
sible for putting millions of young people, especially African American and Latino
youth, into such horrible circumstances. Providing jobs is the first step in the
many steps needed to bring hundreds of thousands out of despair. Health care is
needed, plus counseling, sports and recreation—experiences that foster a healthy
outlook toward one’s fellow human beings.
5 7 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 610 ---
J. TYNER, “CRIME—CAUSES AND CURES” 5 7 9
Ironically, those who demonstrate total alienation actually reflect in a stark way
the attitudes of the corporate world: complete selfishness, total greed, not caring
who you hurt as long as you get what you want. These are considered “virtuous”
in the dog-eat-dog business world. Anything to make a buck is an accurate motto
of big business. These ideas didn’t start with the drug pusher on the street corner,
they started in the corporate suites and are alive and prominent in the media and
on Wall Street today. There must be a total fight against such ideas, including
exposing their source in the capitalist system, if we are to win.
How to Win
After NAFTA and the many other rebuffs to the people’s agenda, it’s clear now that
Clinton, left on his own, will not deliver progressive change. It is therefore neces-
sary to build a multi-racial grassroots movement, of working people first and fore-
most, that can force change. And that is what the Communist Party USA is work-
ing for. We have a long history of participating in the building of such movements.
In our view, there is a new militancy in the ranks of labor and a new level of
unity of labor and the racially oppressed. There is renewed militancy in the ranks
of the racially oppressed and those desiring peace and equality. Among all pro-
gressive forces there is a greater willingness to build independent politics, includ-
ing third-party movements, and to support candidates who are ready to fight for
jobs and equality.
Our starting point is that there is a way out. Taxing the rich and slashing the
military budgets are among the most popular slogans of our day. The goal of the
Communist Party program is to bring these slogans to life. Our program would
provide an additional one trillion dollars per year to finance people’s needs while
reducing the tax burden on the majority. It would do more than provide the con-
ditions for lowering crime drastically. It would upgrade the national spirit and
social and cultural well-being of the people. It would provide the means for
greater unity of all races and nationalities. It would make the streets safer and
homes more livable for the people—working people in the first place.
This program is based on affirmative action, which means it would make a spe-
cial effort where the problem is especially critical, in regards to the victims of dis-
crimination. We are for a special effort to uplift those especially held back:
African Americans, Latinos, other racially oppressed, and women.
Our country needs a different approach that protects people from crime but also
gets more to the causes of crime, an approach that provides a humane and demo-
cratic solution. It must be a solution that rejects police state methods, that will unite
the people across racial lines and move our country forward, not backward.
The death penalty does not deter crime and is mainly applied to poor people.
What we need is not more prisons but more schools, free and accessible drug-
treatment facilities, more recreation and health centers, decent housing for all
and a guaranteed future for the youth. What is needed are tough laws against dis-
crimination and racism and a commitment to provide for children and families,


--- PAGE 611 ---
assuring a more stable home life. What is needed is a government, and a politi-
cal-economic system based on the principle of putting people before profits.
And ultimately, what is needed is “Bill of Rights” socialism here in our coun-
try, if not today, then tomorrow.
Source: “Crime—Causes and Cures.” Reprinted by the courtesy of Jarvis Tyner, Vice Chair-
man, Communist Party USA.
O13 O
Louis Farrakhan: The Million Man March, 1995
Louis Farrakhan (1933–  ) for more than a generation, has been one of the most
influential, although controversial, leaders within the African-American commu-
nity. Born Louis Walcott in Bronx, New York, he was raised in Boston,
Massachusetts. As a youth, he learned to play the violin and guitar, and became a
talented and popular singer. In 1955, Walcott attended the Nation of Islam’s
annual Savior’s Day Convention in Chicago, where he first encountered Elijah
Muhammad and Malcolm X. Joining the NOI later that year, and becoming Louis
X, he quickly rose to leadership. In 1956 Louis X became the assistant minister to
Malcolm X at Harlem’s Mosque 7. Two years later, Louis X was named minister of
the NOI’s mosque in Boston. Following the assassination of Malcolm X in 1965,
Louis X became the minister of Harlem’s Mosque 7 for the next decade. Renamed
Louis Farrakhan by Elijah Muhammad, in the 1970s, he became a powerful force
within black American society. With the death of Elijah Muhammad in 1975, the
leadership of the NOI passed to Elijah’s son, Wallace Muhammad, ultimately lead-
ing Farrakhan to break from the Nation of Islam. In 1981 he reconstituted the
“new” Nation of Islam around the conservative patriarchal principles of Elijah
Muhammad. On October 16, 1995, Farrakhan organized the “Million Man
March” in Washington, D.C., which was the largest public gathering of African
Americans in U.S. history. Ten years later, in 2005, Farrakhan returned to
Washington, D.C., to convene the “Million Family March.”
O
“STILL 2 AMERICAS, ONE BLACK, ONE WHITE”
Right here on this mall where we are standing, according to books written on
Washington, D.C., slaves used to be brought right here on this Mall in chains to be
sold up and down the eastern seaboard. Right along this mall, going over to the
White House, our fathers were sold into slavery. But, George Washington, the first
president of the United States, said he feared that before too many years passed over
his head, this slave would prove to become a most troublesome species of property.
5 8 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 612 ---
THE MILLION MAN MARCH 5 8 1
Thomas Jefferson said, he trembled for this country when he reflected that
God was just and that his justice could not sleep forever. Well, the day that these
presidents feared has now come to pass, for on this mall, here we stand in the cap-
ital of America, and the layout of this great city, laid out by a Black man, Benjamin
Banneker. This is all placed and based in a secret Masonic ritual. And at the core
of the secret of that ritual is the Black man, not far from here is the White House.
And the first president of this land, George Washington, who was a grand mas-
ter of the Masonic order laid the foundation, the cornerstone of this capitol build-
ing where we stand. George was a slave owner. George was a slave owner. Now,
the President spoke today and he wanted to heal the great divide. But I respect-
fully suggest to the President, you did not dig deep enough at the malady that
divides Black and White in order affect a solution to the problem.
And so, today, we have to deal with the root so that perhaps a healing can take
place. . .
You came not at the call of Louis Farrakhan, but you have gathered here at the
call of God. For it is only the call of Almighty God, no matter through whom that
call came, that could generate this kind of outpouring. God called us here to this
place. At this time. For a very specific reason.
And now, I want to say, my brothers — this is a very pregnant moment.
Pregnant with the possibility of tremendous change in our status in America and
in the world. And although the call was made through me, many have tried to dis-
tance the beauty of this idea from the person through whom the idea and the call
was made.
Some have done it mistakenly. And others have done it in a malicious and
vicious manner. Brothers and sisters, there is no human being through whom God
brings an idea that history doesn’t marry the idea with that human being no mat-
ter what defect was that human being’s character.
You can’t separate Newton from the law that Newton discovered, nor can you
separate Einstein from the theory of relativity. It would be silly to try to separate
Moses from the Torah or Jesus from the Gospel or Muhammad from the Koran.
When you say Farrakhan, you ain’t no Moses, you ain’t no Jesus, and you’re not
no Muhammad. You have a defect in your character.
Well, that certainly may be so, however, according to the way the Bible reads,
there is no prophet of God written of in the Bible that did not have a defect in his
character. But, I have never heard any member of the faith of Judaism separate
David from the Psalms, because of what happened in David’s life and you’re never
separated Solomon from the building of the Temple because they say he had a
thousand concubines, and you never separated any of the Great Servants of God.
So today, whether you like it or not, God brought the idea through me and he
didn’t bring it through me because my heart was dark with hatred and anti-semi-
tism, he didn’t bring it through me because my heart was dark and I’m filled with
hatred for White people and for the human family of the planet. If my heart were
that dark, how is the message so bright, the message so clear, the response so
magnificent?


--- PAGE 613 ---
So, we stand here today at this historic moment. We are standing in the place
of those who couldn’t make it here today. We are standing on the blood of our
ancestors. We are standing on the blood of those who died in the middle passage,
who died in the fields and swamps of America, who died hanging from trees in
the South, who died in the cells of their jailers, who died on the highways and who
died in the fratricidal conflict that rages within our community. We are standing
on the sacrifice of the lives of those heroes, our great men and women that we
today may accept the responsibility that life imposes upon each traveler who
comes this way.
We must accept the responsibility that God has put upon us, not only to be
good husbands and fathers and builders of our community, but God is now call-
ing upon the despised and the rejected to become the cornerstone and the
builders of a new world.
And so, our brief subject today is taken from the American Constitution. In
these words, Toward a more union. Toward a more perfect union.
Now, when you use the word more with perfect, that which is perfect is that
which has been brought to completion. So, when you use more perfect, you’re
either saying that what you call perfect is perfect for that stage of its development
but not yet complete. When Jefferson said, “toward a more perfect union,” he was
admitting that the union was not perfect, that it was not finished, that work had
to be done. And so we are gathered here today not to bash somebody else.
We’re not gathered here to say, all of the evils of this nation. But we are gath-
ered here to collect ourselves for a responsibility that God is placing on our shoul-
ders to move this nation toward a more perfect union. Now, when you look at the
word toward, toward, it means in the direction of, in furtherance or partial ful-
fillment of, with the view to obtaining or having shortly before coming soon, emi-
nent, going on in progress. Well, that’s right. We’re in progress toward a perfect
union. Union means bringing elements or components into unity.
It is something formed by uniting two or more things. It is a number of per-
sons, states, etcetera, which are joined or associated together for some common
purpose. We’re not here to tear down America. America is tearing itself down. We
are here to rebuild the wasted cities. . .
White supremacy is the enemy of both White people and Black people
because the idea of White supremacy means you should rule because you’re
White, that makes you sick. And you’ve produced a sick society and a sick world.
The founding fathers meant well, but they said, “toward a more perfect union.”
So, the Bible says, we know in part, we prophesy in part, but when that which is
perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away with.
So either, Mr. Clinton, we’re going to do away with the mind-set of the found-
ing fathers. You don’t have to repudiate them like you’ve asked my brothers to do
me. You don’t have to say they were malicious, hate filled people. But you must
evolve out of their mind-set. You see their minds was limited to those six
European nations out of which this country was founded. But you’ve got Asians
here. How are you going to handle that? You’ve got children of Africa here. How
are you going to handle that?
5 8 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 614 ---
THE MILLION MAN MARCH 5 8 3
You’ve got Arabs here. You’ve got Hispanics here. I know you call them illegal
aliens, but hell, you took Texas from them by flooding Texas with people that got
your mind. And now they’re coming back across the border to what is Northern
Mexico, Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and California. They don’t see themselves
as illegal aliens. I think they might see you as an illegal alien. You have to be care-
ful how you talk to people. You have to be careful how you deal with people. The
Native American is suffering today. He’s suffering almost complete extinction.
Now, he learned about bingo. You taught him. He learned about black jack. You
taught him. He learned about playing roulette. You taught him. Now, he’s making
a lot of money. You’re upset with him because he’s adopted your ways. What
makes you like this? See, you’re like this because you’re not well. You’re not well.
And in the light of today’s global village, you can never harmonize with the Asians.
You can’t harmonize with the islands of the Pacific.
You can’t harmonize with the dark people of the world who out number you
11 to 1, if you’re going to stand in the mind of white supremacy. White supremacy
has to die in order for humanity to live. . .
Now, brothers, moral and spiritual renewal is a necessity. Every one of you
must go back home and join some church, synagogue or temple or mosque that
is teaching spiritual and moral uplift. I want you, brothers, there’s no men in the
church, in the mosque.
The men are in the streets and we got to get back to the houses of God. But
preachers we have to revive religion in America.
He have to revive the houses of God that they’re not personal chiefdoms of
those of us who are their preachers and pastors. But we got to be more like Jesus,
more like Mohammed, more like Moses and become servants of the people in ful-
filling their needs.
Brothers, when you go home, we’ve got to register eight million, eligible but
unregistered brothers, sisters. So you go home and find eight more like yourself.
You register and get them to register. I register as Democrat? Should I register as
a Republican? Should I register as independent?
If you’re an independent, that’s fine. If you’re a Democrat, that’s fine. If you’re
a Republican, that’s OK. Because in local elections you have to do that which is
in the best interest of your local community. But what we want is not necessarily
a third party, but a third force.
Which means that we’re going to collect Democrats, Republicans and inde-
pendents around an agenda that is in the best interest of our people. And then all
of us can stand on that agenda and in 1996, whoever the standard bearer is for the
Democratic, the Republican, or the independent party should one come into exis-
tence. They’ve got to speak to our agenda. . . .
Now, brothers, I want you to take this pledge. When I say I, I want you to say
I, and I’ll say your name. I know that there’s so many names, but I want you to
shout your name out so that the ancestors can hear it.
Take this pledge with me. Say with me please, I, say your name, pledge that
from this day forward I will strive to love my brother as I love myself. I, say your
name, from this day forward will strive to improve myself spiritually, morally,


--- PAGE 615 ---
mentally, socially, politically, and economically for the benefit of myself, my fam-
ily, and my people. I, say your name, pledge that I will strive to build business,
build houses, build hospitals, build factories, and then to enter international trade
for the good of myself, my family, and my people. I, say your name, pledge that
from this day forward I will never raise my hand with a knife or a gun to beat, cut,
or shoot any member of my family or any human being, except in self-defense.
I, say your name, pledge from this day forward I will never abuse my wife by
striking here, disrespecting her for she is the mother of my children and the pro-
ducer of my future. I, say your name, pledge that from this day forward I will
never engage in the abuse of children, little boys, or little girls for sexual gratifi-
cation. But I will let them grow in peace to be strong men and women for the
future of our people. I, say your name, will never again use the B word to describe
my female, but particularly my own Black sister.
I, say your name, pledge from this day forward that I will not poison my body
with drugs or that which is destructive to my health and my well being. I, say your
name, pledge from this day forward, I will support Black newspapers, Black radio,
Black television. I will support Black artists, who clean up their acts to show
respect for themselves and respect for their people, and respect for the ears of
the human family.
I, say your name, will do all of this so help me God
Source: Excerpt from Farrakhan’s speech at the Million Man March, Washington, D.C.,
October 16, 1995 as recorded by CNN. www-cgi.cnn.com/US/9510/megamarch/10-16
/transcript/index.html
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1996).
Arthur J. Magida, Prophet of Rage: A Life of Louis Farrakhan and His Nation (New York:
Basic Books, 1996).
O14 O
“A Voice from Death Row,” Mumia Abu-Jamal
Born Wesley Cook, Mumia Abu-Jamal (1954–  ) grew up in Philadelphia and at
age fifteen served as the Minister of Information for the Philadelphia chapter of
the Black Panther Party. After the destruction of the Panthers, he turned to radio
broadcasting, where he became a local celebrity. He served as president of the
Philadelphia Association of Black Journalists, and became an outspoken advocate
of the local radical MOVE organization. In 1981, while he was moonlighting as a
cab driver, Jamal was involved in a late-night altercation in which a police officer,
5 8 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 616 ---
M. ABU-JAMAL, “A VOICE FROM DEATH ROW” 5 8 5
Daniel Faulkner, was shot and killed. Jamal had a registered .38 handgun, but it
was never decisively linked to Faulkner’s wounds. Nevertheless, Jamal was con-
victed of murder and sentenced to death. After more than twenty years on death
row, a federal district court found that instructions to jury members had been
unconstitutional, and as a result, in 2001 Jamal’s sentenced was commuted to life
imprisonment. Jamal’s case has attracted worldwide attention as a possible human
rights violation.
O
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
The death penalty is a creation of the State, and politicians justify it by using it as
a stepping stone to higher political office. It’s very popular to use isolated cases—
always the most gruesome ones—to make generalizations about inmates on death
row and justify their sentences. Yet it is deceitful; it is untrue, unreal. Politicians
talk about people on death row as if they are the worst of the worst, monsters and
so forth. But they will not talk about the thousands of men and women in our
country serving lesser sentences for similar and even identical crimes. Or others
who, by virtue of their wealth and their ability to retain a good private lawyer, are
not convicted at all. The criminal court system calls itself a justice system, but it
measures privilege, wealth, power, social status, and—last but not least—race to
determine who goes to death row.
Why is it that Pennsylvania’s African-Americans, who make up only 9% of its
population, comprise close to two-thirds of its death row population? It is because
its largest city, Philadelphia, like Houston and Miami and other cities, is a place
where politicians have built their careers on sending people to death row. They
are not making their constituents any safer. They are not administering justice by
their example. They are simply revealing the partiality of justice.
Let us never forget that the overwhelming majority of people on death row are
poor. Most of them cannot afford the resources to develop an adequate defense
to compete with the forces of the State, let alone money to buy a decent suit to
wear in court. As the O. J. Simpson case illustrated once again, the kind of
defense you get is the kind of defense you can afford. In Pennsylvania, New Jer-
sey, and New York, in Florida, in Texas, in Illinois, in California—most of the peo-
ple on death row are there because they could not afford what O. J. could afford,
which is the best defense.
One of the most widespread arguments in favor of the death penalty is that it
deters crime. Study after study has shown that it does not. If capital punishment
deters anything at all, it is rational thinking. How else would it be conceivable in a
supposedly enlightened, democratic society? Until we recognize the evil irrational-
ity of capital punishment, we will only add, brick by brick, execution by execution,
to the dark temple of Fear. How many more lives will be sacrificed on its altar?
Source: Jamal News Service, 1998.


--- PAGE 617 ---
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Mumia Abu-Jamal, Live from Death Row(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1995).
———, Death Blossoms: Reflections from a Prisoner of Conscience (Plough Publishing
House, 1997).
J. Patrick O’Connor, The Framing of Mumia Abu-Jamal (Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books,
2008).
Leonard Weinglass, Race for Justice: Mumia Abu-Jamal’s Fight against the Death Penalty
(Monroe, Maine: Common Courage Press, 1995).
Daniel R. Williams, Executing Justice: An Inside Account of the Case of Mumia Abu-Jamal
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002).
O15 O
“Let Justice Roll Down Like Waters,”
African-American Prisoners in Sing Sing, 1998
By the end of the twentieth century, about one in three black males in their
twenties was imprisoned, on probation or parole, or awaiting trial in the United
States. Nearly one million black Americans were incarcerated in federal pris-
ons, state correctional facilities, and local jails. Prisons have become, in effect,
the principal means for extending social control over the lives of millions of
African Americans. We have selected excerpts from three essays written by pris-
oners who in 1998 were enrolled in a Master’s of Professional Studies Program
in the infamous Sing Sing Prison, one of the oldest correctional facilities in the
United States.
O
STATEMENT BY SING SING PRISONERS
We are seventeen theology students currently in exile within the bowels of a
New York state prison. Mostly from the five boroughs of New York City, we are
from various ethnic groups, mainly Black and Latino. Our faith traditions are
primarily Christianity and Islam. We are believers striving to live out our faith
in all that we say and do each day. We were transferred to Sing Sing
Correctional Facility to study as a group toward a master’s degree in profes-
sional studies.
There are seventy prisons in New York state and approximately seventy thou-
sand prisoners. According to the New York State Department of Correctional
Services figures for 1995, the New York state prison population is made up of
85 percent Blacks and Latinos, with 75 percent coming from the inner-city
areas of New York City. Upon release 98 percent of us will return to our neigh-
borhoods.
5 8 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 618 ---
AFRICAN-AMERICAN PRISONERS IN SING SING 5 8 7
It is clear that Black and Latino communities are most impacted by the poli-
cies of the criminal justice system. Yet our communities have the least to say
about what goes on in prison. Those establishing and enforcing criminal justice
policies are seldom from our urban communities, and their policies are out of step
with the needs of Blacks and Latinos. The policy makers are commonly vocifer-
ous and consistently diligent with regard to their “tough-on-crime” stance. But
they are eerily silent when it comes to the issues of poverty, education, housing,
and health care for the marginalized.
Correctional facilities have become big businesses. With 98 percent of state
prisons located in rural districts, the prison-industrial complex reflects the inter-
ests of those communities. It costs taxpayers approximately $30,000 a year to
incarcerate a prisoner; by contrast it costs $11,215 to send an undergraduate to
the State University of New York for a year. The crime rate has actually declined,
but they continue to build more prisons. As the educational system in our com-
munities continues to deteriorate, prison construction escalates. The high school
dropout rate is alarmingly high in our communities, yet educational budgets are
slashed and remedial education is eliminated.
We are prepared to make the best of our time and the necessary adjustments
for a successful reentry into society, but facing the parole board is like returning
to court and having the judge sentence you again for the same crime. There is a
double standard of justice and a double jeopardy in judgment.
There is a public outcry against the parole system. To listen only to government
officials one would conclude that most of the crimes committed in New York City
are committed by individuals on parole. However, 1995 statistics compiled by the
NYPD indicate that only 4.5 percent of crimes were committed by parolees.
Many of the churches and other faith communities in the Black and Latino
neighborhoods from which we have come have abandoned us. The silence of
Black and Latino Christian, Jewish, and Islamic congregations in urban commu-
nities makes them unwilling accomplices to the plight of prisoners.
We feel trapped and cut off by a system that seems to have no capacity for love
or compassion and refuses to recognize that people can change. Increasingly,
politicians and the media manipulate public sentiment toward vengefulness
instead of redemption, and that makes the public slow to understand the social
causes of wrong behavior. Prison: easy to get in and difficult to get out—even
when you are eligible for parole. Prison is a branding method tantamount to mod-
ern slavery; it totally rejects any possibility of rehabilitation. . . .
A message needs to be sent to those in power to stop penalizing every prisoner
for the criminal acts of a few parolees. We should be judged by what we have
done to change our own lives and should be held accountable for our own actions,
not somebody else’s.
As a measure to deter crime and to keep urban youth out of prison, adequate
and effective education should be the focal point for government, churches, and
recreation centers. Education builds a sound and safe society, while illiteracy


--- PAGE 619 ---
contributes to the destruction of humanity, perpetuating the poverty that too
easily leads to prison. We know first-hand the benefits of education and pledge
ourselves to share those benefits both in prison and when we return to our com-
munities.
We ask in the Spirit of Righteousness and the One, True, and Living God, that
you take this document to heart, remembering always to consider the good that is
inherent in all of creation and the struggle of the despised and imprisoned
throughout our nation. Let us “believe and do good works, and exhort one another
to truth and exhort one another to endurance” (Qur’an 103.3). Seek God’s Spirit
and Righteousness with us in every endeavor. In the words of Amos, “Let justice
roll down like waters, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream” (Amos 5:24).
O
THE PRISON-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX: AN INVESTMENT IN FAILURE
Bliss as a consequence of profound ignorance is a far-reaching, all-encompassing and
enduring lie. This nation generally perceives quality education as a privilege and has
greatly erred in embracing this obsolete and futile socio-political stance. In 1995,
when elitist policy makers and the media contrived to eradicate post-secondary edu-
cation from prisons, they hustled and beguiled the public with the premise that
higher education is a privilege, and prisoners should not have access to it.
It was irrelevant that only a few prisoners participated in post-secondary edu-
cation. In fact fewer than 1 percent received government grants. The fact that
higher education had proved to be the most dramatic recidivism-reducing pro-
gram within prisons and saved taxpayers more in the long run was lost in the hul-
labaloo and “get-tough” rhetoric. New York State prisons only provide an eighth-
grade education for its captives. Who benefits from ignorant, inter-personally and
managerially incompetent prisoners? No one but the Prison-Industrial Complex.
The Prison-Industrial Complex is a national phenomenon with a vested
interest in economic and political power. This multi-billion-dollar industry tar-
gets African Americans and Latinos, primarily within socially, economically and
politically destitute communities. The criminal justice system is the complex
machine that devours African-American and Latino men, women and children
as the raw material to sustain the Prison-Industrial Complex under the moral
banner of “the war on crime.” This is more accurately a war on “street crime,”
revealed as a war on people of color, the marginalized. Historically, this country
has always misused its power against its marginalized. The method has not
changed. Mass media works with elitist policy makers to shape and create pub-
lic misperceptions which so desensitize citizens to the real issues that the tar-
geted group is held with contempt or indifference. The Prison-Industrial
Complex is unequivocally “an institutionally racist mechanism, which is neu-
tralizing generations of Black and Latino males in New York and across the
nation and is devastating communities of color that comprise America’s inner
cities,” according to John Flateau.
5 8 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 620 ---
AFRICAN-AMERICAN PRISONERS IN SING SING 5 8 9
In 1995, 150 new prisons were built in the United States alone, and 171 existing
prisons were expanded. New York State Department of Correctional Services
(DOCS) is moving forward with the largest prison expansion in 70 years, and resi-
dents in New York State are more likely to be victims of crime than in 1981. State
and federal governments have mobilized massive resources and demonized, crimi-
nalized, and incarcerated African Americans and Latinos. Policy makers are quite
vociferous when it comes to “street crime”; they are reticent and less vocal when it
comes to poverty, meeting children’s needs in such areas as education, health and
child care, housing, substance abuse treatment, college tuition, recreation and jobs.
The propensity for this nation to take reactionary measures seems more often
than not to benefit the ruling class. It is easier to declare war on “street crime”
than it is to declare war on poverty, inferior education in dilapidated schools, and
substandard housing. It is easier to build prisons than it is to build people up with
hope and a sense of purpose.
Jim Wallis highlights this contradiction well in his book, The Soul of Politics.
Wallis writes, “Washington is the most powerful city in the nation, and D.C. is
the most powerless, without control even over its own affairs and destiny.
Considered by many to be a colony, the District of Columbia didn’t obtain par-
tial home rule until 1974. To this day, District residents (more than 606,000 peo-
ple) have no voting representation in Congress, and all actions taken by elected
city government are subject to congressional veto. As the ‘last colony,’ D.C. sym-
bolizes the relationship that many parts of the world have with official
Washington.”
This national symbolism is illustrated in Albany and City Hall. It is not subtle,
but blatant. With about 70,000 prisoners in New York State and about 63,000 ex-
offenders on parole at any given time, it is not hard to conclude that current crim-
inal justice policies are more geared toward investment in recidivism, and keep-
ing non-violent offenders for bizarre and lengthy sentences only as financial
pawns. If we expect prisoners to return to their communities, why are post-sec-
ondary education and effective therapeutic programs scarce, and obsolete in their
application? If we desire men and women to return to society with civil interper-
sonal skills, why relegate them to repositories of violent rage? If we expect men
and women to return to their communities as assets, and with respect for the law,
why do we ignore brutal and corrupt prison guards/police officers who abuse
those in their custody with impunity?
We must honestly question what we expect and how our ideology drives the
Prison-Industrial Complex. Young men entering the criminal justice system are
asphyxiated by despair and banality. They are fatalistic in their reasoning, and
angry. Their escalating negativism and sense of dejection make them ideal fuel for
the Prison-Industrial Complex.
America could not let go of slavery, so she inserted a clause in the 13th Amend-
ment which made slavery legal for those who were locked up, and convicted of a
crime. Prior to the Civil War, the Slave Codes governed all African-American
slaves in the South. Once slavery was abolished America merely rewrote the Slave


--- PAGE 621 ---
Codes, and called it the Black Codes. African Americans were arrested and
locked up on trumped-up charges and became a captive labor force. They were
leased out to white plantations and other private businesses. The State of Georgia
illustrated this well in 1878 when it leased out 1,239 convicts. Not surprisingly,
1,124 were African Americans. Brutality abounded unchecked for decades before
reform took place in the 1930s. But where carte blanche control over another
human being’s life is allowed, exploitation and abuse will continue unabated,
especially where the prisoner is held with the lowest regard.
In conclusion, higher education has proven to be a critical therapeutic device
for me. Others saw deeper qualities within me that I could not see myself. As my
horizons expanded, and I was reconciled with my humanity, the possibilities of
what I could become exploded before me. It takes courage and perseverance to
honestly acknowledge your deficiencies and work earnestly to correct them. My
ignorance was not blissful. I have caused a lot of pain for others, and for myself.
While I am still incarcerated, critical education has liberated and empowered me.
I will be an asset to others, no matter where I am. Unfortunately, many in prison
will not have that opportunity, though they desperately need it.
O
RIVER HUDSON
The River Hudson, what a wonderful sight for me, even from what is such a neg-
ative place behind prison fences and walls. Nonetheless, akin to every other place
in time, life is what you and I make it. I close my eyes then, and dream, not of far-
away places but of places up the river and down. It is during these times that I am
free, if only in my mind. Prison bars, cells, fences and walls can never take away
my true freedom inside, for I am free to go sailing up and down the River Hudson
through every corner of my mind. As I stand at my prison window facing north,
in my mind’s eye I see the Boulderberg Manor, a wonderful restaurant from days
of old; then, my mind goes south to pier 91 where the Queen Elizabeth II (QE
II) sits docked in all her majesty. These thoughts signify freedom for me; the
River Hudson, what a wonderful place to be.
As I stand staring into the waves of the river from my window, I think of
days my wife and I made countless trips to and from the Palisades Parkway via
Annsville Circle, the Bear Mountain Bridge, and the breathtaking scenery
along the way. We awoke to frost some days, sunshine on others, but always
with a heartwarming view of the River Hudson as we made our way to and
from work or leisure. There were never better days in my life. What a blessing
to be able to close my eyes and see the gracefulness and peace the River
Hudson holds for me. I stay the course behind these fences and walls, drifting,
sailing, hoping—little gentle breezes engulfing me—in the corners of my
mind.
On yet another day, though they all seem the same from here, I sit looking out
across the River Hudson to Rockland County facing me. For the life of me I can-
5 9 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 622 ---
AFRICAN-AMERICAN PRISONERS IN SING SING 5 9 1
not stop my mind from drifting up the river as I wonder—I see it as clear as if it
were yesterday—the Boulderberg Manor Restaurant, overlooking the River
Hudson from Tompkins Cove, NY. Again the River Hudson: what a breathtaking
view even from the Rockland County side, I recall, during a delectable dining
experience. Fresh grilled salmon, asparagus covered with hollandaise sauce, yel-
low rice pilaf, freshly baked sweet potato bread (I can almost smell that warm
fresh baked aroma!); and, lest I forget the view, the River Hudson. Whether fac-
ing north, south, or simply east from the gazebo on the restaurant lawn, the view
was always the absolute best, as we gazed contentedly across to Westchester.
Thus, I truly believe one day in the future, perhaps not the Boulderberg with the
impeccable service and delightful hospitality we grew so accustomed to, but some
place facing the River Hudson awaits Christine and me when these present days,
too, will be thoughts of the past.
Still, some days I lay in my Sing Sing bunk, and I reminisce on my love for driv-
ing. There is nothing quite like driving along the River Hudson from Westchester
County, going south through small towns and quaint villages like Croton on the
Hudson, Ossining, Tarrytown, and Dobbs Ferry. Once I make my way to River-
dale, I prepare to cross the Henry Hudson Bridge. Upon approaching the West
Side Highway along the riverside, I see the distinctive reddish-orange and black
smokestack of Cunard’s QE II luxury cruiseliner perched at New York City’s Pier
91. It is something again to draw closer to that seafaring vessel, leave the car, and
embark upon the ship itself. The view driving alongside the river is calming, but
the view from the ship is something I shall never forget, even as I lie here in my
bunk. I think of the vessel moving away from the pier and cruising slowly down
the River Hudson—New Jersey on the right, New York City on the left—an
unbelievable sight! And as these thoughts rest with me now and again, I know one
day I will move away from these banks of Sing Sing and move down the River
Hudson to my freedom and joys untold.
Freedom rings bright in the halls of my mind, and yet I know that one day
again, freedom will truly be mine. Like a cool breeze that passes across the prison
yard I admire the gentle—sometimes choppy—waves of the River Hudson. I
think of it now, I’ll think of it then—what a pleasure; but such freedom will never
elude me again. For me, the River Hudson has been a wonderful source of inspi-
ration, it reminds me I have a better life to come. There are bars, fences, and
walls that separate me from some experiences anew, but never from the hopes
and dreams of my heart and my mind too. Freedom, that inevitable freedom, is
yet to come to release me from this time, but physically, not just in the corners of
my mind.
Sources: (1) Statement by Sing Sing Prisoners, May 1998, pp. 36–38; (2) Michael J. Love,
“The Prison-Industrial Complex: An Investment in Failure,” pp. 24–25; and (3) Willis L.
Steele, Jr., “River Hudson,” in Pamphlet, Voices of the Class of 1998: Master of Professional
Studies Program at Sing Sing Correctional Facility (New York: New York Theological
Seminary, 1998), pp. 34–35.


--- PAGE 623 ---
O16 O
Black Radical Congress, 1998
On March 1, 1997, a group of thirty-five veteran political activists met in Chicago
to discuss the state of the black-American left and the future of progressive U.S.
politics. They decided to plan a large national meeting to be called the “Black
Radical Congress,” bringing together a broad range of progressive organizations
and individuals who were involved in socialist, Communist, lesbian and gay, fem-
inist, and revolutionary black-nationalist political work. The Black Radical
Congress (BRC) was held in Chicago on June 19–21, 1998, and attracted more
than two thousand African-American activists. The BRC established a network
of local organizing committees, and its members became involved in a variety of
political activities, including anti–police-brutality cases, economic-justice cam-
paigns, and the struggle to defend public education. The documents below are
the “Principles of Unity” that were approved at the initial 1997 Chicago orga-
nizing meeting, and served as the basis for the BRC’s national mobilization; the
“Call to the Congress” issued in the fall of 1997 and circulated nationally; and the
major policy document of the BRC, the “Black Freedom Agenda.” The “Free-
dom Agenda” was the product of several drafts and intense discussion over eigh-
teen months. The version presented below was approved by the BRC’s national
council in April 1999. The Freedom Agenda was largely inspired by the African
National Congress’s “Freedom Charter,” the Black Panther Party’s “Ten-Point
Program,” and the Combahee River Collective Statement of 1977.
O
PRINCIPLES OF UNITY
The Black Radical Congress will convene to establish a “center without walls” for
transformative politics that will focus on the conditions of Black working and poor
people. Recognizing contributions from diverse tendencies within Black
Radicalism—including socialism, revolutionary nationalism and feminism—we
are united in opposition to all forms of oppression, including class exploitation,
racism, patriarchy, homophobia, anti-immigration prejudice and imperialism. We
will begin with a gathering on June 19–21, 1998. From there we will identify pro-
posals for action and establish paths forward. The Black Radical Congress does
not intend to replace or displace existing organizations, parties or campaigns but
will contribute to mobilizing unaffiliated individuals, as well as organizations,
around common concerns.
1. We recognize the diverse historical tendencies in the Black radical tradition
including revolutionary nationalism, feminism and socialism.
2. The technological revolution and capitalist globalization have changed the
economy, labor force and class formations that need to inform our analysis
and strategies. The increased class polarization created by these develop-
5 9 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 624 ---
BLACK RADICAL CONGRESS 5 9 3
ments demands that we, as Black radicals, ally ourselves with the most
oppressed sectors of our communities and society.
3. Gender and sexuality can no longer be viewed solely as personal issues but
must be a basic part of our analyses, politics and struggles.
4. We reject racial and biological determinism, Black patriarchy and Black cap-
italism as solutions to problems facing Black people.
5. We must see the struggle in global terms.
6. We need to meet people where they are, taking seriously identity politics
and single-issue reform groups, at the same time that we push for a larger
vision that links these struggles.
7. We must be democratic and inclusive in our dealings with one another, mak-
ing room for constructive criticism and honest dissent within our ranks.
There must be open venues for civil and comradely debates to occur.
8. Our discussions should be informed not only by a critique of what now
exists, but by serious efforts to forge a creative vision of a new society.
9. We cannot limit ourselves to electoral politics—we must identify multiple
sites of struggle.
10. We must overcome divisions within the Black radical forces, such as those of
generation, region and occupation. We must forge a common language that
is accessible and relevant.
11. Black radicals must build a national congress of radical forces in the Black
community to strengthen radicalism as the legitimate voice of Black work-
ing and poor people, and to build organized resistance.
O
THE STRUGGLE CONTINUES: 
SETTING A BLACK LIBERATION AGENDA FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS—J UNE 19–21, 1998
Black people face a deep crisis. Finding a way out of this mess requires new think-
ing, new vision, and a new spirit of resistance. We need a new movement of Black
radicalism.
We know that America’s capitalist economy has completely failed us. Every day
more of us are unemployed and imprisoned, homeless and hungry. Police brutal-
ity, violence and the international drug trade threaten our children with the great-
est dangers since slavery. The politicians build more prisons but cut budgets for
public schools, day care and health care. They slash welfare yet hire more cops.
The government says working people must pay more taxes and receive fewer ser-
vices, while the rich and the corporations grow fat. Black people and other
oppressed people have the power to change the way things are today. But first we
must unite against the real enemy.
Now is the time for a revival of the militant spirit of resistance that our people
have always possessed, from the Abolitionist Movement to outlaw slavery to the
Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s, from Black Power to the anti-apartheid
campaign of the 1980s. Now is the time to rebuild a strong, uncompromising


--- PAGE 625 ---
movement for human rights, full employment and self-determination. Now is the
time for a new Black radicalism.
If you believe in the politics of Black liberation, join us in Chicago in 1998 at the
Black Radical Congress. If you hate what capitalism has done to our community—
widespread joblessness, drugs, violence and poverty—come to the Congress. If you
are fed up with the corruption of the two-party system and want to develop a plan
for real political change, come to the Congress. If you want to struggle against class
exploitation, racism, sexism and homophobia, come to the Congress. The Black
Radical Congress is for everyone ready to fight back: trade unionists and workers,
youth and students, women, welfare recipients, lesbians and gays, public-housing
tenants and the homeless, the elderly and people on fixed incomes, veterans, cul-
tural workers and immigrants. You!
Sisters and Brothers, we stand at the edge of a new century. The moment for
a new militancy and a new commitment to the liberation of all Black people, at
home and abroad, has arrived. Let us build a national campaign toward the Black
Radical Congress, setting in motion a renewed struggle to reclaim our historic
role as the real voice of democracy in this country. Spread the word: “Without
struggle, there is no progress!” Now’s the time!
O
THE FREEDOM AGENDA
Preamble
During the last 500 years, humanity has displayed on a colossal scale its capacity
for creative genius and ruthless destruction, for brutal oppression and indom-
itable survival, for rigid tradition and rapid change. The Americas evolved to their
present state of development at great cost to their original, indigenous peoples,
and at great cost to those whose labor enabled modernization under the yoke of
that protracted crime against humanity, slavery. Even so, a good idea is implicit in
the Declaration of Independence of the United States that all people are
“endowed with certain inalienable rights, and among these are life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness.” That the idea of a just society, contained in those words,
remains unrealized is what compels this declaration.
Not only has the idea not been realized, but we are moving further away from
its realization by the hour. Global capitalism, both the cause and effect of neo-
liberal and Reaganist policies, has facilitated the transfer of enormous wealth
from the bottom to the top of society in recent years, concentrating the control of
abundant resources in ever fewer hands. As a result, the working people who con-
stitute the vast majority of people have confronted a steady decline in their
prospects for earning a decent living and controlling their lives. In the U.S., the
threat of sudden unemployment hangs over most households. We pay unfair taxes
and receive fewer services, while multibillion-dollar fortunes accumulate in the
private sector. Prisons proliferate as budgets are slashed for public schools, day
5 9 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 626 ---
BLACK RADICAL CONGRESS 5 9 5
care, healthcare and welfare. The grip of big money on the two-party electoral
process has robbed us of control over the political institutions that are mandated
to serve us. We are losing ground, and democracy is more and more elusive.
As for people of African descent, most of whose ancestors were among the
shackled millions who helped build the edifices and culture of the Americas, we
carry an enormously disproportionate burden. In the U.S., the living legacy of
slavery, and the pervasiveness of institutional white supremacy, have placed us on
all-too-familiar terms with poverty, urban and rural, exploitative conditions of
employment; disproportionately high rates of unemployment and underemploy-
ment; inferior health care; substandard education; the corrosive drug trade, with
its accompanying gun violence; police brutality and its partner, excessive incar-
ceration; hate-inspired terrorism; a biased legal system, and discrimination of
every kind—persistent even after the end of legal segregation.
Resistance is in our marrow as Black people, given our history in this place.
From the Haitian revolution, to the U.S. abolitionist movement against slavery,
to the twentieth-century movement for civil rights and empowerment, we have
struggled and died for justice. We believe that struggle must continue, and with
renewed vigor. Our historical experiences suggest to us, by negative example,
what a truly just and democratic society should look like: It should be democra-
tic, not just in myth but in practice, a society in which all people—regardless of
color, ethnicity, religion, nationality, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age,
family structure, or mental or physical capability—enjoy full human rights, the
fruits of their labor, and the freedom to realize their full human potential. If you
agree, and if you are committed to helping achieve justice and democracy in the
twenty-first century, please sign your name and/or the name of your organization
to this 15-point Freedom Agenda.
The Freedom Agenda
I. We will fight for the human rights of Black people and all people.
We will struggle for a society and world in which every individual enjoys full
human rights, full protection of the United Nations Declaration of Human
Rights, and in the United States equal protection of the Constitution and of all
the laws. We seek a society in which every individual—regardless of color, nation-
ality, national origin, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age, family struc-
ture, or mental or physical capability—is free to experience “life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness.” We affirm that all people are entitled to:
a. a safe and secure home;
b. employment at a living wage—that is, compensation for the full value
of their labor;
c. free, quality health care, including full reproductive freedom with the
right to choose when or whether to bear children, and free, quality
child care;
d. free, quality public education.


--- PAGE 627 ---
We oppose the Human Genome Project in its current form and with its current
leadership, and we oppose all sociobiological or genetic experiments that are
spurred by, and help perpetuate, scientific racism. We will fight for a society and
world in which every individual and all social groups can live secure, dignified lives.
II. We will fight for political democracy.
We will struggle to expand political democracy to ensure the people’s greater par-
ticipation in decision-making. In the U.S., we will work to replace the current
two-party, winner-take-all electoral system with a more democratic multiparty
system based on proportional representation, and we will fight to abolish all reg-
istration procedures that restrict the number of eligible voters. We oppose private
financing of electoral campaigns, especially corporate contributions; we will work
to replace the present corrupt system with public financing.
III. We will fight to advance beyond capitalism, which has demonstrated its struc-
tural incapacity to address basic human needs worldwide and, in particular, the
needs of Black people.
Guided by our belief that people should come before profits, we will fight to max-
imize economic democracy and economic justice.
a. We seek full employment at livable wages, public control of private-
sector financial operations, worker control of production decisions,
and a guaranteed annual income for the needy;
b. we will fight to end racial discrimination by capitalist enterprises,
especially banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions;
c. we seek a society in which working people enjoy safe working condi-
tions and flexible hours to accommodate family responsibilities, lei-
sure and vacations;
d. we seek laws mandating public ownership of utilities, and mandating
federal and local budgetary emphases on programs for the general
welfare—health care, education, public transportation, recreation and
infrastructure;
e. we will struggle for laws that regulate private-sector business prac-
tices, especially regarding prices, fees, plant shutdowns and job relo-
cations—where shutdowns are permitted, adequate compensation to
workers shall be required;
f. we support the historical mission of trade unions to represent workers’
interests and to negotiate on their behalf;
g. we seek a fair, equitable, highly progressive tax system that places the
heaviest taxes on the wealthiest sector, and we seek expansion of the
earned income tax credit.
IV . We will fight to end the super-exploitation of Southern workers.
More than 50 percent of people of African descent residing in the U.S. live in the
South, where workers’ earnings and general welfare are besieged by corporate
practices, and where “right to work” laws undermine union organizing. Thus, we
5 9 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 628 ---
BLACK RADICAL CONGRESS 5 9 7
seek relief for Southern workers from corporate oppression, and we will struggle
to repeal anti-union laws. We will also fight for aid to Black farmers, and for the
restoration of farm land seized from them by agribusiness, speculators and real-
estate developers.
V . We will struggle to ensure that all people in society receive free public education.
We affirm that all are entitled to free, quality public education throughout their
lifetime. Free education should include adult education and retraining for occu-
pational and career changes. We will fight to ensure that curricula in U.S. schools,
colleges and universities are anti-racist, anti-sexist and anti-homophobic, and for
curricula that adequately accommodate students’ needs to express and develop
their artistic, musical or other creative potential.
VI. We will struggle against state terrorism.
We will fight for a society in which every person and every community is free
from state repression, including freedom from state-sponsored surveillance. We
seek amnesty for, and the release of, all political prisoners. We will struggle to
repeal all legislation that expands the police power of the state and undermines
the U.S. Constitution’s First and Fourth Amendments. We will fight to eliminate
the deliberate trafficking in drugs and weapons in our communities by organized
crime, and by institutions of the state such as the Central Intelligence Agency.
VII. We will struggle for a clean and healthy environment.
We will fight for a society in which the welfare of people and the natural environ-
ment takes precedence over commercial profits and political expediency. We will
work to protect, preserve and enhance society’s and the planet’s natural heritage—
forests, lakes, rivers, oceans, mountain ranges, animal life, flora and fauna. In the
U.S., we will struggle against environmental racism by fighting for laws that strictly
regulate the disposal of hazardous industrial waste, and that forbid both the dis-
criminatory targeting of poor and non-white communities for dumping and
despoilment of the natural environment.
VIII. We will fight to abolish police brutality, unwarranted incarceration and the
death penalty.
We are determined to end police brutality and murder:
a. We will fight for strong civilian oversight of police work by elected
civilian review boards that are empowered to discipline police mis-
conduct and enforce residency requirements for police officers;
b. we seek fundamental changes in police training and education to
emphasize public service over social control as the context in which
law enforcement occurs, and to stress respect for the histories and cul-
tures of the U.S.-born and immigrant communities served;
c. we seek to limit incarceration to the most violent criminals, only those
who have clearly demonstrated their danger to the lives and limbs of
others;


--- PAGE 629 ---
d. regarding non-violent offenders, we demand that they be released and
provided with appropriate medical, rehabilitative and educative assis-
tance without incarceration;
e. we will struggle for abolition of the death penalty, which has been
abolished in the majority of developed nations. In the U.S., the his-
tory of the death penalty’s application is inextricable from the
nation’s origins as a slave state. Since Emancipation, it has been a
white-supremacist tool intended to maintain control over a popula-
tion perceived as an alien, ongoing threat to the social order. Appli-
cation of the death penalty, which is highly discriminatory on the
basis of color and class, violates international human-rights law and
must be eliminated.
IX. We will fight for gender equality, for women’s liberation, and for women’s
rights to be recognized as human rights in all areas of personal, social, economic
and political life.
We will work to create a society and world in which women of African descent,
along with their sisters of other colors, nationalities and backgrounds, shall enjoy
non-discriminatory access to the education, training and occupations of their
choice. We will struggle to ensure that all women enjoy equal access to quality
health care and full reproductive rights, including the right to determine when or
whether they will bear children and the right to a safe, legal abortion. We will
fight to end domestic abuse and sexual harassment in the workplace.
X. We recognize lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people as full and equal
members of society, and of our communities.
We affirm the right of all people to love whom they choose, to openly express
their sexuality, and to live in the family units that meet their needs. We will fight
against homophobia, and we support anti-homophobic instruction in public
schools. We will fight for effective legal protections for the civil rights and civil
liberties of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, and we demand that
violence and murder committed against such people be prosecuted as hate
crimes. We will also fight to end discrimination against this sector in employment,
health care, social welfare and other areas.
XI. We support affirmative action.
We will fight to retain and expand affirmative-action policies in education,
employment, the awarding of government contracts and all other areas affected
by historical and contemporary injustices. Affirmative action, with goals and
timetables, is indispensable for achieving equal opportunity, justice and fairness
for the members of all historically oppressed groups.
XII. We will fight for reparations.
Reparations is a well-established principle of international law that should be
applied in the U.S. Historically, the U.S. has been both the recipient and dis-
5 9 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 630 ---
BLACK RADICAL CONGRESS 5 9 9
burser of reparations. As the descendants of enslaved Africans, we have the legal
and moral right to receive just compensation for the oppression, systematic bru-
tality and economic exploitation Black people have suffered historically and con-
tinue to experience today. Thus, we seek reparations from the U.S. for
a. its illegal assault on African peoples during the slave trade;
b.its exploitation of Black labor during slavery; and
c. its systematic and totalitarian physical, economic and cultural violence
against people of African descent over the last four centuries.
XIII. We will struggle to build multicultural solidarity and alliances among all
people of color.
We will fight against white-supremacist tactics aimed at dividing people of color.
We seek alliances with other people of color to develop unified strategies for
achieving multicultural democracy, and for overcoming the divisions that exist
around such issues as immigration, bilingual education, political representation
and allocation of resources.
XIV . We will uphold the right of the African-American people to self-determination.
The formation of the Black Radical Congress in June 1998 was an act of
African-American self-determination, a principle which is codified in the
United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. The African-American people
are entitled to define the direction, priorities, allies and goals of our struggle
against national and racial oppression. Building the power to exercise these pre-
rogatives is central to our struggle against all the systems of oppression con-
fronting our people. Therefore, we will fight for both a national program of lib-
eration and for a mass base of power in the social sectors, institutions, all levels
of government, communities and territories of society that affect the lives of our
people.
XV . We support the liberation struggles of all oppressed people.
We affirm our solidarity with peoples of African descent throughout the African
diaspora. We support their struggles against imperialism and neo-colonialism
from without, as well as against governmental corruption, exploitation and
human-rights abuses from within. We especially support struggles against
transnational corporations, whose global market practices gravely exploit all work-
ers, abuse workers’ rights and threaten all workers’ welfare. We affirm our soli-
darity with all oppressed people around the world, whatever their color, nation or
religion—none of us is free unless all are free. We believe that all people every-
where should enjoy the right to self-determination and the right to pursue their
dreams, unfettered by exploitation and discrimination.
Sources: (1) “BRC Principles of Unity”; (2) The “Call to Congress”; and (3) “The Freedom
Agenda of the BRC.” Copies in possession of the editors.


--- PAGE 631 ---
O17 O
2000 Presidential Election
The 2000 presidential election was one of the closest and most bitterly contested
in American history. Vice president Al Gore, the Democratic Party’s presidential
candidate, received over 500,000 more popular votes than his Republican chal-
lenger, Texas governor George W. Bush. However, as in the contested election of
1876, an extremely close race in Florida placed that state’s electoral votes into
question. Florida officials led by Bush’s brother, governor Jeb Bush, halted the
count of ballots and proclaimed the Republican candidate the victor by several
hundred votes. There was widespread evidence that tens of thousands of poor
and African-American voters had been denied access to voting. The U.S.
Supreme Court in its decision, Bush v. Gore, declared the Florida ballot recount
unconstitutional, and in effect named Bush the winner of the presidency.
At the U.S. Congressional tally of the Electoral College vote on January 6,
2001, the Congressional Black Caucus objected to awarding Florida’s twenty-five
contested electoral votes to George W. Bush. Though just one vote from a sena-
tor was required to put a stop to the count and adjourn the session, not one sen-
ator stepped forward to cast the necessary vote. The Caucus walked out of the
session in protest, and Bush was declared president of the United Sates.
In a subsequent investigation of voting rights violations, the Commission on
Civil Rights concluded that there were gross violations of the Voting Rights Act
in Florida during the 2000 presidential election, preventing thousands of resi-
dents from voting and discarding the votes of others. In addition, the Commission
found that African-American voters were significantly more likely than whites to
be barred from voting.
O
LETTER TO GOVERNOR BUSH FROM CHAIRPERSON MARY FRANCES BERRY
March 8, 2001
Via Facsimile and U.S. Mail
The Honorable John Ellis Bush
Governor
Office of the Governor
The Florida Capitol
Tallahassee, FL 32399-0001
Dear Governor Bush:
I am writing to express my deep disappointment with your statement of prior-
ities that was presented during the opening of the Florida legislative session,
6 0 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 632 ---
2000 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 6 0 1
in which you did not address the most serious problems that occurred in
Florida during the 2000 elections. My disappointment is based on my prelim-
inary assessment that these problems would not be resolved even if the legis-
lature approved your request that new technology for recording votes be
acquired and put into place. Voting technology reforms are necessary and your
support of them is a step in the right direction. These measures standing alone,
however, are insufficient to address the significant and distressing issues and
barriers that prevented qualified voters from participating in the recent
Presidential election.
As you know, the Commission has undertaken a formal investigation into allegations
by Floridians of voting irregularities arising out of the November 7, 2000
Presidential election. The Commission has held two fact-finding hearings in Florida
to examine whether eligible voters faced avoidable barriers that undermined their
ability to cast ballots and have their ballots counted in this closely contested election.
In total, over 100 witnesses testified under oath before the Commission, includ-
ing approximately 65 scheduled witnesses who were selected for the two hear-
ings due to their knowledge of and/or experience with the issues under investi-
gation. The Commission heard testimony from top elected and appointed state
officials, including your own testimony, that of the Secretary of State, the
Attorney General, the Director of the Florida Division of Elections and other
Florida state and county officials. A representative of Database Technologies,
Inc. [Choicepoint], a firm involved in the controversial, state-sponsored removal
of felons from the voter registration rolls also testified.
We also heard the sworn testimony of registered voters and experts on election
reform issues, election laws and procedures and voting rights. Also, the Chair and
Executive Director of the Select Task Force on Election Reforms that you estab-
lished testified before the Commission. Testimony was also received from the
supervisors of elections for several counties, county commission officials, law
enforcement personnel, and a states attorney. In addition to the scheduled wit-
nesses, the Commission extended an opportunity for concerned persons, includ-
ing Members of Congress and members of the Florida State Legislature, to sub-
mit testimony under oath that was germane to the issues under investigation.
Significantly, the Commission subpoenaed scores of relevant documents to assist
with this investigation.
The evidence points to an array of problems. These problems cry out for solu-
tions, for example, a process for insuring the equitable allocation of resources
to insure that poor and or people of color areas are not disproportionately
affected. They also include a better process for identifying felons who are inel-
igible to vote, insuring coordination between the DMV and election boards to
make sure registrations are actually filed and on a timely basis, funds for better
training of poll workers, improved and updated communication systems, funds
for voter education, and clarifications in the law to permit provisional ballots to


--- PAGE 633 ---
be cast, when appropriate. As you know, counties have uneven funding bases
and priorities.
Because I believe the need to address these problems is serious, I have deter-
mined that the Commission should hold additional hearings in Florida after the
conclusion of the legislative session to bring state and local officials before us to
assess what changes have been legislated or enacted at the state and local level
and to report to the public on what progress has been made.
I expect the Commission to formally endorse the new hearings at our meeting on
March 9, 2001. We intend to keep a steady focus on these developments to ensure
that the voting rights of all eligible persons are protected.
Respectfully,
Mary Frances Berry
Chairperson
Source: Mary Frances Berry, “Letter to Governor Bush from Chairperson Mary Frances
Berry,” U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, (2001) www.usccr.gov/pubs/vote2000/Berry
.htm.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Douglas Brinkley, “The Great Election 2000 Media Debacle,” Harvard International
Journal of Press/ Politics 6, no. 2 (March 1, 2001), pp. 82–88.
Corrine Brown, “On Voting Rights,” House of Representatives (2004) www.house
.gov/corrinebrown/ccorner108/cc_041007_votingrights.htm.
John Conyers and United States Congress House Committee on the Judiciary, How to
Make over One Million Votes Disappear: Electoral Sleight of Hand in the 2000
Presidential Election: A Fifty-State Report (Washington, DC: U.S. House of
Representatives, 2001).
Hermon George Jr., “Putting Election 2000 in Perspective: A Declaration of War,” Black
Scholar 31, no. 2 (June 2001), pp. 11–13.
Lani Guinier, “What We Must Overcome,” American Prospect12, no. 5 (March 12, 2001),
pp. 26–31.
Revathi I. Hines, “The Silent Voices: 2000 Presidential Election and the Minority Vote in
Florida,” Western Journal of Black Studies 26, no. 2 (Summer 2002), pp. 71–74.
Jack N. Rakove, ed., The Unfinished Election of 2000 (New York: Basic Books, 2001).
United States Commission on Civil Rights, “Voting Irregularities in Florida During the
2000 Presidential Election,” The Commission (2001) www.usccr.gov/pubs/vote
2000/report/main.htm.
Hanes Walton Jr., “The Disenfranchisement of the African American Voter in the 2000
Presidential Election: The Silence of the Winner and Loser,” Black Scholar 31, no. 2
(June 2001), pp. 21–24.
Jerry White, “Why Did the U.S. Media Black out the Civil Commission Report on the
Florida Vote?,” Black Scholar 31, no. 2 (June 2001), pp. 8–10.
6 0 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 634 ---
HIP-HOP ACTIVISM 6 0 3
O18 O
Hip-Hop Activism
Hip-hop emerged in the Bronx during the mid-1970s as a challenge to structural
racism. One element of hip-hop—rap music—became a mainstream multimillion-
dollar business. However, a more progressive strand of hip-hop is typically associated
with activism. The term hip-hop activism, which became popular in the 1980s, drew
attention to hip-hop as a social critique of injustice. Young organizers, scholars,
activists, artists and cultural workers have used hip-hop to address the serious issues
confronting their generation, including poverty, police brutality, massive incarcera-
tion of juveniles, felony disenfranchisement, and the HIV/HIV pandemic. The Hip-
Hop Summit Action Network (HSAN), founded in 2001 by Russell Simmons, was
one of many organizations to use hip-hop music as a framework for activism.
O
“WHAT WE WANT”
1. We want freedom and the social, political and economic development and
empowerment of our families and communities; and for all women, men and chil-
dren throughout the world.
2. We want equal justice for all without discrimination based on race, color,
ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, age, creed or class.
3. We want the total elimination of poverty.
4. We want the highest quality public education equally for all.
5. We want the total elimination of racism and racial profiling, violence,
hatred and bigotry.
6. We want universal access and delivery of the highest quality health care
for all.
7. We want the total elimination of police brutality and the unjust incarcera-
tion of people of color and all others.
8. We want the end and repeal of all repressive legislations, laws, regulations
and ordinances such as “three strikes” laws; federal and state mandatory mini-
mum sentencing; trying and sentencing juveniles as adults; sentencing disparities
between crack and powdered cocaine use; capitol punishment; the Media
Marketing Accountability Act; and hip-hop censorship fines by the FCC.
9. We want reparations to help repair the lingering vestiges; damages and
suffering of African Americans as a result of the brutal enslavement of genera-
tions of Africans in America.
10. We want the progressive transformation of American society into a Nu
America as a result of organizing and mobilizing the energy, activism and resources
of the hip-hop community at the grassroots level throughout the United States.


--- PAGE 635 ---
11. We want greater unity, mutual dialogue, program development and a pri-
oritizing of national issues for collective action within the hip-hop community
through summits, conferences, workshops, issue task force and joint projects.
12. We want advocacy of public policies that are in the interests of hip-hop
before Congress, state legislatures, municipal governments, the media and the
entertainment industry.
13. We want the recertification and restoration of voting rights for the 10 mil-
lion persons who have loss their right to vote as a result of a felony conviction.
Although these persons have served time in prison, their voting rights have not
been restored in 40 states in the U.S.
14. We want to tremendously increase public awareness and education on the
pandemic of HIV/AIDS.
15. We want a clean environment and an end to communities in which poor
and minorities reside being deliberately targeted for toxic waste dumps, facilities
and other environmental hazards.
T
HE TOOKIE PROTOCOL FOR PEACE
Point I:
Proclamation
A-1: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL immediately cease fire and end any
verbal, written, or physical violence against one another.
A-2: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL cease and desist the perpetuation
of drive-by shootings, walk-up shootings, set-up shootings, ambushes, murder,
drug deals, robbery, vandalism, kidnapping, rape, extortion, female and child
abuse, illegal profiteering, or any other kind of violence or criminality.
A-3: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL use every nonviolent measure to
resolve all past, present, or future conflicts between us.
A-4: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL learn to respect one another and
co-exist in peace within the community and elsewhere.
A-5: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL help to restore order and to rebuild
the community.
A-6: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL not disrespect, instigate, or taunt
each other or family members, relatives, wives, girlfriends, and acquaintances of
the opposite parties.
A-7: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL not encroach upon each other’s
community or neighborhood without prior notice, to avoid suspicion or conflict.
A-8: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL help individually and collectively to
keep the community safe from any improprieties.
A-9: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL not use the Peace Accord as cam-
ouflage to commit mayhem against each other.
6 0 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 636 ---
HIP-HOP ACTIVISM 6 0 5
A-10: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL neither seek out nor plot with
acquaintances or outsiders (defined as parties not obligated to this Proclamation)
to carry out vendettas against each other.
A-11: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL not allow mistreatment or harm
to befall any individuals appointed as Peacekeepers or others involved in the
peace process.
A-12: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES will put forth effort to become educated,
computer-literate, and to learn a trade that will enable us to become productive
in the reconstruction of our community.
A-13: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES WILL eliminate any self-destructive
behavior and personal vices—illicit drug usage, drug dealing, abuse of alcohol,
inhalants, etc.—that would intoxicate our minds, impair our judgment and jeop-
ardize the peace negotiations.
A-14: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES will work side by side to do whatever is eth-
ical to uphold the Peace Accord and Proclamation, and we vow to live in harmony.
A-15: WE THE INVOLVED PARTIES recognize both the Peace Accord and
Proclamation as being fair and attainable. We agree to its entire contents.
Sources: Hip-Hop Summit Action Network, “What We Want,” www.hsan.org
/content/main.aspx?pageid=27.
Stan “Tookie” William, “Tookie Protocol for Peace,” www.tookie.com/protocol
/index.html.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation(New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 2005).
Raymond Codrington, “Hip-Hop Beyond Appropriation: An Introduction to the Series,”
Transforming Anthropology 15, no. 2 (October 2007), pp. 138–140.
Michael Eric Dyson, Know What I Mean? Reflections on Hip-Hop (New York: Basic
Civitas, 2007).
Bakari Kitwana, The Hip Hop Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African
American Culture (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2002).
Tony Mitchell, ed., Global Noise: Rap and Hip-Hop Outside the USA , Music/Culture
(Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2001).
Mark Anthony Neal and Murray Forman, eds., That’s the Joint!: The Hip-Hop Studies
Reader (New York: Routledge, 2004).
Tricia Rose, Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America ,
Music/Culture (Hanover: University Press of New England, 1994).
Andrew Ross and Tricia Rose, eds., Microphone Fiends: Youth Music & Youth Culture
(New York: Routledge, 1994).
Simmons Russell and Chavis Benjamin, “Hip-Hop Summit Action Network Calls for End
to ‘Bitch,’ ‘Ho’ and ‘Nigger’ in Music,” Michigan Chronicle (April 25, 2007), p. A1.
Timothy Francis Strode and Tim Wood, eds., The Hip Hop Reader (New York: Pearson/
Longman, 2008).
S. Craig Watkins, Hip Hop Matters: Politics, Pop Culture, and the Struggle for the Soul of
a Movement (Boston: Beacon Press, 2005).


--- PAGE 637 ---
O19 O
World Conference Against Racism—Durban, South Africa
The World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
other Forms of Intolerance was held in Durban, South Africa, from August 31 to
September 8, 2001. The conference and its Non-Governmental Organizations
Forum was attended by 8,000 people including delegates, activists, and scholars
from more than 160 countries. Though there were more than 1,500 black
Americans who participated in preconference panels and in the official proceed-
ings, official representatives from the U.S. State Department walked out of the
meeting in protest with the Israeli delegation.
Among other important topics, conference participants discussed repara-
tions for slavery and colonialism. Conference participants endorsed a document
that recognized the negative effects of racism and globalization; the connec-
tions between racial discrimination, xenophobia, and class oppression; and
called upon Western governments to acknowledge slavery as “a crime against
humanity.” The conference dramatically escalated social movements by people
of African descent in many Third World countries, especially across Latin
America.
O
THE VIENNA DECLARATION AND PLAN OF ACTION, 20011
Acknowledging the Black Holocausts
Whereas, African Slave Trade and Slavery exploited the motherland of Africa;
Forced the brutal displacement or removal of over one hundred million of its
people (the largest forced migration in history); Directly caused the death of
millions [of] Africans; Destroyed African civilizations which were among the
most advanced societies of the world; Impoverished African economies which
had prospered up to that time; and launched a period of African under-devel-
opment and marginalization which continues to this day—five hundred years
later;
Whereas, Africa was dismembered and divided among European powers,
which created Western monopolies for the continued exploitation of vital African
natural resource riches for Western industries; and
Whereas, African Slavery was imposed by and for the benefit of major
European and
American states to satisfy their appetites for free labor; and the exploitation of
Africans and African descendants by these States continued unabated for over
three hundred years; and
6 0 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 638 ---
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM 6 0 7
Whereas, After the Slave Trade, Africa was subjected to another form of
enslavement, namely, Colonization in which the exploitation of Africa’s rich nat-
ural resource heritage continued unabated by the European powers; and,
Eliminating Anti-Black Racism
Whereas, Africans and African descendants are commonly victims of anti-
Black racism and of multiple forms of overt and covert discrimination. The most
pernicious are institutional, systemic, structural and cultural discrimination. The
impact of institutional, structural and cultural racism is felt in every aspect of life:
housing, employment, education, health, civil and criminal justice, economic
development. Many of these policies and practices are perpetrated by the states
themselves; and,
Whereas, Anti-Black racism (both past and present) is fundamentally rooted
in white supremacist ideology and the economic profits of the colonial and neo-
colonial oppressors; and
Whereas, Anti-Black racism cannot be eradicated without the elimination 
of social ghettoization and demonization of Africans and African descendants;
and
Whereas, Many Africans and African descendants suffer from multi-oppressions
structured around class, gender, disability, immigrant status and sexuality. These
forms of oppression must be eliminated; and,
Whereas, African and African descendant women play, and have always
played, a fundamental role in the development and maintenance of our families,
peoples, communities and nations, even though historically they have faced the
worst conditions, the greatest marginalization and systematic exclusion. Women
and men, and children and youth of both genders are equal and must be treated
so; and,
Whereas, Racism is a major health determinant. Historical and current dis-
crimination, as well as colonial and neo-colonial policies against Africans and
African descendants have resulted in Africans and African descendants having
significantly lower health status, less or no access to health care and poorer qual-
ity health care;
Whereas, AIDS represents a human genocide, disproportionally victimizing
African people, both on the continent and in the Diaspora and,
Whereas, Media and new technologies (including the internet) play a signifi-
cant role in the maintenance of structural and cultural anti-black racism; and,
Whereas, Environmental racism refers to any government, military, industry
or other institution’s action, or failure to act, which has a disproportionate nega-
tive environmental impact on Africans and African descendants, on Indigenous
peoples, Latino, Asian, migrant or other ethnic groups or the places where they
live. Environmental racism, although not new, is a recent example of the histori-
cal double standard as to what is acceptable in certain communities, villages or
cities and not in others. The mobility of corporations has made it possible for


--- PAGE 639 ---
them to seek the greatest profit, the least government and environmental regula-
tions and the best tax incentives, anywhere in the world. Natural resource extrac-
tion techniques, chemical uses and disposal of wastes unacceptable in white com-
munities are routinely employed in African descendants communities; and,
Whereas, Africans and African descendants are victims of grave discriminatory
treatment in the legal and judicial processes as well as police procedures (specifically
police brutality). This includes the framing up of accusations against Africans and
African descendants, the duration of prison sentences, the inhuman state of prisons
and, where it exists, the death penalty which particularly affects Africans and African
descendants; and,
Whereas, To ensure the future of all Africans, special attention must be given
to protecting and empowering African indigenous peoples, language groups and
cultures both inside and outside the African continent; and,
Restoring Africa, the Motherland
Whereas, The development of Africa has been greatly impeded by the global
imbalances in power created by slavery, colonialism, and other forms of exploita-
tion and is maintained and extended today by neo-colonial policies and practices
including the pillage of the human and material resources of Africa and the drain-
ing of its financial resources by foreign debt services; and,
Whereas, Current day slavery has just taken other forms and the right to life
and freedom of African people is being regularly violated with complete indiffer-
ence in Western countries and by African dictators who are very often supported
and protected by Western countries; and,
Whereas, The world major powers are plundering the African continent
through a “debt” which has already been paid off three times over and to which
the African states assign more than 50% of their national budgets; and,
Whereas, To ensure total control over the enslaved Africans and African
descendants, the Western slaveholding states resorted to systematic violence,
brain-washing, falsifying and negating African history and values while enhancing
Western history and values in a policy of cultural imperialism; and,
Whereas, Africans and African descendants have significantly contributed to
world history, their achievements need to be re-assessed within the context of the
significant positive contributions made by Africa culture, Africans and African
descendants; and,
Whereas, In a world where people are valued and devalued according to a
given level of economic development, it is essential that the economic develop-
ment of Africa be promoted as a means of fighting anti-black racism; and
Now, therefore,
Africans and African Descendants from across the world, gathered in Vienna,
Austria, in unity and solidarity born of the common African root, recognition of
sharing a common history—that of the African Slave Trade, Slavery, and
Colonialization—and a continuing common experience of anti-Black racism,
which root, history and experience bind us as a unique community; and
6 0 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 640 ---
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM 6 0 9
Respectful of the Memory of Our Ancestors and the ultimate sacrifice which
they paid, and mindful that this memory must never be forgotten; and
As a Community, Committed to the elimination [of] anti-Black racism wher-
ever it occurs in the World; and
Cognizant of the Enormity of the depredations of the Black Holocausts
(Slavery and Colonialization) and the significance of these historical epochs for
the world; and,
In fraternity with all peoples imbued with a sense of genuine respect for the
rights of people of all races, ethnicities and creeds; and,
In abhorrence of all forms of African Slavery and the African Slave Trade
(trans-Atlantic, trans-Saharan and trans-Indian Ocean) and the Colonization of
Africa;
BE IT RESOLVED that this Assembly:
Black Holocausts (Slavery and Colonization)
CONDEMNS AFRICAN SLAVERY in all its manifestations (trans-Atlantic,
trans-Saharan and trans-Indian Ocean) and calls on the United Nations and the
governments of the World to do likewise;
DECLARES AFRICAN SLAVERY AND COLONIZATION and the atten-
dant unprecedented genocide and systematic violations of human rights and the
rights of Africans and African descendant People, as Crimes Against Humanity;
CALLS, SPECIFICALLY, ON former European countries and American
slave-holding States and all those who benefitted [sic] from the slave trade and
colonization of Africa to unconditionally and separately adopt a Declaration of
recognition of the Black Holocausts (Slave Trade/Slavery and Colonization) as
Crimes Against Humanity;
CALLS, SPECIFICALLY, ON former European and American slave-holding
States and all those who benefitted [sic] from the slave trade and colonization of
Africans to unconditionally and separately adopt a Declaration which asks for for-
giveness for the exactions committed during the Slave Trade/Slavery and
Colonization and for their lasting effects on the Africans and African
Descendants, in psychological spheres as well as on economical, social, political
and cultural ones;
CALLS ON THE UNITED NATIONS AND GOVERNMENTS of the
World to make it an offence, punishable by law, for anyone to deny the existence
of the Black Holocausts (African Slave Trade/Slavery and Colonization);
CALLS ON FORMER EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN SLAVE-HOLDING
STATES and all those who benefitted [sic] from the slave trade and coloniza-
tion of Africans to acknowledge the principle of reparations for the cultural,
demographic, economic, political, social and moral wrongs of the Slave
Trade/Slavery and Colonization and that the Africans and African descendants
victims of the Slave Trade/Slavery and Colonization reserve the right to deter-
mine the form and manner of reparations; and,


--- PAGE 641 ---
DEMAND THAT THE Governments of the World condemn the trans-
Saharan and Indian Ocean slave trade which, like the trans-Atlantic slave trade,
brought serious damages to Africa. Unlike the trans-Atlantic slave trade, vestiges
of the trans-Saharan slave trade continues [sic] [to] this day unabated (specifically
in Mauritania and Sudan); and, call on the governments of Mauritania and Sudan
to recognize this problem and to eradicate it completely [sic].
CALL on the German and Italian Government[s] to ask for forgiveness for the
exactions and genocide committed during the World War [II] by the Nazis and
Fascist[s] against Africans and African descendants; recognizing that African and
African descendant victims of Nazism have the same right to compensatory mea-
sures as Jews or Romas;
and,
CALLS ON STATES, SURVIVING CORPORATE INTERESTS,
CHURCHES AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES involved in the
trans-Atlantic slave trade, the resulting slavery and colonization to acknowl-
edge their wrongdoings and accept the principle of restitution and that the
Africans and African descendants victims of the Slave Trade/Slavery and
Colonization reserve the right to determine the form and manner of repara-
tions; and,
Eliminating Anti-Black Racism
DEMANDS THAT GOVERNMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS recognize
anti-Black racism as a form of racism which has its own specificity in the same way
as anti-Semitism and to be differentiated from all other forms of racism, discrim-
ination and intolerance; and,
CALLS ON GOVERNMENTS AND OTHERS TO condemn any political,
economic or social structure that has the effect of promoting, encouraging, or
facilitating anti-Black racism; and,
DEMAND THAT States eliminate racial disparities in education, housing,
economic development, health and health care, [the] environment, civil and
criminal justice; and,
DEMAND THAT States adopt effective mechanisms for monitoring and elim-
inating all forms of overt and covert racial discrimination, placing particular
emphasis on institutional and structural anti-Black racism in education, housing,
economic development, health and health care, environment, civil and criminal
justice; and,
CALL ON States, and United Nations organizations (such as World Health
Organization) to routinely and systematically collect race, gender and socio-
economic class data related to education, housing, economic development, health
and health care, environment, civil and criminal justice; and,
DEMAND THAT STATES stop the criminalization of blackness immediately.
REQUEST THAT a representative of the Africans and African Descendants
Caucus be allowed to address the World Conference against Racism, Racial
6 1 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 642 ---
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM 6 1 1
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Forms of Intolerance in South
Africa; and,
DEMAND THAT ALL ORGANIZATIONS (multilateral, financial, develop-
ment and human rights) formulate diagnostic indicators of the impact of their
policies and programs on African and African descendant communities; and,
DEMAND THAT States, and the international community, develop effective
anti-discrimination laws which provide an adequate institutional framework for
redress that is specific to eliminating institutional and structural anti-Black dis-
crimination (both overt and covert); and,
URGE states to institute educational steps to combat racism including chal-
lenging racist language and eradication of words and terms with a racist content
especially when used by authorities; and adopting a prohibition against racist doc-
uments particularly books for children which convey a depreciative image of
Africans and African Descendants; and,
CALL on civil society groups to help develop advocacy strategies that link
environmental issues (including environmental racism) to human rights; and
Governments adopt and enforce legislation and policies that protect society from
environmental racism; and,
CALL on the United Nations to support a world institute dedicated to
research, fact finding and resource networking for Africans, African descendants
and related issues. The research should serve to bridge the gap between the
past, by presenting African history according to credible African resources, the
present, by monitoring the overall life conditions of Africans and African descen-
dants worldwide and the future, by implementing its’ [sic] research in informal
and formal education to change attitudes, perceptions and promote understand-
ing; and,
REQUEST the media of the world and providers of Internet services to imple-
ment initiatives for increasing public awareness of anti-racist and tolerant behav-
ior towards Africans and promote a positive and valorizing image of Africans; and,
URGE States and organizations to give special attention to adolescents and
young people of African descent in terms of empowerment, training, mentoring
and possibilities to exercise responsibilities; Attention must be given to activities
promoting a healthy and balanced African identity for children and youth; Youth
participation must be se- cured on national and international levels of political
decision making; and,
URGE the international community to take practical steps to understand
the political nature of the AIDS epidemic and to improve prevention strate-
gies, testing material, access to medicines and care for those infected with
AIDS; and,
CALLS ON AFRICANS AND AFRICAN DESCENDANTS to recognize
that the struggle against anti-black racism is inevitably linked with the struggle
against poverty, racism against others, imperialism, globalization and war.
Africans and African descendants express solidarity with other peoples who are
similarly oppressed and exploited; and,


--- PAGE 643 ---
Restoring Africa, the Motherland
CALL ON AFRICANS AND AFRICAN DESCENDANTS TO END conflicts
based on ethnic divisions which is tearing the African continent apart through
ethnic genocide, ethnic cleansing and ethnic culture war; the struggle against
racism must go hand in hand with struggle against negative ethnicity in Africa;
and
CALL ON AFRICAN NATIONS to take legal action and give priority to the
equitable redistribution of stolen, possessed and occupied land on the continent;
and call on the international community to support such actions; and,
CALL on African governments to adopt policies to grant all Africans and
African descendants the possibility to return home and settle without limitations
or discrimination; and,
DEMAND that European, American and other governments repatriate funds
stolen from African countries/people and stored in European and American
banks to the African countries of their origin; and,
URGE the debt-holding countries to take practical steps toward the cancella-
tion of the “debt” of African States; and,
DEMAND THAT THE MANY ART[I]FACTS AND ANTIQUITIES of
African civilization which have been stolen or taken out of the country without
permission be returned or that the countries from which these antiquities were
taken be compensated; and,
DEMAND THAT THE TRAFFICKING OF AFRICAN AND AFRICAN
DESCENDANT women, children and youth for sex, and for forced labour and
various forms of enslavement be stopped in both locations receiving victims of
trafficking, and in locations of origin. International, local/national, and other
media are urged to continue and increase their much-needed work of reporting
on these crimes; and,
CALL ON AFRICANS AND AFRICAN DESCENDANTS to urgently free
themselves from slave and colonial mentality and attitudes. The rich African cul-
tural heritage at our disposal serve[s] as the first step in a real liberation and
renaissance of Africa and its people all over the World.
Source: Excerpt from “Paper Trail: World Conference against Racism, Xenophobia, and
Related Intolerance,” Souls 4, no.3 (May 2002), pp. 69–82.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
“The Vienna Declaration and Plan of Action: African and African Descendents Caucus”,
2001) academic.udayton.edu/race/06hrights/WCAR2001/NGOFORUM/Victims.htm.
Carol Barton, “UN World Conference against Racism-Breaking the Silence,” World
Conference Against Racism (2001) www.wicej.addr.com/wcar_docs/index.html.
Salih Booker and William Minter, “Global Apartheid,” Peace Research Abstracts 40, no. 2
(2003), pp. 123–261.
6 1 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 644 ---
AFRICAN AMERICANS RESPOND TO TERRORISM AND WAR 6 1 3
Linda Burnham, “The Light of History,” Souls 4, no. 1 (January 2002), pp. 15–19.
Gernot Kohler, Global Apartheid (New York: Institute for World Order, 1978).
———, “The Three Meanings of Global Apartheid: Empirical, Normative, Existential,”
Alternatives 20, no. 3 (1995), pp. 403.
Leith Mullings, “Race and Globalization,” Souls 6, no. 2 (June 2004), pp. 1–9.
Scott Sherman, “Target Ford,” Nation 282, no. 22 (June 5, 2006), pp. 13–20.
J. Michael Turner, “The Road to Durban—and Back,” NACLA Report on the Americas 35,
no. 6 (May/ June 2002), pp. 31–35.
O20 O
African Americans Respond to Terrorism and War
On September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks destroyed the World Trade Center
towers in New York City. These crimes against humanity claimed the lives of
nearly 3,000 people, including passengers on the planes that crashed into the
towers or to the ground. Another terrorist attack took place at the Pentagon,
where more than 100 people were killed. Like most Americans, African
Americans were outraged by these attacks and supported military retaliation
against the Al Qaeda terrorist network in Afghanistan. However, when the
attacks were used by the Bush administration as justification for undermining
civil liberties incarcerating Muslims and people of Middle Eastern descent
based on their religion or ethnic background alone, many black Americans
protested.
Representative Barbara Lee was the only member of Congress to oppose
authorizing the Bush administration to use military force to invade Afghanistan.
After the initiation of the “War on Terror” and the establishment of the Office of
Homeland Security, the majority of African-American leaders vigorously
protested the curtailment of civil liberties and the unilateral expansion of U.S.
militarism in the Muslim world. As the war expanded into Iraq in 2003 a signifi-
cant number of U.S. soldiers and Iraqi war veterans turned against the war, citing
the failure to find weapons of mass destruction in the country and the massive
cost to the U.S. taxpayer.
O
“BARBARA LEE’S STAND”
When Congress voted to authorize the Bush Administration to use military force
in response to the September 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon, Representative Barbara Lee stood alone in opposition to what she saw


--- PAGE 645 ---
as a “rush to judgment.” Lee, the California Democrat who holds the Bay Area
seat once occupied by antiwar activist Ron Dellums, spoke with John Nichols, The
Nation’s Washington correspondent, this week.
THE NATION: How did you reach the decision to oppose authorizing the use
of force?
LEE: I was at the National Cathedral in Washington. I went to the memorial ser-
vice on the Friday after the attacks and I prayed. I said to myself, “You’ve got to fig-
ure this one out.” I was dealing with all the grief and sorrow and the loss of life, and
it was very personal because a member of my staff had lost a cousin in the
Pennsylvania crash. I was thinking about my responsibility as a member of Congress
to try to insure that this never happens again. I listened to the remarks of the clergy.
Many of them made profound statements. But I was struck by what one of them
said: “As we act, let us not become the evil that we deplore.” That was such a wise
statement, and it reflected not only what I was feeling but also my understanding
of the threats we continue to face. When I left the cathedral, I was fairly resolved.
THE NATION: Were you also concerned about the constitutional implications
of the vote?
LEE: Absolutely. Given the three branches of government, and given that each
has a role in the making of monumental decisions such as this, I thought the
Congress had a responsibility in this instance especially to step back and say,
“Let’s not rush to judgment. Let us insist that our democracy works by insuring
that the checks and balances work and that the Congress is a part of the decision-
making process in terms of when we go to war and with whom. . . . I think we dis-
enfranchised the American people when we took their representatives out of the
decision-making on whether to go to war with a specific nation.
THE NATION: Were you surprised that no other members of Congress voted
with you?
LEE: It never dawned on me that I would cast the only vote against this resolu-
tion. Many members asked me to change my position. They were friends, and
they said, “You do not want to be out there alone.” I said, “Oh, no, don’t worry.
There will be others.” When there weren’t, I said, “Oh my God.” I could not
believe it. It was an awesome feeling. And a lonely feeling.
THE NATION: You mentioned that other members said, “You don’t want to be
out there alone.” Do you think other members shared your concerns but were
unwilling to cast a risky vote with emotions running so high?
LEE: If you read the floor statements. you’ll see that there are many members of
Congress who share my concerns. I think that, when I cast that vote, I was speak-
ing for other people in Congress and outside Congress who want a more deliber-
ative approach.
6 1 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 646 ---
AFRICAN AMERICANS RESPOND TO TERRORISM AND WAR 6 1 5
THE NATION: At the same time, you have received precisely the sort of criti-
cism that most politicians fear.
LEE: I’ve been called a traitor, a coward, a communist, all the awful stuff. It’s
been quite difficult for me. But I still believe that I cast the right vote. My dis-
trict, I think, understands this vote. . . . I’ve gotten probably 20,000 e-mails. At
first, there were a lot of very harsh messages. But now we are hearing more from
people who are saying, “Yes, let’s use some restraint. Yes, let’s break the cycle of
violence if we can.” I think the further we get away from that tragic day, the more
we will hear those voices of reason.
Iraq Veterans Against the War
Why we’re against the War
Q: Why are veterans, active duty, and National Guard men and women opposed
to the war in Iraq?
A: Here are 10 reasons we oppose this war:
The Iraq war is based on lies and deception.
The Bush Administration planned for an attack against Iraq before September
11th, 2001. They used the false pretense of an imminent nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons threat to deceive Congress into rationalizing this unneces-
sary conflict. They hide our casualties of war by banning the filming of our
fallen’s caskets when they arrive home, and when they refuse to allow the media
into Walter Reed Hospital and other Veterans Administration facilities which are
overflowing with maimed and traumatized veterans.
The Iraq war violates international law.
The United States assaulted and occupied Iraq without the consent of the UN
Security Council. In doing so they violated the same body of laws they accused
Iraq of breaching.
Corporate profiteering is driving the war in Iraq.
From privately contracted soldiers and linguists to no-bid reconstruction con-
tracts and multinational oil negotiations, those who benefit the most in this con-
flict are those who suffer the least. The United States has chosen a path that
directly contradicts President Eisenhower’s farewell warning regarding the mili-
tary industrial complex. As long as those in power are not held accountable, they
will continue. . .
Overwhelming civilian casualties are a daily occurrence in Iraq.
Despite attempts in training and technological sophistication, large-scale civilian
death is both a direct and indirect result of United States aggression in Iraq. Even
the most conservative estimates of Iraqi civilian deaths number over 100,000.
Currently over 100 civilians die every day in Baghdad alone.


--- PAGE 647 ---
Soldiers have the right to refuse illegal war.
All in service to this country swear an oath to protect and defend the Constitution
of the United States against all enemies, both foreign and domestic. However,
they are prosecuted if they object to serve in a war they see as illegal under our
Constitution. As such, our brothers and sisters are paying the price for political
incompetence, forced to fight in a war instead of having been sufficiently trained
to carry out the task of nation-building.
Service members are facing serious health consequences due to our
Government’s negligence.
Many of our troops have already been deployed to Iraq for two, three, and even
four tours of duty averaging eleven months each. Combat stress, exhaustion, and
bearing witness to the horrors of war contribute to Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD), a serious set of symptoms that can lead to depression, illness,
violent behavior, and even suicide. Additionally, depleted uranium, Lariam, insuf-
ficient body armor and infectious diseases are just a few of the health risks which
accompany an immorally planned and incompetently executed war. Finally, upon
a soldier’s release, the Veterans Administration is far too under-funded to fully
deal with the magnitude of veterans in need.
The war in Iraq is tearing our families apart.
The use of stop-loss on active duty troops and the unnecessarily lengthy and
repeat active tours by Guard and Reserve troops place enough strain on our mil-
itary families, even without being forced to sacrifice their loved ones for this
ongoing political experiment in the Middle East.
The Iraq war is robbing us of funding sorely needed here at home.
$5.8 billion per month is spent on a war which could have aided the victims of
Hurricane Katrina, gone to impoverished schools, the construction of hospitals
and health care systems, tax cut initiatives, and a host of domestic programs that
have all been gutted in the wake of the war in Iraq.
The war dehumanizes Iraqis and denies them their right to 
self-determination.
Iraqis are subjected to humiliating and violent checkpoints, searches and home
raids on a daily basis. The current Iraqi government is in place solely because of
the U.S. military occupation. The Iraqi government doesn’t have the popular sup-
port of the Iraqi people, nor does it have power or authority. For many Iraqis the
current government is seen as a puppet regime for the U.S. occupation. It is
undemocratic and in violation of Iraq’s own right to self-governance.
Our military is being exhausted by repeated deployments, involuntary
extensions, and activations of the Reserve and National Guard.
The majority of troops in Iraq right now are there for at least their second tour.
Deployments to Iraq are becoming longer and many of our service members are
facing involuntary extensions and recalls to active duty. Longstanding policies to
limit the duration and frequency of deployments for our part-time National
6 1 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 648 ---
AFRICAN AMERICANS RESPOND TO TERRORISM AND WAR 6 1 7
Guard troops are now being overturned to allow for repeated, back-to-back tours
in Iraq. These repeated, extended combat tours are taking a huge toll on our
troops, their families, and their communities.
Sources: (1)“Barbara Lee’s Stand,” The Nation(October 8, 2001), p. 5. (2) “Iraq Veterans
against the War,” www.ivaw.org/about.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Patricia Foulkrod, The Ground Truth, Universal City: Universal Studios Home
Entertainment, 2006. DVD Video.
Derrick Z. Jackson, “Blacks Have Good Cause to Oppose War in Iraq,” Boston Globe
(February 26, 2003), p. A19.
Yvonne Latty, In Conflict: Iraq War Veterans Speak out on Duty, Loss, and the Fight to
Stay Alive (Sausalito: PoliPoint Press, 2006).
Yvonne Latty and with photographs by Ron Tarver, We Were There: Voices of African
American Veterans from World War II to the War in Iraq (New York: Amistad, 2004).
Bill Maher, Ann Coulter, and Dennis Miller, “Weapons of Mass Seduction: The War in
Iraq and Inside the U.S.,” in Debating Race with Michael Eric Dyson, ed. by Michael
Eric Dyson (New York: Basic Civitas, 2007).
Julianne Malveaux and Reginna A. Green, eds., The Paradox of Loyalty: An African
American Response to the War on Terrorism , 2nd ed. (Chicago: Third World Press,
2004).
Manning Marable, “Racism in a Time of Terror,” Souls 4, no. 1 (January 2002), pp. 1–14.
Barack Obama, “Remarks of Senator Barack Obama: Turning the Page in Iraq” (September
12, 2007) www.barackobama.com/2007/09/12/remarks_of_senator_barack_obam_23
.php.
Martha J. Simmons and Frank A. Thomas, eds., 9.11.01: African American Leaders
Respond to an American Tragedy (Valley Forge: Judson Press, 2001).
O21 O
The “Personal Responsibility vs. Institutional Racism Debate” 
Bill Cosby vs. Michael Eric Dyson
In the early twentieth-first century, a national debate erupted between social pol-
icy researchers and educators over the escalating crisis of the “criminalization of
black youth.” Statistical evidence mounted across the country that African-
American young people, as a group, had become stigmatized as antisocial, delin-
quent, and potentially violent. Such stereotypes profoundly effected the adminis-
trative treatment of black youth inside educational institutions. For example, in
Oakland, California, during the 2004–2005 school year, black males comprised 28
percent of the city’s public school students but accounted for 53 percent of all sus-
pensions. Nationwide that same year, black youth were 17.1 percent of all public
school students, but 32.7 percent of expulsions. As of 2000, black youth com-
prised only 15 percent of their national age cohort, but represented 29 percent of
all youth arrested, and 44 percent of all youth in juvenile correctional facilities.


--- PAGE 649 ---
Social conservatives and some religious leaders in the black community began to
argue that such social devastation was the result of irresponsible behavior by African-
American young people. They criticized the bawdy language of hip-hop music and
other elements of black popular culture as socially destructive and nihilistic.
O
COSBY SUMMARY
It was from this perspective that comedian and philanthropist Bill Cosby
addressed an NAACP-sponsored event celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the
May 19, 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision, outlawing the legal racial
segregation of public schools. Cosby recognized the accomplishment of that legal
victory, but he was far more concerned with what he considered social deviance
and violence by young blacks who comprised a post-Brown generation.
Cosby attributed the socioeconomic inequalities and problems that were devas-
tating the national black community to antisocial behaviors, criminality and the
absence of parental control in African-American households. He ridiculed the cloth-
ing, language and hip-hop cultural style of black young people. “Are you not paying
attention, people with their hat on backwards, pants down around the crack. Isn’t
that a sign of something?” Inner-city blacks who claim that their cultural values are
drawn from Africa, Cosby implied, were simply fooling themselves. “What part of
Africa did this come from? We are not Africans. Those people are not Africans, they
don’t know a damned thing about Africa.” Cosby made fun of the African and Islamic
names many young blacks have. “With names like Shaniqua, Shaliqua, Mohammed,
and all that crap and all of them are in jail. . . . What’s the point of giving them strong
names if there is not parenting and values backing it up.”
Cosby’s rant was laced with humorous asides, but his core message was pro-
foundly conservative, and critical of African-American young people and their
popular culture. It said virtually nothing about factors such as racial discrimina-
tion within educational institutions and the criminal justice system that have neg-
atively affected black youth. Nevertheless, the national media eagerly picked up
Cosby’s anti–hip-hop polemic and media pundits debated the implications of
Cosby’s arguments. Many suggested that affirmative action was not only no longer
necessary, but for criminalized black youths it was undeserved. In the preparation
of this anthology, Cosby’s representatives refused to extend permission to reprint
the entire text of the comedian’s remarks. However, due to the significance of the
issues involved, the editors have presented a brief summary of Cosby’s statement
(above) and, to accompany it, a critical response by cultural critic and religious
studies scholar Michael Eric Dyson.
D
YSON RESPONSE
Cosby’s overemphasis on personal responsibility, not structural features, wrongly
locates the source of poor black suffering—and by implication its remedy—in
the lives of the poor. When you think the problems are personal, you think the
6 1 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 650 ---
THE COSBY VS. DYSON DEBATE 6 1 9
solutions are the same. If only the poor were willing to work harder, act better,
get educated, stay out of jail and parent more effectively, their problems would
go away. It’s hard to argue against any of these things in the abstract; in princi-
ple such suggestions sound just fine. But one could do all of these things and still
be in bad shape at home, work or school. For instance, Cosby completely ignores
shifts in the economy that give value to some work while other work, in the
words of William Julius Wilson, “disappears.” In our high-tech, high-skilled
economy where low-skilled work is being scaled back, phased out, exported, or
severely under-compensated, all the right behavior in the world won’t create bet-
ter jobs with more pay. And without such support, all the goals that Cosby
expresses for the black poor are not likely to become reality. If the rigidly segre-
gated educational system continues to miserably fail poor blacks by failing to
prepare their children for the world of work, then admonitions to “stay in school”
may ring hollow.
In this light, the imprisonment of black people takes on political consequence.
Cosby may be right that most black folk in jail are not “political prisoners,” but it
doesn’t mean that their imprisonment has not been politicized. Given the vicious
way blacks have been targeted for incarceration, Cosby’s comments about poor
blacks who end up in jail are dangerously naïve and empirically wrong. Cosby’s
critique of criminal behavior among poor blacks neglects the massive body of
work that catalogs the unjust imprisonment of young blacks. This is not to suggest
an apologia for black thugs; instead, it suggests that a disproportionate number 
of black (men) are incarcerated for nonviolent drug offenses. Moreover, Cosby
seems to offer justification for the police killing a young black for a trivial offense
(the theft of a Coca-Cola or pound cake), neglecting the heinous injustices of 
the police against blacks across the land. Further, Cosby neglects to mention 
that crime occurs in all classes and races, though it is not equally judged and 
prosecuted.
Cosby also slights the economic, social, political and other structural barriers
that poor black parents are up against: welfare reform, dwindling resources, export
of jobs and ongoing racial stigma. And then there are the problems of the working
poor: folk who rise up early every day and often work more than forty hours a
week, and yet barely, if ever, make it above the poverty level. We must acknowl-
edge the plight of both poor black (single) mothers and poor black fathers, and the
lack of social support they confront. Hence, it is incredibly difficult to spend as
much time with children as poor black parents might like, especially since they will
be demonized if they fail to provide for their children’s basic needs. But doing so
deflects critical attention and time from child—rearing duties-duties that are dif-
ficult enough for two-parent, two-income, intact middle-class families.
2 The char-
acteristics Cosby cites are typical of all families that confront poverty the world
over. They are not indigenous to the black poor; they are symptomatic of the
predicament of poor people in general. And Cosby’s mean-spirited characteriza-
tions of the black poor as licentious, sexually promiscuous, materialistic and wan-
tonly irresponsible can be made of all classes in the nation. . . .


--- PAGE 651 ---
Cosby’s views on education have in some respects changed for the worse. His
earlier take on the prospects of schooling for the poor was more humane and bal-
anced. In his 1976 dissertation, Cosby argued against “institutional racism” and
maintained that school systems failed the poorest and most vulnerable black stu-
dents. It is necessary as well to acknowledge the resegregation of American edu-
cation (when in truth it was hardly desegregated to begin with). The failure of
Brown v. Board to instigate sufficient change in the nation’s schools suggests that
the greatest burden and responsibility—should be on crumbling educational
infrastructures. In suburban neighborhoods, there are $60-million schools with
state-of-the-art technology, while inner city schools fight desperately for funding
for their students. And anti-intellectualism, despite Cosby’s claims, is hardly a
black phenomenon; it is endemic to the culture. Cosby also spies the critical
deficiency of the black poor in their linguistic habits, displaying his ignorance
about “black English” and “Ebonics.” But the intent of Ebonics, according to its
advocates, is to help poor black youth speak “standard” English while retaining
an appreciation for their dialects and “native tongues.” All of this suggests that
structural barriers, much more than personal desire, shape the educational
experiences of poor blacks. In fact, Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids, Cosby’s
lauded ‘70s television cartoon series, won greater acceptance for a new cast of
black identities and vernacular language styles. Cosby has made money and
gained further influence from using forms of Black English he now violently
detests. . .
Cosby also contends that black folk can’t blame white folk for our plight. His
discounting of structural forces and his exclusive focus on personal responsi-
bility, and black self-help, ignore the persistence of the institutional racism
Cosby lamented in his dissertation. To be sure, even when black folk argued
for social justice, we never neglected the simultaneous pursuit of personal
responsibility and self-help, since that’s often the only help we had. In the end,
Cosby’s views may make white and black liberal fence—sitters unfairly critical
of the black poor. Cosby may even convince them that personal behavior will
help the poor more than social programs, thus letting white and black elites off
the hook. . .
Sources: Dr. Bill Cosby speaks at the 50th anniversary commemoration of the Brown v.
Topeka Board of Education Supreme Court Decision, May 17, 2004.
Excerpt from Michael Eric Dyson, Is Bill Cosby Right?: Or Has the Black Middle Class
Lost Its Mind? (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2005) pg. 6–14.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Damian Bruce, “Poor Excuse: Cosby and the Politics of Disgust,” in Debating Race
with Michael Eric Dyson , ed. by Michael Eric Dyson (New York: Basic Civitas,
2007).
Bill Cosby and Alvin F. Poussaint, Come on, People on the Path from Victims to Victors
(Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2007).
6 2 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 652 ---
THE COSBY VS. DYSON DEBATE 6 2 1
Juan Williams, Enough: The Phony Leaders, Dead-End Movements, and Culture of Failure
That Are Undermining Black America—and What We Can Do About It (New York:
Crown Publishers, 2006).
O22 O
U.S. Senate Resolution Against Lynching, 2005
Between 1880 and 1940, nearly five thousand Americans, most of whom were
black, were lynched in the United States. For many decades, the NAACP pres-
sured the U.S. Congress to pass federal legislation outlawing the crime of lynch-
ing. Southern white opposition repeatedly blocked these efforts in Congress.
Scholars contend that lynching was a form of social control and domination for
“uppity” blacks, thus asserting white supremacy throughout the South. On June
13, 2005, the 109th Congress passed Senate Resolution 39, “apologizing to the
victims of lynching and the descendents of those lynchings for the failure of the
Senate to enact anti-lynching legislation.” After the passage of the resolution,
eight white senators, all Republicans, refused to sign the document. Although the
resolution was an unprecedented occasion, scholars have noted that despite the
passage of the resolution black people continue to experience incidents of
extreme brutality and extra legal terrorism in the United States.
O
109th CONGRESS
1st Session
S. RES. 39
Apologizing to the victims of lynching and the descendants of those victims for
the failure of the Senate to enact anti-lynching legislation.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 7, 2005
Ms. LANDRIEU (for herself, Mr. ALLEN, Mr. LEVIN, Mr. FRIST, Mr. REID,
Mr. ALLARD, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. BROWNBACK, Mr. BAYH, Ms. COLLINS, Mr.
BIDEN, Mr. ENSIGN, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. HAGEL, Mr. CORZINE, Mr. LUGAR,
Mr. DAYTON, Mr. MCCAIN, Mr. DODD, Ms. SNOWE, Mr. DURBIN, Mr.
SPECTER, Mr. FEINGOLD, Mr. STEVENS, Mrs. FEINSTEIN, Mr. TALENT,
Mr. HARKIN, Mr. JEFFORDS, Mr. JOHNSON, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. KOHL,
Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. LEAHY, Mr. LIEBERMAN, Mr. NELSON of Florida,
Mr. PRYOR, Mr. SCHUMER, Ms. STABENOW, Mr. SALAZAR, Mr. VITTER,
Mr. OBAMA, Mrs. LINCOLN, Mr. SANTORUM, Mr. SARBANES, Mr. KERRY,


--- PAGE 653 ---
Mr. BYRD, Mr. COBURN, Mr. COLEMAN, Mr. CRAIG, Ms. MIKULSKI, Mrs.
MURRAY, Ms. CANTWELL, Mr. DEMINT, Mr. DOMENICI, Mr. DORGAN,
Mr. INOUYE, Mrs. CLINTON, Mr. NELSON of Nebraska, Mr. CARPER, Mr.
GRAHAM, Mr. BURR, Mr. MCCONNELL, Mr. BUNNING, Mr. MARTINEZ,
Mr. BURNS, Mr. DEWINE, Mrs. DOLE, Mr. ROCKEFELLER, Mr. THUNE,
Mr. WYDEN, Mr. WARNER, Mr. BAUCUS, Mr. ROBERTS, Mr. CHAFEE, Mr.
SESSIONS, Mr. BOND, Mr. CHAMBLISS, Mr. ISAKSON, and Mr. INHOFE)
submitted the following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on the
Judiciary
June 13, 2005
Committee discharged; considered and agreed to
RESOLUTION
Apologizing to the victims of lynching and the descendants of those victims for
the failure of the Senate to enact anti-lynching legislation.
Whereas the crime of lynching succeeded slavery as the ultimate expression of
racism in the United States following Reconstruction;
Whereas lynching was a widely acknowledged practice in the United States
until the middle of the 20th century;
Whereas lynching was a crime that occurred throughout the United States,
with documented incidents in all but 4 States;
Whereas at least 4,742 people, predominantly African-Americans, were
reported lynched in the United States between 1882 and 1968;
Whereas 99 percent of all perpetrators of lynching escaped from punishment
by State or local officials;
Whereas lynching prompted African-Americans to form the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and prompted
members of B’nai B’rith to found the Anti-Defamation League;
Whereas nearly 200 anti-lynching bills were introduced in Congress during the
first half of the 20th century;
Whereas, between 1890 and 1952, 7 Presidents petitioned Congress to end
lynching;
Whereas, between 1920 and 1940, the House of Representatives passed 3
strong anti-lynching measures;
Whereas protection against lynching was the minimum and most basic of Federal
responsibilities, and the Senate considered but failed to enact anti-lynching legisla-
tion despite repeated requests by civil rights groups, Presidents, and the House of
Representatives to do so;
Whereas the recent publication of ‘Without Sanctuary: Lynching Photography
in America’ helped bring greater awareness and proper recognition of the victims
of lynching;
Whereas only by coming to terms with history can the United States effectively
champion human rights abroad; and
6 2 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 654 ---
U.S. SENATE RESOLUTION AGAINST LYNCHING 6 2 3
Whereas an apology offered in the spirit of true repentance moves the United
States toward reconciliation and may become central to a new understanding, on
which improved racial relations can be forged: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) apologizes to the victims of lynching for the failure of the Senate to enact
anti-lynching legislation;
(2) expresses the deepest sympathies and most solemn regrets of the Senate to
the descendants of victims of lynching, the ancestors of whom were deprived of
life, human dignity, and the constitutional protections accorded all citizens of the
United States; and
(3) remembers the history of lynching, to ensure that these tragedies will be
neither forgotten nor repeated.
SOURCE: Senate, “Apologizing to the Victims of Lynching and the Descendants of Those
Victims for the Failure of the Senate to Enact Anti-Lynching Legislation” (Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2005).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
“Eight U.S. Senators Decline to Cosponsor Resolution Apologizing for Failure to Enact
Anti-Lynching Legislation,” Journal of Blacks in Higher Education Weekly Bulletin
(June 30, 2005).
Alfred L. Brophy, Reparations: Pro & Con (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
W. Fitzhugh Brundage, ed., Under Sentence of Death: Lynching in the South(Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1997).
Jacqueline Denise Goldsby, A Spectacular Secret: Lynching in American Life and
Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
Amy Goodman and Juan Gonzalez, “Senate Apologizes for Not Enacting Anti-Lynching
Legislation, a Look at Journalist and Anti-Lynching Crusader Ida B. Wells,” Democracy
Now (June 14, 2005), www.democracynow.org/2005/6/14/senate_apologizes_for_not_
enacting_anti.
Jacqueline Jones Royster, ed., Southern Horrors and Other Writings: The Anti-Lynching
Campaign of Ida B. Wells, 1892–1900, The Bedford Series in History and Culture
(Boston: Bedford Books, 1997).
Julius Eric Thompson, Lynchings in Mississippi: A History, 1865–1965 (Jefferson:
McFarland & Company, 2007).
O23 O
Hurricane Katrina Crisis, 2005
Hurricane Katrina hit the southern U.S. coastline bordering the Gulf of Mexico
on August 29, 2005, with Mississippi, southwestern Alabama, and Louisiana suf-
fering the most devastation. The storm resulted in tens of billions of dollars in


--- PAGE 655 ---
property damage and the loss of more than 1,000 lives. When the levees were
breached, New Orleans was overwhelmed by massive flooding. Local residents
were forced to remain in the Superdome and Convention Center for days with-
out adequate food, running water, or toilets. Generally agreed to be a national
disgrace, the response of the U.S government was woefully inadequate. Much of
the national media presented racially biased stereotypes in describing black vic-
tims of the flood. The documentary by filmmaker Spike Lee, “When the Levees
Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts” provided an analysis of the aftermath and the
stories of victims, those who stayed in New Orleans and those who were dis-
persed to other states.
O
“THIS IS CRIMINAL”
It’s criminal. From what you’re hearing, the people trapped in New Orleans
are nothing but looters. We’re told we should be more “neighborly.” But
nobody talked about being neighborly until after the people who could afford
to leave . . . left.
If you ain’t got no money in America, you’re on your own. People were told to
go to the Superdome, but they have no food, no water there. And before they
could get in, people had to stand in line for 4–5 hours in the rain because every-
body was being searched one by one at the entrance.
I can understand the chaos that happened after the tsunami, because they
had no warning, but here there was plenty of warning. In the three days before
the hurricane hit, we knew it was coming and everyone could have been evac-
uated.
We have Amtrak here that could have carried everybody out of town. There
were enough school buses that could have evacuated 20,000 people easily, but
they just let them be flooded. My son watched 40 buses go underwater—they just
wouldn’t move them, afraid they’d be stolen.
People who could afford to leave were so afraid someone would steal what
they own that they just let it all be flooded. They could have let a family with-
out a vehicle borrow their extra car, but instead they left it behind to be
destroyed.
There are gangs of white vigilantes near here riding around in pickup
trucks, all of them armed, and any young Black they see who they figure does-
n’t belong in their community, they shoot him. I tell them, “Stop! You’re going
to start a riot.”
When you see all the poor people with no place to go, feeling alone and help-
less and angry, I say this is a consequence of HOPE VI. New Orleans took all the
HUD money it could get to tear down public housing, and families and neighbors
who’d relied on each other for generations were uprooted and torn apart.
Most of the people who are going through this now had already lost touch
with the only community they’d ever known. Their community was torn down
and they were scattered. They’d already lost their real homes, the only place
6 2 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 656 ---
HURRICANE KATRINA CRISIS 6 2 5
where they knew everybody, and now the places they’ve been staying are
destroyed.
But nobody cares. They’re just lawless looters . . . dangerous.
The hurricane hit at the end of the month, the time when poor people are
most vulnerable. Food stamps don’t buy enough but for about three weeks of the
month, and by the end of the month everyone runs out. Now they have no way
to get their food stamps or any money, so they just have to take what they can to
survive.
Many people are getting sick and very weak. From the toxic water that peo-
ple are walking through, little scratches and sores are turning into major
wounds.
People whose homes and families were not destroyed went into the city right
away with boats to bring the survivors out, but law enforcement told them they
weren’t needed. They are willing and able to rescue thousands, but they’re not
allowed to.
Every day countless volunteers are trying to help, but they’re turned back.
Almost all the rescue that’s been done has been done by volunteers anyway.
My son and his family—his wife and kids, ages 1, 5 and 8—were flooded out
of their home when the levee broke. They had to swim out until they found an
abandoned building with two rooms above water level.
There were 21 people in those two rooms for a day and a half. A guy in a boat
who just said “I’m going to help regardless” rescued them and took them to
Highway I-10 and dropped them there.
They sat on the freeway for about three hours, because someone said they’d
be rescued and taken to the Superdome. Finally they just started walking, had to
walk six and a half miles.
When they got to the Superdome, my son wasn’t allowed in—I don’t know
why—so his wife and kids wouldn’t go in. They kept walking, and they happened
to run across a guy with a tow truck that they knew, and he gave them his own
personal truck.
When they got here, they had no gas, so I had to punch a hole in my gas tank
to give them some gas, and now I’m trapped. I’m getting around by bicycle.
People from Placquemine Parish were rescued on a ferry and dropped off on
a dock near here. All day they were sitting on the dock in the hot sun with no food,
no water. Many were in a daze; they’ve lost everything.
They were all sitting there surrounded by armed guards. We asked the guards
could we bring them water and food. My mother and all the other church ladies
were cooking for them, and we have plenty of good water.
But the guards said, “No. If you don’t have enough water and food for every-
body, you can’t give anything.” Finally the people were hauled off on school buses
from other parishes.
You know Robert King Wilkerson (the only one of the Angola 3 political pris-
oners who’s been released). He’s been back in New Orleans working hard, orga-
nizing, helping people. Now nobody knows where he is. His house was destroyed.
Knowing him, I think he’s out trying to save lives, but I’m worried.


--- PAGE 657 ---
The people who could help are being shipped out. People who want to stay,
who have the skills to save lives and rebuild are being forced to go to Houston.
It’s not like New Orleans was caught off guard. This could have been pre-
vented.
There’s military right here in New Orleans, but for three days they weren’t
even mobilized. You’d think this was a Third World country.
I’m in the Algiers neighborhood of New Orleans, the only part that isn’t
flooded. The water is good. Our parks and schools could easily hold 40,000 peo-
ple, and they’re not using any of it.
This is criminal. These people are dying for no other reason than the lack of
organization.
Everything is needed, but we’re still too disorganized. I’m asking people to go
ahead and gather donations and relief supplies but to hold on to them for a few
days until we have a way to put them to good use.
I’m challenging my party, the Green Party, to come down here and help us
just as soon as things are a little more organized. The Republicans and
Democrats didn’t do anything to prevent this or plan for it and don’t seem to care
if everyone dies.
Source: Malik Rahim, “‘This Is Criminal’: Malik Rahim Reports from New Orleans”
(September 1, 2005) www.cwsworkshop.org/katrinareader/node/268.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
“Race an Issue in Katrina Response: Lawmakers Voice Opinions on Role of Skin Color in
Rescue Efforts,” CBS News (Sept. 3, 2005) www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/09/03
/katrina/main814623.shtml.
Darwin Bond Graham, “The New Orleans That Race Built: Racism, Disaster, and Urban
Spatial Relationships,” Souls 9, no. 1 (January–March 2007), pp. 4–18.
Douglas Brinkley, The Great Deluge: Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans, and the Mississippi
Gulf Coast (New York: Morrow, 2006).
Michael Eric Dyson, Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of
Disaster (New York: Basic Civitas, 2006).
Kevin Michael Foster, “Are They Katrina’s Kids or Ours?: The Experience of Displaced
New Orleans Students in Their New Schools and Communities,” Souls 9, no. 1 (2007),
pp. 45–52.
Chester W. Hartman and Gregory D. Squires, eds., There Is No Such Thing as a Natural
Disaster: Race, Class, and Hurricane Katrina (New York: Routledge, 2006).
Jed Horne, Breach of Faith: Hurricane Katrina and the near Death of a Great American
City (New York: Random House, 2006).
Spike Lee, When the Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts, New York: HBO Documentary
Films, 2006. DVD Video.
Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke, eds., Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane
Katrina Crisis, Race, and Public Policy Reader (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).
Betsy Reed, ed., Unnatural Disaster: The Nation on Hurricane Katrina (New York: Nation
Books, 2006).
Lydia Sargent, The Katrina Crisis: Race, Class, & Disaster in New Orleans, Woods Hole:
Z Video Productions, 2006. DVD Video.
6 2 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 658 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 2 7
David Dante Troutt, ed., After the Storm: Black Intellectuals Explore the Meaning of
Hurricane Katrina (New York: New Press, 2006).
O24 O
Barack Obama’s Presidential Campaign, 2007–2008
In the aftermath of the federal government’s irresponsible actions connected
with the 2005 Hurricane Katrina crisis, many African-Americans became more
pessimistic about their ability to impact national politics. So when in early
2007, a young, first-term senator from Illinois named Barack Hussein Obama
(1961– ), an African American, announced his candidacy for the presidency
most blacks doubted that he would be successful. Some African American crit-
ics, noting that his mother had been white, questioned his racial authenticity.
Obama’s political message, moreover, was a sharp departure from the protest-
style of Jesse Jackson’s Rainbow Coalition campaigns of the 1980s. Obama was
a liberal progressive, but his style down played “race,” and emphasized con-
sensus issues that brought people together regardless of color, class, or gender.
As late as December 2007, in public opinion surveys, a majority of African
Americans favored New York Senator Hillary Clinton over Obama for the pres-
idency.
But in a stunning triumph, Obama defeated Clinton and other Democratic
challengers in the Iowa caucus, in January 2008, where blacks represented less
than 2 percent of all voters. In the following months Obama won a series of pri-
maries and caucuses in many states with relatively few blacks or other racialized
minorities. Obama consistently won majorities among voters under age thirty, col-
lege-educated voters, and voters earning over $50,000 annually. By the South
Carolina Democratic primary, the vast majority of blacks swung their allegiance
behind Obama, and by the final races the candidate’s African-American support
exceeded 90 percent. Winning the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in
August 2008, Obama subsequently ran what many media observers described as
a near-flawless campaign. On November 4, 2008, Obama easily defeated his
Republican opponent, Arizona senator John McCain, winning nearly 53 percent
of the popular vote.
The rise of a Barack Obama was at a certain level inevitable. Demographically,
the white majority population will begin to decline in several years. Latinos,
Asians, African Americans, and other racialized minorities will outnumber whites
by 2042, according to Census Bureau projections. But the larger question is what
the Obama victory portends for the realization of racial justice, or “freedom,” that
remains the central motivating factor behind the African-American struggle. Is


--- PAGE 659 ---
Obama’s victory a statement of symbolic representation for blacks, or will it be
translated into a transformed political environment with greater opportunities
and fewer inequalities for people of color?
O
KEYNOTE ADDRESS AT THE 2004 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION
Excerpts are from speech as prepared for delivery.
Tonight is a particular honor for me because, let’s face it, my presence on this
stage is pretty unlikely. My father was a foreign student, born and raised in a small
village in Kenya. He grew up herding goats, went to school in a tin-roof shack. His
father, my grandfather, was a cook, a domestic servant.
But my grandfather had larger dreams for his son. Through hard work and per-
severance my father got a scholarship to study in a magical place: America, which
stood as a beacon of freedom and opportunity to so many who had come before.
While studying here, my father met my mother. She was born in a town on the
other side of the world, in Kansas. Her father worked on oil rigs and farms
through most of the Depression. The day after Pearl Harbor he signed up for
duty, joined Patton’s army and marched across Europe. Back home, my grand-
mother raised their baby and went to work on a bomber assembly line. After the
war, they studied on the GI Bill, bought a house through FHA, and moved west
in search of opportunity.
And they, too, had big dreams for their daughter, a common dream, born of two
continents. My parents shared not only an improbable love; they shared an abid-
ing faith in the possibilities of this nation. They would give me an African name,
Barack, or “blessed,” believing that in a tolerant America your name is no barrier
to success. They imagined me going to the best schools in the land, even though
they weren’t rich, because in a generous America you don’t have to be rich to
achieve your potential. They are both passed away now. Yet, I know that, on this
night, they look down on me with pride.
I stand here today, grateful for the diversity of my heritage, aware that my par-
ents’ dreams live on in my precious daughters. I stand here knowing that my
story is part of the larger American story, that I owe a debt to all of those who
came before me, and that, in no other country on earth, is my story even possi-
ble. Tonight, we gather to affirm the greatness of our nation, not because of 
the height of our skyscrapers, or the power of our military, or the size of our
economy. Our pride is based on a very simple premise, summed up in a decla-
ration made over two hundred years ago, “We hold these truths to be self-
evident, that all men are created equal. That they are endowed by their Creator
with certain inalienable rights. That among these are life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness.”
6 2 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 660 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 2 9
That is the true genius of America, a faith in the simple dreams of its people, the
insistence on small miracles. That we can tuck in our children at night and know
they are fed and clothed and safe from harm. That we can say what we think,
write what we think, without hearing a sudden knock on the door. That we can
have an idea and start our own business without paying a bribe or 
hiring somebody’s son. That we can participate in the political process without
fear of retribution, and that our votes will he counted—or at least, most of 
the time.
This year, in this election, we are called to reaffirm our values and commitments,
to hold them against a hard reality and see how we are measuring up, to the legacy
of our forbearers, and the promise of future generations. And fellow Americans—
Democrats, Republicans, Independents—I say to you tonight: we have more
work to do. More to do for the workers I met in Galesburg, Illinois, who are los-
ing their union jobs at the Maytag plant that’s moving to Mexico, and now are hav-
ing to compete with their own children for jobs that pay seven bucks an hour.
More to do for the father I met who was losing his job and choking back tears,
wondering how he would pay $4,500 a month for the drugs his son needs without
the health benefits he counted on. More to do for the young woman in East St.
Louis, and thousands more like her, who has the grades, has the drive, has the
will, but doesn’t have the money to go to college.
Don’t get me wrong. The people I meet in small towns and big cities, in diners
and office parks, they don’t expect government to solve all their problems. They
know they have to work hard to get ahead and they want to. Go into the collar
counties around Chicago, and people will tell you they don’t want their tax money
wasted by a welfare agency or the Pentagon. Go into any inner city neighborhood,
and folks will tell you that government alone can’t teach kids to learn. They know
that parents have to parent, that children can’t achieve unless we raise their
expectations and turn off the television sets and eradicate the slander that says a
black youth with a book is acting white. No, people don’t expect government to
solve all their problems. But they sense, deep in their bones, that with just a
change in priorities, we can make sure that every child in America has a decent
shot at life, and that the doors of opportunity remain open to all. They know we
can do better. And they want that choice.
In this election, we offer that choice. Our party has chosen a man to lead us
who embodies the best this country has to offer. That man is John Kerry. . . .
. . . John Kerry believes in America. And he knows it’s not enough for just some
of us to prosper. For alongside our famous individualism, there’s another ingredi-
ent in the American saga.
A belief that we are connected as one people. If there’s a child on the south side
of Chicago who can’t read, that matters to me, even if it’s not my child. If there’s a


--- PAGE 661 ---
senior citizen somewhere who can’t pay for her prescription and has to choose
between medicine and the rent, that makes my life poorer, even if it’s not my
grandmother. If there’s an Arab American family being rounded up without bene-
fit of an attorney or due process, that threatens my civil liberties. It’s that funda-
mental belief—I am my brother’s keeper, I am my sister’s keeper—that makes this
country work. It’s what allows us to pursue our individual dreams, yet still come
together as a single American family. “E pluribus unum.” Out of many, one. . . .
We are one people, all of us pledging allegiance to the stars and stripes, all of us
defending the United States of America.
In the end, that’s what this election is about. Do we participate in a politics of cyn-
icism or a politics of hope? John Kerry calls on us to hope. John Edwards calls on
us to hope. I’m not talking about blind optimism here—the almost willful igno-
rance that thinks unemployment will go away if we just don’t talk about it, or the
health care crisis will solve itself if we just ignore it. No, I’m talking about some-
thing more substantial. It’s the hope of slaves sitting around a fire singing freedom
songs; the hope of immigrants setting out for distant shores; the hope of a young
naval lieutenant bravely patrolling the Mekong Delta; the hope of a millworker’s
son who dares to defy the odds; the hope of a skinny kid with a funny name who
believes that America has a place for him, too. The audacity of hope!
O
REMARKS OF SENATOR BARACK OBAMA: “A MORE PERFECT UNION”
As Prepared for Delivery
“We the people, in order to form a more perfect union.”
Two hundred and twenty one years ago, in a hall that still stands across the street,
a group of men gathered and, with these simple words, launched America’s
improbable experiment in democracy. Farmers and scholars; statesmen and patri-
ots who had traveled across an ocean to escape tyranny and persecution finally
made real their declaration of independence at a Philadelphia convention that
lasted through the spring of 1787.
The document they produced was eventually signed but ultimately unfinished. It
was stained by this nation’s original sin of slavery, a question that divided the
colonies and brought the convention to a stalemate until the founders chose to
allow the slave trade to continue for at least twenty more years, and to leave any
final resolution to future generations.
Of course, the answer to the slavery question was already embedded within our
Constitution—a Constitution that had at its very core the ideal of equal citizen-
6 3 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 662 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 3 1
ship under the law; a Constitution that promised its people liberty, and justice,
and a union that could be and should be perfected over time.
And yet words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from
bondage, or provide men and women of every color and creed their full rights and
obligations as citizens of the United States. What would be needed were
Americans in successive generations who were willing to do their part—through
protests and struggle, on the streets and in the courts, through a civil war and civil
disobedience and always at great risk—to narrow that gap between the promise
of our ideals and the reality of their time.
This was one of the tasks we set forth at the beginning of this campaign—to con-
tinue the long march of those who came before us, a march for a more just, more
equal, more free, more caring and more prosperous America. I chose to run for
the presidency at this moment in history because I believe deeply that we cannot
solve the challenges of our time unless we solve them together—unless we per-
fect our union by understanding that we may have different stories, but we hold
common hopes; that we may not look the same and we may not have come from
the same place, but we all want to move in the same direction—towards a better
future for our children and our grandchildren.
This belief comes from my unyielding faith in the decency and generosity of the
American people. But it also comes from my own American story.
I am the son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas. I was
raised with the help of a white grandfather who survived a Depression to serve in
Patton’s Army during World War II and a white grandmother who worked on a
bomber assembly line at Fort Leavenworth while he was overseas. I’ve gone to
some of the best schools in America and lived in one of the world’s poorest
nations. I am married to a black American who carries within her the blood of
slaves and slaveowners—an inheritance we pass on to our two precious daughters.
I have brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews, uncles and cousins, of every race and
every hue, scattered across three continents, and for as long as I live, I will never
forget that in no other country on Earth is my story even possible.
It’s a story that hasn’t made me the most conventional candidate. But it is a story
that has seared into my genetic makeup the idea that this nation is more than the
sum of its parts—that out of many, we are truly one.
Throughout the first year of this campaign, against all predictions to the contrary,
we saw how hungry the American people were for this message of unity. Despite
the temptation to view my candidacy through a purely racial lens, we won com-
manding victories in states with some of the whitest populations in the country.


--- PAGE 663 ---
In South Carolina, where the Confederate Flag still flies, we built a powerful
coalition of African Americans and white Americans.
This is not to say that race has not been an issue in the campaign. At various stages
in the campaign, some commentators have deemed me either “too black” or “not
black enough.” We saw racial tensions bubble to the surface during the week
before the South Carolina primary. The press has scoured every exit poll for the
latest evidence of racial polarization, not just in terms of white and black, but
black and brown as well.
And yet, it has only been in the last couple of weeks that the discussion of race in
this campaign has taken a particularly divisive turn.
On one end of the spectrum, we’ve heard the implication that my candidacy is
somehow an exercise in affirmative action; that it’s based solely on the desire of
wide-eyed liberals to purchase racial reconciliation on the cheap. On the other
end, we’ve heard my former pastor, Reverend Jeremiah Wright, use incendiary
language to express views that have the potential not only to widen the racial
divide, but views that denigrate both the greatness and the goodness of our
nation; that rightly offend white and black alike.
I have already condemned, in unequivocal terms, the statements of Reverend
Wright that have caused such controversy. For some, nagging questions remain.
Did I know him to be an occasionally fierce critic of American domestic and for-
eign policy? Of course. Did I ever hear him make remarks that could be con-
sidered controversial while I sat in church? Yes. Did I strongly disagree with
many of his political views? Absolutely—just as I’m sure many of you have
heard remarks from your pastors, priests, or rabbis with which you strongly dis-
agreed.
But the remarks that have caused this recent firestorm weren’t simply controver-
sial. They weren’t simply a religious leader’s effort to speak out against perceived
injustice. Instead, they expressed a profoundly distorted view of this country—a
view that sees white racism as endemic, and that elevates what is wrong with
America above all that we know is right with America; a view that sees the conflicts
in the Middle East as rooted primarily in the actions of stalwart allies like Israel,
instead of emanating from the perverse and hateful ideologies of radical Islam.
As such, Reverend Wright’s comments were not only wrong but divisive, divisive
at a time when we need unity; racially charged at a time when we need to come
together to solve a set of monumental problems—two wars, a terrorist threat, a
falling economy, a chronic health care crisis and potentially devastating climate
change; problems that are neither black or white or Latino or Asian, but rather
problems that confront us all.
6 3 2 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 664 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 3 3
Given my background, my politics, and my professed values and ideals, there will
no doubt be those for whom my statements of condemnation are not enough.
Why associate myself with Reverend Wright in the first place, they may ask? Why
not join another church? And I confess that if all that I knew of Reverend Wright
were the snippets of those sermons that have run in an endless loop on the tele-
vision and You Tube, or if Trinity United Church of Christ conformed to the car-
icatures being peddled by some commentators, there is no doubt that I would
react in much the same way
But the truth is, that isn’t all that I know of the man. The man I met more than
twenty years ago is a man who helped introduce me to my Christian faith, a man
who spoke to me about our obligations to love one another; to care for the sick
and lift up the poor. He is a man who served his country as a U.S. Marine; who
has studied and lectured at some of the finest universities and seminaries in the
country, and who for over thirty years led a church that serves the community by
doing God’s work here on Earth—by housing the homeless, ministering to the
needy, providing day care services and scholarships and prison ministries, and
reaching out to those suffering from HIV/AIDS.
In my first book, Dreams From My Father, I described the experience of my first
service at Trinity:
“People began to shout, to rise from their seats and clap and cry out, a forceful
wind carrying the reverend’s voice up into the rafters. . . . And in that single
note—hope!—I heard something else; at the foot of that cross, inside the thou-
sands of churches across the city, I imagined the stories of ordinary black people
merging with the stories of David and Goliath, Moses and Pharaoh, the Christians
in the lion’s den, Ezekiel’s field of dry bones. Those stories—of survival, and free-
dom, and hope—became our story, my story; the blood that had spilled was our
blood, the tears our tears; until this black church, on this bright day, seemed once
more a vessel carrying the story of a people into future generations and into a
larger world. Our trials and triumphs became at once unique and universal, black
and more than black; in chronicling our journey, the stories and songs gave us a
means to reclaim memories that we didn’t need to feel shame about . . . memo-
ries that all people might study and cherish—and with which we could start to
rebuild.”
That has been my experience at Trinity. Like other predominantly black churches
across the country, Trinity embodies the black community in its entirety—the
doctor and the welfare mom, the model student and the former gang-banger.
Like other black churches, Trinity’s services are full of raucous laughter and
sometimes bawdy humor. They are full of dancing, clapping, screaming and
shouting that may seem jarring to the untrained ear. The church contains in full
the kindness and cruelty, the fierce intelligence and the shocking ignorance, the


--- PAGE 665 ---
struggles and successes, the love and yes, the bitterness and bias that make up the
black experience in America.
And this helps explain, perhaps, my relationship with Reverend Wright. As imper-
fect as he may be, he has been like family to me. He strengthened my faith, offi-
ciated my wedding, and baptized my children. Not once in my conversations with
him have I heard him talk about any ethnic group in derogatory terms, or treat
whites with whom he interacted with anything but courtesy and respect. He con-
tains within him the contradictions—the good and the bad—of the community
that he has served diligently for so many years.
I can no more disown him than I can disown the black community. I can no more
disown him than I can my white grandmother—a woman who helped raise me, a
woman who sacrificed again and again for me, a woman who loves me as much as
she loves anything in this world, but a woman who once confessed her fear of
black men who passed by her on the street, and who on more than one occasion
has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that made me cringe.
These people are a part of me. And they are a part of America, this country that
I love.
Some will see this as an attempt to justify or excuse comments that are simply
inexcusable. I can assure you it is not. I suppose the politically safe thing would
be to move on from this episode and just hope that it fades into the woodwork.
We can dismiss Reverend Wright as a crank or a demagogue, just as some have
dismissed Geraldine Ferraro, in the aftermath of her recent statements, as har-
boring some deep-seated racial bias.
But race is an issue that I believe this nation cannot afford to ignore right now.
We would be making the same mistake that Reverend Wright made in his offend-
ing sermons about America—to simplify and stereotype and amplify the negative
to the point that it distorts reality.
The fact is that the comments that have been made and the issues that have sur-
faced over the last few weeks reflect the complexities of race in this country that
we’ve never really worked through—a part of our union that we have yet to per-
fect. And if we walk away now, if we simply retreat into our respective corners,
we will never be able to come together and solve challenges like health care, or
education, or the need to find good jobs for every American.
Understanding this reality requires a reminder of how we arrived at this point. As
William Faulkner once wrote, “The past isn’t dead and buried. In fact, it isn’t even
past.” We do not need to recite here the history of racial injustice in this country.
But we do need to remind ourselves that so many of the disparities that exist in
6 3 4 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 666 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 3 5
the African-American community today can be directly traced to inequalities
passed on from an earlier generation that suffered under the brutal legacy of slav-
ery and Jim Crow.
Segregated schools were, and are, inferior schools; we still haven’t fixed them,
fifty years after Brown v. Board of Education, and the inferior education they pro-
vided, then and now, helps explain the pervasive achievement gap between
today’s black and white students.
Legalized discrimination—where blacks were prevented, often through violence,
from owning property, or loans were not granted to African-American business
owners, or black homeowners could not access FHA mortgages, or blacks were
excluded from unions, or the police force, or fire departments—meant that black
families could not amass any meaningful wealth to bequeath to future genera-
tions. That history helps explain the wealth and income gap between black and
white, and the concentrated pockets of poverty that persists in so many of today’s
urban and rural communities.
A lack of economic opportunity among black men, and the shame and frustration
that came from not being able to provide for one’s family, contributed to the ero-
sion of black families—a problem that welfare policies for many years may have
worsened. And the lack of basic services in so many urban black neighborhoods—
parks for kids to play in, police walking the beat, regular garbage pick-up and
building code enforcement—all helped create a cycle of violence, blight and
neglect that continue to haunt us.
This is the reality in which Reverend Wright and other African-Americans of his
generation grew up. They came of age in the late fifties and early sixties, a time
when segregation was still the law of the land and opportunity was systemati-
cally constricted. What’s remarkable is not how many failed in the face of dis-
crimination, but rather how many men and women overcame the odds; how
many were able to make a way out of no way for those like me who would come
after them.
But for all those who scratched and clawed their way to get a piece of the
American Dream, there were many who didn’t make it—those who were ulti-
mately defeated, in one way or another, by discrimination. That legacy of defeat
was passed on to future generations—those young men and increasingly young
women who we see standing on street corners or languishing in our prisons, with-
out hope or prospects for the future. Even for those blacks who did make it, ques-
tions of race, and racism, continue to define their worldview in fundamental ways.
For the men and women of Reverend Wright’s generation, the memories of
humiliation and doubt and fear have not gone away; nor has the anger and the bit-
terness of those years. That anger may not get expressed in public, in front of


--- PAGE 667 ---
white co-workers or white friends. But it does find voice in the barbershop or
around the kitchen table. At times, that anger is exploited by politicians, to gin up
votes along racial lines, or to make up for a politician’s own failings.
And occasionally it finds voice in the church on Sunday morning, in the pulpit and
in the pews. The fact that so many people are surprised to hear that anger in some
of Reverend Wright’s sermons simply reminds us of the old truism that the most
segregated hour in American life occurs on Sunday morning. That anger is not
always productive; indeed, all too often it distracts attention from solving real
problems; it keeps us from squarely facing our own complicity in our condition,
and prevents the African-American community from forging the alliances it needs
to bring about real change. But the anger is real; it is powerful; and to simply wish
it away, to condemn it without understanding its roots, only serves to widen the
chasm of misunderstanding that exists between the races.
In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community. Most
working- and middle-class white Americans don’t feel that they have been partic-
ularly privileged by their race. Their experience is the immigrant experience—as
far as they’re concerned, no one’s handed them anything, they’ve built it from
scratch. They’ve worked hard all their lives, many times only to see their jobs
shipped overseas or their pension dumped after a lifetime of labor. They are anx-
ious about their futures, and feel their dreams slipping away; in an era of stagnant
wages and global competition, opportunity comes to be seen as a zero sum game,
in which your dreams come at my expense. So when they are told to bus their
children to a school across town; when they hear that an African American is get-
ting an advantage in landing a good job or a spot in a good college because of an
injustice that they themselves never committed; when they’re told that their fears
about crime in urban neighborhoods are somehow prejudiced, resentment builds
over time.
Like the anger within the black community, these resentments aren’t always
expressed in polite company. But they have helped shape the political landscape
for at least a generation. Anger over welfare and affirmative action helped forge
the Reagan Coalition. Politicians routinely exploited fears of crime for their own
electoral ends. Talk show hosts and conservative commentators built entire
careers unmasking bogus claims of racism while dismissing legitimate discussions
of racial injustice and inequality as mere political correctness or reverse racism.
Just as black anger often proved counterproductive, so have these white resentments
distracted attention from the real culprits of the middle class squeeze—a corporate
culture rife with inside dealing, questionable accounting practices, and short-term
greed; a Washington dominated by lobbyists and special interests; economic policies
that favor the few over the many. And yet, to wish away the resentments of white
Americans, to label them as misguided or even racist, without recognizing they are
6 3 6 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 668 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 3 7
grounded in legitimate concerns—this too widens the racial divide, and blocks the
path to understanding.
This is where we are right now. It’s a racial stalemate we’ve been stuck in for
years. Contrary to the claims of some of my critics, black and white, I have never
been so naïve as to believe that we can get beyond our racial divisions in a single
election cycle, or with a single candidacy—particularly a candidacy as imperfect
as my own.
But I have asserted a firm conviction—a conviction rooted in my faith in God and
my faith in the American people—that working together we can move beyond
some of our old racial wounds, and that in fact we have no choice if we are to con-
tinue on the path of a more perfect union.
For the African-American community, that path means embracing the burdens
of our past without becoming victims of our past. It means continuing to insist
on a full measure of justice in every aspect of American life. But it also means
binding our particular grievances—for better health care, and better schools,
and better jobs—to the larger aspirations of all Americans—the white woman
struggling to break the glass ceiling, the white man whose been laid off, the
immigrant trying to feed his family. And it means taking full responsibility for
own lives—by demanding more from our fathers, and spending more time with
our children, and reading to them, and teaching them that while they may face
challenges and discrimination in their own lives, they must never succumb to
despair or cynicism; they must always believe that they can write their own
destiny.
Ironically, this quintessentially American—and yes, conservative—notion of self-
help found frequent expression in Reverend Wright’s sermons. But what my for-
mer pastor too often failed to understand is that embarking on a program of self-
help also requires a belief that society can change.
The profound mistake of Reverend Wright’s sermons is not that he spoke about
racism in our society. It’s that he spoke as if our society was static; as if no progress
has been made; as if this country—a country that has made it possible for one of
his own members to run for the highest office in the land and build a coalition of
white and black; Latino and Asian, rich and poor, young and old—is still irrevo-
cably bound to a tragic past. But what we know—what we have seen—is that
America can change. That is the true genius of this nation. What we have already
achieved gives us hope—the audacity to hope—for what we can and must achieve
tomorrow.
In the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging
that what ails the African-American community does not just exist in the minds of


--- PAGE 669 ---
black people; that the legacy of discrimination—and current incidents of dis-
crimination, while less overt than in the past—are real and must be addressed.
Not just with words, but with deeds—by investing in our schools and our com-
munities; by enforcing our civil rights laws and ensuring fairness in our criminal
justice system; by providing this generation with ladders of opportunity that were
unavailable for previous generations. It requires all Americans to realize that your
dreams do not have to come at the expense of my dreams; that investing in the
health, welfare, and education of black and brown and white children will ulti-
mately help all of America prosper.
In the end, then, what is called for is nothing more, and nothing less, than what
all the world’s great religions demand—that we do unto others as we would have
them do unto us. Let us be our brother’s keeper, Scripture tells us. Let us be our
sister’s keeper. Let us find that common stake we all have in one another, and let
our politics reflect that spirit as well.
For we have a choice in this country. We can accept a politics that breeds division,
and conflict, and cynicism. We can tackle race only as spectacle—as we did in the
OJ trial—or in the wake of tragedy, as we did in the aftermath of Katrina—or as
fodder for the nightly news. We can play Reverend Wright’s sermons on every
channel, every day and talk about them from now until the election, and make the
only question in this campaign whether or not the American people think that I
somehow believe or sympathize with his most offensive words. We can pounce on
some gaffe by a Hillary supporter as evidence that she’s playing the race card, or
we can speculate on whether white men will all flock to John McCain in the gen-
eral election regardless of his policies.
We can do that.
But if we do, I can tell you that in the next election, we’ll be talking about some other
distraction. And then another one. And then another one. And nothing will change.
That is one option. Or, at this moment, in this election, we can come together and
say, “Not this time.” This time we want to talk about the crumbling schools that
are stealing the future of black children and white children and Asian children
and Hispanic children and Native American children. This time we want to reject
the cynicism that tells us that these kids can’t learn; that those kids who don’t look
like us are somebody else’s problem. The children of America are not those kids,
they are our kids, and we will not let them fall behind in a 21st century economy.
Not this time.
This time we want to talk about how the lines in the Emergency Room are filled
with whites and blacks and Hispanics who do not have health care; who don’t have
6 3 8 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 670 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 3 9
the power on their own to overcome the special interests in Washington, but who
can take them on if we do it together.
This time we want to talk about the shuttered mills that once provided a decent
life for men and women of every race, and the homes for sale that once belonged
to Americans from every religion, every region, every walk of life. This time we
want to talk about the fact that the real problem is not that someone who doesn’t
look like you might take your job; it’s that the corporation you work for will ship
it overseas for nothing more than a profit.
This time we want to talk about the men and women of every color and creed who
serve together, and fight together, and bleed together under the same proud flag.
We want to talk about how to bring them home from a war that never should’ve
been authorized and never should’ve been waged, and we want to talk about how
we’ll show our patriotism by caring for them, and their families, and giving them
the benefits they have earned.
I would not be running for President if I didn’t believe with all my heart that this
is what the vast majority of Americans want for this country. This union may never
be perfect, but generation after generation has shown that it can always be per-
fected. And today, whenever I find myself feeling doubtful or cynical about this
possibility, what gives me the most hope is the next generation—the young peo-
ple whose attitudes and beliefs and openness to change have already made his-
tory in this election.
There is one story in particularly that I’d like to leave you with today—a story I
told when I had the great honor of speaking on Dr. King’s birthday at his home
church, Ebenezer Baptist, in Atlanta.
There is a young, twenty-three year old white woman named Ashley Baia who
organized for our campaign in Florence, South Carolina. She had been working
to organize a mostly African-American community since the beginning of this
campaign, and one day she was at a roundtable discussion where everyone went
around telling their story and why they were there.
And Ashley said that when she was nine years old, her mother got cancer. And
because she had to miss days of work, she was let go and lost her health care. They
had to file for bankruptcy, and that’s when Ashley decided that she had to do
something to help her mom.
She knew that food was one of their most expensive costs, and so Ashley convinced
her mother that what she really liked and really wanted to eat more than anything
else was mustard and relish sandwiches. Because that was the cheapest way to eat.


--- PAGE 671 ---
She did this for a year until her mom got better, and she told everyone at the round-
table that the reason she joined our campaign was so that she could help the mil-
lions of other children in the country who want and need to help their parents too.
Now Ashley might have made a different choice. Perhaps somebody told her
along the way that the source of her mother’s problems were blacks who were on
welfare and too lazy to work, or Hispanics who were coming into the country ille-
gally. But she didn’t. She sought out allies in her fight against injustice.
Anyway, Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks every-
one else why they’re supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and
reasons. Many bring up a specific issue. And finally they come to this elderly black
man who’s been sitting there quietly the entire time. And Ashley asks him why
he’s there. And he does not bring up a specific issue. He does not say health care
or the economy. He does not say education or the war. He does not say that he
was there because of Barack Obama. He simply says to everyone in the room, “I
am here because of Ashley.”
“I’m here because of Ashley.” By itself, that single moment of recognition between
that young white girl and that old black man is not enough. It is not enough to give
health care to the sick, or jobs to the jobless, or education to our children.
But it is where we start. It is where our union grows stronger. And as so many gen-
erations have come to realize over the course of the two-hundred and twenty one
years since a band of patriots signed that document in Philadelphia, that is where
the perfection begins.
Source: Excerpts from (1) Barack Obama, “Keynote Address at the 2004 Democratic
National Convention” (July 27, 2004) and (2) Barack Obama, “A More Perfect Union,”
(March 18, 2008).
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY:
David Mendell, Obama: From Promise to Power (New York: Amistad/HarperCollins,
2007).
Barack Obama, The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream(New
York: Crown Publishers, 2006).
———, Barack Obama in His Own Words, ed. by Lisa Rogak (New York: Carroll & Graf,
2007).
———, Barack Obama: Speeches 2002–2006, ed. by Maureen Harrison and Steve Gilbert
(Carlsbad: Excellent Books, 2007).
———, Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance , rev. ed. (New York:
Three Rivers Press, 2006).
John K. Wilson, Barack Obama: This Improbable Quest (Boulder: Paradigm, 2008).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
Robert D. Bullard, ed., The Black Metropolis in the Twenty-First Century: Race, Power,
and Politics of Place (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007).
6 4 0 THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT: 1975 TO THE PRESENT


--- PAGE 672 ---
BARACK OBAMA’S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 6 4 1
Michael Eric Dyson, April 4, 1968: Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Death and How It Changed
America (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2008).
Patricia Hill Collins, From Black Power to Hip Hop: Racism, Nationalism, and Feminism,
Politics, History, and Social Change (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006).
Jacqueline Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family
from Slavery to the Present (New York: Vintage Books, 1995).
Manning Marable, Ian Steinberg, and Keesha Middlemass, eds., Racializing Justice,
Disenfranchising Lives: The Racism, Criminal Justice, and Law Reader , Critical Black
Studies Series (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
Leith Mullings, “Losing Ground: Harlem, the War on Drugs, and the Prison Industrial
Complex, Souls, 5, no. 2 (June 2003), pp. 1–21.
———, On Our Own Terms: Race, Class, and Gender in the Lives of African American
Women (New York: Routledge, 1997).
Michael Omi and Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the New Millennium , Critical
Social Thought (London: Routledge, 2008).
Nell Irvin Painter, Creating Black Americans: African-American History and Its Meanings,
1619 to the Present (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).
James B. Stewart, ed., African Americans and Post-Industrial Labor Markets (New
Brunswick: Transaction, 1997).


--- PAGE 673 ---



--- PAGE 674 ---
PERMISSIONS
SECTION ONE: FOUNDATIONS, 1768–1861
1. Excerpt from Complete Writings by Phillis Wheatley, intro. by Vincent Carretta,
ed. by Vincent Carretta. Copyright 2001 by Vincent Carretta. Used by permission of
Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
2. Excerpt from Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah
Equiano, or Gustav Vasa, the African in 2 volumes(New York, 1789 and 1791). 
3. Prince Hall, “Thus Doth Ethiopia Stretch Forth Her Hand from Slavery, to Free-
dom and Equality.” Excerpt of speech delivered at black Masonic lodge, Menotomy,
Massachusetts, June 24, 1797. Originally published in William C. Nell, The Colored Patri-
ots of the American Revolution (Boston: R. F. Wallcut, 1855), pp. 61–64; also in Philip S.
Foner, ed., The Voice of Black America(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1972), pp. 13–15. 
4. “The Founding of the African Methodist Episcopal Church.” Excerpt from Rich-
ard Allen, The Life, Experience and Gospel Labors of the Rt. Rev. Richard Allen (Phila-
delphia: Lee & Yocum, 1888), pp. 11–17, 23–24.
5. “David Walker’s Appeal, 1829–1830.” Excerpt from David Walker, David Walker’s
Appeal in Four Articles; Together with a Preamble, to the Coloured Citizens of the World,
but in Particular and Very Expressly, to those of the United States of America (Boston:
Revised and published by David Walker, 3rd ed., 1830).
6. “The Statement of Nat Turner, 1831.” “Autobiographical Statement of Nat
Turner,” published in Thomas R. Gray, ed., The Confessions of Nat Turner, the leader of
the late insurrection in Southampton, Va.(Baltimore: 1831). 
7. “Slaves Are Prohibited to Read and Write by Law, 1831.” “Act Passed by the General
Assembly of the State of North Carolina at the Session of 1830–1831” (Raleigh: 1831).
8. “Mrs. Stewart’s Farewell Address to Her Friends in the City of Boston, Delivered
September 21, 1833,” published as Productions of Mrs. Maria W. Stewart (Boston:
William Lloyd Garrison and Knapp, 1832).
9. “A Slave Denied the Rights to Marry, 1834.” Letter from Milo Thompson (slave)
to Louisa Bethley, October 15, 1834, in Dwight L. Diamond, ed., Letters of James G.
Birney, 1831–1857, Vol. I (New York: Appleton-Century, 1938), p. 144.
10. “The Selling of Slaves, 1835.” Advertisement, “Hewlett and Bright Sale of Valuable
Slaves,” New Orleans, May 13, 1835. Copy at the New-York Historical Society.
11. “Solomon Northrup Describes a New Orleans Slave Auction, 1841.” Solomon
Northrup, Twelve Years a Slave(Auburn, N.Y.: 1853), p. 78.


--- PAGE 675 ---
12. “Cinque and the Amistad Revolt, 1841.” Excerpts from the United States
Appellants v. the Libellants and Claimants of the Schooner Amistad, Supreme Court of the
United States, 15 Pet. (40 U.S.) 581, 587 (1841).
13. “Let Your Motto Be Resistance!” Henry Highland Garnet, 1843. “An Address to the
Slaves of the United States of America,” 1843, reprinted in Garnet, A Memorial Discourse
by Rev. Henry Highland Garnet(Philadelphia: Joseph M. Wilson, 1865), pp. 44–51.
14. “Slavery as It Is,” William Wells Brown, 1847. “A Lecture Delivered before the
Female Anti-Slavery Society of Salem at Lyceum Hall, November 4, 1847, by William
Wells Brown, A Fugitive Slave,” reported by Henry M. Parkhurst, Boston, 1847. 
15. “A’n’t I a Woman?” Sojourner Truth, 1851. (1) Excerpt from The Anti-Slavery
Bugle, June 21, 1851; and (2) Reported in Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, and
M. J. Gage, History of Women Suffrage, Vol. I (Rochester, N.Y.: 1887).
16. Mary Ann Shadd Cary, excerpts from A Plea for Emigration, or Notes of Canada
West, ed. by Richard Almonte. Toronto: The Mercury Press, 1998, pp. 43–44 and 88–89.
Reprinted by permission.
17. “A Black Nationalist Manifesto,” Martin R. Delany, 1852. Excerpt from The Con-
dition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored People of the United States,
Politically Considered(Philadelphia: Privately Printed, 1852).
18. “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” Frederick Douglass, 1852. From: Alice
Moore Dunbar, ed., Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence (New York: Bookery Publishing,
1914), pp. 42–47.
19. “No Rights That a White Man Is Bound to Respect”: The Dred Scott Case and Its
Aftermath. From: (1) Dred Scott petitions for his freedom, July 1847, Missouri Court
Records, St. Louis; (2) Roger B. Taney, excerpt from “ Obiter Dictum on Dred Scott v.
Sandford,” 1857; and (3) Excerpt from Frederick Douglass, “A Most Scandalous and
Devilish Perversion of the Constitution,” speech denouncing the Dred Scott decision,
May 1857.
20. “Whenever the Colored Man Is Elevated, It Will Be by His Own Exertions,” 
John S. Rock, 1858. Speech from The Liberator, March 12, 1858.
21. “The Spirituals: ‘Go Down, Moses’ and ‘Didn’t My Lord Deliver Daniel.’” Trad-
itional spirituals.
SECTION TWO: RECONSTRUCTION AND REACTION, 1861–1915
1. “What the Black Man Wants,” Frederick Douglass, 1865. Excerpt from “What the
Black Man Wants,” speech delivered in 1865. 
2. “Henry McNeal Turner, Black Christian Nationalist.” Speech delivered on
September 3, 1868, before the Georgia State Legislature. 
3. “Black Urban Workers during Reconstruction.” (1) Excerpt, “The National Colored
Labor Convention, 1869,” American Workman, Boston (December 25, 1869), p. 2; and (2)
excerpt, article on African-American workers in Baltimore, New York Tribune (Septem-
ber 1, 1870).
4. “Labor and Capital Are in Deadly Conflict,” T. Thomas Fortune, 1886. Speech
delivered on April 20, 1886, Brooklyn Literary Union, printed in the New York Freeman,
May 1, 1886.
5. “Edward Wilmot Blyden and the African Diaspora.” Lecture delivered at the
American Colonization Society, Washington, D.C., January 19, 1890.
6 4 4 PERMISSIONS


--- PAGE 676 ---
PERMISSIONS 6 4 5
6. “The Democratic Idea Is Humanity,” Alexander Crummell, 1888. Excerpt from
1888 speech, “The Race Problem in America,” in Africa and America: Addresses and
Discourses (Springfield, Mass.: Wiley, 1891), pp. 39–57.
7. “A Voice from the South,” Anna Julia Cooper, 1892. Excerpt from A Voice from
the South, By a Black Woman from the South(Xenia, Ohio: Aldine Printing House, 1892).
8. “The National Association of Colored Women: Mary Church Terrell
and Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin.” From: (1) Mary Church Terrell, “The Progress of
Colored Women,” excerpt from a speech originally published in The Voice of the Negro
(July 1904), pp. 292– 94; and (2) Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, excerpt from “Letter to the
Ladies of the Georgia Educational League,” June 1889, published in Alice Moore Dunbar,
ed., Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence(New York: Bookery Publishing, 1914), pp. 173–76.
9. “Ode to Ethiopia,” “We Wear the Mask,” and “Sympathy.” In The Collected Poetry
of Paul Laurence Dunbar, ed. Joanne Braxton, pp. 15–16, 71, 102. Copyright 1993 by
the Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia. Reprinted by permission of the
University of Virginia Press.
10. “Booker T. Washington and the Politics of Accommodation.” (1) Excerpt from
“Atlanta Exposition Address,” delivered in Atlanta, Georgia, September 18, 1895,
reprinted in Washington, Up from Slavery: An Autobiography (New York: Doubleday,
Page, 1900); (2) excerpt from “The Fruits of Industrial Training,” originally printed in The
Negro in Business (Boston: Hertel, Jenkins, 1907); and (3) “My View of Segregation
Laws,” New Republic 5, no. 57 (December 4, 1915), pp. 113–14.
11. “William Monroe Trotter and the Boston Guardian.” Excerpt from editorial,
Boston Guardian, December 20, 1902.
12. “Race and the Southern Worker.” From: (1) “A Negro Woman Speaks,” The Inde-
pendent 54 (September 18, 1902), pp. 2221–24; (2) “The Race Question a Class Ques-
tion,” The Worker (October 2, 1904); and (3) “Negro Workers!” appeal drafted by the
Committee of Defense, Brotherhood of Timber Workers, Alexandria, Louisiana, pub-
lished in Solidarity(September 28, 1912).
13. “Ida B. Wells-Barnett, Crusader for Justice.” Excerpt from speech delivered at
the National Negro Conference, 1909 ( Proceedings: National Negro Conference, 1909,
pp. 174–79).
14. “William Edward Burghardt Du Bois.” Ex cerpts from “The Conservation of
Races,” paper presented to the American Negro Academy, Occasional Papers, No. 2
(Washington, D.C., 1897); and (2) excerpts from chapter I, “Of Our Spiritual Strivings,”
and chapter II, “Of the Dawn of Freedom,” from The Souls of Black Folk (Chicago: A.C.
McClurg, 1903).
15. “The Niagara Movement, 1905.” From: “The Niagara Movement Declaration of
Principles,” 1905. Originally published in the Cleveland Gazette, July 22, 1905.
16. “Hubert Henry Harrison, Black Revolutionary Nationalist.” Excerpt from speech
originally delivered in about 1912, first published in Harrison, The Negro and the Nation
(New York: 1917[?]), pp. 48–58.
SECTION THREE: FROM PLANTATION TO GHETTO, 1915–1954
1. “Black Conflict over World War I.” From: (1) W. E. B. Du Bois, “Close Ranks,”
Crisis 16 (July 1918), reprinted by permission of The Crisis; (2) excerpt from Hubert H.
Harrison, “The Descent of Du Bois,” in When Africa Awakens (New York: Porro Press,


--- PAGE 677 ---
1920); and (3) Du Bois, “Returning Soldiers,” The Crisis 18 (May 1919), pp. 13–14,
reprinted by permission of The Crisis. The editors wish to thank the Crisis Publishing Co.,
Inc., the publisher of the magazine of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People, for the use of the material from The Crisis.
2. From: “If We Must Die,” Liberator2 (July 1919), p. 21. Reprinted from Selected
Poems of Claude McKay (New York: Bookman Associates, 1953), p. 36.
3. “Black Bolsheviks: Cyril V . Briggs and Claude McKay.” (1) “What the African
Blood Brotherhood Stands For,” originally published in the Communist Review[London]
2 (April 1922), pp. 448–54; and (2) Claude McKay, excerpt from “Soviet Russia and the
Negro,” originally published in The Crisis27 (December 1923), pp. 61–65, and (January
1924), pp. 114–18, reprinted by permission of The Crisis. The editors wish to thank the
Crisis Publishing Co., Inc., the publisher of the magazine of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People, for the use of the material from The Crisis.
4. “Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association.” (1) Excerpt
from “Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World,” August 1920, originally
published in Amy Jacques Garvey, ed., Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, Vol.
2 (New York: Universal Publishing House, 1925), pp. 135–42; (2) “An Appeal to the Con-
science of the Black Race to See Itself,” in Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey;
and (3) excerpt from “An Exposé of the Caste System among Negroes,” in Philosophy and
Opinions of Marcus Garvey, Vol. 2, pp. 55–61.
5. “Women as Leaders,” from The Negro World(October 25, 1925).
6. “Langston Hughes and the Harlem Renaissance.” From: (1) “The Negro Artist
and the Racial Mountain,” The Nation122 (June 23, 1926), reprinted with permission. For
subscription information to The Nation, call 1-800-333-8536. Portions of each week’s
Nation magazine can be accessed at www.thenation.com; (2) “My America,” from What
the Negro Wants, ed. by Rayford W. Logan (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1944), pp. 299–307. Copyright 1944 by the University of North Carolina Press,
renewed 1974 by Rayford W. Logan. Used by permission of the publisher; and (3) “I, Too”
and “Harlem,” from The Collected Poems by Langston Hughes, ed. by Arnold Rampersad
with David Roessel, associate editor (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994). Copyright 1994
by the Estate of Langston Hughes. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., a
division of Random House, Inc.
7. “The Negro Woman and the Ballot,” from Messenger 9 (April 1927), p. 111.
8. “James Weldon Johnson and Harlem in the 1920s.” Excerpt from “Harlem: The
Culture Capital,” originally written in 1925 and published in Alain Locke, ed., The New
Negro (New York: Albert and Charles Boni, 1925), pp. 301–11.
9. “Black Workers in the Great Depression.” From: “The Negro Worker: A Problem
of Progressive Labor Action,” The Crisis37, no. 3 (March 1930), pp. 83–85. The editors
wish to thank the Crisis Publishing Co., Inc., the publisher of the magazine of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for the use of the material from The
Crisis.
10. “The Scottsboro Trials, 1930s.” From: “Scottsboro Boys Appeal from Death Cells
to the Toilers of the World,” originally published in The Negro Worker2, no. 5 (May 1932),
pp. 8–9.
11. “You Cannot Kill the Working Class,” Angelo Herndon, 1933 . From: (1) Angelo
Herndon’s Speech to the Jury, January 17, 1933; and (2) excerpt from Angelo Herndon,
You Cannot Kill the Working Class(New York: International Labor Defense and League
6 4 6 PERMISSIONS


--- PAGE 678 ---
PERMISSIONS 6 4 7
of Struggle for Negro Rights, 1937–?).
12. Excerpts reprinted by permission of Nell Irvin Painter, from The Narrative of
Hosea Hudson: His Life as a Negro Communist in the South, edited by Nell Irvin
Painter. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979.
13. “Breaking the Bars to Brotherhood,” Mary McLeod Bethune, 1935. Excerpts from
speech located in the Mary McLeod Bethune Papers, Amistad Research Center, Tulane
University, New Orleans. 
14. “Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., and the Fight for Black Employment in Harlem.”
From: “Soap Box,” Amsterdam News, May 7, 1938; and “Platform for Job Campaign,”
Amsterdam News, May 14, 1938. 
15. “Black Women Workers during the Great Depression.” Fr om: (1) Elaine Ellis,
“Women of the Cotton Fields,” The Crisis 45 (October 1938), pp. 333, 342, reprinted by
permission; and (2) Naomi Ward, “I Am a Domestic,” New Masses35 (June 25, 1940), pp.
20–21. The editors wish to thank the Crisis Publishing Co., Inc., the publisher of the mag-
azine of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for the use of
the material from The Crisis.
16. “Southern Negro Youth Conference, 1939.” From: “Call to Third All-Southern
Negro Youth Conference,” issued in March 1939.
17. “A. Philip Randolph and the Negro March on Washington Movement, 1941.”
From: (1) Excerpt from “Call to the March, July 1, 1941,” originally published in The
Black Worker, May 1941; and (2) “Why Should We March?” Survey Graphic 31
(November 1942), pp. 488–89.
18. “Charles Hamilton Houston and the War Effort among African Americans,
1944.” From: “The Negro Soldier,” reprinted with permission from the Nation 159 (Octo-
ber 21, 1944), pp. 496–97. For subscription information to the Nation, call 1-800-333-
8536. Portions of each week’s Nation magazine can be accessed at www.thenation.com.
19. “An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro Woman!” Claudia Jones,
1949. From essay originally published in Political Affairs(1949).
20. “The Negro Artist Looks Ahead,” Paul Robeson, 1951. Excerpt from “The Negro
Artist Looks Ahead,” originally published in Masses and Mainstream (January 1952), 
pp. 7–14.
21. “Thurgood Marshall: The Brown Decision and the Struggle for School Desegre-
gation.” Excerpt from the Edwin Rogers Embree Memorial Lectures of Thurgood Mar-
shall at Dillard University, New Orleans, Spring 1954. 
SECTION FOUR: WE SHALL OVERCOME, 1954–1975
1. From: (1) Letter from Jo Ann Robinson to W. J. Gayle, May 21, 1954, reprinted
by permission of the University of Tennessee Press. From The Montgomery Bus
Boycott and the Women Who Made It: The Memoir of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson ,
edited, with a foreword, by David J. Garrow (Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1987). Copyright 1987 by the University of Tennessee Press; (2) “Rosa L.
Parks” from My Soul Is Rested by Howell Raines, copyright 1977 Howell Raines.
Used by permission G. P . Putnam’s Sons, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.;
and (3) excerpts from an account by Jo Ann Robinson, from David J. Garrow, ed., The
Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Made It: The Memoir of Jo Ann
Gibson Robinson. Copyright 1987 by the University of Tennessee Press, pp. 43–47,


--- PAGE 679 ---
61–63, 112–13, 161–63.
2. “Roy Wilkins and the NAACP .” Excerpt from an address delivered on February
24, 1956, NAACP Southeast Regional Convention, Charleston, South Carolina, originally
published in The Crisis46 (April 1956), pp. 197–201, 254–55, reprinted with permission.
The editors wish to thank the Crisis Publishing Co., Inc., the publisher of the magazine of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for the use of the mate-
rial from The Crisis.
3. “The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1957.” From: “This is SCLC,”
pamphlet printed as mimeograph by the SCLC in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1957.
4. “Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and the Sit-In Movement, 1960.”
From: “Statement of Purpose,” drafted for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit-
tee by the Rev. James Lawson, May 14, 1960, mimeographed document.
5. “Freedom Songs, 1960s.” Traditional songs: “We Shall Overcome” and “Ain’t
Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me ’Round.”
6. “We Need Group-Centered Leadership,” Ella Baker. From: “Bigger than a Ham-
burger,” Southern Patriot 18 (June 1960).
7. “Martin Luther King, Jr., and Nonviolence, 1957 and 1963.” From: (1) Excerpts
from “Nonviolence and Racial Justice,” copyright 1957 by Martin Luther King, Jr., copy-
right renewed 1985 by Coretta Scott King; and (2) “I Have a Dream” speech delivered
at the March on Washington, August 28, 1963, copyright 1963 by Martin Luther King,
Jr., copyright renewed 1991 by Coretta Scott King. Both are reprinted by arrangement
with The Heirs to the Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., c/o Writers House, Inc., as
agent for the proprietor.
8. “The Revolution Is at Hand,”John R. Lewis, 1963. From: Speech by John Lewis,
delivered at the March on Washington, August 28, 1963, courtesy of U.S. Representative
John Lewis.
9. “The Salvation of American Negroes Lies in Socialism,” W. E. B. Du Bois. Excerpt
from “The Negro and Socialism,” in Helen Alfred, ed., Toward a Socialist America(New
York: Peace Publications, 1958), pp. 179–91.
10. “The Special Plight and the Role of Black Women,” Fannie Lou Hamer. Excerpt
from a speech delivered at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund Institute, New York City,
May 7, 1971, pp. 609–14. 
11. “SNCC Position Paper: Women in the Movement,” 1964. From: “Student Non-
violent Coordinating Committee Position Paper: Women in the Movement,” text made
available through the Institute of Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of
Virginia at Charlottesville, April 18, 1998.
12. “Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam.” Excerpt from “Program and Position”
of the Nation of Islam, in Clifton E. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition
from Separatism to Islam, 1930–1980(Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1984), pp. 62–64.
13. “Malcolm X and Revolutionary Black Nationalism.” From: (1) “The Ballot or the
Bullet” speech delivered in Cleveland, Ohio, April 3, 1964, reprinted in Malcolm X
Speaks (New York: Merit Publishers, 1965), pp. 23–44. Copyright 1965, 1989 by Betty
Shabazz and Pathfinder Press, reprinted by permission; and (2) “Statement of the Basic
Aims and Objectives of the Organization of Afro-American Unity,” June 28, 1964,
reprinted in George Breitman, ed., The Last Year of Malcolm X: The Evolution of a
Revolutionary (New York: Merit Publishers, 1967), pp. 105–11. Copyright Pathfinder
6 4 8 PERMISSIONS


--- PAGE 680 ---
PERMISSIONS 6 4 9
Press, reprinted by permission.
14. “Black Power.” From: (1) Stokely Carmichael, excerpt from “What We Want,”
New York Review of Books 7, no. 4 (September 22, 1966), pp. 5–6, 8; (2) SNCC,
“Position Paper on Black Power,” published in the New York Times, August 5, 1966; and
(3) Bayard Rustin, excerpt from “‘Black Power’ and Coalition Politics,” Commentary 42
(September 1966), pp. 35–40.
15. “CORE Endorses Black Power,” Floyd McKissick, 1967. Excerpts from speech
delivered at the “National Conference of Black Power,” Newark, New Jersey, July
20–23, 1967. Originally published in the New York Times, July 30, 1967.
16. “To Atone for Our Sins and Errors in Vietnam,” Martin Luther King, Jr., 1967 .
Excerpt from “Testament of Hope” speech delivered at Riverside Church, New York
City, April 4, 1967, copyright 1967 by Martin Luther King, Jr., copyright renewed 
by the Martin Luther King, Jr. Estate. Reprinted by arrangement with The Heirs to
the Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., c/o Writers House, Inc., as agent for the pro-
prietor.
17. “Huey P . Newton and the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense.” From: (1) “The
Black Panther Program: What We Want, What We Believe,” October 1966; (2) “Rules
of the Black Panther Party,” Central Headquarters, Oakland, California; and (3) Excerpt
from Huey P . Newton, “On the Defection of Eldridge Cleaver from the Black Panther
Party and the Defection of the Black Panther Party from the Black Community,” Black
Panther Intercommunal News Service, April 17, 1971. 
18. “The People Have to Have the Power,” Fred Hampton. Excerpts from “Fred
Speaks”: Fred Hampton 20th Commemoration (Chicago: December 4th Committee,
1989).
19. “I Am a Revolutionary Black Woman,” Angela Y. Davis, 1970. Excerpts from “I
Am a Revolutionary Black Woman,” published originally in Muhammad Speaks
(December 1970).
20. “Our Thing Is DRUM!” The League of Revolutionary Black Workers. From:
“General Program (Here’s Where We’re Coming From),” General Policy Statement
and Labor Program (Highland Park, MI: League of Revolutionary Black Workers,
1970).
21. Attica: “The Fury of Those Who Are Oppressed,” 1971. From: “The Five
Demands: To the people of America,” reprinted from A Time to Die: The Attica Prison
Revolt by Tom Wicker by permission of the University of Nebraska Press. Copyright
1975 by Tom Wicker.
22. “The National Black Political Convention, Gary, Indiana, March 1972.” From:
“The Gary Declaration,” from “The National Black Political Agenda” (Washington,
D.C.: National Black Political Convention, 1972).
23. “There Is No Revolution Without the People,” Amiri Baraka, 1972 . From: (1)
Excerpt from Baraka, “The Pan-African Party and the Black Nation,” in Robert
Chrisman and Nathan Hare, Pan-Africanism (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1974), pp.
114–26; and (2) “A Poem for Black Hearts” reprinted by permission of Sterling Lord
Literistic, as agents for the author. Copyright by Amiri Baraka.
24. “My Sight Is Gone But My Vision Remains,” Henry Winston. From: (1) “On
Returning to the Struggle” published with permission from Political Affairs 40, no. 8
(August 1961), pp. 1–2; and (2) excerpt from “A Letter to my Brothers and Sisters” with


--- PAGE 681 ---
permission from Political Affairs 52, no. 2 (February 1973), pp. 13–21.
SECTION FIVE: THE FUTURE IN THE PRESENT, 1975 TO THE PRESENT
1. “Combahee River Collective Statement, 1977.” From: “Combahee River Collec-
tive: A Black Feminist Statement,” copyright 1979 by Zilla R. Eisenstein. Reprinted by
permission of the Monthly Review Foundation.
2. “Women in Prison: How We Are,” Assata Shakur, 1978. Excerpt from “Women in
Prison: How We Are” with permission from Black Scholar9, no. 7 (April 1978), pp. 50–57.
3. “It’s Our Turn,” Harold Washington, 1983. From: “Harold Washington’s
Announcement of Candidacy for the Democratic Nomination for Mayor of Chicago,”
from Dempsey J. Travis, Harold: The People’s Mayor (Chicago: Urban Research Press,
1989), used by permission of Ramon Price for the Washington Estate.
4. Reprinted by permission from Sister Outsider, by Audre Lorde. Copyright 1984,
2007 by Audre Lorde. Berkeley, Calif.: Crossing Press, www.tenspeed.com.
5. “Shaping Feminist Theory,” bell hooks, 1984. Excerpt from “Black Women:
Shaping Feminist Theory,” from bell hooks, Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center
(Boston: South End Press, 1984), pp. 1–15.
6. “The Movement against Apartheid: Jesse Jackson and Randall Robinson.” From:
(1) Jesse L. Jackson, “Don’t Adjust to Apartheid,” with permission from Black Scholar 16,
no. 6 (November/December 1984), pp. 39–43; and (2) Clarence Lusane, “State of the U.S.
Anti-Apartheid Movement: An Interview with Randall Robinson,” with permission from
Black Scholar 17, no. 6 (November/December 1985), pp. 40–42.
7. “Keep Hope Alive,” Jesse Jackson, 1988. From: “Common Ground and Common
Sense,” address delivered July 20, 1988, reprinted in Vital Speeches54, no. 21 (August 15,
1988), pp. 649–53.
8. “Afrocentricity,” Molefi Asante, 1991. From: “The Afrocentric Idea in Education,”
Journal of Negro Education 60, no. 2 (Spring 1991), pp. 170–80. Copyright 1991 by
Howard University.
9. “The Anita Hill–Clarence Thomas Controversy, 1991.” From: (1) “African-
American Women in Defense of Ourselves”; and (2) June Jordan, “Can I Get a Witness?”
Both are reprinted with permission from Black Scholar 22, nos. 1 and 2 (Winter/Spring
1991), pp. 56–58, 155.
10. “Race Matters,” Cornel West, 1991. From: “Nihilism in Black America,” Dissent
(Spring 1991).
11. “Black Demogogues and Pseudo-Scholars,” by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Copyright
1992 by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Originally published in the New York Times. Reprinted by
permission of the author.
12. “Crime—Causes and Cures,” Jarvis Tyner, 1994. Reprinted by the courtesy of
Jarvis Tyner, Vice Chairman, Communist Party USA.
13. “Louis Farrakhan: The Million Man March, 1995.” Excerpt from Farrakhan’s
speech at the Million Man March, Washington, D.C., October 16, 1995.
14. “A Voice from Death Row,” Mumia Abu-Jamal. From: Jamal News Service, 1998.
15. “Let Justice Roll Down Like Waters,” African-American Prisoners in Sing Sing,
1998. From: (1) Statement by Sing Sing Prisoners, May 1998, pp. 36–38; (2) Michael J.
Love, “The Prison-Industrial Complex: An Investment in Failure,” pp. 24–25; and (3)
6 5 0 PERMISSIONS


--- PAGE 682 ---
LET NOBODY TURN US AROUND 6 5 1
Willis L. Steele, Jr., “River Hudson,” in Pamphlet, Voices of the Class of 1998: Master of
Professional Studies Program at Sing Sing Correctional Facility (New York: New York
Theological Seminary, 1998), pp. 34–35.
16. “Black Radical Congress, 1998.” From: (1) “BRC Principles of Unity”; (2) The
“Call to Congress”; and (3) “The Freedom Agenda of the BRC.” Copies in possession of
the editors.
17. Letter to Governor Bush from Chairperson Mary Frances Berry, U.S. Commission
on Civil Rights, March 8, 2001. Reprinted by permission of Mary Frances Berry.
18. “Protocol for Peace, Point 1: Proclamation,” reprinted by permission of the estate
of Stanley Tookie Williams.
19. Excerpt from “Paper Trail: World Conference against Racism, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance,” Souls4, no. 3 (Summer 2002), pp. 69–82. Reprinted by permission.
20. John Nichols, “Barbara Lee’s Stand,” Nation, October 8, 2001. Reprinted by per-
mission. For subscription information, call 1-800-333-8536. Portions of each week’s
Nation magazine can be accessed at http://www.thenation.com. From “Iraq Veterans
against the War,” www.ivaw.org.
21. Michael Eric Dyson, Is Bill Cosby Right? Or Has the Black Middle Class Lost its
Mind? (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2005), pp. 6–14 (excerpts). Reprinted by permis-
sion of Civitas, a member of the Perseus Books Group.


--- PAGE 683 ---



--- PAGE 684 ---
INDEX
ABB. See African Blood Brotherhood
Abernathy, Ralph, 358
abolitionists: American Union for,
99–101; for black suffrage, 123–24,
127–28; colonizationists v., 143;
growth of, 94–95, 97; societies of, 105.
See also Douglass, Frederick; Rock,
John S.; Truth, Sojourner
absorption. See assimilation; unity
Abu-Jamal, Mumia, 497
Abyssinian Baptist Church, 298
accommodation: destruction of, 220–21;
Washington, Booker T., on, 175–81
Actors Equity, 330
actors, jobs for, 327–31
Adams, John Quincy, 51
affirmative action, 598; liberal
integrationists v., 345
AFL. See American Federation of Labor
Africa: agriculture in, 12–13; apartheid
and, 533–34; beauty in, 12; Benin in,
9–13; colonizationists v., 607–10;
commerce in, 11–12; culture of,
xxi–xxii, 10; education about, 550;
Equiano on, 9–13; ethnic conflicts
within, 611–12; Europe in, 140–41,
144–45; exploration of, 144–45; foods
of, 10–11; freedom in, 233, 244;
genocide and, 608–10; God v.,
140–41; houses in, 11; imperialism in,
482–83; knowledge in, 42; labor in,
12; mothers of, 318–19; neo-
colonialism in, 483–84; Pan-African
movement for, 394; physical demands
of, 139–40; poverty in, 530;
restoration of, 608–9; riches of,
483–84; Roman Catholic Church in,
140; slavery in, 12, 13; stereotype of,
529–30; violence and, 608; warfare in,
12–13. See also emigration; specific
African countries
African-American feminist(s), 496, 497,
502, 503; Cooper as, 120–21; Davis,
Angela Y., as, 459–60; genesis of,
502–4; Jones, Claudia, as, 223. See
also Combahee River Collective
Statement
African Americans, 222; crime and,
575–76; Democratic Party for, 344;
duty for, 212; self-determination for,
599; spirituals for, 111–13; workers’
organizations for, 121–22; World War
I v., 224–28. See also colored men;
colored women; Negroes
African Blood Brotherhood (ABB), 221;
Briggs, Cyril V ., on, 229–33; militancy
of, 228–29; for press service, 231
African diaspora, 139–49
African Holocaust: Holocaust v., 550–51.
See also Black Holocaust
African Methodist Episcopal (AME)
Church, 6, 20–24
African National Congress (ANC), 495;
apartheid and, 535


--- PAGE 685 ---
Africans: Negroes v., 409. See also slavery
Afrocentricity: debate about, 551;
definition of, 547–48; education v.,
546–52; Eurocentricity v., 548;
multiculturalism v., 548–50; resistance
and, 549; white supremacy v., 549–51
agape, love as, 379
ageism, 518
agriculture: in Africa, 12–13; slavery for,
3–4
AIDS, 544, 611
Alabama: elections in, 421; segregation
in, 260
Alabama Journal, 359
Allen, Richard, 6; AME Church from,
20–24; background of, 20
amalgamation: of Negroes, 153, 154–55;
of races, 154. See also assimilation
ambition: fear v., 45. See also hope;
progress
AME Church. See African Methodist
Episcopal (AME) Church
America, 428; Anglo-Saxons in, 152; as
Babylon, 45; barbarity in, 27–28;
culture of, 326–31; Europe v., 235;
hypocrisy of, 63–64, 84–88, 257–64,
332–33; imperialism for, 390;
independence v. slaves for, 84–88;
morality of, 411, 440–41; “more
perfect union” for, 582; Negroes’
arrival in, 152–53; post-racial, with
Obama, 500, 639–42; races in, 152;
socialism for, 391–95; Vietnam v.,
439–44. See also United States
American Colonization Society, 77; for
African emigration, 68–69, 142–43;
from Brazilians, 83n2
American Federation of Labor (AFL),
275–76
American Missionary Association, 144
American Negro Academy: creed for,
203; for exponents, 201–2; impartiality
in, 202; for Negro sociology, 202–3;
for practicalities, 202
Americans: Christians as, 32–33; colored
people as, 31–32, 73; Negroes v.,
200–201, 205–6, 208–9; race and,
405–6; responsibility of, 439–44. See
also black men; white men
American Union, 101; North v., 99–100
Amistad, 51–56, 61
ANC. See African National Congress
anger: for militancy, 419; nihilism and,
563; Obama on, 638–39
Anglo-Saxons: in America, 152; progress
of, 247–48; as slaves, 247
Anti-Defamation League, 622
anti-semitism. See black anti-semitism
apartheid: Africa and, 533–34; ANC and,
535; background on, 529; Congress
and, 533–34; education on, 532;
human rights v., 530–31;
independence v., 531–32; Jackson on,
529–32; movement against, 529–35;
nuclear technology and, 531; policy
on, 532–35; protests against, 495,
533–35
appearance: contempt v., 187; of Harlem,
268; pride in, 110; between races,
198–99; race v., 81, 196–97
army. See military
arts, discrimination in, 327–31
Asante, Molefi Kete (Arthur Smith),
547–52; background on, 546
assimilation, 199–200; of black elected
officials, 351–52; slavery v., 142
Attica brothers, xxix
Attica prison, 466; demands from, 467;
proposals from, 468
The Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured
Man (Johnson, J.), 267
Azbell, Joe, 358
Baia, Ashley, 641–42
Baker, Ella, 347, 376; background of,
375. See also Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee
Baraka, Amiri, 475–77; background of,
473–74; poetry of, 478–79
baseball, race in, 426
behavior: structure v., 559–60. See also
conservative behaviorists
belief: in unity, 631–32. See also faith
Beloved (Morrison), 563
654 INDEX


--- PAGE 686 ---
INDEX 655
Benin, 9–13
Berry, Mary Frances, 495; on presidential
election 2000, 600–602
Bethley, Louisa, 47–48
Bethune, Mary McLeod: background on,
294–95; on brotherhood, 295–97; to
NAACP , 223, 295–98
Bible, slaveholders v., 86–88, 105
birth, 318
birth control, sterilization v., 301
The Birth of a Nation, 219
BLA. See Black Liberation Army
black activists: Che-Lumumba Club and,
460–61; hip-hop and, 495–96, 603–6;
rap artists and, 495–96; rights and,
426; white radicals v., 428–29. See also
Black Panther Party; Black Radical
Congress; specific activists
black America, nihilism for, 558–65
Black and White: Land, Labor, and
Politics in the South (Fortune), 
136
black anti-semitism: Farrakhan and, 569;
Gates against, 566–71; heritage of,
568–69; multiculturalism v., 567–68;
from NOI, 567–68; rise of, 566; West
on, 570
black community, 5, 419–20; Black
Panthers v., 450–55; prison v., 511;
structure for, 454
black culture. See culture
black elected officials: assimilation of,
351–52; attempts for, 420–21, 430–31;
within Black Power movement,
351–52; Gary Convention for, 469–73;
Lee, Barbara, as, 613–17; nihilism v.,
564; Powell as, 298–300; progress for,
334; Rainbow Coalition for, 494–95;
Washington, H., as, 493–94; women
as, 252. See also Lewis, John R.;
Obama, Barack; Washington, Harold
black feminists. See African-American
feminist(s)
Black Freedom movement, 343; class
and, 489; coalitions within, 344–49;
gender discrimination in, 347,
399–401; leadership in, 347
Black Holocaust: acknowledgement of,
606–8; as racism, 606–8; slavery as,
606–8; United Nations and, 609
Black Liberation Army (BLA), 507–8
black men: feminism v., 506; white
women v., 528. See also colored men;
white men
black nationalism: Black Power as, 432;
for civil rights, 408; definition of, 410;
economic philosophy of, 410; Garvey,
Amy, for, 223; for Harrison, 122,
213–16; integrationalists v., 347–48;
integrationism v., xxiii–xxiv;
organizations for, 411; progress’ lack
for, 432–33; repatriation as, 118; social
philosophy of, 410–11; violence and,
408. See also Nation of Islam;
religious nationalists; revolutionary
nationalists; Turner, Henry McNeal
blackness: boundaries of, 7; integration v.,
422–23
Black Panther Party, xxv, 350, 422, 431;
as armed police patrol, 452;
background of, 445; black community
v., 450–55; class and, 457; Cleaver v.,
450, 453–55; communication for, 449;
demands of, 446–48; dialectic
materialism for, 450; free-speech
movement within, 454; morality for,
448, 449; RAM v., 450; rules of,
448–49; Southern Negroes and, 431;
systematic ideology for, 451; United
Nations and, 447; violence and, 448,
456. See also Abu-Jamal, Mumia
black people, commonality between, 405
Black Power: as black nationalism, 432;
coalition politics and, 430–35;
Hampton on, 456–59; representation
and, 421–22; SNCC’s position paper
on, 425–29
Black Power movement: black elected
officials within, 351–52; civil rights
movement v., 348, 419–25, 430, 434;
Communists within, 350–51;
competing visions within, xxv–xxvi;
conservatives within, 349; cultural
nationalists within, 349; exploitation v.,


--- PAGE 687 ---
422; injustice v., 434; liberal
integrationism v., 348–49; polarization
v., 423; for redefinition, 348; religious
nationalists within, 349–50;
revolutionary nationalists within,
350–51. See also Carmichael, Stokely;
Rustin, Bayard
Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in
America (Carmichael and Hamilton),
419
black pride. See pride
Black Radical Congress (BRC), 498;
background on, 592; black liberation
agenda from, 593–94; against
capitalism, 593–99; against capital
punishment, 597–98; class and,
592–99; democracy and, 596; for
education, 597; freedom agenda from,
594–99; gender and, 593, 598; for
human rights, 593–99; against
oppression, 592–99; principles of
unity from, 592–93; on unions, 596
black radicals: divisions within, 593;
SNCC as, 346–47; as
transformationists, 346–47
black revolt: in Haiti, 137. See also Dred
Scott
black suffrage: abolitionists for, 123–24,
127–28; citizenship and, 126–27; for
freedom, 206; for opportunities,
127–28, 210; for women, 124, 265–67,
324. See also disenfranchisement;
voter-registration; voting
black urban workers: New York Tribune
on, 133–35; during Reconstruction,
132–35
black women: bourgeoisie against,
316–17; Cooper on, 159–65; in prison,
507–13; strengths of, 511–12; violence
against, 279–81, 520; white women v.,
321–22, 396–97, 512, 518–20, 525–28.
See also African-American feminist(s);
colored women
Black Women Organized for Action
(BWOFA), 502
Blyden, Edward Wilmot: on African
diaspora, 139–49; background of,
138–39
Bobo, Lawrence, 492
bourgeoisie: black, 491; against black
women, 316–17
Bowles, Chester, 335–36
Bradley, Michael, 567
Brazilians, Colonization Society from,
83n2
BRC. See Black Radical Congress
Breakfast for Children Program, 457
Breakthrough on the Color Front
(Nichols), 337
Briggs, Cyril V ., 221; on ABB, 229–33;
background of, 228–29; on Great
Migration, 229–30; on mob law, 232;
on peonage, 232
Briggs, Martha, 163
brotherhood, 197; Bethune on, 295–97;
church v., 212; from God, 156; love of,
583–84. See also African Blood
Brotherhood; equality
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters,
308
Brown, Hallie Quinn, 163
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,
Kansas, 331–32, 343; Cosby on,
619–21; Obama on, 635
Brown, William Wells, xxvi; background
of, 63; on slavery, 63–65
Buchanan, Pat, 575
Bush administration, 552–54; War on
Terror and, 613–17
Bush, George W., 498; presidential
election of, 600–602
Bush, Jeb, 600–602
BWOFA. See Black Women Organized
for Action
Canada, slaves’ emigration to, 68–70
Cane (Toomer), 255–56
capitalism: BRC against, 593–99; crime
v., 571–80; Declaration of
Independence v., 594–95; exploitation
and, 457; human nature v., 387; media
and, 390–91; morality v., 391–92;
patriarchy v., 504–7; propaganda for,
391; racism v., 470–73; socialism v.,
388–89; Soviet Russia against, 236;
without entitlements, 576
656 INDEX


--- PAGE 688 ---
INDEX 657
Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for
Socialist Feminism (Eisenstein), 502
capitalists: black v. white workingmen for,
188; labor v., 136–38, 187–91, 213–16,
278; Washington, Booker T., and,
188–89
capital punishment, 585–86; BRC
against, 597–98. See also lynching
Carmichael, Stokely (Ture, Kwame), 348,
420–29; background of, 418–19
Carter, Jimmy, 536
caste, race v., 214–15
Central America: colored majority in,
73–74; for emigration, 73–75, 77;
equality in, 73, 83n2
Chairman Mao, 452–53
change: peace and, 534–35. See also
progress
Cary, Mary Ann Shadd : background of,
68; for Canadian emigration, 68–70
Che-Lumumba Club, 460–61
Chicago, 494, 513–15; crime in, 514;
unemployment in, 513; voter-
registration in, 515
children, 457; colored, 169–71, 186, 204;
crime against, 520; domestics and,
303–4; for labor, 301; race and, 204;
white chauvinism and, 323–24. See
also youth
Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race
(Blyden), 139
Christians: as Americans, 32–33; Bible v.
slaveholders for, 84–88, 105; cruelties
of, 32–33; miseries from, 28; slavery
v., 57–58; W.C.T.U. as, 160, 164n1.
See also Southern Christian
Leadership Conference; specific
churches
church, 6; brotherhood v., 212; Obama
on, 632–33, 636; persecution in,
21–22. See also specific churches
Cinque, Joseph, 61
citizenship: black suffrage and, 126–27;
definition of, 90; dual, 332–33;
inferiority v., 90–92, 363, 375; slavery
v., 90–92; urgency for, 380; voting and,
334. See also voter-registration; White
Citizens Councils
civil disobedience: SCLC and, 369. See
also King, Martin Luther, Jr.
civil rights: black nationalism for, 408;
voting v., 600–602
Civil Rights Bill: Democratic Party v.,
406–7; filibuster against, 407, 418n2;
Lewis against, 384–85
civil rights movement: Black Power
movement v., 348, 419–25, 430, 434;
races within, 434
class(es): art v., 517–18; Black Freedom
Movement and, 489; Black Panther
party and, 457; BRC and, 592–99;
culture v., 330, 517–18; democracy v.,
158; economics and, 388; equality
and, 187–88; feminism and,
xxvii–xxviii, 523–28; gender/race and,
223; God v., 137–38; Herndon on,
281–88; income and, 387–88, 489;
Jackson on, 544–45; labor v., xxiv–xxv;
NAACP and, 221; within Negroes,
393; poetry and, 466–67; pride and,
253–55; of prison guards, 509–10;
race and, 158, 186–91, 214–16, 222,
229–31, 236–41, 253–55, 398, 491;
racism v., 121–22, 463–66;
segregation by, 187–88; wealth v.,
136–38; working, 188, 281–88. See
also bourgeoisie; Communist(s);
socialism
Cleage, Albert, 350
Cleaver, Eldridge, 450, 453–55
Clotel: or, The President’s Daughter
(Brown, W.), 63
coal miners, 290
collective identity, xxii
colonizationists, 44, 483–84; abolitionists
v., 143; Africa v., 607–10; Garnet as,
57; Negroes v., 147–48. See also
American Colonization Society
Colonization Society, 83n2. See also
American Colonization Society
colored children, 204; Southern white
women for, 169–71; white children v.,
186
colored men: colored women v., 161; for
labor, 175–76; as strike breakers,
188–89; white men v., 175–80, 185


--- PAGE 689 ---
colored people, 70; ambition and, 42; as
Americans, 31–32, 73; elective
franchise for, 76; ignorance of, 25–26,
27–32, 33n2; illustrious among, 41–42;
miseries of, 24–26; in New York,
268–72; proximity to, 177–80; against
slaves, 30–31; socialism for, 394
colored race: for resistance, 108–9;
Spanish language for, 73, 83n1
colored women, 165, 294; charity from,
167–68; colored men v., 161; devotion
of, to race, 167; disrespect for, 185;
experiences of, 183–86; intellectual
progress of, 166–67; labor and, 168;
morality of, 166; politics and, 168;
progress of, 166–69; Republican Party
and, 162–63; temperance and, 168;
wisdom of, 162
Combahee River Collective Statement:
background of, 502; beliefs of, 504–5;
problems of, 505–7
communication: for Black Panthers, 449;
segregation v., 336. See also education;
media
Communism, 222, 463–66; Che-
Lumumba Club as, 460–61; in NLF,
443; Pan-African movement v., 481;
segregation v., 365–66; Smith Act
against, 480; unions and, 224; Vietnam
v., 444n3
Communist(s), 480; within Black Power
movement, 350–51; Davis as, 460–63;
from Germany, 289–90, 294n1; Jones,
Claudia, as, 316–26; white chauvinism
of, 323–24; Winston as, 480–85
Communist Party: for change, 579–80;
convention of, 289–90; democracy in,
222; empowerment from, 285–88;
equality in, 286–87; Hudson and, 222,
288–94; Unemployment Council and,
285–87; white chauvinism in, 325–26;
women for, 325–26
Communist Party of the United States
(CPUSA), 480
community, 378; culture from, 327–28,
331; SNCC for, 419–20. See also black
community
The Condition, Elevation, Emigration,
and Destiny of the Colored People of
the United States, Politically
Considered (Delany), 70
Congress: apartheid and, 533–34; Lee,
Barbara, v., 613–18. See also Black
Radical Congress; Powell, Adam
Clayton, Jr.
Congressional Black Caucus, 351; and
presidential election 2000, 600
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE),
345; strategies of, 346
conservative behaviorists: liberal
structuralists v., 559–60; nihilism
from, 560; politics of conversion v.,
564; victimization and, 560–61
conservatives, within Black Power
movement, 349
Constitution: Bible v., 86–88, 105
constitution (state): disenfranchisement
and, 182–83; Reconstruction’s
revisions of, 181–82
Constitution (U. S.): 14th Amendment,
360–61; race and, 130, 233;
slaveholders v., 84–88, 105; slavery
and, 633; slaves and, 92, 102, 103–4,
105, 106; State v., 90. See also specific
amendments
Cooper, Anna Julia, xxvi, xxvii; as African-
American feminist, 120–21;
background of, 159; on black women,
159–65
Coppin, Fanny Jackson, 163
CORE. See Congress of Racial Equality
corporate market institutions, 562
Cosby, Bill: on Brown v., 618
cotton fields, 300; unions and, 302;
women in, 301–2
courts: injustice and, 232, 243–44;
Negroes and, 232; Niagra Movement
on, 210–11; oppression from, 461–63.
See also Supreme Court
CPUSA. See Communist Party of the
United States
crime: African Americans and, 575–76;
anti-crime hysteria v., 574–75; bill
against, 576; capitalism v., 571–80;
658 INDEX


--- PAGE 690 ---
INDEX 659
capital punishment v., 585; causes v.
cures, 571–80; in Chicago, 514;
against children, 520; drugs and, 573;
employment v., 572–73, 577–78; hip-
hop activists and, 603–5; media on,
571–72; personal responsibility v., 618;
poverty v., 492–93, 572–74; prisons v.,
587–91; race and, 185, 186, 470; rise
of, 571; welfare v., 576; white-collar,
574; women and, 507–13. See also
violence
Crisis, xxvii. See also Du Bois, W. E. B.
Crummell, Alexander: background of,
150; on humanity, 150–59
cultural nationalists, within Black Power
movement, 349
culture, 327–31, 392; of Africa, xxi–xxii,
10; of America, 326–31; class v., 330,
517–18; common, 220; from
community, 327–28, 331; corporate
market institutions v., 562; films as,
329; freedom songs as, 372–74; from
Harlem, 220, 253, 268–73; hip-hop as,
495–96, 603–6; Hughes for, 220;
multiculturalism as, 220, 567–68; from
oppression, xxi–xxii; Organization of
Afro-American Unity for, 417–18;
politics v., 505; pride in, 417; race and,
343, 428; Southern Negro Youth
Conference for, 307; theatre as, 255,
330. See also poetry
Daley, Richard, 494
dance, 328
Davis, Angela Y., xxv–xxvi, xxix, 461–63,
503; background on, 459–60; identity
of, 460
death: slavery v., 60–62. See also capital
punishment; lynching
Declaration of Independence, 91–92, 102;
capitalism v., 594–95; pride in, 630
Declaration of Rights of the Negro
Peoples of the World, 242–47
defense program: unemployment v., 312.
See also World War II
deindustrialization, employment v.,
489–90
Delany, Martin R., 71–83; background of,
70; for emigration, xxiii–xxiv; on
women, xxvi
democracy: BRC and, 596; class v., 158;
in Communist Party, 222; elections v.,
389–90; equality for, 156–57; facism
v., 283; freedom for, 156–57; humanity
as, 157; slavery v., 63–65, 142; for
South, 258–59; Truman
Administration v., 317; U. S. v.,
310–11, 386, 388; World War II v.,
311–13
Democracy Matters (West), 558
Democratic Party: for African Americans,
344; blacks for, 344; Civil Rights Bill
v., 406–7; Dixiecrats and, 431; MFDP
as, 395, 420, 536; support for, 471
Democrats, Dixiecrats v., 407
dialectic materialism, for Black Panthers,
450
discrimination, 242–47; American
Federation of Labor v., 275–76; in
arts, 326–31; conference against,
606–13; Good Neighbor policy v., 315;
for jobs, 257–58, 262, 298–300; in
military, 258, 312–13, 314–15; Niagra
Movement on, 211; in other countries,
143; over housing, 269–70; residential,
492; sexism and, 598; in Southern
states, 258–62; in Soviet Russia,
238–39, 240–41; unemployment and,
298–300; from unions, 365–71; World
War I and, 226–27. See also gender
discrimination; Montgomery bus
boycott; racism
disenfranchisement: in South, 389; World
War I and, 226
Dixiecrats, 407, 431
Dixon, Governor, 260
Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement
(DRUM), xxvi, 463–66
domestics, 318; children and, 303–4; self-
respect and, 304–5; unions for, 321–22
Domestic Workers Union, 322
Douglass, Frederick, 49, 83; background
of, 84; for black empowerment,
122–28; on black male rights, 117; on


--- PAGE 691 ---
Dred Scott, 93–106; on Fourth of
July, 85–88; on political freedom, 5–6;
on socialism, 386–95
dreams: of freedom, 380–82; of
integration, 381–82; Jackson for, 544;
of King, 380–82
Dreams From My Father (Obama),
635–36
drugs, 597, 605; crime and, 573; Jackson
on, 542; poverty and, 492–93; prison
and, 493; race and, 573–74
DRUM. See Dodge Revolutionary Union
Movement
Du Bois, W. E. B., xxv, xxix, 196–209;
background of, 195–96, 385–86;
criticism of, 225–26; Garvey, Marcus,
against, 221; harassment of, 386;
Washington, Booker T., v., 119–20; on
World War I, 224–25, 226–27. See
also Niagara Movement
Dukadis, Mike, 538–39
Dunbar-Nelson, Alice Moore:
background on, 264–65; on voting,
265–67
Dunbar, Paul Laurence: background of,
171; poetry of, 171–74
duty, 212
Dyson, Michael Eric: response to Bill
Cosby, 618–20
Early, Sarah Woodson Early, 163
Eastland, James, 397
Ebonics, 620
economic racism, 572–73, 635–36
economics, 344, 410; black women and,
317–18; class and, 388; equality and,
388; Organization of Afro-American
Unity and, 416; politics v., 387–88;
Rainbow Coalition and, 540–42
education, 169–70, 638, 640; about
Africa, 550; about slavery, 550;
Afrocentricity v., 546–52; on
apartheid, 532; for army, 261; BRC
for, 597; Brown v., 331–32, 343; in
classics, 78–79, 157; colonization v.,
44; control of, 415–16; Ebonics v.,
620; for elevation, 82, 176, 207, 210;
equality for, 366; Georgia Educational
League for, 169–70; for identity,
207–8, 446; Jim Crow v., 260–61; for
jobs, 578; for labor, 262; militarism in,
392; for military, 261; morality in, 169;
for Muslims, 402; in ‘Negro History,’
246; oppression and, 516;
Organization of Afro-American Unity
for, 415–16; for practicalities, 78; press
service for, 231; prisons v., 468,
587–90; for professions, 77–79,
110–11, 176; pro-human, 551–52;
racism in, 365; for reality, 208;
segregation v., 179, 331–32, 336, 343,
411–12, 622; society v., 547–52; for
teachers, 552; Tuskegee Institute for,
119; violence in, 365; of whites, 5; for
women, 79, 169–70; World War I and,
226. See also media
Eisenstein, Zilla, 502
elections: in Alabama, 421; democracy v.,
389–90; promises v., 405; in Vietnam,
444n3. See also black elected officials;
black suffrage; voting
elective franchise, for colored persons, 76
Ellis, Elaine, 300–302
emancipation: Jefferson on, 142; omens v.,
93; as socialism, 392–93; whites for, 5
Emancipation Proclamation, 333–34
Emerson, Irene, 89
emigration, 147; age v., 144; to Canada,
68–70; Central/South America/West
Indies for, 73–75, 77; Delany for,
xxiii–xxiv; to Liberia, 77, 83n2, 145;
Nicaragua/New Grenada for, 75–76;
organization for, 143–49; redemption
from, 74–75; reproduction v., 148;
South American States for, 74. See
also American Colonization Society;
Great Migration
employment, 308; crime v., 572–73,
577–78; deindustrialization v., 489–90;
demand of, 446; legislation for,
334–35. See also jobs; unemployment
empowerment: from Communist Party,
285–88; from
reform/resistance/renewal, xxii
660 INDEX


--- PAGE 692 ---
INDEX 661
England, 58
environment, 597, 604; inner cities as,
492. See also Hurricane Katrina
environmental racism, 607–8, 611
equality, 86, 155–58, 242–47, 307–8; call
for, 42, 45–46; in Central/South
America, 73, 83n2; class and, 187–88;
in Communist Party, 286–87; CORE
for, 345, 346; for democracy, 156–57;
differences and, 516–17, 521–22;
economics and, 388; for education,
366; illusion of, 187; between
labor/capital, 138; for Muslims, 403; in
Nicaragua/New Grenada, 75–76;
racial differences and, 201; self-efforts
for, 423–24; social, 177, 188; through
self-efforts, 72–73, 110; white men v.,
71–72. See also segregation laws;
socialism
Equiano, Olaudah, 5, 9–17; on Africa,
9–13; on beauty, 6; enslavement of,
13–14; journey of, 15–16; sale of, 16–17
eros, love as, 379
Ethiopia, poetry on, 171–72
ethnicity: Africa’s conflicts and, 611–12.
See also race(s)
Ethridge, Mark, 260
Eurocentricity, 548
Europe: in Africa, 140–41, 144–45;
America v., 235; Negroes in, 235;
racism in, 234–35
exploitation: Black Power v., 422;
capitalism and, 457; by employers,
274; race and, 215, 405, 436–38,
463–66; in Southern states, 596–97.
See also African Blood Brotherhood
Fair Employment Practices Committee,
308
faith: African-American spirituals for,
111–13; nonviolence as, 379; prayer
for, 614; prejudice v., 44–45; suffering
and, 381. See also Christians; God
Farmer, James, 346
Farrakhan, Louis, 350, 580–84;
background on, 580; black anti-
semitism and, 569; for march, 496
Faulkner, William, 635
Fauntroy, Walter, 495
fear: ambition v., 45; self-determination
v., 429; socialism v., 394. See also
intimidation
The Feminine Mystique (Friedan),
523–24
feminism: black men v., 506; class and,
xxvii–xxviii, 523–28; identity politics v.,
504; power v., 506–7; racism and,
524–28; Third World and, 506–7. See
also African-American feminist(s);
specific feminists
films, 329
Florida, in presidential election 2000,
600–602
Ford Revolutionary Union Movement
(FRUM), 463
Fortune, T. Thomas, xxiv, 137–38;
background of, 135–36
14th Amendment, 360–61
Fourth of July, slavery v., 84–88
Frazier, Demita, 502
Free African Society, 20
free blacks, 5; slavery v., 57; violence
against, 19
freedom, 87; in Africa, 233, 244; black
suffrage for, 206; collective identity v.,
xxii; dream of, 380–82; from England,
58; for Negroes, 206–7; with Obama,
501–2; opportunity v., 123; from
oppression, 377–78; Organization of
Afro-American Unity for, 413;
persecution v., xxix; in prison, 590–91;
responsibility for, 100; slavery v.,
58–59; songs of, 372–74; struggle for,
459; to travel, 245; women after,
319–20. See also Black Freedom
Movement
Freedom Farm Coop, 397–98
freemen: elevation of, 81–82; slaves v.,
80–82
Free South Africa Movement, 532–35
Freire, Paulo, 522
French Revolution, 137
Friedan, Betty, 523–24
Fruit of Islam, 402


--- PAGE 693 ---
FRUM. See Ford Revolutionary Union
Movement
Fugitive Slave Law, 68
Gage, France Dana, 66
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 378
Garnet, Henry Highland, 5, 58–62;
background of, 56–57
Garvey, Amy Euphemia Jacques, 223,
251–52
Garvey and Garveyism (Garvey, A.), 251
Garvey, Marcus, xxiv, xxix, 242–50;
background of, 241; against Du Bois,
221; harassment of, 222; against
NAACP , 221
Gary Convention, 351, 469–73
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr.: background of,
566; against black anti-semitism,
566–71
gender: BRC and, 593, 598; heterosexism
v., 520–21; inferiority and, 399–401;
power v., 519, 521–22; race and,
120–21, 161, 166, 251–52, 396–99,
502–7, 515–22; race/class and, 223; in
social theory, xxvi–xxvii; traditionalism
and, 506. See also feminism; women
gender discrimination, 598; in Black
Freedom movement, 347, 399–401
genocide: Africa and, 608–10. See also
Black Holocaust
geopolitics, white supremacy v., 344
Georgia, 129–32
Georgia Educational League, 169–70
Germany: America and, 152; Communist
from, 289–90, 294n1
G.I. Bill of Rights, 315
God: Africa v., 140–41; brotherhood
from, 156; class v., 137–38; justice v.,
27; legislature v., 129–31; race and,
148–49, 153, 158; responsibilities
from, 581–82, 619; slavery and, 26–27,
29–30, 86; Supreme Court v., 95. See
also religion
Good Neighbor policy, discrimination v.,
315
Gore, Al, 600–602
government: conspiracy of, 407–8;
personal responsibilities v., 629;
protest against, 439–44; treason v.,
124–25. See also elections; legislature;
Rainbow Coalition; specific laws,
government officials
Gray, Fred, 355–56
Gray, Thomas, 34
Great Depression, 221–22, 275–79;
unemployment during, 273–74;
women during, 300–306
Great Migration: Briggs, Cyril V ., on,
229–30; from injustices, 232; from
South, 219–20, 270, 274; for
urbanization, 220
GrimkÈ, Charlotte Forten, 163
gun control, 577–78
Haiti, 137
Hall, Prince: background of, 17–18;
Masonic lodge by, 6–7, 18; speech by,
18–19
Hamer, Fannie Lou, xxvii–xxviii, xxix;
background of, 395–96; Freedom
Farm Coop, 397–98
Hamilton, Charles, 419
Hampton, Fred, xxix; background of, 456;
on Black Power, 456–59; on racism, 350
Hannibal, 29
Harlem, 220; appearance of, 268;
characteristics of, 271–72; culture
from, 220, 253, 268–73; as
experiment, 220; jobs in, 298–300;
peace in, 272. See also Powell, Adam
Clayton, Jr.
Harlem Renaissance, 220
Harper, Frances Watkins, 163
Harris, Abram L.: background on, 273;
on Great Depression, 273–79; on
radicalism, 222
Harrison, Hubert Henry, xxiv, xxv;
background of, 213; black nationalism
for, 122, 213–16; on World War I,
225–26
Hayes, Roland, 258, 260
health care, 595, 607, 638–39;
pregnancy/birth and, 301
Hellman, Lillian, 527
Herndon, Angelo, xxix; background on,
281; on working class, 281–88
662 INDEX


--- PAGE 694 ---
INDEX 663
heterosexism, 520–21
Hill, Anita, 552–58
hip-hop activists, 495–96, 606; crime and,
603–5; law and, 603; peace from,
604–5; pledge from, 604–5; for
reparations, 603
Hip-Hop Summit Action Network
(HSAN), 603
Hispanics, 583
history, 246; NOI v., 568; race and,
153–54, 197–99; race-problems and,
150–51; segregation and, 333–34;
women and, 316–20
Ho Chi Minh, 441, 443, 444n3
Holocaust, African Holocaust v., 550–51
Holt Street Baptist Church, 358
hooks, bell, 524–28; background on, 523
hope: Jackson for, 544–45; jobs for,
578–79; nihilism v., 562–63; River
Hudson for, 590–91
housing, 11; discrimination over, 269–70;
legislation for, 335
Houston, Charles Hamilton, 223;
background on, 314; on military,
314–15
HSAN. See Hip-Hop Summit Action
Network
Hudson, Hosea: background on, 288;
Communist Party and, 222, 288–94
Hughes, Langston, 254–62; background
of, 253; for black culture, 220; poetry
of, 263–64
Human Brotherhood, doctrine of, 197
Human Genome Project, 596
humanity: progress and, 247–48; white
supremacy v., 582–83
human nature, capitalism v., 387
human rights: apartheid v., 530–31; BRC
for, 593–99. See also civil rights; Abu-
Jamal, Mumia
Hurricane Katrina, 498–99; background
on, 623–24; poverty and, 624–26;
violence and, 624–26
The Iceman Inheritance: Prehistoric
Sources of Western Man’s Racism,
Sexism, and Aggression (Bradley), 
567
identity: collective, xxii; of Davis, 460;
education for, 207–8, 446; integration
of, 520; race and, 203; unity for, 201.
See also feminism
identity politics, black feminists v., 504
ignorance: of colored people, 25–26,
27–32, 33n2. See also education
immigrants, Negroes v., 257
imperialism: in Africa, 482–83; for
America, 390; missionaries for, 483;
race and, 464–65
income, 392; class and, 387–88, 489. See
also poverty
independence: of America v. slaves,
84–88; apartheid v., 531–32; apings v.,
249–50; Declaration of Independence
v., 91–92, 102; martyrs for, 311; of
Vietnam, 441, 444n1
inequality, 242–47, 307–8; in punishment,
86
inferiority: citizenship v., 90–92, 363, 375;
gender and, 399–401; for oppression,
126; race and, 125–26, 240, 425; in
segregation, 178–79; self-respect v.,
296–97, 377; slavery and, 3; socialism
and, 189. See also white supremacy
injustice, 185, 242–47; Black Power
movement v., 434; courts and, 232,
243–44; to Negro physicians, 246; of
segregation, 177–80; World War I
and, 226–27. See also lynching;
segregation
inner cities, 492
integration: blackness v., 422–23; dreams
of, 381–82; of identity, 520; for
military, 308–10; morality and, 335;
principles for, 338–39; progress for,
332–33. See also segregation
integrationalists: black nationalists v.,
347–48; goal of, xxiii
integrationism, xxii–xxiii; black-nationalist
tradition v., xxiii–xxiv
integrationists, liberal, 345
The Interesting Narrative of the Life of
Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vasa,
the African, Written by Himself
(Equiano), 9
International Labor Defense, 280–81


--- PAGE 695 ---
intimidation: race and, 425; by White
Citizens Councils, 365
Islam, 139. See also specific Islamic
organizations, persons
Jackson, Jesse, 494, 535–46, 564; on
apartheid, 529–32; background of,
535–36; on class, 544–45; on drugs,
542; for hope, 544–45; on leadership,
542–43, 566–67
Jamal, Mumia Abu-, 584–85
jazz, 256–57
Jefferson, Thomas, 581; on emancipation,
142
Jews: as allies, 569–70; Anti-Defamation
League from, 624. See also black anti-
semitism
Jim Crow: cars for, 211, 242, 259–63;
characteristics of, 257–63, 550;
education v., 260–61; march against,
308–13; in New York, 259; violence
over, 260; in Washington, 259, 262.
See also lynching
jobs, 270–71; for actors/musicians,
327–31; discrimination for, 257–58,
262, 298–300; education for, 578; in
Harlem, 298–300; for hope, 578–79;
for women, 325. See also unions
Johnson, Frank M., 360–61
Johnson, James Weldon: background of,
267–68; on Harlem, 220
Johnson, Lyndon B., 406–7, 413, 418n2
Johnstone, Peter W., 89
Jones, Claudia, xxvii, xxix; background on,
316; on Negro women, 316–26; as
radical feminist, 223
Jones, Everett Leroi. See Baraka, Amiri
Jordan, June, 554–58
justice: black juries for, 447; God v., 27;
King for, 346. See also injustice;
Supreme Court
Kantrowitz, Melanie Kaye, 569
Kennedy, John, 538
Kerry, John, 629
King, Martin Luther, Jr., xxiii, xxv, xxix;
background of, 377; dreams of,
380–82; for justice, 346; on mutuality,
570; nonviolence from, 346, 377–79;
on Vietnam, 438–45
knowledge: in Africa, 42; practice v., 458;
rebellion v., 39–40
Koch, Edward, 575
Korean War, 405, 409
Ku Klux Klan, 219; NAACP v., 362. See
also lynching
labor: AFL for, 275–76; in Africa, 12;
capital from, 137; capitalists v.,
136–38, 187–91, 213–16, 278;
children for, 301; class v., xxiv–xxv;
colored men for, 175–76; colored
women and, 168; education for, 262;
equality/capital and, 138; Negro
women in, 317–18; parenting v.,
621–22; politics v., 175; progressives
and, 273–79; race and, 343–44;
Republican Party and, 278; skilled v.
unskilled, 277; southern workers as,
183–91; women and, 317–18, 320–21.
See also capitalism; unions
labor relations: race and, 133–35, 189–91;
white supremacy in, 190–91
language, Ebonics as, 620
law(s), 68, 232; for employment, 334–35;
gun control as, 577–78; Herndon v.,
281–88; hip-hop and, 603; for
housing, 335; interpretation of, 101;
lynching v., 192–95; natural, 196–97;
Scottsboro Trials v., 279–81;
segregation and, 177–81, 331–39;
selective enforcement of, 573–74,
575–76, 608; Socialist Party v.,
291–93; Southern states v., 366–67,
377. See also legislature; police
brutality; Supreme Court; specific
laws
law of attainder, slavery v., 102
Lawson, James, 346–47
leadership: apings v., 249–50; in Black
Freedom movement, 347; cynicism
and, 565; as enemies, 286; failure in,
564–65; Jackson, Jesse, on, 542–43,
566–67; locality for, 565; lynching for,
664 INDEX


--- PAGE 696 ---
INDEX 665
293–94; NAACP and, 296; Southern
Negro Youth Conference for, 306–8;
UNIA and, 249–50. See also Southern
Christian Leadership Conference
League of Revolutionary Black Workers,
351, 463–66
Lee, Barbara, 613–17
Lee, Spike, 624
legislation. See law(s)
legislature: God v., 129–31; racism in,
129–32, 364. See also black elected
officials
lesbians: Lorde as, 515–22. See also
Combahee River Collective Statement
Lewis, John R., xxv, xxix, 347; background
of, 383; censorship of, 384, 385n1;
against Civil Rights Bill, 384–85; on
police brutality, 384, 385nn1–2
liberal integrationism, 348–49
liberal integrationists, 345
liberal structionalism, 564
liberal structuralists, conservative
behaviorists v., 559–60
liberation. See freedom
Liberia: Blyden for, 139–49; description
of, 145–47; emigration to, 77, 83n2,
145
“Lift Every Voice and Sing,” 267
literacy: for slaves, 4, 39–40, 58. See also
education
literature, 257; propaganda v., 234; race
and, 255–56. See also specific books
locality, for leadership, 565
Lorde, Audre, 515–22; background of,
515–16
love: of brotherhood, 583–84; as
eros/philia/agape, 379; nonviolence as,
371, 379
love ethic, 563
lynching, 118; causes for, 193; federal
power v., 194; Illinois and, 193; laws
v., 192–95; for leadership, 293–94;
NAACP and, 621–22; Negro women
against, 266; newspapers and, 194;
politics of, 192; race and, 192–95;
remedies for, 193–94; Southern white
women v., 192–93; unions and,
293–94; U. S. Senate Resolution
against, 621–23; Wells-Barnett on,
192–95; women against, 266; World
War I and, 226
Malcolm X, xxiv, xxv, xxix; background of,
404; ballot v. bullet for, 404–13;
Organization of Afro-American Unity,
413–18; policies of, 347–48; religion
of, 404. See also Organization of Afro-
American Unity
marches: against Jim Crow, 308–13;
violence v., 310–11
March on Washington Movement (1941),
308–14; demands for, 313
marriage: denial of, 46–47. See also
women
Marshall, Thurgood, 331–32
Masonic lodge, 6–7, 18
McCarthyism, 224
McKay, Claude, 227–28; as celebrity,
236–38; poetry of, 227–28, 238; on
Soviet Russia, 234–41
McKissick, Floyd, xxv, 435–38;
background of, 435–36
media, 329, 611; capitalism and, 390–91;
on crime, 571–72; films as, 329;
newspapers as, 194; press service as,
231; Thomas-Hill and, 553–54
men. See black men, colored men, white
men
Methodists: against slavery, 104. See also
African Methodist Episcopal (AME)
Church
MFDP . See Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party
MIA. See Montgomery Improvement
Association
militancy: of ABB, 228–29; among Negro
women, 316; among women, 316,
320–21; anger for, 419; McKay for,
227–28; within SNCC, 371
militarism: in education, 392; race v., 440
military, 246; discrimination in, 258,
312–13, 314–15; education for, 261;
exemption from, 446–47; Houston on,
314–15; integration for, 308–10;


--- PAGE 697 ---
segregation in, 336–37; in Soviet
Russia, 238–39. See also World War I;
World War II
Million Man March, 496, 580–84
The Mis-education of the Negro
(Woodson), 546–47
missionaries, 483
Mississippi, 396–99; poverty in, 397–98
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP), 395, 420, 536
Montez, Pedro, 52–56
Montgomery Advertiser, 358
Montgomery bus boycott, 352–61;
Abernathy for, 358; 14th Amendment
and, 360–61; organization of, 353,
355–59; pride from, 357–58;
Robinson, Jo Ann, on, 353–61;
Supreme Court on, 361; White
Citizens Councils and, 365–66
Montgomery Improvement Association
(MIA), 367–68
morality: of America, 411, 440–41; for
Black Panthers, 448, 449; capitalism
v., 391–92; corporate market
institutions v., 562; in education, 169;
integration and, 335; of Negroes, 203;
politics v., 543; responsibility for,
416–17; sexual abuse v., 552–58;
slavery v., 333; of transformation,
470–73; Vietnam War v., 439–44;
women for, 159–60, 166
Morrison, Toni, 563
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick, 575
Muhammad, Elijah, 347; background of,
401–2; on Muslims, 402–3
multiculturalism: black anti-semitism v.,
567–68; definition of, 548–49
music: jazz as, 256–57; Negroes and, 255,
327–31; songs as, 111–13, 372–74
musicians, jobs for, 327–31
Muslims: beliefs of, 402–3; demands of,
402; education for, 402; equality for,
403; Muhammad on, 402–3. See also
specific Muslims, Muslim
organizations
mythical norm, 517
NAACP . See National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
NACW. See National Association of
Colored Women
The Narrative of Hosea Hudson
(Painter), 288
Narrative of the Life of Frederick
Douglass (Douglass), 83
Narrative of William Wells Brown, A
Fugitive Slave (Brown, W.), 63
The Nation, 614–18
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 119–20; Bethune to, 223,
295–98; class and, 221; criticism of,
364; Garvey, Marcus, against, 221;
Houston for, 223; Ku Klux Klan v.,
362; leadership and, 296; lynching
and, 621–23; SNCC v., 427; Wilkins
to, 362–67
National Association of Colored Women
(NACW), 165, 294
National Black Feminist Organization
(NBFO), 502, 503
National Black Independent Political
Party (NBIPP), 496–97
National Black Political Convention
(Gary Convention), 470–73; agenda
of, 351; background of, 469
National Black United Front (NBLU),
496–97
National Colored Labor Union, 121;
convention’s document from, 132–35
National Federation of Afro-American
Women, 165–66
nationalists, white, 429
National Liberation Front (NLF),
442–43; Communism in, 443
Nation of Islam (NOI): black anti-
semitism from, 567–68; history v., 568;
for separatism, 347. See also
Farrakhan, Louis; Muslims
Native Americans, 583
natural law, 196–97
NBFO. See National Black Feminist
Organization
666 INDEX


--- PAGE 698 ---
INDEX 667
NBIPP . See National Black Independent
Political Party
NBLU. See National Black United Front
Negroes, 389; Africans v., 409;
amalgamation of, 153, 154–55;
Americans v., 200–201, 205–6, 208–9;
arrival of, 152–53; classes within, 393;
colonizationists v., 147–48; control of,
363; country for, 248–49; courts and,
232; culture of, 392; Democratic Party
and, 431; Dixiecrats and, 431; in
Europe, 235; familiarity of, 175–76;
freedom for, 206–7; ideals for, 208–9;
immigrants v., 257; injustice for, 185;
insecurity of, 184; for jobs, 270–71; in
military, 246; morality of, 203; music
and, 255, 327–31; against ‘nigger,’ 244;
numbers of, in unions, 277;
organizations for, 201; organization v.,
425, 426; poetry and, 253–54, 256; as
problem, 204; propaganda against,
234–35; race identity for, 203; races
to, 196; representation for, 243–44;
residences for, 184–85; self-
consciousness of, 205; Sen Katayama
for, 236; slavery’s preservation of, 141;
socialism and, 386–95; Soviet Russia
and, 238–41; state constitutions and,
181–83; unity among, 247; wage slaves
v. chattel slaves, 187, 213–16;
Washington, Booker T., and, 181–82,
183; without absorption, 199–200;
women’s suffrage and, 324. See also
African Americans
Negro sociology, 202–3
Negro women. See women
neoliberalism, socialism v., 490–91
New Grenada, 75–76
New Orleans, 498–99
newspapers: lynching and, 194. See also
specific newspapers
Newton, Huey P ., xxv, 447–56;
background of, 445–46
New York: colored people in, 268–72;
“white flight” from, 269–70
New York Tribune, 133–35
Ngo Dihn Diem, 444n3
Niagara Movement, 209, 213; for black
pride, 119–20; on courts, 210–11;
demands from, 210–12; on
discrimination, 211; on oppression,
211–12; on public opinion, 211; on
unions, 211
Nicaragua, 75–76
Nichols, John, 614–17
Nichols, Lee, 337
nihilism: anger and, 563; for black
America, 558–65; black elected
officials v., 564; buffers against, 561;
from conservative behaviorists, 560;
criminal behavior and, 562; definition
of, 561; hope v., 562–63; politics of
conversion v., 564
9/11, 613–14; racism from, 498
Nixon, E. D., 358
Nixon, Richard, 336
NLF. See National Liberation Front
NOI. See Nation of Islam
nonviolence: for “beloved community,”
378; cowardice v., 378; against evil v.
persons, 378; as faith, 379; from King,
346, 377–79; as love, 371, 379; as
revolution, 384–85; SCLC for, 368;
SNCC for, 371; Vietnam War v., 440;
violence v., 378. See also civil
disobedience
nonviolent resistance. See nonviolence
North Carolina, 39–40
Northrup, Solomon, 49–51
North Vietnam, 443
nuclear technology, apartheid and, 531
Obama, Barack, 627; on anger, 635–36;
on Brown v., 635; on church, 632–33,
638; family of, 628, 631–32; freedom
with, 501–2; keynote address from,
628–30; on parenting, 628; post-racial
America with, 500, 637–40;
presidential campaign of, 627–28; as
presidential candidate, 630–41; race
v., 499–502, 632–33


--- PAGE 699 ---
Operation PUSH, 494, 535
opportunity/ies: black suffrage for,
127–28, 210; freedom v., 123;
Reconstruction for, 117–18; sin v., 43;
for women, 164
oppression, 242–47; BRC against,
592–99; from courts, 461–63; culture
from, xxi–xxii; education and, 516;
freedom from, 377–78; inferiority for,
126; Niagra Movement on, 211–12;
servility under, 82–83; sexism v.,
524–25; sexual, 503–7; social/political
theory from, xxi–xxii; in Spain, 26–27;
Walker on, 26–27. See also African
Blood Brotherhood; persecution;
slavery
organization(s): of African-American
workers, 121–22; for black politics,
469–73; for development, 248–49; for
emigration, 143–49; of Montgomery
bus boycott, 353, 355–59; Negroes v.,
425, 426; of slaveholders, 94; of
SNCC, 427–28; women in, 320. See
also specific organizations
Organization of Afro-American Unity,
413–18; culture for, 417–18;
economics and, 416; for education,
415–16; for freedom, 413; politics and,
416; for self-control, 413–18; for self-
defense, 414–15; social responsibility
for, 416–17; for unity, 413–14
Painter, Nell Irvin, 288
Pan-African movement, 394;
Communism v., 481
Pan-African party, 474
parenting: children v., 617–18; Obama
on, 628
Parks, Rosa: arrest of, 353–54, 355;
background of, 352
paternalism, 400
patriarchy, capitalism v., 504–7
Payton, Philip A., 269
peace: change and, 534–35; in Harlem,
272; from hip-hop activists, 604–5;
race and, 155; struggle for, 325–26.
See also Vietnam War; violence; World
War I; World War II
The Pedogogy of the Oppressed (Freire),
522
Pentiment (Hellman), 527
People United to Save Humanity. See
Operation PUSH
persecution: in church, 21–22; freedom
v., xxix. See also slavery; violence
personal responsibility: crime v., 618; for
destiny, 637; government v., 629;
victimization v., 618–20
personal responsibility, institutional
racism v., 618–20
philia, love as, 379
pledge: from hip-hop activists, 604–5;
against violence, 584
Plessy v. Ferguson, 332
Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and
Moral (Wheatley), 8
poetry: of Baraka, 478–79; of Brown,
William, 64, 65; class and, 466–67; of
Dunbar, 171–74; on Ethiopia, 171–72;
of Harper, 163; of Hughes, 263–64; by
McKay, 227–28, 238; Negroes and,
253–54, 256; pride and, 171–73; prose
v., 517; rap as, 495–96; on slavery,
171–73; by Wheatley, 7–8. See also
songs
polarization, Black Power movement v.,
423
police brutality: Lewis on, 384,
385nn1–2; self-defense v., 447
politicalization, prisons and, 619–20
politicians: prophet v., 143; thinkers/doers
v., 161. See also specific politicians
politics: coalition, Black Power and,
430–35; colored women and, 168;
culture v., 505; economics v., 387–88;
geopolitics as, 344; identity, 504; labor
v., 175; of lynching, 192; manipulation
in, 161–62; morality v., 543;
organization for, 469–73; Organization
of Afro-American Unity and, 416;
women in, 324. See also black elected
officials
politics of conversion, 563–64;
conservative behaviorists v., 564;
liberal structionalism v., 564; nihilism
v., 564
668 INDEX


--- PAGE 700 ---
INDEX 669
poverty, 392; in Africa, 530; capital
punishment and, 585–86; crime v.,
492–93, 572–74; drugs and, 492–93;
Hurricane Katrina and, 623–26; in
inner cities, 492; in Mississippi,
397–98; parenting v., 619–23; race v.,
81, 393, 408–9, 424, 436
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 222;
background on, 298; as black elected
official, 298–300
power: empowerment as, xxii, 285–88;
federal, 194; feminism v., 506–7;
gender v., 519, 521–22; mythical norm
and, 517; of people, 456–59; political,
420–23, 463–66; of voting, 409–10.
See also Black Power; Black Power
movement
prayer, 614
pregnancy/birth, 318; health care and,
301
prejudice, 200; discouragement from,
207–8; faith v., 44–45; war from, 390
Presbyterian Church, 104
presidential election 2000, 600–2
press service, 231
pride: in appearance, 110; class and,
253–55; in culture, 417; in
Declaration of Independence, 631;
Farrakhan for, 496; from Montgomery
bus boycott, 357–58; Niagara
Movement for, 119–20; poetry and,
171–73; UNIA for, 250
prison(s): Attica, 466–68; black
community v., 511; building of, 589;
as businesses, 587–89; crime v.,
587–91; demands for, 576–77; drugs
and, 493; education v., 468, 587–90;
as escape, 510–11; freedom in,
590–91; guards in, 509–10; in New
York state, 586–91; politicalization
and, 619–20; races in, 577; racism in,
466–68; religion and, 586–88;
revolution v., 510; Scottsboro Trials v.,
279–81; Sing Sing, 586–91; slavery v.,
467–68, 510–11, 589–90; violence v.,
577; Winston in, 480–81; women in,
507–13. See also Abu-Jamal, Mumia;
Shakur, Assata
progress: of Anglo-Saxons, 247–48; for
black elected officials, 334; in
Chicago, 494; of colored women,
166–69; doubts about, 408; exposition
on, 175–77; humanity and, 247–48;
for integration, 332–33; intellectual, of
colored women, 166–67; lack of,
432–34; lack of, for black nationalism,
432–33; philanthropy for, 177; from
self-efforts, 72–73, 110, 423–24;
transformation for, 470–73; WPA for,
288
progressives: labor and, 273–79;
radicalism of, 222–23; radicals v.,
222–24
propaganda: literature v., 234; against
Negroes, 234–35
prophets: politicians v., 143; race and,
149
protection: Organization of Afro-
American Unity for, 414–15; self-, of
Southern white women, 170; self-,
weapons for, 412–13, 418n4. See also
law(s)
protest(s): against apartheid, 495, 533–35;
against government, 439–44; against
“Jim Crow” cars, 211; movements for,
222–23; against segregation, 245
punishment: inequality in, 86. See also
capital punishment
Quakers, 3
Quayle, Dan, 575
race(s): against absorption, 199–200;
alliances for, 431–32; amalgamation of,
154; Americans and, 405–6;
appearance v., 81, 196–97; for art,
254–55; in baseball, 426; capital
punishment and, 585–86; caste v.,
214–15; children and, 204; within civil
rights movement, 434; class and, 158,
186–91, 214–16, 222, 229–31, 236–41,
253–55, 398, 491; Constitution and,
130, 233; crime and, 185, 186, 470;
culture and, 343, 428; definition of,
197; destiny of, 150–54; distinction
between, 198–99; drugs and, 573–74;


--- PAGE 701 ---
economy and, 344; equality and,
155–58; exploitation and, 215, 405,
436–38, 463–66; gender and, 120–21,
161, 166, 251–52, 396–99, 502–7,
515–22; gender/class and, 223; God
and, 148–49, 153, 158; history and,
153–54, 197–99; Human Brotherhood
and, 197; identity and, 203;
imperialism and, 464–65; inferiority
and, 125–26, 240, 425; instinct v., 148;
intimidation and, 425; labor and,
343–44; labor relations and, 133–35,
189–91; literature and, 255–56;
messages of, 199, 203; militarism v.,
440; names of, 198; within nations,
150–51; natural law and, 196–97; to
Negroes, 196; Obama v., 499–502,
634–35; peace and, 155; physical
differences between, 198–99; political
ideas/practices and, 122; poverty v., 81,
393, 408–9, 424, 436; preservation of,
153–54; in prisons, 577; prophets and,
149; Reconstruction and, 130;
representation and, 425; of servants,
80; social equilibrium between, 203;
socialism and, 121–22, 189; social
sphere and, 155; solidarity among, 599;
southern worker and, 183–91; in Soviet
Russia, 237; spiritual/social differences
and, 199; unions and, 133–35, 189–91,
229–30; urbanization and, 198–99;
voting and, 406; Wisconsin and, 153;
women and, 5, 461–62, 518–20; in
women’s studies courses, 518–19; in
world, 543
Race Matters (West), 558
racism, 242–47, 428; after World War I,
219, 227; Black Holocaust as, 606–8;
blame for, 436–37; capitalism v.,
470–73; class v., 121–22, 463–66;
economic, 572–73; in education, 365;
environmental, 607–8, 611; in
Europe, 234–35; feminism and,
524–28; in Georgia, 129–32;
Hampton on, 350; heritage of,
568–69; Hurricane Katrina and,
498–99; institutional, personal
responsibility v., 618–23; “laissez
faire,” 492; in legislature, 129–32,
364; from 9/11, 498; in prisons,
466–68; satisfaction v., 381; sexism
and, 552–58; in society, 424–25;
solidarity v., 457; in Southern states,
117–18, 124–25, 129–32, 363–67; of
white nationalists, 429; white women’s
movement and, 507
radicalism: Harris on, 222; McCarthyism
against, 224; progressives v., 222–24.
See also Black Radical Congress;
specific radicals
Rainbow Coalition, 494–95, 535; for
common ground, 537–40; economics
and, 540–42; for unity, 536–46
RAM. See Revolutionary Action
Movement
Randolph, A. Philip, xxiii, 222;
background on, 308
rap artists, 495–96
Reagan administration: social services v.,
491; South Africa v., 495
Reagan, Ronald, 490, 532–33
rebellion: knowledge v., 39–40; for
Negroes, 436–37. See also specific
rebellions
Reconstruction, 334; black urban workers
during, 132–35; for opportunities,
117–18; race and, 130; state
constitutions’ revisions for, 181–82
“Red Summer of 1919,” 219
reform, xxii
relief, during unemployment, 281–84
Religion and the Pure Principles of
Mortality, the Sure Foundation on
Which We Must Build (Stewart),
40–41
religions, 638; prisons and, 586–88;
against slavery, 104. See also church;
Crummell, Alexander; Turner, Henry
McNeal; specific churches, religions,
religious organizations
religious nationalists, 349–50
reparations, 598–99, 610, 612; hip-hop
for, 603
repatriation: black nationalism as, 118;
Pan-African party v., 474. See also
emigration
670 INDEX


--- PAGE 702 ---
INDEX 671
representation: Black Power and, 421–22;
for Negroes, 243–44; race and, 425.
See also black elected officials; black
suffrage
Republican Party: colored women and,
162–63, 266; labor and, 278; Negro
women for, 266; in Southern states,
162–63
resistance, xxii; African-American
spirituals for, 111–13; Afrocentricity
and, 549; colored race for, 108–9; to
slavery, 4–5, 58–62, 107; submission
v., 107; white men for, 108–9. See also
specific rebellions
respect, 248. See also pride
restitution, for slavery, 446
revolt: on Amistad, 51–56, 61. See also
specific rebellions
revolution, 351, 463–66; consciousness
and, 455; DRUM for, xxvi, 463–66;
French, 137; FRUM for, 463; guns v.,
452–53; justification of, 437; Lewis
and, 347; nonviolence as, 384–85; as
process, 451–52; women in, 461–62;
women prisoners v., 510
Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM),
450
revolutionary nationalists: within Black
Power movement, 350–51;
marginalization of, 496–97; NBIPP as,
496–97; NBLU as, 496–97. See also
Malcolm X
rights: black activists and, 426; erosion of,
118; Turner, Henry, for, 117–18. See
also civil rights; human rights
Riker’s Island Correctional Institution for
Women, 507–13
Rising Son: or, The Antecedents and
Advancement of the Colored Race
(Brown, W.), 63
River Hudson, 590–91
Rives, Richard T., 360–61
Robeson, Paul, xxix; background on,
326–27; harassment of, 224
Robinson, Jo Ann: background of, 352;
on Montgomery bus boycott, 354–61;
Montgomery bus boycott letter from,
353
Robinson, Randall, 495, 532–35;
background on, 529
Rockefeller, Nelson, 466–67
Rock, John S., 107–11; background of,
107
Roman Catholic Church, 140
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 294; for Fair
Employment Practices Committee,
308
Ruffin, Josephine St. Pierre: background
of, 165–66; to Georgia’s white women,
169–71
Ruiz, Jose, 52–56
Russell, Samuel, 89
Rustin, Bayard, 348, 430–34; background
of, 419
Sanford, Alex, 89
satyagraha (truth force), 368
schools, segregation of, 179, 331–32, 336,
343, 411–12
SCLC. See Southern Christian
Leadership Conference
Scott, Dred: background of, 88–89; court
case, 88–106, 333; Douglass on,
93–106; petition of, 89
Scottsboro Trials, 279–81; background
on, 279–80
Second Amendment, 412, 418n4
The Secret Relationship Between Blacks
and Jews, 568
segregation: in Alabama, 260; Brown v.
against, 343; by class, 187–88;
communication v., 336; Communism
v., 365–66; as control, 412; cost of,
335; de facto, 184–86; education v.,
179, 331–32, 336, 343, 411–12, 622;
history and, 333–34; inferiority in,
178–79; injustice of, 177–80; as law,
331–39; laws and, 177–81, 331–39; in
military, 336–37; pressure v., 338;
principles against, 338–39; protest
against, 245; proximity and, 178, 179;
of schools, 331–32, 336; SCLC and,
369–70; slavery v., 336; for socialism,
393; in unions, 275–76; in
Washington, 337–38. See also
apartheid; Jim Crow


--- PAGE 703 ---
segregation laws, 331–39; demand for,
177–78; residences and, 178–79;
Washington, Booker T., on, 177–81
self-efforts, progress from, 72–73, 110,
423–24
self-reliance, 248
self-respect: domestics and, 304–5;
inferiority v., 296–97, 377
Sen Katayama, for Negroes, 236
separatism, 347
servants: race of, 80. See also domestics
sexism, 503–7, 567; discrimination and,
598; oppression v., 524–25; racism
and, 552–58. See also heterosexism
sexual abuse, 319; morality v., 552–58;
rape as, 279–81; Thomas and, 552–58
Shakur, Assata, 497; background of,
507–8
sharecropping, 118
Simmons, Russell, 496, 603
Simons, Arthur, 203–4
Simpson, O. J., 585
sin: opportunity v., 43. See also morality
Sing Sing Prison, 586–91
sisterhood, women’s movement v., 517
slaveholders: Bible/Constitution v.,
84–88, 105; organization of, 94. See
also Southern states
slavery: in Africa, 12, 13; for agriculture,
3–4; assimilation v., 142; avarice and,
26; as Black Holocaust, 606–8; Brown,
William, on, 63–65; Christians v.,
57–58; citizenship v., 90–92;
constitutionality of, 103, 106;
Constitution (U. S.) and, 633; death v.,
60–62; democracy v., 63–65, 142;
education about, 550; founding
fathers against, 105; Fourth of July v.,
84–88; free colored people v., 57;
freedom v., 58–59; free states v.,
88–106; God and, 26–27, 29–30, 86;
inferiority and, 3; law of attainder v.,
102; Methodists against, 104; morality
v., 333; for Negroes’ preservation, 141;
in other countries, 64; poetry on,
171–73; Presbyterian Church against,
104; present-day, 610, 612; prison v.,
467–68, 510–11, 589–90; religions
against, 104; resistance and, 4–5,
58–62, 107; restitution for, 446;
segregation v., 336; settlements of, 95;
socialism and, 213–16; of Spartans, 28;
stability of, 93; St. Louis against, 98;
submission to, 58; Supreme Court on,
95–96, 101; treaties and, 52–56; wage
slaves v., 187, 213–16; Walker on,
26–33; Washington, G., against, 105;
women and, 318–20. See also
abolitionists; Brown, William Wells
slaves: America’s independence v., 84–88;
Amistad v., 51–56, 61; Anglo-Saxons
as, 247; for Canadian emigration,
68–70; in Colonies, 91; colored people
against, 30–31; Constitution and, 92,
102, 103–4, 105, 106; Declaration of
Independence v., 91–92, 102; freemen
v., 80–82; literacy for, 4, 39–40, 58; as
men, 86–87; miseries of, 25–26; rights
of, 90; selling of, 4, 16–17, 47–51;
violence and, 30, 31, 97–98; wage v.
chattel, 187, 213–16. See also
Douglass, Frederick; Equiano,
Olaudah; Garnet, Henry Highland;
Hall, Prince; Northrup, Solomon;
Scott, Dred; Truth, Sojourner; Turner,
Nat; Washington, Booker T.;
Wheatley, Phillis
Smith Act, 480
Smith, Barbara, 502
Smith, Beverly, 502
SNCC. See Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee
socialism, 121–22, 189; for America,
391–95; capitalism v., 388–89; for
change, 579–80; for colored people,
394; Douglass on, 386–95;
emancipation as, 392–93; fear v., 394;
inferiority and, 189; Negroes and,
386–95; neoliberalism v., 490–91;
segregation for, 393; slavery and,
213–16; spread of, 386–87; voting for,
395. See also African Blood
Brotherhood; Communism; Harrison,
Hubert Henry; Robeson, Paul
672 INDEX


--- PAGE 704 ---
INDEX 673
Socialist Party, 291–93
social philosophy, 410–11
social responsibility, 416–17. See also civil
rights
social services, 491. See also relief;
welfare
social theory: gender in, xxvi–xxvii; from
oppression, xxi–xxii; practice v., xxviii
society: education v., 547–52; regulation
of, 70–71
songs: African-American spirituals as,
111–13; of freedom, 372–74
Soul City, 434–35
The Soul of Politics (Wallis), 589
The Souls of Black Folk (Du Bois), 196;
excerpts from, 203–4
South: black migration from, 219–20,
270, 274; democracy for, 258–59;
disenfranchisement in, 389. See also
Southern states
South Africa: conference in, 606–13;
Reagan administration v., 495; U. S.
and, 484–85. See also apartheid
South America: colored majority in,
73–74; for emigration, 73–75, 77;
equality in, 73, 83n2
Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC), xxiii, xxv;
background of, 367–68; for “beloved
community,” 370; civil disobedience
and, 369; constructive program of,
370; nonviolent mass direct action
and, 368; philosophy of, 368; purposes
of, 368; segregation and, 369–70;
SNCC v., 427; strategy of, 345; voter-
registration and, 369. See also King,
Martin Luther, Jr.
Southern Negroes, 431
Southern Negro Youth Conference,
306–8; for culture, 307; for leadership,
306–8; objectives for, 307
Southern states: discrimination in, 258–62;
disenfranchisement in, 389; exploitation
in, 596–97; law v., 366–67, 377;
legislature’s racism in, 129–32, 364;
racism in, 117–18, 124–25, 129–32,
363–67; Republican Party in, 162–63;
responsibility of, 363–64; treason
within, 124–25. See also Montgomery
bus boycott; specific states
Southern white women, 169–71; for
colored children, 169–71; lynching v.,
192–93; self-protection of, 170
Soviet Russia: against capitalism, 236;
discrimination in, 238–39, 240–41;
intelligentsia in, 237–38; McKay on,
234–41; military in, 238–39; Negroes
and, 238–41; race in, 237; women in,
238
Soviet Union, 490–91
Spain: oppression in, 26–27. See also
Amistad
Spanish language, for colored race, 73,
83n1
Spartans, 28, 33n1
Speilberg, Steven, 51
sports, 426
State, Constitution v., 90
status: white chauvinism v., 322–24; from
women, 318. See also class(es)
stereotype: of Africa, 529–30; of Negro
women, 318
sterilization, birth control v., 301
Stewart, Maria W., 5, 40–46; background
of, 40–41
St. Louis, against slavery, 98
structure: for black community, 454
structure, behavior v., 559–60
Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC): background of,
371; Black Power position paper from,
425–29; as black radicals, 346–47; for
community, 419–20; militancy within,
371; organization of, 427–28; purpose
of, 371; SCLC/NAACP v., 427; for
voter-registration, 420, 422; women
in, 399–401
suffrage. See black suffrage
superiority: black, 7; for paternalism, 400.
See also segregation
Supreme Court: on Brown v., 343; God
v., 95; law’s interpretation by, 101; on
Montgomery bus boycott, 361;
Scottsboro Trials and, 279–80; on


--- PAGE 705 ---
slavery, 95–96, 101; Thomas and,
552–58. See also Marshall, Thurgood;
Scott, Dred
Taney, Roger B., 88, 90–92; on slavery’s
constitutionality, 103, 106
temperance: for colored people, 42;
colored women and, 168; W.C.T.U.
for, 164n1; women and, 160, 164n1
Terrell, Mary Church, 120; background
of, 165; on colored women’s progress,
166–69
theater, 255, 330
Third World, 506–7
Thomas, Clarence, 552–58; background
on, 552–53
Thompson, Milo, 46–47
De Tocqueville, Alexis, 158
Toomer, Jean, 255–56
traditionalism, gender and, 506
transformation: morality of, 470–73; for
progress, 470–73
transformationists, 497–98; black radicals
as, 346–47
treason, within Southern states, 124–25
treaties, slavery and, 52–56
Trotter, William Monroe: background of,
181; against Washington, Booker T.,
181–83
Truman Administration, 317
Truth, Sojourner, xxvii, 163; background
of, 66; on women, 66–68
Turner, Henry McNeal, xxvi; background
of, 128–29; against legislature’s racism,
129–32; for rights, 117–18
Turner, Nat, xxix, 61; background of,
34–35; discovery of, 38–39; planning
by, 37–38; on resistance, 4; spirituality
of, 35–37; violence and, 38
Turner’s Confessions(Gray), 34
Tuskegee Institute, 119. See also
Washington, Booker T.
Twelve Years as a Slave (Northrup), 49
Tyner, Jarvis, 571
unemployment, 432; in Chicago, 513;
defense program v., 312;
discrimination and, 298–300; during
Great Depression, 273–74; relief
during, 281–84; skills v., 274–75;
strike-breakers v., 274; unions and,
309; welfare state v., 490; working
class and, 282–84, 286–87. See also
jobs
Unemployment Council, 285–87
UNIA. See Universal Negro
Improvement Association
Union Mine Workers, 274
unions: BRC on, 596; coal miners and,
290; Communism and, 224; cotton
fields and, 302; craft, 290–91, 294n2;
discrimination from, 365–71; for
domestics, 321–22; industrial, 290–91;
jobs and, 299; lumber workers and,
189–91; lynching and, 293–94;
Negroes’ numbers in, 277; Niagra
Movement on, 211; organization of,
190–91; race and, 133–35, 189–91,
229–31; segregation in, 275–76;
unemployment and, 309; violence
and, 190–91; women and, 302,
320–21. See also specific unions
United Nations, 610–11; Black Holocaust
and, 609; Black Panthers and, 447;
U.S. v., 532
United States (U.S.): democracy v.,
310–11, 386, 388; Geneva Convention
for, 444n2; imperialism of, in Africa,
482–83; as “racist state,” 219; South
Africa and, 484–85; United Nations v.,
532. See also Constitution (U.S.);
specific states
unity: among Negroes, 247; belief in,
630, 640; for identify, 201; Rainbow
Coalition for, 536–46; UNIA for, 
247
Universal Negro Improvement
Association (UNIA), 221, 222, 241;
leadership and, 249–50; for pride,
250; for unity, 247
urbanization: Great Migration for, 220;
races and, 198–99. See also black
urban workers
Urban League, xxv
674 INDEX


--- PAGE 706 ---
INDEX 675
U.S. See United States
U.S. Senate Resolution Against Lynching,
621–23
Van Buren, Martin, 51
Veazie, Denmark, 61
victimization: black v. Jewish, 569–70;
conservative behaviorists and, 560–61;
personal responsibility v., 618–20. See
also lynching; police brutality
Vietnam: America v., 439–44;
Communism v., 444n3; destruction of,
442, 444; elections in, 444n3; Geneva
Convention for, 444n2; independence
of, 441, 444nn1–2; King on, 438–45;
NLF for, 442–43; North Vietnam v.,
443
Vietnam War, 432–33; morality v.,
439–44; nonviolence v., 440
violence: Africa and, 608; black
nationalism and, 408; Black Panthers
and, 448, 456; against black women,
279–81, 520; dignity v., 380–81; in
education, 365; against free blacks, 19;
Hurricane Katrina and, 623–26;
marches v., 310–11; over Jim Crow,
260; pledge against, 584; prisons v.,
577; sexual-abuse as, 552–58; slaves
and, 30, 31, 97–98; Turner, Nat, and,
38; unions and, 190–91; White
Citizens Councils and, 364. See also
Garnet, Henry Highland; King,
Martin Luther, Jr.; nonviolence;
slavery
A Voice from the South (Cooper),
120–21, 159
voter-registration, 583; in Chicago, 515;
SCLC and, 369; SNCC for, 420, 422
voting, 258–59, 389; citizenship and, 334;
civil rights v., 600–602; cohabitation v.,
262; Dunbar-Nelson on, 265–67;
felons’ rights for, 604; power of,
409–10; race and, 406; for socialism,
395; women and, 265–67. See also
black suffrage; specific political
parties, politicians
Voting Rights Act, 600–602
Walker, David, 5; Appeal of, 24–33;
background of, 24; on boundaries of
blackness, 7
Wallis, Jim, 589
war, 409–10; from prejudice, 390. See
also Vietnam War; World War I;
World War II
Ward, Naomi, 302–5
warfare, in Africa, 12–13
Waring, Thomas, 363–64
War on Terror, 613–19
Washington: Jim Crow in, 259, 262;
March on, 308–14; segregation in,
337–38
Washington, Booker T.: on
accommodation, 175–81; background
of, 174–75; capitalists and, 188–89;
conservativism of, 118–19; criticism
of, 119, 181–83, 188–89; Du Bois v.,
119–20; Negroes and, 181–82, 183; on
segregation laws, 177–81; Trotter
against, 181–83; white people and,
182. See also Niagara Movement
Washington, George, 105, 580–91
Washington, Harold, 493–94; background
of, 513; on Chicago, 513–15
Washington, Madison, 61
Washington, Margaret Murray, 120
W.C.T.U. See Women’s Christian
Temperance Union
wealth: class v., 136–38. See also
poverty
Weary Blues (Hughes), 253
welfare, crime v., 576
welfare state, 490
Wells-Barnett, Ida B.: background of,
191–92; on lynching, 192–95
West, Cornel, 559–66; background on,
558; on black anti-semitism, 570
West Indies, for emigration, 73–75, 77
Wheatley, Phillis, 7–8
When Africa Awakes (Harrison), 213
white chauvinism, 322–24; children and,
323–24; in Communist Party, 
325–26
white children: colored children v., 186.
See also education


--- PAGE 707 ---
White Citizens Councils, 364;
intimidation by, 365; Montgomery bus
boycott and, 365–66
“white flight,” 269–70
white men: accomplishments of, 71–72;
apings of, 249–50; colored men v.,
175–80, 185; equality v., 71–72; for
information, 76, 77; for resistance,
108–9; white women v., 397. See also
abolitionists; colored men;
slaveholders
white people: education of, 5;
Washington, Booker T., and, 182
white radicals, black activists v., 428–29
white supremacy: Afrocentricity v.,
549–51; geopolitics v., 344; humanity
v., 582–83; in labor relations, 190–91;
World War II v., 311–13
white women: black men v., 528; black
women v., 321–22, 396–97, 512,
518–20, 525–28; with domestics,
302–5; movement of, racism in, 507;
North v. South, 169–70; white men v.,
397. see also domestics; Southern
white women
Wilkins, Roy: background of, 362; as liberal
integrationist, 345; to NAACP , 362–67
Williams, Ashton, 362
Winston, Henry, xxix; background of, 480;
as Communist, 480–85; in prison,
480–81
women, 607; after freedom, 319–20;
authority of, 319, 326n1; as black
elected officials, 252; black suffrage for,
124, 265–67, 324; bourgeoisie against,
316–17; for Communist Party, 325–26;
in cotton fields, 301–2; crime and,
507–13; Delany on, xxvi; as domestics,
302–5, 321–22; education for, 79,
169–70; during Great Depression,
300–306; history and, 316–20; jobs for,
325; Jones, Claudia, for, 316–26; labor
and, 317–18, 320–21; as leaders, 120,
163, 164n2, 251–52; against lynching,
266; militancy among, 316, 320–21; for
morality, 159–60, 166; from 1915-1954,
223; opportunities for, 164; in
organizations, 320; in politics, 324; in
prison, 507–13; as professionals,
323–24; race and, 5, 461–62, 518–20;
rape of, 279–81; for Republican Party,
162–63, 266; responsibilities of, 164; in
revolution, 461–62; sexual abuse of,
319, 553–58; slavery and, 318–20; in
SNCC, 399–401; in Soviet Russia, 238;
status from, 79–80, 318; stereotype of,
318; struggle and, 324–26; temperance
and, 160, 164n1; Truth on, 66–68;
unions and, 302, 320–21; voting and,
265–67; work of, 160. See alsoblack
women; colored women; lesbians;
white women; specific women
Women’s Christian Temperance Union
(W.C.T.U.), 160, 164n1
women’s movement, sisterhood v., 
517
women’s studies courses, 518–19
Woodson, Carter G., 546–47
working class, 188; Herndon on, 281–88;
unemployment and, 282–84, 286–87
Works Progress Administration (WPA),
288, 375
World Conference Against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and other Forms of Intolerance,
606–13
World War I: African Americans v.,
224–28; blacks v., 224–28;
discrimination and, 226–27;
disenfranchisement and, 226; Du Bois
on, 224–25, 226–27; education and,
226; Harrison, H., on, 225–26;
injustice and, 226–27; lynching and,
226; racism after, 219, 227
World War II: democracy v., 311–13;
white supremacy v., 311–13
WPA. See Works Progress Administration
Wright, Jeremiah, 632–34, 637–38
YCL. See Young Communist League
Young Communist League (YCL), 480
Young Workers Liberation League
(YWLL), 571
youth, 306–8
YWLL. See Young Workers Liberation
League
676 INDEX


--- PAGE 708 ---
ABOUT THE EDITORS
One of America’s most influential interpreters of the African-American experi-
ence is Manning Marable . Marable is currently the M. Moran Weston and
Black Alumni Professor of African-American Studies, professor of public affairs,
history and political science, and director of the Center for Contemporary Black
History (CCBH) at Columbia University in New York City. For ten years, he was
founding director of Columbia’s Institute for Research in African-American
Studies (1993 to 2003). A prolific writer, since 1975 Marable has produced 15
books, 13 edited volumes, and over 400 articles in academic journals, antholo-
gies, encyclopedias, and related publications. Marable’s major works include
How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America (1983); Beyond Black and
White (1995); The Great Wells of Democracy (2002); and Living Black History
(2006). Since 1999, he has also been founding editor of the quarterly academic
publication Souls: A Critical Journal of Black Politics, Culture and Society.
Leith Mullings is Distinguished Professor of Anthropology at the Graduate
Center, City University of New York. Her books include: Therapy, Ideology
and Social Change: Mental Healing in Urban Ghana (1984); Cities of the
United States (editor, 1987); On Our Own Terms: Race, Class and Gender in
the Lives of African American Women (1997); Stress and Resilience: The Social
Context of Reproduction in Central Harlem (2001, with Alaka Wali); Freedom:
A Photohistory of the African American Struggle (2002, with Manning
Marable); Gender, Race, Class and Health: An Intersectional Approach (2005,
coedited with Amy Schulz). In addition, she has written numerous articles and
book chapters on stratification, ethnicity, race, gender, health, globalization,
participatory research, public policy, and social movements. She is currently
working on an edited volume, Rethinking Global Justice: Social Movements in
the African Diaspora, forthcoming in 2009. Mullings has served on the execu-
tive boards of the American Ethnological Society and the American
Anthropological Association. Her awards include the Chair in American
Civilization at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris and
the Prize for Distinguished Achievement in the Critical Study of North
America from the Society for the Anthropology of North America.


--- PAGE 709 ---



--- PAGE 710 ---



--- PAGE 711 ---



--- PAGE 712 ---



--- PAGE 713 ---


