=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Marcus-Garvey-Bio.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 103
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:14:57.111775
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION
Marcus Garvey
BLACK NATIONALIST LEADER


--- PAGE 3 ---
Muhammad Ali
Frederick Douglass
W.E.B. Du Bois
Marcus Garvey
Alex Haley
Langston Hughes
Jesse Jackson
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Malcolm X
Thurgood Marshall
Jesse Owens
Rosa Parks
Colin Powell
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Booker T. Washington
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION


--- PAGE 4 ---
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION
Marcus Garvey
BLACK NATIONALIST LEADER
Mary Lawler
With additional text written by 
John Davenport
Consulting Editor, Revised Edition
Heather Lehr Wagner
Senior Consulting Editor, First Edition
Nathan Irvin Huggins
Director, W.E.B. Du Bois Institute
for Afro-American Research
Harvard University


--- PAGE 5 ---
CHELSEA HOUSE PUBLISHERS
VP , NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT Sally Cheney
DIRECTOR OF PRODUCTION Kim Shinners
CREATIVE MANAGER Takeshi Takahashi
MANUFACTURING MANAGER Diann Grasse
Staff for MA RCUS GARVEY
EXECUTIVE EDITOR Lee Marcott
ASSISTANT EDITOR Alexis Browsh
PRODUCTION EDITOR Noelle Nardone
PHOTO EDITOR Sarah Bloom
SERIES AND COVER DESIGNER Keith Trego
LAYOUT 21st Century Publishing and Communications, Inc.
©2005 by Chelsea House Publishers,
a subsidiary of Haights Cross Communications.
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of Am erica.
www.chelseahouse.com
First Printing
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lawler, Mary.
Marcus Garvey: Black nationalist leader/Mary Lawler; with additional text by John Davenport.
p. cm.—(Black Americans of achievement)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7910-8159-1 — ISBN 0-7910-8333-0 (pbk.) 
1. Garvey, Marcus, 1887–1940—Juvenile literature. 2. African America ns—Biography—
Juvenile literature. 3. Intellectuals—United States—Biography—Juv enile literature.
4. Universal Negro Improvement Association—Juvenile literature. I. Davenport, John, 1960–
II. Title. III. Series.
E185.97.G3L395 2004
973'.0496073'0092—dc22
2004012658
All links and web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of publication.
Because of the dynamic nature of the web, some addresses and links  may have changed
since publication and may no longer be valid.
COVER: UNIA leader Marcus Garvey riding in a parade at the First Conv ention of the
Negro Peoples of the World in 1920.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Introduction vi
Homecoming 1
A Place in the World 4
Doomed to Lead 12
“Up, You Mighty Race” 27
Star of Destiny 41
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 50
The Most Dangerous Enemy 60
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 71
Chronology 83
Further Reading 84
Index 86
About the Contributors 94
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8


--- PAGE 7 ---
Nearly 20 years ago Chelsea House Publishers began to publish
the first volumes in the series called B LACK AMERICANS OF
ACHIEVEMENT. This series eventually numbered over a hundred
books and profiled outstanding African Americans from
many walks of life. T oday, if you ask school teachers and school
librarians what comes to mind when you mention Chelsea
House, many will say—“Black Americans of Achievement. ”
The mix of individuals whose lives we covered was eclectic,
to say the least. Some were well known—Muhammad Ali
and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr, for example. But others, such
as Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth, were lesser-known
figures who were introduced to modern readers through these
books. The individuals profiled were chosen for their actions,
their deeds, and ultimately their influence on the lives of others
and their impact on our nation as a whole. By sharing these
stories of unique Americans, we hoped to illustrate how
ordinary individuals can be transformed by extraordinary
circumstances to become people of greatness. We also hoped
that these special stories would encourage young-adult readers
to make their own contribution to a better world. Judging from
the many wonderful letters we have received about the B
LACK
AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT biographies over the years from
students, librarians, and teachers, they have certainly fulfilled
the goal of inspiring others!
Now, some 20 years later, we are publishing 18 volumes of
the original B
LACK AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT series in revised
editions to bring the books into the twenty-first century and
Introduction
vi


--- PAGE 8 ---
make them available to a new generation of young-adult readers. The
selection was based on the importance of these figures to Americ an
life and the popularity of the original books with our readers. T hese
revised editions have a new full-color design and, wherever poss ible,
we have added color photographs. The books have new features,
including quotes from the writings and speeches of leaders and
interesting and unusual facts about their lives. The concluding
section of each book gives new emphasis to the legacy of these me n
and women for the current generation of readers.
The lives of these African-American leaders are unique and
remarkable. By transcending the barriers that racism placed in t heir
paths, they are examples of the power and resiliency of the human
spirit and are an inspiration to readers.
We present these wonderful books to our audience for their
reading pleasure.
Lee M. Marcott
Chelsea House Publishers
August 2004
INTRODUCTION vii


--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---
The steamship Santa Marta was not scheduled to arrive in
Kingston, Jamaica, until the afternoon, but early that Saturday
morning crowds had already begun to gather near the pier.
Black men and women, young and old, had started to line the
streets that led to the capital city’s port, eagerly awaiting th e
return of Marcus Garvey, their beloved leader and country-
man. On that day, December 10, 1927, he was still one of the
most famous black men in the world.
Twelve years before, at the age of 28, Garvey had left his
native island of Jamaica for the United States. Settling in New
Y ork, he quickly rose to become a leader of blacks in America
and all over the world. He also made some powerful enemies,
but none of them seemed to be among the crowds waiting for
him to arrive in Kingston.
As the day wore on, the crowd’s excitement mounted, until—
three hours later than expected—the Santa Marta steamed up
the channel and into the harbor.
Homecoming
1
1


--- PAGE 11 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
“He’s coming! He’s coming!” the happy onlookers cried.
On the second deck of the ship stood a 40-year-old man,
short and pudgy, with very dark skin and a mustache. He looked
dignified even in the cheap, ill-fitting suit that had been issu ed
to him upon his release from a U.S. prison a few weeks earlier.
Once the crowd noticed Garvey on the deck, a deafening
cheer went up. The excitement swelled as he made his way
down the gangplank and stepped ashore, where he was greeted
by officials of the Universal Negro Improvement Association
(UNIA), the international black organization that he had
founded 13 years earlier. The organization’s message of
racial pride and unity had spread so quickly and so far that
UNIA branches could be found almost everywhere that blacks
lived, from Colombia to Canada, from Africa to Australia.
Garvey entered an awaiting car and was driven slowly past the
crowds of well wishers, preceded by a small procession of UNIA
members and bands marching in colorful costumes. The car
traveled slowly through streets thronged with people determined
to catch a glimpse of Garvey, who waved and stretched out both
arms to shake hands with those who pressed toward him.
“No denser crowd has ever been witnessed in Kingston, ”
reported the Daily Gleaner , a local newspaper. At times the
crowd was so thick that Garvey’s car could barely move. His
enthusiastic followers came close to carrying him for the
rest of his journey on their shoulders but were stopped by
uniformed policemen who lined the route to Liberty Hall, the
meeting place of the local UNIA chapter. Garvey had planned
on giving a speech in the auditorium of Liberty Hall, but when
he reached the building, he saw that thousands of people were
jammed inside it and thousands more were crowding the
adjacent streets. Determined to have as many people as possible
hear his words, he stood on the running board of his car and
made a brief speech. He thanked his countrymen for their
kind welcome and promised them that “as long as I live, I shall
do everything for your advancement, well knowing that the
2


--- PAGE 12 ---
Homecoming 3
organization which has been established for your uplift will
always receive your fullest support. ”
Then, excited yet exhausted from his travels and his home-
coming, Garvey retired to a friend’s house to rest and to make
plans for the future. He did not suspect that his greatest
moment had just passed, that he would never regain the fame
and power that had become his only a few years before, when
the UNIA had formed the basis of the biggest mass movement
in black history. Even so, his dreams of leading his race back to
the African continent would live on. In the years to come,
many of his goals would be realized, giving future generations
cause to remember Marcus Garvey.
Marcus Garvey was born in Jamaica and returned to its capital, Kingston,
seen here, in 1927. Garvey left Jamaica for New York to form the Universal
Negro Improvement Association, an organization that promoted bl ack
pride and unity and made Garvey one of the most famous black me n of
the early twentieth century.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Marcus Mosiah Garvey was born on August 17, 1887, in St. Ann’s
Bay, a picturesque little village on Jamaica’s northern coast.
The eleventh child of Sarah and Marcus Garvey, he and his
older sister Indiana were the only children in the family to
reach adulthood; all of the others died during their childhood.
Christened Marcus after his father, Garvey was given the
middle name of Mosiah as the result of a compromise. His
mother wanted to call him Moses, for she had a hunch that her
son would someday lead his people, just as the biblical Moses
had led the Jews. His father, not a particularly religious man,
favored a less pretentious name. They settled on Mosiah,
although most people just called the youngster Mose or, less
kindly, Ugly Mug.
Marcus’s mother was a gentle, slim, and beautiful woman
who was known for being kind and helpful to her neighbors
and for working hard to bring up her family. Because her
A Place in the World
2
4


--- PAGE 14 ---
A Place in the World 5
husband found employment only sporadically, the task of
supporting and educating the children often fell to her. The
daughter of a farming family, she shared a plot of land with
her brother, and the proceeds from the crops grown there,
along with the cakes and pastries she baked and sold, often
supplied the family with its only income.
Marcus’s father was different: hard, stern, and stubborn. A
skilled stonemason, he cut and shaped white rock for the
walls of nearby plantation houses belonging to the island’s
wealthy estate owners. He worked only when he felt like it. He
preferred to spend long hours locked in his private study, read-
ing from his collection of books and magazines. This constant
reading kept Marcus’s father well informed, and he became
known in St. Ann’s Bay as the village lawyer—a man whom
the other townspeople often went to for advice. He was so
respected in the town that everybody—even his wife—called
him Mr. Garvey. “My father, ” Marcus wrote later, “was a man
of brilliant intellect and dashing courage. He was unafraid
o fc o n s e q u e n c e s ....H e  was severe, firm, determined, bold,
and strong, refusing to yield even to superior forces if he
believed he was right. ” Y et these qualities eventually caused the
downfall of Marcus’s father.
The elder Garvey received a newspaper every week for
20 years. Assuming it was a gift from the publisher, he never
paid anything for it. When the publisher died, the executors
of the estate sent Garvey a bill, which Marcus’s father stubbornly
ignored. The executors took the matter to court, and Garvey
was ordered to pay. He still refused, so the judge sold one of the
Garvey family’s properties to cover the debt, which had increased
because of the court costs. Quarrels with neighbors over bound-
aries and property rights resulted in other court actions and
led to the loss of more Garvey property. Finally, the family
was left with only the plot of land on which their home stood.
Stubbornness and pride were character traits that Marcus’s
father may have gotten from his ancestors. He was a descendant


--- PAGE 15 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
of the Maroons, escaped Jamaican slaves who banded together
during the seventeenth and eightteenth centuries to fight the
island’s British colonial rulers. Located in the Caribbean Sea, part
of the group of islands known as the West Indies, Jamaica had
been ruled by foreigners for centuries. In 1494, conquistadors
arrived from Spain and virtually destroyed the native Arawak
Indian population of Jamaica, making the island into a Spanish
colony. Spaniards ruled Jamaica until 1655, when it was taken
over by the British and briefly became a haven for pirates preying
on Spanish shipping. By the late seventeenth century, the West
Indies was the center of the lucrative sugar trade, and Britain,
France, and the Netherlands constantly warred with each other
for control of the islands. As the British began to cover Jamaica
with sugar plantations, they were soon faced with the need for a
source of cheap labor. Their solution was to import black slaves
from Africa for the grueling work of harvesting the sugar cane.
European traders had been kidnapping the people of Africa
and selling them into slavery since the 1470s. The traders had
originally traveled to Africa in search of gold and treasures, but
they soon began buying people instead, dealing with both
small coastal tribes and powerful West African nations that
sold slaves in return for guns, rum, cloth, and other European
goods. During the centuries that the slave trade continued, an
estimated 60 to 100 million blacks were taken from Africa and
sold into slavery in the New World.
Slave uprisings in the European colonies occurred every
now and then over the years, but the fierce Jamaican Maroons
preserved their freedom more successfully than did most
ex-slave groups. Banding together in the island’s inaccessible
central highlands, the Maroons developed their own distinct
culture. During the 1730s, after 10 years of warfare, the British
authorities gave in. They awarded the Maroons tax-free land of
their own and gave them the right to govern themselves. Most
of the blacks in Jamaica remained slaves, however. In 1833,
slavery was finally abolished throughout the British Empire.
6


--- PAGE 16 ---
A Place in the World 7
The blacks of Jamaica became free, but most did not own
land and were poor. By the time of Garvey’s birth, they were
starting to agitate for better conditions.
The Maroons were escaped British slaves who settled in the
Caribbean and fought British colonial rule in the late seven-
teenth and early eighteenth century. The former slaves, like
the man seen here, lived and developed a culture in Jamaica’s
highlands and eventually were awarded the right to govern
themselves and own tax-free land by the British.


--- PAGE 17 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Jamaica then had a population of about 600,000. Approxi-
mately 80 percent of the island’s inhabitants were black. Y et
this large segment of the population was primarily a poor
laboring class. The whites, who formed only about two percent
of the total population, were members of the upper class. The
remaining 18 percent of the Jamaicans were mainly “coloreds, ”
people of mixed race who formed the middle class.
GARVEY’S JAMAICA
As the relatively privileged son of a tradesman and landowner,
Marcus Garvey knew little of these class boundaries or of racial
prejudice. His father’s property adjoined that of two white
families, and Marcus played with neighborhood children
without being concerned about their color. “T o me, at home
in my early days, there was no difference between white and
black, ” Garvey recalled. “We romped and were happy children
playmates together. ”
Garvey’s first lesson in prejudice came when he was a
teenager. He recalled later:
The little white girl who I liked most knew no better
than I did myself. We were two innocent fools who
never dreamed of a race feeling and problem ....A t
fourteen my little white playmate and I parted. Her
parents thought the time had come to separate us and
draw the color line. They sent her and another sister
to Edinburgh, Scotland, and told her that she was
never to try to write or get in touch with me, for I was
a “nigger. ”
It was then that I found for the first time that there
was some difference in humanity, and that there were
different races, each having its own separate and
distinct social life. I did not care about the separation
after I was told about it, because I never thought all
during my childhood that the girl and the rest of the
8


--- PAGE 18 ---
A Place in the World 9
children of her race were better than I was; in fact, they
used to look up to me. So I simply had no regrets.
Garvey’s friendship with white males lasted a little longer
but eventually came to a similar end.
At maturity, the black and white boys took different
courses in life. I grew up then to see the difference
between the races more and more. My schoolmates as
young men did not know or remember me any more.
Then I realized that I had to make a fight for a place in
the world, that it was not so easy to pass on to office
and position.
Garvey’s fight was helped by his desire to learn. Educated
in public grammar schools and by private tutors, he read on
his own from the volumes in his father’s library. When Garvey
was 15, he left school to work full-time as a printer’s appren-
tice in his godfather’s shop. This did not mean the end of his
education. His godfather was an educated man, and Garvey
continued his schooling in the back room of the printing shop,
which was filled with old magazines, books, and newspapers.
Always adventurous, Garvey used to sit by the St. Ann’s Bay
wharf and watch the sailors and dockhands at work, loading
ships bound for Germany with pimentos and log wood and for
America with citrus, sugar, and rum. Sometimes he would talk
with the seamen, whose exciting descriptions of the ports and
towns they visited gave him a keen desire to see the world.
At 18, Garvey moved to Kingston, Jamaica’s capital, and
went to work in his uncle’s print shop. Within two years he
was a master printer and foreman at one of the island’s largest
firms. This experience in the printing business proved to
be invaluable later in his life, when he started the series of
newspapers and journals that became such an important part
of the organizations he founded. Garvey’s time in Kingston


--- PAGE 19 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
was even more important for the exposure it gave him to the
political ideas of the day. When he first arrived in Kingston,
he was immediately attracted by the noisy street debates—
an informal method of discussing current issues and events.
Having no experience in such discussions, his first attempts at
adding his own opinions met with a curt “Country boy, shut
your mouth!”
Garvey became determined to learn the art of public speak-
ing. He spent his Sundays visiting various churches, listening
to the oratorical techniques of Kingston’s most popular
preachers. Garvey then practiced these skills by reading aloud
passages from a schoolbook while experimenting with gestures
in front of a mirror. He also carried a pocket dictionary with
him and studied it to expand his vocabulary. Caught up in his
own studies, he still found time to teach debating techniques
to young people. As a friend recalled, “He was always busy,
planning and doing something for the underprivileged youth.
Uplift work we called it. ”
During his years in Kingston, Garvey became fully aware
of the unfairness of the racial divisions in Jamaican society.
“I started to take an interest in the politics of my country, ”
Garvey said, “and then I saw the injustice done to my race
because it was black, and I became dissatisfied on that account.”
He understood that blacks had little chance of overcoming the
poverty that was so common among them.
One incident in particular triggered his awareness. On
the afternoon of January 14, 1907, an earthquake and fire
destroyed much of Kingston. The disaster caused a scarcity
of food and goods that, in turn, drove up prices. The city’s
ill-paid laborers soon had barely enough money to feed them-
selves. The workers of the printing company where Garvey
was employed protested this situation by striking for higher
wages. As a foreman, Garvey was in a management position
and was not obligated to go out on strike with his men, but
he believed the workers’ cause was just and joined the strike,
10


--- PAGE 20 ---
A Place in the World 11
even though his employers offered him a salary increase if he
would stay on the job.
The strike eventually failed, however. The printing companies
brought in new employees content to work for low wages, while
the treasurer of the workers’ organization ran off with their
union money. Workers’ organizations, Garvey discovered, were
often an ineffective tool for improving the conditions under
which blacks lived and worked. Maintaining unity among
workers was difficult on an overcrowded island, where huge
numbers of desperate, unemployed men competed for meager,
low-paying jobs.
Garvey lost his job after the strike was over and went to
work at the government printing office. By this time he had
already begun to realize that his printing work in Kingston was
not really his main interest. In 1909, when he was 22, Garvey
became active in Kingston’s intellectual circles as a member
of the National Club. Organized by a local lawyer to fight the
problems caused by Britain’s rule of Jamaica, the National Club
campaigned for political candidates and put out a publication
called Our Own. Working on the publication provided Garvey
with his first experience in newspaper publishing and
prompted him to put out his own periodical at this time.
Garvey’s Watchmansoon failed.
By his early 20s, Garvey had become deeply immersed in
political activities and efforts to improve the status of Jamaican
blacks. He needed more money to support his interest in
organizational work—more than he could hope to raise in
Jamaica. Many West Indians were going to Central and South
America to look for work, and Garvey decided he might find
a better-paying job abroad. Thus, in 1910, at the age of 23, he
set out for Costa Rica.


--- PAGE 21 ---
When Garvey sailed from Kingston in 1910, he intended to
work for a short time, save some money, and then go back to
Jamaica to continue the struggle for black political rights. He
knew that his people would need strong leadership if they were
to break their shackles of inequality and poverty. His plans for
a quick return to Jamaica changed, however, when he discovered
the conditions that blacks labored under in Latin American
countries. What he saw there shocked him.
In Costa Rica, Garvey took a job on a banana plantation
owned by the United Fruit Company. This giant U.S. firm
controlled much of the fruit production in Latin America and
was rapidly clearing land for new plantations. As a timekeeper,
Garvey kept track of the hours worked by company employees,
many of them black West Indians like himself. The workers
battled daily to drain swamps while contending with snakes
and other wild animals. They worked long hours for low
Doomed to Lead
3
12


--- PAGE 22 ---
Doomed to Lead 13
wages, and their money often disappeared into the pockets of
petty thieves or dishonest bankers.
Distressed by the plantation workers’ suffering, Garvey
began a crusade to improve their working conditions. Many of
the West Indians were citizens of islands controlled by Britain
and were entitled to British protection. The British had close
ties with the nations of Central America, and their consulates
had a strong amount of influence with the local governments.
Garvey therefore decided to bring the workers’ plight to the
attention of the British consulate in the nearby city of Puerto
Limón. T o Garvey’s dismay the consul showed no interest in
the matter and said the British government could do nothing
to help the men. It was clear to Garvey that white officials lik e
the consul did not value the lives of black people.
Garvey remained in Puerto Limón, working on the docks
with other poorly paid black laborers. Again, he tried to organize
the workers. He started a newspaper called La Nacionale (The
National ), which agitated for workers’ rights and encouraged
blacks to demand fairer treatment. He received little support.
The mainly illiterate laborers were unable to read his articles
in La Nacionale. Most were too busy trying to feed themselves
to get involved in a political movement. After a short while
in Puerto Limón, Garvey decided to see what he could
accomplish elsewhere.
Leaving Costa Rica, Garvey traveled to Nicaragua, Colombia,
V enezuela, and other Latin American nations. He found West
Indian migrant workers in all of these countries, men who had
fled the poverty of their own islands only to find nothing but
backbreaking work abroad.
In Panama, thousands of blacks were helping to build the
nearly completed canal that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
was constructing to link the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Many
workers caught malaria and other deadly tropical diseases in
the steaming Panamanian jungles. Black workers did much of
the heavy excavating labor on the 50-mile length of the canal,


--- PAGE 23 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
but they were poorly paid. Their white co-workers lived in
separate camps and were treated much better.
In the tobacco fields and copper mines of Ecuador, Garvey
discovered more West Indian migrants working in wretched
conditions. Again and again, he met with the islanders, heard
14
Garvey moved to Costa Rica in 1910 to quickly raise some
money by working on a banana plantation, like the one shown
here, owned by the United Fruit Company. He discovered that
working conditions in Costa Rica were even worse than those
in Jamaica, and he began a campaign to organize black
workers and improve their working conditions.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Doomed to Lead 15
their complaints, and tried to organize the men into workers’
associations. None of the British consulates in the countries
he visited would listen to his appeals for help. They always
insisted that they could not risk upsetting their friendly
relations with the local governments.
After campaigning unsuccessfully for two years to improve
the lot of the West Indian workers, Garvey grew discouraged.
Wherever he went, he was harassed by government authorities,
who viewed him as a dangerous subversive. Finally, in 1912,
worn out from a bout with malaria, he returned to Jamaica.
Back home again, his health restored, Garvey renewed his
efforts to help his scattered countrymen. In Kingston he found
many other people who were concerned about the welfare of
relatives working overseas. Garvey organized a delegation to
bring the migrant workers’ problems to the attention of the
governor of Jamaica, the head of the island’s colonial adminis-
tration. Again, Garvey received a cold welcome. The governor
told the delegation that if conditions were so bad abroad, then
the workers should return to Jamaica. “Return to do what?”
Garvey asked, for the reason the men had left Jamaica was that
they could not find work at home. The governor made no reply.
Garvey was not defeated. Jamaica, he knew, was only a small
part of the British Empire, whose sprawling domain included
the modern-day countries Ireland, India, Pakistan, Kenya,
Uganda, Barbados, and many other parts of Europe, Asia,
Africa, and the West Indies. He believed that in London, where
British colonial policy was decided, he might find people who
could help the West Indians. Garvey did not have the money
for a ticket to England, but his sister, who was working as a
nanny in London, sent him the fare. In 1912, at the age of 23,
Garvey sailed for England.
LEARNING AND LIVING IN BRITAIN
During his stay in London, Garvey learned much about the
conditions experienced by blacks around the world. On the


--- PAGE 25 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
London docks, where he worked to support himself, Garvey
spoke with black seamen from the West Indies, Africa, and
the United States. Hearing the sailors describe the indignities
blacks endured in other countries, Garvey concluded that
no matter where they lived, the people of his race shared a
common bond of suffering. Whether they were a minority class
or the major racial group in their country made no difference;
blacks everywhere had to obey discriminatory laws and accept
unfair working conditions.
Although Garvey put in long days on the docks, he still
found time to attend classes in law and philosophy at Birkbeck
College, a school for working-class people in London. Here
he studied the ideas of important thinkers, from the ancient
Greek philosophers Socrates and Plato to black scholars of his
own time.
Garvey also spent many hours in London’s public libraries
poring through books on the history and culture of his African
ancestors. He read with pride about the Ghana, Mali, and
Songhai kingdoms, which centuries earlier had ruled large
parts of central and western Africa. Having been taught that
Africa’s inhabitants had always been poor, primitive tribal folk,
Garvey was delighted to learn that advanced civilizations had
flourished on the continent long before the Europeans arrived
in the fifteenth century. The Africans’ magnificent art and music
and highly developed political institutions and religious
traditions had been virtually ignored by white society.
The heyday of the great African kingdoms had long since
passed, however. In Garvey’s time, Africa was dominated by
European nations. During the nineteenth century, Great Britain,
France, Germany, Belgium, Portugal, and Italy had competed
against each other to slice up the continent into colonies. Repre-
sentatives of the European powers met at the Berlin Conference
of 1884–85 to establish the boundaries of their colonial states.
The only countries that remained in black control were Liberia,
a West African nation founded by black immigrants from the
16


--- PAGE 26 ---
Doomed to Lead 17
United States, and the ancient east African kingdom of
Ethiopia. The European nations justified their occupation of
Africa by claiming that they were bringing civilization and
Christianity to godless and backward people, the “heathen
savages” of the “dark continent. ” (For additional information
about the European occupation of Africa, enter “colonialism in
Africa” in any search engine and browse the sites listed.)
The foreign powers’ domination of Africa angered Garvey.
In London he met many other blacks who shared his views.
The large metropolitan city attracted students and intellectuals
from around the British Empire who, like Garvey, wanted to be
near the center of political activity. London also hosted many
international conventions. One of them, held 12 years earlier,
brought together delegates representing black communities in
England, the West Indies, and the United States to discuss how
to promote pan-Africanism.
Formed in the late 1800s, the pan-African movement held
as its ideal the belief that blacks throughout the world were
one people and that Africa was their common homeland.
The members of the movement were devoted to establishing
African nations that would be governed by blacks. The leading
writers of the pan-African movement—Henry McNeal Turner,
Edward Wilmot Blyden, and J.E. Casely Hayford—had a
strong influence on Garvey. More and more he came to believe
that blacks throughout the world must unite and wrest Africa
from its colonial occupiers.
In 1913, Garvey met Duse Mohammed Ali, the half-
Egyptian, half-black publisher of the African Times and Orient
Review, a journal committed to fighting for the rights of the
native peoples in African and Asian colonies. Ali took a liking
to the much-traveled Jamaican dockworker and hired him
as a messenger. Working for the journal allowed Garvey to
continue his political education and to become familiar with
the leading spokesmen of the international black community,
many of whom wrote for the paper. Garvey himself had one


--- PAGE 27 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
piece published in the journal. In the article, Garvey voiced
a demand for greater black participation in the Jamaican
government, and he predicted that the West Indians would
one day help to unite the race into a mighty empire.
Taking a break from his work, writing, and studies, Garvey
traveled around Europe, visiting many of those countries whose
colonial administrations were supposedly bringing enlighten-
ment to the African people. At the time of Garvey’s visit, the
political climate in Europe was tense. The major powers had
divided into hostile camps and were spending heavily to build
up their military forces. Within a year, Great Britain, France,
Italy, and Russia would be fighting a horrifyingly destructive
war with Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Turkey. This conflict,
which began in August 1914, would be known as the Great
War, or World War I.
After his tour of Europe, Garvey returned to England,
probably in late 1913. He may have visited more English cities,
finding work where he could. His wanderings soon came to an
end, for he found a book that stopped him in his tracks and
burned its way into his soul. The book was Up from Slavery, and
the author was Booker T. Washington, the most influential black
leader in the United States. Born a slave in Virginia in 1856,
Washington had gained his freedom during the Civil War. After-
ward he worked his way through school and became a respected
educator. He was especially famous as the founder of the
Tuskegee Institute, an all-black school of higher learning in
Alabama. In 1901 he published his autobiography, Up from
Slavery. In the book, Washington urged the members of his race
to work hard, save money, and improve themselves through
education. Once educated, Washington envisioned blacks
thriving in agriculture, first as farm managers but later as
farmers in their own right. He opposed public protests against
racial intolerance because he believed they would increase
hostilities between blacks and whites. Instead, what Washington
advocated was a form of race relations known as accommodation:
18


--- PAGE 28 ---
Doomed to Lead 19
blacks should, at least for the time being, accommodate white
interests and prejudice. This would avoid conflict long enough
to give blacks a chance to advance. Eventually, Washington
After reading Booker T. Washington’s book Up From Slavery,
Garvey was inspired to become a leader of his race and
formed the Universal Negro Improvement Association. The
most influential black leader of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century, Washington, seen here (seated) in 1902,
with his secretary Emmet J. Scott, advocated the improvement
of the black race through hard work and education.


--- PAGE 29 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
believed, blacks would be fully accepted by whites and would
share equally in the benefits of American society.
Washington’s ideas had a profound effect on Garvey’s think-
ing. After reading Up from Slavery, he realized he had found his
20
Marcus Garvey’s insistence on self-reliance as the key to black  advance-
ment was patterned in large part on the socioeconomic model dev eloped
by Booker T. Washington. Both men believed sincerely in the upl ifting
power of black investment in industry and agriculture and the r esulting
financial benefits. The two leaders also agreed on the central role
played by education in creating an entrepreneurial spirit among  black
Americans. Garvey corresponded regularly with Washington and ad mired
him greatly; he even went so far as to advocate the creation of  a Jamaican
version of Washington’s Tuskegee Institute. This man, who Garve y strove
to emulate, knew the potential for liberation that came with ec onomic
self-sufficiency.
Born in 1856 into a world of slavery as the property of a Virgi nia planter,
Washington accepted agriculture as the black man’s lot and came  to see it
as the best hope for true racial uplift. He became convinced th at the road to
genuine, lasting freedom began in the fields and workshops rather than in the
halls of government. Consequently, Washington encouraged black Americans
to educate themselves in the agricultural and industrial arts. He envisioned
the knowledge gained in such pursuit being applied in an effort  to carve out
a niche for blacks in the larger national economy and eventuall y in society
in general.
After struggling to get an education at Hampton Institute, Washington took
the bold step of designing his own agricultural school—the Tuskegee Institute
—in Alabama in 1881. He planned to train a generation of independent black
workers and owners. Washington urged blacks to accommodate rath er than
challenge white interests and to work for black advancement wit hin the
white power structure while remaining separate from it. He advo cated
this form of “separate but equal” socioeconomic arrangement until his
death in 1915. This worldview cost Washington dearly in terms of standing
among mainstream black leaders at the time, but it won him the unwavering
respect of Marcus Garvey, so much so that Garvey’s widow once r emarked,
“Booker T. Washington was the idol of Marcus Garvey.”
Booker T. Washington


--- PAGE 30 ---
Doomed to Lead 21
purpose in life. “My doom—if I may so call it—of being a race
leader dawned on me, ” he recalled later. The book prompted
him to ask many disturbing questions: “Where is the black
man’s Government? Where is his President, his country, and his
ambassador, his army, his navy, his men of big affairs?” He
promised himself that he would win these things for his people.
UNIA
Filled with great dreams, Garvey made a resolution: “I was
determined that the black man would not continue to be
kicked about by all the other races and nations of the world. I
could not remain in London anymore. My brain was afire. ” He
packed his bags and took passage on a ship bound for Jamaica.
Garvey arrived home on July 15, 1914, and immediately began
to contact people whom he had worked with in the past.
Seventeen days later he formed the Universal Negro Improve-
ment and Conservation Association and African Communities
League. The association’s title was soon shortened, and it
became known as the UNIA. Garvey was appointed president
and traveling commissioner (chief recruiter) of the Kingston-
based organization. Among the UNIA ’s officers was Amy
Ashwood, a young woman who would serve for many years as
Garvey’s secretary.
The UNIA ’s purpose was to unite Jamaica’s black population
behind a spirit of racial pride and a program of educational
and economic opportunity. Furthermore, the UNIA vowed
to work for the establishment of independent black-ruled
nations in Africa. This great dream could only be achieved,
Garvey said, when blacks from around the world joined
together and demanded that Africa be freed from colonial
rule. Garvey intended the UNIA to be the standard-bearer of
international black protest; his organization would force the
world’s governments to take notice of black unrest.
These great plans would all take time. From the start the
UNIA had high ideals but limited funds. Membership dues


--- PAGE 31 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
raised only a small amount of money, and the organization
depended on volunteer work. Garvey realized he had to
address the immediate needs of Jamaica’s poor to gain their
support. The UNIA tried to attract recruits by offering a
limited form of health insurance. The main thrust of Garvey’s
program was to promote learning among the ill-educated
peasants and workers. Most of these people saw little need for
education, knowing they were destined to spend their lives
laboring in the fields or on the docks. The UNIA planned to
change this outlook.
As his organization’s traveling commissioner, Garvey visited
many towns and villages in Jamaica in search of new
members. Though many people listened to him, few were
ready to join the UNIA, and fewer still had any organiza-
tional talents. Garvey had no qualms about pointing out
his people’s shortcomings, admitting that most of them were
“unfit for good society. ” Like Booker T. Washington, he
believed that until the black workers became committed to self-
improvement, they would be looked down upon by whites.
He often used his own struggle to educate himself as an
example for others. He told one audience: “I came from
surroundings not better than many of you, but my mind
lifted me out of my surroundings. ” In the books of his father
and godfather he had found the inspiration to become more
than a common dockworker, and he had set his sights on
becoming a leader of poor and oppressed people. “Nobody
helped me toward that objective, ” he asserted, “except my
own mind and God’s good will. ”
T o help his people follow in his footsteps, Garvey organized
lectures, debates, speaking contests, adult-education classes,
entertainments, and religious meetings. He also called for the
establishment of colleges and vocational schools to allow all
qualified students to attain higher education. The one special
project that consumed Garvey was his idea for a school
modeled on the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. Booker
22


--- PAGE 32 ---
Doomed to Lead 23
T. Washington’s all-black school was known as an industrial
college because it taught students the advanced skills they
needed to pursue careers in a trade or business. Among the
professors at Tuskegee was George Washington Carver, the
agricultural scientist who had helped restore the economy of
the American South after the Civil War. Carver had discovered
many new uses for peanuts, soybeans, sweet potatoes, cotton,
and other crops grown in the region. Garvey dreamed of
building a school based on Tuskegee, one that would attract
men like Carver and gain worldwide attention for the UNIA ’s
proposed educational program.
Many of the leading figures in Jamaica’s white society,
including the colonial governor and the bishop of the Anglican
church, encouraged Garvey’s work, providing him with some
financial support and attending UNIA social functions when
invited. They were interested in his educational program,
not his political views. Garvey, of course, was opposed to the
whites’ domination of the black population, and membership
in his organization was restricted to people of his own race, but
he favored racial cooperation in Jamaica. On the other hand,
he believed that black society should remain separate from
white society. “I want to have Jamaica a country of ‘Black and
White, ’ all living in peace and harmony but with equal rights
and opportunities, ” he said. Such a policy, he knew, would
eventually bring Jamaica’s black majority into power.
Although Garvey received some support from prominent
white liberals, Jamaica’s colored middle class was openly
hostile to the UNIA. The product of intermarriage between
the races, the coloreds jealously guarded their position as
intermediaries between blacks and whites. Although they were
not allowed to hold any important offices in the government,
the coloreds were usually wealthier and better educated than
blacks. They considered themselves more white than black
and superior to the common black laborer. Most of them felt
threatened by Garvey’s racial-solidarity movement.


--- PAGE 33 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
The option of joining the colored class had been open to
Garvey. Normally, educated blacks such as Garvey tried to
improve their standing by marrying into the colored middle
class. Those who did so were seeking to break their ties with
fellow blacks—denying their “inferior” blood. Garvey could
not make such a compromise, and he knew that by refusing
to do so he was endangering some old friendships. “I had to
decide whether to please my friends and be one of the ‘black-
whites’ of Jamaica, and be reasonably prosperous, or come out
openly and defend and help improve and protect the integrity
of the black millions and suffer, ” Garvey wrote later. “I decided
to do the latter. ”
Jamaica’s colored leaders responded to Garvey’s attempts to
organize the blacks with scalding attacks on him in the local
newspapers. “I was openly hated and persecuted by some of
those colored men on the island, who did not want to be
classified as Negroes, but as white, ” Garvey recalled. “They hated
me worse than poison. ” He was bitterly disappointed about
the treatment he received from the coloreds. These were the
educated people he had hoped would be at the forefront of
the crusade for black advancement. Instead, they had rejected
their African heritage.
The coloreds’ disdainful attitude toward their black ancestry
produced an opposite reaction in Garvey. “When Europe was
inhabited by a race of cannibals, a race of savages, naked men,
heathens, and pagans, Africa was peopled with a race of cultured
black men, who were masters in art, science and literature, ”
Garvey taught the UNIA ’s members. The superiority of African
to European civilization was to become a central point of his
philosophy. He would continue to look back to an Africa
inhabited by “men who were cultured and refined; men who, it
was said, were like the gods. ”
By late 1915, however, Garvey was forced to recognize that
his movement was struggling. The UNIA had attracted only
about 100 members, and it was clear to the black population
24


--- PAGE 34 ---
Doomed to Lead 25
that the organization could do little to help them. Garvey
admitted that he was finding his work “harassing and
heartrending. ” Much of his talk about the glories of ancient
Africa was probably lost on impoverished farmers struggling
to feed their families. In addition, his colored opponents
had used their considerable influence to discredit the UNIA.
White sympathizers whom Garvey was counting on to help
fund a Jamaican Tuskegee Institute were, after World War I
began in 1914, preoccupied with the news coming from the
European battlefronts.
Marcus Garvey began the UNIA in hopes of uniting the black population in an
atmosphere of racial pride that promoted education and opportun ity. He laid
out the beliefs of the organization in an issue of Negro World, an official
UNIA newspaper created by Garvey.
What We Believe
The Universal Negro Improvement Association advocates the unity  and
blending of all Negroes into a strong, healthy race.
It is against miscegenation [racial intermarriage] and race sui cide.
It believes that the Negro race is as good as any other, and therefore should
be as proud of itself as the others are.
It believes in the purity of the Negro race and the purity of t he white race.
It is against rich blacks marrying poor whites.
It is against rich or poor whites taking advantage of Negro wom en.
It believes in the spiritual Fatherhood of God and the Brotherh ood of Man.
Marcus Garvey, Negro World, 1924
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 35 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Realizing that he would have to look elsewhere for the
money to carry out his programs, Garvey decided to make a
fund-raising tour of the southern United States. He wrote to
Booker T. Washington about his plans, hoping that Tuskegee’s
director would introduce him to American audiences. In late
1915, Garvey learned that Washington had died. Saddened
by the loss of the man he so admired, Garvey nonetheless
continued to prepare for his trip. He did not care that he had
no friends in America, for he believed it was his mission in lif e
to lead his people. Wherever Garvey found members of his
race living in oppression, he would also find followers.
26


--- PAGE 36 ---
When the 28-year-old Garvey arrived in the United States on
March 23, 1916, he found a large black population that was
ready to listen to ideas about racial pride and self-improvement.
American blacks were tired of being the victims of prejudice
and mob violence in their own country and were seeking a
leader who could restore their dignity and self-respect. Garvey
believed he could be that leader.
Few people in 1916 had heard of the UNIA or its founder,
and Garvey arrived in New Y ork City without fanfare. He
lodged with a Jamaican family in Harlem, an area that had
recently become the center of the city’s black population. A
strong black community organization was well established,
and the district had already gained a reputation as a place
where blacks could come to pursue their own culture free from
harassment. Among those who had flocked to Harlem was
the ragtime pianist and composer Scott Joplin. The district
“Up, You Mighty Race”
4
27


--- PAGE 37 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
also supported a thriving business community and a growing
black protest movement.
During his first months in New Y ork, Garvey worked as a
printer and spent his free time on street corners, explaining his
program for racial solidarity to anyone who would listen. The
Harlem blacks regarded him curiously—this Jamaican who
spoke so fervently about the wonders of Africa. T oo short to
have much of a presence in crowds, Garvey stood on boxes
to give his speeches. Sometimes, weak from hunger, he fell off
his stand. He caught many colds standing chilled and damp in
his worn-out shoes and thin suits. Though he tried hard to win
a following, Harlem was not ready for him. American blacks
were more interested in racial problems in their own country
than in the situation in faraway Africa.
After three months in New Y ork, Garvey had saved enough
money to begin his lecturing and fund-raising tour. As in Latin
America and Europe, he traveled extensively, speaking in major
cities from Boston to Washington, D.C., to Chicago and visiting
nearly every state with a large black population. He spoke about
conditions in Jamaica and the Caribbean and met with black
community leaders to hear their views about the racial situation
in the United States. During his travels Garvey learned about
the history of black Americans and became familiar with the
serious problems they faced throughout the country.
Since 1619, when the first group of African slaves had been
brought to Virginia, blacks had toiled in the fields, shops,
and homes of white Americans. The institution of slavery
became firmly established throughout the South as Americans
moved west, but it gradually died out in the North after the
Revolutionary War. The slave trade with Africa was finally
outlawed in 1808, but most blacks in the South remained
in bondage until 1863. On January 1 of that year, midway
through the American Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln
issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed all
slaves in the Confederate states.
28


--- PAGE 38 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 29
When the Civil War ended in 1865, blacks held great hopes
for their future in the United States. From 1867 to 1877, the
South underwent the process of Reconstruction, during which
Though Garvey was mostly ignored when he came to the
United States to promote his ideas on race and the UNIA, he
soon improved his speaking skills and won supporters. This
handbill advertises one of the mass meetings held by Garvey
to discuss the issues of the black race around the world.


--- PAGE 39 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
the formerly rebellious states were brought back into the
Union. Congress passed laws that forced white Southerners to
give equal rights to their ex-slaves. Black males were given the
right to vote and to run for public office. In general, blacks
expected an improvement in their economic and social status.
These hopes gradually faded in the following decades as
the Southern state governments fell into the control of men
opposed to black progress. Blacks remained primarily in the
South. Most were poor, owned little land, and were denied
opportunities for advancement that were open to whites. In
the 1890s, Southern states began to pass laws denying voting
privileges to anyone who could not meet certain literacy or
property-ownership standards. The poor, mainly uneducated
Southern blacks were stripped of their voting rights.
Although discrimination was worst in the South—where
the so-called Jim Crow laws allowed whites to bar blacks from
restaurants and hotels and to force them to attend separate
schools—segregation was also common in the North. Race
riots in New Y ork City in 1900 and in Springfield, Illinois, in
1908 demonstrated that attacks on blacks by white mobs were
possible anywhere in the country.
Shortly before Garvey arrived in the United States, black
hopes for winning equal rights had revived. In 1914, World
War I broke out in Europe. The United States remained neutral
during the first years of the conflict, but American industries
increased production to meet orders for supplies from the
warring European nations. Northern factories had previously
depended on recent immigrants from Europe to fill job
openings in their plants, but wartime attacks on ships in the
Atlantic reduced the flow of traffic from abroad. Companies
began sending representatives to the South in search of cheap
sources of labor. These agents promised jobs with good pay to
any blacks who moved to the Northern cities to work. Many
poor farmers leaped at the offer and moved their families
north. There they hoped to find a better way of life.
30


--- PAGE 40 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 31
Garvey witnessed the northward flow of black migration
during his travels in 1916 and 1917. He saw that the migrants
had not discovered the promised land they had dreamed of.
Instead, they encountered wretched housing conditions, a high
cost of living, and much of the same discrimination they faced
in the South. (For additional information on the migration
of African-Americans to Northern cities, enter “great black
migration” into any search engine and browse the sites listed.)
Wherever he traveled, Garvey spoke out against the injustices
his race was forced to endure. Blacks should be proud of their
blood, he told his audiences, but he warned them they would
never be given the respect and equality they deserved until they
improved themselves. Blacks first needed to unite for their own
protection, and they must obtain more education and free
themselves of their dependence on white employers.
American blacks had a long way to go before they could
achieve the self-sufficiency Garvey advocated. As he told a
crowd in one North Carolina town: “When I came down here,
I had to get on a white man’s train, on a white man’s railroad.
I landed in a white man’s town, came out here on a white
man’s car, and am now speaking from a white man’s platform.
Where do you Negroes come in? If I depended on getting
here on anything that you have furnished, I would have been
walking for six months. ”
Despite the overall grimness of the racial situation in the
United States, Garvey did find some room for hope. Out-
numbered and battling organized discrimination, blacks had
still made great accomplishments during their half-century
of freedom. He said to a Chicago audience: “I have seen Negro
banks in Washington and Chicago, stores, cafes, restaurants,
theaters, and real estate agencies that fill my heart with joy t o
realize . . . that the people of the race have sufficient pride to
do things for themselves. ”
After nearly a year of traveling, Garvey returned to New Y ork,
determined to have another crack at a Harlem audience. He


--- PAGE 41 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
soon got his chance. On June 12, 1917, he attended a lecture
given by Hubert Harrison, a militant spokesman for the black
protest movement. Harrison spotted Garvey and introduced
the leader of the Jamaican UNIA to his audience. When he
finished his lecture, Harrison asked Garvey to join him on
the stage and speak to the crowd. When Garvey explained
his program for black unity, the crowd clapped and cheered.
His recent travels had obviously shown him how to touch
responsive chords in American audiences.
Soon after his first successful speech in New Y ork, Garvey
began holding weekly Sunday meetings at neighborhood
churches. He saw that his powerful, eloquent speaking style
was having a strong effect on his listeners. Encouraged, he
helped a group of supporters form a New Y ork chapter of his
Jamaican organization.
OFF AND RUNNING IN AMERICA
The new UNIA branch was run by a board of elected officials,
with Garvey serving in an advisory role. He remained president
of the Jamaican UNIA, with which he corresponded by mail.
He still intended on returning home and renewing his efforts
to start a Jamaican Tuskegee Institute. These plans had to
be changed, however, when the New Y ork UNIA branch ran
into trouble during the first months of its existence. A group
of Harlem politicians tried to grab control of the organization.
Garvey’s moves to block the takeover resulted in an ugly battle
within the UNIA. By the end of 1917, the organization had
fallen apart.
Almost immediately, Garvey started a new and larger UNIA
chapter in New Y ork, with himself as president. He decided
that the United States, with its greater wealth and population,
was a better place than Jamaica to base his operations. Thus,
New Y ork became the international headquarters of the UNIA.
Garvey quickly began building up the strength of the
UNIA and writing to black communities throughout the world.
32


--- PAGE 42 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 33
His weekly meetings were moved to large convention halls,
where he excited his audiences with visions of a proud and free
black race. During 1918, the former printer began publishing
Negro World, the internationally distributed UNIA newspaper.
Negro World was an invaluable tool for spreading Garvey’s
philosophy around the globe. The weekly newspaper carried
Garvey’s own lengthy—and often highly controversial—
editorials and reported on news events and issues that were
of interest to blacks. The activities of the UNIA were of course
covered in detail. Garvey wrote many articles that paid tribute
to great figures in black history. The paper also published
letters from its readers, which helped blacks learn about
conditions in other countries.
In Negro World ’s early days, Garvey’s eager staff arose at
dawn to distribute the paper free of charge, pushing it under
the doors of Harlem’s black households. In later years the
weekly charged from 5 to 10 cents—about the same price as
daily newspapers—so the Negro World was affordable to
most of Garvey’s supporters. The newspaper was circulated
in the United States, Canada, the West Indies, Latin America,
Europe, and Africa. At its peak Negro World had a circulation
of more than 60,000. Black readers throughout the world
eagerly awaited the next copy of the paper that sported
on its masthead the UNIA motto: “One God, One Aim,
One Destiny. ”
With the help of the Negro World , Garvey’s message even
succeeded in penetrating into the remoter areas of Africa.
Jomo Kenyatta, the African nationalist leader and president
of Kenya from 1964 to 1978, described how the newspaper
circulated throughout the British East African colony in which
he grew up. “Kenyan nationalists, unable to read, would gather
round a reader of Garvey’s newspaper, the Negro World, and
listen to an article two or three times. Then they would run
various ways through the forest, ” carefully repeating all that
they had heard to others they met.


--- PAGE 43 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Interest in the UNIA grew quickly, and the organization was
soon boasting a membership in the thousands. Branches were
established in Chicago, Philadelphia, New Orleans, Los Angeles,
and many other cities. Like the Jamaican UNIA, the American
chapters offered health insurance to their members. Dues
were 35 cents a month, part of which was turned over to the
UNIA headquarters.
Garvey’s dynamic personality was an essential factor in the
spread of the movement. A tireless worker, he spent seven days
a week on UNIA business. He often spoke in two places in a day
as he traveled around the United States and Canada. Many of
the people he had met during his years of travel were enlisted
in forming new UNIA branches. He was also assisted by some
members of the Jamaican chapter, including Amy Ashwood,
who came to New Y ork to help him run the organization.
The UNIA president’s powerful voice also played a big role
in his success. Many people traveled long distances to hear
him speak, often leaving the meeting as dedicated UNIA
members. Garvey spoke from the heart and never used notes
for his speeches. Wherever he went, he made sure to learn
about the special problems in the area and would focus on
them in his lectures.
William L. Sherrill, a UNIA official, described how he decided
to join the organization after hearing Garvey speak in Baltimore:
One night on my way to a show, I saw a huge crowd
outside a church. I went up and said, “What’s going on
in there?” A lady turned to me and said, “Man alive,
don’t you know that Marcus Garvey is in there talking.
Y es, indeed, Garvey in person. ” Shucks, I said, I may as
well see what he looks like ....
I squeezed in, until I could get a good look at him;
then suddenly he turned in my direction, and in a voice
like thunder from Heaven he said, “Men and women,
what are you here for? T o live unto yourself, until your
34


--- PAGE 44 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 35
body manures the earth, or to live God’s purpose to the
fullest?” He continued to complete his thought in that
compelling, yet pleading voice for nearly an hour. I
stood there like one in a trance, every sentence ringing
in my ears, and finding an echo in my heart. When I
walked out of that church, I was a different man ...a n d
so help me! I am still on the Garvey train.
Busy with UNIA organizational work, Garvey had little
time to worry about his own income or comfort. His hard
work paid off, and by the middle of 1919, he was claiming that
the UNIA had attracted 2 million members in 30 chapters
around the world. Although these figures are probably extreme
exaggerations, they do reflect the widespread influence of the
organization. “No one will ever know the accurate membership
of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, ” declared
Garvey, “because every second Negro you meet, if not an actual
member, is one in spirit. ”
No matter what the true membership figures for the UNIA
really were, it is clear that, by 1919, Garvey was finding recruit-
ing easy in America’s worsening racial climate. World War I
ended in 1918, and the country’s economic boom ended with it.
The men who had gone overseas to fight after the United States
entered the war in 1917 returned home looking for work.
Immigrants from Europe again began to arrive in America.
Blacks who had moved north for jobs and good wages found
that they were the first to be fired once the labor shortage
eased up. The competition for jobs, combined with the friction
caused by the growth of black communities in Northern cities,
bred increasing racial hostilities. By 1919, these tensions
exploded into race riots in cities across the United States.
VIOLENCE, BLOOD, AND RACE
In Chicago, the drowning of a black boy who accidentally
swam into the white section of a public beach touched off cries


--- PAGE 45 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
of murder and led to 13 days of bloody racial violence. Further
rioting occurred in 1919 in such places as Washington, D.C.,
Longview, T exas, and Elaine, Arkansas. Some of the outbursts
were sparked by rumors of black assaults on white women,
others by white attacks on black homes and churches.
Although blacks defended themselves, they invariably got the
worst of the battles with white mobs and hostile police.
The increase in racial violence was accompanied by a revival
of the Ku Klux Klan. Founded in 1866, this dreaded white
supremacist organization had won a large following in the
36
Black soldiers, like this group leaving France after winning th e croix de
guerre bravery medal, were shocked to find increased racial vio lence
and discrimination upon their return to the United States after World War I.
Many blacks were outraged that their willingness to help their country
during war was rewarded with increased oppression, and they tur ned to
Garvey for solutions.


--- PAGE 46 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 37
South after the Civil War. The hooded and white-robed
Klansmen launched terror attacks against blacks and fought
to overturn the racial-equality measures passed during
Reconstruction. The second Klan started in Georgia in 1915
and included Jews, Catholics, and foreigners among its targets.
Blacks were the Klan’s favorite victims, however, and many
were kidnapped and lynched by white-robed mobs. Among
those lynched were black soldiers returning home from the
battlefields of World War I.
American blacks were shocked by the violence directed
at them. They had supported the war effort enthusiastically,
enlisting in the armed forces in great numbers and using their
hard-earned savings to buy war bonds. Instead of greater
freedom, however, blacks faced worse oppression after the
war. Disillusioned about their chances for achieving equality
in America, an increasing number of blacks were turning to
Garvey for leadership.
The UNIA extended a welcoming hand to the restless black
masses. As Garvey traveled around the country recruiting new
members, he repeatedly emphasized the theme of universal
black solidarity. “I know no national boundary where the
Negro is concerned, ” he told his listeners, instructing them to
reach out to their brothers and sisters in other countries. “Up,
you mighty race” became the rallying cry of the UNIA.
In his speeches, Garvey continued to stress the importance
of a good education. He told blacks to be proud of their race,
for their African ancestors had been masters of the arts and
sciences. White societies, he said, were “but duplicates of a
grander civilization” created in Africa centuries before. He also
told his audiences to look to people of their own race for models
and to save their admiration for black heroes. They should put
the interests of their race before those of their country.
Another of Garvey’s proposals was that blacks stop
worshiping a white God and pray to a divine being who was
black. He admitted that God really had no skin color, but he


--- PAGE 47 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
was disturbed that many blacks hung pictures on the walls of
their homes that showed God as a white man. This difference
between themselves and the way they saw God could only make
blacks think of themselves as members of an inferior race.
38
The Ku Klux Klan leaders with whom Marcus Garvey met in 1922 re pre-
sented an organization in its second incarnation that already w as known
across the country as America’s most notorious racist group. Fo unded
in Pulaski, Tennessee, in 1866 and led by prominent ex-Confeder ates
such as Nathan Bedford Forrest, the “first” Klan concentrated its effor ts
on bringing down Republican governments and restricting black civil rights
throughout the South. To achieve these ends, the Klan relied on violence
and intimidation —so much so that it provoked uncharacteristically swift
federal action. In 1871, the United States government moved aggres-
sively to suppress the group, with the result that, within a ye ar, the Klan
essentially ceased to exist.
Like a weed, however, the organization sprang up again. It resu rfaced in
1915, in Stone Mountain, Georgia, energized by widespread racist sentiment
of the type found in Thomas Dixon’s popular novel The Clansman (1905) and
D.W. Griffith’s blockbuster silent film The Birth of a Nation (1915). This
“second” Klan started a reign of terror that left thousands of blacks and
even some whites, mainly Roman Catholics and Jews, dead or injured across
America. Claiming to be the sole defenders of the white race, t he Klan
rampaged from Oregon to Georgia and once had the audacity to ma rch
down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C., flaunting their h ate. By
the mid-1920s, the Ku Klux Klan had more than three million white-h ooded
members coast to coast.
The Great Depression and World War II fixed popular attention o n the
economy at home and war overseas. As a result, by 1944, the Kla n had
withered and died once more.
The latest incarnation of the KKK rose to prominence during the  civil
rights battles of the 1950s and 1960s and persists today as sma ll, locally
based hate groups and racist publications and Web sites. Yet de spite small
numbers and loose organization, the Klan remains as dangerous a s when
Marcus Garvey ill advisedly chose to meet with its members.
The KKK


--- PAGE 48 ---
“Up, You Mighty Race” 39
“[Angels] are not white peaches from Georgia, ” he said. “We are
going to make them beautiful black peaches from Africa. ”
For the same reason, Garvey told parents to give their
children black dolls to play with. He cried out against the skin-
bleaching and hair-straightening products that many blacks
used to make themselves look “more white, ” and he forbade the
Negro World to accept advertisements for such merchandise.
“God made us as his perfect creation, ” he said. “He made no
mistake when he made us black with kinky hair ....N o w  t a k e
those kinks out of your mind instead of your hair. ”
Garvey told his followers the things that blacks wanted to
hear—that their race could rise up and be free, proud, and
powerful. Others had said it before, but none with Garvey’s
passion. By 1919 his fame was beginning to spread around the
globe. The UNIA had purchased a large auditorium in Harlem
to serve as its headquarters. The building, renamed Liberty
Hall, was filled nearly every night with thousands of adoring
“Garveyites” straining to hear the voice of the prophet of black
pride. Soon other UNIA branches were naming their meeting
halls after the famous Harlem auditorium.
There were many people in the United States who did not
look kindly on Garvey’s movement. Most whites believed he
was a dangerous anti-American fanatic who was inciting blacks
to attack whites. Many black intellectuals thought his ideas
were crude and simplistic. Some black clergymen supported
him wholeheartedly, but others accused him of trying to steal
their congregations from them. He engaged in long-running
disputes with rival political leaders and the editors of other
black newspapers. Finally, even some UNIA officials found him
to be arrogant and unwilling to accept any criticism.
Garvey’s task was immensely difficult, and he was bound to
stir up much controversy no matter what he did. In October
1919 his life nearly came to an end. He was sitting in his
New Y ork office when a former employee named George Tyler
stormed in and demanded that he be given $25 that he was


--- PAGE 49 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
owed. Suddenly, Tyler drew out a gun and fired several times.
Garvey was lucky to escape serious injury, but one bullet grazed
his forehead, and another struck his leg. His secretary, Amy
Ashwood, grappled with the gunman and forced him to flee.
Tyler was apprehended later in the day but died under
mysterious circumstances, supposedly jumping to death from
the prison cell where he was being held. Before he died, Tyler
had reportedly said that he had been sent to murder Garvey. No
accomplices were ever found, however, and the police treated
the matter as a private dispute between Garvey and Tyler.
Garvey soon recovered from his wounds, and his popularity
soared. The black press trumpeted him as a hero of his race, a
great leader who had almost been struck down while shielding
his people from racial bigotry. For the moment his critics were
silenced, and his followers were cheering on the man they
called Black Moses.
40


--- PAGE 50 ---
Early in 1919, Garvey made an announcement that electrified
the black community: The UNIA was founding a giant shipping
company that would be owned and operated entirely by blacks.
The new firm was christened the Black Star Line.
Advertisements were placed in the Negro World and other
newspapers inviting blacks to buy stock in their own
steamship line. Garvey’s shipping venture opened whole new
horizons to blacks. Millions were swept up by the vision of a
fleet representing the entire race, proudly bearing the Black
Star flag into all the world’s ports.
The formation of the Black Star Line was Garvey’s opening
shot in his battle to achieve black economic independence.
The maritime company was intended to be many times the
size of any black-owned business then in existence. As he
explained to his followers, “Our economic condition seems, to
a great extent, to affect our general status ....B e  not deceived,
Star of Destiny
5
41


--- PAGE 51 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
wealth is strength, wealth is power, wealth is justice, is liberty ,
is real human rights. ”
T o Garvey, the Black Star Line was far more than a shipping
company; it embodied within it the struggle for black rights.
Because black employees and customers were discriminated
against in the white-dominated business world, their only hope
for winning economic security was to found and patronize
their own stores and companies.
One tool for helping blacks start their own businesses was
the Negro Factories Corporation, which was established by
the UNIA in 1919. The goal of this association was, the Negro
World announced, to “build and operate factories in the big
industrial centers of the United States, Central America, the
W est Indies, and Africa to manufacture every marketable
commodity. ” Stock in the corporation sold for $1 a share,
and Garvey preached to the masses that by investing in the
UNIA firm, blacks would be creating jobs for themselves and
their children.
While never growing to the extent envisioned by the Negro
World, the Negro Factories Corporation did start and operate
many businesses in Harlem. These included a chain of grocery
stores, laundries, restaurants, clothing stores, a doll factory,
and a small publishing house. The corporation also supplied
guidance and issued loans to black businesses.
The UNIA ’s most ambitious project was the Black Star Line.
While Garvey’s critics grudgingly praised his other economic
projects, his proposals for a black shipping line met with great
skepticism. The general black population had fewer doubts,
however, and the $5-a-share company stock was sold almost
as fast as it could be printed. In September 1919, Garvey
announced that the line had made its first purchase, the
32-year-old merchant ship Y armouth, for the impressive sum
of $165,000.
Even before the Black Star Line was officially established,
Garvey had told UNIA members that he was collecting money
42


--- PAGE 52 ---
Star of Destiny 43
to buy ships. They responded enthusiastically, and more than
$600,000 worth of stock was sold during the line’s first year.
UNIA supporters scraped together their savings to buy shares,
and money poured in from all over the world. “I have sent
twice to buy shares amounting to $125, ” wrote a stockholder
from Panama. “Now I am sending $35 for seven more shares.
Y ou might think I have money, but the truth, as I stated before,
is that I have no money now. But if I’m to die of hunger it
will be all right because I’m determined to do all that’s in my
power to better the conditions of my race. ”
Buoyed by the initial success of the Black Star Line, Garvey
began to make plans for a huge extravaganza that would display
the UNIA ’s growing power. Late in 1919, he sent a message to
UNIA branches and to other black organizations: A convention
of delegates representing all the black peoples of the world
would be held in New Y ork during August 1920. The purpose
of the convention was to organize the black race into a united
front. Delegates would draw up a Negro Declaration of Rights
and then present it to all the world’s governments.
Garvey was also in the news for another reason. He and his
secretary, Amy Ashwood, were married on December 25, 1919.
A lavish wedding ceremony took place in Harlem’s Liberty
Hall. It was a taste of the festivities that would occur the follow-
ing August. Details of Garvey’s ambitious scheme circulated
throughout Harlem, but they gave the black world little
preparation for the magnificent spectacle he organized that
summer. Delegates came from as far away as Africa and South
America; packed convention sessions were held in Liberty Hall
for 30 days. The 1920 First International Convention of the
Negro Peoples of the World made both blacks and whites sit up
and take notice of Garvey and his program.
A GRAND GATHERING
The convention opened on Sunday, August 1, with religious
services and a silent march of delegates and UNIA members


--- PAGE 53 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
through Harlem. The next day, the true spectacle began. Garvey
had organized a giant parade through the streets of Harlem.
Much of the district closed down as thousands lined the streets
to watch the procession. Garvey rode in an open car, wearing
a fancy uniform and a plumed hat. He was not the only one
dressed for the occasion. Spectators were astonished to view an
army of UNIA groups.
First in line were members of the African Legions, some
riding horses, some marching on foot. They were outfitted in blue
uniforms with bright red trouser stripes. The group’s members
were unarmed and were used by Garvey mainly for ceremonial
purposes, but their military bearing suggested the hidden
power of the black race. Garvey hoped that the Legions could
one day be used to reclaim Africa from its foreign occupiers.
Following the African Legions were 200 Black Cross nurses,
marching in long white dresses and white stockings. Few of the
nurses had any actual medical training, but they symbolized
the UNIA ’s commitment to aiding sick and needy members of
the black community. In the middle of the parade came the
officers and crew of the Black Star Line, who received huge
ovations from the crowd. After them marched the Women’s
Auxiliary, a female counterpart of the African Legions. Next
came a group of proud young Garveyites, the UNIA Juveniles.
At the end of the parade were several brass bands, the UNIA
choir, and the thousands of convention delegates who had
responded to Garvey’s call.
The marchers carried banners that proclaimed “Down with
Lynching, ” “Join the Fight for Freedom, ” and “Africa Must Be
Free. ” Some of the women waved signs reading “God Give Us
Real Men. ” Many of those watching felt for the first time the
power and united spirit of an aroused black race.
On the night of August 2, people gathered at Madison Square
Garden, the largest indoor auditorium in New Y ork, to hear
the words of their leader, Marcus Garvey. The crowd filled the
hall of the auditorium and spilled out into the streets. Inside
44


--- PAGE 54 ---
Star of Destiny 45
the hall, the convention finally got under way. The people in
the audience sang the new UNIA anthem, “Ethiopia, Thou
Land of Our Fathers” (Ethiopia is an ancient name for Africa),
and were entertained by bands as they waited impatiently for
Garvey to appear.
Encouraged by the success of his business ventures, Garvey
held the First Convention of the Negro Peoples of the World
in 1920. The event lasted 30 days, and featured speeches,
meetings, and a parade of various representatives from the
black community. Here, Garvey rides in the parade, dressed
in a military costume and plumed hat.


--- PAGE 55 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Dressed in dark robes, Garvey finally stepped onto the
stage and received a five-minute standing ovation. When the
clapping died down, he made an announcement: The UNIA
had sent a telegram to Eamon De Valera, the leader of the Irish
independence movement, expressing the convention’s support
for Ireland’s struggle to free itself from British rule. Ireland
was in the process of winning self-rule, and De Valera had
assumed the title of president of the Irish Republic. The UNIA
telegram stated: “We believe Ireland should be free even as
Africa shall be free for the Negroes of the world. Keep up the
fight for a free Ireland. ” (For additional information this Iris h
leader, enter “Eamon De Valera” into any search engine and
browse the sites listed.)
The telegram highlighted one of the main thrusts of Garvey’s
program: the need for an independent black-ruled nation in
Africa. He had long sympathized with the Irish cause, and by
comparing that struggle to the black desire for self-rule in
Africa, he drew international attention to his own campaign.
All oppressed people were tied together, he said. “We are the
descendants of a suffering people, we are the descendants of a
people determined to suffer no longer. ”
46
Marcus Garvey believed Africa was the only place where black people could
truly have freedom and equality with other races. In Africa, th e black man
was in the majority, and by becoming powerful there he could ga in power
around the world. Garvey discusses this opinion in a 1929 artic le from his
Jamaican newspapers The Blackman:
We are determined to solve our own problem by redeeming our Mot herland
Africa from the hands of alien exploiters and found there a Gov ernment, a
nation of our own, strong enough to lend protection to the memb ers of our
race scattered all over the world, and to compel the respect of  the nations
and races of the earth.
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 56 ---
Star of Destiny 47
In his speeches at the convention, Garvey stressed that Africa
belonged to the black peoples of the world. He warned the
European colonial powers that blacks were “coming 400 million
strong, and we mean to retake every square inch of the
12 million square miles of African territory belonging to us
by right Divine. ” The statement was backed by Garvey’s slogan
“Let Africa be our guiding star—Our Star of Destiny. ”
Garvey was just beginning to form his ambitious plans for a
black homeland. Eventually, he believed, Africa would become
a magnet for all blacks in search of a nation that would allow
them full rights as citizens. The convention raised hopes that
this vision could become a reality.
For four weeks the speeches and meetings continued. In
the midst of all this commotion, the UNIA was raising lots of
money for its various operations. Stock in the Black Star Line
and the Negro Factories Corporation was purchased in massive
quantities. People who contributed sums of $50 or more to the
UNIA were given special bronze, silver, or gold crosses known
as African Redemption medals.
Acting as representatives of the worldwide black community,
the delegates set up a model government for a future black
nation. They elected Garvey provisional president of Africa,
the head of a government in exile. Leading UNIA officials
received titles such as “knight of the Nile. ” The delegates chose
a flag of red, black, and green to represent the new UNIA-
sponsored nation: red for the blood shed by blacks to make
themselves free, black for their skin color, and green for the
lush African forests. All of this was done to demonstrate to
blacks that they were capable of creating institutions that
equaled those of whites.
The convention’s most important task was the composition
of the Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World.
In order to prepare a document that would truly represent
blacks throughout the world, the writers of the declaration
listened to delegates report on the conditions in their countries.


--- PAGE 57 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
The first section of the declaration protested that blacks were
“denied the common rights due to human beings for no other
reason than their race and color. ” The document condemned
all forms of discrimination, lynching, unequal school systems
for blacks, and the denial of equal pay for equal work.
Following the declaration’s section on black grievances came
a list of 54 rights that all countries should give to their Negr o
citizens. The convention stated that blacks should be accorded
the right to participate in politics and should receive the sam e
legal rights as other citizens. “Negro” should be written with
a capital N, the declaration pointed out. Africans should be
48
The Black Cross Nurses, who symbolized the UNIA’s commitment to sick
and poor black community members, were one of many groups to ma rch
in Garvey’s 1920 convention. The convention instilled feelings of pride
and unity in the black people who attended it, and Garvey hoped  it would
lead to important changes in the position of the black race in the world.


--- PAGE 58 ---
Star of Destiny 49
given their freedom. Lastly, the declaration proclaimed that
August 31, the final day of the convention, was to be an annual
international holiday for blacks.
This was a declaration to make blacks proud, and it made
everyone take notice of the great movement that was stirring
within the Negro race. “The nations of the world are aware
that the Negro of yesterday has disappeared from the scene
of human activities, ” Garvey declared after the convention.
“His place has been taken by a new Negro who stands erect,
conscious of his manhood rights and fully determined to
preserve them at all costs. ”


--- PAGE 59 ---
When Garvey started his new shipping venture in 1919, he
promised that the Black Star Line would make large profits
for its investors. This opportunity to make money was of
secondary concern to many of the firm’s stockholders. Far more
important to them was that the Black Star Line gave them a
tremendous feeling of hope about the future of their race.
The cheering crowds that greeted the ships in every port they
visited were filled with a newfound sense of pride when they
saw the vessels flying the red, black, and green UNIA flag.
While the multitudes cheered, however, some of Garvey’s
critics were asking a troublesome question: Did Garvey or
any of his UNIA associates know anything about running
a steamship line? The answer was no. The Black Star Line’s
board of managers had little business experience, and some
of the line’s officials were more intent on lining their own
pockets than on operating a profitable shipping company.
Proud Ships 
Sailing in Circles
6
50


--- PAGE 60 ---
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 51
Garvey gave little thought as to what kind of ships he needed,
how they should be maintained, what cargo they would carry,
or where they would sail. He looked upon the ships as promo-
tional tools that would be used to spread the UNIA ’s message.
After purchasing the Black Star Line’s flagship, the Y armouth,
Garvey announced that the vessel was being renamed the
Frederick Douglass after the leading black spokesman of the
antislavery movement in pre-Civil War America. (The ship
remained officially known as the Y armouthbecause the Black
Star Line, for financial reasons, failed to register it under its
new name.) Garvey immediately scheduled a voyage to the
West Indies and hired one of the only qualified black captains,
Joshua Cockbourne, to command the ship. On October 31,
thousands of Garveyites gathered at New Y ork’s 135th Street
pier to see the Y armouthoff.
The grand bon voyage almost turned into a humiliating
fiasco. Just before the scheduled departure, a representative
of the Y armouth’s previous owners appeared with an order
forbidding the ship to sail until it was fully insured. Garvey
had only made a down payment on the ship, and the previous
owner was nervous about the voyage. With the excited crowd
waiting nearby, however, the agent relented. The ship was
allowed to sail, but only as far as the 23rd Street pier. There
the ship remained until Garvey obtained the insurance. The
Y armouthfinally departed from New Y ork, but the initial delay
was a sign of the troubles that the ship and the Black Star Line
would undergo.
The Y armouthwas hardly in tip-top shape. Its boilers were
old and in need of repair, and the ship could rarely work up
any speed. “The Y armouth was not a vessel to set a sailor’s
heart aflame, ” wrote Hugh Mulzac, an officer on the ship. He
estimated that the vessel was worth less than one sixth what
the Black Star line paid for it. Financially, the first voyage wa s
a total loss. The Y armouthsailed from New Y ork nearly empty,
and it carried few passengers and little cargo on its return tr ip.


--- PAGE 61 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
The ship was greeted by large crowds in every port it visited,
and sales of company stock soared—but operating the ship
was a huge financial drain.
52
Garvey, here in 1921, hit frequent roadblocks with his
projects that were intended to give blacks equality, opportunity,
and hope. His biggest venture, the Black Star Line, was a
financial failure, and Garvey was eventually arrested on
accusations of mail fraud associated with the shipping line.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 53
The Y armouth’s second voyage was no better than the first.
Cockbourne dumped half the ship’s cargo of whiskey over-
board, supposedly to lighten the ship after it started to list. A
fleet of boats was waiting by the ship to salvage the jettisoned
cargo, so the captain’s actions seemed suspicious. The ship spent
its second voyage ferrying between ports in the Caribbean,
losing money on each trip. Many stops were made merely to
promote Black Star Line stock. On the Y armouth’s return to the
United States, Cockbourne ran the ship aground in Boston, and
Garvey fired him.
The Y armouth made one more unprofitable voyage and
then was sold in late 1921 for a paltry $1,625. Neither of the
Black Star Line’s other two ships fared any better. In early 1920,
Garvey purchased the Shadyside, a small 50-year-old excursion
boat, for $35,000. The vessel was used for Hudson River
pleasure cruises and catered to Harlemites who wanted to get
away from the city on hot summer days—but the ancient
Shadyside was costly to operate, and Garvey was forced to retire
the ship after less than a year of service. The boat finally sank
during a winter storm while tied up at its dock. The company’s
other ill-fated ship was the Kanawha, an old pleasure yacht
that was purchased for $60,000 in 1920. The ship could only
carry a small cargo and, like the Y armouth, was used mainly
to advertise the shipping line and raise money for the UNIA.
After a series of engine failures that required expensive repairs,
Garvey ordered that the ship be abandoned in Cuba.
TRYING TO SALVAGE THE BLACK STAR WRECK
As early as November 1919, Garvey had promised that the
Black Star Line would acquire a ship capable of sailing to
African ports. By October 1920, the expenses of buying
and operat ing the Y armouth, Shadyside , and Kanawha had
crippled the Black Star Line. T o get around these difficulties,
Garvey formed another enterprise, the Black Star Steamship
Company of New Jersey, which could raise money for another


--- PAGE 63 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
vessel free of any legal connection to the financially troubled
Black Star Line.
The new corporation’s stock sold well, and Garvey began
seeking a satisfactory ship, which he intended to name the
Phillis Wheatley after the first black American poet. Several
attempts were made to purchase such a vessel, but all ended in
failure. By the end of 1921, Black Star shipping operations had
nearly ceased.
While the Black Star Line had been sailing into troubled waters,
Garvey had also been pursuing other parts of his program. Chief
among these were his efforts to secure an independent African
homeland for all of the world’s blacks. Many people believed
that Garvey was intending to lead all blacks living outside of
Africa in a return to the great continent. The UNIA therefore
became known as a “Back-to-Africa” movement. According to
some of Garvey’s close associates, he never envisioned a sudden
mass emigration to Africa. He proposed only that a few thousand
American blacks move to Africa and establish an independent
nation committed to fighting for the rights of blacks every-
where. He did hope, however, that the initial groups would be
followed by much larger emigrations over time.
Garvey feared for blacks living in countries where they
were a minority. He believed that continual demands for
equality by American blacks would threaten whites and lead
to increasingly violent racial conflicts. A strong African nation,
however, might be able to force other countries to respect the
rights of their black citizens.
Some of Garvey’s impoverished working-class followers were
swept up in the dream of escaping their troubles through the
“Back-to-Africa” movement. His critics charged that his ideas
were hopelessly unrealistic. Black Americans, they said, must
forget about moving to Africa, where they were total strangers,
and concentrate on improving conditions in the United States.
How could black Americans go back to a place where they had
never been?
54


--- PAGE 64 ---
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 55
One of Marcus Garvey’s favorite sayings reveals his truly unive rsal
perspective when it came to racial dignity: “A strong man is st rong every-
where.” Distilled, this particular aphorism (statement of a pri nciple)
implies that black self-determination could not be achieved in one place
without existing in every other. For Garvey, Africa represented  a hub for
a worldwide movement. Within this context, Garvey’s particular definition
of the term “back to Africa” differed substantially from the on e that had
emerged a century earlier.
Garvey was not the first to envision blacks returning to Africa ; indeed,
his only innovation lay in the fact that he envisioned such a m igration as a
prerequisite for the founding of a powerful black nation on the  continent.
Garvey imagined that this new “mother country” would draw on th e creative
energies of black men and women from around the world and would  base
itself on an economy driven by the exploitation of abundant nat ural
resources. As this state grew in power and prosperity, it would  protect and
promote black interests globally. Thus, any exodus of African A mericans
stood less for a return to an ancestral homeland than as a tent ative step
toward a genuinely universal pan-African center of gravity.
This was something entirely new. Until the unveiling of the UNIA program,
the phrase “back to Africa” had carried a radically different m eaning. The
idea of black Americans returning to Africa had been around, in  some form,
since the early nineteenth century. As early as 1817, with the formation
of the American Colonization Society, white Americans had begun  trying
to erase the black presence in the young republic. Supporters o f the
Society’s repatriation plan included two presidents—James Madis on and
James Monroe—one Supreme Court chief justice, and the famous Am erican
orator Daniel Webster. Whereas Garvey sought a return to Africa in the hope
of empowering blacks, the ACS wanted to isolate them in a land its members
and supporters labeled as forsaken. The ACS held long meetings on the
subject of sending blacks back to their “home,” and, in the end , the
organization did far more than just talk. The Society purchased  a large tract
of land in West Africa in 1821 and immediately began transporti ng freed
slaves across the Atlantic Ocean. Eventually, an estimated 12,0 00 African
Americans arrived in what became the modern nation of Liberia. Marcus
Garvey might have been the last person to argue seriously for a  move
“back to Africa,” but he certainly was not the first.
“Back to Africa”


--- PAGE 65 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Garvey made several attempts to realize his dream of an
African homeland. After World War I, the defeated Germans
were stripped of their African possessions. In 1922, Garvey
sent a delegation to the League of Nations, the predecessor of
the United Nations, to ask that the former German colonies be
turned over to the UNIA. The league briefly considered the
petition, but the matter was later dropped.
Knowing that his chance of gaining a colony through the
League of Nations was a long shot, Garvey had previously
opened negotiations with the West African nation of Liberia
over the possibility of establishing settlements of black
Americans there. Liberia had been founded in 1822 as a
home for free black Americans who wanted to return to
Africa, and Garvey assumed that the Liberian government
would welcome the UNIA settlers. At first the Liberians did
indeed seem open to the idea, and Garvey promised that his
organization would build colleges, factories, and railroads
in the African nation. The UNIA sent a small team to make
arrangements for the new settlements. The expedition soon ran
out of money, however, and Garvey was too involved in other
matters to follow through on his plans. By early 1924, Garvey
was ready to make another try. This time a UNIA delegation
convinced Liberia to accept an initial settlement of a
few thousand Americans. By the summer of 1924, however,
when UNIA officials arrived to make final arrangements,
the Liberian president Charles D.B. King’s government had
changed its position entirely. The delegation was told to go
home; no settlements would be permitted.
Garvey desperately appealed to the Liberians to reconsider
their decision, but to no avail. King clearly had begun to
suspect that the UNIA was planning to overthrow his govern-
ment once it had established a strong presence in his country.
The Liberians were also afraid that France or Britain might
invade their nation if UNIA agitators began to stir up trouble
in the surrounding colonial areas. Finally, the land that the
56


--- PAGE 66 ---
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 57
UNIA had been promised was leased to the Firestone Rubber
Company soon after the deal fell through.
The setback in Liberia occurred three years after the
beginning of a series of events that was to isolate Garvey from
much of the black community and devastate the UNIA. In the
spring of 1921, Garvey toured throughout the West Indies and
Central America selling Black Star Line stock. Although he
raised considerable amounts of money, Garvey had a difficult
time reentering the United States. The State Department
declared him a dangerous radical and ordered the American
consulates in the countries he was visiting to refuse to grant
him a visa. The order was later rescinded, but Garvey was
beginning to feel strong pressure from the U.S. government.
Aware that he could easily be deported from the country by
hostile government officials, he applied for U.S. citizenship.
On his return to New Y ork, Garvey learned that his wife,
Amy Ashwood Garvey, was suing for a legal separation on the
grounds that he was having an affair with his new secretary,
a Jamaican woman named Amy Jacques. The marriage had
been troubled from the start, and Garvey had previously filed a
divorce suit against his wife, which he later dropped. The Garveys’
marital problems were widely discussed in the newspapers.
The second UNIA convention in August 1921 showed
further evidence of an organization in trouble. Although
the convention was well attended, some UNIA members
demanded to see a report on the financial status of the Black
Star Line. The feeling of black unity that marked the first
convention was already beginning to wane.
After the convention, Garvey’s long-cherished desire for a
black church was finally realized. Acting at Garvey’s request,
an ex-chaplain of UNIA, George Alexander McGuire, formed
the African Orthodox Church. In a ceremony held on
September 28, 1921, McGuire was ordained as bishop of the
church, which taught its members that God and Christ were
black. Many religious leaders attacked the new church, but it


--- PAGE 67 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
won a wide following, claiming a membership of 250,000 at
its peak. The church, however, served a broader purpose than
spiritual uplift. The AOC was meant to spread the Garvey
message throughout the black religious community.
By the end of 1921, the Black Star Line’s financial problems
were beginning to catch up to Garvey. His critics demanded
to know what had become of the three quarters of a million
dollars that investors had sunk in his shipping line. The postal
58
While Marcus Garvey languished in an American prison, petitione rs begged
President Calvin Coolidge to release the man they considered th eir savior.
One group from Panama went so far as to claim that, to them, Ga rvey was
“a superman; a demigod; and the reincarnated Angel of Peace com e from
Heaven to dispense Political Salvation.” Another band of supporters spoke of
Garvey as part of the Holy Trinity: “God, the Creator of all things and people,
His Son, the Spiritual Savior of all mankind . . . [and] Marcus  Garvey, the
leader of the Negro peoples of the world.” Such bold, almost ab surd
declarations of Garvey’s near divinity become understandable in the context
of the leader’s sincere, if rather eccentric, religiosity.
The head of UNIA felt sure that the God of peace and justice stood behind
him and his movement. More important, this God was a black God,  and a
black God required a black church. The logical outgrowth of thi s conviction
was a close affiliation between UNIA and the African Orthodox C hurch.
Founded in 1921 by George Alexander McGuire, a former UNIA chaplain, the
AOC became the de facto religious wing of Garvey’s organization. Through the
church and its official publication, the Negro Churchman, Garvey’s message
reached an audience that otherwise would have been unreceptive to his
political and social ideas.
The AOC also extended UNIA’s global reach. Congregations of the church
sprang up from Canada to South Africa. Binding itself so closel y to Garvey
and UNIA, however, also guaranteed that the AOC’s demise would coincide
with that of its patron. The partnership between black religion  and black
politics was for the most part suspended on UNIA’s disintegration, but it was
not dissolved. Other men such as Martin Luther King, Jr., and M alcolm X
would eventually reestablish it at another time with other agen das.
African Orthodox Church


--- PAGE 68 ---
Proud Ships Sailing in Circles 59
department charged that Garvey was circulating false adver-
tisements in order to raise money for the Black Star Line. In
January 1922, Garvey was arrested on a charge of using the
mail to deceive Black Star Line investors. In February, he
and three other company officials—Orlando Thompson, Elie
Garcia, and George T obias—were indicted on 12 counts of
mail fraud. The four men were released on bail while the
federal government conducted a thorough investigation into
the operations of the Black Star Line. The trial would not
begin until 15 months after the indictment was handed down.
It was the beginning of the end for Garvey and his movement.
His great business, the Black Star Line, was to be his downfall.


--- PAGE 69 ---
As Garvey began his trial on March 21, 1923, he was aware that
he was in deep trouble. His phenomenal success in building up
the biggest black organization in history, his radical ideas, and
his abrasive style had earned him the hatred of many enemies.
The efforts of these foes, combined with the failings of his own
organization, brought about the UNIA leader’s ruin.
The most powerful force opposing Garvey was the U.S.
government. Agents of the Justice Department had been
watching his movements ever since his arrival in the United
States. State Department officials periodically reported on UNIA
activities in other countries. The UNIA was often described
as dangerous in government reports on radical organizations.
As early as 1919, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover suggested in
a memo that the government stifle Garvey by bringing fraud
charges against him in connection with his Black Star Line
business dealings. (For additional information on the FBI and
The Most 
Dangerous Enemy
7
60


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Most Dangerous Enemy 61
its interest in Garvey, enter “J. Edgar Hoover and Garvey” into
any search engine and browse the sites listed.)
Garvey’s statements that blacks should put the interests of
their race above those of their country were seen by government
officials as a threat to law and order. He was accused of being
unpatriotic for saying, shortly after the end of World War I,
“The first dying that is to be done by the black man in the
future will be done to make himself free . . . as for me, I think
I have stopped dying for [the white man]. ” In 1921, when
he was applying for U.S. citizenship, Garvey toned down his
statements—but he remained firmly committed to the black
separatist movement in America.
The U.S. government was not alone in wanting to silence
Garvey. The European colonial powers saw the UNIA ’s strong
backing for native self-rule movements as a threat to their
control of Africa and other regions. They blamed Garvey for
inciting race riots and workers’ strikes in the colonies and
barred him from entering many of their possessions.
Garvey made a number of enemies within his own race as
well. The leaders of other black organizations resented Garvey’s
criticisms of their efforts to win a place for blacks within the
larger white society. The most powerful of Garvey’s opponents
was W.E.B. Du Bois, renowned editor and writer, cofounder of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), and tireless worker for racial cooperation.
Du Bois and his journal, the NAACP Crisis, had at first
been mildly supportive of Garvey, calling him a “sincere,
hardworking idealist. ” In late 1920, Du Bois wrote articles
criticizing Garvey’s management of the Black Star Line, but
heated exchanges between the two did not really begin until
the middle of 1922.
Du Bois published a series of damaging critiques of Garvey
and his program and described the UNIA president as a “little,
fat black man, ugly, but with intelligent eyes and a big head. ”
For his part, Garvey mocked Du Bois for his light-colored


--- PAGE 71 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
skin and accused the NAACP leader of wishing that he were
white. Ever since his disputes with Jamaica’s colored popula-
tion, Garvey had been hostile to lighter-skinned black leaders,
62
Garvey’s often controversial projects and statements drew
suspicion from the U.S. government and even from some
members of his own race. W.E.B. Du Bois, cofounder of the
NAACP, was one such black enemy of Garvey. Du Bois, seen
here, supported integration, as opposed to the separatism
espoused by Garvey, and the two men frequently attacked
each other verbally.


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Most Dangerous Enemy 63
believing that they looked down upon their darker brothers
and sisters. Garvey mistrusted whites and excluded them from
the UNIA. Du Bois’s organization was open to both blacks and
whites. Garvey believed that this was a dangerous mistake, for
he felt that though “there may be a few good white men in
America, there is no white man honest enough, sympathetic
enough, humane enough, liberal enough to really take up the
Negro’s cause and fight it to a successful conclusion. ”
Garvey also criticized the NAACP’s program of racial
integration. The UNIA advocated racial separatism, believing
that blacks and whites must establish their own separate social
and political institutions—their own churches, their own schools,
their own businesses, their own governments. The NAACP ,
Garvey charged, wanted to destroy the black race through
intermarriage with whites. Du Bois and his kind, Garvey
claimed, “believe that the black race will become, through
social contact and intercourse, so mixed up with the white race
as to produce a new type, probably like Du Bois himself, which
will in time be the real American. ” Maintaining a “separate but
equal” arrangement, in this case, translated into a vibrant, pure
black race that could confront and compete with whites on their
own terms. Garvey argued for a parallel global power structure
in which distinct races checked and balanced one another in the
pursuit of self-interested advancement.
THE STORM BREAKS
Many of Garvey’s views were shared by the Ku Klux Klan and
other white supremacist groups, who also believed in racial
separatism and purity. Early in 1922, Garvey made a terrible
mistake. Hoping to win Klan support for his Back to Africa
movement, Garvey met with Klan leader Edward Y oung Clarke
in Atlanta. Clarke wanted to learn about Garvey’s views on
racial purity and his plans for the black race. “I was speaking
to a man who was brutally a white man, and I was speaking to
him as a man who was brutally a Negro, ” Garvey said of the


--- PAGE 73 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
meeting. The two men were able to agree on many points.
Clarke reportedly assured Garvey that the Klan would not
interfere with UNIA activities.
Garvey obviously never supported the Klan’s campaign of
violence and terror against blacks, but he did believed that the
Klan represented the true feelings of most white Americans
toward blacks. He thought that the organized hostility of
white supremacist groups was useful because it forced blacks
to unite. He was also convinced that the Klan was too strong
to fight and that blacks must seek their future in a free Afric a.
Y et, in the end, what linked Garvey to the Klan was a shared
sense that blacks and whites simply could not, and more to
the point should not, live together. True, the KKK took pride
in its announced hatred of blacks, but Garvey had no love
for whites either. Each race, he believed, must make its own
way in the world. The black and white futures were distinct
and incompatible.
Y et the majority of black American leaders vehemently
disagreed. They joined in condemning Garvey for meeting
with the Klan, and ultimately branded him as the worst kind
of race traitor. Du Bois wrote, “Marcus Garvey is, without
doubt, the most dangerous enemy of the Negro race in America
64
Marcus Garvey shared the belief of the Ku Klux Klan that blacks  and whites
were incompatible and should be separate, and he met with Klan leader
Edward Young Clarke to discuss race issues. In his book The Philosophy and
Opinions of Marcus Garvey, he discussed his opinions on the Klan:
Between the Ku Klux Klan and the [NAACP], give me the Klan for their
honesty and purpose towards the Negro. They are better friends to my race
for telling us what they are, and what they mean, thereby giving us a chance
to stir for ourselves, than all the hypocrites put together . .  .
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Most Dangerous Enemy 65
and in the world. He is either a lunatic or a traitor. ” William
Pickens, a noted black educator, told Garvey, “Y ou compare the
aim of the Ku Klux Klan in America with your aim in Africa—
and if that be true, no civilized man can endorse either of you. ”
Garvey’s critics were appalled that he was willing to give up the
fight for black rights in America.
Further controversies dogged Garvey. On June 15, 1922, he
divorced his wife, from whom he was separated, while she was
away in England. A month later, he married his secretary, Amy
Jacques. On her return to the United States, Amy Ashwood
Garvey contested the divorce and Garvey’s second marriage,
but the suit failed. The black press, by now generally hostile to
Garvey, supported the charges of misconduct filed against him
by his ex-wife.
Hostility toward Garvey continued to grow. In August 1922,
as delegates gathered for the third UNIA convention, a group
opposed to Garvey, called the Friends of Negro Freedom, met
in New Y ork to denounce his alleged alliance with the Ku Klux
Klan. Amid street fights between UNIA militants and their
opponents, the cry of “Garvey must go” was heard loudly
and clearly.
On January 15, 1923, eight leaders of the black community
sent a letter to U.S. Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty
asking the government to push ahead with its efforts to bring
Garvey to trial. The case had been delayed for nearly a year
while the government investigated the Black Star Line. The
letter claimed that Garvey was trying to stir racial hatred and
that his organization was involved in many acts of lawlessness
and violence. Garvey lashed back at his attackers, accusing
them of treachery to their race.
Whether or not the letter had any effect, four months later
the trial began. Marcus Garvey, Elie Garcia, George T obias, and
Orlando Thompson were brought to trial for illegally sending
false and misleading Black Star Line advertisements through
the mail. The UNIA membership remained devoted to their


--- PAGE 75 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
66
Marcus Garvey’s momentary flirtation with the Ku Klux Klan was
not his last trip down the dark corridors of racial nationalism .
The rise of Fascism in Italy and National Socialism (Nazism) in
Germany attracted Garvey’s attention and admiration very early on.
Surveying the totalitarian landscapes being crafted by Benito
Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, Garvey first regarded them with jealousy,
wanting that success for his own efforts; later, he beamed with
praise. Indeed, UNIA’s founder ultimately revealed a distressing
naïveté in his inability to recognize Mussolini and Hitler for the
men they were. Garvey completely misread the objectives of
the Fascist and Nazi programs and shamed himself by identifying
black interests with men who eventually caused immeasurable
suffering in Europe and Africa.
By the 1930s, Hitler already was laying the foundation for
his war of racial genocide; at the same time, Mussolini was
preparing to reestablish the Italian presence in Africa. Despit e
the obvious threats each man posed, Garvey construed their
movements as akin to his own. He was neither blind to Hitler’s
overt racism nor oblivious to Mussolini’s imperial pretensions,
but he nonetheless lauded both dictators. In 1933, for example,
Garvey declared that “Hitler, the German chancellor, cannot be
mistaken for anything else than a patriot . . . Hitler stands f or a
greater Germany, which is his right, and the Negro should stand
for a greater Africa which is also his right.” Garvey similarly
admired Italy’s master but painted him as a Johnny-come-lately.
Swelling with pride in 1937, Garvey told an audience that
“UNIA was before Mussolini and Hitler were heard of. Mussolini
and Hitler copied the program of UNIA . . . .” Two years earlie r,
Garvey had reminded an interviewer that people had “laughed at
me because I dressed my followers up in uniforms and paraded
them through the streets. But look at what Mussolini and Hitler
have done with shirts and uniforms.” Of the many follies and
foibles that plagued and eventually destroyed Garvey and his
movement, none proved as distasteful as his high regard for two
tyrants who plunged the world into war and caused the deaths
of millions of innocent people.
DID YOU KNOW?


--- PAGE 76 ---
The Most Dangerous Enemy 67
troubled leader. Thousands of letters and petitions objecting
to the charges against him poured into government offices.
During the trial, hundreds of supporters gathered around the
courthouse, praying, protesting, and sometimes threatening
the witnesses who testified against Garvey.
Garvey was convinced that government officials were intent
on discrediting him and destroying his organization. Once the
trial proceedings began, he became even more certain that he
was caught in a trap. The judge, Julian Mack, was a contributor
to the NAACP , the organization that Garvey considered his
bitterest enemy. Garvey requested that Mack disqualify himself
on the grounds that the judge might be unconsciously swayed
to make rulings in favor of the prosecution. Mack refused,
denying that he was biased in any way against the defendants.
Garvey hired one of the ablest black lawyers in America,
Cornelius W. McDougald, for his defense. At the end of the
first day of the trial, however, he dismissed McDougald.
Always suspicious, Garvey believed that the lawyer was being
used in the plot against him. For a while thereafter, Garvey
conducted his own defense. His inexperience as a lawyer hurt
his case. He showed off, made irrelevant speeches, argued
continually with the judge’s rulings, and generally prolonged
the trial. He finally realized he needed help and accepted the
services of a white lawyer named Armin Kohn.
The trial lasted for more than a month. The prosecution
called 30 witnesses, many of them former Black Star Line
employees and stockholders. The company’s records were
introduced as evidence. They revealed that the Black Star
Line had been badly mismanaged. The charge that Garvey
was personally dishonest was more difficult to prove. The govern-
ment’s case rested on the claim that Garvey mailed misleading
advertisements to blacks to convince them to purchase Black
Star Line stock. Although Garvey knew that his company was
failing, the government claimed, he continued to send out
advertisements that promised huge profits and dividends.


--- PAGE 77 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
The main witness was Benny Dancy, a man who allegedly
bought stock after receiving a Black Star Line advertisement.
When questioned on the stand, however, Dancy displayed only
a vague memory of what kind of mail he had been sent. He
could not remember any specific details about the Black Star
Line advertisement.
In his closing address to the jury, Garvey pointed out that
the government had not proved that he had made any state-
ments about his shipping company that he had known were
false. He and the other defendants had only the best intentions
regarding the Black Star Line, he added. “We had no monetary
considerations or reward before us, but the good we could do
for our race....Y o u  w i l l  s a y  i t  was bad business. But, gentlemen,
there is something spiritual beside business. I ask no mercy.
I ask no sympathy. I ask but for justice. ”
Garvey’s entreaties were in vain. After deliberating for six
hours, the jury found the Black Star Line president guilty of
fraud. The other three defendants were acquitted. Garvey was
flabbergasted. The trial, he angrily protested, was “a conspiracy
to ruin Marcus Garvey....I  a m  s a tisfied to let the world judge
me innocent or guilty. History will decide. ”
On June 21, 1923, Judge Mack sentenced Garvey to pay
a $1,000 fine and to serve a five-year term in prison, the
maximum sentence. UNIA lawyers immediately filed an
appeal, and Garvey waited impatiently in the T ombs prison, a
Manhattan detention center, while his organization tried
desperately to raise the $15,000 bail. “My work is just begun, ”
he wrote in prison, “and as I lay down my life for the cause of
my people, so do I feel that succeeding generations shall be
inspired by the sacrifice that I made for the rehabilitation of
our race. ”
Garvey was finally released on bail three months later,
and the ecstatic UNIA membership flocked to Liberty Hall to
celebrate. He was convicted, Garvey told the crowd, “because
I represented, even as I do now, a movement for the real
68


--- PAGE 78 ---
The Most Dangerous Enemy 69
emancipation of my race. ” Never one to take a temporary
setback for defeat, he set out to rejuvenate his organization
while his appeals dragged on in court. The first step was a new
Garvey was put on trial for using the mail to send false
advertisements regarding the Black Star Line. Though it was
clear that the Black Star Line was badly mismanaged, there
was no definitive evidence that Garvey had intentionally done
anything wrong. Nevertheless, Garvey, seen here on his way
to jail, was found guilty of fraud and sentenced to five years
in prison.


--- PAGE 79 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
shipping line, and on March 20, 1924, he announced that he was
forming the Black Cross Navigation and Trading Company.
The sorry fate of the Black Star Line had not weakened
his followers’ trust in him, and stock sales for the new
company boomed. The line soon purchased the steamship
General G.W. Goethals for $100,000 and scheduled a trip to
the West Indies, departing from New Y ork in January 1925.
Unfortunately, the fate of the Black Cross vessel was depressingly
similar to that of the Black Star Line ships. As usual, Garvey
tried to finance the voyage by using the ship to sell stock alo ng
the way, and the General G.W. Goethals was forced to stop in
port after port while attempts were made to raise enough money
to continue. The ship was later sold to cover UNIA debts.
On February 2, 1925, Garvey’s appeal was rejected. He
was in Detroit on UNIA business and immediately returned
to New Y ork to surrender to the federal marshals. They hand-
cuffed and arrested him as the train pulled into the station.
On February 8, he was assigned to the Atlanta Federal
Penitentiary, far from the center of UNIA activity in New Y ork.
In March, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected a final appeal by
Garvey’s lawyers to review his case.
Beginning his five-year term, Garvey wrote to his followers,
“If I die in Atlanta my work shall only then begin, but I shall
live, in the physical or spiritual [sense] to see the day of Africa’s
glory. With God’s dearest blessings, I leave you for a while. ”
70


--- PAGE 80 ---
Behind bars in Atlanta, the once-powerful UNIA leader was
assigned to work in the prison library. Garvey spent much of
his time writing poetry, in which he expressed his frustration
with the legal system that had convicted him. In his poem
“The Tragedy of White Injustice, ” he wrote:
Every man on his own foothold should stand,
Claiming a nation and a fatherland!
White, Y ellow, and Black should make their own laws
And force no one-sided justice with flaws.
Desperate to return to his work, Garvey wrote to President
Calvin Coolidge three times requesting a pardon. These pleas
went unanswered, so Garvey tried to conduct UNIA business
from his cell. He continued to appoint the association’s officers
and to advise his New Y ork headquarters on important
“Look for Me in 
the Whirlwind”
8
71


--- PAGE 81 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
matters. Amy Jacques Garvey worked heroically to hold the
organization together, traveling to UNIA meetings throughout
the country to speak in her husband’s place. In 1925, she
arranged for the publication of Philosophy and Opinions of
Marcus Garvey or Africa for the Africans , an exhaustive collec-
tion of the UNIA leader’s writings.
Garvey was not forgotten. Much of the black community
was convinced that he had been unfairly treated. Former
enemies forgave him and joined in his defense. His personal
misfortunes seemed to prove his claim that blacks could
not get a fair deal in the United States. UNIA members flooded
government offices with letters, telegrams, and petitions
demanding their leader’s release. Rallies were held in many
cities, and in the summer of 1926 a protest march in Harlem
attracted more than 100,000 people.
The U.S. government took notice of the public clamor. “The
situation as presented in the Garvey case is most unusual, ”
Attorney General John Sargent wrote to President Coolidge
in 1927. “Notwithstanding the fact that the prosecution was
designated for the protection of colored people . . . none of those
people apparently believe that they have been defrauded. ”
Sargent stated that Garvey had regained his popularity and
that his imprisonment was being seen as an attack on his race.
In response to pressure from the black community,
Coolidge commuted Garvey’s sentence and ordered his release
on November 18, 1927. The 40-year-old UNIA leader had
served more than half of his five-year sentence.
Garvey’s troubles were not over. A decision on the appli-
cation for U.S. citizenship that he had filed in 1921 had been
delayed because of his legal troubles. Soon after entering
prison in Atlanta, he learned that his petition for citizenship
had been denied. Released from jail, he was still not a free
man. The U.S. government declared that as a convicted
criminal, the Jamaican troublemaker should be deported
from the country.
72


--- PAGE 82 ---
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 73
Garvey was not even allowed to return to his New Y ork head-
quarters to say good-bye to his loyal membership. He was taken
directly from Atlanta to New Orleans and put on board the
Saramacca, a ship that was sailing to Panama. Guarded closely
by federal officers, the UNIA president watched from the deck
The black community protested Garvey’s incarceration, and
President Calvin Coolidge responded by commuting Garvey’s
sentence and ordering his release in 1927, after he spent
almost three years in jail. However, as a convicted criminal
without U.S. citizenship, Garvey was deported to Jamaica.
Here, in 1936, Garvey prepares to sail to London, where
he moved his UNIA headquarters after his deportation.


--- PAGE 83 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
of the ship as hundreds of loyal Garveyites gathered at the docks
to see him off. Garvey called out to his followers, “The UNIA
is not something I have joined, it is something I have founded.
I have set everything aside to do this work. It is part of me. I
dream about it, I sacrifice and suffer for it, I live for it, and
I would gladly die for it. Go forward come what may. ”
ADRIFT IN THE WORLD
The UNIA was never the same again. The American member-
ship had always been the mainstay of the organization, and
without Garvey’s leadership, the movement began to die. T o
the end of his life, Garvey tried desperately to recapture the
magic of 1920, but he was hopelessly handicapped by his
banishment abroad.
Garvey was philosophical about his misfortunes in the
United States and was always hopeful about the future: “I
never look back, there is no time for that, besides, it would
make me cautious. ”
When the news that Garvey was returning reached Jamaica,
his countrymen flocked to the Kingston pier to greet the Santa
Marta, which he had boarded in Panama. Garvey had become
a hero to Jamaican blacks, and crowds lined the streets to
watch him make his triumphant way to the local UNIA head-
quarters. He had come a long way since his quiet departure
from the island 11 years earlier.
Garvey immediately began to rebuild the long-neglected
Jamaican branch of the UNIA. He also made a valiant effort
to maintain contact with his American followers, cabling his
editorials to Negro World in New Y ork every week. Determined
to sustain the growth of the association, he traveled to England
in the spring of 1928 to set up a European chapter of the
UNIA. He was disappointed to find that blacks there showed
little interest in the movement.
Shortly after Garvey arrived in London, he planned a
meeting to explain his program. Certain that he could attract
74


--- PAGE 84 ---
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 75
a huge audience, he rented the Royal Albert Hall, which had a
seating capacity of 10,000. For weeks before the meeting, he
sent out handbills and invitations. Only a few hundred people
showed up for Garvey’s lecture on the night of June 6, 1928,
and he was deeply embarrassed. He gave a long, rambling
speech in which he attacked his many enemies for sabotaging
his great plans.
Quickly recovering from this setback, Garvey established a
European headquarters for the UNIA in London and set up
another branch in Paris. He then traveled to Canada, where he
ran into more trouble with U.S. authorities. In Montreal,
he made speeches urging American blacks to vote for the
Democratic candidate, Alfred E. Smith, in the upcoming
presidential election. When the American consul heard about
Garvey’s comments, he complained to Canadian officials.
Garvey was asked to leave the country.
Early in 1929, Garvey returned to Jamaica. Always planning
ahead, he began thinking about the upcoming summer and
the traditional August convention. Only one convention had
been held after 1923, and that had been an emergency meeting
called by UNIA officers while Garvey was in prison. Now that
he was free, he wanted to call the world’s black community
together once again. Since he could not go to the traditional
convention site in Harlem, he decided that the delegates must
come to him. The Sixth International Convention of the Negro
Peoples of the World was scheduled to be held in Kingston
that August.
The 1929 convention was truly a reminder of the glorious
days of the UNIA ’s peak. On the opening day, thousands of
cheering spectators lined the streets of Kingston to view a
parade that stretched for five miles. Men, women, and children
perched on rooftops, fences, and trees to watch the amazing
spectacle. Garvey, wearing scarlet robes and a red and white
hat, rode in an open car that was decorated with the UNIA
colors of red, black, and green. Around him marched the


--- PAGE 85 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
uniformed members of the UNIA ’s various divisions. At the
end of the parade were grouped the thousands of delegates
who had again answered Garvey’s call.
Garvey was triumphant. The convention reassured him
that his organizational skills and leadership talents were stil l
intact. Unfortunately, the 1929 convention was also the scene
of trouble between the UNIA leader and the organization’s
U.S. chapters. Early in the month-long convention Garvey
criticized some of the American UNIA leaders. It was their
fault, Garvey charged, that the organization faltered while
he was in prison. Stung by these accusations, the Americans
grew hostile to Garvey. When he demanded that the UNIA ’s
international headquarters be moved from New Y ork to
Kingston, they rebelled.
Garvey, as the founder and president of the association,
wanted the headquarters to be where he was. The Americans,
protesting that the UNIA ’s strength and financial support were
based in the United States, wanted it to remain in New Y ork.
Unwilling to compromise on the issue, the U.S. delegates
angrily withdrew from the convention.
Because the U.S. branch of the association had accumulated
some heavy debts, Garvey was eager to sever his ties and
start anew. The split became official in August 1929. Garvey
renamed his group the Parent Body of the Universal Negro
Improvement Association. Both the American organization
and Garvey’s international association continued to refer to
themselves as the UNIA. The schism further weakened his
already faltering movement.
Meanwhile, Garvey decided to try his hand at Jamaican
politics. In 1929, he formed the People’s Political party and
began campaigning for a seat in the Jamaican legislature.
His platform called for an improvement in working conditions
and economic and educational opportunities for Jamaican
blacks. He also called for a reform of the judiciary system.
After making negative remarks about certain Jamaican judges,
76


--- PAGE 86 ---
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 77
he was sentenced to three months in jail for contempt of court.
He served a few terms on the local governing council of
Kingston, but the People’s Political Party was never a great
success. While he was in Jamaica, he became the father of two
sons: Marcus, born in 1930, and Julius, born in 1933.
THE END OF THE MAN AND THE MOVEMENT
In 1935, Garvey left Jamaica for the last time and moved the
UNIA headquarters to London. His efforts to rebuild his
once-great organization from Jamaica had failed. He hoped
that in London he would have better luck.
A few months after Garvey arrived in London he was heart-
broken by the news that the independent black nation of
Ethiopia had been attacked and invaded by Italy. His hope for
black self-rule in Africa grew weaker after Ethiopia’s conquest.
Although he joined other black spokesmen in denouncing
Italy’s unprovoked attack, he also criticized Ethiopia’s ruler,
Emperor Haile Selassie, for failing to modernize the country’s
armed forces so that they could repel the invasion. (For addi-
tional information on the invasion of Ethiopia, enter “Ethiopia
invasion by Italy” into any search engine and browse the
sites listed.)
Garvey called on the world’s blacks to unite in defense of their
ancestral homeland and predicted grim consequences if they
failed. “This is a warning, ” he said of Ethiopia’s defeat. “If you
Negroes do not readjust and steady yourselves and think intelli-
gently as the age demands, your next fifty years will not see you
defeated but will see you wiped out entirely from civilization.”
Using his newest publication, a monthly magazine called
Black Man that he had started in December 1933, Garvey
published his views on the Ethiopian situation and other
black issues. Negro Worldhad folded in 1933, and Garvey knew
he needed some way to keep in touch with his scattered
followers. Black Man was expensive to publish and distribute
and appeared less frequently as the years went on.


--- PAGE 87 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Garvey tried to regain a following in the United States, and
he held UNIA conferences in T oronto, Canada, in 1936, 1937,
and 1938. Some loyal Garveyites crossed the Canadian border
to see their old leader, but their numbers grew fewer each year.
Realizing that he needed to recruit the younger generation
if he wanted to keep the movement going, in 1937 Garvey
formed the School of African Philosophy to train interested
students for UNIA leadership. The program was offered as a
correspondence course, but only eight students enrolled in the
school in 1937.
Ultimately, Garvey’s efforts to rebuild the UNIA failed. The
membership dwindled, and from 1935 to 1937 Garvey collected
less than $400 from all of his various fund-raising drives. The
days when he could raise thousands of dollars in a single night
were gone forever. He was barely able to support his family and
could not afford to bring them to England until the summer
of 1937. The wet and chilly English climate was hard on his
two sons, however, and in 1938 Amy Jacques Garvey took the
boys back to Jamaica. Garvey remained behind.
Garvey had presided over a wealthy organization during
the UNIA ’s heyday, but he lived close to poverty during his
final years. He had never accepted the full salaries due him as
president of the UNIA and the Black Star Line, and he had
often used his own savings for organizational activities. Garvey
often wrote to his family, assuring them that the association
would take care of them after he died. “I have nothing to leave
for them, but the service I have cheerfully given to my race will
guarantee their future, ” he believed.
In January 1940, Garvey suffered a serious stroke that left
his right side paralyzed. He had always had a problem with
asthma, and he suffered two dangerous bouts of pneumonia
during the 1930s. Garvey’s doctor urged him to leave England
for the warmer Jamaican climate, but he refused. He knew he
could not lead an international organization from that tiny,
isolated island.
78


--- PAGE 88 ---
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 79
Sick as Garvey was, he continued to conduct UNIA business
from his home. He read all of his letters and newspapers,
dictated correspondence, and held interviews at his bedside. In
May 1940, the final blow came. A London newspaper published
a report that Garvey had died in poverty. Believing the story
to be true, other newspapers picked up the story and printed
obituaries. Cables and condolence letters poured into Garvey’s
London office. His secretary, fearing the effect that this
depressing correspondence would have on his frail health,
kept the mail and newspapers from him for several days.
Garvey finally grew suspicious and demanded to know what
was going on. He was given his mail, but the shock of reading
his own obituary was too much for him. “When he saw the
black streamer headlines of the Negro newspapers, he
motioned to [his secretary] that he wanted to dictate a
statement; but he cried aloud in anguish, and fell back into
his pillow. He was unable to speak again, ” wrote Amy Jacques
Garvey, reporting the news she heard from her husband’s
friends in London.
Garvey died on June 10, 1940, at the age of 53. His last
request was that his body be brought back to Jamaica from the
“land of strangers. ” More than two decades later, that request
was honored. In 1964, Garvey’s remains were transported to
his homeland by the Jamaican government. Garvey, once
scorned by the Jamaican elite, was given the title of “First
National Hero, ” the country’s highest honor.
GARVEY’S LEGACY
Although Garvey’s name is not widely known today, his ideas
live on. During the decades after his death, much of Africa
won freedom. Garvey never visited the land that played such a
large role in his dreams, but his philosophy had a profound
impact on that continent. Many leaders of the emerging black
nations, such as Nnamdi Azikiwe of Nigeria and Kwame
Nkrumah of Ghana, have acknowledged the importance of


--- PAGE 89 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Garvey’s movement in their fight for independence. Nkrumah
said, “I think that of all the literature I studied, the book that
did more to fire my enthusiasm was the Philosophy and
Opinions of Marcus Garvey .”
Garvey’s philosophy has had a lasting influence on the
United States. During the 1960s, young black Americans
dissatisfied with the progress of the civil rights movement
revived many of his ideas. Like Garvey, these militant young
people advocated black separatism and self-reliance. “Black
power” became their rallying cry.
Many black leaders cited Garvey as a major influence on
their lives; one was Malcolm X, who in the 1960s was the
80
Garvey died in England on June 10, 1940, and over twenty years
later his remains were moved to this gravesite in Kingston, Jam aica.
Though Garvey’s life was marred by controversy and he is not as
widely known today as other black leaders, his philosophy and h is
support of black pride continue to have significant influence o n
black leaders and thinkers.


--- PAGE 90 ---
“Look for Me in the Whirlwind” 81
spokesman of the black separatist organization known as the
Nation of Islam. Malcolm’s father was a passionate Garveyite,
and, as a young boy, Malcolm was exposed to Garvey’s
doctrine of African nationalism and black unity. “Every time
you see another nation on the African continent become
independent, you know Marcus Garvey is alive, ” Malcolm X
once said. “All the freedom movements that are taking place
right here in America today were initiated by the work and
teachings of Marcus Garvey. ”
Garvey’s ideas provided Malcolm X with an ideological
starting point, and Garvey’s insistence on quiet dignity and
impeccable public behavior on the part of his UNIA followers
served as an example of how to project both strength and firm
purpose. The Nation of Islam’s emphasis on economic self-
sufficiency and the pervasive Afrocentrism that characterized
its worldview clearly bore Garvey’s imprint.
Garvey and UNIA also reappeared in a different way under
the trademark black berets of the Black Panther Party. Like
Garvey, leaders of the most famous black militant group of the
1960s, such as Huey Newton, stressed not only the economic
independence of the black community but also collective
self-defense. The Black Panthers never advocated a return to
Africa, but the call of black pride that they broadcast echoed
Garvey’s earlier appeals. Like the crisp suits and razor-sharp
bow ties of members of the Nation of Islam, the berets and
leather coats of the Black Panthers offered a new image
of uniformed African Americans determined to advance
racial solidarity and justice—just as UNIA had done decades
earlier. There is no denying the debt owed to Garvey by late-
twentieth-century radicals who consciously or unconsciously
resurrected his tactics and style.
Garvey’s ideas are reflected in the words and actions of
many of the black activists who followed him. Regardless of
their opinions of Garvey himself, black leaders—conservatives
and radicals—could ignore neither the man nor his message.


--- PAGE 91 ---
MARCUS GARVEY
Themes of black pride and a global black agenda resonate
today and testify to the enduring legacy of Marcus Garvey.
The black newspaper Amsterdam News described Garvey’s
accomplishments in this way: “Marcus Garvey made black
people proud of their race. In a world where black is despised,
he taught them that black is beautiful. ”
Garvey knew that the fight would continue after his death.
“When I am dead wrap the mantle of the Red, Black and Green
around me, ” he once said. “Look for me in the whirlwind or
the storm, look for me all around you, for, with God’s grace, I
shall come and bring with me countless millions of black
slaves who have died in America and the West Indies and the
millions in Africa to aid you in the fight for Liberty, Freedom
and Life. ”
82


--- PAGE 92 ---
1887 Born Marcus Mosiah Garvey in St. Ann’s Bay, Jamaica, on
August 17
1917 Establishes the New Y ork branch of UNIA
1918 Negro World begins publication
1919 UNIA goes into business as the United Negro Factories
Corporation and the Black Star Line; Garvey marries 
Amy Ashwood
1920 Presides over the First International Convention of the
Negro Peoples of the World
1921 Travels to Latin America; U.S. government tries to prevent
his return; African Orthodox Church is founded
1922 Divorces Amy Ashwood; marries Amy Jacques; later is
arrested, charged, and indicted for mail fraud in connection
with Black Star Line; meets with Ku Klux Klan members
1923 Convicted in mail fraud trial and sentenced to five years
imprisonment; he appeals his conviction and is released 
on bail
1924 Black Cross Navigation and Trading Company is set up
1925 Appeals are rejected; enters the Atlanta Penitentiary
1927 Sentence is commuted; is deported to Jamaica
1928 Travels to London; European UNIA branch founded
1929 Returns to Jamaica and presides over Sixth International
Convention of the Negro Peoples of the World
1930 Marcus, Jr., is born; another son, Julius Winston, is born
three years later
1935 Moves UNIA headquarters to London
1940 Dies in London on June 10
CHRONOLOGY 83


--- PAGE 93 ---
Clarke, John Henrick, ed. Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa.
New Y ork: Random House, 1974.
C r o n o n ,E .D a v i d .Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the
Universal Negro Improvement Association. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1969.
Davis, Daniel S. Marcus Garvey. New Y ork: Franklin Watts, 1972.
Garvey, Amy Jacques.Garvey and Garveyism . Kingston, Jamaica:
United Printers, 1963.
Garvey, Amy Jacques, ed.Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey .
New Y ork: Atheneum, 1986.
Hill, Robert A., ed. The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro
Improvement Association Papers. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1983.
Martin, T ony.Marcus Garvey, Hero: A First Biography.D o v e r ,M A :
Majority Press, 1983.
———. Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of
Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association.
Dover, MA: Majority Press, 1976.
Nembhard, Len S. Trials and Triumphs of Marcus Garvey.N e w  Y o r k :
Kraus Reprint Company, 1978.
WEBSITES
About Marcus Garvey
http://afroamhistory.about.com/cs/marcusgarvey/p/bio_garvey.htm
American Experience
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/garvey/
FURTHER READING84


--- PAGE 94 ---
Encarta Africana
http://www.africana.com/research/encarta/tt_608.asp
Harlem: 1900–1940
http://www.si.umich.edu/CHICO/Harlem/text/garvey.html
FURTHER READING 85


--- PAGE 95 ---
accommodation, Washington on,
18–20
Africa
and anthem of UNIA, 45
and “Back-to-Africa” movement,
3, 54, 56–57, 63, 64, 65
and Ethiopia, 17, 77
European domination of, 16–18
and Garvey in prison, 70
Garvey learning about, 16
Garvey on as black homeland, 3,
45, 47, 54, 56–57, 63, 64, 65
Garvey on independent black-
ruled nations in, 17, 21, 28, 44,
46–47, 61, 77
Garvey on superiority of civiliza-
tion, 24, 25, 37, 39
and Garvey’s legacy, 79–80
and Germany, 16, 56
and Liberia, 16–17, 56–57
Negro World in, 33
and pan-African movement, 17
and slave trade, 6, 28
African Legions, 44
African Orthodox Church, 57–58
African Redemption medals, 47
African Times and Orient Review
(journal), 17–18
Ali, Duse Mohammed, 17
Amsterdam New (newspaper), 82
Arawak Indians, 6
asthma, Garvey suffering from,
78–79
Atlanta Federal Penitentiary
(Georgia), Garvey in, 70, 71–72
Austria-Hungary, and World War I,
18
Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 79–80
“Back-to-Africa” movement, 3, 54,
56–57, 63, 65, 74
Belgium, and Africa, 16
Berlin Conference, 16
Birkbeck College (London),
Garvey attending, 16
Black Cross Navigation and 
Trading Company, 70
Black Cross nurses, 44
Black Man (magazine), 77
“Black Moses, ” Garvey known as,
40
Black Panther Party, 81
black protest movement, 28, 32
black separatist movement
and civil rights movement, 80
and Garvey, 23, 37, 61, 63–65
and Malcolm X, 80–81
Black Star Line
Du Bois’ criticism of Garvey’s
management of, 61
and financial difficulties, 51–54,
57, 58–59
and First International Conven-
tion of the Negro Peoples of
the World, 43
founding of, 41–43
and Garvey arrested for mail
fraud, 58–59
and Garvey not accepting full
salary from, 78
and Garvey on trail for mail
fraud, 60–61, 65, 67–69, 70
and Garvey selling stock in West
Indies and Central America, 57
and hope about future of black
race, 50
rewards for stock purchases in, 47
ships of, 42–43, 50–53
Black Star Steamship Company of
New Jersey, 53–54
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 17
Canada
Garvey versus United States
authorities in, 75
UNIA conferences in, 78
INDEX86


--- PAGE 96 ---
Carver, George Washington, 23
Central America
Garvey selling Black Star Line
stock in, 57
Garvey working in, 12–14
and Great Britain, 13, 15
Chicago, Illinois, race riots in,
35–36
cities, race riots in, 35–36
civil rights movement, and 
Garvey’s legacy, 80
Civil War, 28–29
Clarke, Edward Y oung, 63–64
Cockbourne, Joshua, 51, 53
Colombia, Garvey in, 13
colored
and Garvey, 23–24, 62–63
in Jamaica, 8, 23–24, 26, 62
Coolidge, Calvin, 71, 72
Costa Rica
and Garvey as dockworker in
Puerto Limón, 13
Garvey working on banana 
plantation in, 12–13
Daily Gleaner (newspaper), 2
Dancy, Benny, 68
Daugherty, Harry M., 65
De Valera, Eamon, 46
Declaration of Rights of the Negro
Peoples of the World, 43, 47–49
Du Bois, W.E.B., 61–63, 64–65
Ecuador, Garvey in, 14–15
Elaine, Arkansas, race riots in, 36
Emancipation Proclamation, 28
Ethiopia, 17, 77
“Ethiopia, Thou Land of Our
Fathers, ” 45
Europe
and African domination, 16–18
and Garvey in London, 15–21,
74–75, 77–79
and opposition to Garvey, 61
and UNIA branch in London,
74–75, 77
and World War I, 18, 25, 30, 35
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), and mail fraud charges
against Garvey, 60
Firestone Rubber Company, 57
France
and Africa, 16
and Liberia, 56
and UNIA branch in Paris, 75
and World War I, 18
Frederick Douglass (steamship), 51
Friends of Negro Freedom, 65
Garcia, Elie, 59, 65
Garvey, Amy Ashwood (first wife)
and divorce from Garvey, 65
as Garvey’s secretary in UNIA,
21, 34, 40
and legal separation from 
Garvey, 57
and marriage to Garvey, 43
and separation from Garvey, 57
Garvey, Amy Jacques (second wife)
children of, 77, 78
and Garvey having affair with,
57
and Garvey’s death, 79
and marriage to Garvey, 65
and UNIA while Garvey was in
prison, 57
Garvey, Indiana (sister), 4, 15
Garvey, Julius (son), 77, 78
Garvey, Marcus (father), 4–5
and books as Garvey’s inspiration,
22
family of, 5–6
and Garvey’s middle name, 4
p r o p e r t y  o f ,5 ,8
and sporadic employment, 5
INDEX 87


--- PAGE 97 ---
and unpaid newspaper subscrip-
tion, 5
as village lawyer, 5
Garvey, Marcus (son), 77, 78
Garvey, Marcus Mosiah
and Africa, 3, 17, 21, 37, 39, 44,
45, 46–47, 54, 56–57, 61, 63, 64,
65, 70, 79–80
and appealing conviction, 69–70
and appearance, 2, 28
and arrest for mail fraud, 58–59
attempted murder of, 39–40
birth of, 4
and Black Man, 77
and black separatist movement,
23, 37, 61, 63–65
childhood of, 8–9
children of, 77
and colored, 23–24, 62–63
death of, 79, 82
decline of, 57–59, 60–65, 67–70,
71–74, 77–78
and deported to Jamaica, 1–3,
72–77
as dockworker, 9, 13, 15–16, 17,
22
and dolls as black, 39
Du Bois versus, 61–63, 64–65
and early interest in shipping, 9
and early years in Jamaica, 4–5,
8–11
education of, 2, 9, 10, 16
enemies of, 1, 23–24, 25, 39–40,
54, 57, 58–59, 60–64, 65, 67–69,
70, 71–74, 75
in Europe, 15–21, 74–75, 77–79
family of, 4–5, 8, 22
and father’s unpaid newspaper
subscription, 5
and first experience in newspa-
per publishing, 11
and first periodical, 11
and hair-straightening, 39
in Harlem in New Y ork City, 1,
26, 27–28, 31–32
and health problems, 78–79
and improving status of West
Indian blacks, 10–11, 12–18
and Jamaican politics, 76–77
and Ku Klux Klan, 63–65
in Latin America, 10–11, 12–15, 57
as leader of blacks, 1, 20–21, 22,
26, 27
and leaving Jamaica, 1, 11
legacy of, 79–82
in London, 15–21, 74–75, 77–79
and marriages. See Garvey, Amy
Ashwood; Garvey, Amy Jacques
and middle name as Mosiah, 4
and pan-Africanism, 17
and poetry, 71
popularity of, 40
and poverty, 78, 79
as printer, 9, 10–11, 28
in prison in Jamaica, 77
in prison in United States, 2, 68,
70, 71–72
and public speaking, 11, 28, 32,
34–35
and racial solidarity, 2, 23, 28, 31,
32, 33, 37–39, 43, 47–49, 57
racism experienced by, 8–9, 10
and released on bail, 68–69
and skin-bleaching, 39
on trial for mail fraud, 60–61, 65,
67–69, 70
and United States citizenship, 57,
61, 72
and Washington, 18–21, 26
and worship of black divine
being, 37–39, 57–58
and writings, 17–18, 71, 72, 80.
See also Black Star Line; Univer-
sal Negro Improvement and
Conservation Association and
African Communities League
INDEX88


--- PAGE 98 ---
Garvey, Sarah (mother)
and family income, 4–5
and Garvey’s middle name, 4
Garvey’s Watchman(newspaper),
11
General G.W. Goethals (steamship),
70
Georgia, and Garvey in prison in
Atlanta, 70, 71–72
Germany, and Africa, 16, 56
Ghana
and Garvey’s legacy, 79–80
kingdom of, 16
God, and Garvey on worship of
black divine being, 37–39, 57–58
godfather, 9, 22
Great Britain
and Africa, 16
and blacks in London, 15–16
and Central America, 13, 15
and Garvey in London, 15–21
and Jamaica, 6, 11
and Liberia, 56
and pan-African movement in
London, 17
and West Indian blacks, 13, 15
and World War I, 18
Harrison, Hubert, 32
Hayford, J.E. Casly, 17
H o o v e r ,J .E d g a r ,6 0
International Convention of the
Negro Peoples of the World
First, 43–50
Second, 57
Sixth, 75–76
Third, 65
Ireland, and UNIA on self-rule, 46
Italy
and Africa, 16
and Ethiopia, 77
and World War I, 18
Jamaica
Arawaks in, 6
blacks in, 5–9, 10–11, 18, 21–26
colored in, 8, 23–24, 26, 62
and earthquakes in Kingston, 10
and Garvey as “First National
Hero,” 79
and Garvey born in St. Ann’s
Bay, 1, 4
and Garvey improving status of
blacks in, 10–11, 12–18
and Garvey involved in politics,
76–77
Garvey leaving, 1, 11
and Garvey moving to Kingston,
9–11
and Garvey planning Tuskegee
Institute in, 22–23, 25, 32
and Garvey’s deportation to, 1–3,
72–77
and Garvey’s early years in, 4–5,
8–11
and Garvey’s remains trans-
ported to, 79
and Great Britain, 6, 11
and Maroons, 5–7
and noisy street debates, 10
racism in, 8–9, 10–11
slavery in, 5–7
and Spain, 6
and strike in printing company,
10–11
sugar plantations in, 6
UNIA in, 2, 21–25, 32, 34, 74–77
in West Indies, 6
whites in, 8–9, 23, 25
Jim Crow laws, 30
Joplin, Scott, 27
Justice Department, Garvey 
investigated by, 60
Kanawha (steamship), 53
Kenya, Negro World in, 33
INDEX 89


--- PAGE 99 ---
Kenyatta, Jomo, 33
King, Charles D.B., 56
“knight of the Nile, ” 47
Kohn, Armin, 67
Ku Klux Klan
and Garvey, 63–65
revival of, 36–37
Latin America
blacks in, 12–15
Garvey in, 10–11, 12–15, 57
League of Nations, 56
Liberia, 16–17, 56–57
Liberty Hall, 6, 39, 43
Lincoln, Abraham, 28
Longview, T exas, race riots in, 36
McDougald, Cornelius W., 67
McGuire, George Alexander, 57
Mack, Julian, 67, 68
Madison Square Garden, UNIA
convention in, 44–46
malaria, Garvey suffering from, 15
Malcolm X, 80–81
Mali, kingdom of, 16
Maroons, 5–7
“Mose, ” Garvey known as, 4
Mulzak, Hugh, 51
Nacional, La (The National)
(newspaper), 13
Nation of Islam, 81
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 61–63, 67
National Club, 11
Negro Factories Corporation, 42, 47
Negro World (newspaper), 33, 39,
41, 42, 74, 77
New York City
and Garvey in Harlem, 1, 26,
27–28, 31–32
Garvey in prison in, 68
and Negro Factories Corporation,
42, 47
UNIA branch in, 32
and UNIA headquarters in
Harlem, 32, 39
Newton, Huey, 81
Nicaragua, Garvey in, 13
Nigeria, and Garvey’s legacy, 79–80
Nkrumah, Kwame, 79–80
North
black migration to, 30–31
racism in, 30–31.
See also New York City
Our Own (publication), 11
pan-African movement, 17
Panama, Garvey in, 13–14
Panama Canal, 13–14
Parent Body of the Universal
Negro Improvement Association,
76
People’s Political Party, 76–77
Phillis Wheatley (steamship), 54
Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus
Garvey or Africa for the Africans,
72, 80
Pickens, William, 65
Portugal, and Africa, 16
prison, Garvey in
in Jamaica, 77
in United States, 2, 68, 70, 71–72
racial solidarity, Garvey on, 2, 23,
28, 31, 32, 33, 37–39, 43, 47–49, 57
racial violence, 35–37
racism
Garvey experiencing, 8–9
in Jamaica, 10–11
in Latin America, 11, 12–15
in London, 15–16
in North, 30–31
in South, 29–30, 36–37
INDEX90


--- PAGE 100 ---
Reconstruction, 29–30, 37
Royal Albert Hall, 75
Russia, and World War I, 18
Santa Marta (steamship), 1, 74
Saramacca (steamship), 73–74
Sargent, John, 72
School of African Philosophy,
78
Selassie, Haile, 77
Shadyside (steamship), 53
Sherrill, William L., 34–35
slavery
in Jamaica, 5–7
and slave trade, 28
in United States, 28
Smith, Alfred E., 75
Songhai, kingdom of, 16
South
and Civil War, 28–29
racism in, 29–30, 36–37
slavery in, 28
Spain, and Jamaica, 6
State Department
and Garvey as dangerous radical,
57
and UNIA, 60
stroke, Garvey suffering, 78–79
sugar trade, and Jamaica, 6
Thompson, Orlando, 59, 65
T obias, George, 59, 65
T ombs prison (New Y ork City),
Garvey in, 68
“Tragedy of White Injustice, The, ”
71
Turkey, and World War I, 18
Turner, Henry McNeal, 17
Tuskegee Institute
Garvey modeling school after in
Jamaica, 22–23, 25, 32
and Washington, 18, 22–23
Tyler, George, 39–40
“Ugly Mug, ” Garvey know as, 4
UNIA. See Universal Negro
Improvement and Conservation
Association and African Commu-
nities League
UNIA Juveniles, 44
United Fruit Company, 12–13
United States government
and Garvey applying for citizen-
ship, 57, 61, 72
and Garvey arrested for mail
fraud, 58–59
and Garvey as radical, 57
and Garvey in prison in Atlanta,
70, 71–72
and Garvey leaving Canada, 75
and Garvey on trial for mail
fraud, 60–61, 65, 67–69, 70
and Garvey released from prison,
72
United States Supreme Court,
Garvey’s appeal rejected by, 70
Universal Negro Improvement and
Conservation Association and
African Communities League
(UNIA)
and Africa, 3, 21, 24, 25, 37, 39,
44, 45, 46–47, 54, 56–57, 61, 63,
64, 65, 77
and anthem, 45
and Ashwood, 21, 34, 40
and “Back-to-Africa” movement,
54, 56–57, 63, 64, 65
and black church, 57–58
and Black Cross Navigation and
Trading Company, 70
and Black Panther Party, 81
and black separatism, 63
and Black Star Steamship 
Company of New Jersey, 53–54
branches of, 2, 32, 34, 34–35,
74–75
and colored in Jamaica, 23–24, 25
INDEX 91


--- PAGE 101 ---
and conventions in Canada, 78
decline of, 57–59, 74, 77–78
and education program, 21,
22–23, 25, 32, 37
and European branch, 74–75
and first convention, 43–50
and flag, 50
founding of, 2, 3, 9, 21
and funding, 21–22, 26, 28–31,
34
and Garvey as president and
traveling commissioner of
Jamaican branch, 21, 22, 32, 78
and Garvey deported to Jamaica,
74
and Garvey in prison, 71–72
and Garvey not accepting full
salary from, 78
and Garvey’s return to Jamaica,
1–3, 74–77
and Garvey’s trial, 65, 67, 68–69
and headquarters in London,
74–75, 77–79
and headquarters in New Y ork,
32, 39
and Ireland, 46
in Jamaica, 2, 21–25, 32, 34,
74–77
and membership, 22, 23, 24–25,
34–35, 37, 78
message of, 2, 3, 21–23, 24, 25,
28, 31, 32, 33, 37–39, 43, 47–49
and motto, 37
and Negro Factories Corporation,
42, 47
and Negro World, 33, 39, 41, 42,
74, 77
and New Y ork branch, 32
and Parent Body of the, 76
and School of African Philosophy,
78
and second convention, 57
and sixth convention, 75–76
and State Department, 60
and third convention, 65
and United States branch 
splitting from, 76.
See also Black Star Line
Up from Slavery (Booker T.
Washington), 18–21
V enezuela, Garvey in, 13
Washington, Booker T., 18–21
death of, 26
message of, 18–20, 22
and Tuskegee Institute, 18, 22–23
and Up from Slavery, 18–21
Washington, D.C., race riots in,
36
West Indies, 6
Garvey improving status of
blacks in, 10–11, 12–18
Garvey selling Black Star Line
stock in, 57
General G.W. Goethals’voyage
to, 70
Y armouthsailing to, 51–53.
See also Jamaica
Women’s Auxiliary, 44
World War I, 18, 25, 30, 35
blacks in, 37
Y armouth(steamship), 42, 51–53
INDEX92


--- PAGE 102 ---
3: © Lake Country Museum/
CORBIS
7: © Hulton|Archive by 
Getty Images, Inc.
14: Library of Congress
19: Library of Congress
29: © David J. & Janice L. Frent
Collection/CORBIS
36: © CORBIS
45: © Underwood & Underwood/
CORBIS
48: © Underwood & Underwood/
CORBIS
52: Library of Congress
62: Library of Congress
69: © Bettmann/CORBIS
73: © Bettmann/CORBIS
80: © Jacques M. Chenet/CORBIS
PICTURE CREDITS 93
page:
Cover: © Underwood & Underwood/CORBIS


--- PAGE 103 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Mary Lawler is a freelance writer living in New Y ork. She is a graduate of
Duke University and has also studied at the University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. She is a former reporter for the Brookline Citizen in
Brookline, Massachusetts
AUTHOR OF ADDITIONAL TEXT, LEGACY EDITION
John Davenport holds a Ph.D. from the University of Connecticut and
currently teaches at Corte Madera School in Portola Valley, California.
He lives in San Carlos, California, with his wife Jennifer, and hi s
two sons, William and Andrew. He has previously written The
U.S.-Mexico Border and The Mason-Dixon Line in the Chelsea House
series ARBITRARY BORDERS.
CONSULTING EDITOR, REVISED EDITION
Heather Lehr Wagner is a writer and editor. She is the author of 30
books exploring social and political issues and focusing on the
lives of prominent Americans and has contributed to biographies of
Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, Malcolm X,
Thurgood Marshall, and Martin Luther King, Jr., in the revised
B
LACK AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT series. She earned a BA in
political science from Duke University and an MA in government
from the College of Wil liam and Mary. She lives with her husband
and family in Pennsylvania.
CONSULTING EDITOR, FIRST EDITION
Nathan Irvin Huggins was W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of History and
Director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research
at Harvard University. He previously taught at Columbia University.
Professor Huggins was the author of numerous books, including
Black Odyssey: The Afro-American Ordeal in Slavery , The Harlem
Renaissance, and Slave and Citizen: The Life of Frederick Douglass .
Nathan I. Huggins died in 1989.
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS94

