=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Martin_Bernal-Black_Athena_The_Afroasiatic_Root.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 303
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:19:55.701650
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
\ 
I 
l 
I 
t 
I 
I 
Black Athena 
The Afroasiatic Roots 
of Classical Civilization 
VOLUME I 
The Fabrication of Ancient Greece 1785 - 1985 
Martin Bernal 
Rutgers University Press 
New Brunswick, New Jersey


--- PAGE 2 ---
First published in the United States by 
Rutgers University Press, 1987 
Sixth paperback printing, May 1991 
First published in Great Britain by 
Free Association Books, 1987 
© Martin Bernal 1987 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Bernal, Martin 
Black Athena. 
(The fabrication of ancient Greece, 1785-1985; v. I) 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
I. Greece-Civilization- Egyptian influences. 
2. Greece-Civilization-Phoenician influences. 
3. Greece-Civilization- To 146 B.C. I. Tide. 
II. Tide: Afroasiatic roots of classical civilization. 
III. Series: Bernal, Martin~ of ancient 
Greece, 1785-1985; v. I. 
DF78.B398 1987 949.5 87- 16408 
ISBN 0-8135-1276-x 
ISBN 0-8135-1277-8 (pbk.) 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
All rights reserved 
The publication of Black Athena was aided by 
the Hull Memorial Publication Fund 
of Cornell University. 
To the memory of my fother, 
John Desmond Bernal, 
who taught me. that things 
fit together, interestingly


--- PAGE 3 ---
CONTENTS 
Preface and Acknowledgements xii 
Transcription and Phonetics xix 
Maps and Charts xxiii 
Chronological Table xxxi 
INTRODUCTION I 
Background I I 
Proposed historical oudine 17 
BlackAthena, Volume I: a summary of the argument 22 
Greece European or Levantine? The Egyptian and West Semitic 
Components of Greek Civilization / a summary of Volume 2 38 
Solving the Riddle of the Sphinx and Other Studies in Egypto-Greek 
Mythology / a summary of Volume 3 63 
Chapter I THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 75 
Pelasgians 75 
Ionians 83 
Colonization 84 
The colonizations in Greek tragedy 88 
Herodotos 98


--- PAGE 4 ---
viii BLACK ATHENA CONTENTS ix 
Thucydides 101 Chapter IV HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 189 
Isokrates and Plato 103 Christian reaction 190 Aristode 108 The 'triangle': Christianity and Greece against Egypt 192 Theories of colonization and later borrowing in the Hellenistic The alliance between Greece and Christianity 195 world 109 'Progress' against Egypt 196 Plutarch's attack on Herodotos 112 Europe as the 'progressive' continent 198 The triumph of Egyptian religion 114 'Progress' 198 Alexander son of Ammon 115 Racism 201 
Romanticism 204 Chapter II EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION Ossian and Homer 206 FROM THE DARK AGES TO THE RENAISSANCE 121 Romantic Hellenism 209 
The murder of Hypatia 121 Winckelmann and Neo- Hellenism in Germany 212 
The collapse of Egypto- Pagan religion 122 Gottingen 21 5 
Christianity, stars and fish 124 
Chapter V ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS The relics of Egyptian religion: Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism 
and Gnosticism 130 The rise of India and the fall of Egypt, 1740-1880 224 
Hermeticism - Greek, Iranian, Chaldaean or Egyptian? 134 The birth of Indo-European 226 
Hermeticism and Neo- Platonism under early Christianity, The love affair with Sanskrit 227 
Judaism and Islam 145 Schlegelian Romantic linguistics 230 
Hermeticism in Byzantium and Christian Western Europe 150 The Oriental Renaissance 233 
Egypt in the Renaissance 151 The fall of China 237 
Copernicus and Hermeticism 155 Racism in the early 19th century 239 
Hermeticism and Egypt in the 16th century 156 What colour were the Ancient Egyptians? 240 
The national renaissance of modern Egypt 246 
Chapter III THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT IN THE 17TH AND Dupuis, Jomard and Champollion 250 
18TH CENTURIES 161 Egyptian monotheism or Egyptian polytheism 257 
Hermeticism in the 17th century 162 Popular perceptions of Ancient Egypt in the 19th and 
Rosicrucianism: Ancient Egypt in Protestant countries 165 20th centuries 266 
Ancient Egypt in the 18th century 169 Elliot Smith and 'diffusionism' 270 
The 18th century: China and the Physiocrats 172 Jomard and the Mystery of the Pyramids 272 
The 18th century: England, Egypt and the Freemasons 173 Chapter VI HELLEN OMAN lA, I 
France, Egypt and 'progress': the quarrel betWeen The fall of the Ancient Model, 1790-1830 281 Ancients and Moderns 177 
Mythology as allegory for Egyptian science 181 Friedrich August Wolf and Wilhelm von Humboldt 283 
The Expedition to Egypt 183 Humboldt's educational reforms 285


--- PAGE 5 ---
x BLACK ATHENA CONTENTS xi 
The Philhellenes 289 Victor Berard 377 
Dirty Greeks and the Dorians 292 Akhenaton and the Egyptian Renaissance 383 
Transitional figures, I: Hegel and Marx 294 Arthur Evans and the 'Minoans' 385 
Transitional figures, 2: Heeren 297 The peak of anti-Semitism, 1920-39 387 
Transitional figures, 3: Barthold Niebuhr 297 20th-century Aryanism 388 
Petit-Radel and the first attack on the Ancient Model 307 Taming the alphabet: the final assault on the Phoenicians 393 
Karl Otfried Miiller and the overthrow of the Ancient Model 308 
Chapter X THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
Chapter VII HELLENOMANIA, 2 The return to the Broad Aryan Model, 1945-85 400 
Transmission of the new scholarship to England and 
The post-war situation the rise of the Aryan Model, 1830-60 317 402 
Developments in Classics, 1945-65 404 
The German model and educational reform in England 318 The model of autochthonous origin 407 
George Grote 326 East Mediterranean contacts 408 
Aryans and Hellenes 330 Mythology 412 
Language 413 
Chapter VIII THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS, Ugarit 414 
1830- 85 337 Scholarship and the rise of Israel 415 
Phoenicians and anti-Semitism 338 Cyrus Gordon 416 
What race were the Semites? 340 Astour and Hellenosemitica 419 
The linguistic and geographical inferiorities of the Semites 344 Astour's successor? - J. C. Billigmeier 422 
The Arnolds 347 An attempt at compromise: Ruth Edwards 423 
Phoenicians and English, I: the English view 350 The return of the Iron Age Phoenicians 426 
Phoenicians and English, 2: the French view 352 Naveh and the transmission of the alphabet 427 
Salammb6 355 The return of the Egyptians? 433 
Moloch 358 
I, The Revised Ancient Model 437 I 
I 
The Phoenicians in Greece: 1820-80 359 
, 
Gobineau's image of Greece 360 CONCLUSION 439 
Schliemann and the discovery of the 'Mycenaeans' 362 
Babylon 364 Appendix WERE THE PHILISTINES GREEK? 445 
Chapter IX THE FINAL SOLUTION OF'THE PHOENICIAN Notes 45 1 
PROBLEM, 1885-1945 367 Glossary 509 
The Greek Renaissance 368 Bibliography 523 
Salomon Reinach 370 Index Julius Beloch 373 565


--- PAGE 6 ---
PREFACE AND 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
T
HE STORY BEHIND Black Athena is long, complicated and, I 
believe, sufficiently interesting as a study in the sociology of 
knowledge to deserve extended treatment; thus I can give only 
a brief outline of it here. I was trained in Chinese studies; for almost 
twenty years I taught about China and carried out research on both 
intellectual relations between China and the West at the tum of the 20th 
century and contemporary Chinese politics. After 1962, I became 
increasingly concerned with the war in Indo-China, and in the virtual 
absence of any serious scholarship on Vietnamese culture in Britain, I 
felt obliged to study it. This was both to contribute to the movement 
against the American repression there, and for its own sake as a 
fascinating and extremely attractive civilization that was at the same 
time both thoroughly mixed and entirely distinctive. Thus in many ways 
Vietnam and Japan - whose history I had also studied - have served as 
my models for Greece. 
In 1975 I came to a mid-life crisis. The personal reasons for this are 
not particularly interesting. Politically, however, it was related to the 
end of the American intervention in Indo-China and the awareness that 
the Maoist era in China was coming to an end. It now seemed to me that 
the central focus of danger and interest in the world was no longer East 
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xiii 
Asia but the Eastern Mediterranean. This shift led me to a concern for 
Jewish history. The scattered Jewish components of my ancestry would 
have given nightmares to assessors trying to apply the Nuremburg 
Laws, and although pleased to have these fractions, I had not previously 
given much thoughtto them or to Jewish culture. It was at this stage that 
I became intrigued - in a Romantic way - by this part of my 'roots'. I 
started looking into ancientJewish history, and - being on the periphery 
myself - into the relationships between the Israelites and the surround­
ing peoples, particularly the Canaanites and Phoenicians. I had always 
known that the latter spoke Semitic languages, but it came as quite a 
shock to discover that Hebrew and Phoenician were mutually intelli­
gible and that serious linguists treated both as dialects of a single 
Canaanite language. 
During this time, I was beginning to study Hebrew and I found what 
seemed to me a large number of striking similarities between it and 
Greek. Two factors disinclined me to accept these as random coinci­
dences. First, having studied Chinese, Japanese and Vietnamese as well 
as a little Chichewa - a Bantu language spoken in Zambia and Malawi -
I realized that this number of parallels is not normal for languages with­
out contacts with each other. Secondly, I now realized that Hebrew/ 
Canaanite was not merely the language of a small tribe, isolated 
inland in the mountains of Palestine, but that it had been spoken all 
over the Mediterranean - wherever the Phoenicians sailed and settled. 
Thus there seemed to me no reason why the large number of important 
words with similar sounds and similar meanings in Greek and Hebrew­
or at least the vast majority of those which had no Indo-European 
roots - should not be loans from Canaanite/Phoenician into Greek. 
At this stage, led by my friend David Owen, I became heavily 
influenced by the works of Cyrus Gordon and Michael Astour on 
general contacts between Semitic and Greek civilizations. Further­
more, I was convinced by Astour that the legends concerning the 
foundation of Thebes by the Phoenician Kadmos contained a kernel of 
truth. Like him, however, I dismissed the legends of Egyptian settle­
ment either as complete fantasy or as cases of mistaken identity, 
believing that - whatever the Greeks had written - the colonists had 
really been Semitic speakers.


--- PAGE 7 ---
xiv BLACK ATHENA 
I worked along these lines for four years, and became convinced that 
anything up to a quarter of the Greek vocabulary could be traced to 
Semitic origins. This, together with 40-50 per cent that seem to be 
Indo- European, still left a quarter to a third of the Greek vocabulary 
unexplained. I hesitated between seeing this irreducible fraction con­
ventionally as 'Pre- Hellenic' or of postulating a third outside language, 
either, from Anatolian or - as I preferred - Hurrian. When I looked into 
these languages, however, they provided virtually no promising mat­
erial. It was only in 1979, when I was glancing through a copy of Cerny's 
Coptic Etymological Didionary, that I was able to get some sense of Late 
Ancient Egyptian. Almost immediately, I realized that this was the third 
outside language. Within a few months I became convinced that one 
could find plausible etymologies for a further 20-25 per cent of the 
Greek vocabulary from Egyptian, as well as the names for most Greek 
gods and many place names. Putting the Indo-European, Semitic and 
Egyptian roots together, I now believed that - with further research­
one could provide plausible explanations for 80-90 per cent of the 
qreek vocabulary, which is as high a proportion as one can hope for in 
any language. Thus there was now no need for the 'Pre-Hellenic' 
element at all. 
At the beginning of my research I had had to face this question: Why, 
if everything is as simple and obvious as you maintain, has nobody seen 
it before? This was answered when I read Gordon and Astour. They 
had seen the East Mediterranean as a cultural whole, and Astour had 
demonstrated that anti-Semitism provided an explanation for the 
denial of the role of the Phoenicians in the formation of Greece. After 
hitting upon the Egyptian component, I soon became even more acutely 
involved in the problem of , why hadn't I thought of Egypt before?' It was 
so obvious! Egypt had by far the greatest civilization in the East 
Mediterranean during the millennia in which Greece was formed. 
Greek writers had written at length about their debts to Egyptian 
religion, and other aspects of culture. Furthermore, I found my failure 
still more puzzling because my grandfather was an Egyptologist, and as 
a child I had been extremely interested in Ancient Egypt. Clearly there 
were very profound cultural inhibitions against associating Egypt with 
Greece. 
\ 
\ 
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xv 
At this point I began to investigate the historiography of the origins of 
Greece, to make sure that the Greeks had really believed they had been 
colonized by Egyptians and Phoenicians and had taken most of their 
culture from these colonies, as well as from later study in the Levant. 
Once again, I had a big surprise. I was staggered to discover that what 
I began to call the 'Ancient Model' had not been overthrown until the 
early 19th century, and that the version of Greek history which I had 
been taught - far from being as old as the Greeks themselves - had been 
developed only in the 1840S and 50S. Astour had taught me that 
attitudes towards the Phoenicians in historiography were profoundly 
affected by anti-Semitism; it was therefore easy for me to make a 
connection between the dismissal of the Egyptians and the explosion of 
Northern European racism in the 19th century. The connections with 
Romanticism and the tensions between Egyptian religion and Chris­
tianity took rather longer to unravel. 
Thus, one way and another, the scheme set out in Black Athena has 
taken me more than ten years to develop. During this time I have been a 
public nuisance in both Cambridge and Cornell. Like the Ancient 
Mariner, I have waylaid innocent passers-by to pour my latest half­
baked ideas over them. lowe these 'wedding guests' a tremendous debt, 
if only for their patient listening. I am even more grateful for the 
extremely valuable suggestions they made, which - although I have 
been able to acknowledge only a few of them - have been ofincalculable 
help to my work. Most important of all, I want to thank them for their 
excitement about the subject and for the confidence they gave me that it 
was not madness to challenge the authority of so many academic 
disciplines. They appeared to believe in what I was saying and they 
convinced me that although some of my ideas were probably wrong in 
particular, I was on the right track. 
lowe the experts a different kind of gratitude. They were not simply 
in my way. I pursued them into their lairs and pestered them with 
requests for rudimentary information and explanations of the reasons 
behind their ideas or conventional wisdom. Despite the fact that I took 
up much of their valuable time and sometimes upset their most 
cherished beliefs, they were uniformly courteous and helpful, often 
going to considerable efforts on my behalf. The help of the 'wedding


--- PAGE 8 ---
xvi BLACK ATHENA 
guests' and the experts has been central and essential to the project. In 
many ways I see the whole thing as a collective rather than an individual 
effort. One person could not possibly have covered all the many fields 
involved. Even with this massive outside help, however, I have inevit­
ably fallen short of the thoroughness one would righdy expect of a 
monographic study. Furthermore, I am fully aware that I have not 
understood or properly assimilated much of the best advice given to me. 
Thus none of the people mentioned below is in any way responsible for 
many errors of fact and interpretation the reader will find. Neverthe­
less, the credit for this work belongs to them. 
First, I should like to thank the men and women without anyone of 
whom I could never have completed this work: Frederic Ahl, Gregory 
Blue, the late and very much lamented Robert Bolgar, Edward Fox, 
Edmund Leach, Saul Levin, Joseph Naveh, Joseph Needham, David 
Owen, and Barbara Reeves. In different proportions, they gave me the 
information, advice, constructive criticism, backing and encourage­
ment that have been crucial for these volumes. All of them are 
exceptionally busy people and working on extremely important and 
fascinating projects of their own. I am more moved than I can say at the 
great amounts of time they spent on my work, which was often 
presented to them when it was at a very primitive level. 
I also want to thank the following men and women - and record my 
gratitude to those who are now dead - for the time and trouble they 
took to help me: Anouar Abdel-Malek, Lyn Abel, Yoel Arbeitman, 
Michael Astour, Shlomo Avineri, Wilfred Barner, Alvin Bernstein, 
Ruth Blair, Alan Bornhard, Jim Boon, Malcolm Bowie, Susan Buck 
Morse, Anthony Bullough, Carol Caskey, Alan Clugston, John 
Coleman, Mary Collins, Jerrold Cooper, Dorothy Crawford, Tom 
Cristina, Jonathan Culler, Anna Davies, Frederick de Graf, Ruth 
Edwards, Yehuda Elkana, Moses Finley, Meyer Fortes, Henry Gates, 
Sander Gilman, Joe Gladstone, Jocelyn Godwin, Jack Goody, Cyrus 
Gordon, Jonas Greenfield, Margot Heinemann, Robert Hoberman, 
Carleton Hodge, Paul Hoch, Leonard Hochberg, Susan Hollis, Clive 
Holmes, Nicholas Jardine, Jay Jasanoff, AlexJoffe, Peter Kahn, Richard 
Kahn, Joel Kupperman, Woody Kelly, Peter Khoroche, Richard 
Kline, Diane Koester, Isaac Kramnick, Peter Kuniholm, Annemarie 
Kunzl, Kenneth Larsen, Leroi Ladurie, Philip Lomas, Geoffrey 
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xvii 
Lloyd, Bruce Long, Lili McCormack, John McCoy, Lauris Mckee, 
Edmund Meltzer, Laurie Milroie, Livia Morgan, John Pairma~ Brown, 
Giovanni Pettinato, Joe Pia, Max Prausnitz, Jamil Ragep, Andrew 
Ramage, John Ray, David Resnick, Joan Robinson, Edward Said, 
Susan Sandman, Jack Sasson, Elinor Shaffer, Michael Shub, Quentin 
Skinner, Tom Smith, Anthony Snodgrass, Rachel Steinberg, Barry 
Strauss, Marilyn Strathern, Karen Swann, Haim Tadmore, Romila 
Thapar,James Turner, Steven Turner, Robert Tannenbaum, Ivan van 
Sertima, Cornelius Vermeule, Emily Vermeule, Gail Warhaft, Linda 
Waugh, Gail Weinstein, James Weinstein, and Heinz Wismann. I 
should particularly like to thank the few among them who objected 
strongly to what I was trying to do but still knowingly and willingly 
provided very useful aid. 
I should like to express my deep gratitude to everybody at the 
Department of Government at Cornell who not only tolerated but 
encouraged my involvement in a project so far from the usual concerns 
of a government department. Equally, I should like to thank all at 
Telluride House for many years of hospitality and for the intellectual 
stimulus that led me to tum to my new field. I am also very grateful to 
everybody at the Society for the Humanities at Cornell, where I spent a 
very productive and happy year in 1977/8. 
lowe a deep debt to my publisher, Robert Young, for his confidence 
in the project and the constant help and encouragement he has given 
me. At the same time, I want to thank my editor, Ann Scott, for the huge 
amount of work she has put into this volume, her patience, and the 
sympathetic way in which she has vasdy improved the quality of the text 
without bruising my amour propre. I am deeply indebted to the two 
scholarly readers, Neil Flanagan and Dr Holford-Strevens, and the 
copy-editor, Gillian Beaumont. I can assure the readers that the many 
errors, inconsistencies and infelicities still lurking in this book are 
nothing to those abounding in the text before it came under their expert 
scrutiny. Despite the frustrations of their Augean task, they have been 
extraordinarily patient and charming in all their dealings with me. I 
should like, too, to thank Kate Grillet for her first draft of the maps and 
charts and her extraordinary skill in interpreting my rushed and impre­
cise directions. I am also very grateful to my daughter, Sophie Bernal, 
for help with the bibliography and for her cheerful and patient gofering.


--- PAGE 9 ---
xviii BLACK ATHENA 
lowe an incalculable debt to my mother, Margaret Gardiner, who 
gave me my basic education and self-confidence. More specifically, she 
has provided the means for me to complete this volume and has given 
valuable editorial help with the introduction. I should like to thank my 
wife, Leslie Miller-Bernal, for her useful judgement and criticism, but 
above all for providing the warm emotional base upon which so large an 
intellectual undertaking is utterly dependent. Finally, I should like to 
thank Sophie, William, Paul, Adam and Patrick for their love and for 
keeping me so firmly rooted in the things that really matter. 
TRANSCRIPTION 
AND PHONETICS 
EGYPTIAN 
T
HE ORTHOGRAPHY USED in Egyptian words is the standard 
one accepted by modem Egyptologists, the only exception 
being the 3 used to represent the 'vulture or double )aleph', 
which is often printed as two commas on top of each other. 
Whatever the exact sound of the 3 in Old Egyptian it was transcribed 
into Semitic scripts as r, 1, or even n. This consonantal value was 
retained at least until the 2nd Intermediate Period in the 17th century 
Be. In Late Egyptian it appears to have become an >aleph and later, like 
the Southern English r, it merely modified adjacent vowels. The 3 is the 
first sign of the alphabetical order used by Egyptologists, and I shall 
continue with other letters with obscure or difficult sound values. 
The Egyptian i corresponds to both the Semitic >aleph and yod. 
> Aleph is found in many languages, and nearly all Afroasiatic ones. It is 
a glottal stop before vowels, as in the Cockney 'bo>le' or 'bu>e' ('bottle' 
and 'butter'). 
The Egyptian <ayin, which also occurs in most Semitic languages, is a 
voiced or spoken >aleph. The Egyptian form seems to have been 
associated with the 'back' vowels 0 and u.


--- PAGE 10 ---
xx BLACK ATHENA 
In early Egyptian the sign w, written as a quail chick, may have had 
purely consonantal value. In Late Egyptian, the form of the language 
which had the most impact on Greek, it seems to have been frequently 
pronounced as a vowel, either 0 or u. 
The Egyptian sign written as r was more usually transcribed as I in 
Semitic and Greek. In later Egyptian it seems, as with the 3, to have 
weakened into becoming merely a modifier of vowels. 
The Egyptian and Semitic letters Romanized as I}. appear to have 
been pronounced as an emphatic h. 
The Egyptian and Semitic b represents a sound similar to the ch in 
'loch'. In later times it became thoroughly confused with the letter s. 
The Egyptian letter h appears to have represented the sound by. It 
too became confused with s. 
The letter written here as s was transcribed as either s or z. 
s was pronounced as sh or skh. In later times it became very confused 
with bandh· 
~ represents an emphatic k. Inconsistently, I have followed the 
common practice of Semitists and have employed q to represent the 
same sound in Semitic. 
The letter twas probably originally pronounced as tY• However, even 
in Middle Egyptian it was being confused with t. 
Similarly, the g was frequently alternated with d. 
EGYPTIAN NAMES 
Egyptian divine names are vocalized according to the commonest 
Greek transcription - for example, Amon for )1mn. 
Royal names generally follow Gardiner's (196 I) version of the Greek 
names for well-known pharaohs, for instance, Ramesses. 
COPTIC 
Most of the letters in the Coptic alphabet come from Greek and the 
same transcriptions are used. Six extra letters derived from Demotic are 
transcribed as follows: 
lY s 
q f 
TRANSCRIPTION AND PHONETICS xxi 
SEMITIC 
The Semitic consonants are transcribed relatively conventionally. 
Several of the complications have been mentioned above in connection 
with Egyptian. Apart from these, one encounters the following: 
In Canaanite the sound b merged with I}.. Transcriptions here 
sometimes reflect the etymological b rather than the later I}.. t is an 
emphatict. 
The Arabic sound usually transcribed as th is written here as tY• The 
same is true of the dh/ dY• 
The letter found in Ugaritic which corresponds to the Arabic Chain 
is transcribed g. 
The Semitic emphatic k is written q, rather than ~ as in Egyptian. 
The Semitic letter Tsade, almost certainly pronounced ts, is written~. 
In Hebrew from the I st millennium BC the letter Shin is written as s. 
Elsewhere, however, it is transcribed simply as s, not as s, because I 
question the antiquity and the range of the latter pronunciation 
(Bernal, forthcoming, 1988). This, however, causes confusion with 
Samekh, which is also transcribed as s. Sin is transcribed as s. 
Neither dagesh nor begadkepatis indicated in the transcription. This is for 
reasons of simplicity as well as doubts about their range and occurrence 
in Antiquity. 
VOCALIZATION 
The Masoretic vocalization of the Bible, completed in the 9th and lOth 
centuries AD but reflecting much older pronunciation, is transcribed as 
follows: 
Name of sign Plain with' y with,w with iT h 
Pata~ ~ ba 
Qdmq ~ ba '~ bft i1~ bah 
/fireq :;1 bi ':;1 bi 
~ere :;} be ':;} be iT:;} beh 
segol i) be '~ b~ i1~ beh 
/folem ~ bo t:l bo i1~ boh 
QjbU!j ~ bu ~::l btl


--- PAGE 11 ---
xxii BLACK ATHENA 
The reduced vowels are rendered: 
:p be q 1)a 
Accentuation and cantillation are not normally marked. 
GREEK 
The transcription of the consonants is orthodox. 
1) is transcribed as y. 
q 1)0. 
The long vowels Tl and ware written as e and 0, and where it is 
significant the long a is rendered a. 
Accentuation is not normally marked. 
GREEK NAMES 
It is impossible to be consistent in transliterating these, because certain 
names are so well known that they have to be given in their Latin forms -
Thucydides or Plato - as opposed to the Greek Thoukydides or Platon. 
On the other hand, it would be absurd to make Latin forms for 
little-known people or places. Thus the commoner names are given in 
their Latin forms and the rest simply transliterated from Greek. I have 
tried wherever possible to follow Peter Levi's translation ofPausanias, 
where the balance is to my taste well struck. This, however, means that 
many long vowels are not marked in the transcription of names. 
MAPS AND CHARTS


--- PAGE 12 ---
xxiv 
CHART I 
I I I 
CHAOIC BERBER EGYPTIAN 
BLACK ATHENA 
AFROASIATIC 
I 
BEJA 
I 
SEMITIC 
I 
CENTRAL 
CUSHITIC 
I 
EAST 
CUSHITIC 
I 
SOUTH 
CUSHITIC 
IRISH 
I 
ANGLO­
SAXON 
I 
FRISIAN 
I 
I 
NORSE 
I 
CHART 2 
SERBIAN 
GERMAN SOUTH SLAV 
I 
GOTHIC POLISH WEST 
SLAV CZECH LITHUANIAN 
MODERN 
INDIAN 
I 
ROMANCE ROMANCE GERMANIC 
I 
I , 
I 
LATIN OSCAN etc 
WELSH 
BRETON 
I 
CELTIC 
ETRUSCAN 
INDO· 
EURO EAN 
INDO-HITTITE 
S V 
LATVIAN PERSIAN 
GREEK PHRYGIAN BALTIC IRA IAN SANSKRIT 
LYDIAN 
ANATOLIAN 
LYCIAN LUVIAN 
CHART 2 
Indo-Hittite Language Family


--- PAGE 13 ---
xxvi BLACK ATHENA MAP 3 
I-E Indo-European 
I-H Indo-Hittite 
xxvii


--- PAGE 14 ---
xxviii 
MAP 4 
Egypt 
FAYUM 
~ 
u P 
E G 
BLACK ATHENA MAPS xxix 
THRACE 
PHRYGIA I~ 
ANATOLIA $' 
L B Y A 
MAPS 
The Ancient East Mediterranean


--- PAGE 15 ---
xxx BLACK ATHENA 
MAP6 
The Ancient Aegean 
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 
Aryan Model, Aryan Model, Revised Ancient BC 
Crete Greece Model 
33 00 
3 200 
3 100 
Early Minoan I Early Minoan I 3000 
PHRYGIA Early Helladic I Early Helladic I 
2900 
2800 
2700 
2600 
EMIl EHII EMIl, EH II 25 00 
2400 
2300 
EMIlI EH III Coming of EM III, EH III 2200 
the Greeks?? 
2100 
MM I First MMI Men~otpel 
palaces Rhadamanthys 
suzerain in Crete 2000 
and Boiotia ?? 
MHIComing Senwosre/Hpr KJ R ( 
of the Greeks? Kekrops suzerain of 
Attica ?? 1900 
1800 
Destruction of palaces MM III Hyksos 
invasions 
MMIII Danaos and Kadmos 1700 
MHIII 1 st Shaft Graves 
1 st Shaft Graves LM IA Alphabet introd. 
Thera eruption


--- PAGE 16 ---
xxxii 
LMIA 
LMIB 
LM II Mycenaean 
conquest 
Final destruction of 
Cretan palaces 
LWMyc.I1IB 
Trojan War 
LWMyc.IIIC 
BLACK ATHENA 
LHIAor 
Mycenaean IA 
Thera eruption? 
Thera eruption? 
LWMyc.I1 
LWMyc.III 
Mycenaean palaces 
LWMyc.IIIB 
Thebes destroyed 
Trojan War 
Dorian invasion 
Mycenae destroyed 
LWMyc.IIIC 
Ionian migrations 
Corinth ruled by 
Bakchiadai 
Alphabet introduced? 
Homer 
First Olympic Games 
Colonies established 
in Italy and Sicily 
Hesiod 
First Oriental 
influence 
Athens 
Persians conquer 
Anatolia 
Persian invasions 
of Greece 
Herodotos 
Peloponnesian War 
Sokrates 
Plato, Isokrates 
Rise of Macedon 
Alexander the Great 
Aristotle 
LMIB 
LM II Mycenaean 
conquest of Crete, 
Egyptian suzerainty 
LWMyc. III Pelops' 
invasion? 
LWMyc.IIIB 
Thebes destroyed 
Trojan War 
Retumofthe 
Heraklids 
Mycenae destroyed 
LWMyc.IIIC 
Philistines 
Ionian migrations 
Hesiod 
Corinth ruled by 
Bakchiadai 
Homer 
Lykourgos reforms 
Sparta 
First Olympic Games 
Colonies established 
in Italy and Sicily 
Solon reforms 
Persians conquer 
Anatolia 
,Persian invasions 
of Greece 
Herodotos 
Peloponnesian War 
Sokrates 
Plato, Isokrates 
Rise of Macedon 
Alexander the Great 
Aristotle 
1500 
1300 
1200 
1100 
1000 
900 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
INTRODUCTION 
Almost always the men who achieve these fun­
damental inventions of a new paradigm have ez'ther 
been very young or very new to the field whose 
paradigm they change. 
(Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions, p. 90) 
M
y USE OF THIS QUOTATION from Thomas Kuhn is an 
attempt to justify my presumption, as someone trained in 
Chinese history, to write on subjects so far removed from my 
original field. For I shall be arguing that although the changes of view 
that I am proposing are not paradigmatic in the strict sense of the word, 
they are none the less fundamental. 
These volumes are concerned with two models of Greek history: one 
viewing Greece as essentially European or Aryan, and the other seeing 
it as Levantine, on the periphery of the Egyptian and Semitic cultural 
area. I call them the 'Aryan' and the 'Ancient' models. The 'Ancient 
Model' was the conventional view among Greeks in the Classical and 
Hellenistic ages. According to it, Greek culture had arisen as the result 
of colonization, around 1500 BC, by Egyptians and Phoenicians 
who had civilized the native inhabitants. Furthermore, Greeks had 
continued to borrow heavily from Near Eastern cultures. 
Most people are surprised to learn that the Aryan Model, which most 
of us have been brought up to believe, developed only during the first 
half of the 19th century. In its earlier or 'Broad' form, the new model 
denied the truth of the Egyptian settlements and questioned those of 
the Phoenicians. What I call the 'Extreme' Aryan Model, which


--- PAGE 17 ---
2 BLACK ATHENA 
flourished during the twin peaks of anti-Semitism in the 1890S and 
again in the 1920S and 30s, denied even the Phoenician cultural 
influence. According to the Aryan Model, there had been an invasion 
from the north - unreported in ancient tradition - which had over­
whelmed the local 'Aegean' or 'Pre-Hellenic' culture. Greek civiliza­
tion is seen as the result of the mixture of the Indo-European-speaking 
Hellenes and their indigenous subjects. It is from the construction of 
this Aryan Model that I call this volume The Fabrication of Ancient Greece 
1785-1 985. 
I believe that we should return to the Ancient Model, but with some 
revisions; hence I call what I advocate in Volume 2 of Black Athena the 
'Revised Ancient Model'. This accepts that there is a real basis to the 
stories of Egyptian and Phoenician colonization of Greece set out in 
the Ancient Model. However, it sees them as beginning somewhat 
earlier, in the first half of the 2nd millennium BC. It also agrees with the 
latter that Greek civilization is the result of the cultural mixtures created 
by these colonizations and later borrowings from across the East 
Mediterranean. On the other hand, it tentatively accepts the Aryan 
Model's hypothesis of invasions - or infiltrations - from the north by 
Indo-European speakers sometime during the 4th or 3rd millennium 
BC. However, the Revised Ancient Model maintains that the earlier 
population was speaking a related Indo-Hittite language which left little 
trace in Greek. In any event, it cannot be used to explain the many 
non-Indo-European elements in the later language. 
If I am right in urging the ooerthrow of theA ryan Model and its replacement 
by the Revised Ancient one, it will be necessary not only to rethink the 
fundamental bases of ' Western Civilization' but also to recognize the penetra­
tion of racism and 'continental chauvinism' into all our historiography, or 
philosophy of writing history. The Ancient Model had no major 'internal' 
deficiencies, or weaknesses in explanatory power. It was ooerthrown for external 
reasons. For 18th- and 19th-century Romantics and racists it was simply 
intolerable for Greece, which was seen not merely as the epitome of Europe 
but also as its pure childhood, to have been the result of the mixture of 
native Europeans and colonizing Africans and Semites. Therefore the 
Ancient Model had to be ooerthrown and replaced by something more 
acceptable. 
INTRODUCTION 3 
What is meant here by 'model' and 'paradigm'? The value of defining 
such terms is limited, both by an unavoidable looseness in their use and 
by the fact that words can be defined only by other words, providing no 
bedrock upon which to build. Nevertheless, some indication of their 
intended meaning is necessary. By 'model' I generally mean a reduced 
and simplified scheme of a complex reality. Such a transposition always 
distorts, as the Italian proverb puts it - traduttore traditore, 'translator 
traitor'. Despite this, like words themselves, models are necessary to 
nearly all thought and speech. It should always be remembered, 
however, that models are artificial and more or less arbitrary. Fur­
thermore, just as different aspects oflight are best explained as waves or 
particles, other phenomena can be fruitfully seen in two or more 
different ways; that is to say, using two or more different models. 
Usually, however, one model is better or worse than another in its 
capacity to explain the features of the 'reality' confronted. Thus it 
is useful to think in terms of competition between models. By 'para­
digm' I simply mean generalized models or patterns of thought 
applied to many or all aspects of 'reality' as seen by an individual or 
community. 
Fundamental challenges to disciplines tend to come from outside. It 
is customary for students to be introduced to their fields of study 
gradually, as slowly unfolding mysteries, so that by the time they can see 
their subject as a whole they have been so thoroughly imbued with 
conventional preconceptions and patterns of thought that they are 
extremely unlikely to be able to question its basic premises. This 
incapacity is particularly evident in the disciplines concerned with 
ancient history. The reasons seem to be, first, that their study is 
dominated by the learning of difficult languages, a process that is 
inevitably authoritarian: one may not question the logic of an irregular 
verb or the function of a particle. At the same time as the instructors lay 
down their linguistic rules, however, they provide other social and 
historical information that tends to be given and received in a similar 
spirit. The intellectual passivity of the student is increased by the fact 
that these languages have generally been taught during childhood. 
While this facilitates learning and gives the scholar thus trained 
an incomparable feel for Greek or Hebrew, such men and women


--- PAGE 18 ---
4 BLACK ATHENA 
tend to accept a concept, word or form as typically Greek or 
Hebrew, without requiring an explanation as to its specific function 
or origin. 
The second reason for inhibition is the near, or actual, religious awe 
felt in approaching Classical or Jewish cultures, which are held to be the 
founts of 'Western' civilization. Thus there is a reluctance to use 
'profane' analogies to provide models for their study. The great 
exception to this has been in folklore and mythology where, since the 
time ofJames Frazer and Jane Harrison at the turn of the 20th century, 
there has been considerable comparative work. Nearly all this, however, 
has stayed within the bounds set in the I 820S by the man who destroyed 
the Ancient Model, Karl Otfried Miiller. Miiller urged scholars to 
study Greek mythology in relation to human culture as a whole, but was 
adamantly opposed to recognizing any specific borrowings from the 
East. I When it comes to higher culture, there has been an even greater 
reluctance to see any precise parallels. 
The situation is at its most extreme, however, in the realms of 
language and names. Since the 1840S Indo-European philology, or 
study of the relationships between languages, has been at the heart of 
the Aryan Model. Then, as now, Indo-Europeanists and Greek phil­
ologists have been extraordinarily reluctant to see any connections 
between Greek - on the one hand - and Egyptian and Semitic, the two 
major non-Indo-European languages of the Ancient East Mediterra­
nean, on the other. There is no doubt that if Egyptian, West Semitic and 
Greek had been the languages of three important contiguous tribes in 
the modern Third World, there would have been extensive comparative 
study, after which most linguists would have concluded that they might 
well be distantly related to each other and that there had certainly been 
considerable linguistic and presumably other cultural borrowings 
among the three peoples. Given the deep respect felt for Greek 
and Hebrew, however, this type of crude comparative work is felt to be 
inappropriate. 
Outsiders can never have the control of detail gained so slowly and 
painfully by experts. Lacking a full understanding of the background 
complexities, they tend to see simple-minded correspondences 
INTRODUCTION 5 
between superficial resemblances. This does not mean, however, that 
the outsiders are necessarily wrong. Heinrich Schliemann, the German 
tycoon who first excavated at Troy and Mycenae in the 1870S-, made a 
naive but fruitful conjunction of legends, historical documents and 
topography, showing that much as academics might like it to be so, the 
obvious is not always false. 
Another tendency among professionals is to confuse what I would 
call the ethics of a situation with its reality. While it is 'only fair' that the 
expert who has spent a lifetime trying to master a subject should know 
better than a brash newcomer, this is not always the case. The latter 
sometimes has the advantage of perspective; the ability to see the 
subject as a whole and to bring outside analogies to bear on it. Thus one 
encounters the paradoxical situation that while amateurs are usually 
unable to help scholarly advance within a model or paradigm, they are 
often the best people to challenge it. The two most important break­
throughs in Hellenic studies since 1850 - the archaeological discovery 
of the Mycenaeans and the decipherment of their script, Linear B -
were both made by amateurs: Schliemann, to whom I have just referred, 
and Michael Ventris, who was an Anglo-Greek architect. 
Yet the fact that fundamentally new approaches often come from the 
outside certainly does not mean that all proposals from this quarter are 
correct or helpful. Most are not, and are rightly rejected as cranky. 
Discrimination between the different types of radical challenge poses 
two difficult problems. Who should do it? How should it be done? 
Naturally, the first group to be consulted should be the experts. They 
have the knowledge necessary to assess the plausibility and use of the 
new ideas. If, as with Ventris' decipherment of Linear B, most of them 
accept one of these, it would be foolish to challenge their verdict. Their 
negative opinion, on the other hand, cannot be regarded with the same 
unqualified respect, for, while they have the necessary skills to make a 
judgement, they have a direct stake in the case. They are the guardians 
of the academic status quo and have an intellectual and often an 
emotional investment in it. In some cases scholars even defend their 
position with the claim that the heroic age of amateurs, which in 
their field was once necessary, is now over. Therefore, although their 
discipline was founded by nonprofessionals, the latter can no longer


--- PAGE 19 ---
i ~ 
6 BLACK ATHENA 
contribute to it. However plausible the idea of an outsider may appear, it 
is inherently impossible for it to be true. 
It is because of such attitudes that just as 'war is too serious a matter 
to be left to military men', informed lay, as well as professional, opinion 
is necessary to assess the validity of new challenges which have been 
rejected by the scholars concerned. Although the latter generally know 
better than the public, there have been cases that show the contrary. 
Take, for example, the idea of Continental Drift, first proposed by 
Professor A. L. Wegener at the end of the 19th century. Throughout 
much of the early 20th century the significance of' evident fits' between 
Africa and South America, the two sides of the Red Sea and many other 
coasts was denied by most geologists. Now, by contrast, it is universally 
accepted that the continents have 'floated' apart. Similarly the Amer­
ican populists' proposals, in the 1880s and 90S, to abandon the gold 
standard were denounced by the academic economists of the time as 
completely unworkable. In such cases it would seem that the public was 
right and the academics wrong. Thus, although professional opinion 
should be studied carefully and treated with respect, it should not 
always be taken as the last word. 
How should an informed layperson distinguish between a construc­
tive outside radical innovator and a crank? Between a Ventris who de­
ciphered a Cretan syllabary and a Velikovsky who wrote sequences of 
events and catastrophes completely at variance with all other recon­
structions of history? Ultimately, a lay jury has to rely on its own 
subjective or aesthetic judgement. There are, however, some helpful 
clues. The crank - that is, someone with a coherent explanation, whose 
hypotheses do not quickly attract the interest of the academic establish­
ment - tends to add new unknown and unknowable factors into their 
theories: lost continents, men from outer space, planetary collisions, 
etc. Sometimes, of course, this type of hypothesis is spectacularly 
vindicated by the discovery of the postulated unknown factors. For 
instance, the great Swiss linguist Saussure's mysterious 'coefficients' 
which he hypothesized to explain anomalies in Indo-European vowels 
were found in the Hittite laryngeals. Before this, however, the theory 
remained untestable and to that extent uninteresting. 
Less imaginative innovators, by contrast, tend to remove factors 
INTRODUCTION 7 
rather than to add them. Ventris took away the unknown Aegean 
language in which Linear B was supposed to have been written, leaving 
a direct juxtaposition between two known entities, Homeric and Clas­
sical Greek, and the corpus of Linear B tablets. Thus he instantly 
created a whole new academic field. 
I maintain that the revival of the Ancient Model of Greek history 
proposed in these volumes belongs to this second category. It adds no 
extra unknown or unknowable factors. Instead it removes two intro­
duced by proponents of the Aryan Model: (I) the non- Indo- European­
speaking 'Pre-Hellenic' peoples upon whom every inexplicable aspect 
of Greek culture has been thrust; and (2) the mysterious diseases of 
'Egyptomania', 'barbarophilia' and interpretatio Graeca which, the 
'Aryanists' allege, have deluded so many otherwise intelligent, balanced 
and informed Ancient Greeks with the belief that Egyptians and 
Phoenicians had played a central role in the formation of their culture. 
This 'delusion' was all the more remarkable because its victims gained 
no ethnic satisfaction from it. The removal of these two factors and the 
revival of the Ancient Model leaves the Greek, West Semitic and 
Egyptian cultures and languages in direct confrontation, generating 
hundreds if not thousands of testable hypotheses-predictions that if 
word or concept a occurred in culture x, one should expect to find its 
equivalent in culture y. These could enlighten aspects of all three 
civilizations, but especially those areas of Greek culture that cannot be 
explained by the Aryan Model. 
The Ancient, Aryan and Revised Ancient models share one para­
digm, that of the possibility of diffusion of language or culture through 
conquest. Interestingly, this goes against the dominant trend in 
archaeology today, which is to stress indigenous development. The 
latter is reflected in Greek prehistory by the recently proposed Model of 
Autochthonous Origin.2 Black Athena, however, will focus on the 
competition between the Ancient and Aryan models. 
The 19th and 20th centuries have been dominated by the paradigms 
of progress and science. Within learning there has been the belief that 
most disciplines made a quantum leap into 'modernity' or 'true science' 
followed by steady, cumulative, scholarly progress. In the historiogra­
phy of the Ancient East Mediterranean these 'leaps' are perceived to


--- PAGE 20 ---
I 
I 
8 BLACK ATHENA 
have taken place in the 19th century, and since then scholars have 
tended to believe that their work has been qualitatively better than any 
that has gone before. The palpable successes of natural science during 
this period have confirmed the truth of this belief in that area. Its 
extension to historiography is less securely based. Nevertheless, the 
destroyers of the Ancient Model and the builders of the Aryan believed 
themselves to be 'scientific'. To these German and British scholars, the 
stories of Egyptian colonization and civilizing of Greece violated 'racial 
science' as monstrously as the legends of sirens and centaurs broke the 
canons of natural science. Thus all were equally discredited and 
discarded. 
For the past hundred and fifty years, historians have claimed to 
possess a 'method' analogous to those used in natural science. In fact, 
ways in which the modern historians differ from the 'prescientific' ones 
are much less certain. The best of the earlier writers were self­
conscious, used the test of plausibility and tried to be internally 
consistent. Furthermore, they cited and evaluated their sources. By 
comparison, the 'scientific' historians of the 19th and 20th centuries 
have been unable to give formal demonstrations of 'proof' or establish 
firm historical laws. Today, moreover, the charge of 'unsound 
methodology' is used to condemn not merely incompetent but also 
unwelcome work. The charge is unfair, because it falsely implies the 
existence of other methodologically sound studies with which to 
contrast it. 
Considerations of this kind lead to the question of positivism and its 
requirement of 'proof' . Proof or certainty is difficult enough to achieve, 
even in the experimental sciences or documented history. In the fields 
with which this work is concerned it is out of the question: all one can 
hope to find is more or less plausibility. To put it in another way, it is 
misleading to see an analogy between scholarly debate and criminal law. 
In criminal law, since conviction of an innocent person is so much worse 
than acquittal of a guilty one, the courts rightly demand proof 'beyond 
reasonable doubt' before a conviction can be made. But neither 
conventional wisdom nor the academic status quo has the moral rights of 
an accused person. Thus debates in these areas should not be judged on 
the basis of proof, but merely on competitive plausibility. In these volumes 
INTRODUCTION 9 
I cannot, and therefore do not attempt to, prove that the Aryan Model is 
'wrong'. All I am trying to do is to show that it is less plausible than the 
Revised Ancient Model and that the latter provides a more fruitful 
framework for future research. 
20th-century prehistory has been bedevilled by a particular form of 
this search for proof, which I shall call 'archaeological positivism'. It is 
the fallacy that dealing with 'objects' makes one 'objective'; the belief 
that interpretations of archaeological evidence are as solid as the 
archaeological finds themselves. This faith elevates hypotheses based 
on archaeology to a 'scientific' status and demotes information about 
the past from other sources - legends, place names, religious cults, 
language and the distribution of linguistic and script dialects. In these 
volumes it is maintained that all these sources must be treated with great 
caution, but that evidence from them is not categorically less valid than 
that from archaeology. 
The favourite tool of the archaeological positivists is the 'argument 
from silence': the belief that if something has not been found, it cannot 
have existed in significant quantities. This would appear to be useful in 
the very few cases where archaeologists have failed to find something 
predicted by the dominant model, in a restricted but well-dug area. For 
instance, for the past fifty years it has been believed that the great 
eruption on Thera took place during the ceramic period Late Minoan 
IB, yet despite extensive digging on this small island, no sherd of this 
ware has appeared below the volcanic debris. This suggests that it 
would be useful to look again at the theory. Even here, however, some 
pots of this type could still tum up, and there are always questions about 
the definition of ceramic styles. In nearly all archaeology - as in the 
natural sciences - it is virtually impossible to prove absence. 
It will probably be argued that these attacks are against straw men, or 
at least dead men. 'Modem archaeologists are much too sophisticated 
to be so positivist', and 'no serious scholar today believes in the 
existence, let alone the importance, of "race".' Both statements may be 
true, but what is claimed here is that modern archaeologists and ancient 
historians of this region are still working with models set up by men who 
were crudely positivist and racist. Thus it is extremely implausible to 
suppose that the models were not influenced by these ideas. This does


--- PAGE 21 ---
10 BLACK ATHENA 
not in itself falsify the models, but - given what would now be seen as 
the dubious circumstances of their creation - they should be very 
carefully scrutinized, and the possibility that there may be equally good 
or better alternatives should be seriously taken into account. In particu­
lar, if it can be shown that the Ancient Model was overthrown for 
externalist reasons, its supersession by the Aryan Model can no longer 
be attributed to any explanatory superiority of the latter; therefore it is 
legitimate to place the two models in competition or to try to reconcile 
them. 
At this point, it would seem useful to provide an outline of the rest of this 
introduction. In a project as large as the one I am trying to realize here, it 
is obviously helpful to give summaries of arguments, together with some 
indications of the evidence provided to back them. It is for these reasons 
that I have included an outline of the chapters that make up this book. 
The problems involved in explaining my arguments clearly are com­
pounded by the fact that my views on the larger context in which the 
topics of Black Athena are set sometimes differ from conventional 
wisdom. Therefore, I have written a very schematic historical back­
ground which sweeps across the Western Old World, over the last 
twelve millennia. This broad survey is followed by a historical outline 
of the 2nd millennium BC, the period with which Black Athena 
is largely concerned. This is provided in order to show what I 
think actually happened as opposed the other people's views on the 
subject. 
Then comes the summary of the The Fabrication of Ancient Greece 
itself, which is followed by rather more detailed descriptions of the 
contents of the other two volumes of the series. The outline of the 
second, Greece European or Levantine?, is included here to demonstrate 
that a powerful case can be made for the revival of the Ancient Model in 
terms of the archaeological, linguistic and other forms of evidence 
available. I have written a rather more sketchy descrlpton of the 
intended contents of Volume 3, Solving the Riddle of the Sphinx, in order 
to show the interesting results one can achieve through applying the 
Revised Ancient Model to previously inexplicable problems in Greek 
mythology. 
INTRODUCTION II 
BACKGROUND 
Before outlining the topics covered in these volumes, it may be useful to 
give a general impression of my views on their historical background, 
especially where they differ from conventional wisdom. Like most 
scholars, I believe that it is impossible to judge between the theories of 
monogenesis and polygenesis for human language, though I incline 
towards the former. On the other hand, recent work by a small but 
increasing number of scholars has convinced me that there is a genetic 
relationship between the Indo-European languages and those of the 
Afroasiatic language 'superfamily'. 3 I further accept the conventional, 
though disputed, view that a language family originates from a single 
dialect. I therefore believe that there must once have been a people who 
spoke Proto-Afroasiatic-Indo-European. Such a language and culture 
must have broken up a very long time ago. The latest possibility would 
be the Mousterian period, 50-30,000 years BP (Before the Present), but 
it may well have been much earlier. The tenninus ante quem is deter­
mined by the far greater differences between Indo-European and 
Afroasiatic than those within them, and I believe that the break-up of 
the latter can be dated to the 9th millennium BC. 
I see the spread of Afroasiatic as the expansion of a culture - long 
established in the East African Rift Valley - at the end of the last Ice 
Age in the lOth and 9th millennia BC. During the Ice Ages water was 
locked up in the polar icecaps, and rainfall was considerably less than it 
is today. The Sahara and Arabian Deserts were even larger and more 
forbidding then than they are now. During the increase of heat and 
rainfall in the centuries that followed, much of these regions became 
savannah, into which neighbouring peoples flocked. The most success­
ful of these were, I believe, the speakers of Proto- Afroasiatic from the 
Rift. These not only had an effective technique of hippopotamus­
hunting with harpoons but also possessed domesticated cattle and food 
crops. Going through the savannah, the Chadic speakers reached Lake 
Chad; the Berbers, the Maghreb; and the Proto-Egyptians, Upper 
Egypt. The speakers of Proto-Semitic settled Ethiopia and moved on to 
the Arabian savannah (map I; chart I). 
With the long-term desiccation of the Sahara during the 7th and 6th


--- PAGE 22 ---
12 BLACK ATHENA 
millennia Be, there were movements into the Egyptian Nile Valley from 
the west and east as well as from the Sudan. I also maintain - but here I 
am in a minority - that a similar migration took place from the Arabian 
savannah into Lower Mesopotamia. Most scholars believe that this area 
was first inhabited by Sumerians or Proto-Sumerians and was infil­
trated by Semites from the Desert only in the 3rd millennium. I argue 
that during the 6th millennium Semitic speech spread with the so­
called Ubaid pottery to Assyria and Syria, to occupy more or less the 
region of South- West Asia where Semitic is spoken today (map 2). I see 
the Sumerians as having arrived in Mesopotamia from the north-east, 
at the beginning of the 4th millennium. In any event, we now know 
from the earliest texts that have been read - those from Uruk from 
c.3000 Be - that bilingualism in Semito-Sumerian was already well 
established. 4 
Few scholars would contest the idea that it was in Mesopotamia that 
what we call 'civilization' was first assembled. With the possible 
exception of writing, all the elements of which it was composed - cities, 
agricultural irrigation, metalworking, stone architecture and wheels for 
both vehicles and pot-making - had existed before and elsewhere. But 
this assemblage, when capped by writing, allowed a great economic and 
political accumulation that can usefully be seen as the beginning of 
civilization. 
Before discussing the rise and spread of this civilization, it would 
seem useful to consider the break-up and separate development of the 
Indo-European languages. In the first half of the 19th century it was 
thought that Indo-European originated in some Asian mountains. As 
the century wore on this Urheimat, or homeland, shifted west, and it was 
generally agreed that Proto- Indo- European was first spoken by nomads 
somewhere to the north of the Black Sea. In the last thirty years, this has 
been generally identified with the so-called Kurgan Culture attested in 
this region in the 4th and 3rd millennia Be. Possessors of this material 
culture seem to have spread west into Europe, south-east to Iran and 
India, and south to the Balkans and Greece. 
The general scheme of expansion from Central Asia or the Steppes 
was developed before the decipherment of Hittite, the discovery that it 
was a 'primitive' Indo-European language, and the further recognition 
INTRODUCTION 13 
that there was a whole Anatolian linguistic family. I should mention that 
for linguists, 'Anatolian' languages do not include those like Phrygian 
and Armenian which, though spoken in Anatolia - modern Turkey -
are clearly Indo-European. The true Anatolian languages - Hittite, 
Palaic, Luvian, Lycian, Lydian, Lemnian, probably Etruscan and 
possibly Carian - present a number of problems for the conventional 
view of Indo-European origins (map 3). It is generally conceded that 
Proto-Anatolian split from Proto-Indo-European before the latter 
disintegrated. However, it is impossible to tell the length of time 
between the two events, which could be anywhere from 500 years to 
10,000. In any event, the difference is sufficient to cause many linguists 
to make a distinction between Indo-European - which excludes the 
Anatolian languages - and Indo-Hittite, which includes both families 
(see chart 2). 
If, as most historical linguists suppose, not merely Indo-European 
but Indo-Hittite began north of the Black Sea, how and when did 
speakers of the Anatolian languages enter Anatolia? Some authorities 
argue that this took place during the late 3rd millennium when, 
Mesopotamian sources indicate, there were barbarian invasions there. 
These invasions would seem much more likely to have been those of the 
Phrygian and Proto-Armenian speakers. It is almost inconceivable that 
a period of a few hundred years, before the first attestation of Hittite and 
Palaic, would allow for the very considerable differentation between 
Indo-European and Anatolian and within the latter family. The 
archaeological record for the 3rd millennium is extremely spotty, but 
there is no obvious break in material culture that would fit such a major 
linguistic shift. Nevertheless, one should not rely too heavily on the 
argument from silence, and an influx of Anatolian culture during the 
5th and 4th millennia cannot be ruled out. 
A more attractive possibility is the scheme proposed by Professors 
Georgiev and Renfrew.s According to this, Indo-European - I should 
prefer Indo-Hittite - was already spoken in Southern Anatolia by the 
makers of the great Neolithic cultures of the 8th and 7th millennia, 
including the famous one at Catal Hiiyiik in the plain of Konya. 
Georgiev and Renfrew propose that the language moved into Greece 
and Crete with the spread of agriculture around 7000 Be, when


--- PAGE 23 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
archaeology suggests a significant break in material culture there. Thus 
a dialect of Indo- Hittite would have been the language of the Neolithic 
'civilizations' of Greece and the Balkans in the 5th and 4th millennia. It 
would seem convenient to accept the proposal of the American Profes­
sor Goodenough that the Kurgan nomadic culture was derived from the 
mixed agricultural system of these Balkan cultures and hence derived 
its language from them. 6 In this way it is possible to reconcile the 
theories of Georgiev and Renfrew with those of orthodox Indo­
Europeanists, by postulating that the Indo- European -speaking Kurgan 
culture spread back into the Balkans and Greece over an Indo- Hittite­
speaking population. 
The hypothetical expansion of Afroasiatic with African agriculture in 
the 9th and 8th millennia BC, and of Indo-Hittite with that of South­
West Asia in the 8th and 7th, would to some extent explain what seem to 
be fundamental differences between the north and south coasts of the 
Mediterranean. These migrations were largely overland because sea 
travel, though possible at least as early as the 9th millennium, was still 
risky and laborious. With the improvement of navigation in the 5th and 
4th millennia, the situation was largely reversed. Despite the fact that 
nomads continued to migrate overland, particularly across plains, 
transport and communications from the 4th millennium BC until the 
development of railways in the 19th century AD were generally easier by 
water than by land. In this long period rivers and seas provided links, 
while territories were isolated by riverless deserts and mountains. Such 
a pattern of historical layering of first land, then sea, would explain the 
general paradox with which this book is concerned: the apparent 
contradiction between the striking cultural similarities found among 
populations all around the Mediterranean and the fundamentallinguis­
tic and cultural division between the peoples of its south and north 
coasts.7 
Civilization spread from 4th-millennium Mesopotamia with great 
speed. The idea of writing seems to have been taken up in India and 
many parts of the East Mediterranean even before its codification as 
cuneiform in its land of origin. We know that hieroglyphs were 
developed in the Nile Valley by the third quarter of this millennium, 
and despite the lack of attestation it would seem likely that Hittite 
INTRODUCTION 
hieroglyphs, as well as the prototypes of Levantine, Cypriot and 
Anatolian syllabaries, were formed before the arrival in Syria, near the 
beginning of the 3rd millennium, of fully fledged Sumero-Semitic 
civilization, with its regular cuneiform script. 
Egyptian civilization is clearly based on the rich Pre-dynastic cultures 
of Upper Egypt and Nubia, whose African origin is uncontested. 
Nevertheless, the great extent of Mesopotamian influence, evident 
from late Pre-dynastic and I st-dynasty remains, leaves little doubt that 
the unification and establishment of dynastic Egypt, around 3250 BC, 
was in some way triggered by developments to the east. The cultural 
mix was further complicated by the fundamental linguistic and, I 
would argue, cultural links between Egypt and the basically Semitic 
component of Mesopotamian civilization. 
The miraculous 4th millennium was followed by the prosperous 3rd. 
The newly discovered archives from Ebla in Syria, dating from around 
2500 BC, portray a concert of rich, literate and sophisticated states 
stretching from Kurdistan to Cyprus. We know from archaeology that 
civilization at this time extended still farther - to the Harappan culture 
stretching from the Indus to Afghanistan, and the metalworking cul­
tures of the Caspian, Black Sea and Aegean. The Semito-Sumerian 
civilizations of Mesopotamia were tightly bound by a common script 
and culture. Those on the periphery, though equally 'civilized', re­
tained their own languages, scripts and cultural identities. In Crete, for 
instance, there seems to have been a considerable cultural influx from 
the Levant at the beginning of the ceramic period Early Minoan I, at the 
tum of the 3rd millennium. Nevertheless, cuneiform did not become 
the dominant script, and Crete was never fully incorporated into 
Syro-Mesopotamian civilization. Apart from sheer distance, the most 
plausible reasons for this would seem to be the resilience of the native 
culture and the fact that Crete was culturally between the Semitic and 
Egyptian spheres of influence. 
This double relationship with both the Levant and Africa is reflected 
in archaeological discoveries. Many Syrian and Egyptian objects of this 
period have been found in Crete and other parts of the Aegean. Around 
3000 BC, as in the Near East, copper began to be mixed with arsenic to 
make bronze; pots started to be wheel-made, and there are striking


--- PAGE 24 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
similarities between fortification systems in the Cyclades and those of 
the same period found in Palestine. The archaeologists Professors 
Peter Warren in Bristol and Colin Renfrew in Cambridge ask us to 
believe that these developments took place independently, unaffected 
by the fact that the same changes had occurred somewhat earlier in the 
Near East and by the undoubted contacts between the two regions. 8 I find 
this very implausible. It would seem much more likely that the Aegean 
developments took place as the result of contacts through Levantine 
trade and settlement and local initiatives in response to these stimuli. 
We know that most of the bronze-using world of the 3rd millennium 
was literate, either in cuneiform or in local scripts. There is, however, 
no trace of writing in the Aegean at this period. How seriously should 
'the argument from silence' be taken in this case? There are some 
cogent points to be made against it. In the first place, the climates of 
Greece and Anatolia are far less suitable for preserving clay tablets 
and papyrus than those of the Middle East or North-West India. 
Even in these dry regions, evidence is often hard to find. Until the 
discovery of tablets at Ebla in 1975, there was no evidence whatsoever 
ofliteracy in Syria during the 3rd millennium. We now know that Syria 
at that time contained a cultivated literary class and that men travelled 
from the Euphrates to study at the schools of Ebla. 
A further point suggests that there was writing in the Aegean during 
the Early Bronze Age. Although Linear A, Linear B and the Cypriot 
syllabaries found from the 2nd millennium seem to share a common 
prototype, they also show great divergences which, by analogy with 
historically observed developments of scripts, would take many 
centuries to come about. Thus the evidence from the scripts' 'dialects' 
would seem to indicate that the original form existed in the 3rd 
millennium and would allow for its development in the 4th which, on 
the grounds given above, would have been a plausible period for this to 
have taken place. Finally, I have argued elsewhere that the latest the 
alphabet could have reached the Aegean is the middle of the 2nd 
millennium. 9 If this is the case, it would seem plausible to suppose that 
the survival of the syllabaries shows that they were already well rooted in 
the region. Thus, in this way too, the evidence points to their existence 
in the 3rd millennium. 
INTRODUCTION 17 
Early Bronze Age civilization broke down in the 23rd century BC. In 
Egypt, it has been marked as the First Intermediate Period. In Mesopo­
tamia there was the Gutian invasion from the north. The whole civilized 
world was racked by barbarian invasion and social revolt, both of which 
may have been brought about by sudden climatic deterioration. It was in 
these years that Anatolia was invaded by groups that I believe should be 
identified with Phrygian and Proto-Armenian speakers. In Mainland 
Greece in this and the following centuries there were widespread 
destructions at the end of ceramic period Early Helladic II, which have 
been plausibly linked to an 'Aryan' or 'Hellenic' invasion of Greece but 
could also be the result of Egyptian raids and colonies at the beginning 
of the Middle Kingdom. Three centuries later there was another, 
though less devastating, destruction at the end of Early Helladic III, 
c. 1900 BC, possibly associated with conquests of the Egyptian Pharaoh 
Senwosret I, known to the Greeks as Sesostris. 
Postulating this degree of contact between the Aegean and the Near 
East in the 3 rd millennium, it is likely that some of the words, place 
names and religious cults of Egyptian and Semitic origin discussed in 
this work were introduced into the Aegean at this time. On Mainland 
Greece these are less likely to have survived the turmoil of the north­
ern invasions or infiltrations. However, in Crete and the Cyclades, 
which were not affected by such turmoils and may well have been 
largely Semitic-speaking, these cultural elements are much more 
likely to have continued. 
I must repeat here that the scheme given above is not the topic of 
these volumes, but my perception of its background. Thus, though I 
shall discuss many of the linguistic issues in Volume 2, and I have 
written elsewhere on some other aspects, I cannot provide full evi­
dence here to back up all these contentions. 10 
PROPOSED HISTORICAL OUTLINE 
Black Athena is focused on Greek cultural borrowings from Egypt and 
the Levant in the 2nd millennium BC or, to be more precise, in the 
thousand years from 2100 to 1100 BC. Some of these may be earlier.


--- PAGE 25 ---
18 BLACK ATHENA 
and a few later exchanges will also be considered. The reasons for 
choosing this particular time-span are first that this seems to have been 
the period in which Greek culture was formed, and secondly that I have 
found it impossible to discover indications of any earlier borrowings 
either from the Near East or from legendary, cultic or etymological 
Greek evidence. 
The scheme I propose is that while there seems to have been more or 
less continuous Near Eastern influence on the Aegean over this 
millennium, its intensity varied considerably at different periods. The 
first 'peak' of which we have any trace was the 2 I st century. It was then 
that Egypt recovered from the breakdown of the First Intermediate 
Period, and the so-called Middle Kingdom was established by the new 
I I th Dynasty. This not only reunited Egypt but attacked the Levant and 
is known from archaeological evidence to have had wide-ranging 
contacts further afield, certainly including Crete and possibly the 
Mainland. The succession of Upper Egyptian black pharaohs sharing 
the name Mentl}.otpe had as their divine patron the hawk and bull god 
Mn!W or Mont. It is during the same century that the Cretan palaces 
were established and one finds the beginnings there of the bull-cult 
which appears on the walls of the palaces and was central to Greek 
mythology about King Minos and Crete. It would therefore seem 
plausible to suppose that the Cretan developments directly or indirectly 
reflected the rise of the EgyptiaJ,1 Middle Kingdom. 
Just north of the Greek Thebes there is a large mound, traditionally 
called the tomb of Amphion and Zethos. One of its latest excavators, 
th~ distinguished archaeologist T. Spyropoulos, describes this as an 
earthen stepped pyramid with a brick top in which there was a 
monumental - though robbed - tomb. He dates the pottery and few 
pieces of jewellery found near it to the ceramic period Early Helladic III 
- generally accepted to be around the 2 I st century. On the basis of this, 
of the extraordinarily sophisticated draining of the nearby Lake Kopais 
- which seems to have taken place at about this time - and of the 
considerable Classical literature connecting the region to Egypt, 
Spyropoulos postulates an Egyptian colony in Boiotia in this period. 11 
There is further evidence to support his hypothesis, which will be ~ited 
in the later volumes of Black A thena. 
INTRODUCTION 
Meanwhile, it is interesting to note that according to an ancient 
tradition referred to by Homer, Amphion and Zethos were the first 
founders of Thebes and that its other founder, Kadmos, arrived from 
the Near East long after their city had been destroyed. Like the 
Egyptian Pyramids, the tomb of Amphion and Zethos was associated 
with the sun and, like them, the Greek Thebes had close associations 
with a sphinx. Furthermore, it was in some way linked to the zodiacal 
sign Taurus, and many scholars have drawn parallels between the 
Theban and the Cretan bull-cults. Nothing is certain, but there is 
strong circumstantial evidence connecting the tomb and the first 
foundation of Thebes directly or indirectly to 11th-dynasty Egypt. 
While Crete kept the bull-cult as central for another 600 years, Egypt 
abandoned the royal cult of Mont with the rise of the 12th Dynasty soon 
after 2000 Be. The new dynasty had the Upper Egyptian ram god Amon 
as its patron. I believe that it is from influence of this period that most of 
the ram-cults found around the Aegean and generally associated with 
Zeus were derived, drawing both from Amon and from the Lower 
Egyptian cult of the rami goat Mendes. 
Herodotos and later authors wrote at length about the widespread 
conquests of a pharaoh he called Sesostris, whose name has been 
identified with S-n-Wsrt or Senwosret, that of a number of 12th­
dynasty pharaohs. Herodotos' claims on this, however, have been 
treated with especial derision. The same treatment has been given to 
ancient legends concerning wide-ranging expeditions by the Ethiopian 
or Egyptian prince Memnon, whose name could well derive from 
>lmn-m-l,ut (written Ammenemes by later Greek writers), the name of 
other important 12th-dynasty pharaohs. Both legendary cycles now 
seem to have been vindicated by the recent reading of an inscription 
from Memphis which details the conquests, by land and sea, of two 
12th-dynasty pharaohs, Senwosret I and Ammenemes II. There is also 
an intriguing resemblance between ijpr 10 R (, an alternative name for 
Senwosret, and Kekrops, the legendary founder of Athens whom some 
ancient sources said was an Egyptian. 12 
The next wave of influence, about which tradition was much more 
clear-cut, took place during the Hyksos period. The Hyksos, whose 
name came from the Egyptianlf~3IflSt, 'Rulers of Foreign Lands', were


--- PAGE 26 ---
20 BLACK ATHENA 
invaders from the north who conquered and ruled at least Lower Egypt 
from about 1720 to 1575 Be. Although other, possibly Hurrian, 
elements seem to have been involved, the Hyksos were predominandy 
Semitic-speaking. 
The first revision I propose for the Ancient Model is to accept the 
idea that there were, during the 4th and 3rd millennia, invasions or 
infiltrations of Greece by Indo-European speakers from the north. The 
second revision I want to make is to put Danaos' landing in Greece near 
the beginning of the Hyksos period, at around 1720 Be, not near its end 
- in or after 1575 - as set out in the ancient chronographies. Ever since 
late Antiquity, writers have seen links between the Egyptian records of 
the expulsion of the hated Hyksos by the Egyptian 18th Dynasty, the 
biblical tradition of the exodus from Egypt after the Israelite sojourn 
there, and the Greek legends of the arrival in Argos of Danaos. 
According to Greek tradition Danaos was either Egyptian or Syrian, but 
he definitely came from Egypt after or during his struggle with his twin, 
Aigyptos - whose origin is self-evident. This three-way association 
would seem plausible and has been reconciled, by some authorities, 
with the archaeological evidence. However, recent developments in 
radiocarbon dating and dendrochronology make it impossible to place 
the new settlements in Greece at the end of the Hyksos period. On the 
other hand, they and archaeological evidence from Crete would fit in 
very well with a landing in the late 18th century, at the period's 
beginning. 
The ancient chronographers varied in their dating of the arrival of 
Kadmos and his 'second' foundation of Thebes. I would associate these 
legends too with the Hyksos, though they could refer to later periods. 
Greek tradition associated Danaos with the introduction of irrigation 
and Kadmos with the introduction of certain types of weapons, the 
alphabet, and a number of religious rituals. According to the Revised 
Ancient Model, it would seem that irrigation came with an earlier wave 
but other borrowings, including the chariot and the sword - both 
introduced to Egypt in Hyksos times - came soon after to the Aegean. In 
religion, the cults introduced at this stage seem to have centred on those 
around Poseidon and Athena. I maintain that the former should be 
identified with Seth, the Egyptian god of the wilderness or sea, to whom 
INTRODUCTION 21 
the Hyksos were devoted, and with the Semitic Yam (Sea) and Yahwe. 
Athena was the Egyptian Neit and probably the Semitic <Anat who also 
seems to have been worshipped by the Hyksos. This is not to deny that 
other cults of such divinities as Aphrodite and Artemis were introduced 
over this period. 
It is generally agreed that the Greek language was formed during the 
17th and 16th centuries Be. Its Indo-European structure and basic 
lexicon are combined with anon -Indo- European vocabulary of sophis­
tication. I am convinced that much of the latter can be plausibly derived 
from Egyptian and West Semitic. This would fit very well with a long 
period of domination by Egypto-Semitic conquerors. 
In the mid- I 5th century the 18th Dynasty established a powerful 
empire in the Levant, and received tribute from the Aegean. Many 
18th-dynasty objects have been found in that region. I believe that this 
was another high tide of Egyptian influ~nce and that it was probably 
in this period that the cult of Dionysos - which was traditionally 
considered to be 'late' - was introduced to Greece. Specifically, I accept 
the ancient tradition that the Eleusinian mystery cult of Demeter was 
established in this period. 13 At the beginning of the 14th century Be I 
believe there was another invasion of Greece, that of the Pelopids or 
Achaians from Anatolia, which introduced new styles of fortification 
and possibly chariot-racing; but this is not of direct concern to my 
project. 
In the 12th century Be there was a more disruptive historical break. In 
Antiquity, what is now called the 'Dorian Invasion' was much more 
frequendy termed 'The Return of the Heraklids'. The incomers 
undoubtedly came from the north-western fringes of Greece, which 
had been less affected by the Middle Eastern culture of the Mycenaean 
palaces which they destroyed. Their calling themselves 'Heraklids' is 
fascinating, as it was a claim not only to divine descent from Herakles 
but also to Egyptian and Phoenician ancestors of the royal families 
which had been replaced by the Pelopids. There is no doubt that the 
descendants of these conquerors, the Dorian kings of Classical and 
Hellenistic times, believed themselves to be descended from Egyptians 
and Phoenicians. 14 
In Volume 2, I shall consider what I see to be the 'Egyptianizing' of


--- PAGE 27 ---
22 BLACK ATHENA 
Spartan society between 800 and 500 BC, and in Volume 3 I shall also 
discuss the introduction in the 6th century BC of Egyptian Orphic cults. 
I have written elsewhere about the Phoenician origin of the polis or 
city-state and of Marxist 'Slave Society' as a whole, in the 9th and 8th 
centuries. I also hope, at some time, to work on the transmission of 
Egyptian and Phoenician science, philosophy and theoretical politics by 
the Greek 'founders' of these subjects, most of whom studied in Egypt 
or Phoenicia. However, Black Athena is essentially concerned with the 
Egyptian and Semitic roles in the formation of Greece in the Middle 
and Late Bronze Age. 
BLACKATHENA, VOLUME I: 
A SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT 
The first volume of Black Athena is concerned with the development of 
the Ancient and Aryan Models, and the first chapter, 'The Ancient 
Model in Antiquity', treats the attitudes of Greeks in the Classical and 
Hellenistic periods to their distant past. It considers the writings of 
authors who affirmed the Ancient Model, referred to Egyptian colonies 
in Thebes and Athens, and gave details of the Egyptian conquest of the 
Argolid and the Phoenician foundation of Thebes. I discuss the claims 
made by various 19th- and 20th-century 'source critics' that the 
Ancient Model was concocted only in the 5th century BC, and I cite 
iconographic evidence and a number of earlier references to demon­
strate that the scheme existed several centuries earlier. 
Chapter I pays special attention to Aischylos' The Suppliants, which 
describes the arrival in Argos of Danaos and his daughters. The 
argument here, on the basis of a number of etymologies, is that there is 
considerable evidence of Egyptian influence in the play's peculiar 
vocabulary, indicating that Aischylos was in touch with extremely 
ancient traditions. In particular, I claim that the theme itselfis based on 
a pun between hikes(ios) (suppliant) and Hyksos; while at another level, 
the idea that the settlers from Egypt had come as suppliants can be seen 
as a sop to Greek national pride. A similar attempt to soften the blow can 
be seen in the Timaios, in which Plato admitted an ancient 'genetic' 
relationship between Egypt and Greece, in general; and Athens and 
INTRODUCTION 23 
Sais, the major city at the north-western edge of the Delta, in particular. 
But, rather implausibly, he claimed priority for Athens. 
Like some other Greeks, Aischylos and Plato appear to have been 
offended by the legends of colonization because they put Hellenic 
culture in an inferior position to that of the Egyptians and Phoenicians, 
towards whom most Greeks of this time appear to have felt an acute 
ambivalence. The Egyptians and Phoenicians were despised and 
feared, but at the same time deeply respected for their antiquity and 
well-preserved ancient religion and philosophy. 
The fact that so many Greeks overcame their antipathies and 
transmitted these 'traditions [of colonization] so little accommodating 
to national prejudice' greatly impressed the 18th-century historian 
William Mitford, who used it to maintain that 'for their essential 
circumstances they seem unquestionable.' Before Mitford no one 
questioned the Ancient Model, so there was no need to articulate a 
defence of it. Such motives of 'national prejudice' would help explain 
Thucydides' failure to mention these legends, of which he was certainly 
aware. 
Chapter I goes on to discuss some of the equations made between 
specific Greek and Egyptian divinities and rituals, and the general belief 
that the Egyptian were the earlier forms and that Egyptian religion was 
the original one. Only in this way - the desire to return to the ancient 
and proper forms - can one explain why, starting in the 5th century at 
the latest, Egyptian deities began to be worshipped under Egyptian 
names - and following Egyptian ritual - throughout Greece, the East 
Mediterranean and later the whole Roman world. It was only after the 
collapse of Egyptian religion in the 2nd century AD that other Oriental 
cults, notably Christianity, began to replace it. 
Chapter II, 'Egyptian wisdom and Greek transmission from the Dark 
Ages to the Renaissance', considers the attitude of the Church Fathers 
towards Egypt. After the crushing of Neo-Platonism, the Hellenic, 
pagan descendant of Egyptian religion, and Gnosticism, its J udaeo­
Christian counterpart, Christian thinkers tamed Egyptian religion by 
turning it into a philosophy. The process was identified with the figure 
of Hermes Trismegistos, a euhemerized or rationalized version of


--- PAGE 28 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Thoth, the Egyptian god of wisdom; and a number of texts associated 
with Thoth, written in the last centuries of the Egyptian religion, were 
attributed to him. The Church Fathers were divided on whether or not 
Trismegistos antedated Moses and biblical moral philosophy. Saint 
Augustine's weighty opinion came down firmly in favour of the priority, 
and hence the superiority, of Moses and the Bible. Following the 
Classical tradition, however, the Fathers were united in the belief that 
the Greeks had learnt most of their philosophy from the Egyptians -
though the Egyptians might have learnt some of theirs in tum from 
Mesopotamia and Persia. Thus, throughout the Middle Ages, Hermes 
Trismegistos was seen as the founder of non-biblical or 'Gentile' 
philosophy and culture. 
This belief continued through the Renaissance. The revival of Greek 
studies in the 15th century created a love of Greek literature and 
language and an identification with the Greeks, but no one questioned 
the fact that the Greeks had been the pupils of the Egyptians, in whom 
there was an equal, if not more passionate, interest. The Greeks were 
admired for having preserved and transmitted a small part of this 
ancient wisdom: to some extent the experimental techniques of 
men like Paracelsus and Newton were developed to retrieve this lost 
Egyptian or Hermetic knowledge. A few Hermetic texts had been 
available in Latin translation throughout the Dark and Middle Ages; 
many more were found in 1460 and were brought to the court of 
Cosimo di Medici in Florence, where they were translated by his 
leading scholar, Marsilio Ficino. These and the ideas contained in them 
became central to the Neo-Platonist movement started by Ficino, 
which was itself at the heart of Renaissance Humanism. 
Although Copernicus' mathematics was derived from Islamic sci­
ence, his heliocentricity seems to have come with the revival of the 
Egyptian notion of a divine sun in the new intellectual environment of 
Hermeticism in which he was formed. His champion Giordano Bruno, 
at the end of the 16th century, was more explicit on this and went 
beyond the respectable Christian Neo-Platonic Hermeticism ofFicino. 
Appalled by the Wars of Religion and Christian intolerance, he advo­
cated a return to the original or natural religion, that of Egypt, for which 
he was burnt at the stake by the Inquisition in 1600. 
\~ 
INTRODUCTION 25 
This brings us to Chapter III, 'The triumph of Egypt in the 17th and 
18th centuries'. Bruno's influence continued after his death. He seems 
to have had some contact with the founders of the mysterious and 
elusive Rosicrucians, whose anonymous manifestos fascinated people 
in the early 17th century: the Rosicrucians, too, saw Egypt as the fount 
of religion and philosophy. It is commonly supposed that the Hermetic 
Texts were discredited in 1614 by the great scholar Isaac Casaubon, 
who showed to his satisfaction that the Texts did not come from deepest 
Antiquity but were post-Christian. This view has been accepted as 
axiomatic since the 19th century, even by 'rebel' scholars such as 
Frances Yates. However, in this chapter I try to show why I am inclined 
to the view put forward by the Egyptologist Sir Flinders Petrie that the 
earliest Texts date back to the 5th century Be. Whatever their actual 
date, the belief that Casaubon destroyed the credibility of the Texts is 
wrong. Hermeticism continued to be a major force well into the second 
half of the 17th century and retained considerable influence even after 
that. The Texts did, however, lose their appeal with the decline in the 
beliefin magic among the upper classes at the end of the 17th century. 
Though the Hermetic Texts became less attractive to the thinkers of 
the Enlightenment, interest in and admiration for Egypt did not 
diminish. In general the 18th century was a period of Classicism and 
one with a desire for order and stability, and so Rome was usually 
preferred to Greece; at the same time - in order to break away from the 
feudalism and superstitious Christianity of the European past - there 
was great interest in other non- European civilizations. By far the most 
influential of these, for this century, were those of Egypt and China. 
Both were seen as having superior writing systems representing ideas, 
not sounds; and both had profound and ancient philosophies. Their 
most attractive feature, however, seems to have been that they were 
ruled rationally, without superstition, by a corps of men recruited 
for their morality and required to undergo rigorous initiation and 
training. 
Egyptian priesthoods had in fact appealed to conservative thinkers 
at least since the time when Plato had modelled his Guardians on 
them. In the 18th century this line of thought was taken up by the 
Freemasons; but even in the Middle Ages, Freemasons appear to have


--- PAGE 29 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
been especially interested in Egypt because, following ancient tradition, 
they believed it to be the home of geometry or Masonry. With the 
formation of Speculative Masonry at the turn of the 18th century they 
drew on Rosicrucianism and Bruno to establish a 'twofold philosophy' . 
This entailed superstitious and limited religions for the masses but, for 
the illuminati, a return to the natural and pure original religion of Egypt, 
from the debris of which all the others had been created. Thus the 
Masons, who included almost every significant figure in the Enlighten­
ment, saw their religion as Egyptian; their signs as hieroglyphs; their 
lodges as Egyptian temples; and themselves as an Egyptian priesthood. 
Indeed, the Masonic admiration for Egypt has survived the country's 
fall from grace among academics. With some degree of self­
deprecation, Masons have maintained the cult until today, as an 
anomaly in a world where 'true' history is seen to have begun with the 
Greeks. 
The culmination of radical Masonry - and its most acute threat to 
Christian order - came during the period of the French Revolution. 
Here the political and military menace was accompanied by an intellec­
tual challenge in the work of the great French scholar, anticlerical 
and revolutionary Charles Fran~ois Dupuis. Dupuis's case was that 
Egyptian mythology - which, following Herodotos, he saw as the 
same as that of Greece - was essentially made up of allegories for the 
movements of the constellations, and that Christianity was merely a 
collection of misunderstood fragments of this grand tradition. 
'Hostilities to Egypt in the 18th century' is the topic of Chapter IV. The 
Egyptian menace to Christianity naturally provoked response and 
Bruno's immolation, and Casaubon's attack on the antiquity of the 
Hermetic Texts, can both be seen as early instances of this reaction. 
However, the situation became acute once more at the end of the 
17th century with the reorganization and attempted radicalization of 
Masonry. The threat posed by this 'Radical Enlightenment' can explain 
the sharp change in Newton's attitudes towards Egypt. In his early work 
he followed his Cambridge N eo-Platonist teachers in their respect for 
the country, but the last decades of his life were spent trying to diminish 
Egypt's importance by bringing down the date of its foundation to 
} 
INTRODUCTION 
just before the Trojan War. Newton was concerned with a threat to his 
conception of physical order and its theological and political counter­
parts - a divinity with regular habits and the Whig constitutional 
monarchy. The threat was of pantheism, implying an animate universe 
without need for a regulator or even a creator. 
This pantheism could be traced back past Spinoza to Bruno and 
beyond, to the Neo-Platonists and Egypt itself. The first articulate 
rejection of the challenge of the Radical Enlightenment - and the 
earliest popularization of the Newtonian 'Whig' scheme in science, 
politics and religion - was made in 1693 by Richard Bentley, Newton's 
friend and a great sceptical Classicist. One way in which Bentley 
attacked his and Newton's enemies was to use Casaubon's tactics. He 
employed his critical scholarship to undermine Greek sources on the 
antiquity and wisdom of the Egyptians. Thus throughout the 18th and 
19th centuries we find a de facto alliance of Hellenism and textual 
criticism with the defence of Christianity. The ructions caused by 
occasional Hellenist atheists like Shelley and Swinburne were trivial 
compared to the threat of Aegypto-Masonry. 
Newton had merely tried to demote Egypt in relation to Christianity; 
he did not try to raise Greece. By the middle of the 18th century, 
however, a number of Christian apologists were using the emerging 
paradigm of 'progress', with its presupposition that 'later is better', to 
promote the Greeks at the expense of the Egyptians. These strands of 
thought soon merged with two others that were becoming dominant at 
the same time: racism and Romanticism. Thus Chapter IV also outlines 
the development of racism based on skin colour in late- I 7th -century 
England, alongside the increasing importance of the American col­
onies, with their twin policies of extermination of the Native Americans 
and enslavement of African Blacks. This racism pervaded the thought 
of Locke, Hume and other English thinkers. Their influence - and that 
of the new European explorers of other continents - was important at 
the university of Gottingen, founded in 1734 by George II, Elector of 
Hanover and King of England, and forming a cultural bridge between 
Britain and Germany. It is not surprising, therefore, that the first 
'academic' work on human racial classification - which naturally put 
Whites, or to use his new term, 'Caucasians', at the head of the


--- PAGE 30 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
hierarchy - was written in the 1770S by Johann Friedrich 
Blumenbach, a professor at Gottingen. 
The university pioneered the establishment of modem disciplinary 
scholarship. In the same decade, other professors at Gottingen began to 
publish histories not of individuals, but of peoples and races and their 
institutions. These 'modem' projects, combined with exhaustiveness 
and a critical approach to sources, can usefully be seen as an academic 
aspect of the new Romantic concern with ethnicity, current in German 
and British society at the time. 18th-century Romanticism was not 
merely a faith in the primacy of emotion and a belief in the inadequacy 
of reason. Clustered around these were feelings for landscapes -
especially wild, remote and cold ones - and admiration for the vigorous, 
virtuous and primitive folk who were somehow moulded by them. 
These sentiments were combined with the belief that as the landscape 
and climate of Europe were better than those of other continents, 
Europeans must be superior. They were championed by Montesquieu 
and Rousseau, but took firmest root in Britain and Germany. 
By the end of the 18th century, 'progress' had become a dominant 
paradigm, dynamism and change were valued more than stability, and 
the world began to be viewed through time rather than across space. 
Nevertheless, space remained important for the Romantics, because of 
their concern for the local formation of peoples or 'races'. Thus a race 
was believed to change its form as it passed through different ages, but 
always to retain an immutable individual essence. Real communication 
was no longer perceived as taking place through reason, which could 
reach any rational man. It was now seen as flowing through feeling, 
which could touch only those tied to each other by kinship or 'blood' 
and sharing a common 'heritage'. 
To return to the theme of racism. Many Ancient Greeks shared a 
feeling very like what would now be called nationalism: they despised 
other peoples and some, like Aristotle, even put this on a theoretical 
plane by claiming a Hellenic superiority based on the geographical 
situation of Greece. It was a feeling qualified by the very real respect 
many Greek writers had for foreign cultures, particularly those of 
Egypt, Phoenicia and Mesopotamia. But in any event, the strength of 
INTRODUCTION 29 
this Ancient Greek 'nationalism' was negligible compared to the tidal 
w~~ ~f ethnicity and racialism, linked to cults of Christian Europe and 
thtNorth, that engulfed Northern Europe with the Romantic move­
ment at the end of the 18th century. The paradigm of , races' that were 
intrinsically unequal in physical and mental endowment was applied to 
all human studies, but especially to history. It was now considered 
u~irable, if not disastrous, for races to mix. To be creative, a 
civihzation needed to be 'racially pure'. Thus it became increasingly 
intolerable that Greece - which was seen by the Romantics not merely 
as the epitome of Europe but also as its pure childhood - could be the 
result of the mixture of native Europeans and colonizing Africans and 
Semites. 
Chapter V, 'Romantic linguistics: the rise ofIndia and the fall of Egypt, 
1740-1880', begins with a sketch of the Romantic origins of historical 
linguistics and the passion at the turn of the 18th century for ancient 
India largely caused by the perception of a fundamental relationship 
between Sanskrit and the European languages. It also surveys the 
decline in the European estimation of China, as the balance of trade 
between the two turned in Europe's favour and the British and French 
carried out increasingly large-scale attacks on China. I argue that these 
factors necessitated changing the image of China from one of a refined 
and enlightened civilization to one of a society filled with drugs, dirt, 
corruption and torture. Ancient Egypt, which in the 18th century had 
been seen as a very close parallel to China, suffered from the same 
effects of the need to justify the increasing European expansion into 
other continents and maltreatment of their indigenous peoples. Both 
were flung into prehistory to serve as a solid and inert basis for 
the dynamic development of the superior races, the Aryans and the 
Semites. 
Despite the fall in Egypt's reputation, interest in the country con­
tinued during the 19th century. Indeed, in some ways this interest even 
increased with the explosion of knowledge about it that followed 
Napoleon's Expedition there in 1798; its most important consequence 
being Jean Fran~ois Champollion's decipherment of hieroglyphics. In 
the chapter I look at some of the intricacies ofChampollion's motivation


--- PAGE 31 ---
30 BLACK ATHENA 
and academic career in relation to the Masonic tradition and the 
triangular relationship between Ancient Egypt, Ancient Greece and 
Christianity. Here we need simply note that by the time of his death in 
183 I his championship of Egypt had antagonized both the Christian 
political establishment and the newly and passionately Hellenist 
academic one. Thus, after an initial enthusiasm for it, Champollion's 
decipherment was neglected for a quarter of a century. On its revival in 
the late 1850s, scholars were torn between the appeal of Egypt and the 
brilliance of Champollion's work on the one hand and the intense 
racism of the age on the other. By the I 880s academics saw Egyptian 
culture as a static and sterile cultural cuI de sac. 
During the 19th century a number of mathematicians and astron­
omers were 'seduced' by what they saw as the mathematical elegance of 
the Pyramids into believing that they ~ere the repositories of a higher 
ancient wisdom. They were classified as cranks for this triple offence 
against professionalism, racism and the concept of 'progress' - the 
three cardinal beliefs of the 19th century. Among 'sound' scholars the 
reputation of the Egyptians has remained low. In the late 18th and early 
19th centuries, Romantic scholars saw the Egyptians as essentially 
morbid and lifeless. At the end of the 19th century a new contrary but 
equally disparaging image began to emerge. The Egyptians were now 
seen to conform to the contemporary European vision of Mricans: gay, 
pleasure-loving, childishly boastful and essentially materialistic. 
Another way oflooking at these changes is to assume that after the rise 
of black slavery and racism, European thinkers were concerned to keep black 
Africans as for as possible from European civilization. Where men and 
women in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance were uncertain about 
the colour of the Egyptians, the Egyptophil Masons tended to see them 
as white. Next, the Hellenomaniacs of the early 19th century began to 
doubt their whiteness and to deny that the Egyptians had been civilized. 
It was only at the end of the 19th century, when Egypt had been entirely 
stripped ofits philosophic reputation, that its African affinities could be 
re-established. Notice that in each case the necessary divide between B!lJcks 
and civilization was clearly demarcated. Yet despite the triumph of 
Hellenism and dismissal of Egypt in academic circles, the concept of 
Egypt as 'the cradle of civilization' never completely died. Moreover, 
INTRODUCTION 31 
the widespread mystical and cranky admiration for Egyptian religion 
and philosophy has remained a constant irritation to 'serious' pro­
'essio~al ~gyptologists. Two s~ands o~ this 'counter-discipli~~', the 
diffuslODlsm' promoted by Elliot Snnth and the long tradloon of 
'pyramidology', are discussed in this chapter. 
Chapter VI is entitled 'Hellenomania, 1: The fall of the Ancient Model, 
1790-1830'. Although racism was always a major source of hostility to 
the Ancient Model and became a mainstay of the Aryan one, it was 
matched in the 18th and early 19th centuries by an attack on the 
significance of Egypt from Christians alarmed at the threat of the 
religion or 'wisdom' of Egypt. These Christian attacks challenged 
Greek statements about the importance of Egypt, and boosted the 
independent creativity of Greece in order to diminish that of Egypt. 
Indeed, it is deeply significant that the Ancient Model was first 
challenged between 1815 and 1830, for these were years of intense 
reaction against the Masonic rationalism seen to be behind the French 
Revolution; and years of Romanticism and Christian revival. Further, 
as Christianity was identified with Europe, the two could come together 
with the notion of progress in a philhellenic movement which backed 
the struggle of the Christian, European and 'young' Greeks against the 
'old' Asian, infidel Turks. 
In the 1820S, the Gottingen professor Karl Otfried Muller used the 
new techniques of source criticism to discredit all the ancient refer­
ences to the Egyptian colonizations, and weaken those concerning the 
Phoenicians. These techniques had also begun to be used to attack the 
reports of Greeks having studied in Egypt. The Ancient Model had 
placed a barrier in the way of the new faiths that Greek culture was 
essentially European and that philosophy and civilization had orig­
inated in Greece; this barrier was 'scientifically' removed even before 
the general acceptance of the notion of an Indo-European language 
family. 
The title of Chapter VII is 'Hellenomania, 2: Transmission of the 
new scholarship to England and the rise of the Aryan Model, 183°-6o'. 
Unlike the Ancients, the proponents of the Aryan Model were firm 
believers in 'progress'. Victors were seen as more advanced, and hence


--- PAGE 32 ---
32 BLACK ATHENA 
'better', than the vanquished. Thus, despite apparent and short-term 
anomalies, history - now seen as the biographies of races - consisted of 
the triumphs of strong and vital peoples over weak and feeble ones. 
'Races', formed by the landscape and climates of their homelands, 
retained permanent essences, even though they took on new forms in 
every new age. For these scholars, in addition, it was self-evident that 
the greatest 'race' in world history was the European or Aryan one. It 
alone had, and always would have, the capacity to conquer all other 
peoples and to create advanced, dynamic civilizations - as opposed to 
the static societies ruled by Asians or Africans. Some fringe Europeans, 
like the Slavs and the Spaniards, might be conquered by other 'races', 
but such a rule - unlike the conquest of 'inferior races' by Europeans­
could never be permanent or beneficial. 
These paradigms of 'race' and 'progress' and their corollaries of 
'racial purity', and the notion that the only beneficial conquests were 
those of 'master races' over subject ones, could not tolerate the Ancient 
Model. Thus Miiller's refutations of the legends of Egyptian coloniz­
ation in Greece were quickly accepted. The Aryan Model - which 
followed his success - was constructed within the new paradigms. Itwas 
encouraged by a number of factors: the discovery of the Indo-European 
language family with the Indo-Europeans or Aryans soon seen as a 
'race'; the plausible postulation of an original Indo-European home­
land in central Asia; and the need to explain that Greek was fun­
damentally an Indo-European language. Moreover at precisely the 
same period, the early 19th century, there was intense historical 
concern with the Germanic overwhelming of the Western Roman 
Empire in the 5th century AD, and the Aryan conquests in India in the 
2nd millennium Be. The application of the model of northern conquest 
to Greece was thus obvious and very attractive: vigorous conquerors 
were supposed to have come from a suitably stimulating homeland to 
the north of Greece, while the 'Pre-Hellenic' aborigines had been 
softened by the undemanding nature of their homeland. And although 
the large number of non -Indo- European elements in Greek culture 
could not be reconciled with the ideal of complete Aryan' Hellenic 
purity, the notion of a northern conquest did make the inevitable 'racial' 
mixing as painless as possible. Naturally the purer and more northern 
/. 
INTRODUCTION 33 
Hellenes were the conquerors, as befitted a master race. The Pre­
Hellenic Aegean populations, for their part, were sometimes seen as 
'rginall y Europ.ean, and al~ays as Cauc~~i~; in ~s way, even the 
natives were untamted by Afncan and SemItIc blood . 
The question of 'Semitic blood' leads us to Chapter VIII, 'The rise 
and fall of the Phoenicians, 1830-85'. K. O. Miiller, writing in the 
1820S, had denied that the Phoenicians had had any influence on 
Greece, but he was extreme in his Romanticism and ahead of his time in 
the intensity of his racialism and anti-Semitism. In some ways, there­
fore, the Phoenicians even profited from the fall of the Egyptians, since 
legends of Egyptian colonization could now be explained as having 
referred to them. Consciously or unconsciously, all European thinkers 
saw the Phoenicians as the Jews of Antiquity - as clever 'Semitic' 
traders. The predominant mid- 1 9th -century view of world history was 
one of a dialogue between Aryan and Semite. The Semite had created 
religion and poetry; the Aryan conquest, science, philosophy, freedom 
and everything else worth having. This limited recognition of the 
'Semites' corresponded with what one might call a limited 'window of 
opportunity' in Western Europe, between the disappearance of re­
ligious hatred of the Jews and the rise of 'racial' anti-Semitism. In 
England, which had mixed traditions of anti- and philo-Semitism, there 
was considerable admiration of the Phoenicians because their cloth 
trading, exploration and apparent moral rectitude seemed, to both 
foreigners and English, to be almost Victorian. The opposing view of 
the Phoenicians - and other Semites - as luxurious, cruel and treacher­
ous always persisted, and was generally predominant on the continent. 
This hatred of the Phoenicians as both 'English' and Oriental was 
particularly striking in the works of the great French Romantic historian 
Jules Michelet. Michelet's views on the Phoenicians were spread 
even more widely in Flaubert's immensely popular historical novel 
Salammbo, published in 186 I. SalammbO contained vivid descriptions of 
Carthage at its most decadent which powerfully reinforced the already 
widespread anti-Semitic and anti-Oriental prejudices. Still more 
damning ~as his brilliant and gruesome description of the sacrifice of 
children to Moloch. The firm and public attachment of this ultimate 
biblical abomination to the Carthaginians and Phoenicians made it very


--- PAGE 33 ---
34 BLACK ATHENA 
difficult to champion them, and during the 1870S and 80S their 
reputation plummeted even faster than that of the Jews. 
This leads us to Chapter IX, 'The final solution of the Phoenician 
problem, 1880-1945'. With this reputation and the rise of anti­
Semitism in the 1880s, there was a sustained attack on the Phoenicians 
which was particularly fierce where it came to their legendary contacts 
with, and influence on, the Greeks - who had by now been given 
semi-divine status. 
A decade later, in the 1890s, two short but extraordinarily influential 
articles were published by Julius Beloch, a German who taught in Italy, 
and Salomon Reinach, an assimilated Alsatian Jew at the centre of 
Parisian cultivated society and scholarship. Both recognized Muller as a 
forerunner and claimed that Greek civilization was purely European, 
while the Phoenicians, apart from their transmission of the consonantal 
alphabet, had contributed nothing to Hellenic culture. Although many 
scholars were reluctant to accept this position over the next twenty 
years, the basis of what I call the Extreme Aryan Model was firmly 
established by the turn of the 20th century. There was a marked dif­
ference, for instance, between reactions to Heinrich Schliemann's 
discovery of Mycenaean civilization in the 1870S and Arthur Evans' 
reports of the Cretan one at Knossos in 1900. In the earlier case, several 
scholars initially suggested that the finds, which were completely unlike 
those from Classical Greece, could be Phoenician. This was then 
energetically denied in the following decades. In 1900, by contrast, 
the culture at Knossos was immediately tagged with the new name 
'Minoan' and considered to be 'Pre-Hellenic'; certainly not Semitic, 
despite the ancient traditions that Crete had been so. 
The final elimination of the Piloenician influence on Greece - and its 
complete dismissal as a 'mirage' - came only in the 1920S with the 
crescendo of anti -Semitism resulting from the imagined and real role of 
Jews in the Russian Revolution and the Communist 3rd International. 
In the 1920S and 30S all the legends of Phoenician colonization of 
Greece were discredited, as were reports of Phoenician presence in the 
Aegean and Italy in the 9th and 8th centuries BC. The many previously 
proposed Semitic origins of Greek names and words were all denied. 
Every effort was now made to limit the significance of the only 
INTRODUCTION 35 
irreducible borrowing from Semitic culture - the alphabet. First, great 
emphasis was laid on the supposed Greek invention of vowels which, it 
'" argued, were essential to a 'true' alphabet and without which, it was 
implied, man was unable to think logically. Secondly, the site of the 
borrowing was shifted to Rhodes, Cyprus and finally to an alleged 
Greek colony on the Syrian coast. This was partly because it was now 
seen as more in character for the 'dynamic' Greeks to have brought it 
from the Middle East than to have received it passively from 'Semites' 
as the legends had stated, but it was also because borrowing was 
perceived to involve social mixing, and the racial contamination that this 
would have entailed in Greece was unacceptable. Thirdly, the date of 
transmission was now lowered to C.720 BC, safely after the creation of the 
polis and the formative period of Archaic Greek culture. This opened 
up a long period of illiteracy between the disappearance of the Linear 
scripts discovered by Evans and the introduction of the alphabet, which 
in turn provided a double advantage: it allowed Homer to be the blind­
almost northern - bard of an illiterate society, and it established an 
impermeable seal or complete Dark Age between the Mycenaean and 
Archaic ages. In this way, later Greek reports of their early history and 
the Ancient Model were discredited still further. 
The 193 os were years in which positivism weakened in 'hard' science 
but gained strength beyond its borders in such fringe subjects as logic 
and ancient history. Thus in Classics the solution of the Phoenician 
problem seemed 'scientific' and final: from now on the discipline could 
proceed scientifically or, as one would now put it, a paradigm had been 
established. Any scholar who denied it was outlawed as incompetent, 
unsound or a crank. The strength of this position is demonstrated by its 
survival for more than thirty years after the consequences of anti­
Semitism were revealed in 1945, profoundly shaking the ideological 
basis of anti-Phoenicianism. In the long term, however, there has been 
a retreat from the Extreme Aryan Model, and this process is described 
in Chapter X, 'The post-war situation: the return to the Broad Aryan 
Model, 1945-85'. 
It is probable that the foundation of Israel has been more influential 
than the Holocaust in the restoration of the Phoenicians. Since 1949, 
Jews - or at least Israelis - have been increasingly accepted as full


--- PAGE 34 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Europeans, and it has become quite clear that speaking a Semitic 
language does not disqualify people from military achievement. 
Moreover, the 1950S also saw a sharp increase of Jewish confidence in 
their Semitic roots. 
In the context of this process - and possibly because they were unable 
to accept the exclusiveness of either orthodox Judaism or Zionism -
Cyrus Gordon and Michael Astour, two great Semitists, began to 
champion West Semitic Civilization as a whole and to attack the 
Extreme Aryan Model. Gordon, who knows the languages of the 
Ancient East Mediterranean better than any other living person, has 
always seen it as his mission to prove interconnections between Hebraic 
and Hellenic culture. In this process his bridges have been Ugarit, an 
ancient port on the Syrian coast, and Crete. He saw connections to both 
the Bible and Homer in the Canaanite myths recorded in Ugarit in the 
14th and 13th centuries and translated in the 1940S and 50S; the 
monograph he published on the subject in 1955 destroyed his repu­
tation as a 'sound' scholar, but fascinated some general historians and 
members of the lay public. Soon after this, he offended the orthodox 
still further by reading the Cretan Linear A inscriptions as Semitic, 
immediately facing a barrage of objections, nearly all of which have 
been removed by later research. Most scholars, however, have still not 
accepted his interpretation. While Ventris' decipherment - a few years 
earlier - of Linear B as Greek was novel, it was welcome in that it 
confirmed the geographical breadth and historical depth of Greek 
culture; but to accept Linear A, and hence Minoan civilization, as 
Semitic-speaking was to upset all notions of Hellenic, and therefore of 
European, uniqueness. 
The upholders of conventional wisdom have been equally, if not 
more, disconcerted by Hellenosemitica, a major work by Gordon's 
colleague Michael Astour, which first appeared in 1967. 
Hellenosemitica, a series of studies of striking parallels between West 
Semitic and Greek mythology, showed connections of structure and 
nomenclature that were far too close to be explained away as similar 
manifestations of the human psyche. Apart from the challenge posed by 
this basic theme, Astour made three other fundamental attacks. First, 
the fact of his writing the book at all upset the academic status quo. While 
INTRODUCTION 37 
it was permissible for a Classicist, coming from the dominant discipline, 
t~cuss the Middle East in its relation to Greece and Rome, the 
converse did not hold true. A Semitist was felt to have no right to write 
about Greece. Secondly, Astour questioned the absolute primacy of 
archaeology over all other sources of evidence about prehistory - myth, 
legend, language and names - thus threatening the 'scientific' status of 
ancient history. Thirdly, he sketched out a sociology of knowledge for 
Classics, indicating links between developments in scholarship and 
those in society. He even implied a connection between anti-Semitism 
and hostility to the Phoenicians and cast doubt on the notion of steady 
accumulative progress of learning. But the worst threat came from his 
basic message that the legends of Danaos and Kadmos contained a 
factual kernel. 
So many heresies could not go unpunished. Astour was so battered 
by his critics that he has stopped work on the field he had so brilliandy 
opened up. Nevertheless his work, like that of Gordon, has had 
profound effects: together with the increasing number of finds of 
Levantine objects in Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age sites in the 
Aegean, it has subverted the Extreme Aryan Model. It would seem fair 
to say that by 1985 the majority of researchers working in the area have 
retreated to the Broad Aryan Model. That is to say, they accept the 
possibility of Bronze Age West Semitic setdements not merely on the 
islands but on the mainland, at least at Thebes. They also believe that 
Phoenician influence on Iron Age Greece began well before the 8th 
century BC, and possibly as early as the lOth. 
On the other hand, Gordon and Astour, for all their intellectual 
daring, have not challenged the Aryan Model itself. Neither of them has 
considered the possibility of a massive Semitic component in the Greek 
vocabulary; nor, given their Semitic preoccupations, have they investi­
gated the possible Egyptian colonizations of Greece and the hypothesis 
that Egyptian language and culture played an equal or even more 
central role in the formation of Greek civilization. 
There have been a few attempts to revive the traditions of Egyptian 
influence on Greece. In 1968, the East German Egyptologist Siegfried 
Morenz published a major work on the subject and its wider ramifica­
tions for Europe as a whole, but this has received very litde attention


--- PAGE 35 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
outside Germany. Dr Spyropoulos' postulation of an Egyptian colony in 
21st-century Thebes has been buried in decent obscurity. Scholars 
have sniped at his dating, while avoiding as far as possible any mention 
of his 'cranky' conclusion. IS For the most part, the only people to 
consider major Egyptian influences on Greece have been on or beyond 
the fringes of academia; men such as Peter Tompkins - who has written 
on a wide range of journalistic topics as well as his cautiously written but 
boldly titled Secrets of the Great Pyramid - and the Afroamerican scholar 
G. G. M.James, whose fascinating little book Stolen Legacy also makes a 
plausible case for Greek science and philosophy having borrowed 
massively from Egypt. The Fabrication ends with the prediction that 
although the Broad Aryan Model will take somewhat longer to over­
throw than the Extreme one, a revised form of the Ancient Model will 
be generally accepted early in the next century. 
The following sections of the Introduction contain a considerable 
amount of technical discussion and are not necessary to an under­
standing of this volume. I therefore recommend readers whose chief 
interests are in historiography to go directly to the beginning of 
Chapter I. 
GREECE EUROPEAN OR 
LEV ANTINE? THE EGYPTIAN AND 
WEST SEMITIC COMPONENTS OF 
GREEK CIVILIZATION 
Volume 2 of Black Athena is concerned with comparing the relative 
fruitfulness of the two models to a number of different disciplines or 
approaches to historical reconstruction; contemporary documentary 
sources, archaeology, place names, language and religious cults. The 
Introduction to this volume is a comparison of the inherent plausibility 
of the two models. 
With the possible exception of knowledge of Ancient Egypt, it is clear 
that proponents of the Ancient Model had more information about the 
2nd millennium BC than do those of the Aryan one. The latter, however, 
have not based their claims to superiority on quantity ofinformation but 
INTRODUCTION 39 
o~eir 'scientific method' and objectivity, both of which are fun­
damentally questioned in The Fabrication of Ancient Greece. On the issue 
of objectivity it is pointed out that while the Greek writers were tom 
between their wish to gain additional historical depth for their culture 
and their desire to be superior in every way to their neighbours, the 
19th-century scholars had no such ambivalence. They had every 
interest in elevating European Greece and in downgrading the African 
Egyptians and the Semitic Phoenicians. This in itself would make an 
outsider incline to the belief that the Ancients were more 'objective' 
than 19th- and earlY-2oth-century historians. 
However, better possibilities of access to information and greater 
objectivity do not in themselves mean that the Ancient Model has a 
superior explanatory value to that of the Aryan one. As I have argued, 
and reiterate in the conclusion of this volume, the latter should not be 
dismissed simply because the motives that inspired its construction are 
now considered suspect. For example, the fact that the i9th-century 
scholars revelled in the historical pichIres of the Aryan invasion ofIndia 
and the formation of the c~ste system on the basis of colour does not 
remove the scheme's utility as a historical explanation. We should 
remember, however, that in India, unlike Greece, there were ancient 
traditions of invasion. 
Chapter I of Greece European or Levantine.' outlines the documentary 
evidence for the period and area with which we are concerned. The 
East Mediterranean in the 2nd millennium BC was not illiterate: 
Egyptians and Levantines had been writing for centuries; Crete was 
using its own hieroglyphs and Linear A, which was also employed on 
the Cyclades. Further, it is overwhelmingly likely that Linear B de­
veloped on Mainland Greece during the first half of the millennium, 
and I also maintain that most of the East Mediterranean was using 
alphabets by the 15th century BC. I6 Thus not only was writing wide­
spread but, unlike the formulators of the Aryan Model, we are able to 
read most of its various forms. 
Having said this, the documentary evidence for relations between the 
different cultural regions of the East Mediterranean in this period 
remains scanty. The Mit Rahineh inscription discovered recently on a 
block under a colossal statue gives details of wide-ranging Egyptian


--- PAGE 36 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
land expeditions and marine voyages in the 20th century BC. 17 It has 
been known for some time that early in the 16th century BC Queen 
Al:tl:totpe, the mother of the first pharaoh of the 18th Dynasty, was 
supposed to have come from J:bw Nbw, a foreign region that has been 
plausibly identified with the Aegean. The report seems to be confirmed 
by the Aegean designs of some of her jewellery. Although her son 
Amosis also seems to have claimed some kind of suzerainty over I:IJW 
Nbw, nothing further is heard of this for over a century. Whatever the 
nature of the relationship between Amosis and I:I3W Nbw, it is clear that 
at the end of the Hyksos period and the beginning of the 18th Dynasty 
there was some interchanging of population. The name P3 Kfclwy, 'The 
Cretan', occurs in Egypt at this time, and Egyptians and Levantines 
appear on a list of Cretan names found in a contemporary Egyptian 
papyrus. This picture of a thoroughly mixed population in the Southern 
Aegean in the 17th century BC is confirmed by frescoes from Thera and 
by later personal names found in.Linears A and B. 
Egyptian documentary evidence of contact with the Aegean is much 
more abundant for the 15th and 14th centuries BC. Inscriptions and 
tomb-paintings make it clear that after Tuthmosis Ill's conquests in 
Syria in the middle of the 15th century, the Egyptians felt able to 
exercise some form of suzerainty over Crete and beyond, which was 
renewed many times over the next hundred years. Soon after the 
relationship was established, Egyptian documents and paintings indi­
cate a change of power in Crete, which tallies with archaeological 
evidence from Knossos to suggest that there was a Mycenaean con­
quest of the Minoans at this point. Egyptian texts stopped referring to 
Kfclw in the Aegean, replacing it with TIru or Ta-na-yu. The identi­
fication of this with the Danaans and Greece is made almost certain by a 
14th-century inscription giving the names of places in Ta-na-yu, 
several of which have been plausibly identified with toponyms in Crete 
and Greece. Moreover, from the same period there is a letter from the 
king of the Phoenician city ofTyre to the Egyptian pharaoh referring to 
a king ofDa-nu-na, which could well be in Greece. 
There are references to contacts between the Levant and the Aegean 
in the 14th century in both Ugaritic and Linear B. Ugaritic merchants 
were trading with Crete, and I believe that the personal name Dnn 
INTRODUCTION 
found at Ugarit is 'Danaan' and points to there having been Greeks at ..... that port. The tablets in Linear B show that there was a Greek -speaking 
palatial society and economy in Crete and the Peloponnese, very much 
like those in the contemporary Near East. Linguistically, the Linear B 
inscriptions show that many of the admitted Semitic loan words in 
Greek were already present in the 14th century. Admittedly, these are 
generally the 'ideologically sound' semantic areas of luxury goods that 
could have been brought by Semitic traders. However, they include 
chiton, the standard word for 'dress', and chrysos (gold), a metal that had 
been of central cultic importance in Greece since the Neolithic, which 
indicate a great depth of contact by the Late Bronze Age. Furthermore, 
there are many personal names of the type 'Egyptian', 'Tyrian', and so 
on. All in all, the documents indicate close contacts and population 
mixture of a type that would be quite consistent with the Ancient 
Model. On the other hand they could be accommodated by the 
Aryan Model, and there is no documentary proof of the legendary 
colonizations. 
Chapter II is on Archaeology. It begins with the possible traces of 
Middle Kingdom influences in Boiotia at the tum of the 2nd millen­
nium. Much of the chapter, however, is concerned with the dating of 
the great explosion at Thera, an island seventy miles north of Crete. We 
know that this eruption of the whole centre of the island was several 
times the size of the gigantic one at Krakatoa in 1883. Since the 
Krakatoa eruption broke windows hundreds of miles away, and sent 
tidal waves across the Indian Ocean - and since the dust it sent around 
the world helped the development of Impressionism and affected the 
climate of the whole Northern Hemisphere - the impact of the Thera 
explosion must have been colossal. Conventional wisdom holds that it 
took place at the same time as the destructions in Crete which have also 
been associated with the arrival of the Mycenaean Greeks on the island 
in around 1450 BC. One difficulty with this scheme, however, is that 
pottery on Crete before this destruction is of the style Late Minoan IB 
which, despite intensive search, has not been found below the volcanic 
deposits on Thera. Some archaeologists have therefore separated 
the two events, arguing that the eruption was some fifty years


--- PAGE 37 ---
42 BLACK ATHENA 
earlier than the Mycenaean destruction, that is to say in about 
1500 BC. 
I believe that the explosion took place even earlier, in 1626 BC, the 
precision of this date being based on dendrochronology - in this case, 
the counting of the tree rings of brisde-cone pines in the South­
Western United States. Explosions on the scale of Krakatoa leave 
marks of summer frosts and stunted growth for several years on trees 
from near the snowline. Now there is no evidence from these aged 
brisde-cones of a world-shaking eruption in the 15th and 16th cen­
turies BC, but there is for one in 1626. This was also a bad year for oaks 
in Ireland. Such a 'Krakatoa effect' could have been caused by another 
massive seismic event anywhere in the world; but, given the problem of 
finding a record of the Thera eruption, the identification would seem 
probable. IS There is, however, other evidence to back the higher or 
earlier date. Although volcanic gases appear to have distorted some of 
the carbon dates given for material found just below the destruction 
level, those from the short-lived plants - which provide the only 
accurate information-point to a I 7th- rather than a 15th-century date 
for the event. 19 
In China, the fall of Jie, the last emperor of the Xia Dynasty, was 
accompanied by extraordinary events such as a yellow fog, frosts in 
summer, a dimming sun, and three suns at a time - all of which have 
been plausibly explained as resulting from Thera's dust cloud. The next 
problem, however, is the dating ofJie's fall. It could not have taken place 
in the 15th century: some historians put it in the 16th century and others 
before 1700. However, compilations based on ancient- 3rd-century-Bc 
- chronography and archaeological evidence indicate a date in the 17th 
century.20 
Further indication of an early date comes from Egypt, where the 15th 
century BC is very well documented. It would be surprising if an event 
on the scale of the Thera explosion, which must have affected Lower 
Egypt, should not have been recorded in some way. Furthermore, as we 
saw, Crete seems to have been sending tributary missions to Egypt at 
precisely this time, c.1450. There are, by contrast, virtually no Egyptian 
records from the 17th century, which would make it easier to explain 
the absence of any mention of the explosion. The huge scale of the 
INTRODUCTION 43 
catastrophe allows me to make an exception to my general opposition to 
th~rgument from silence'. However, I acknowledge that this type of 
argument is inherendy weak. Furthermore, the dendrochronological, 
the carbon and the 'Chinese' datings are all open to doubt. Neverthe­
less, given the extreme weakness of the case for a 15th -century date, the 
four sources together make 1626 BC seem much more plausible. 
As there is now very little doubt that the eruption took place during 
the Late Minoan lA, some adjustment upwards of the absolute dates for 
a number of periods is required. The Cambridge Ancient History gives 
the chronological scheme using the standard periodization based on 
changing styles of pottery: 
Middle Minoan III, 1700- I 600; Late Minoan lA, 1600- 1500; 
Late Minoan IB, 1500-1450. 
The one proposed here is: 
MM III, 173°-1650; LM lA, 1650-1550; LM IB, 1550-1450. 
A revision of the Cretan ceramic periods would also require one for 
those of Mainland Greece, which were based on the Minoan ones and 
remain more or less correlated with them. In particular it would involve 
changing the dates of the Shaft Graves - first discovered by Schliemann 
at Mycenae - from the late to the early 17th century. To do so actually 
increases the difficulty for the Ancient Model, which maintained that 
the colonizations that began the heroic age were the result of the 
Egyptian exPulsion of the Hyksos in the 16th century. However, the 
16th-century date also conflicts with the absence of Cretan archaeol­
ogical evidence of a significant general destruction in this period, and it 
is very unlikely that the colonizers from Egypt would have bypassed the 
island. 
These incongruities with the archaeological evidence explain one of 
the two major revisions of the Ancient Model proposed in Black Athena. 
The Revised Ancient Model maintains that the Egypto-West Semitic 
settlements in the Aegean started at the end of the 18th century Be, 
when the Hyksos first gained control of Lower Egypt, rather than in the 
1570s, when their power there collapsed. If, for the moment, one 
accepts the revision, one is then left with the question of why the


--- PAGE 38 ---
44 BLACK ATHENA 
Ancients, with their respect for Antiquity, should have lowered the date 
of the landings? One reason could have been the desire to associate 
them with the Egyptian expulsion of the Hyksos and the Israelite 
Exodus, which probably did take place in the early 16th century. 
Another factor could be underestimation through a wish to appear 
sober-minded and reasonable, for there is no reason why pressure in 
this direction should have been any less in Antiquity than it is today. 
Finally, the 'patriotic' feelings and the pun Hikesios/Hyksos could have 
been influences. It was less damaging to Greek pride to see the 
incomers as refugees or suppliants at the end of the Hyksos period than 
as conquerors arriving near its beginning. 
There is archaeological evidence that would fit very well with the 
hypothesis of a Hyksos invasion of the Aegean soon after their arrival in 
Egypt. In the late 18th century BC there was a destruction of all the 
palaces in Crete, followed by their rebuilding in a slightly but signifi­
cantly different way. There is thus a conventional demarcation at this 
break between the Early and Late Palace periods; among the changes 
are the introduction of swords, shaft graves and the royal motif of 
the griffin - all of which existed earlier in the Levant and became 
important in Mycenaean Greece. A sealing at this destruction level 
at Knossos shows a barbaric, bearded king of strongly Mycenaean 
appearance. 
Artistically, there are striking resemblances between Aegean objects 
of Middle Minoan III/Middle Helladic III, and objects found in Egypt 
in the Hyksos period and the early 18th Dynasty. The cultural flow is 
generally thought to be from the Aegean to Egypt; however, this is in 
some doubt because of the Levantine precedents for many of the most 
characteristic Mycenaean objects, techniques and motifs. To my mind, 
the most fruitful analogy for the great mixing of - at least - material 
cultures around the East Mediterranean in the late 18th and 17th 
centuries BC is that of the Pax Tartarica in the 13th century AD. In this 
the Mongol rulers brought about a mixing of Chinese, Persian and Arab 
techniques and art, introducing features of one to another and breaking 
their more rigid conventions. In the case of the Hyksos, I postulate that 
long-established traditions, like those of Egypt and Crete, quickly 
recovered with some slight modification; but that in Mainland Greece, 
INTRODUCTION 45 
which lacked such a tradition, the eclectic 'Hyksos international style' 
lasted rather longer. 
The hypothesis of a Hyksos Egypto-Canaanite conquest of Crete, 
and the establishment of colonies further north at the end of the 18th 
century, would provide a plausible scheme in which to fit the archae­
ological evidence I have mentioned. The Shaft Graves at Mycenae, 
which are full of new weapons and other objects showing foreign, 
largely Minoan and Near Eastern influence, could well be the tombs 
of the new conquerors. Indeed, the Cambridge ancient historian 
Professor Frank Stubbings maintained the same in his article on the 
Shaft Graves in the Cambridge Ancient History, though he accepts a 
16th-century date and assures his readers that the Hyksos invaders 
had no lasting effect on Greek culture. ZI Since the article's publi­
cation in the 1960s, more evidence has emerged to strengthen his 
minority position. Recent archaeological discoveries at Tel ed 
Daba<a in the Eastern Delta, almost certainly the site of the 
Hyksos capital Avaris, have revealed a composite West Semitic­
Egyptian material culture showing clear resemblances to that of the 
Shaft Graves. zz 
The continuities in pottery styles in Mycenae from the Middle 
Bronze Age seem to indicate survival of the earlier culture at a relatively 
low social level. This is precisely what the linguistic evidence as 
interpreted by the Revised Ancient Model would suggest. It would also 
fit descriptions of the native Pelasgians having become Danaans or 
Athenians on instruction from the newcomers. It must be insisted, 
however, that this is not the only interpretation that can be given to the 
archaeological evidence. Even after the finds at Tel ed Daba<a, it is still 
possible to argue that Mycenaean material culture was the result of 
native Aegean chiefs becoming rich and powerful and importing 
foreign objects and craftsmen; or that Greek mercenaries returned 
from Egypt with wealth and a vision of the new styles. Despite the 
fact that there is no linguistic evidence or ancient authority to 
back these interpretations, they are followed by most contemporary 
archaeologists. 
As I have mentioned, there is also a school of thought that sees the 
radical change in Greek material culture at this point as the result of an 
I 
i.


--- PAGE 39 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
invasion without long-term results. In both cases, however, there is 
little doubt that the archaeologists have been heavily affected by 
non-archaeological arguments. Inevitably the majority of scholars, who 
deny that there were any Hyksos settlements, have been influenced by 
the Aryan Model in which they are working. Similarly, the minority who 
believe in the settlements have been affected by the legends that make 
up the Ancient Model. In both cases, it is quite clear that the objects 
themselves do not impose a single conceptual pattern. In good cir­
cumstances, archaeology may be able to provide fascinating and 
important information on population density, settlement size or local 
economy, but it is much too blunt a tool to give answers on its own to the 
questions with which BlackAthena is concerned. 
Chapter III, 'River and mountain names', is the first chapter in Black 
Athena to concentrate on linguistic borrowing. It begins, therefore, with 
a discussion of the acknowledged phonetic correspondences between 
Egyptian, Semitic and Greek. Those between Egyptian and Semitic 
have been worked out in some detail, and a great deal of information 
about their correspondences with Greek can be deduced from the few 
admitted loan words and the hundreds of proper names transcribed in 
the other languages. From all this it is clear that there was an extraordi­
narily wide range of phonetic correspondences; the wide variety of ways 
in which, for example, a Semitic or Egyptian word or name could be 
transcribed in Greek is quite bewildering. This variation can be 
explained partly by difficulties in hearing and reproducing foreign 
sounds, and by loaning through different regional dialects or third 
languages. However, the main source of the divergencies would seem to 
come from the extraordinarily long time-span over which the borrowing 
seems to have taken place. In the period from 2100 to 1100 Be - with 
which we are chiefly concerned - all three languages, and Egyptian in 
particular, went through radical sound shifts. Thus I argue that the 
same word or name could have been borrowed two or more times with 
very different results. The most useful analogy I have found here is with 
Japanese loans from Chinese over a similar period of about a millen­
nium; in this case, however, the writing system allows one to see what 
the original word was, and it is the many differentJapanese 'readings' or 
INTRODUCTION 47 
pronunciations of the Chinese character that indicate the different 
borrowings. 
Neither the Egyptian nor the West Semitic writing system indicated 
vowels. Some attempts at reconstructing them can be made from 
Coptic and the Masoretic vocalization of the Bible, as well as from 
cuneiform, Greek and other transcriptions of them. Nevertheless, 
many etymologies have to be made on the basis of consonantal structure 
alone. This - with the wide range of equivalences evident among the 
consonants themselves - creates an extraordinary number of possible 
phonetic correspondences between Egyptian, Semitic and Greek words 
and names. On the other hand, the fact that phenomena can be easily 
imagined has nothing to do with the likelihood of their actual occur­
rence. Furthermore, there are powerful external arguments in favour of 
massive linguistic borrowing having taken place. Even without the 
Ancient Model, there are the geographical and temporal proximities 
and the documentary and archaeological evidence of close contact. 
Added to these has been the failure of scholars working in the Aryan 
model over the last 160 years to explain 50 per cent of the Greek 
vocabulary and 80 per cent of proper names in terms of either 
Indo- European or the Anatolian languages supposedly related to 
'Pre- Hellenic'. 
In these circumstances I think it worthwhile to look for Egyptian and 
Semitic etymologies of Greek forms, but as rigorously as possible. First 
of all, I make no attempt to replace generally accepted Indo-European 
etymologies, even though some of these may well be wrong; the majority 
of the new ones proposed in this work have no orthodox competition. 
Even in such cases, however, one should still be extremely cautious. On 
the phonetic side one should be restricted to consonantal correspon­
dences that are actually attested, even though it is very likely that others 
do occur. Similarly, there should be no metatheses - or switching of 
consonantal order. The one exception to this rule is the exchange of 
liquids - Is and rs between 2nd and 3rd position. This is tolerated 
because it is extremely common in all three languages, particularly in 
Egyptian and Greek. Thus it would seem legitimate to derive the Greek 
martyr (witness) from the Egyptian mtrw (witness), or pyramis (pyramid) 
from the Egyptian PJ mr (the tomb) or (the pyramid). The main control


--- PAGE 40 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
to avoid spurious derivations is, however, with semantics, where tight 
correspondences of meaning are required. 
The area of toponyms - place names - is one in which scholars 
working within the Aryan Model have been particularly lax in this 
respect. Any loose phonetic correspondence between a Greek and an 
Anatolian name has been considered sufficient to link the two -
regardless of whether they refer to an island, a mountain, a river or a 
town, let alone their geographical or legendary circumstances. This 
sloppiness has led the more rigorous to avoid the subject altogether, and 
nothing in this area has superseded the very sketchy work of the 
German Classical scholar A. Fick, published in 1905. This startling gap 
has been the inevitable result of the almost complete inability of 
Aryanist scholars to explain Aegean toponyms, because only a minute 
proportion of them are explicable in terms of Indo-European. All the 
Aryanists can do is to explain why they cannot explain them, and simply 
call them 'Pre-Hellenic'. 
Aryanists place great emphasis on the allegedly 'Pre-Hellenic' place­
name elements -(i)ssos and -nthos, which have never been given any 
meaning. This classification, first made by the German Classical 
linguist Paul Kretschmer, was developed by the American Classicist 
J. Haley and the archaeologist Carl Blegen, who argued that the 
distribution of these place names corresponded with Early Bronze Age 
settlements; and, further, that as the invaders were supposed to have 
arrived at the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age, they were indicators 
of Pre-Hellenic settlements. Archaeologically the theory is very flimsy, 
as the correspondences would hold as well for Late Bronze Age as for 
Early Bronze Age sites. The toponymic aspect is equally feeble. Even 
before Haley and Blegen announced their theory, Kretschmer admitted 
that the suffixes could be attached to Indo-European roots, and there­
fore could not in themselves be indicators of the Pre-Hellenes - that is, 
if one accepts the Aryan Model. As the suffixes also appear at the end of 
Semitic and Egyptian stems, they are equally unhelpful as indicators of 
an indigenous substratum when one is working within the Ancient 
Model. 
Given these obvious inadequacies, it might seem surprising that 
Blegen and Haley's hypothesis continues to be treated with so much 
INTRODUCTION 49 
respect. The explanation is that not even rubbish can be thrown away in 
a field so utterly barren as Ancient Greek toponymy. According to the 
Revised Ancient Model, -nthos has many different origins, the two 
most common being simple nasalization before dentals and the 
Egyptian -ntr (holy); -(i)ssos would seem to be a characteristic Aegean 
ending, but one that continued to be used at least until the end of the 
Bronze Age. 
As I said, Chapter III is concerned with river and mountain names. 
These are the toponyms that tend to be the most persistent in any 
country. In England, for instance, most are Celtic and some even seem 
to be pre-Indo-European. The presence of Egyptian or Semitic moun­
tain names would therefore indicate a very profound cultural pen­
etration. The chapter cannot treat all my proposals in the area, but those 
considered include some very widely attested place names. Take, for 
instance, Kephisos or Kaphisos, the name of rivers and streams found 
all over Greece for which no explanation has been offered. I would 
derive it from Kbl)., a common Egyptian river name 'Fresh', with the 
suffix -isos. The semantic fit is excellent: Kbl}. is clearly linked to the 
words #(bJ (cool) and ~b~ (purifY). The Greek Kephisoi were frequent­
ly used for purification rituals. 4b~ had a subsidiary meaning: 'lake with 
wild fowl'. This would fit well with the great shallow Lake Kopais, 
which has many Egyptian connections in Greek tradition and is fed by a 
river, Kephisos. As far as I am aware, this etymology has never been 
proposed before. 
That of the Greek river name lardanos - which is found in Crete 
and the Peloponnese - from the Semitic Yarden or Jordan was generally 
accepted before the onset of the Extreme Aryan Model. Even Beloch 
and Fick had to admit that the derivation was 'alluring' and could 
provide no alternatives. Nevertheless, it has been denied throughout 
the 20th century. Another Semitic etymology widely acknowledged 
before the late 19th century is that of the Greek toponymic element 
sam- as in Samos, Samothrace, Samikon, which always refers to high 
places, from the Semitic root Vsmm (high). This too has been neglected 
or denied. Other derivations proposed in this chapter require rather 
more discussion. 
In Chapter IV I am concerned with city names. These are more


--- PAGE 41 ---
50 BLACK ATHENA 
commonly transmitted from culture to culture than those of natural 
features. Nevertheless, the insignificant number of Indo-European 
city names in Greece, and the fact that plausible Egyptian and Semitic 
derivations can be found for most of them, suggests an intensity of 
contact that is impossible to explain in tenns of trade. One of the 
commonest clusters of Greek city names, for instance, is around 
the stem Kary(at). This could be plausibly explained in tenns of the 
standard West Semitic word for town - qrt - vocalized in different city 
names in many ways, including Qart-, Qaret or Q!ryahlat. It is, in fact, 
one of the commonest Phoenician and Hebrew place names, seen in 
Carthage and many other cities. 
I give instances showing a strict parallel between the use ofKary- and 
that of the standard Greek word for 'city', polis. The most striking 
of these is the placing of the figures of Karyatids around the tomb of 
Kekrops, the legendary founder of Athens, in a porch of the temple of 
Athena Polias. Thus, 'Daughters of the City' would seem a more 
plausible explanation for this name than 'Priestesses of Artemis from 
Karyai in Lakonia', or 'Nut Fairies', which are the only explanations 
given today. There are many variants of the stem Kary-, among which I 
include Korinthos (Corinth). 
N ear Corinth on the Isthmus was the city of Megara. Pausanias, the 
Greek Baedeker of the 2nd century AD, explained the name as meaning 
'cave' or 'subterranean chamber'. A West Semitic word with exactly this 
meaning appears in the Ugaritic place name Mgrt, and the biblical 
Mc<arah. These would seem plausible origins for the otherwise un­
explained Greek city or city-ward names Megara and Meara. 
It is not well known that Ancient Egypt had a long tradition of 
bull-fighting, that is, of bull fighting bull. The fight - and the arena in 
which it took place - was called M!Wn. In Homer the word moth os -
accusative moth on - meant 'battle-din' and 'fight between animals'; 
while mothiin could mean 'licentious dance, a flute tune', or 'a young 
impudent fellow'. M!Wn was a common Egyptian place name; 
Mothone, Methone or Methana were almost equally frequent in 
Greece. These are all set on bays that could well be described as 
theatrical. It is therefore not surprising to find a coin from Mothone 
which portrays the port as a theatre, thus tying it clearly to M!WD. 
INTRODUCTION 51 
The traditional etymology for Mykenai (Mycenae) is from mykes, 
'mushroom'. A more plausible candidate would seem to be from 
Mabaneh, 'Camp' or Mabanayim, 'Two Camps' - a common toponym 
in West Semitic. Then again, before the advent of the Extreme Aryan 
Model it was generally accepted that the Greek city name Thebai came 
from the Canaanite tebdh (ark, chest) which itself came from the 
Egyptian tb~ or dbt (box). These two were often confused with another 
and possibly related word db] (wicker float, ark of bulrushes) and til)]t 
(coffin, shrine) and hence (palace). Ob3, written Tbo or Thbo in Coptic, 
was an Egyptian city name. Interestingly, however, there is no record of 
its having been used for the southern capital of Egypt which the Greeks 
called Thebai. Nevertheless, it may well have been used for the Hyksos 
capital at Avaris. If this were the case, Ob3/Thebai could have become a 
Greek tenn or name for 'Egyptian capital', which was attached to the 
Egyptian Thebes when the 18th Dynasty established their capital there. 
In any event, there is no reason to doubt that the Greek city name came 
from the West Semitic tebdh and the Egyptian cluster mentioned above. 
Chapter V is devoted to one city, Athens. In it I argue that both the city 
name Athenai and the divine name Athene or Athena derive from the 
Egyptian J:It Nt. In Antiquity, Athena was consistently identified with 
the Egyptian goddess Nt or Neit. Both were virgin divinities of warfare, 
weaving and wisdom. The cult ofNeit was centred on the city ofSais in 
the Western Delta, whose citizens felt a special affinity with the 
Athenians. Sais was a secular name, the city's religious title being J:It Nt 
(Temple or House of Neit). This name is not attested in Greek or 
Coptic, but the toponymic element I:It- is transcribed as At- or Ath-. 
It was also extremely common for Egyptian words to have what are 
called prothetic vowels before the first consonant. In this case the likeli­
hood that Nt was preceded by a vowel is increased by the name <Anat, 
given to a very similar West Semitic goddess; hence it would seem 
legitimate to propose a vocalization of *Atanait for I:It Nt. The lack of 
i in Athene, Athana in the Doric dialect and A-ta-na in Linear B would 
,. is the convention used to denote hypothesized but unattested forms of a word or 
name.


--- PAGE 42 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
seem to be a problem. However, Attic and Doric have the variants 
Athenaia and Athanaia, while the full Homeric form is Athenaie. And as 
final -ts were dropped in both Greek and Late Egyptian, the letter's 
non-appearance in Athenai and Athene should be expected. 
If the phonetic fit is good, the semantic one is perfect. As I have said, 
the Ancients saw Neit and Athena as two names for the same deity. In 
Egypt it was normal for a divinity to be addressed by the name of her or 
his dwelling, and this would explain the Greek confusion between the 
names of the goddess and her city. Finally there is the statement, by 
Charax of Pergamon in the 2nd century AD,. that 'the Saitians called 
their city Athenai', which makes sense only if they saw I:It Nt as a name 
for Sais.23 
Chapter V goes on to look at iconographic connections between Neit 
and Athena. Neit had been symbolized since Pre-dynastic times as a 
cockroach on a stick, from which it developed into a figure 8 shield often 
associated with weapons. This symbolism would seem to be the origin 
of the so-called 'Shield Goddess' found in Minoan Crete, which in tum 
is generally linked to a painted limestone plaque, found at Mycenae, 
showing the arms and neck of a goddess coming from behind a figure 8 
shield. Now this image has been seen as an early representation of the 
Palladion, a standing suit of armour associated with the cult of Pallas 
Athena, as well as with the goddess herself. In this way, then, one can 
trace an iconographic development from Egypt in the 4th and 3 rd 
millennia Be, through Crete and Mycenae in the 2nd, to the well­
known goddess of the 1st - which corresponds precisely with the 
legendary association between Neit and Athena and the etymology 
here. Furthermore, the high point in the state cult of Athena in Athens 
was at the same time in the mid-6th century that Amasis, the Saite 
pharaoh of Egypt, was promoting her worship elsewhere in the East 
Mediterranean. 
Sais was on the frontier of Egypt and Libya and was sometimes part 
Libyan, which explains Herodotos' detailed description of Athena's 
association with Libya; it is also clear that this first great Greek historian 
thought the Egyptians and some Libyans were black. On the other hand, 
the earliest Greek representation of Athena is that from Mycenae, in 
which her limbs are painted, in line with the Minoan convention -
INTRODUCTION 53 
taken from Egypt - of representing men as redlbrown and women 
as yellow/white. Nevertheless, it is the conjunction of Neitl Athena's 
Egypto-Libyan origins, Herodotos' awareness of the connection, 
and his portrayal of the Egyptians as black, that has inspired the title 
of this series. 
Chapter VI is exclusively concerned with Sparta. I see this place name 
as one of a large cluster, including such variants as Spata and Sardis, to 
be found all over the Aegean basin. I believe that they should all be 
derived directly or indirectly from the Egyptian toponym Sp(3)(t) 
(nome) or 'District and its Capital'. In Old and Middle Egyptian the 
'vulture' sign represented here as 3 was heard as a liquid r/l; in Late 
Egyptian it merely modified other vowels. In Egypt the Sp(3)(t) par 
excellence was one near Memphis dedicated to Anubis the Jackal, 
messenger of death and guardian of the dead. I maintain that this link 
persisted in at least Sardis and Sparta, for Spartan or Lakonian culture 
is full of canine associations. These include the other name for Sparta, 
Lakedaimon, which can be plausibly explained as the 'Howling/Gnaw­
ing Spirit', an epithet altogether appropriate for Anubis and an exact 
calque for Kanob/pos, K3 >Inpw, 'Spirit of Anubis', the name of the 
westernmost mouth of the Nile. In Greek myth Kanopos had close 
associations with Sparta, and both were seen as entries to the Under­
world. Hence I also investigate the religious importance of Anubis' 
Greek counterpart Hermes in Lakonia and the special Spartan concern 
with canines, the Underworld and death, all of which I am convinced 
can be traced back to the Bronze Age. 
The last section of the chapter is devoted to Egyptian influences on 
Iron Age Sparta. The fact that much of the uniquely Spartan political 
vocabulary can be plausibly derived from Late Egyptian is linked to the 
tradition that the Spartan lawgiver Lykourgos visited the East and 
Egypt to study their institutions. Moreover, the notion of Egyptian 
cultural influence there in the 9th and 8th centuries is strengthened by 
the strikingly Egyptian appearance of early Spartan art. All these link up 
with the Spartan kings' belief in their Heraklid - hence Egyptian or 
Hyksos - ancestry; and would thus explain such anomalies in the Aryan 
Model as the building of a pyramid at the Menelaion, the Spartan


--- PAGE 43 ---
54 BLACK ATHENA 
'national' shrine, and the letter one of the last Spartan kings wrote to the 
High Priest in Jerusalem, claiming kinship with him. 
Chapter VII returns the reader to linguistics, with a survey of the 
arguments for and against there being a genetic relationship between 
Afroasiatic and Indo-European languages. Here I come out clearly for 
the minority position taken by A. R. Bornhard, A. B. Dolgopolskii, 
Carleton Hodge and the other linguists who believe that there must 
have been a common proto-language for both families. I also believe 
that there may well have been loans from Semitic and Egyptian before 
the disintegraton of Proto-Indo-European at the tum of the 3rd 
millennium. Both these conclusions complicate my task considerably, 
however, as resemblances between Egyptian and West Semitic words 
on the one hand, and Greek ones on the other, cannot simply be 
attributed to loaning in the 2nd millennium; they could be the result not 
only of coincidence but of genetic relationships or much earlier borrow­
ings. The best way to control for this is to see whether similar words are 
found in Teutonic, Celtic and Tokharian -languages remote from the 
Middle East and therefore relatively unlikely to have borrowed from 
Afroasiatic. Even with these, however, one can never be certain. 
Chapter VIII is entided 'Common features in Ancient Near Eastern 
languages, including Greek'. Since the discovery of Indo-European,­
historical linguistics has been largely concerned with the ramifications 
and differentiations oflanguage families. Where similarities have been 
perceived among neighbouring but 'unrelated' languages, these 
Sprachbunden are usually attributed to ancient 'substrates' underlying 
the later languages. In recent years, however, some linguists have begun 
to look at linguistic convergence among adjacent, genetically unrelated 
languages: that is to say, language changes taking place across linguistic 
frontiers. Take, for instance, the fashionable French r, diffused into 
German and the upper-class English affected mispronunciation of the 
sound. Then there is the tendency to replace the simple past tense by a 
compound one, which seems to have spread from French to adjacent 
dialects of German, Italian and Spanish. These changes not only 
indicate dose contact but also reflect the high political and cultural 
INTRODUCTION 55 
prestige of France between the 17th and 19th centuries, when the 
linguistic changes took place. 
Chapter VIII is concerned with the possibility that such processes 
took place in the Ancient Near East. It is argued, for instance, that 
although the shift from initial s- to initial h- has happened in many 
languages, including Welsh, its occurrence in Greek, Armenian and 
Iranian should be linked to that in the contiguous Anatolian language 
Lycian, and the Semitic Canaanite and Aramaic. This development 
seems to have taken place in the 2nd millennium because it is not 
present in older languages of the region like Eblaite, Akkadian and 
Hittite. Furthermore, in Ugaritic texts dating from the 14th and 13th 
centuries the process appears to have begun but is not complete. 
Another 2nd-millennium development was that of the definite ar­
ticle, a feature which is not so common among world languages as one 
might suppose. It is attested only in Indo-European and Afroasiatic 
languages, and in every case the definite article is a weakened form of 
a native demonstrative. Still, this does not exclude the possibility of 
the concept's having been borrowed. The definite article appears first 
in Late Egyptian, in what seems to be the colloquial of the 19th cen­
tury Be. It does not exist in U garitic or early biblical poetry, but is present 
in Phoenician and biblical prose. Given the Egyptian Empire in the 
Levant in the 15th and 14th centuries, it would seem plausible to 
suggest that this - and other characteristically 'Canaanite' linguistic 
changes - took place then as a result of Egyptian influence. 
Greece, for its part, seems to have developed the definite article a 
litde later. There is no trace of it in the Linear B texts and titde in 
Homer; it is, however, present in the earliest Iron Age prose, and the 
fact that the Greek article is used in a number of ways peculiar to 
it and to Canaanite suggests that the idea was borrowed from the 
Levant. As is well known, Latin has no definite article but all its de­
scendants do; and it was widespread in vulgar Latin, presumably as a 
result of its use in Greek, Punic and Aramaic, the next most influen­
tiallanguages in the Roman Empire. Its later spread through the Teu­
tonic and Western Slav languages can be traced historically. 
It is only with the hypotheses of a genetic relationship between 
Afroasiatic and Indo-European, and areal features resulting from


--- PAGE 44 ---
56 BLACK ATHENA 
convergence, that one can explain such 'coincidences' as the remark­
able similarity between the Hebrew ha (the) and the Greek nominative 
forms of the word, ho and he. Both Afroasiatic and Indo-European had a 
demonstrative *'se. Both Greek and Canaanite seem to have trans­
formed initial s- into h-, and both developed definite articles out of 
demonstratives. There may have been a direct influence or 'contami­
nation' from the Semitic to the Greek forms, but the latter is too 
well-rooted in Indo-European to be considered as a loan. 
An even more intricate pattern of convergence can be seen in the 
breakdown of the long a or ~ a, in many phonetic contexts, which took 
place in much of the region in the second half of the 2nd millennium. In 
Egypt and Canaan it shifted to long o. But in Ugaritic in the Northern 
Levant, Lycian in Southern Anatolia, and the Ionian of East Greece -
but not the other Greek dialects, where the long a remained - it became 
long e. This distribution of 0 and e corresponds well with the known 
political division of the period between the Egyptian and Hittite 
empires and spheres ofinfluence.1t is particularly interesting because it 
cuts across the historical and genetic linguistic boundaries of West 
Semitic and Greek. Such widespread changes in the 2nd millennium 
BC indicate a degree of contact in the East Mediterranean that is not 
generally recognized, and indicates the political and! or cultural 
influence of Egypt and Canaan. 
'Labiovelars in Semitic and Greek' is the topic of Chapter IX. Labio­
velars are sounds like qu - in which a velar like k or g is followed by a 
rounding of the lips or a w. It is generally recognized that such sounds 
existed in Proto- Indo- European, but there is no general recognition 
that this is the case with Proto-Semitic. However, labiovelars are 
common throughout the rest of Afroasiatic and in Semitic languages of 
Ethiopia. In this chapter, I argue that in many respects it is much more 
useful to reconstruct Proto-Semitic on the basis of some South 
Ethiopic Semitic languages than from Arabic, as is done at present. In 
particular, I claim - on the grounds of evidence from these languages 
themselves - that Asiatic Semitic had labiovelars and that West Semitic 
retained them well into the 2nd millennium. Since it is generally agreed 
that the Greek labiovelars broke down during the middle of that period, 
INTRODUCTION 57 
I argue that some loans from Semitic into Greek were made when both 
had labiovelars, some after Greek had dropped them but West Semitic 
still retained them, and some after they had disappeared from both. 
Thus, postulating considerable contact between West Semitic and 
Greek culture before the breakdown of the labiovelars - that is to say, 
before the middle of the 2nd millennium BC - can resolve a number of 
otherwise inexplicable problems in Greek etymology. It also illustrates 
how much the Revised Ancient Model can achieve from using the 
abundant Greek material to help in the reconstruction of early forms in 
Egyptian and Semitic. 
In this summary I can cite only two examples of this. The first is that 
of the famous Phoenician city known as Gublu(m) in Eblaite and 
Akkadian, G9Jal in Hebrew, andJebeil in Arabic. Given my belie fin the 
West Semitic retention oflabiovelars, I think it plausible to postulate an 
early pronunciation *'Gweb(a)l, which could explain these variants. By 
contrast, the Greek name for the city is Byblos or Biblos. This puzzle 
can be solved by postulating that the name was known in the Aegean 
before the middle of the 2nd millennium. As it is known that in most 
dialects the Greek gWi became bi after the breakdown of the labiovelars, 
it would seem plausible to suggest that the name *'Gweb(a)l was in use in 
Greek as *'Gwibl while that language still possessed labiovelars, and 
then, following the normal sound shifts, became Biblos or Byblos. 
The second example is the puzzling name of Demeter. From 
Ethiopic and West Semitic evidence it is possible to reconstruct 
the early forms *'gWe and *gWay, meaning 'land' or 'wide valley'. If this 
word had been introduced into Greek before the breakdown of the 
labiovelars and had gone through the regular sound shifts, gWe would 
have become *de. This could explain why the Greek earth mother 
goddess was called Demeter and not *Gemeter, a question that has 
tantalized scholars for two millennia. There are problems with the 
vocalization, and the fact that the name does not appear in Linear B; 
nevertheless, in the absence of any alternative it remains a plausible 
explanation, and one which is reinforced by the existence of the rare 
word gyes (measure of land). Gyes would seem to be a loan from Ca­
naanite into Greek after labiovelars had broken down in Greek, but 
before the shift had taken place in Canaanite. Finally, after labiovelars


--- PAGE 45 ---
58 BLACK ATHENA 
had disappeared from both languages, the Greek gaia and gi (earth), 
which have no explanation from Indo-European, would seem to have 
been borrowed from the Canaanite, gaf), which in the 'construct' or 
modified form is pronounced ge) . 
Chapters X and XI are concerned with linguistic borrowings from West 
Semitic and Egyptian, and here I shall start by discussing the two 
chapters together. In both, some reference is made to syntax or word 
order, as for instance the similar uses of the definite article in Late 
Canaanite - Phoenician and Hebrew - on the one hand and Greek on 
the other. Elsewhere morphology or word modification is considered; 
but most of the chapters are devoted to studying lexical borrowings or 
loan words. 
We begin here with morphology, or the modification of words with 
number, gender, case, tense and so on. With the exception of Hittite 
Greek is the earliest attested Indo-European language, and this makes 
the degree of its morphological 'decay' very remarkable. For although 
the original Indo-European verbal system appears to have been very 
well preserved in Greek, ~ouns in Greek had only five cases while 
Latin, first recorded over 1,000 years later, had six; and Lithuanian, 
written down only in modem times, has retained all of the eight 
postulated for Proto-Indo-European. The morphological loss experi­
enced by Greek would suggest intensive contact with other languages; 
this tallies with the lexical evidence and weakens ~e Model of 
Autochthonous Origin. However, it can be explained by both the 
Ancient and Aryan models which, unlike the first, can explain just such 
contact. 
The major concern of these two chapters, however, is with verbal 
loans. As I have mentioned, the Indo-European component of the 
Greek lexicon is relatively small. For instance languages like Old 
Church Slavonic and Lithuanian, which are first attested 2,000 years 
later than Greek, have a considerably higher proportion of roots with 
cognates in other Indo-European languages. Further, the semantic 
range in which the Indo-European roots appear in Greek is very much 
the same as that of Anglo-Saxon roots in English. These roots provide 
most pronouns and prepositions; most of the basic nouns and verbs of 
INTRODUCTION 59 
family - though not political - life; and of subsistence - though not 
commercial - agriculture. By contrast, the vocabulary of urban life, 
luxury, religion, administration and abstraction is non -Indo-European. 
Such a pattern usually reflects a long-term situation in which 
speakers of the language or languages which provide the words of 
higher culture control the users of the basic lexicon - as in the 
relationships between Anglo-Saxon and French in English; Bantu and 
Arabic in the creation of Swahili; or Vietnamese and Chinese in the 
formation of Modern Vietnamese. A less common pattern is that seen in 
Turkish and Hungarian, in which the conquerors took over the soph­
isticated vocabulary of the natives. In these cases, however, Turks and 
Hungarians retained their own or Mongol words for military tech­
nology or organization. In Greek, however, the words for chariot itself, 
sword, bow, march, armour, battle, etc., are non-Indo-European. 
Hence Greek, as pictured in the Aryan Model, does not resemble 
languages of the Turkish type. Thus, to accept the Aryan Model, it is 
necessary to postulate Greek as a language that is typologically unique. 
The Ancient Model would place Greek, with English and Vietnamese, 
in the commonest category of such mixed languages. 
To tum now to each of the two chapters. Chapter X looks at Greek 
borrowings from West Semitic. In this area I can follow not only the 
scholarship from before the triumph of the Aryan Model, but also that 
of scholars in the last two decades who have been cautiously and 
soundly restoring the earlier etymologies and even adding some of their 
own. Despite this progress, however, we are still far from the situation 
as it was before the onset of the Extreme Aryan Model. For instance, 
as I mentioned above, the embargo on Semitic loans never included 
spices and Oriental luxuries. But the proposals by Semitists of equally 
plausible etymologies from more sensitive semantic regions, such as 
bomos from bdmdh - both meaning 'high place' or 'altar' - are still 
generally rejected by Classicists. 
Other examples of the West Semitic etymologies for religious terms 
put forward in this chapter include the Greek haima, a word that in 
Homer had overtones of 'spirit' and 'courage', as well as having its 
standard sense of ' blood '. The first two meanings are reflected in Greek 
science, where haima was seen as the equivalent of air and not - as one


--- PAGE 46 ---
60 BLACK ATHENA 
might expect - water. It is argued that haima derives from the Canaanite 
~ayim (life); in Canaanite religion blood was seen as the repository of 
life. As a second example, there is the extremely well-known Semitic 
root 'I qds (sacred); semantically, this tallies very well with the Greek 
cluster of words around kudos, meaning 'divine glory'. Interestingly, too, 
qds in the sense of 'apart, unclean' seems to be reflected in the Greek 
kudos (vile) and kuJo,zo (revile). Another cluster of words with religious 
significance, that around naio (dwell) and naos (dwelling, temple or 
shrine), would seem to come from the Semitic root Ynwh, which has the 
same general and specific connotations. The derivation of nektar from a 
Semitic *niqtar (smoked or perfumed wine, etc.) was widely accepted 
before the onset of the Extreme Aryan Model, and has recently been 
revived by Professor Saul Levin. 
Looking at the abstract vocabulary, there is the Greek stem kosm, 
from which we derive not only our 'cosmos' but our 'cosmetics'. Its 
basic meaning is to 'distribute' or 'arrange'. The Semitic root Yqsm 
covers the semantic range 'divide, arrange and decide'. Then again, 
Canaanite sem (mark, name) seems to have been borrowed into Greek 
twice; first as sema (sign, mark, token), and later - probably from the 
form fem - as schema (form, shape, figure, configuration). In politics, 
too, there are such word clusters as the Greek deil- (wretched) and doul­
(client) or (slave), which could well come from the Canaanite ddl or dal 
(dependent, reduced) or (poor); while the Greekxenos (stranger) would 
seem to derive from the West Semitic Ysn} (hate, enemy) __ 
In the military sphere we find such etymologies as phasgan-(sword) 
or (blade) from the Semitic root Vpsg (cleave), and hanna (chariot) 
or (tackle), from the Semitic root YQrm (net). Finally, there are 
some basic Greek words which appear to have Semitic etymologies; for 
instance, mechri(s) (up to, as far as) would seem to come from the 
Semitic root Ymvr (be in front, come to meet). It is true that none 
of these derivations is certain; but they are all more or less plausible. 
In the absence of competing Indo-European etymologies, and in the 
light of all the other evidence in favour of Semitic influence on 
2nd- and 1st-millennium Greece, they should be given very serious 
consideration. 
The same is true of the Egyptian etymologies proposed in Chapter 
INTRODUCTION 
XI. Unlike the study of Semitic etymologies, research into Egyptian 
loan words in Greek has never been seriously developed. The simple 
reason for this is that hieroglyphics were deciphered only as the Ancient 
Model was coming to an end. By the 1860s, when dictionaries of 
Ancient Egyptian were first published, the Aryan Model was so firmly 
established that comparison between the two vocabularies was imposs­
ible within academia. The only exception to this were the bold and 
fruitful attempt made by the Abbe Barthelemy in the 18th century to 
compare Greek words with Coptic. Today, with the three anomalies of 
bans (a type of small boat), xiphos (sword) and makar- (blessed), no 
Greek word of any significance has been allowed an Egyptian ety­
mology, and the latter two were widely questioned. Two short articles in 
1969 collected and ratified a number of obviously exotic words, with 
plausible Egyptian origins; but, as with West Semitic, these could easily 
have been transmitted by trade or casual contact and were therefore 
acceptable to the Aryan Model. In 197 I an even more negative piece 
appeared, denying some and casting doubt on others of the few 
established Egyptian etymologies.24 
I have stressed the importance of military vocabulary, so the deri­
vation of xiphos from the Egyptian sft (knife, sword) is therefore very 
significant. It means that there is one Semitic and one Egyptian 
etymology for the two Greek words for sword, both admitted to be 
non-Indo-European - the sword being the new wonder weapon of the 
'heroic' Late Bronze Age. Other instances worth mentioning here 
include makar-which comes from the Egyptian ml brw (true of voice), 
the title given to the blessed dead who have passed the test of 
judgement. Other Greek legal terms would seem to have equally 
plausible Egyptian etymologies, while we have already come across the 
derivation of martyr from mtrw (witness). The stem tima- (honour) in 
both warfare and law probably comes from an Egyptian *dt ml attested 
in Demotic as tyml, meaning (render true, justify). 
In politics, while there is a widespread and fundamental Indo­
European root Vreg meaning 'rule' or 'king' which is found in the 
Indian rajah, the Gaulish rix, the Latin rex, and the Irish ri, the Ancient 
Greek words for king had nothing to do with this but were (w)anax and 
basileus. The former, which will be discussed in Chapter I of this 
.J


--- PAGE 47 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
volume, would seem to come from the Egyptian formula (no 4t (may he 
live for ever!) used after the names of living pharaohs. In early Greek a 
bas ileus was not a king but an official subordinate to the (w)anax. In 
Egyptian PJ sr (the official) became a standard title for the vizier. It has 
been found transcribed in Akkadian as pa-fi-i-a-(ra). As p and b were 
not distinguished in late Egyptian, and Egyptian r was frequently 
rendered I in Greek, there is no phonetic difficulty to impede the 
perfect semantic fit. 
The Egyptian origin of the Greek sophia (wisdom) is described in 
Chapter I of this volume. All these etymologies in the areas of power, 
abstraction and sophistication tally with the pattern suggested by the 
Ancient Model of Egyptian rulers over a less developed native popula­
tion. As with Semitic, however, other loan words suggest an even 
deeper penetration into Greek life. There is no reason to doubt that the 
Greek chera (widow) comes from the Egyptian !1.3rt (widow), or that the 
particle gar derives from the Egyptian grt, which has the same functi~n 
and syntactic position. As I have mentioned, final ts were dropped In 
both Late Egyptian and Greek. 
The conclusion of Greece European or Levantine? is that while the 
documentary and archaeological evidence tends to support the Ancient 
Model over the Aryan one, it is not conclusive. By contrast, that from 
language and names of all sorts strongly supports the intrinsically 
plausible case for the ancient tradition, for the scale and centrality of the 
lexical and nominal borrowing would suggest massive and sustained 
Egyptian cultural influence on Greece. Although the Japanese case 
shows that borrowings on such a large scale need not be the result of 
conquest, conquest or colonization is the usual way in which ~ey 
arise. The linguistic evidence, then, strongly supports the Ancient 
Model. 
Taking all classes of evidence together, there is no way in which the 
Aryan Model has superior heuristic value. Given the case - made in 
Volume I of Black Athena - that the supersession of the Aryan Model 
over the Ancient can be explained in terms of the Weltanschauung of the 
early 19th century, there is no need to retain it. In short, as I have said 
elsewhere in this book, Volume I shows that the Aryan Model was 
'conceived in sin'. Volume 2 will show that it is bankrupt. 
INTRODUCTION 
SOLVING THE RIDDLE OF THE 
SPHINX AND OTHER STUDIES 
IN EGYPTO-GREEK MYTHOLOGY 
Volume 3 of Black Athena is an attempt to use the Revised Ancient 
Model to throw some light on previously inexplicable aspects of Greek 
religion and mythology, and especially on the names of heroic or divine 
beings. The chapters are set out in what seems to be the chronological 
order of the various cults that arrived in Greece; like everything in this 
area, however, the sequence is very uncertain. 
The first chapter is concerned with the earliest discernible religious 
influence - that of the 11th-dynasty royal cult of the hawk/bull god 
Mn!W or Mont in the 2 I st century Be - on the establishment of the 
Cretan bull-cult at the same time as the foundation of the palaces there 
in the same century. I argue that the lack of evidence of a bull-cult in 
Crete in the Early Minoan period, in the 3rd millennium, makes it very 
unlikely that there is any continuity from the bull-cult found in 
7th-millennium Anatolia. Furthermore, mountainous Crete can in no 
way be considered natural cattle country. Apart from the sudden 
appearance of the bull-cult there, the coincidence of timing, the known 
expansion of Egyptian influence during the reigns of the various 
pharaohs named Mentl).otpe of the 11th Dynasty, and the archaeologi­
cal evidence of contacts between Egypt and the Aegean at this time, 
there is also legendary evidence to suggest Egyptian influence on Crete 
at this point. I believe that the names of both the god Mn!W and the 
pharaoh Mentl).otpe are reflected in that given in Greek legends to an 
ancient judge, lawgiver and subduer of the Greek islands, Rhada­
manthys, whose name can be plausibly derived from an Egyptian *Rdi 
M(a)n!W, 'Mn!W gives'. Rhadamanthys was also the warlike stepfather 
of Herakles, who taught the hero how to shoot; Mn!W was the god of 
archery. Mn!W was associated with the goddess R <t, whose name we 
know, from Mesopotamian sources, to have been vocalized Ria. This 
would then seem a very plausible origin for the name of the goddess 
Rhea, who played a central role in Cretan religion. 
The cult of Mn!W was not the only Egyptian bull-cult to reach the 
Aegean. I think it is plausible to associate the legendary figure of Minos,


--- PAGE 48 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
the first king and lawgiver of Crete, with Menes - or Min, as Herodotos 
called him - the first lawgiver and pharaoh of Egypt, who should be 
dated to about 3250 BC. Min was credited in Antiquity with having 
founded the bull-cult of Apis at Memphis. Another Egyptian bull-cult­
called Mnevis by the Romans - has been plausibly derived from an 
Egyptian form *Mnewe. This cult had been associated with 'winding 
walls' since the Old Kingdom, hundreds of years before the first Cretan 
palaces were constructed. Thus we have a triple coincidence: in Egypt 
there were two bull-cults associated with the names Min and Mnewe; 
the first was the name of the royal founder, and the second was linked to 
a 'winding wall'; in Crete there was a bull-cult associated with the 
founder King Minos and a labyrinth! Greek tradition was clear on the 
point that the labyrinth was copied for King Minos from an Egyptian 
original by the great craftsman and architect Daidalos. Attempts to 
derive the name labyrinth from an alleged Lydian word labrys meaning 
'axe' seem less plausible than the etymology proposed by Egyptolo­
gists in the 1860s - and denied by those of the 20th century - from a 
reconstructed Egyptian place name *R-pr-r-hnt, for the site of the 
great Egyptian labyrinth described by Herodotos and other ancient 
writers. 
Bull-cults deriving not only from that ofMn!W but also from those of 
Min, Mnevis, and Apis occurred throughout Greece, but were eclipsed 
by those of goats and rams. At or near the beginning of the 12th 
Dynasty, the Egyptian royal cult changed from that of the hawklbull 
Mn!W to one of the ram Amon. As I have mentioned, the 12th-dynasty 
pharaohs named ~Imn-m-1)3t and S-n Wsrt, ~ho can be plausibly 
identified with the mighty conquerors Memnon and Sesostris of Greek 
tradition, have now been shown by inscriptional evidence to have 
carried out wide-ranging expeditions in the East Mediterranean. Thus 
I argue in Chapter II that the widespread oracular rami goat -cults 
found throughout the Aegean basin began to be introduced soon after 
they rose to prominence in Egypt itself in the 20th century BC. In Egypt 
the cults were associated with both Amon and Osiris, and in the Aegean 
with Zeus and Dionysos, who were seen as their Greek equivalents. 
The natural confusion between the rams and goats seems to have 
been compounded by the fact that the oracular cult at the Delta city -
INTRODUCTION 65 
known to the Greeks as Mendes - was associated with a well-endowed 
species of ram that - rather embarrassingly for a symbol of fertility _ 
became extinct. In later centuries this was represented in a way that led 
Herodotos, at least, to describe it alternately as a goat and a ram. 
Dodona, in North-West Greece, was generally conceded to be the most 
ancient oracle of this type; according to Herodotos and other Greek 
writers it had been established from the oracles at Siwa, an oasis in the 
Libyan desert, and Thebes, with its oracular cult of Amon. Archaeology 
has confirmed remarkable parallels between Dodona and Siwa. Fur­
thermore, the cult of Amon in Siwa was associated with the deity Ddwn, 
which would seem to be the origin of the otherwise inexplicable name 
Dodona. 
The confusion between Zeus and Dionysos was particularly great in 
Crete - where Zeus was supposed to have died - and the northern 
frin~es of Greece, from Dodona in the west to Thrace and Phrygia far 
to the east. These regions, which on other grounds can be shown to 
have been particularly conservative, would seem to have preserved an 
undifferentiated cult that was superseded by the more specific ones that 
were introduced or grew up later. Nevertheless, many cult centres -like 
that of Zeus at Olympia - preserved elements of the earlier stratum. At 
the end of the section on ramlgoat-cults I consider the parallels 
between the acting-out of Osiris' passion or drama in Egyptian religion 
and the origins of Greek theatre. It is striking to note that in Greece, 
tragedy, which was essentially religious, was associated with both 
Dionysos and the goat, tragos. 
Chapter III of Solving the Riddle of the Sphinx is called 'Beauty' and is 
concerned with the goddess Aphrodite. Her name was traditionally 
derived from the word aphros (foam); no explanation has been offered 
for the otherwise unknown suffix -dite. The Classical image of the 
goddess rising from the foam shows that the tradition is ancient. 
Nevertheless it would seem to me to be a pun or a folk etymology, the 
true one almost certainly coming from the Egyptian Pr W3Qyt (House of 
W3Qyt). This name, given to two cities - one in the Nile Delta, later 
known to the Greeks as Bouto/ os, and the other in Upper Egypt, called 
Aphroditopolis - demonstrates the identification of W3Qyt with


--- PAGE 49 ---
66 BLACK ATHENA 
Aphrodite. I have already mentioned the Egyptian aSSocIatIOn of 
divinities with their dwellings, in connection with Athena; in this case, 
however, the use of Pr W3Qyt as a form of address has been attested. 
Phonetically there are some problems, as there is no other case where 
the r in pr has been preserved; though if it had, the prefixing of a 
'prothetic' ali would be automatic. In any event, the derivation from 
*aPr-W3Qyt is clearly better phonetically than that from aphros. 
Semantically, the case for deriving Aphrodite from Pr W3ID't is very 
strong indeed. W3ID't was a goddess of fertility and she was associated 
with the new growth after the Flood, just as Aphrodite was with spring 
and youthful love; W3Qyt was also associated with the snakes that 
emerged in that season. It so happens that one of the most remarkable 
Egyptian finds from Middle Minoan Crete is the base of a statue of a 
priest of W3Qyt. What is more, the hieroglyphs are so irregular as to 
suggest that they may have been engraved locally. In any event, the find 
suggests that the cult existed on the island at that time. It is striking, 
therefore, to find several figures from this period of a beautiful and 
alluring goddess holding two snakes, figures which a number of 
scholars have tentatively linked to Aphrodite. The cult seems to have 
flourished towards the end of Middle Minoan, so it would seem 
plausible to date the goddess's introduction tentatively to the wave of 
Egypto-Levantine-Minoan influence around the 'Hyksos' invasions at 
the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 17th century Be. 
'Beauty' is followed by Chapter IV: 'and the Beast'. Its topic is Seth or 
Sutekh, the god to whom the Hyksos were supposed to have been 
devoted. In Egyptian theology Seth was the divinity of the outside, of the 
deserts and their wild and unpredictable inh~bitants; and, according to 
Plutarch, he was the god of the sea. There seems every reason to 
suppose that just as the Hyksos conquest can be identified with the 
biblical sojourn in Egypt, the Hyksos Seth was the Israelite Yahwe, the 
god of the wilderness, of volcanos and of the tumultuous seas. In 
Ugaritic myth, the enemy of the fertility god Ba<al was Yam, 'Sea', who 
would then appear to be another Semitic counterpart. In Hellenistic 
times Seth was rendered Typhon but, unlike all the other Egyptian 
gods, he lacked a Greek divine counterpart. The reason for this seems 
J 
INTRODUCTION 
obvious: by then, Seth as the epitome of evil could not be equated with a 
respectable divinity. 
On the other hand, the only major Greek god lacking an Egyptian 
counterpart was Poseidon. I maintain that the two loose ends should be 
tied together. Both deities were concerned with the sea, earthquakes, 
hunting, chariots and horses, and were generally cantankerous. Just as 
the Hyksos were devoted to Seth, Poseidon was the god most frequently 
referred to in the Linear B tablets from Mycenaean Crete and Greece. 
Alternative forms with a t, such as Poteidon, have led Indo-Europeanists 
to identify the name with the root Vpot 'power'. However, it is difficult 
to link the suffix -d(e)on to dios (divine). To someone working in the 
Ancient Model the alternation sit suggests the Semitic letter ~ade, 
which seems to have been a form of ts. 
The etymology I propose for Poseidon is p3(W) or Pr Sidon, 'He of or 
'House of Sidon'. Sid, the patron god of Sidon, derived his name from 
the root V~d, 'to hunt'. He was a divinity of hunting, fishing, chariots 
and the sea; thus the semantic fit is perfect. The difficulty with the 
derivation, however, is that it requires an Egypto-Semitic form of a 
type that has so far not been attested; therefore I can propose the 
etymology only tentatively. But whether or not it can be accepted, I 
believe that I can show striking parallels between Seth and Poseidon, 
and these are particularly interesting precisely because the two were not 
identified in Classical times. Similarities between the two gods and 
their cults, therefore, cannot be attributed to later 'Egyptianizing'. 
Chapter V, 'The terrible twins', is concerned with the twins Apollo and 
Artemis. In Egypt the sun was worshipped in many different ways - as 
Ra, as Aten the solar disc, and as Ijprr and Tm, the young sun in the 
morning and the old sun at night, respectively. Phonetically, the only 
problem with the derivation of Apollo from Ijprr is that b is very seldom 
transcribed as 0. Such a borrowing would be possible, on the other 
hand, if the introduction were late and had come through Phoenician, 
in which the b merged with the softer l}., quite often rendered as 0 in 
Greek. As it happens, there are two indications that this is, in fact, the 
case. Lateness is suggested by the fact that the name Apollo is not 
attested in Linear B; and Phoenician transmission by the vocalization


--- PAGE 50 ---
68 BLACK ATHENA 
CaCoC, suggesting that the name had passed through the 'Canaanite 
shift' ii> o. 
Semantically, the derivation of Apollo from Ijprr would seem very 
good. Ijprr was identified with I:Ir m 31}.t, the Greek Harmachis, 'Horus 
of the Rising Sun'. Horus had been identified with Apollo at least from 
the time of the poet Pindar in the 5th century, but this dawning aspect 
would seem the most appropriate for Apollo, who was always seen as 
young. The central myth concerning Horus was of his struggle with, 
and victory over, Seth manifested as a water monster. In Greece a major 
myth of Apollo was that of Delphi, where the young god, accompanied 
by his sister Artemis, killed the Python. I argue that Delphi, like adelphos 
(brother), comes from a Semitic word for 'couple' or 'twin'. Thus 
Apollo's title Delphinios is a doublet of another, Didymos 'twin', and 
Apollo's 'twinness' seems essential to his nature. 
Modern historians of Greek religion are moving away from the idea 
that Apollo's twin sister Artemis was exclusively a moon goddess. It is 
now thought that she was a virgin, huntress goddess of the evening and 
night. In Hellenistic times Artemis was seen as the counterpart of the 
Egyptian cat goddess BJstt, who Was identified with the moon. How­
ever, B3stt also had a fiery aspect and as such was supposed to help in the 
destruction of Horus' enemies. In this capacity she was seen as a lioness 
and identified as the female counterpart ofRa and Tm, the god of the 
evening sun. Ijprr and Tm together formed the twin aspects of I:Ir 
3l).twy 'Horus of the (Two) Horizons', who was the equivalent of Ra. 
Tm's consort Tmt/B3stt seems to have had some independence, and 
from the middle of the 3rd millennium she was connected with the two 
lion goddesses linked to Horus of the (two) horizons. Horus' greatest 
monument in Egypt was the Sphinx at GizCJ. Although the monument is 
only of a single lion, a dedication inserted near it in the late 15th 
century, over 1,000 years after its construction, refers to I:Ir 31}.twy and 
to I:Ir(i) Tm, which almost certainly refers to Tm himself. On phonetic 
grounds, a feminine form *I:Irt Tmt would provide a good etymology 
for Artemis. The correspondence of an Egyptian final -t with a Greek 
final -is is common; the medial t would drop with the normal develop­
ment of Egyptian; and the vocalization ofI:Ir as (1:l)ar is amply attested, 
as is the modification of the Egyptian I). to 0. Thus the 'twinness' of 
'I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Apollo and Artemis can be seen to be that of IJprr and Tm, that 
between the morning and the evening sun. 
Chapter V goes on to investigate the reasons for the sex change, and 
also the parallels between Apollo and Artemis and Kadmos and 
Europa, whose names come from the Semitic Yqdm (east) and Y<rb 
(west) and (evening). The cults and myths of the Greek Thebes are 
particularly important in this respect because they too are associated 
with the Sphinx, adding to the intricate network linking them to this 
aspect of Egyptian solar religion. I argue that the Theban Sphinx can be 
identified as the savage and leonine nature of Europa and Artemis, but 
an even tighter connection between the two sphinxes is provided by the 
riddle posed by the Greek one, 'What being has only one voice, has 
sometimes two feet sometimes three, sometimes four, and is weakest 
when it has the most?' Oedipus' answer referred to the life of man, but 
the fiddle belongs to a cluster - found all over the world - many of 
which refer to the weakness of the sun in the morning and evening and 
its strength at midday. I think that in the light of the Egyptian Sphinx's 
dedication to the sun in the morning and evening, the parallel is quite 
remarkable. 
Despite the lateness of Apollo's name, the interplay of Egyptian and 
Semitic influences leads me to believe that this solar myth cycle was 
introduced during the Hyksos period. The Eleusinian Mysteries, on 
the other hand, which are the subject of Chapter VI, seem to have 
arrived rather later. The ancient chronographers, for their part, were 
generally agreed that the cult of Demeter and Dionysos arrived in Attica 
in the second half of the 15th century. This would seem altogether 
plausible, despite the earlY-2nd-millennium origin of the name 
Demeter (see above, p. 57). The late 15th century was a period of great 
Egyptian power after the conquests ofTuthmosis III, and one in which 
the mystery cults ofisis and Osiris seem to have been well established in 
Egypt and the Levant. Since Egyptian faIence plaques of the type placed 
under the corners of temples have been found at Mycenae dated to the 
reign of Amenophis III (14°5-1367), I have no difficulty in accepting 
the possibility that the Eleusinian cult of Archaic Greece was the 
descendant of an Egyptian foundation made there 700 years earlier. For


--- PAGE 51 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
one of the many ways in which this cult was unique in Greece was that­
like Egyptian temples - it had an established priesthood, in this case 
made up of two clans whose members in Hellenistic times certainly 
believed that they had Egyptian connections. 
The Egyptian Osiran mysteries featured Isis' search for her mur­
dered husbandlbrother, her reassembly of his body, and the triumph of 
their son Horus over his father's murderer Seth. At first blush the 
Eleusinian story seems very different. In it Demeter searched for her 
daughter Persephone, stolen by Hades, god of the Underworld. She 
found Persephone but, failing to release her, she went on strike, 
preventing any natural seasonal growth. Finally a deal was made, 
according to which Persephone should spend half the year with Hades 
and half with her mother. These differences are not sufficient to 
override the ancient testimony that the Greek mysteries came from 
Egypt. 
In Egypt, while Osiris was the focus of the cult, its chief protagonist 
was Isis; in Greece, there is little doubt that behind Demeter there lay 
Dionysos. Furthermore, in the Egyptian mysteries there were in fact not 
one, but two women. Isis had a constant companion in her sister/double 
Nephthys, who not only searched and mourned for Osiris but was also 
married to his murderer, Seth. In this way, she exacdy paralleled the 
ambiguity of Persephone with her loving and hellish aspects. Above all, 
however, the wide variations one finds within these Egyptian and Greek 
myth cycles themselves show that too much should not be made of the 
differences between them, given the large number of detailed parallels 
found between the two mystery cults. 
There is also a survey of 20th-century studies of the subject, starting 
with the work of Paul Foucart, whose detailed research on Eleusis and 
considerable knowledge of Egyptology convinced him that the ancient 
tradition of Egyptian origin was irrefutable. 25 In any event, there is no 
doubt that the centre of the Eleusinian Mysteries was the search for 
immortality, and the paradoxical belief that this could be achieved only 
through dying. It was believed that through the initiation of the 
Mysteries one could go through a symbolic death to be 'born again' as 
an immortal; this conception was current throughout the Ancient Near 
East but was overwhelmingly strong in Egypt. Thus the consensus of 
INTRODUCTION 71 
ancient writers was that Pythagoras, Orpheus, Sokrates, Plato and 
others concerned with the immortality of the soul had learnt about it 
from Egypt. 
The concern with personal immortality was central to Orphism, an 
aspect of Greek religion that appears to have been introduced in the 
Archaic period, hundreds of years after the end of the Bronze Age with 
which Black Athena is otherwise concerned. Nevertheless, I believe its 
closeness to the Dionysian and Eleusinian cults justifies its presence in 
the third volume. The name Orpheus would seem to come from the 
Egyptian form CI)rp(t (Hereditary Prince), which was transcribed in 
Greek as Orpais. CI)rp (t was a tide given to the Egyptian god commonly 
known as Geb: the latter was a deity of the good earth - both the flora 
and fauna that covered it - and the Underworld. This fits both with 
Orpheus' place as a harmonizer of nature and with his concern with the 
interior of the earth. Geb had a close relationship with Osiris, who was 
sometimes supposed to be his son and by whom he was largely replaced 
as lord of the Underworld. Orpheus and Dionysos seemed in many 
ways to duplicate each other similarly, but with some hostility between 
them. Egyptian society appears to have been rather intolerant of 
homosexuality, and it is hard to find any direct parallel to this aspect of 
Orpheus' character. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that, although 
eI)rp<t is not a feminine form, it was written with an egg as a deter­
minative, which seems to be related to the cosmogenic egg laid byGeb in 
his form as a goose, often without female intervention. Here, too, there is 
a striking parallel with Greece, as a primal egg was also the beginning 
of the Orphic cosmogeny. 
Despite Geb's great antiquity, it is probable that the Orphic cult in 
Greece was a late introduction. There is, for instance, no mention of 
Orpheus or his cosmogony in Hesiod's Theogony, and the vocalization of 
CI)rp(t as Orpais/Orpheus would seem to be late. It seems likely, 
therefore - as many Ancients and Moderns have suspected - that 
although Orpheus may be very ancient, Orphism was established in the 
6th century in close conjunction with Pythagoreanism; and that the 
association with Cl)rp<t was an attempt to give a new cult the kudos of 
antiquity. It is impossible to decide, however, whether the reform began 
in Greece or in Egypt. The Orphic and Pythagorean emphasis on


--- PAGE 52 ---
72 BLACK ATHENA 
metampsychosis - the transmigration of souls - and the linked veg­
etarianism were also current among Egyptian priests in Hellenistic and 
Roman times. It is impossible to say how ancient these abstinences 
were, but given the general conservatism of Egyptian religion, they 
could well date back to the Old Kingdom. They could, on the other 
hand, have been promoted by later reforms. 
There are also connections between Orpheus and The Book of the 
Dead. In New Kingdom and later Egypt this served·as a guide for the 
soul through the perils of the Underworld to immortality, and was 
frequently buried with the mummified corpse. In Greece and Italy, 
spells and hymns inscribed on gold leaf were placed by the bodies of 
devotees of Orpheus. So it is interesting to note in this connection that a 
version of The Book of the Dead does refer to 'the books of Geb and 
Osiris'. 
In Classical times it was generally believed the Orpheus was in some 
way Thracian, but that he had learnt his mysteries in Egypt. The close 
connections between Pythagoras and Egypt were acceptel by all in 
Antiquity. Thus the striking etymological and cultic similarities be­
tween Egyptian forms, and Orphic and Pythagorean ones, seem very 
easy to explain in terms of the Ancient Model. I should add, however, 
that it would be possible for an Aryanist to admit the Egyptian origin of 
such 'late' features without damaging his model as a whole. Neverthe­
less, I believe it is significant that so few do so. 
The conclusion of Solving the Riddle of the Sphinx reiterates my 
general view that the etymologies and cultic parallels which make up the 
volume should be seen in context. The comparisons being made are not 
between Greek and, say, Algonquin or Tasmanian religions separated 
by vast distances of space and time. They are between two systems 
situated at the same end of the Mediterranean during the same 
millennia. Furthermore, the Classical and HeI1enistic Greeks them­
selves maintained that their religion came from Egypt, and Herodotos 
even specified that the names of the gods were - with one or two 
exceptions - all Egyptian. In the absence of any plausible etymologies or 
cultic parallels from Indo-European culture, it would seem reasonable 
to look for Egyptian ones. The material in Volume 3, taken together 
with the sections on Athena and Hermes in Volume 2, shows that 
INTRODUCTION 73 
juxtaposing Greek with Egyptian and Canaanite religion makes com­
prehensible large tracts of what had previously been complete mystery. 
More importantly, however, it raises many interesting new questions 
and generates hundreds of testable hypotheses. As I said at the 
beginning of the overall Introduction to this work, this~ is precisely what 
differentiates fruitful radical innovation from sterile crankiness. The 
scholarly purpose of Solving the Riddle of the Sphinx is the same as that of 
the other two volumes: to open up new areas of research to women and 
men with far better qualifications than I have. The political purpose of 
BlackAthena is, of course, to lessen European cultural arrogance.


--- PAGE 53 ---
f 
CHAPTER I 
THE ANCIENT MODEL 
IN ANTIQUITY 
How it happened that Egyptians came to the Pelo­
ponnese, and what they did to make themselves 
kings in that part of Greece, has heen chronicled by 
other writers; I will add nothing therefore, hut 
proceed to mention some points which, no one else has 
yet touched upon. 
(Herodotos, Histories, VI.SS)l 
T
HE MAJORITY OF US have been taught to regard Herodotos as 
the 'father of history', but even those who follow Plutarch and 
regard him as the 'father of lies' can hardly maintain that 
Herodotos was lying about the existence of such chronicles. His was not 
an unverifiable statement about some remote peoples, but one which 
readers could easily check, if they did not know about it already. Setting 
aside for a while the problem of what actually happened over a 
millennium before Herodotos wrpte his Histories, his statement strongly 
suggests that in the 5th century BC it was generally believed that Greece 
had been colonized from Egypt at the beginning of the Heroic Age. In 
this chapter I hope to demonstrate that Herodotos' views on the 
Egyptian and Phoenician settlements, though treated with condescen­
sion and scorn by most modem Classicists and ancient historians, were 
conventional not only in his own times but also throughout Archaic, 
Classical and later Antiquity. 
PELASGIANS 
Before exploring the views of Greeks in the Classical period on these 
and other hypothetical invasions, it would be useful to consider their


--- PAGE 54 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
ideas about the earlier population of Greece. This is because it was the 
basis upon which they saw the Near Eastern influences as having acted. 
Here we encounter the thorny problem of the most widely known native 
population, the Pelasgoi or Pelasgians, a name used differently by 
different Greek authors. According to Homer, there were Pelasgians 
on both sides of the Trojan War. Some of Achilles' force of Hellenes 
and Achaians were supposed to have inhabited 'PelasgianArgos', which 
was clearly seen as being in Thessaly.2 Fighting for Troy, on the other 
hand, were the warriors of Hippothoos the Pelasgian, who came from 
Larisa. 3 The probable derivation of the place name Laris(s)a is from the 
Egyptian toponym R-ll}t, 'Entry into the Fertile Lands', which was 
probably used for the Hyksos capital A varis, in the rich soils of the 
Eastern Nile Delta. 4 The semantic fit between Laris(s)a and R-ll) is 
excellent. Further, the Homeric epithet for two different Larisai was 
mbolax (deep-soiled).5 As Strabo, the geographer of the 1st centuries 
Be and AD, pointed out, all the many Greek Laris(s)ai were on alluvial 
soil.6 
If we take the Hyksos colonizations as a working hypothe~s, it is 
striking to note that the akropolis of the Peloponnesian Argos, the city 
which Danaos was supposed to have founded and with which he had 
many cultic connections, was called Larisa. 7 Furthermore Strabo 
maintained, in another part of his Geography, that argos in Greek meant 
'flat land,.8 This would fit nicely with the etymology of Larisa from 
'Entry into the Fertile Lands' as the name of the Hyksos' capital. 
However, argos also signified 'speed' and 'dog' or 'wolf', both of which 
were reflected in the mythology and iconography of the Peloponnesian 
city.9 The core meaning of the word was 'brilliant' or 'silver'. This fits 
well with >Inb I)g, 'Silver Wall', the most frequently used name for 
Memphis, the capital of Lower Egypt. 10 These three-way connections 
between Pelasgian, Larisa and Argos are reinforced by the existence of I' 
a Pelasgian Argos in the region of the two Larisai recorded in 
Thessaly.11 
Homer referred to the great and ancient oracle of Zeus at Dodona in 
Epirus as 'Pelasgian', an epithet that was used for it by later writers. 12 
Pelasgians appear elsewhere on his list of Cretan peoples which also 
included Achaians, Eteocretans, Kydonians and Dorians. 13 Hesiod -
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 77 
or possibly Kekrops of Miletos - stated that 'Three Hellenic tribes 
settled in Crete, the Pelasgoi, Achaians and Dorians.,14 Much later 
Diodoros Sikeliotes claimed that Pelasgians had settled in Crete after 
the Eteocretans but before the Dorians. 15 
Even if the earlier quotation does not date back to Hesiod who, 
according to the Ancient Model, lived in the lOth century Be, it tallies 
well with the Homeric list. In the latter the Pelasgians are distinguished 
from the Eteo or 'true' Cretans, who are assumed to be non-Hellenic, 
possibly Anatolian- but more probably Semitic-speaking. 16 Further­
more, Homer made no mention ofDanaans or Argives in Crete. These 
facts, together with the general connotation of 'native' associated with 
the name, would make it plausible to suggest that the Pelasgians were 
the earliest Hellenic or Greek-speaking inhabitants of the island. Thus 
'Hesiod's' order would appear to be chronological: the Pelasgians 
having arrived on the island before the Achaian invasion of the 14th 
century, and that of the Dorians in the 12th. Thus they would seem on 
both lists to be equivalent to the Danaans. 
A further indication that the Cretan Pelasgians were Hellenic comes 
from the link, made by several scholars, between the Pelasgians and the 
Philistines who settled in Palestine in the 12th century Be. According to 
a substantial biblical tradition, the Philistines were supposed to have 
come from Crete. The equation *Pelasg and *Pelast has usually been 
explained by postulating an original 'Pre-Hellenic' final stop that was 
heard as g by the Greeks and t by Egyptian and Semitic speakers. Apart 
from my suspicions about the existence of Pre- Hellenes, it is very hard 
to construct a consonant somewhere between g and t. 
There is, however, another way by which one can associate the two. 
In 1951 Jean Berard reinforced the links by drawing attention to the 
variant PelasgikoniPelastikon found in the great dictionary of 
Hesychios of the 5th century AD and in the scholium or commentary to 
the Iliad, Book XVI, verse 233. 17 This shows that it is possible to 
confuse the written forms of rand T. If, as I maintain elsewhere, the 
Greek alphabet has been in use since the 15th century Be, such an error 
might explain not only these textual variants but the name Pelasgoi 
itself. This could have come from *Pelast, the vocalization recon­
structed for the Canaanite form. 18 (The development of the name


--- PAGE 55 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Hebrides from a misreading of the original Hebudes provides an 
analogy for this.)19 Although the nature of the Philistine language or 
languages is still very uncertain, the most likely candidates are West 
Anatolian languages like Lydian or Greek. The latter seems to me 
much more likely.20 Thus if there is an equation between Pelasgian and 
Philistine, which is possible, and if the Philistines spoke Greek, which is 
probable, it would increase still further the likelihood that the Cretan 
Pelasgians spoke a Hellenic language. 
Like Homer, Hesiod seems to have seen Pelasgians in Phthia in 
Thessaly.21 He also saw them in Arkadia, where the eponym Pelasgos 
was described as autochthonous. 22 Akousilaos, in the 6th or 5 th century 
Be, referred to all Greece south of Thessaly as 'Pelasgia'. Aischylos in 
the 5th enlarged it to include North Greece. 23 Herodotos, meanwhile, 
wrote several interesting but very confusing passages about the 
Pelasgians. According to him, although they had lived throughout 
Greece, they were the ancestors only of the Ionians, not of the Dorians, 
who were 'Hellenes'. He maintained that the PelasgianJanguage was 
not Greek, basing this argument on the observation that in two cities on 
the Hellespont which were supposed to be Pelasgian, the language was 
foreign. Thus peoples like the Athenians, who were supposed to have 
been Pelasgian before becoming Hellenes, would have had to have 
changed their language. 24 
Apart from Athens, the places Herodotos associated with the Pelas­
gians were Dodona, the coast of the Peloponnese and Lemnos, 
Samothrace and the North-Eastern Aegean as a whole.25 Herodotos' 
contention would appear to be backed by the modem discovery in 
Lemnos of a stele in a language resembling Etruscan, and there is every 
reason to suppose that the cities he referred to on the Hellespont also 
spoke Anatolian languages. 26 
In general, Herodotos' picture of the Pelasgians seems similar to that 
given by Thucydides a generation later. According to both, Pe(asgians 
formed the bulk, though not the whole, of the early population of 
Greece and the Aegean and most of them were gradually assimilated by 
the Hellenes. 27 Herodotos saw this transformation as having taken 
place after the invasion by Danaos, which he envisioned around the 
middle of the 2nd millennium Be, and he described the Egyptian 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 79 
Danaids as having taught the Pelasgians - not the Hellenes - the 
worship of the gods. Diodoros referred to Kadmos' having taught the 
Pelasgians the use of Phoenician letters.28 Furthermore, the tradition 
that Kekrops, the founder of Athens, was Egyptian was probably 
current in Herodotos' day. Thus despite the latter's claims that the 
Athenians - u~like the Argives and Thebans - were autochthonous -
that is to say, aboriginal- one finds the interesting passage: 
When what is now called Greece [Hellas] was occupied by 
the Pelasgians, the Athenians, a Pelasgian people, were called 
the Kranaoi. In the reign of Kekrops they acquired the name of 
Kekropidai. At the succession of Erechtheus they changed their 
name to Athenians. 29 
The idea that the Pelasgians were the native population, converted to 
become something more Greek by the invading Egyptians, occurs more 
clearly in the plays of Aischylos and Euripides, written around the time 
of Herodotos' Histories. According to them the Pelasgians were the 
indigenes, encountered and somehow overcome by Danaos in the 
Argolid: 
Danaos, the father of fifty daughters, on coming to Argos took up his 
abode in the city of Inachos and throughout Greece [Hellas] he laid 
down the law that all people hitherto named Pelasgians were to be 
named Danaans. 30 
According to Aischylos the Pelasgians were clearly identified with the 
later Hellenes, and he refers anachronistically to the practices of the 
former as Hellenic. 31 
Strabo, in the I st centuries Be and AD, compiled many of the sources 
on the Pelasgians, adding a detailed story of a Pelasgian migration from 
Boiotia to Attica.32 Pausanias, in the 2nd century AD, referred to 
Pelasgians at Athens, Corinth, Argos, Lakonia and Messenia, though 
those in the last were supposed to have come from Thessaly.33 He 
stressed, however, the connection between them and the Arkadians. 
Pelasgos was considered to be the Arkadian ancestor, and Pausanias 
quoted the 6th-century poet Asios of Samos: 'And black earth 
produced the god-equalling Pelasgos.,34


--- PAGE 56 ---
80 BLACK ATHENA 
Can any sense be made of these varied references? It was not only 
ancient writers like Herodotos and Strabo who had trouble reconciling 
them. The same difficulty has afflicted modem scholars. 'Their name 
was probably a national one: at least the Greek explanations of it are 
absurd', as the 19th -century polymath Niebuhr, the founder of modern 
ancient history, put it. 35 A century later Eduard Meyer, who dominated 
ancient historiography at the tum of the 19th century, was equally 
despairing. 36 Other 20th-century historians have tended to neglect the 
question and go no further than saying that the Pelasgians were a 
significant element in the early population of Greece. 37 
It is certainly difficult to accommodate them in the Aryan Model of 
Hellenic conquest from the north. Some writers, like the 19th-century 
pioneer of the Aryan Model, Ernst Curtius, saw them as a 'semi-Aryan' 
people conquered by a minority of superior Aryan Hellenes. 38 This fits 
quite nicely with Herodotos' reports of Pelasgians in the Anatolian­
speaking North-Eastern Aegean. Such a hypothesis, however, makes it 
difficult to explain why, if the Pelasgians were so we!l remembered, 
there should have been no memory of their conquest by the Hellenes. 
Even Thucydides refers to the Pelasgians and others as having been 
'Hellenized' by gradual 'intercourse' with the 'sons of Hellen', who 
themselves originated in Phthiotis near Thessaly.39 
One way round this problem is the tack taken by William Ridgeway -
who dominated Classical archaeology at the turn of the 20th century -
and the 20th-century scholars Ernst Grumach and Sinclair Hood. 
They claim that the Hellenic conquest was recorded in tradition as the 
'Return of the Heraklids' and 'Dorian Invasion', which were indeed 
tribal movements from north to south in the 12th century Be.40 Such a 
scheme jibes well with Herodotos' linking the Dorians to the Hellenes 
and the lonians to the Pelasgians.41 There is a slight problem in 
reconciling the reported Hellenization of the 'Pelasgian' Athenians 
with the strong tradition that Athens was never conquered f'Y the 
Dorians. But this difficulty pales into insignificance next to the 'fact', 
accepted by most I 9th- and nearly all 20th-century historians, that the 
Pre-Dorian makers of Mycenaean civilization were Greek-speaking. 
Thus the only way in which the 'Dorian Invasion' can be attached to 
the 'Aryan Conquest' is to say that it was the last of a series of 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 81 
waves of migration. This, however, gets one no further forward in 
understanding the first arrival of Greek or 'Proto-Greek' speakers in 
Greece. 
As can be seen from the references to Greek authors made above, the 
Ancient Model, too, faces difficulties over the Pelasgian question. For a 
modem proponent of the Revised Ancient Model, the best solution is to 
follow the mainstream of 19th-century historiography - scholars such 
as Grote and Wilamowitz-Moellendorf - and say that Pelasgian was a 
general name given to natives or aboriginals.42 I would claim, however, 
that it was predominantly applied to the indigenous Indo-European­
speaking peoples colonized and to some extent culturally assimilated by 
the Egypto- Phoenician invasions. This would fit well with the descrip­
tions of Aischylos and Euripides given above. Thus Danaos' ordering 
the Pelasgians to become Danaan would represent their adoption of 
Near Eastern civilization. The idea of assimilation would also tally with 
the process of the Athenians turning, possibly through the agency of 
Kekrops and Erechtheus, from Pelasgians to lonians. 
Thus, working in the Ancient Model one does not have the problem 
faced by scholars following the Aryan one in understanding how 
Classical writers saw the Pelasgians both as the original 'barbarian' 
inhabitants of Greece and as in some way Hellenic. It is also striking 
that in later times the Pelasgians tended to be associated with remote 
places like Arkadia, Epirus and the edge of Thessaly. In this case they 
could well be seen as partially unassimilated 'Proto-Greeks' . 
(An analogy for this would be the blurred distinction between the 
Vietnamese of the Red River Delta, and the Muong of the mountains to 
the south whose language and culture are like those of the Vietnamese 
but with far less of the latter's massive cultural borrowing from China. 
There is, however, no evidence to back such speculation.) We also 
know that Arkadians, at least by the end of the Mycenaean Age, were 
speaking Greek. Arkadia, moreover, seems to have been particularly 
full of Egyptian and Semitic influence. 43 This could be explained by 
postulating a slow but complete assimilation there. Thus just as the 
Welsh, who had resisted Roman rule, preserved many Latin loan words 
and Roman Christianity, the Arkadians preserved traditions from the 
higher culture they had previously resisted. Against this, however, one


--- PAGE 57 ---
82 BLACK ATHENA 
could also argue that they were called 'Pelasgian' simply because of 
their later traditionalism. 
The Arkadians were not the only Greeks to preserve elements of 
Mycenaean culture into the Iron Age. The same can be said of the 
Ionians and the Aiolians. The great exception were the Dorians; this 
raises the problem of the nature of the Dorian culture or that of 
Northern and North-Western Greece, from which they are plausibly 
supposed to have come. There is little doubt about the presence of 
Egyptian and Semitic religious influences throughout Northern Greece 
and Thrace. There are also the specific links between the most important 
and probably the oldest oracular centre of the region, 'Pelasgian' 
Dodona, the Egypto-Libyan oracle of Ammon in the Siwa Oasis and 
the great oracle of Amon at Thebes, which will be discussed in Volume 3. 
Furthermore, the Dorian leaders claimed to be 'Heraklids', that is 
descendants of the Danaan -Egyptian colonizers, replacing the later 
Tantalid or Pelopid dynasties which appear to have arrived from 
Anatolia in the 14th century. It is clear that Dorian kings continued to 
be proud of their Egypto-Hyksos ancestry well into Hellenistic times.44 
Nevertheless, no Mycenaean palaces have been found in North-West 
Greece, and it would seem plausible to suppose that in general the 
region was much less affected by Near Eastern influences than the rest 
of Greece. In addition the Dorian 'Return of the Heraklids', while 
claiming Danaan legitimacy, may also have had revolutionary social and 
national aspects. Several archaeologists have noted a revival of Pre­
Mycenaean, Middle Helladic material culture after the destruction of 
the Mycenaean palaces. Thus it may well by that the Mycenaean Age 
was ended by invasions of unassimilated Dorians combined - in some 
areas at least - with support from only partially assimilated peasants 
living within the palatial economy.45 
All in all, the references to Pelasgians on Mainland Greece fit the 
Ancient Model reasonably well. According to it, 'Pelasgian' was ,imply 
a name given to unassimilated native Greeks. Such a framework would 
not be incompatible with the early but Hellenic Pelasgians in Crete. 46 
The great difficulty for the Revised Ancient Model, on the other hand, 
comes from Herodotos' explicit statement that he believed the 
Pelasgians to have been non-Greek-speaking. He seems to have based 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 
this claim entirely on evidence from the North-East Aegean, and it 
would seem plausible to suggest that in this case 'Pelasgian' was being 
used in its broad sense of 'native , . It appears to have been the attempt to 
unify these disparate peoples that has caused such confusion to ancient 
and modern writers. 
IONIANS 
The Ionians were one of the two great tribes of Greece, the other being 
the Dorians. In Classical times the Ionians lived in a band across the 
central Aegean from Attica to 'Ionia' on the Anatolian shore. They had 
strong traditions, both of having colonized to the East after the arrival of 
the Dorians, and of having lived more widely in Greece before the 
invasions. Herodotos, almost certainly following an older tradition, 
linked the Pelasgians to the Ionians:47 
The Ionians ... according to the Greek account, as long as they lived 
in what is now known as Achaia in the Peloponnese, before the 
coming of Danaos and Xouthos, were called Pelasgians of the coast 
... The Islanders too . . . are a Pelasgian people: they were later 
known as the Ionians for the same reason as those who inhabited the 
twelve cities founded from Athens. 48 
The Ionians of Attica and Ionia on the Anatolian coast placed great 
stress on their ancient native origins. No one denies that I(a)on, found 
in Linear B as ia-wo-ne, is the same as the West Semitic Yawan, the 
Assyrian Yawani or Yamani, the Persian Yauna and the Egyptian 
Demotic Wynn. All mean 'Greek'. All authorities, however, assume the 
name Ion to be Greek, despite the fact that it lacks an Indo-European 
etymology.49 The most plausible origin for the cluster and for the 
names of the native Aones and Hyantes encountered by the legendary 
Egypto-Phoenician invaders of Boiotia would seem to be the Egyptian 
>Irvn(ty(rv)) (bowmen, barbarians).5o Not only is this word attested well 
over a thousand years before the others, but it has an obvious etymology 
. from irvnt (bow) and irvn (pillar or tree trunk). 
The fact that Egyptian texts tend to apply it to other African peoples 
and do not use it for Greeks, for whom they had other names, does not


--- PAGE 58 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
seriously weaken the derivation. The indiscriminate use of the English 
name 'Indian', applied to completely different peoples, shows how 
easily terms for 'natives' or 'barbarians' can shift. In this case we know 
that West Semitic speakers were using a strikingly similar term specifi­
cally for Greeks at least by the tum of the I st millennium Be. As has 
been mentioned in the Introduction, the Egyptian deity of the desert 
and all the wildness beyond the Nile valley and its inhabitants was St, 
transcribed as Seth in Greek and Sutekh in Akkadian. It will be argued 
in Volume 3 that Seth was the equivalent of Poseidon, and it is striking 
therefore to note that according to conventional wisdom in 5th -century 
Greece, the father of Ion - the legendary eponym after whom the 
people were named - was a troublemaker called Xouthos, a name that 
could phonetically well derive from St. The semantic connection 
between the two is strengthened by the fact that Poseidon was the 
patron of the Ionians. 51 
In this way the Revised Ancient Model can provide plausible ety­
mologies for the names Xouthos and Ion, and explanations for the close 
relations perceived by ancient writers between--the Pelasgians and 
Ionians. Generally it can begin to make some sense of data that have 
remained a hopeless jumble to the many brilliant scholars who have 
attempted to understand them in terms of the Aryan Model. 
COLONIZATION 
When dealing with the Greek· traditions of colonization, I think it is 
useful to put them in three categories. First, there are the vague, not to 
say incoherent, traditions concerning such legendary figures as King 
Inachos in Argos and Amphion and Zethos at Thebes. Secondly, there 
are those concerning Kekrops in Attica or Rhadamanthys in Crete and 
Ionia which were the subject of debate in Antiquity. Thirdly, there were 
the reports of Kadmos, Danaos and Pelops, which were generally 
accepted. As mentioned above, I believe that for reasons of cultural 
pride Greeks tended to play down the extent of Near Eastern influence 
and colonization. Furthermore, I am certain that all the legends contain 
interesting kernels of historical truth, and that the hierarchy!'f obscur­
ity can be explained in terms of age: the more recent the colonization, 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 85 
the clearer the picture of it. This volume will be largely concerned with 
the traditions of Danaos and Kadmos, as it was the more recent 
colonizations that were the battleground during the fall of the Ancient 
Model and the triumph of the Aryan one. 
First, we should consider Kadmos' colonization of Thebes. This was 
the stronghold of the Ancient Model because it was so vigorously and 
widely attested, and because respect for the Semitic Phoenicians 
outlasted that for the African Egyptians by several decades. English­
speaking Classical scholarship on Kadmos has been dominated by an 
article published in 19 I 3 by A. W. Gomme. This author claimed that 
the Kadmeian and, by implication, the other colonizations had been 
invented by 'rationalist' historians in the early 5th century, just before 
Herodotos. 52 Such an extreme position was always difficult to defend, 
however, and it is now untenable. First of all, there is the intrinsic 
implausibility of such detailed, varied and unpatriotic legends springing 
up so suddenly and widely in the intensely nationalistic 5th century. 
Secondly, there is the pictorial evidence: a 7th-century relief vase 
fragment depicts Europa in Oriental costume, and there are similar 
early representations of her and the Danaids. 53 
The central argument, however, comes from literature. While 
Homer did not mention the colonizations, there is no reason why he 
should have done. While his epics almost certainly contained earlier 
materials, they were concerned with the end of the Mycenaean Age, not 
its beginnings several hundred years earlier. The Iliad is full of 
references to Danaans and Kadmeians, whose eponyms - Danaos and 
Kadmos - would have been instantly recognized by at least later Greeks 
as having come from Egypt or Phoenicia. Homer and Hesiod both 
referred to Europa, who was always seen as a sister or some other close 
relative to Kadmos, as the 'daughter ofPhoinix'. Reluctant to admit that 
this could have any connection with Phoenicia, Karl Otfried Muller and 
other source critics have pointed out, correctly, that phoinix has many 
other meanings and need not be directly connected with the Levant. 54 
However, given Homer's frequent use of Phoinix in the sense of 
'Phoenician', and the later universal identification of Europa and 
Kadmos with Phoenicia, this argument seems rather far-fetched, 
especially when we know that Hesiod described Phoinix as the father of


--- PAGE 59 ---
86 BLACK ATHENA 
Adonis, whose Phoenician parentage is as beyond doubt as the origin of 
his name from the Canaanite )c1don (lord}.55 Indeed, since Gomrne 
wrote his article, a fragment of Hesiod's Catalogue of Women has 
been published in which Europa is described as the daughter of the 
'noble Phoenician' and her abductor, Zeus, carries her over the 'salt 
water'.56 This confirms that the Europa story, which the scholiast 
on Iliad XII.292 attributed to both Hesiod and the 5th-century poet 
Bakchylides, existed in the time of the former. 
For Danaos there is Hesiod's testimony that Danaos and his daugh­
ters dug wells for the city of Argos and the strong implication of his 
relationship with Aigyptos. There is also a fragment from a lost epic, the 
Danais, which describes the daughters of Dana os anning themselves by 
the banks of the Nile.57 Thus even if one wants to doubt the antiquity of 
the sources of Aischylos, Euripides and Herodotos, other evidence 
makes it overwhelmingly likely that the traditions of Danaos and 
Kadmos go back to epic times. 
In order to know what we are talking about, it would seem useful at 
this point to consider the different assessments of the dates of the 
greatest epic writer, Homer, and of his approiimate contemporary, ~ 
Hesiod. The Ancients tended to put Hesiod before Homer and to place 
them both between 1100 and 850 BC, in any event definitely before the 
first Olympic Games in 776.58 Scholars today tend to reverse the order. 
They place Homer between 800 and 700 BC and Hesiod sometime 
around the latter. The fundamental basis for this down-dating has been 
that since the 1930S conventional wisdom has held that the alphabet 
was introduced only in the 8th century. As the contemporary scholar 
George Forrest has written: 
Hesiod, like Homer, lived in a period of transition from oral to 
written composition. Indeed it seems likely that each was the first, or 
among the first, to commit to manuscript his own version of a long 
oral tradition. 59 
However, even Classicists now tend to date the introduction of the 
Phoenician alphabet into Greece to the 9th or late lOth century BC. 
Some Semitists have put that of the Canaanite alphabet in the 11th, 
while I argue that the transmission must have taken place b9"ore 1400 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 
BC.60 Thus the alphabetic basis for challenging the ancient chronology 
would seem unsound. Further reasons for the lowering of Homer's 
dates are that in the Iliad the most refined goods come from Phoenicia, 
and the Odyssey refers to Phoenicians in the Aegean. Hence, as the latter 
were supposed to have arrived at the earliest in the 9th century, Homer 
- if there had been such an individual - could not have lived before 
then. 61 This argument, however, was developed before recent 
archaeological discoveries indicating that Phoenicians were present in 
the Aegean from the lOth, if not the late 11th century. This new 
evidence tallies well with the powerful historical case for the the peak of 
Phoenician expansion having been between 1000 and 850 BC.62 
Another reason given for placing Homer in the late 8th or 7th century 
is that the Odyssey is largely set to the west of Greece, and it is argued 
that the Greeks could not have known about the central Mediterranean 
before their colonization of Sicily and Southern Italy at the end of the 
8th century.63 I think that it is in many ways useful to look at this epic as a 
Greek version of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, and that in both 
Egyptian and Greek cosmology the western islands of the sunset were 
associated with the Underworld and astral realms of the dead.64 Even 
without this hypothesis, however, it is clear that there was considerable 
Mycenaean trade to the west in the Bronze Age and that even if Greeks 
were not directly involved, they must have been aware of the Phoenician 
dealings with the West Mediterranean in the I I th, lOth and 9th 
centuries. 
The reasons given for putting Hesiod after Homer are first, that it is 
supposed that Hesiod 
does not belong with the heroic poets ... he is always personal and 
contemporary in his outlook ... Hesiod is wholly part of the Iron Age 
of the present, specifically of the Archaic Greek world of the 8th and 
early 7th centuries BC.65 
It is also argued that as Hesiod's Theogony was clearly based on Near 
Eastern models of a type that was developed only after I 100, these can 
have been introduced into Greece only after 800 BC, when it is alleged 
that a Greek colony was established at AI Mina on the Syrian coast. 66 
Hesiod's Theogony belongs to a general type which can be traced


--- PAGE 60 ---
88 BLACK ATHENA 
throughout the Middle East from the 3rd millennium, and there is little 
reason to doubt that some form or forms of it existed in Mycenaean 
Greece. 67 Nevertheless Hesiod's version does seem to contain pecu­
liarities that can best be explained in terms of the traditions of the turn 
of the I st millennium. 68 On the other hand, the existence of the Greek 
colony at Al Mina is in serious doubt, and it would seem plausible 
that Hesiod and his contemporaries were in touch with these later 
theogonies through Phoenicia from where, after all, Hesiod seems 
to have got his favourite wine.69 
All in all, the grounds for challenging the ancient traditions for the 
dating of Homer and Hesiod seem very weak. It would appear reason­
able to accept as a working hypothesis the Classical and Hellenistic 
consensus that Hesiod predated Homer, that the former flourished in 
the lOth century and the latter around the turn of the 9th. Whatever 
dates they are assigned to, however, there seems no reason to doubt that 
traces of the legends of colonization from Egypt and Phoenicia appear 
in the oldest surviving Greek traditions. 
/' 
THE COLONIZATIONS IN 
GREEK TRAGEDY 
Although there are references to Egyptian and Phoenician settlers in 
other plays of the period, I shall focus here on the drama in which 
settlement on the Greek Mainland is a central theme: Aischylos' The 
Suppliants. The Suppliants is generally considered to be the first play and 
sole survivor of a trilogy or tetralogy. The titles of the missing pieces are 
believed to have been The Egyptians, The Danaids, and a satirical play, 
Amymone, and from The Suppliants and later writings on myth and 
legend, the overall theme of the dramas is clear. 
10, the daughter of King Inachos of Argos, was loved by Zeus. Hera, 
in one of her many fits of jealousy, turned 10 into a cow and tormented 
her with gadflies. 10 fled to many places and finally settled in Egypt, 
where she gave birth to Zeus' child, Epaphos. Epaphos' descendants 
and their spouses included Libya, Poseidon, Belos, King Agenor of 
Tyre - the father of Kadmos and Europa - and the twin brothers 
Danaos and Aigyptos.7o Danaos had fifty daughters and Aigyptos fifty 
,/ 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 
sons. The brothers quarrelled but later there was a mass wedding on the 
night of which, with one exception, Danaos' daughters killed Aigyptos' 
sons. In some way Danaos then acquired the throne of Argos. The 
various versions of the story differ greatly, particularly over which of 
these actions took place in Egypt and which in Argos. 
The Suppliants describes one episode of this story, the arrival in Argos 
of Danaos' daughters as suppliants fleeing from Egypt and the evil 
intentions of the sons of Aigyptos. There they are given the sanctuary of 
Zeus Hikesios 'the Suppliant' by the native king, Pelasgos. A herald 
arrives from Aigyptos and his sons and arrogantly commands that 
Danaos' daughters be handed back. Pelasgos, with stout Hellenic 
patriotism, refuses and the play ends with plans for the settlement of 
Danaos and his daughters with Pe1asgos and his people in Argos. 
The extent to which modern study of this play and trilogy has been 
suffused with politics is not generally realized. German Romantic­
Positivists and later scholars have insisted that this is the earliest extant 
play by Aischylos - or, for that matter, by anyone. This dating has in fact 
been set up as a touchstone of modern Classical scholarship: 
Scholars have hitherto regarded the Supplices [Suppliants] as the 
earliest extant play of Aischylos; if we now consent to put it late it 
makes all attempts to study literature futile. 71 . 
However, a papyrus published in 1952 now indicates strongly that the 
trilogy won a prize in 464-3 Be and that it is therefore the product of the 
tragedian's maturity.n This fits well with the high esteem in which 
the play was held in 5th- and 4th-century Athens. A contemporary 
Classicist, Dr Alan Garvie, has devastatingly shown the hollowness of 
the claims made for its early date on grounds of metre, vocabulary and 
dramatic structure. 73 What then caused the consistent disparagement 
of its 'immaturity'? The most plausible reason is that it was considered 
unworthy of the greatest Greek tragedian in his prime to treat a topic 
that could be understood to suggest that Egyptians had settled in the 
Peloponnese. 
There have been equally persistent attempts to diminish the 
Egyptian aspects of the play, which in later times became so important a 
prop for the Ancient Model. For instance, while 10 is seen as coming


--- PAGE 61 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
from Argos, most sources agree that she was only the distant ancestor of 
Aigyptos and Danaos. Thus the brothers and their children were 
Egyptianized, if not purely Egyptian, and the Danaids are explicidy 
described as 'black,.74 The mainstream of German scholarship, how­
ever, has preferred the one scholiast who can dubiously be construed to 
say that the twins were the children of 10 herself. The same scholiast 
also maintains that the whole action of the trilogy took place in Argos. 
This version has been preferred to all the other sources, some of which 
held that all the events were situated in Egypt, and all of which -
including the lines from the Danais mentioned above - had the Danaids 
arriving from Egypt.75 
Despite these criticisms of Aryanist scholars, there is no doubt that 
Aischylos was full of what can usefully be called Hellenic nationalism 
and wanted to lessen the impact of any invasion. He had lived through 
the height of the Persian Wars. As an Athenian aristocrat he took part in 
the critical Batde of Marathon in 492 BC which checked a major Persian 
invasion. His play The Persians direcdy expressed the xenophobic 
passions of his generation. In The Suppliants they are only thinly 
disguised: 
Sirrah! What dost thou? What manner of arrogance has incited thee 
thus to do dishonour to this realm of Pelasgian men? Think'st thou 
forsooth, 'tis to a realm of women that thou art come? For a 
barbarian that has to do with Hellenes, thou waxest over-proud. 76 
In such a passionately chauvinist atmosphere, it would seem more 
plausible to suppose that Aischylos wanted to diminish rather than 
exaggerate the Egyptian components in the myth cycle. There is 
considerable evidence from the text to support this contention, but to 
demonstrate it I shall have to go ahead of my argument and use 
approaches generally reserved for the second and third volumes of this 
work. 
The elements of any legend can be roughly graded for their historical 
value. The least useful are motifs common to folk tales everywhere, in 
this case such elements as the story of the fifty daughters marrying and 
murdering fifty sons. Other folkloric themes occur elsewhere, but in 
significant places. The Egyptian informants ofDiodoros Sikeliotes told 
/' 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 91 
him that Greeks had transferred the site of lo's origin from Egypt to 
Argos.77 Michael Astour has shown how the story ofIo, Zeus and Hera 
resembles the Semitic one of Hagar in the Bible. The last, whose name 
seems to derive from the Semitic Yhgr (wander), was loved and 
impregnated by Abraham and driven by his jealous wife Sarah into the 
desert. She almost died, but God provided her with rest at an oasis 
where she gave birth to Ishmael, who was half man, half beast. Astour 
also cites a striking passage fromJeremiah, 'A beautiful heifer is Egypt, 
but a gadfly from the north has come upon her', to suggest that the 
prophet's Israelite audience knew the legend. Astour uses both these to 
claim that Semitic influence is present in the legends surrounding 
Danaos'setdement. 78 
However, there seem to be even more indications of the presence of 
Egyptian mythology. For example, in the Suppliants (line 212) Danaos 
invokes 'the bird of Zeus' and the chorus responds by invoking 'the 
saving beams of the sun'. Commentators have been obliged to see the 
striking parallel with the solar hawk of Zeus' Egyptian equivalent 
Amon-Ra, but they try to diminish its significance by calling it 
'Egyptianizing', which gives it the flavour of being somehow late and 
superficial. 79 Elsewhere, there are references to a 'nether' or 'under­
ground' Zeus who welcomes the dead, and to 'another Zeus' who holds 
judgement in the Underworld upon men's misdeeds. These look 
remarkably like the Egyptian trial of the dead by Osiris, and it is not 
surprising that the latter has been paralleled with passages in the 
Odyssey which are widely accepted as being 'Orphic' and ultimately 
Egyptian.8o 
These references are suggestive. The 'hardest' historical evidence to 
be found in legends, however, comes from proper names, and here it is 
necessary to draw on the recent work of the Classicist and literary critic 
Frederic Ahl. Ahl has shown the great sophistication of the Classical 
writers and the need to approach their texts as one would, say, Finnegans 
Wake. His view is that one should avoid imposing - as many Classicists 
have - a 'monist' or single crude meaning to them. In practice, he 
argues, one should look for the dense network of puns, anagrams and 
structural parallels which give the texts muitiple and often contradictory 
meanings or 'readings'. Furthermore, the puns should not be treated


--- PAGE 62 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
lightly but should be considered as revealing deep, if not sacred, 
connections and truths. 8 1 
There is no doubt that The Suppliants rewards such treattnent. Garvie 
refers to 
the use of words whose sound or form suggests one of the motifs, 
though its own meaning may be quite different. At Supplices 117 
~Of)VLV means 'hilly land', but suggests 'land of the cow', [The 
stem bou- means 'cattle'] while 'AJtLuv recalls Apis, the Egyptian 
equivalent of of Epaphus (cf. 262). This is much more than a play on 
words. It springs from the idea that a name is not merely a matter of 
convention, but intimately belongs to the thing it represents. 82 
Garvie then goes on to point out specific parallels between the name 
Epaphos and the stem ephap-, which frequently appears in the play and 
which itself has the two meanings, 'seize' and 'caress'. There is also 
epipnoia, which means both the gentle breathing of Zeus that impreg­
nates 10 and later the storm that threatens the Danaids. 83 Even beyond 
these and Apia(n), another connection to the name Epaphos has been 
suggested by Jean Berard: the name >Ip.py was that of two or three __ 
Hyksos pharaohs and was conventionally rendered in Greek as 
Ap(h)ophis.84 As Astour points out, the difference in v~alization can 
be explained by the fact that Late Egyptian went through a vowel shift 
(J>fJ towards the end of the 2nd millennium. 85 This would suggest that 
the name Epaphos was introduced before that time and weaken the 
argument for late 'Egyptianizing'. 
The place name Apia, which is rarely used outside this play, generally 
means Argos, but it is used elsewhere to cover the whole of the 
Peloponnese. It has plausibly been linked with apios (distant) or apie gaie 
(distant land) in Homer.86 However, this is unlikely to be its origin, and 
Apia has many other associations. It was obvious to the Ancients - and 
since 1911 even modem scholarship has recognized - that the name 
recalls the Apis bull of Egypt and is therefore associated with the cow 10 
and her Egyptian son Epaphos.87 The Apis bull-cult in Memphis dated 
back to the I st Dynasty but its peak of influence was after the 18th, 
and the original Egyptian form of the name is I:!pw.88 I:!p or I:!py 
was the name of one of Horns' sons, prominent in The Book of the Dead, 
[CH.IJ THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 93 
whose special responsibility was guarding the north. 89 Thus he would, 
in Egyptian eyes, be associated with Greece. At first sight it might seem 
too far-fetched to connect him with the Greek Apia; however, in The 
Suppliants there is the passage: 
The ground whereon we stand is Apian land itself, and hath of old 
. borne that name in honour of a leech [doctor]. For Apis, seer and 
leech, the son of Apollo, came from Naupaktos on the farther shore 
and purged well this land of monsters deadly to man, which Earth, 
defiled by the bloody deeds of yore, caused to spring up - plagues 
charged with wrath, a baleful colony of swarming serpents. Of these 
plagues Apis worked a cure by surgery and spells to the content of the 
Argive land ... 90 
It should be pointed out that, in the Egyptian pantheon, I:!py was the 
guardian of the Canopic jar containing the small intestine, and in The 
Book of the Dead one of his major functions in protecting the dead was to 
kill demons in the shape of serpents. 91 Apollo was generally equated 
with I:!py's father, Horus. The intricacy of this parallel makes it 
overwhelmingly plausible. However, unlike the apparently ancient 
origin of the name Epaphos, that of Apis - at least in this context -
seems to have been more recent. The name Apia does not occur in 
Homer and the story of its eponym told above appears only in this 
passage and does not seem to have belonged to a more general tradition. 
Epaphos and Apia are not alone. Most of the names in The Suppliants 
have strong Egyptian connotations, of which I shall give only a few 
examples. Inachos, now generally considered to be the most Argive 
name in the play, is seen as the king of Argos and father of 10. He later 
became Argos' major river, and as such was often contrasted with the 
Egyptian Nile. In the 18th century, however, the attitude was very 
different. The bold and brilliant scholar Nicolas Fn!ret, for example, 
maintained - rather dubiously - on the basis of the Christian Church 
E . I· 92 F' t Father Eusebius, that Inachos was an gypoan co omzer. rere 
argued that the name was a common one in the Middle East, meaning 
'men famous for their strength and bravery', and he cited the biblical 
term <iindq, transcribed Enak or Enach in the Greek of the Septuagint, 
and the Greek anox, anaktos (king).


--- PAGE 63 ---
94 BLACK ATHENA 
The name <amlq is ambiguous. It was used for the rulers of Qiryat 
) Arba <, who seem to have been Hittites, but it generally referred to the 
tall and powerful Philistines, who are widely accepted as having come 
from the Aegean. 93 As the word (w)anakt-appears in Phrygian as well as 
in Greek, (iindq could have been derived from it. Apart from the 
dubiousness of this etymology, there is the problem of the clear 
indication that ~ryat >Arba< was founded in the 17th or 18th century 
BC.94 But if, as I believe, the Philistines were predominantly Greek­
speaking, the former may well be a loan from the latter. 9S 
In any event, Freret was unaware of the Egyptian rootV<nv, which 
very much strengthens his general case. Its basic meaning was 'life', as 
in the famous symbol of the ankh, but it had a wide range of extensions. 
The formula (nb 4.t (may he live for ever) was the standard formula used 
after the names ofliving pharaohs, and this makes a plausible etymology 
for the Greek (w)anax, (w)anaktos (king), which has no known origin in 
Indo-European. 96 Another use of(nb is as 'coffin', which would seem 
to be the etymology for the Greek Anaktoron, the sacred reliquary at 
the centre of the Eleusinian Mysteries. 
More relevant to our present concern is the use of (nb in the phrase -
mw(nb to describe 'living' water. Anaktos is used in the same way and 
specifically in the line from the lost epic the Danais-, 3tota~ofl 
NELAOLO 'i\vax"Co£, 'of the royal/living river Nile'. The Nile was 
renowned for its fertility and life-giving powers. Furthermore, accord­
ing to the mythographer Apollodoros, who probably lived in the 1st 
century AD, the mother of Aigyptos and Danaos, who was the daughter 
of the Nile, was called Anchinoe. The possibility that this derives from 
an Egyptian form fI:(nb nwy (living waters or life of water) is increased by 
the variants of her name as Anchirrhoe or Anchirhoe: rhoi means 
'stream or flow' in Greek. 97 
The existence of such peculiar semantic clusters - in both Egyptian 
and Greek - around royalty, coffins and flowing water would seem to 
lessen the chances of random coincidence very nearly to zero. Also, the 
triple service of Inachos as king, progenitor and river and the frequent 
contrasts given between him and the Nile would suggest intricate 
paranomasia, or punning, in Egyptian and Greek of the type sugges­
ted above with I:Ipw/y - Apis/ Apia. Here, too, despite the use of 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 95 
"A vax"Co£ in the epic, the facts that neither Homer nor Hesiod uses the 
name Inachos and that the latter uses another name for lo's father 
suggests that this Egypto-Greek relation is indeed a later elaboration. 
The name of Inachos' daughter 10 has been derived from the verb 
ienai (to wander), which would neatly correspond to the etymology 
of Hagar from v'hgr (wander).98 There are, however, equally clear 
Egyptian and Semitic etymologies. Modern commentators admit the 
dear punning going on in the play between" Iw '10' 'lwv 'Ionian' 
and "Iov 'violet'. 99 The Egyptian origin of Ionian has been suggested 
above. The double etymology of 10 itself would seem to be firstly from 
the Egyptian i(~ (moon), which in the Bohairic dialect of Coptic is 
rendered ;0f!.100 Furthermore, there were traditions that io was a dialect 
word for 'moon' in Argos. Linked to this - as Ahl points out - are the 
associations between 10 and Isis who, in very late Egyptian religion, was 
associated with the moon. Ahl further indicates the lunar connections, 
with the horns and femininity coalesced in the 'cow,.101 It is here that 
we find the second and, I believe, basic Egyptian etymologies for 10: 
those from t~t (cow) - plural i~w - and lWJ (domestic long-horned 
cattle). 
Among the names of lo's descendants we have considered that of 
Epaphos. Libya - from the Late Egyptian Rb - is, I believe, a form of 
Athena. 102 Many scholars have derived the name of their son Belos 
from the Semitic v'b<l, either in the general sense of'lord' or specifically 
as the god of that name. 103 The name Phoinix is clearly associated with 
Phoenicia. 104 Paradoxically, Agenor King ofTyre is the only member of 
the family to have a Greek name meaning 'manly' or 'bold'. The 
etymology of the name Aigyptos is obvious. Originally I:I(t)-K3-Ptl:t, 
'Temple ofthe Spirit ofPtah', was a name of the Lower Egyptian capital 
of Memphis. By the Late Bronze Age, however, it seems to have been in 
common use for 'Egyptian' throughout the East Mediterranean, and 
the personal name Ai-ku-pi-ti-jo is mentioned in Mycenaean 
Greece. IOS 
The name of Aigyptos' twin and rival Danaos appears as Da-na-jo in 
Linear B, but this presents a much more complicated and fascinating 
problem. No known figure in Egyptian history or mythology has this 
name. It does, however, have a long association with the Aegean,


--- PAGE 64 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
possibly stretching back into the 3rd millenium. 106 Da-na-ne is attested 
in Linear A; T)iruy or ta-na-yu appears as an Egyptian name for Greece 
from the 15th century, and D3-m was in use by the 13th.101 Astour has 
linked the stem to the Semitic root Vdn(n) Oudge), seen in such names 
as Dan> el or Daniel, and he maintains that the Danaans, whose eponym 
was Danaos, were a Semitic-speaking tribe he sees as having arrived in 
Greece in the Late Bronze Age, probably from Cilicia in South- Eastern 
Anatolia.
108 
While I accept that there probably were connections 
between the various peoples called Danil a or T ani! a in the East 
Mediterranean, and I believe that both Cilicia and the Southern 
Aegean were heavily Semitized during most of the Bronze Age, I prefer 
to follow those scholars who maintain that the Dnnym found later in 
Cilicia and the biblical tribe of Dan came from the Aegean, rather than 
the other way around. 109 However, the colonizations with which we are 
concerned came considerably earlier, and all the legends about these 
insist that Danaos was an incomer to Greece. 
The name Dan - is certainly surrounded by dense and old punning in 
Egyptian, West Semitic and Greek. Gardiner points out that by the I I th 
century Be the place name D3-m or Dene was written with th~ 
determinative or pictogram of a bent old man. He associates this with 
the Egyptian [nt, later written tn~ - by this period, d, 1, and t were all 
pronounced in the same way - meaning 'old' and 'tired'. He therefore 
calls it the 'tired land,.110 It is interesting to note, therefore, that 
Danaos' most striking characteristics in The Suppliants and elsewhere 
are his great age and weariness. He was also known as a wise judge and 
legislator who settled the Argolid, and he and his daughters were 
especially renowned for their involvement in irrigation. Thus his name 
could well come from an Egyptian form *dnhv (allocator or irrigator), 
from dn~ (allocate, irrigate), which is clearly related to the Semitic 
Vdn(n) OUdge). It seems to me that the network of punning here is too 
dense to make it possible to distinguish which came first: the Danaan 
people of the Aegean or Danaos, the Egypto-Semitic colonial dis­
tributor of lands, legislator and irrigator. 
If.the conclusions to be drawn from Danaos' name are inevitably 
ambIguous, the legends about his struggle with Aigyptos have been 
seen, at least since the 3rd century Be, to point unequivocally to his 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 97 
having been a Hyksos chieftain driven out by the Egyptian national 
revival of the 18th Dynasty. III In this connection, we should tum to 
the Greek name of The Suppliants, Hiketides. This is clearly linked to 
Hikesios (the Suppliant), the central byname of Zeus, the god who 
dominates the play from beginning to end. 112 The rather strange 
byname or epiclesis Hikesios was occasionally used elsewhere, particu­
larly in Southern Greece, and belongs to a general aspect of the god 
whereby he protected strangers. 113 It is also interesting to note that the 
two plays called Hiketides both refer to Argos, the city later especially 
associated with the Hyksos colonization. 1l4 Hikesios strikingly re­
sembles the Egyptian l:ll9 wst, which in the 3rd century Be was 
rendered into Greek as Hyksos. 
Given the general and pervasive paranomasia or punning in the play 
shown above, it would seem very likely indeed that Aischylos and his 
sources were aware of the double entendre in a play set in a trilogy about 
the struggle between Aigyptos and Danaos, and specifically about the 
arrival of the latter in Argos from Egypt. It would also seem reasonable 
to suppose that 'Hyksos' was the primary meaning and that the idea 
of 'suppliant' derived from it. The widespread attestation of Zeus 
Hikesios, however, would suggest that the pun was an old one, and it is 
very unlikely that it originated with Aischylos. 
There is also little doubt that the portrayal of the arrival as one of 
refugees who were hospitably received by the natives and who then 
mysteriously became rulers was much more satisfying to Hellenic 
nationalism than one of a conquest. It would certainly have helped 
relieve the tension between ancient tradition and national pride. The 
question of whether or not there actually was a Hyksos colonization of 
Argos in the 2nd millennium Be will be discussed in Volume 2. All I 
argue here is that the theme of The Suppliants, and the massive amount 
of Egyptian material in it, demonstrate that Aischylos and his sources, 
which go back at least to the writing of the Danais in the 7th century or 
earlier, believed this to have been the case. 
Lastly, I should add that The Suppliants is not the only tragedy to refer 
to the colonizations: many of those treating Thebes mention Kadmos' 
Phoenician origin. In Euripides' The Phoenician Women, for instance, 
the chorus of Phoenician women come - precisely because Kadmos


--- PAGE 65 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
came from Tyre - to see the downfall of his dynasty. 115 There too the 
evidence points in favour of a general belief in the legends in the 5th 
century BC.1l6 
HERODOTOS 
The most striking manifestation of this belief comes from Herodotos, 
who wrote his great Histories in about 450 BC. His major theme was the 
relationship between Europe - by which he generally meant Greece -
and Asia and Africa. He saw this relationship as one of similarities and 
differences, contacts and conflicts, and he asked many questions on 
these topics during his wide travels in the Persian Empire from 
Babylonia to Egypt, and on its northern and western fringes from 
Epirus and Greece to the Black Sea. 
The quotation at the head of this chapter shows that Herodotos did 
not write any descriptions of the colonizations, because he believed that 
this had been done elsewhere. Equally, however, the passage makes it 
clear that he firmly believed they had actually taken place. The Histories 
are full of references to them: 
The temple of Athena there [Lind os in Rhodes] was founded by the 
daughters of Danaos, who touched at the island during their flight 
from the sons of Aigyptos.1l7 
Kadmos, the son of Agenor, touched at it [Thera] during his search 
for Europa and ... left there a number of Phoenicians. 118 ---
Herodotos was not so much interested in the settlements themselves , 
but in how they had been instrumental in introducing Egyptian and 
Phoenician civilization to Greece: 
I propose to hold my tongue about the mysterious rites of Demeter, 
which the Greeks call Thesmophoria, though ... I may say, for 
instance, that it was the daughters of Danaos who brought this 
ceremony from Egypt and instructed the Pelasgian women in 
it ... 1l9 
The Phoenicians who came with Kadmos ... introduced into 
Greece, after their settlement in the country, a number of 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 99 
accomplishments, of which the most important was writing, an art 
till then, I think, unknown to the Greeks. 120 
Elsewhere he related the introduction of Near Eastern civilization to 
cultural figures dependent on political and military ones. The process 
had continued, however, after the initial colonization: 
Now I have an idea that Melampous ... introduced the name of 
Dionysos into Greece, together with the sacrifice in his honour·and 
the phallic procession. He did not, however, fully comprehend the 
doctrine, or communicate it in its entirety; its more perfect develop­
mentwas the work oflater teachers. Nevertheless it was Melampous 
who introduced the phallic procession, and from Melampous that 
the Greeks learnt the rites that they now perform. Melampous, in my 
view, was an able man who acquired the art of divination and brought 
into Greece, with little change, a number of things which he had 
learned in Egypt, and amongst them the worship of Dionysos ... 
Probably Melampous got his knowledge about Dionysos through 
Kadmos ofTyre and the people who came with him from Phoenicia 
to the country now called Boiotia. The names of nearly all the gods came 
to Greece from Egypt. [my emphasis] I know from the enquiries I have 
made that they came from abroad, and it seems most likely that it was 
from Egypt, for the names of all the gods have been known in Egypt 
from the beginning of time ... These practices, then, and others 
which I shall speak oflater, were borrowed by the Greeks from Egypt 
... In ancient times, as I know from what I was told at Dodona, the 
Pelasgians offered sacrifices of all kinds, and prayed to the gods, but 
without any distinction of name or title - for they had not yet heard of 
any such thing. They called the gods by the Greek word theoi -
'disposers' ... Long afterwards the names of the gods were brought 
into Greece from Egypt and the Pelasgians learnt them ... then as 
time went on, they sent to the oracle at Dodona (the most ancient, 
and at that period, the only oracle in Greece) to ask advice about the 
propriety of adopting names that had come into the country from 
abroad. The oracle replied that they would be right to use them. 
From that time onward, therefore, the Pelasgians used the names of


--- PAGE 66 ---
100 BLACK ATHENA 
the gods in their sacrifices, and from the Pelasgians the names 
passed to Greece. 121 
Moreover, Herodotos did not restrict the introduction of Near East­
ern ideas to the colonists. His description of the Egyptian and 
Libyan origins of the oracle at Dodona in Epirus, based on the 
reports of priestesses there and priests at the Egyptian Thebes, 
was in terms of myths that are not in any way related to Danaos or 
Kadmos.122 
As I have mentioned, Herodotos was accused by Plutarch, in the 2nd 
century AD, of being the 'father of lies' and tends today to be treated 
with indulgent condescension by scholars working within the Aryan 
Model, who are especially scornful of his 'credulity'. However, he did 
not rely entirely on legends when he derived Greek customs from the 
E · IdE' . I 123 ast III genera an gypt III parncu ar: 
I will never admit that the similar ceremonies performed in Greece 
and Egypt are the result of mere coincidence - had that been so, our 
rites would have been more Greek in character and less recent in 
origin. Nor will I allow that the Egyptians ever took over from Greec~ 
either this custom or any other. 124 
Thus Herodotos would seem to have been using reason rather than a 
blind faith in tradition, and the method of competitive plausibility which 
would seem entirely appropriate for such a subject. We are not 
concerned here with the rightness or wrongness of his c()H.clusions, 
however, but merely with the facts that he himself believed in them and 
that he was being relatively conventional in doing so. The latter claim 
would seem to be substantiated by the earlier references to the col­
onizations, and by the acceptance of his ideas on them by the Over­
whelming majority of later Greek writers. Such an acceptance is 
particularly impressive in view of the passionate Greek chauvinism of 
these times, and the Greeks' unease with or dislike of traditions that 
made them culturally inferior to the Egyptians and Phoenicians, who 
were still very much around. It may well have been for this kind of 
reason that Ilerodotos appears to have been on the defensive, not about 
the existence of the colonizations but about the extent of Greek cultural 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 101 
borrowings from Egypt and Phoenicia. It is this unease which leads us to 
the second great Greek historian, Thucydides, who lived from 460 to 
400BC • 
THUCYDIDES 
The early- 19th-century critics made great play of the 'silence' of some 
authorities on the colonizations, and the historian they clearly had in 
mind was Thucydides. The latter's introduction to his history does not 
mention Kadmos or Danaos, although it does mention Pelops' invasion 
of Greece from Anatolia. Thucydides also stated that at one time 
'Carians and Phoenicians inhabited most of the islands', and he 
. ld fi B' 11' 125 referred to the Danaans and to Kadmels as an 0 name or 010 a. 
He also described the Pre-Pelopid kings of Argos as descendants of 
Perseus, whom Herodotos had seen either as a 'genuine Egyptian' or as 
an 'Assyrian,.126 Nevertheless, there is no mention of Kadmos or 
Danaos, or of their invasions. 
Given the frequent references to the colonizations in Herodotos and 
the Tragedies in the decades before he wrote, Thucydides must have 
known the traditions and his omission must be seen as the result of a 
conscious decision. It is extremely unlikely that this was reached 
because he possessed evidence disproving them, for in that case he 
would almost certainly have included it both to bolster his reputation as 
a historian and also because, as will be argued below, the invasions were 
offensive to his historical framework. A more charitable explanation 
would be that as a self-consciously 'critical' historian he was reluctant to 
deal with unverifiable legends. The· force of this argument is weakened, 
however, by his mention of the still more distant myth of Hellen son of 
Deukalion - the survivor of the Flood. 127 
One of the reasons Thucydides has had such an appeal during the 
th h· h' . I . , . , 128 last three centuries is at IS Istonca VIew was progressive. 
According to it, the nearer one came to the present, the greater and 
more effective political organization became. Hence he tended to play 
down Mycenaean achievements and to emphasize that society's in­
stability and the chaos of the succeeding 'Dark Ages'. This, for 
instance, helps to explain his denial that Homer had any sense of the


--- PAGE 67 ---
102 BLACK ATHENA 
Hellenes as a single people. 129 According to him, history built up to the 
unprecedented might of his two protagonists, Athens and Sparta, so 
that his life spanned, and his work described 'The greatest disturbance 
in the history of the Hellenes, affecting also a large part of the 
non-Hellenic world, and indeed I might almost say, the whole of 
mankind.'130 
This quite extraordinary claim was incompatible with the notion that 
the Trojan War had involved the Hellenes as a people. Acceptance of 
the colonizations would have been still more devastating to his historical 
framework. The distances covered, the scale of operations, and the 
massive long-term consequences of the legendary invasions would have 
shown up the essentially trivial nature of the Peloponnesian War, which 
has been made great only by Thucydides' history of it. 
An even more important inhibitory factor than what one might call 
his 'temporal chauvinism' was his nationalism - a word I use deliber­
ately. Thucydides drew a rigid distinction between Hellene and 
'barbarian' and his whole work was a paean to the uniqueness of Greek 
achievements, even the destructive ones. Thus the idea that the 
Egyptians, whom Athenians could now conquer, or Phoenicians, who 
formed the most terrible arm of Persian military power - its fleet _ 
should have played a central role in the formation of Greek culture was 
clearly disturbing to Thucydides' contemporaries. 
Such an attitude would explain why Thucydides, the 'critical his­
torian' who rejected legends, was able to mention Hellen, a purely 
national figure, but not civilizing foreigners like Danaos, Kadm'os or the 
Egyptian Kekrops. (Whether or not the desire to remove offensive 
legends can give impetus to the critical approach itself will be discussed 
in Chapters IV and VI.) This kind of 'nationalism' would seem to be 
typical in the aftermath of the Persian Wars of the early 5th century and 
the subsequent expansion of Greek power: from this time on, one finds 
varying degrees of hatred of and contempt for 'barbarians' among most 
Greeks. In such an atmosphere one would expect Greek writers, if 
anything, to play down the legends of cultural indebtedness to the Near 
East. Hence it would be easier to understand, for example, why any 
suggestions ofKekrops' Egyptian connections should be replaced by a 
view of him as autochthonous, or why Thucydides should omit the 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 103 
legends altogether, than why Greeks should invent 'new' stories of 
foreign colonization and civilization. 
ISOKRATES AND PLATO 
In the early 4th century, the outstanding spokesman for Panhellenism 
and Greek cultural pride was the Athenian orator Isokrates. In a famous 
panegyric given at the Olympian festival of 380 Be he called on Spartans 
and Athenians to drop their differences and join in a Panhellenic union 
against Persia and the barbarians. With a new degree of cultural 
security he proclaimed: 
And so far has our city [Athens] distanced the rest of mankind in 
thought and in speech that her pupils have become the teachers of 
the rest of the world. She has brought it about that the name 
'Hellenes' suggests no longer a race but an intelligence, and that the 
title 'Hellenes' is applied rather to those who share our culture than 
to those who share a common blood. 131 
The arrogance of this statement is surprising when one considers that 
many cultured Greeks, including Eudoxos, the greatest mathematician 
and astronomer of the 4th century, still felt obliged to study in Egypt. 132 
Not surprisingly, Isokrates was concerned about the colonizations: 
In former times any barbarians who were in misfortune presumed to 
be rulers over the Greek cities [for example] Danaos, an exile from 
Egypt, occupied Argos; Kadmos from Sidon became king of 
Thebes ... 133 
It is important to note that despite Isokrates' clear dislike of the 
invasions, he did not question their historicity. However, he had a still 
greater ambivalence on the issue. He wrote an extremely flattering 
picture of Egypt in his Bousiris. At one level this speech was merely a 
rhetorical tour de force, the defence of a mythical king chiefly known for 
his practice of killing foreigners. Nevertheless, to be convincing, the 
speech had to appeal to conventional wisdom, and it clearly had very 
serious aspects. The land of Egypt and its people were portrayed in it as 
the most blessed in the world, but above all the piece was a eulogy to


--- PAGE 68 ---
104 BLACK ATHENA 
Bousiris as a mythical lawgiver and to the perfection of the constitution 
he had devised for Egypt.134 
Isokrates admired the caste system, the rulership of the philosophers, 
and the rigour of the Egyptian philosopher/priests' paideia (education) 
that produced the an" theoretikos (contemplative man), who used his 
superior wisdom for the good of his state. 135 The division of labour 
allowed a 'leisure', scholt, which allowed for schole, 'learning'. Above all, 
he insisted that philosophia (philosophy) was, and could only have been, 
a product of Egypt.136 This word seems to have been used by the 
Egyptianizing Pythagoreans for some time - possibly since the 6th 
century - but one of its earliest extant uses comes from Bousiris. 137 
There is in fact no logical inconsistency between this deeply respect­
ful attitude towards Egypt and Isokrates' passionate xenophobia. He 
did not deny the colonization, which at least since Herodotos had been 
associated with the implantation of Egyptian religion in Greece. Fur­
thermore, his paean to the cultural triumph of Athens and Greece 
referred only to the present. It made no claims on the past. Neverthe­
less, there does seem to be a contrast in the two positions. At 
a superficial level it can be explained by the fact that the 'barbarians' 
with whom Isokrates was most concerned were the Persians and the 
Phoenicians, the latter because they formed much of the basis of the 
P~rsian fleet and because his patron, the tyrant Evagoras, had seized his 
territory Salamis in Cyprus from Phoenicians. Furthermore, around 
390 Be when Bousiris was written, a three-way alliance against Persia 
was made among Evagoras, Achoris, Pharaoh of Egypt, and Athens. 138 
I believe, however, that the two paints of view can be int/grated at a 
much more fundamental level, as pa\r.t~ of Isokrates' attempt to unite 
Athens and Sparta against Persia. There is no doubt that Athenians at 
the end of the Peloponnesian War, at the tum of the 4th century, were 
fascinated by the constitution of Sparta, whic4"~d been so successful 
10\, .. 
an enemy. This has led scholars like the great 19th-century German 
Classicist Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, working within the Aryan Model, 
to postulate the existence of a *' Lakedaimonian Politics which had 
inspired Isokrates to write his Bousiris, and to argue that it was because 
Herodotos had claimed that the Spartans owed their institutions to 
Egypt that Isokrates had made Bousiris his ideal. 139 The modern 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 105 
French scholar Charles Froidefond contests this on the grounds that 
Bousiris looks nothing like the Lakedaimonian Politics written by 
Xenophon because Isokrates specified that the Spartans had borrowed 
only partially from Egypt, and because the military aspects of Spartan 
society which most impressed his generation were attributed to 
Lykourgos. It was only much later, in the 2nd century AD, that Plutarch 
claimed that Lykourgos had been an imitator of Egypt. 140 
I agree with Froidefond that there is no need to postulate a *' Lake­
daimonian Politics. On the other hand, we know that 'Post-War' 
Athenians were concerned with the secrets of Spartan success. 
Furthermore, scholars working within the Ancient Model have no 
doubt that the stories about Spartan, and specifically Lykourgan, 
institutional borrowings from Egypt were current at the tum of the 4th 
century because they were true. That is to say, the tradition is confirmed 
not merely by the nature of certain aspects of Spartan society but by the 
strong Egyptian influences on Spartan Archaic art and the many 
plausible Late Egyptian etymologies for the names of specifically 
S ... 141 partan Institutions. 
Isokrates insisted that the Spartans had failed to apply the Egyptian 
principle of the division of labour and that their constitution fell short 
of the perfection of the Egyptian model, about which he wrote: 
'philosophers who undertake to discuss such topics and have won the 
greatest reputation prefer above all others the Egyptian form of 
,142 government ... 
To whom was Isokrates referring? Froidefond plausibly postulates 
that it was to the Pythagoreans, and ~hat Isokrates was drawing from 
th . f. I .. 'E· P I·· ,143 I elf concept 0 , or even an actua wntIng on, gyptIan 0 ltICS . t 
takes the greatest Aryanist ingenuity to deny the strong ancient tra­
ditions - referred to by Herodotos and given in detail by later writers -
that there was such a person as Pythagoras and that his school was 
established on the basis of his long studies in Egypt. Nevertheless, it has 
been attempted. l44 In any event, Isokrates was quite explicit about it: 
'On a visit to Egypt he [Pythagoras] became a student of the religion of 
the people, and was the first to bring to the Greeks all philosophy.,145 
Another less likely possibility is that by 'philosophers' Isokrates 
meant his great rival Plato and his Republic. 146 It is generally thought


--- PAGE 69 ---
106 BLACK ATHENA 
that the latter was written between 380 and 370 BC, that is after Bousiris, 
c·390 . It is also believed that the work was the result of many years of 
thought and teaching, and that there were possibly earlier drafts.147 
The likelihood is, however, that priority should be given to Bousiris. 
Nevertheless, there are striking similarities between it and Plato's 
Republic. In the latter, too, there was a division oflabour based on castes 
ruled by enlightened Guardians produced by careful selection and 
rigorous education. Plato was sharply hostile to the turbulence of 
democratic politics in Athens, and this kind of model was clearly 
comforting. 
To what extent can it be related to Egypt? Apart from the resem­
blance to the explicitly Egyptian Bousiris we know that Egypt, where 
Plato had spent some time, probably around 390 BC, was a central 
concern of his later works.I48 In Phaidros, Plato had Sokrates declare 
that 'He [Theuth- Thoth the Egyptian god of wisdom] it was who 
invented numbers and arithmetic and geometry ... and most important 
of all letters ... ' 149 
In Philebos and Epinomis Plato went into more detail on Thoth as the 
creator of writing, even oflanguage and all sciences. ISO Elsewhere Plato 
praised Egyptian art and music and argued for their adoption in 
Greece. ISI Indeed, the only reason for doubting that his Republic was 
based on Egypt is the fact that he does not say so in the text. This 
omission, however, has an ancient explanation. As his earliest com­
mentator, Krantor, wrote within a few generations of Plato: 
Plato's contemporaries mocked him, saying that he was not the 
inventor of his republic, but that he had copied Egyptian institutions. 
He attached so much importance to the mockers that he attributed to 
the Egyptians the story of the Athenians and the Atlantines to make 
them say that the Athenians had really lived under this regime at a 
certain moment in the past.IS2 
Faced with all this evidence in favour of an Egyptian derivation, early 
modem scholars still associated Plato's Republic with Egypt. As Marx 
put it: 'Plato's RepUblic, in so far as division oflabour is treated in it, as 
the formative principle of the state, is merely an Athenian idealization of 
the Egyptian system of castes.,IS3 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 107 
Popper, who hates Plato, would have loved to tar him with an 
Egyptian brush. However, he was writing in a more systematically 
Aryanist age and, though fully aware of Krantor's charge, he has 
confined it to the footnotes and appears puzzled by Marx's remark. IS4 
Some scholars favourable to Plato have forcefully denounced the idea 
that he favoured an Egyptian type of caste system. The majority simply 
omit any mention of Egypt in connection with the Republic. ISS 
In his dialogues, Timaios and Kritias, Plato referred to the wonders of 
the lost civilization of Atlantis and to its fiery collapse. It will be argued 
in Volume 2 that this refers to the volcanic destruction of Thera in 1626 
BC and that the Atlanteans are an amalgam of northern peoples, the 
Hyksos who invaded Egypt in the middle of the 2nd millennium, and 
the 'Peoples of the Sea' who attacked it at the end of that millennium. 
What concerns us here, however, is Plato's perception of the historic 
relationships between Greece and Egypt. 
As has been mentioned in the Introduction, there was a widespread 
but only late-attested tradition that Athens had been founded by 
Kekrops, the Egyptian from the city of Sais on the Western Delta. 
There was also a recognition that Neit, the goddess of that city, was the 
same as Athena. IS6 In the famous passage on the myth of Atlantis, Plato 
attributed to Kritias the story that when the great Athenian lawgiver 
Solon went to Sais in the early 6th century, when it was capital of Egypt, 
he was treated as a kinsman because of the special relationship felt by 
Saitians for Athenians. He was even granted an interview with senior 
Egyptian priests, one of whom, having condemned Solon with the 
famous words '0 Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children. There 
is no such thing as an old Greek', went on to tell Solon that Athena had 
founded Athens before Sais, rather than the other way round. IS7 He 
explained that the reason for the Athenians' lack of knowledge about 
this and the general Greek ignorance about their own past was that 
Greek culture had been periodically destroyed by disasters of fire and 
water, leaving no memory of Athens' former glory. In Egypt, however, 
thanks to her favoured position, institutions had been preserved. IS8 
Thus, for Plato, if one wanted to return to the ancient Athenian 
institutions one had to tum·· to Egypt. In this way he resembled 
Isokrates, who both called for a Panhellenic combination of Athens and


--- PAGE 70 ---
108 BLACK ATHENA 
Sparta and extolled the Egyptian constitution that was a purer version of 
the Lakedaimonian one. The deeper they went towards the true Hellenic 
roots of Greece, the closer they came to Egypt. One reason for this was that 
both Isokrates and Plato maintained that the great lawgivers and 
philosophers like Lykourgos, Solon and Pythagoras had all brought 
back Egyptian knowledge. Furthermore, Isokrates and Plato both 
believed in the colonizations of Pelops, Kadmos, Aigyptos and Danaos 
and seem to have accepted with Herodotos that the 'barbarians' 
brought important cultural baggage with them. 159 Even on the issue of 
the foundation of Athens, Plato was within the Ancient Model to the 
extent that he accepted that there was a 'genetic' cultural relationship 
between it and Sais. Thus, despite their ambivalence if not hostility to 
the ideas, the two leading intellectual figures of the early 4th century BC 
were forced to admit the critical importance of foreign colonization, 
and massive later cultural borrowing from Egypt and the Levant, 
in the formation of the Hellenic civilization they both loved so 
passionately. 
ARISTOTLE 
Aristotle was not only the pupil of Plato, he also studied at the Academy 
under Eudoxos of Knidos, the great mathematician and astronomer 
who is reported to have spent sixteen months in Egypt shaving his head 
in order to study with priests there. 160 Aristotle was also heavily 
influenced by Herodotos on Egypt, and was clearly fascinated by 
the country. Although at times he stressed the gr~t antiquity of 
Mesopotamian and Iranian civilization, his considered opinion seems 
to have been that the Egyptians were the most ancient people. 161 
Aristotle was equally contradictory on the issue of diffusionism. At 
times he stated his belief in independent invention by different cultures, 
but at others he argued that the Egyptians had created the caste system 
and hence 'Egypt was the cradle of mathematics because the caste of 
priests were given great leisure, schole.,162 According to him, the priests 
had invented the mathematikai technai (mathematical arts), which in­
cluded geometry, arithmetic and astronomy, which the Greeks were 
beginning to possess.163 In fact his admiration for Egypt went beyond 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 109 
that of Herodotos in one respect. Where Herodotos believed that the 
Egyptians had developed geometry, the key science, for practical 
reasons - to measure land after landmarks had been washed away 
by the Nile Flood - Aristotle maintained that it had been developed 
theoretically by the priests. 164 
THEORIES OF COLONIZATION 
AND LATER BORROWING IN THE 
HELLENISTIC WORLD 
Amongst many other things Aristotle was, of course, the tutor of 
Alexander the Great. 165 With the extraordinary Macedonian conquest 
of the Persian Empire in the 330S BC, there was a great surge of Greek 
interest in all Oriental civilizations, and especially in that of Egypt. 
It was in the years immediately after the conquest that the Egyptian 
priest Manetho wrote a history of Egypt in Greek in which he set 
out the scheme of 33 dynasties which remains the basis of the his­
toriography of Ancient Egypt.166 It was also at about this time that 
Hekataios of Abdera set out his view that the traditions of the 
Egyptian expulsion of the Hyksos, the Israelite Exodus and that of 
Danaos' landing in Argos were three parallel versions of the same 
story: 
The natives of the land surmised that unless they removed the 
foreigners their troubles would never be resolved. At once, there­
fore, the aliens were driven from the country and the most outstand­
ing and active among them banded together and, as some say, were 
cast ashore in Greece and certain other regions; their teachers were 
notable men, among them being Danaos and Kadmos. But the 
greater number were driven into what is now called Judaea, which is 
not far from Egypt and at that time was utterly uninhabited. The 
colony was headed by a man called Moses.167 
It seems to have been on this basis - and the belief expressed by 
Herodotos that the ancestry of the Spartan kings went up to the Hyksos 
colonists - that, sometime around 300 BC, Areios King of Sparta wrote 
to Jerusalem beginning:


--- PAGE 71 ---
110 BLACK ATHENA 
To Onias High Priest, greeting. A document has come to light which 
shows that the Spartans andJews are kinsmen descended alike from 
Abraham. 168 
References to the Egypto-Phoenician colonizations in the Hellenistic 
period are too frequent to be given in full here. Debates were not on the 
existence of the landings but on their specifics: the nationality of the 
leaders, their points of departure or their dates. 169 
The tension between Greek cultural pride and respect for the 
ancient civilizations seems to have become even more intense with 
Alexander's extraordinary conquests before 330 Be. This can be seen, 
for instance, in the reactions to Zeno of Kition, the Phoenician 
who founded Stoicism at the tum of the 3rd century Be. He was 
mocked by his rivals as a 'little Phoenician', yet as a pupil wrote of 
him: 
With much toil thou didst found a great new school, 
Chaste parent of unfearing liberty, 
And if thy native country was Phoenicia, 
What need to slight thee? Came not Kadmos thence, 
Who gave to Greece her books and art of writing? 170 
Diodoros Sikeliotes, writing in the I st century Be, expressed the same 
confusion, if not schizophrenia, on the issue of the 'barbarians' who 
civilized Greece near the beginning of his massive flbrary of History 
when he wrote: 
The first peoples which we shall discuss will be the barbarians, not 
that we consider them to be earlier than the Greeks, as Ephoros has 
said, but because we wish to set forth most of the facts about them at 
the outset, in order that we may not, by beginning with the various 
accounts given by the Greeks, have to interpolate in the different 
narrations of their early history any event connected with another 
people. 171 
In Volume V of his work Diodoros cited the Rhodian historian Zeno 
who maintained that Greeks - or the mysterious Heliadai from Rhodes 
- had brought culture to the Egyptians but a great flood had wiped out 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY III 
all memory of it, just as the Athenians had forgotten that Athens was 
senior to Sais: 
And it was because of reasons such as these that many generations 
later men supposed that Kadmos, the son of Agenor, had been the 
first to bring the letters from Phoenicia to Greece. 172 
Presumably still following Zeno, Diodoros went on to detail how both 
Danaos and Kadmos had left traces on Rhodes while on their way to 
colonize Greece. 173 Like Plato's belief in the priority of Athens over 
Sais, Zeno's scheme is an inverted form of the Ancient Model rather 
than one within the Aryan Model. There is no mention of an invasion 
from north of Greece and the scheme still maintains a 'genetic' 
relationship between Greek and Egypto-Phoenician culture and civi­
lization. The view that Greece civilized Egypt has been too much even 
for the most ardent Aryanists. Diodoros' modem translator, Professor 
Oldfather, notes at this point: 
Book I, passim, presents the claims put forward by the Egyptians for 
the priority of their civilization; the counterclaims of the Greeks here 
set forth are empty boasting. 174-
The main thrust ofDiodoros' work is his beliefin Egypt and, to a lesser 
extent, other Eastern civilizations as the fount of world civilization: 
And since Egypt is the country where mythology places the origin of 
the gods, where the earliest observations of the stars are said to have 
been made, and where, furthermore, many noteworthy deeds of 
great men are recorded, we shall begin our history with the events 
connected with Egypt. 175 
Not only did Diodoros frequently refer to the colonizations of Thebes 
and Argos by Kadmos and Danaos but he devoted considerable space, 
near the beginning of his work, to Saitian claims that Kekrops and other 
early Athenian kings had been Egyptians, and their plausible arguments 
for a special relationship between Athens and Egypt. 176 
This colonization was not generally accepted in Hellenistic and 
Roman times, but belief in the colonizations of the Western Pelo­
ponnese and Thebes seems to have been universal. Pausanias'


--- PAGE 72 ---
112 BLACK ATHENA 
Guide to Greece, written in the 2nd century AD, is full of references to 
them: 
The people ofTroizen [in the Argolid] ... say the first human being 
to exist in their country was Oros, which looks to me like an Egyptian 
name, certainly not a Greek one. 177 
There is another road out of Lema right down by the sea to what they 
call the Birthplace; by the sea is a little sanctuary of Poseidon of the 
Birth. Next to this are the landings, where they say Danaos and his 
sons first landed in the Argolid.178 
The linking of the legendary landings with birth is fascinating, as is the 
fact that Poseidon was the chief god of the Mycenaeans and Seth _ 
whom I see as his Egyptian counterpart - was the chief god of the 
Hyksos:179 
In my opinion the Nauplians were Egyptians at an earlier period who 
arrived in the Argolid with Danaos' fleet and were settled three 
generations later by Amymone's son Nauplios in Nauplia. 180 
When Kadmos marched in [to the Thebaid] with a Phoenician army 
and they [the Hyantes and the Aones] lost a battle, the Hyantes ran 
away the very next night, but the Aones made a ritual supplication so 
that Kadmos let them stay and intermarry with his Phoenicians. 181 
The relation of the names Hyantes and the Aonesto the name Ionian 
and the Egyptian >/wn (tywJ (barbarian) has been discussed above (see 
p. 83)·182 There is no doubt, then, that Pausanias was convinced of the 
actuality of the colonizations and believed that there were still many 
direct signs of them in his time, the 2nd century AD. I 
PLUTARCH'S ATTACK 
ON HERODOTOS 
The 2nd century AD also saw the closest to what one might call an attack 
on the Ancient Model. It came in a long essay by the prolific writer 
Plutarch, entitled 'On the Malice of Hemdotos', in which he levelled 
----------
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 113 
many charges against Herodotos, one of which was that of being 
'philobarbarous' : 
He says that the Greeks learnt about processions and national 
festivals from the Egyptians as well as the worship of the twelve gods; 
the very name ofDionysos, he says, was learnt from the Egyptians by 
Melampous, and he taught the rest of the Greeks; and the mysteries 
and secret rituals connected with Demeter were brought from Egypt 
by the daughters of Danaos ... Nor is this the worst. He traces the 
ancestry of Herakles to Perseus and says Perseus, according to the 
Persian account, was an Assyrian; 'and the chiefs of the Dorians' he 
says, 'would be established as pure-blooded Egyptians ... '; not only 
is he anxious to establish an Egyptian and a Phoenician Herakles; he 
says that our own Herakles was born after the other two, and he 
wants to remove him from Greece and make a foreigner out of him. 
Yet of the learned men of old neither Homer nor Hesiod ... ever 
mentioned an Egyptian or a Phoenician Herakles, but all of them 
knew only one, our own Herakles who is both Boiotian and 
Ar . 183 gIve ... 
Plutarch clearly believed that his audience would be outraged by 
Herodotos' ideas on these subjects, but it is interesting to note that he 
cites only ancient authority on the question ofHerakles and that he does 
not confront the colonizations of Danaos and Kadmos directly. Given 
the deep knowledge and appreciation of Egyptian religion expressed in 
his On Isis and Osiris, and above all his conviction ofits essential identity 
with Greek religion, there is also serious doubt as to whether Plutarch 
himself disbelieved Herodotos' claims for the foreign origins of so 
much of Greek culture. It would seem more likely that Plutarch's 
assault on Herodotos' 'barbarophilia' was merely a tool to be used in 
his general attack upon him. It is also fascinating to note that none 
of the modem detractors of the Ancient Model relied on this 
essay. One reason for this, as two of his translators have written, is 
that 
While this essay has offended lovers of Herodotos, it has also 
disturbed admirers of Plutarch, who have found it hard to believe


--- PAGE 73 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
that so kindly and good-natured an author could himself write with 
such fierce malice and thus lay himself open to charges similar to 
those he levels against Herodotos. 184 
More importantly, the modern scholars have been eager to rely on 
'ancient' sources rather than 'late' ones, by which they - living in the 
19th or 20th century AD - mean authors writing after the 5th century Be. 
This preference is influenced by - if not based on - the fact that in Late 
Classical and Hellenistic Greece the overwhelming weight of testimony 
is in favour both of the colonizations and of Greek religion having 
derived from the Egyptian. Before coming to this, however, we should 
consider the impact of Egyptian religion on Greece in Hellenistic and 
Roman times. 
THE TRIUMPH OF 
EGYPTIAN RELIGION 
The movement among Greeks and other Mediterranean peoples to 
worship the gods under their Egyptian names began well before 
Alexander's conquests and the syncretism of Hellenistic times. Early in 
the 5th century Be the poet Pindar wrote a Hymn to Ammon, which 
opened 'Ammon King ofOlympos'. This cult of the Libyan variant of 
the Egyptian Amon was attached to Pindar's native town of Thebes. 185 
However, it was also strong in Sparta, and Pausanias wrote about the 
" sanctuary of Ammon in Aphytis in Sparta: 
The Lakonians seem to have used the Libyan oracle more than 
anyone else in Greece since the beginning. Ammon is not more 
honoured by the Libyan Ammonians than he is at A~hytis. 186 
It is impossible to say what Pausanias meant by 'since the beginning'. In 
any event, it must have been before the end of the 5th century that the 
brother of the great Spartan general Lysander was called Libys because 
the family had a traditional relationship with the basileis (kings or 
priests) of the Ammonians, and Lysander himself consulted the 
oracle. 187 By the 4th century Am(m)on was being worshipped in 
Athens, and one of its sacred triremes was dedicated to him. 188 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY lIS 
ALEXANDER SON OF AMMON 
Alexander the Great clearly considered himself to be a son of Ammon. 
After his conquest of Egypt he set out into the desert to consult the 
god's great oracle at the Libyan oasis of Siwa. The oracle told Alex­
ander that he was the god's son, which explains why from then on 
Alexander's coins portrayed him as a horned Ammon. 189 Modern 
historians describe as slanders many reports that in the last year of his 
life Alexander dressed himself and demanded worship in the guise of a 
number of gods and goddesses and that' Alexander even desired people 
to bow to the earth before him, from the idea that Ammon was his father 
rather than Philip.,190 
Who, then, was the son of Ammon? According to early Egyptian 
tradition, Osiris was the son ofRa. With the rise of the cult of Amon in 
the 12th Dynasty the two came together as Amon -Ra. By the late New 
Kingdom there was seen to be a mystic union between Ra and Osiris. 191 
Thus the thorough confusion between Ammon and Dionysos found 
in Diodoros Sikeliotes or his source from the 2nd century Be, 
the Alexandrian Dionysios Skytobrachion, would seem to have prece­
dents in Egyptian theology}92 In any event Alexander appears to 
have seen himself as this syncretic divinity, both Ammon and his 
son. 
There is no doubt that the actual conquests of Alexander increased 
the importance of the myths of the vast eastern civilizing expedition of 
Dionysos or - as Diodoros named him - of Osiris, traces of which can 
be found in Egyptian tradition from the 18th Dynasty or even the 
Middle Kingdom. 193 Even in Greece, asJames Frazer pointed out, the 
scheme had been outlined by Euripides before Alexander was born. 194 
Alexander's relationship with Dionysos was strained and he felt some 
competition with him, at least after his conquests. 195 When he reached 
Nysa in the mountains of North-West India and was told by the 
inhabitants of its association with the god, it is reported that 
he was very ready to believe the tale about the journeys ofDionysos; 
he was also ready to credit that Nysa was founded by Dionysos, in 
which case he had already reached the point which Dionysos had 
reached, and would go even further than Dionysos.196


--- PAGE 74 ---
1I6 BLACK ATHENA 
There are also unreliable reports of his travelling through India 'in 
mimicry of the Bacchic revelry ofDionysos'. 197 There is no doubt about 
the political and cultic attention he attached to his many long drinking 
bouts, and the civilizing mission of OsirislDionysos provides a crucial 
background for Alexander's own activities along these lines. Thus his 
identification as the son of Ammon, parallel to and rival of Dionysos, 
was central to his life project. Aryanist historians have preferred to 
dwell on his reading ofXenophon and his identification and rivalry with 
Achilles, and there is no doubt that these were significant factors 
in his decision to invade Asia. But they were less important than his 
essentially Egyptian religious mission. The fact that his body was buried 
in Egypt rather than in Greece or Persia cannot simply be attributed to 
the ruthlessness of his general Ptolemy, who succeeded him as ruler of 
Egypt. It shows the centrality of that country to Alexander's life and 
self-image. 198 
Ptolemy and his successors, right up to the Kleopatra of Caesar and 
Antony, made great use of Egyptian religion both to gain the respect and 
affection of their Egyptian subjects and to give them cultural power 
when dealing with the other states that arose from the fragments of 
Alexander's empire. 199 Nevertheless, this is not enough to explain the 
huge expansion of Egyptian religion during this period, in what has 
been called 'the conquest of the Occident by Oriental Religion'. 200 
The Egyptian mother goddess Isis, for in§tance, had been worship­
ped in Athens since the 5th century, not merely by resident Egyptians 
but by native Athenians. 201 By the 2nd century BC there was a temple of 
Isis near the Akropolis and Athens was officially encouraging its 
dependencies to take up Egyptian cults.202 Even on Delos, especially 
sanctified to Apollo, cults of Isis and Anubis were made official in a 
move that was in no way connected to the Ptolemaic }(jngdom which had 
lost control of the island by that time. 203 Indeed, by the 2nd century AD 
Pausanias, who made no mention of other Oriental cults, reported 
Egyptian temples or shrines in Athens, Corinth, Thebes and many 
places in the Argolid, Messenia, Achaia and Phokis. 204 
It should be stressed that Greece had experienced only part of a wave 
that had spread throughout the Roman Empire. 2os For instance, the 
most important shrines discovered at Pompeii from 79 AD - when it was 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 1I7 
overwhelmed by the eruption of Vesuvius - were 'Egyptian'. Tiberius 
had banished Egyptian - and Jewish - religion from Rome itself. But 
the cults were soon restored and later emperors, particularly Domitian 
and Hadrian, were passionately devoted to the Egyptian gods.206 The 
latter even tried to tum his favourite Antinoos into an Egyptian god, and 
in many ways his extraordinary pleasure garden at Tivoli, east of Rome, 
• c. I c. hi d" I 207 is best seen as an EgyptIan lunerary comp ex lor s Ivme over. 
Marcus Aurelius, Septimius Severus, Caracalla, Diocletian and other 
emperors visited Egypt and all reports emphasized how respectful they 
were towards Egyptian religion and culture. 208 Whatever their personal 
feelings, such an attitude would seem to have been politically necessary 
given the central role of Egyptian religion throughout the Empire. 
Such enthusiasm provoked a backlash. The modem Dutch scholars 
Smelik and Hemelrijk, who have tried valiantly to scrape up instances of 
Greek hostility to Egyptian culture, have a rather easier time when it 
comes to Rome. The weak point in the Egyptian armour was the 
worship of animals. Cicero, for instance, found this strange 'in that 
most uncorrupted nation of the Egyptians which preserves written 
records of events of very many ages,.209 The later satirists Juvenal and 
Lucian were unrestrained in their attacks on this zoolatry, and on Egypt 
as a whole. 2IO 
Most writers believed this worship to be symbolic and allegorical, a 
view laid out most clearly by Plutarch in On Isis and Osiris. This work is 
recognized even by scholars working in the Aryan Model as the single 
most important source on Egyptian religion; furthermore, its inter­
pretations have increasingly been confirmed with the advance of 
Egyptology.211 
Plutarch spelled out in detail the general image of Egyptian religion 
that appears to have been common among cultivated Greeks, at least 
since the 4th century BC. According to this, the zoolatry and apparent 
superstition of Egyptian religion were merely an allegorical veneer for 
the masses: the priests, and! or those who had been initiated, knew that 
in reality the zoolatry and fantastic myths concealed deep abstractions 
and a profound understanding of the universe. In On Isis and Osiris, 
Egypt's religious philosophy was principally concerned not with the 
ephemeral, material world of'becoming' with its growth and decay, but


--- PAGE 75 ---
118 BLACK ATHENA 
with the immortal realm of 'being' which was especially manifested in 
numbers, geometry and astronomy. 
All this, of course, strikingly resembled the ideas of Plato, the 
Pythagoreans and Orphics, not only in content but often in the form of 
words used to describe them. 19th-and 20th -century scholars have 
therefore seen Plutarch's work as a prime example of what is called 
interpretatio Graeca, which has been well described as follows: 
The Greek obsenrer was not usually in a position to understand 
Egyptian religion from the inside; an initial obstacle was his ignor­
ance of Egyptian. Sometimes an equation or an explanation was 
based on a misunderstanding of an Egyptian phenomenon, or on a 
modification introduced on a Greek parallel. Each deviation, 
whether radical or slight, contributed to a remove from the true 
picture. 2IZ 
A major modern scholar has devoted a whole book to this Greek 
'mirage' of Egypt.213 This interpretatio Germanica or axiom - that 
Egyptian religion and philosophy were necessarily crude and shallow -
has difficulties with such superbly intelligent men as Eudoxos who, 
according to all reports, lived with the priests and learnt Egyptian, and 
clearly had a great respect and enthusiasm for Egyptian culture. The 
fundamental weaknesses of the modern scheme, however, are its lack of 
self-consciousness and the positivist sense of Besserwissen, 'knowing 
better' than the Ancients. This is true even of the beloved Greeks, who 
were superior in every aspect of their culture except their writing of 
ancient history and their understanding of Greece's relationships with 
other cultures. 
ForPlutarch's contemporaries and later thinker~ within the Ancient 
Model, the striking similarities between Plutarch's description of 
Egyptian religion and philosophy and those of Plato and the Pythagor­
eans provided no difficulty whatever. They were simply the result of 
the fact that - as everyone knew - Plato, Pythagoras and Orpheus had 
taken their ideas from Egypt. Moreover, Plutarch also maintained 
that there were more fundamental links between Egyptian and 
Greek religion. On Isis and Osiris was dedicated to Klea, to whom he 
wrote: 
[CH. I] THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 
That Osiris is identical with Dionysos who could more fittingly know 
than yourself, Klea? For you are the head of the inspired maidens 
[devotees of Dionysos ] of Delphi, and have been consecrated by your 
father and mother in the holy rites of Osiris. 
He went on to give details of cultic similarities between Egyptian and 
Delphic cults.214 Altogether, Plutarch identified Dionysos with Osiris 
three times in this work.2IS Although he was not as explicit on the 
identity of Isis and Demeter, there is no doubt that he was equally 
certain about it. There are, for instance, many detailed parallels 
between his descriptions of Isis' troubles in Byblos and those portrayed 
in Eleusis in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter. This is frequently used by 
Aryanistscholars as a clear example of Plutarch's interpretatio Graeca.216 
It may be so in this case. I would argue, however, that it is probable 
that the mystery cult at Eleusis, to which the Hymn is clearly linked, 
originated from Egypt, as the Ancients believed.217 Even ifitwere not, 
there is archaeological evidence to show that Isis was identified with 
Demeter at Eleusis by the 9th ecentury - that is, before the conventional 
dating of the Hymn.2IB In any event, there is absolutely no reason to 
doubt that Plutarch saw the two as manifestations of the same divinity. 
All in all, it is clear that Plutarch believed both that much of Greek 
philosophy had been introduced from Egypt and that there was a 
fundamental unity between Egyptian and Greek religion. He further 
maintained that the former was purer and older. 
This view of Egyptian religion played a central role in the two major 
'novels' of the 2nd century AD, Heliodoros' Aithiopika and Apuleius' 
Metamorphoses or The Golden Ass. In his morally elevating and roman­
tic story with a beautiful and virtuous Ethiopian - but not black -
heroine, Heliodoros expressed great admiration for the Ethiopians 
and their gymnosophists (naked philosophers or gurus), but Aithiopika 
is focused on Egypt and the moral superiority of its religion. It also 
stresses the passionate interest taken in it by Greek priests, who saw it 
as the key to their own cults. When talking about the priests of Delphi 
bombarding a visiting Egyptian with questions, the author wrote: 
In short, they forgot none of the interesting features of Egypt, for 
there is no country in the world which Greeks prefer to hear about. 219


--- PAGE 76 ---
120 BLACK ATHENA 
Apuleius' The Golden Ass , by contrast, is a satire, but at its serious centre 
are Egyptian mysteries and the figures of Isis, the mistress of disguises 
and transformations, and Osiris/Dionysos behind her. At the book's 
climax the goddess announces to the hero: 
Thus the Phrygians, earliest of all races, call me Pessinuntia, mother 
of all gods. Thus the Athenians, sprung from their own soil, call 
me Cecropeian Minerva and the sea-tossed Cyprians call me 
Paphian Venus, the archer Cretans Diana, Dictynna, and the tri­
lingual Sicilians Proserpine; to the Eleusinians I am Ceres, the 
ancient godess, to others Juno, to others Bellona and Hecate and 
Rhamnusia. But the Ethiopians, who are illumined by the first rays of 
the sun-god as he is born every day, together with the Africans and 
Egyptians, who excel through having the original doctrine, honour me 
with my distinctive rites and give me my true name of Queen Isis.22o 
The belief that Egyptian religion and rites were the original and 'true' 
ones made the Greek and other local forms redundant, and this 
explains the massive turning away from the latter. As the Neo-Platonist 
philosopher lamblichos wrote at the end of the pagan period in the 4th 
century AD: 
Rather think that as the Egyptians were the first of men to be allotted 
the participation of the gods, the go~s when invoked rejoice in 
Egyptian rites. 221 
The repetition and frequent quotation in this chapter comes from the 
need I feel to hammer home the conventionality in Antiquity of a picture 
that is very unconventional in modern Classical studies. The unfam­
iliarity of this approach itself underscores the fact that proponents of the 
Aryan Model are unable to quote extensively to back their case. All I 
claim in this chapter is that after the 5th century BC - the only period 
from which we have any substantial knowledge of them - the Ancient 
Greeks, though proud of themselves and their recent accomplishments, 
did not see their political institutions, science, philosophy or religion as 
original. Instead they derived them - through the early colonization and 
later study by Greeks abroad - from the East in general and Egypt in 
particular. 
CHAPTER II 
EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND 
GREEK TRANSMISSION FROM THE 
DARK AGES TO THE RENAISSANCE 
I
N THIS CHAPTER I am concerned with the survival of Ancient Egypt 
after the fall of its high civilization. In the first place we find the 
survival of Egyptian religion both within Christianity and outside it 
in heretical sects like those of the Gnostics, and in the Hermetic 
tradition that was frankly pagan. Far more widespread than these direct 
continuations, however, was the general admiration for Ancient Egypt 
among the educated elite. Egypt, though subordinated to the Christian 
and biblical traditions on issues 'of religion and morality, was clearly 
placed as the source of all 'Gentile' or secular wisdom. Thus no one 
before 1600 seriously questioned either the belief that Greek civiliz­
ation and philosophy derived from Egypt, or that the chief ways in which 
they had been transmitted were through Egyptian colonizations of 
Greece and later Greek study in Egypt. 
THE MURDER OF HYPATIA 
In 390 AD the temple of Serapis and the adjacent great library of 
Alexandria were destroyed by a Christian mob; twenty-five years later, 
the brilliant and beautiful philosopher and mathematician Hypatia was 
gruesomely murdered in the same city by a gang of monks instigated by


--- PAGE 77 ---
II/ 
I 122 BLACK ATHENA 
St Cyril. These two acts of violence mark the end of Egypto-Paganism 
and the beginning of the Christian Dark Ages. 1 
It is hardly surprising that scholars working within the Aryan Model 
prefer to neglect the Christian factor and see these events as represent­
ing a resurgence of Egyptian Oriental fanaticism against Hellenistic 
rationalism. 2 But, if one disregards the absurd implication that Euro­
peans cannot be fanatical, these two explanations - that the fanatical 
mob was both Christian and Egyptian - are not mutually exclusive. By 
the 4th century AD, Egypt was a passionately - if not the most 
passionately - Christian province in the Roman Empire. 
THE COLLAPSE OF 
EGYPTO- PAGAN RELIGION 
What had happened? Egyptian religion had collapsed with remarkable 
speed between 130 and 230 AD. Why did the heartland of paganism 
convert to Christianity earlier and more fervently than all the other 
Roman provinces? This is linked to the larger problem: why did the 
whole of the pagan world convert to Christianity? For Christian 
historians this event is a non-problem: naturally, when the Egyptians or 
any other people saw the light of 'true religion', they left their idolatrous 
paganism. For historians without this prior commitment, the phe­
nomenon is less easy to explain. 
At a broader level it can be argued that with the anomia and the 
breakdown of traditional local structures in the Hellenistic and Roman 
empires there was a natural tendency towards monotheism, a heavenly 
reflection of terrestrial world empires. This would be demonstrated 
first by the enormous expansion of Judaism - largely through pros­
elytizing - throughout the Mediterranean\after 300 BC. Indeed, by the 
middle of the 1 st century AD Jews formed between 5 and 10 per cent of 
the population of the Roman Empire. 3 In 116-17, however, there was 
a huge revolt in the Diaspora, far greater than the better-known ones of 
the Zealots and Bar Kokhba inJudaea of 66-70 and 132-5. 
The Diaspora revolt was followed by a genocidal repression in 
Cyprus, Cyrene and, above all, Alexandria which completely destroyed 
the brilliant culture of Hellenized Jewry.4 Even before that, although 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 123 
Jews formed a considerable proportion of the population of Egypt, 
Judaism was too foreign to absorb Egyptian culture. Like the Indians 
and Chinese in 19th- and 20th-century colonial empires, or the later 
Jews in Eastern Europe, the Egyptian Jews were middlemen between 
the ruling Greeks and the Egyptian people. And, in all these cases, it 
suited the rulers very well to maintain tension between the natives and 
the allogenes, the foreign middle class. Thus for the rest of the 2nd 
century and beyond, the elimination of the Jews meant that Christianity 
- which in any event was more loosely tied to a particular people - had 
no serious rival as a proselytizing religion. 
It would seem plausible to suppose that Egyptian religion collapsed 
along with the pharaonic state and Egyptian nationality. This argu­
ment has some force, but it also has some problems. Egypt had been 
ruled by foreigners for most of the time since 700 BC; some, like the 
Ethiopians and the Ptolemaic Greeks, had ruled their whole empires 
from Egypt, but the Persians were like the Romans in considering 
Egypt as a - rather special- province. Most rulers considered good 
relations with Egyptian religion essential to their control of the coun­
try. It is true that the Persians did at times persecute Egyptian reli­
gion, but on the whole they too worked with it. 5 The very favourable 
attitude of their Macedonian successors has been described in Chap­
ter I: Egyptian religion flourished and expanded throughout this pe­
riod, apparently reaching a peak in the first half of the 2nd century AD. 
This historical pattern makes its subsequent collapse seem all the 
more remarkable. For, if foreign persecution had been the crucial 
factor, the collapse would have been more likely in the 6th or 4th 
century BC, under the Persians, than in the 2nd century AD when 
Egyptian religion was basking under Roman imperial favour. 
The Ptolemies in Egypt, rather like the Mongols and Manchus in 
China, were - while posing as its champions - very conscious of the 
dangers of absorption by the native civilization. They were determined 
to preserve their own culture and rule through Greeks. Kleopatra VII, 
the queen of Antony and Caesar, was the first - and last - of the dynasty 
to learn Egyptian. Thus although the Egyptian priests objectively 
collaborated with the new foreign rulers, as they had with the earlier 
ones, they tried personally to stay aloof and to some extent continued to


--- PAGE 78 ---
124 BLACK ATHENA 
represent Egyptian 'nationalism'. By the 2nd century AD, however, after 
400 years of Greek rule, the Roman rulers and the Macedonian and 
Egyptian upper classes - including the priesthoods - had fused in 
a common Hellenic civilization with Egyptian religion. The very 
enthusiasm of the Roman emperors for Egyptian religion and its 
'internationalization' seems to have weakened the priests' positions as 
champions of Egypt. 
There is no doubt that by th~ 3rd and 4th centuries AD there was a 
definite class basis to hostility to the old religion and that, as elsewhere, 
the Christians initially represented the poor and then the middle classes 
against the rich. It is therefore possible that - despite the well­
publicized austerity of the priests' lifestyle - the huge wealth of the 
temples and the priesthood's exploitation of the poor caused 
resentment. 6 Thus after the 2nd century, despite the fact that 
Christianity came from Palestine and was consciously international, 
it came to represent the poor and middle-class Egyptians against the 
cosmopolitan Hellenized upper classes with their Egyptian pagan 
religion. 
CHRISTIANITY, STARS AND FISH 
There is little doubt that these social and national factors played a major 
part in the destruction of organized Egyptian religion. But they seem to 
have been slowly-growing, long-term tensions or flaws rather than 
acute problems, and two new features were present in the 2nd century. 
First - as conventional wisdom rightly maintains - there was the 
availability of Christianity, monotheist and universal in a way that 
Judaism could never quite be, and with an exceptional enthusiasm and 
capacity for organization. Secondly, there was the general belief that 
the old world was coming to an enf and that a new age was about to 
begin. 
Messianism or millenarianism is the belief in the imminent arrival of 
a new order or millennium of harmony and justice when the Messiah 
and the saints 'go marching in'. It is a frequent response to distress of all 
sorts, but especially to military conquest and economic and cultural 
domination by foreigners. Indeed, the idea that some outside force will 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 125 
sweep down and overthrow the present illegitimate rulers so that 'the 
first shall be last and the last shall be first' has been fundamental to 
Judaism, at least since the captivity in Babylon in the 6th century BC. It is 
clear, however, that this feeling intensified after about 50 BC and was 
very prominent for the next 200 years; furthermore, the sense of 
apocalypse was not restricted to Jews. The crisis can be partially 
explained by a number of political and economic changes. There were 
the unprecedented success of the Romans in uniting the Mediterra­
nean, the savage ,civil wars between the Roman warlords; and finally, in 
3 I BC, the establishment of the Roman Empire - often portrayed as a 
new age - under Augustus. 
For the Jews, there was the additional factor of the change in Roman 
policy from friendship with them as allies against their common enemy 
the Greek Seleukids, who ruled most of South- West Asia; to neutrality, 
to preserve the balance of power; to hostility, once the Hellenistic 
kingdoms had been crushed and the whole Empire was turned into a 
Roman-Greek condominium. Messianism had long been central to 
Jewish tradition. The first Messiah in the Bible was Cyrus, the king of 
Persia who released the Jews - at least those who wanted to leave - from 
Exile in Babylon.7 Jewish Messianism seems to have retained the 
hope that deliverance would come from the East and in particu­
lar from the Parthians, the new rulers of Persia who also ruled 
Mesopotamia, with its large Jewish population, and who like the 
Jews had also fought a war of independence against the Seleukids. 
There is also little doubt that the risings of 1 15 and I 16, which 
were clearly seen by their participants in Messianic terms, were 
connected to the Emperor Trajan's major attack on Parthia in those 
years. 8 
I should reiterate, however, that the Messianism between 50 BC and 
ISO AD, and the idea that a new age was dawning, were not restricted to 
Jews, nor can they be completely explained in terms of the Roman 
political changes mentioned above. Another element was the astrol­
ogical change from the age of Aries to that of Pisces. Without getting 
into the argument over when and by whom the precession of the 
equinoxes was discovered, there is no disagreement that it was widely 
known by 50 BC.9 The significance in this context is that over the period


--- PAGE 79 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
between 50 BC and 150 AD the spring equinox shifted from Aries to 
Pisces.'*' 
It is only in this concatenation of political, economic, social and 
astrological changes that one can understand the Roman poet Virgil's 
Fourth Eclogue, written in 40 BC, which states near its beginning: 
Now ... the great line of centuries begins anew ... Only do thou, 
sweet Lucina, smile on the birth of a child, under whom the iron 
brood shall first cease, and a golden race spring up throughout the 
world! Thine own Apollo is now king! 
Virgil goes on to greet the child's father, Pollio, who has become 
Consul, as bringing in 'a glorious age'; but history will repeat itself and 
there will be a new War of Troy and other great historical events. 10 With 
modern discomfort at what would seem to be a prefiguration of the 
advent of Christ, most Classicists have used their monist approach to 
claim that these are simply poetic conceits around the birth of a friend's 
child. It would seem much more plausible to suppose that the poet - as a 
poet - employed several different levels of meaning: the birth of Pollio's 
child; the beginning of a peaceful age under his and Pollio's patron, 
Augustus. The words also seem to indicate the coming of a new young 
divinity. They certainly refer to a cosmic or astral change of age, which 
can only be the new age of Pisces. 
Stars are often associated with great and Messianic leaders, from 
Cyrus, who founded the Persian Empire in the 6th century BC, to the 
Chinese rebel leader of the 8th century AD, An Lushan. II It is 
particularly striking to note how often stars appear in association with 
major leaders during the period of crisis from 50 BC to 150 AD; from the 
comet seen as representing the spirit of Julius Caesar to the star of 
Bethlehem and that associated with Hadrian's new god Antinoos; while 
/ 
,. The precession is the result of a wobble in the rotation of the solar system which 
results in the points fixed by that system changing in relation to the stars beyond. In the 
measure most commonly used, the spring equinox appears 'earlier' and 'earlier' in terms 
of signs of the zodiac. It is because the equinox shifts from one zodiacal 'house' to the 
one preceding it approximately every 2,100 years that astrologers are now telling us to 
prepare for the age of Aquarius a century or two hence, when the spring equinox will 
occur in that 'house'.) 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 127 
the last Messianic leader of Jewish resistance was known - at least by 
his friends - as Bar Kokhba, 'son of a star'. Indeed, the aged Rabbi 
Akiba, the cautious and sane founder of modern Judaism who had 
lived through and accommodated himself to the catastrophic defeat 
and the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD, was so swept away by Bar 
Kokhba's initial successes that he saw it as the new age and quoted 
Numbers 24: 17 - 'a star hath trodden forth from Jacob'Y 
From Plutarch's On Isis and Osiris, we know the extreme importance 
attached to astronomical movements as signs of the ideal world of the 
stars and geoinetry and the integral relation seen, at least in late 
Egyptian religion, between the stars and the gods. We also know that 
astronomers in Hellenistic Egypt were concerned with the precession. 
During the 2nd century AD the impact of the precession would seem to 
have been redoubled by an extraordinary astronomical coincidence. 13 
To explain: Ancient Egypt had a number of sophisticated calendrical 
systems. Its two most commonly used 'years' were one based on a civil 
calendar of 365 days, and the 'Sothic year' tied to the rising of the star 
Sirius, which was seen to presage the beginning of the Nile Flood. 14 As 
the astronomical year is a little under 365.25 days, the civil year advanced 
beyond it at a rate of approximately a day every four years. The two 
coincided only every 1460 years, and such a coincidence was noted for 
139 AD! Thus the Egyptian priesthoods, who were closely tied to the 
stars, were given a double message of the end of an epoch. 
In 130 AD the Emperor Hadrian and his young lover Antinoos had 
long consultations with the priests ofThoth, the divinity of wisdom and 
measurement, at his chief cult site of Hermopolis. Soon after that, 
Antinoos was found drowned in the Nile; a major Egyptian tradition 
O " h' 15 saw sins as avmg drowned. The whole affair was meant to be - and 
remains - a mystery. However, the consensus today is that it was a 
voluntary sacrifice, made to avert some sort of catastrophe. 16 It is certain 
that Hadrian immediately proclaimed Antinoos to be a new Osiris and 
the cult that he promoted had a success which, though short-lived, 
seems to have gone beyond its imperial patronage. 
Whether or not Antinoos was meant to be the new saviour for the new 
age can only be a matter for speculation. There is no doubt, however, 
that the Christians saw their new Osiris, Jesus, in this way. There were,


--- PAGE 80 ---
12B BLACK ATHENA 
of course, many other traditional aspects of Christ, but at this point 
I should like to raise a new sacred image, that of the fish. Fish were 
not prominent in either the Egyptian or the Jewish religious traditions. 
In Egypt, certain fish were associated with certain gods, and in some 
Egyptian 'nomes' or districts particular species of fish were worshipped 
and considered taboo. Furthermore in late times, legends arose that fish 
had eaten Osiris' phallus and the word bwt (fish), written as such, could 
mean 'abomination'. Nevertheless, fish cannot be considered in any 
way central to Egyptian religion. 17 
Apart from the dubious case of the Philistine god Dagon, fish ap­
pear to have had no religious connotations in the Old Testament. 18 In 
the New, by contrast, they playa prominent role. Key disciples were 
fishermen, and fishing images abound. There is the miracle of the two 
fishes and the five loaves of bread. Even more strikingly, in the Gospel 
according to St John, Christ gave his disciples fish in a symbolic last 
meal.19 This theme, and the idea that fish were central to the Last 
Supper, were standard in early Christian iconography.lo In the sense 
of transubstantiation, Christ was not merely bread or grain like Osiris, 
he was a fish or - as was equally often represented - two fishes. As 
Tertullian, the brilliant early Christian thinker, wrote around the year 
200: 'We little fishes, after the image of our 'IX8v~, [Ichthys, the 
Greek word for 'fish'] are born in the water.'ll 
This belief explains the use of the symbol of the fish to represent 
Christ and the Christians. The latter is often attributed to the acrostic 
on 'IXei)~ of'.blooi)~ ~QLO'tO~ ~EOi) !!to~ oW'ttlQ (Jesus Christ, Son of 
God, Saviour). However, the symbol of the fish is attested, if anything, 
earlier than the spelling of the word, and it would seem more likely that 
the acrostic was an explanation of the symbol rather than the other way 
round. Interestingly, Christian representations of the fish first appear at 
the beginning of the 2nd century in Alexandria. All in all, there is very 
little doubt that despite the equally strong ram-lamb Arien symbolism 
surroundingJesus, the use of a fish - or, more specifically, two fishes, as 
in the sign of the zodiac - shows that the early Christians saw 
themselves, and were seen by others, as followers of the new religion of 
the new Piscean age. 
Let me recapitulate - in the 2nd century AD, in addition to the 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 129 
long-term social, economic and national pressures on Egyptian re­
ligion, the extraordinary coincidence of the change from Aries to Pisces 
and the completion of the cycle of the Sothic and civil years created a 
powerful self-destructive force at its astronomical heart. Furthermore, 
not only did Egyptian religion contain a deep cyclical sense but it was 
centred on the concepts of birth, death and rebirth. It even included the 
possibility that although the gods were long-lived, they were not 
necessarily immortal. As Professor Hornung writes: 
We can therefore assume that the possibility of a time without the 
gods was much more firmly grounded in the Egyptians' awareness 
than the few clear allusions to it would suggest. A phrase such as m 
4.rw nlrw 'in the realm of the gods', in the senses of 'so long as the 
gods are there' is found in Graeco-Roman temple texts ... otherwise 
eschatology is . . . the domain of magical spells.22 
It is in this context that one must read the Lament found in one of the 
Hermetic Texts: 
There will come a time when it will be seen that in vain have the 
Egyptians honoured the divinity with pious mind and with assiduous 
service. All their holy worship will become inefficacious. The gods 
leaving the earth will go back to heaven; they will abandon Egypt; this 
land, once the home of religion, will be widowed of its gods and left 
destitute. Strangers will fill this country, and not only will there no 
longer be care for religious observances but, a yet more painful thing, 
it will be laid down under so-called laws, under pain of punishments, 
that all must abstain from acts of piety or cult towards the gods ... 
The Scythian or the Indian, or some other such barbarous 
neighbour, will establish himself in Egypt. 
However, as in many biblical prophecies and apocalypses, the 'malice' 
of the enemies of true religion would be destroyed by 
the Lord and Father ... and by the demiurge of the One God ... 
either by effacing it in a deluge or by consuming it by fire, or by 
destroying it by pestilential maladies ... Then he will bring back the 
world to its first beauty ... That is what the rebirth of the world will 
/


--- PAGE 81 ---
130 BLACK ATHENA 
be: a renewal of all good things and most solemn restoration of 
Nature herself ... 23 
This concept of periodicity, of birth and death followed by rebirth, left 
an opening for the would-be restorers of Egyptian religion in the 
Renaissance and the Enlightenment. In the meantime, however, we 
must consider its metamorphosed survival in late Antiquity and under 
Early Christianity. In a general sense the passionate religiosity of the 
people and the subtle philosophy and theology of the priests attributed 
by Greek writers to the Egyptians continued in Early Christian times. 
Furthermore, at the level of church organization and doctrine, all 
Christianity - not just that of Egypt - was deeply permeated by Egyptian 
religion. 
THE RELICS OF EGYPTIAN 
RELIGION: HERMETICISM, 
NEo- PLATONISM AND GNOSTICISM 
Apart from mentioning the striking parallels between Jesus and Osiris 
and the Mesopotamian Tamuz, deities of vegetation who are killed, 
mourned for and triumphantly resurrected, I will not go into the 
fascinating subject of specific survivals of Egyptian and Mesopotamian 
religion in Christianity, as it leads us too far from the topic of this 
book.24 Here, we are interested in the remains of institutional Egyptian 
religion and their survival on the fringes of orthodox Christianity. 
Egypt from 150 to 450 AD was undergoing a period of great political 
and religious uncertainty and diversity. Furthermore, the groups we are 
concerned with tended to believe that divinity could be reached 
individually or in esoteric sects, for which a rigorous and mystical 
initiation was necessary. One of the key elements of this was fearsome 
oaths of secrecy. These groups also tended to be hostile to explicit 
writings or 'publication', believing that true wisdom could be imparted 
only directly by the teacher to the disciple, in isolation and over a long 
period. They were convinced that it was difficult to describe 'the 
ineffable' in words, let alone in writing, and they insisted on the 
importance of mystery. It is extraordinarily difficult to describe them 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 131 
and, even if it were possible, it would be a fundamental betrayal of their 
thought to make it comprehensible - nevertheless, it is necessary to 
outline some general patterns. 25 
Late Antiquity was obsessed with the number three: this can be seen 
in Hermes Trismegistos and the Christian Trinity.26 Among the groups 
with which we are concerned - the Hermeticists, the Neo-Platonists 
and the Gnostics - there were trinities of two basic types. The first, to 
which the Christian form belongs, had a father god, a son who was the 
activating intellect of the father, and a third force mediating between 
the twO.27 A second, more common variant was based on the notion of a 
'hidden god', behind the demiurge or creator worshipped by the Jews, 
Christians and others. The two gods were seen either as distinct or 
mystically united: the Hidden God, 'the Good' or the First Principle of 
Platonic thought, was the pure thought, as opposed to the creator's 
action. The third member of the trinity was the most variable - being 
seen as the 'world soul', the 'mind of god', etc., or even the animated 
matter of the world or universe - but its essential function was the 
dialectical one of both mediating between the other members of the 
trinity and keeping them distinct. 
Paradoxically, the fact that the first god was hidden and ineffable was 
used to justify idolatry. As man could grasp only the finite, and the 
Hidden God was infinite, it could be only partially perceived. As the 
2nd-century Sophist Maximus ofTyre wrote: 
God ... greater than time and eternity and all the flow of being, is 
unnamable by any lawgiver, unutterable by any voice, not to be seen 
by any eye. But we, being unable to apprehend His essence, use the 
help of sounds and names and pictures, of beaten gold and ivory and 
silver, of plants and rivers, mountain tops and torrents, yearning for 
the knowledge of Him. 
He continued - in a spirit that can, parenthetically, be directly traced 
forward to John Locke - to use this as an argument for religious 
toleration: 
Let men know what is divine, let them know; that is all. If a Greek is 
stirred to the remembrance of God by the art of Pheidias, an


--- PAGE 82 ---
13 2 BLACK ATHENA 
Egyptian by paying worship to animals, another man by a river, 
another by fire - I have no anger for their divergences; only let them 
know, let them love, let them remember. 28 
Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism and Gnosticism were 'twofold' philos­
ophies, with superstition for the masses and true knowledge or gnosis for 
the elite. Gnosis, however, 'was not primarily rational knowledge ... we 
could translate it as "insight", for gnosis involves the intuitive process of 
knowing oneself. ,29 
Through education and moral and religious exercises the en­
lightened few could approach the Good, the First Cause, that was 
hidden to the masses who saw nothing beyond the demiurge. The 
introspection and elitism were connected to another feature that was 
completely foreign to orthodox Judaism and Christianity - the belief in 
the actual, or at least potential, divinity of man. My own view is that this 
comes from the Egyptian belief that the dead pharaoh became Osiris. In 
Late Egyptian religion this belief was 'democratized' so that with 
dedication, good instruction and knowledge of the right procedures 
every person had the potential to be Osiris and to become an immortal. 
At a deeper and more vague level, however, I believe this can be traced 
to a distinction between the transcendent shepherd god of the pastoral 
Israelites and the sense of Pantheism and immanent divinity among the 
agricultural Egyptians. In the latter God can be in everything, including 
man. 
The idea that man can become God leads easily from religion, in 
which the worshipper prays for help, guidance etc., into magic, where 
he can command such things. As the Neo-Platonist Plotinos said: 'The 
Gods must come to me, not I to them. ,30 This pattern of thought goes 
beyond equality with God, to pow~r over him - even to the extent of 
man making GOd.31 
To return now to the stars. Stars played a central role in all these 
'power trips'. Although there were a number of different astronomical 
models, the most influential was that set out by the astronomer Ptolemy, 
who lived in Egypt in the 2nd century AD, just at the point of transition 
from the old religion to the new cults. According to Ptolemy the sun, the 
moon, the planets and the 'fixed' stars circled round the earth on their 
t 
I -
I 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 133 
own spheres. Thus in order to reach the ideal realm one had to tran­
scend them. Hermeticism and Neo- Platonism also contained the very 
Egyptian and non-Christian notions of the pre-existence of souls and 
metempsychosis, or the transmigration of souls from one body to the 
next. This process involved passing beyond the spheres, and the new 
forms were to some extent moulded by the conjunctions of stars and 
planets at the point of birth. 32 • 
In her splendid political treatment of the GnostIcs, the contemporary 
scholar Elaine Pagels is sympathetic to them as champions of freedom 
and opponents of the rigidity, hierarchy and repression of the orthodox 
Church. Where the Gnostics had many teachers, texts and gospels, and 
challenged church authority, the orthodox Church was controlled by 
the bishops, restricted to approved teachings, and allowed only the four 
canonical Gospels. Pagels, however, makes less of the fact that the 
Gnostics seem to have been generally richer than the Orthodox, and 
that although in principle gnosis was available to everybody, the study 
needed for it required wealth and leisure. 33 In this context Father 
F estugiere, who dominated Hermetic and Gnostic studies between 
1930 and 1980, has distinguished between what he calls hennetisme 
savant and hennetisme populaire, by which he was contrasting the 
philosophy of the Hermetic Texts, on the one hand, with the magic and 
occult sciences associated with Hermeticism, on the other. However, as 
other scholars have pointed out, 'astrology, alchemy and magic are 
d th r ,34-arcane disciplines and the practice of them was reserve to e e lte. 
The extreme example of this was the great Neo- Platonist philosopher 
and mathematician Hypatia, who could hardly have been more upper­
class and elitist. At the theological level, too, the 'twofold philosophy' 
of the Gnostics - and the Neo-Platonists and Hermeticists - is 
inherently unequal. Despite its hierarchy, manipulation of authority 
and repression, the orthodox Church maintained one faith for all 
believers. 
The three schools' lack of formal organization and the necessary 
individualism of a system of beliefs that emphasized introspection 
would seem perfectly adapted for the situation after the collapse of 
institutional Egyptian religion. However, Egyptian polytheistic religion 
never had the organizational or theological unity of the monotheisms


--- PAGE 83 ---
134 BLACK ATHENA 
that succeeded it. Furthermore, there are indications that at least a 
'proto- Hermeticism' existed well before the 2nd century AD. 
To resume the argument so far. The three schools of thought that 
emerged from the debris of Egyptian religion were Hermeticism, 
Neo-Platonism and Gnosticism. The Hermeticists remained defiantly 
Egyptian, the Neo-Platonists were more Hellenized and focused their 
devotion on the 'divine Plato', while the Gnostics saw themselves as 
Christians. There was, of course, diversity and rivalry - sometimes 
intense - both among and within the three schools. Nevertheless, not 
only did they resemble each other in form but their practitioners 
associated with each other and read each other's works.35 
HERMETICISM - GREEK, IRANIAN, 
CHALDAEAN OR EGYPTIAN? 
There is little doubt that Hermeticism was the earliest of the three and 
had a critical influence on the formation of the other two movements.36 
In addition, everyone agrees that Hermeticism contained Greek, 
Judaic, Persian, Mesopotamian and Egyptian influences. But because 
there is heated controversy on the relative extent and depth of these 
influences, it is necessary to consider the issue in the light of the 
sociology of knowledge before examining what I see as the mainly 
Egyptian roots of Hermeticism. The question of its relationship to 
Ancient Egyptian thought is, of course, highly political. As Bloomfield, 
a historian ofliterature and art, wrote in 1952: 'Scholarship has veered 
from one extreme to the other on this question of the Egyptian elements 
of Hermeticism. ,37 Related to this is the question of its age. The 
contemporary expert on Hermeticism, A. G. Blanco, writes: 'those who 
support the view that the [Hermetic] "Corpus" is of Egyptian origin are 
also those who tend to push back the dates of the documents. >38 
In this debate the two key figures have been Reitzenstein and 
Festugiere. Reitzenstein wrote voluminously on Hermeticism at the 
tum of the century and initially argued that it was Egyptian in inspira­
tion. However, as the century - and the Extreme Aryan Model _ 
progressed, he changed his views until by 1927 he was arguing that it 
was essentially Iranian, hence Aryan.39 From the 1930S until quite 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 135 
recently the field has been dominated by Father Festugiere, who 
'concentrated almost entirely on the Greek influences to the Hennetica', 
and opposed the notion of any connection with an Egyptian mystery 
cult. 40 
On the face of it, it would seem reasonable to grant considerable 
Egyptian influence on a tradition whose literature was written by 
Egyptians, probably in Demotic or Coptic, in Egypt before the collapse 
of organized Egyptian religion.41 Furthermore, while ancient sources 
referred to Iranian-Zoroastrian and Chaldaean-Mesopotamian 
influences, no one in the Roman period challenged the idea that 
Hermeticism was essentially what it purported to be - Egyptian. 
I want to stress that there is a great deal at stake here. It is not merely 
that Hermeticism is integrally connected to Gnosticism and Neo­
Platonism but that, as Father Festugiere has shown, it is closely related 
to Platonism as a whole. There is also a strong resemblance between 
Hermeticism, the theology of the Gospel of St John, and some of St 
Paul's letters!Z The generally admitted closeness of these connections 
makes both the date and the 'Egyptianness' of the Hermetic Texts of 
critical importance. If the Texts antedate Christianity, and are pre­
dominantly Egyptian, another possible origin for what have generally 
been considered to be the Greek, Platonic elements of Christian 
theology would open up. It would also be very difficult to explain away 
Plutarch's 'Platonic' and 'Pythagorean' picture of Egyptian religion as a 
delusion caused by Egyptomania or interpretatio Graeca. If the texts were 
shown to be older still, it would be very hard to deny the ancient view 
that Plato and Pythagoras took their ideas from Egypt. 
Most modem scholarship on the dating of the Hermetic Texts still 
works in a framework established by the great French Protestant textual 
critic Isaac Casaubon in the early 17th century. Casaubon attacked the 
prevailing view of his time that the Texts were an extremely ancient 
repository of Egyptian wisdom. Using techniques for dating Latin texts 
developed at the tum of the 16th century, he argued that the theological 
similarities between the Hermetic Corpus and Saints John and Paul, 
and the close relation between Hermetic hymns and Psalms, clearly 
meant that Holy Writ predated the Hermetic Texts. In the same way, 
the resemblances to Plato - especially to what was then Plato's most


--- PAGE 84 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
widely read work, the Timaios - must be the result of borrowing from 
the latter; in any event, Casaubon pointed out, there was no mention of 
Hermes Trismegistos in Plato, Aristotle or the other ancient writers. 43 
Modern scholars working in the Aryan Model rather than the 
Christian framework of Casaubon have made only minor adjustments 
to his scheme. First, they have no problem in deriving New Testament 
theology from Platonic thought and, to a lesser extent, they are prepared 
to admit early Iranian or even Indian influences on Hermeticism. In this 
way, the Aryan Model allows scholars to raise the date of the Hermetic 
Texts to the 3rd century BC, that is, any time after Plato. For instance, as 
Festugiere put it: 
These allusions [to the cult of Thoth] do not permit us to conclude 
that the temples of Egypt under the pharaohs possessed in their 
archives a collection of works attributed to the god Thoth. Exactly 
the opposite, it seems that since the Ptolemies there was a Greek 
Hermetic literature. 44 
Others have not even availed themselves of this opportunity, preferring 
to date the Texts alongside the Gnostic and Neo-Platonic works in the 
2nd and 3rd centuries AD. 
Nevertheless many have, in fact, explored the possibility that the 
Hermetic tradition dates back to the 3rd century BC. The German 
historian Kroll argued in the I920S that the society described in 
Hermetic Texts, supposedly dating from the 2nd century AD, was that 
of Hellenistic, not Roman Egypt and was definitely one in which the 
temples were fully functioning.45 Kroll's view was supported in the 
1930S by the great historian of Iranian Mithraism and late pagan 
religion Franz Cumont, in the light of editing newly discovered astro­
logical Hermetic Texts. In addition to backing Kroll, Cumont indi­
cated that astronomical indications from astrological texts pointed to 
the 3rd century BC, but he also went beyond this to claim: 
The first Graeco-Egyptian astrologists did not invent the discipline 
they claimed to teach the Hellenic world. They used Egyptian 
sources going up to the Persian period which were themselves at 
least partially derived from ancient Chaldaean documents. Traces of 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 137 
this primitive substratum still survive in our much later texts, erratic 
blocks transported on to more recent soil. When we find mentions 
there of ' the king of kings' or 'satraps' we are no longer in Egypt but 
in the ancient Orient ... We limit ourselves to noting that in all 
appearances, the priests who were the authors of Egyptian astrology 
stayed relatively faithful to the ancient Oriental tradition. 46 
It is true that Cumont was a historian of the Persian religion, and that 
to some Northern Europeans in the late 19th and early 20th centuries 
the Iranians were more 'Aryan' than the Greeks. But these facts do not 
significantly weaken the plausibility of the argument that although the 
heterogeneous Hermetic Corpus was clearly composed at different 
times, some of it antedates not merely Alexander the Great in the late 
4th century but Plato fifty years earlier.47 Cumont's argument presents 
a serious problem to the Aryan Model because it means either that 
Plato's ideas coincided with the Hermetic Oriental-Egyptian ones or 
that they came from Egypt, as the Ancient Model maintained. 
The notion of Persian origin itself has problems in that the ideas of 
Solon, Pythagoras and others who are supposed to have visited Egypt 
before the Persian conquest of that country in 525 BC appear to have 
been very si~ilar to those of Plato and Plutarch, which makes an 
Egyptian origin even more likely than a Persian one. On the question of 
the relative importance of Egyptian and 'Oriental' ideas, it is possible­
and indeed probable - that there were considerable Mesopotamian 
influences on Egypt long before the 6th century BC. These must have 
intensified during the Persian occupations, and it was probably during 
these occupations that most Zoroastrian influence came in. Thus I 
believe that apart from the notorious conservatism and chauvinism of 
the Egyptian priests, the apparent continuity of Greek views of Egyptian 
religion before and after the Persian conquests makes it plausible to 
argue that Cumont exaggerated the extent of , East em' influence on the 
religion of early Ptolemaic Egypt, which despite foreign conquests 
seems to have remained fundamentally Egyptian. 
Nevertheless, Cumont's arguments for dating the earliest strata of 
the Hermetic Texts to the Persian period are reinforced in previous 
work by Sir Flinders Petrie, the brilliant and eccentric founder of


--- PAGE 85 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
modem Egyptology in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Petrie 
argued, from historical context, that at least some passages from the 
Hermetic Texts must date to the Persian period and that the crisis of 
Egyptian religion began in this period. He maintained that the Lament 
prophesying the proscription of Egyptian religion - quoted on p. 129-
was in circulation long before the Christian prohibition of Paganism in 
390 AD, so that it could refer only to the persecutions of the Persian 
period. He also pointed out that the earlier date would also fit better 
with the references to Indians and Scythians as typical foreigners. 
Other Texts refer to foreigners 'newly filling the land'; this could 
hardly apply to the Greek conquest, let alone the Roman one. They also 
mention an Egyptian king - the last of whom reigned between 359 and 
342 BC.48 
Petrie's arguments were considered outrageous by scholars who 
quickly realized that the whole Aryan Model was at stake. As the 
Hellenist expert in Hermeticism, Professor Walter Scott, wrote in 1924: 
'If these dates were proved to be right, there would necessarily result 
from them an astounding bouleversement of all commonly accepted views 
of the history of Greek thought.' Thus evidence challenging the Aryan 
Model was not considered in detail on its own merits, but was crushed 
by the model itself. Petrie's arguments were ruled out of court without 
any need to answer them: 'But the arguments by which he endeavours 
to support his datings are not such as to be worth serious attention.' 
Finally, and with incredible impudence, Scott asserted the superiority 
of Classics over other lesser disciplines: 'It is to be regretted that a man 
who has earned a high reputation by good work in other departments 
has in this case strayed into a field of research in which he does not know 
his bearings. ,49 
There is no doubt at all that Petrie knew far more Greek than Scott 
knew Egyptian. In any event, Scott was simply making explicit the 
hierarchy that had been implicit since the subordination of Egyptology 
to Indo-European studies in the I 880s. In this case it meant that 
Egyptologists could have nothing to say about the Hermetic Texts 
because Hellenists considered them to be Greek. The supposition and 
the expertise claiming a monopoly were mutually reinforcing. 
Aside from Petrie's specific arguments, the central feature pointing 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 139 
to the early dating of the oldest portion of the Texts is that all scholars 
agree that Hermes is the same as the Egyptian Thoth. Casaubon, the 
17th-century debunker of the Texts, did not deny that there might have 
been an ancient sage called Hermes Trismegistos. Similarly, modem 
writers can hardly deny the existence of Thoth as the god of wisdom. 
What is questioned is the antiquity of the Texts and of the figure of the 
sage Hermes Trismegistos. 
It is not so easy, however, to draw clear lines between the traditional 
worship of Thoth, his allegedly Iranian or Hellenic cult in the 
Hellenistic period and the philosophy of the Hermetic Texts. 
Professors Stricker and Derchain have recently shown in detail that the 
Egyptian element in the Corpus is a good deal more prominent than 
Festugiere and other scholars working at the height of the Aryan Model 
supposed. 50 Furthermore, the idea of the 'Writings ofThoth' is clearly 
very old. It occurs frequently in The Book of the Dead, which was current 
in the 18th Dynasty. Father Boylan - who wrote a book on Thoth in the 
1920S - mentions a 19th-dynasty reference to 'the writings of Thoth 
which are in the library'. 51 Plutarch and the early Christian writer 
Clement of Alexandria refer to the 'Writings of Hermes,.52 Although 
the dynastic version may bear very little resemblance to the later 
Corpus, I believe scholars are too hasty in their denial of any connection 
with the latter. 
Recent discoveries have also pushed back the dates of features of the 
Hermetic Corpus previously thought to have come in only in the Roman 
period. The name Ql].wty \ \ (3 (Thoth Thrice Greatest) has been 
found at Esna in Upper Egypt from the early 3rd century BC, and Ql)wty 
p3\ p3 \ p3 <] (Thoth the Thrice Greatest), Hermes Trismegistos, has 
been read in Demotic texts from Saqqara just outside Memphis, from 
the early 2nd century BC. This text was among the documents of a priest 
associated with Thoth. In another item from this collection, The 
Treasury of Hor, there is the tradition that Thoth was the father of Isis, 
which had previously been attested only in the Hermetic Texts. s3 
These two links with the Hermetic Corpus have been found with other 
writings linking them to the so-called Hermopolitan cosmogony, with 
its traditional roots and association with the enormously popular cult of 
Thoth and his sacred bird, the ibis. It has been estimated, for instance,


--- PAGE 86 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
that in anyone year there were 10,000 ibises at Saqqara. 54 It is generally 
believed that Thoth's cult expanded greatly during Ptolemaic times but 
in The Book of the Dead, a thousand years earlier, Thoth was already an 
extremely powerful and often-invoked deity.55 All in all, there is no 
reason whatsoever to doubt that the worship of Thoth in Ptolemaic 
times was firmly rooted in ancient tradition. 
The key reason for making a sharp break between the ancient cult 
and the later Hermeticism was the latter's abstract 'Platonic' philos­
ophy. The denial that the Egyptians were capable of abstract and 
philosophical thought has been a linchpin for the Aryan Model and 
therefore carries a lot of ideological baggage. This can be the only 
reason why proof that Egyptians could think in terms of abstract religion, 
which was published eighty years ago, has received so little attention. The 
proof comes from a text generally called Memphite Theology, which dates 
back to the 2nd or 3rd millennium. The Theology describes a cosmogony 
according to which Ptah, the local god of Memphis, and his emanation 
Atum, were the primal beings. Ptah created the world in his heart, the seat 
of his mind, and actualized it through his tongue, the act of speech. This, 
though Father Festugiere and Father Boylan hasten to deny it, looks 
remarkably like the Platonic and Christian logos, the 'Word' which 'al­
ready was, The Word dwelt with God, and what God was, The Word was, 
The Word then was with God at the beginning, and through him all 
things came to be ... ,56 
After translating and publishing the Memphite Theology the Egyptol-
ogistJames Breasted wrote: 
The above conception of the world forms quite a sufficient basis for 
suggesting that the later notions of nous and logos, hitherto supposed 
to have been introduced into Egypt from abroad at a much later date, 
were present at this early period. Thus the Greek tradition of the 
origin of their philosophy in Egypt undoubtedly contains more of the 
truth than has in recent years been conceded. 
He went on: 
The habit, later so prevalent among the Greeks, of interpreting 
philosophically the functions and relations of the Egyptian gods ... 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 141 
had already begun in Egypt before the earliest Greek philosophers 
were born; and it is not impossible that the Greek practice of the 
interpretations of their own gods received its first impulse from 
Egypt.57 
Thoth's role in this cosmogony was as the heart ofPtah, Ptah's tongue 
being Horus. This tradition of linking Thoth to the heart can still be 
seen 2,000 years later in the Treasury of Hor. Its publisher, John Ray, 
rightly points out the association of the heart with the intellect of which 
Thoth was particularly thought to be the master. 58 In other theologies, 
however, Thoth was the inventor of writing, the originator of math­
ematics and the master of magic spells; the divine act of speech which 
related the gods to each other and to men, and even the creator of the 
world. 59 
The fact that Thoth was a great communicator was a factor in the 
syncretism between him and Anubis·, the Jackal protector of the dead, 
guide to the soul and messenger of death. Still more important was the 
fact that Thoth and Anubis played closely intertwined roles in the trial 
of the dead. The two were closely associated in this function even in the 
Pyramid Texts dating from the 3rd millennium, and a syncretic image of 
the two deities has been found from the 19th Dynasty or 13th century 
Be. However, a formal cult of Hermanubis did not appear in Egyptian 
religion until Ptolemaic times.60 The relationship of this last develop­
ment to the existence in Greek religion of Hermes, who combined the 
roles of Thoth and Anubis, is unclear. Nevertheless, although the 
original combination seems to have begun in Egypt, there seems little 
doubt that the Ptolemaic syncretic form derived from Greek religion. 
. With these multiple aspects, Hermes Trismegistos could play all the 
roles in the theology or 'twofold philosophy' discussed on p. 132. As 
father of the gods and the supreme intellect he could be the Hidden 
God; as activating intellect or act of speech he could be the demiurge; as 
communicator he could be the Holy Ghost linking and separating the 
other two. Finally, he could be the messenger or guide who leads souls 
to immortality and explains the wonders of the universe to them. 
However the dominant later tradition made it clear that Hermes was a , 
philosopher and moral teacher.


--- PAGE 87 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Here we encounter the question of Hermes' euhemerization, his 
turning from a god to a sage. Many scholars consider this euhemeriz­
ation to be another late feature. But here too there are earlier prece­
dents. Plato, in the early 4th century BC, refers to Theuth and Thot as 
the inventor of writing, numbers and astronomy, etc. Furthermore, 
TheuthiThoth appear~ both as a god and as a sage.61 Fifty years later, 
Hekataios of Abdera described Hermes/Thoth as a great human 
inventor. 62 There are also strong suggestions of his early euhemeriz­
ation and rationalization from Phoenicia. In the I st century AD a 
Phoenician, Philon of Byblos, epitomized and translated into Greek 
some of the works of an ancient priest, Sanchunation, who he claimed 
had lived before the Trojan War.63 After the foundation of Classics, in 
the early 19th century, Philon's writings on ancient Phoenician religion 
and myth were dismissed as Hellenistic fantasy. In the 1930S, however, 
the discovery of striking parallels between Philon's mythology and that 
of the U garitic texts from the 13th century BC led to a sharp change of 
opinion. Thus Semitists like William Albright and Otto Eissfeldt 
tended to place Sanchunation in the first half of the I st millennium and 
some of his materials as deriving from the 2nd.64 Still more recendy, 
Professor Baumgarten defied ancient tradition and the two greatest 
20th-century authorities in the field to argue for a much later dating. 
This is firsdy because not everything in Philon can be explained by the 
Ugaritic material, and secondly because Baumgarten takes it as axio­
matic that all the rational and scientific thought in Phil on has Greek 
origins. This in turn is because he believes Classicists have proved that 
reason and science began in Greece~65 In this way, an essentially 
circular argument - there cannot have been any pre-Greek science 
or reason, .because there was no pre-Greek science or reason -
is used to claim that Philon's euhemerism must be Greek and 
late. 
Here I need to draw some distinctions before proceeding. The first 
type of euhemerism, the non-personalized abstraction of natural forces, 
seems to have been present in Egyptian thought from the earliest times. 
It is certainly true of the cosmogony of Hermopolis, which has been 
linked to Thoth and to the cosmogony of Taautos described by 
Sanchunation. 66 The abstraction is indicated by the fact that not one of 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 143 
the Hermopolitan Ogdoad - the eight gods of the city of Hermopolis, 
the four pairs of beings or forces from whom the universe was created -
had temples or cults, though they were sometimes equated with 
divinities which did.67 
The second type of euhemerism - the turning of gods and goddesses 
into mortal sages, heroes and heroines - is a worldwide phenomenon, 
and the widespread tradition of calling the major gods the first kings of 
Egypt goes back at least as far as the Turin Canon of kings from the 13th 
century BC.68 In the Levant it would seem to have been associated with 
the rise of monolatry and monotheism at the tum of the I st millennium 
BC; the reason for this is simply that exclusive cults are unable to tolerate 
even lesser deities. In Genesis, for instance, one finds considerable 
euhemerism in the turning of what appear to have been deities like 
Enoch and Noah into patriarchs, and Genesis seems to have been 
written or compiled early in the 1st millennium BC. Further, scholars 
from Renan in the 19th century to Albright in the 20th have argued that 
Phoenician religion lent itself readily to euhemerist analysis.69 It would 
therefore appear reasonable to accept - literally or metaphorically -
those scholars who link Euhemeros, the original euhemerizer, to Sidon 
and to agree with Albright and Eissfeldt when they place Sanchunation 
and Mochos - whose Sidonian cosmogony was preserved by the late 
Neo- Platonist Damaskios - before the 6th century BC.70 
Sanchunation's cosmogony was ostensibly based on the lost works of 
Taautos. However, Taautos was also mentioned in Philon's work as a 
Phoenician culture hero who had invented letters. 71 Elsewhere in the 
writings, he appears as Hermes Trismegistos - the earliest mention of 
the name in Greek - or as the secretary and cunning vizier of the divine 
hero Kronos, in the thoroughly euhemerized story of the latter's life and 
adventures. 72 
Thoth also appears in the Bible. In the Book ofjob, which dates back 
to the 6th century BC or beyond, one finds the lines: 
Who put wisdom into t~wt? 
Who gave sekwi understanding? 
In his authoritative commentary on Job, Professor Marvin Pope 
writes about this as follows: 
J


--- PAGE 88 ---
144 BLACK ATHENA 
J. G. E. Hoffmann was probably right in taking wwt to refer to the 
god Thoth himself. The consonantal orthography corresponds 
rather closely to the form of the name that prevailed in the 18th 
Dynasty (gjJwty), when the worship of Thoth was at its peak and 
spread to Phoenicia ... Philon of Byblos gives the Phoenician 
pronunciation as Taaut(os), which would reflect the form tahut . .. 
The suggestion of Hoffmann as to selewi, connecting it to ili~ Cop­
tic name of the planet Mercury (soucki), seems preferable to the 
dubious connection with the 'cock'. The all-knowing, clever­
minded Thoth- Taautos, inventor of the alphabet and founder of all 
knowledge, was identified with the Hermes-Mercury of the 
Greeks and Romans under the title of Hermes Trismegistos/ 
Tremaximus. 73 
It should be emphasized that t~wt was filled with knowledge by the 
Lord and was therefore a sage and epitome of wisdom, not a god. Thus 
unless, like Baumgarten, one takes a principled stand against any 
pre-Greek rationality, there would seem to be overwhelming evidence 
that in both Egyptian and Phoenician culture there had been 
euhemerization of gods into sages and heroes long before the massive 
Greek influence on Egypt in the 4th century BC. What is more, this is 
particularly true in the case ofThoth and Hermes Trismegistos. 
Let me reiterate my argument up to this point. Neo-Platonism and 
Gnosticism flourished chiefly in Egypt and among more or less Hel­
lenized Egyptians after the collapse of institutional Egyptian religion. 
Whether or not there was a Hermetic btotherhood or cult from the 2nd 
to the 4th centuries AD, Hermetic ideas played a formative role in, and 
remained central to, these philosophies and heresies and their devotees. 
The cult of Thoth was always important in Egyptian religion but 
became increasingly so in the second half of the 2nd millennium. The 
idea of the 'writings of Thoth' is an ancient one and it is probable that 
such writings existed by the late 2nd millennium. However, the Herme­
tic Corpus, as it now survives, seems to represent Egyptian religion in 
crisis and to contain Iranian and Mesopotamian concepts. It is therefore 
unlikely that there are any texts from before the first Persian invasion in 
525 BC. It is clear that the Corpus is heterogeneous and it probably 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 145 
contains material written over a long period, from the 6th century BC to 
the 2nd century AD. Despite its relative lateness it is overwhelmingly 
likely that the Corpus contains many very much older religiou~ and 
philosophical concepts and that it is fundamentally Egyptian. The 
Iranian and Chaldaean influences have been mentioned above. There 
are also undoubted Greek influences, at least on the later texts. I 
believe, however, that these are difficult to detect because Greek 
Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy was so heavily dependent on 
Egyptian religion and thought. 
HERMETICISM AND NEO-PLATONISM 
UNDER EARLY CHRISTIANITY, 
JUDAISM AND ISLAM 
By the end of the 4th century, Gnosticism had been largely extirpated 
by the orthodox Church. Pagan Ne'o-Platonism survived rather longer, 
but it too had disappeared before the Moslem conquest of Egypt in the 
630S. The figure of Hermes Trismegistos as the epitome of knowledge, 
on the other hand, survived in both Christianity and Islam. Euhemer­
ism was now essential; asJean Seznec, the great 20th-century historian 
of pagan survivals in the Renaissance, has pointed out, euhemerism 
enjoyed 'an extraordinary revival' in early Christian times.74 As with all 
the descendants of Canaanite monotheism, the Christian Church used 
euhemerism to diminish and tame the pagan gods at the same time as it 
allowed them to survive under the new religion. Neitl Athena was 
incorporated as St Catherine, HoruslPerseus as St George, and 
Anubis/Hermes as St Christopher. 75 Significantly, however, Thoth­
Anubis/Hermes remained outside the Church, as the sage and epitome 
of Egyptian and Oriental wisdom Hermes Trismegistos. 
Hermes' relationship to Christianity was always delicately balanced, 
particularly on the question of priority. The 3rd-century Church 
Father Lactantius maintained that Hermes had lived before Moses; St 
Augustine, on the other hand, claimed that while Egyptian astronomy 
and other exact sciences had developed early, there was no moral 
teaching in Egypt until the time ofTrismegistos, who slightly postdated 
Moses and had learnt from the latter and the biblical Patriarchs. Here,


--- PAGE 89 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
as in so' many other areas, Augustine set out the orthodoxy that was to 
last until the 18th century: that biblical knowledge came before _ in 
both priority and importance - Hermetic Egyptian knowledge, but that 
the latter was the source of all 'Gentile' wisdom and specifically that of 
the Greeks. 76 
In Islam, Hermes Trismegistos was euhemerized and identified with 
Idris, a sincere prophet who appears in the Qoran. In this tradition, too, 
he was seen as the 'father of philosophers' and 'the one who is thrice 
endowed with wisdom'. In other Islamic traditions he was seen as three 
sages, one from before the Flood who lived in Egypt and twoJrom after 
it; one from Babylon and the other again from Egypt. He was seen as the 
culture hero who had invented all the arts and sciences, especially 
astronomy, astrology, medicine and magic. Further, although it is 
plausibly argued that his - or Egyptian - influence in early Islam was 
largely in these areas, there was an early Islamic philosophical 
Hermeticism which has not been deeply studied, partly no doubt 
because of the extreme impenetrability of the texts. 77 
The huge Islamic conquests from Persia to Spain of the 7th and 8th 
centuries brought great prominence and prosperity to the Jews. Despite 
its powerful spirit of rationality and equality, Jewish religion had both 
esoteric cults and a 'twofold philosophy' even before the beginning of 
Christianity. The Essenes and other sectaries living in the Judaean 
Desert from the 2nd century Be were convinced that truths had been 
revealed to them that were unknown to the priests in Jerusalem and to 
the ordinary people; we know, for instance, that they used the Book of 
Enoch and other apocalyptic writings. Concerned with astrology and 
other methods of prediction, they also seem to have shared the 
mysticism - attested more fully at a later time - around the images of the 
Throne of God and the Chariot by which Elijah and the mystic could 
ascend into heaven.78 The undoubted relationship between these sects 
and Christianity has been and will be endlessly debated, but less 
attention has been paid to the parallels and possible causal relations 
between the Jewish sects' tendencies towards celibacy, communism 
and desert life and those of early Christian monasticism as it grew up in 
the Egyptian desert.
79 
The two groups certainly shared a common 
populism, Messianism and tendency to violence. 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 147 
A much closer parallel to the thinking of the upper-class Hermeti­
cists and Neo-Platonists can be seen in the massive works of Phil on of 
Alexandria. In Philon's wealthy, Egyptian, Hellenized Jewish circle of 
the I st century AD there was a desire to syncretize the wisdom of the Old 
Testament with Platonic-Egyptian thought through allegorical, 
esoteric and mystical interpretation. Philon even mentioned the exist­
ence of a sectarian community of 'Worshippers of God,.8o Philon 
himself remained an important figure in the development of Middle 
and Neo-Platonic thought, and his mixture of Platonism and Judaism 
has fascinating resonances with that in Christianity. However, the rich, 
cultivated, Hellenized Jewry he represented was destroyed for ever by 
the genocide of the Jews within the Eastern Roman Empire in the 
suppression of their rising of I 16 AD. 
Even though Philon died before the destruction of the Temple of 
Jerusalem in 70 AD, his life in the Diaspora was essentially one of the 
synagogue and thus resembled that oflater Jewry. Even in this prosaic, 
democratic, Pharasaic rabbinic society there were esoteric and mystical 
tendencies in the early centuries of the Common Era which Professor 
Gershom Scholem called 'Jewish Gnosticism'. In the writings of these 
tendencies one finds such specifically Jewish concerns as the Throne 
and the Chariot and the mystical and numerological significance of the 
letters of the Hebrew alphabet or the biblical text. Most of the key 
elements in Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism and Gnosticism are also 
contained: the concept of man as the measure of all things, the eight 
spheres or firmaments which can be transcended, and tendencies 
towards magic.8] 
Mysticism is also attested in Judaism in the 8th and lOth centuries. 
For instance, a Karaite or Jewish sectarian purist in the lOth century 
was familiar with quotations from Philon. Professor Scholem, however, 
warned that 
it should not be deduced from this that there was a continuous 
influence up to this time, let alone up to the time of the formulation 
of the Kabbalah in the Middle Ages. Specific parallels between 
Philonic and Kabbalistic exegesis should be put down to the simi­
larity of their exegetical method, which naturally produced identical 
results from time to time.82


--- PAGE 90 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Here, he has raised a general issue that will occur again in this chapter: 
the possibility of the survival and continuity of secretive mystic sects in 
the face of general hostility and specific persecution over long periods of 
time. On the one hand, such groups leave little trace even when they are 
flourishing; on the other, as Scholem argued, they often use the same 
texts and similar exegetical techniques. Thus there is often a strong 
case for independent invention. In this case, the argument for indepen­
dent invention seems rather extreme. Further, given the transmission of 
so much else in Jewish culture - not only orthodox religion but also 
folklore - over these centuries, I see no reason to doubt that there were 
continuous traditions of mysticism. Scholem himself traces a develop­
ment of Jewish mysticism from Egypt and Palestine to Babylonia in the 
8th and 9th centuries, back to the Mediterranean in Egypt and Italy in 
the lOth, and in the German Hasidism in the 11th and 12th.83 
We must continue this sketch of the history of the Kabbalah here 
because it became closely intertwined with Hermeticism during the 
Renaissance. Much of the Kabbalistic mysticism of Provence and Spain 
in the 12th and 13th centuries can be explained in terms of the survival 
of Hermeticism and its descendants in Christianity and Islam; new 
developments in these cultures; the peculiar situation of Catalonia and 
Languedoc; the intensity of persecution experienced by Jews in this 
period and, as Professor Scholem argued, a mystical reading of the 
same texts in a period of crisis. 
During the 12th and 13th centuries Languedoc was in a state of 
creative turmoil, having been for cen~es a rich and cultivated society 
on the border of Christianity and Islam and, within Judaism, the 
conjunction of the Sephardic Jews who lived under Islam with the 
Ashkenazim from Christian Europe. The inhabitants of Languedoc 
were able to have a certain objectivity about and transcendence of 
specific forms of religion. This goes some way to explain why the region 
should have seen the crystallization of the most radical heresy in 
European Christendom, that of the Albigensians or Cathars. It was a 
heresy in which there were two classes of faithful: the ordinary 
Credentes (believers) and the Perfecti. The Perfecti detached them­
selves from daily life in the material world for spiritual contemplation, 
while their ideal was a complete separation from matter and a fast to 
IeH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 149 
death. The struggle to preserve Catharism became associated with that 
of the region to preserve itself from domination by Northern France 
and the kings in Paris, who claimed to be champions of Catholicism and 
justified their extension of central power as crusades against the 
heretics. Nevertheless there is no doubt that there was a great popular 
attachment to Catharism and to the Perfecti, whose spirituality was felt 
to benefit the whole community.84 
Although clearly a religion of two tiers, and sharing some beliefs with 
the mystical traditions I have discussed above - such as the trans­
migration of souls - Catharism was much more sharply dualist in a way 
that is conventionally seen to be Iranian, Zoroastrian or Manichaean. 
The forces of God and Satan, good and evil, spirit and flesh are cosmic 
and seen to be equally balanced and in constant conflict. This was very 
different from the pantheist and anthropocentric vision of the Hermetic 
traditions. 8s Nevertheless, though both movements existed all over 
Europe, the flourishing of Albigensianism and Kabbalism in Lan­
guedoc and Provence at the same time is striking, and indicates 
something extraordinary about the social and cultural milieu. It is 
difficult to believe that the two did not influence each other, and this 
would seem to be particularly true in social structure. Just as the 
Perfecti' were supported and protected with fierce devotion by the 
Credentes, the mystical Kabbalist rabbis seem to have been maintained 
by their communities for the spiritual benefits their holiness brought to 
them. However, where the Cathars were ruthlessly exterminated by the 
Catholic French, the enemies of the Kabbalists in Jewry lacked these 
means and the movement spread into Spain, where it flourished as an 
esoteric but relatively respectable element in Spanish Judaism until 
Ferdinand and Isabella's Expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492. 
Kabbalah is explicitly esoteric - indeed, its study has been generally 
restricted to good, learned (male) Jews over forty. It rejects both the 
historicism of the common 'superficial' reading of the Bible and the 
rationality of orthodoxy in favour of an 'inner' reading of the text which 
is supposed to reveal a mystic cosmic struggle for the good Jews to 
reconstitute the primeval light shattered at the moment of creation. In 
many ways Kabbalism is an extension of the Orthodox ~almudic 
approach: the mystery is approached through intense study and


--- PAGE 91 ---
II 
BLACK ATHENA 
includes such things as the significance and numerology of the letters 
of the Bible. But it goes beyond such things into contemplation of the 
Throne, the Chariot and above all, the Name of God, all of which leads 
to ecstasy. Kabbalah also contains all the key forms we have seen in 
Hermeticism and its descendants: trinities, the concepts of the 
'absconded' or Hidden God or intellect, the activating logos or word and 
mediating spirit; the eight spheres or firmaments and their transcend­
ence by the well-trained mystic; and man is seen as the measure of all 
things and sometimes even as the maker of God. In the first centuries of 
its existence, this led to astrology, medicine and magic, for all of which 
Jews were renowned throughout Medieval Europe. 86 
HERMETICISM IN BYZANTIUM 
AND CHRISTIAN WESTERN EUROPE 
Neo-Platonism, of at least a nominally Christian kind, seems to have 
survived in the Byzantine Empire, and this was renewed in what 
has been called the 11th-century Renaissance there. Its leading 
Neo-Platonic figure, Psellos, was clearly interested in both Hermetic 
philosophy and magic. The 20th -century scholar Professor Zervos has 
written: 
We do not know how many works Psellos composed on Hermetic 
literature. The only one that remains is a gloss on the 'Poimandres' 
... After maintaining the influence of 'Genesis' on the formation of 
the cosmogonic doctrines of the 'Poimandres', Psellos affirms that 
all Hellenic conceptions of God are influenced by Eastern models. 
He justifies this superiority of the East over Greek philosophy by 
pointing out that Porphery [the Neo-Platonist of the 3rd century AD] 
had gone to an Egyptian priest, Anebon, in order to receive instruc­
tion on the first cause.87 
Here, as with Augustine, one sees the hierarchy - the Bible, Egyptian 
and Oriental wisdom, and Greece, with interest focused on the second. 
The fact that some of Psellos' works were taken to Italy in the 15th 
century means that they had been preserved throughout the troubles 
of the last 400 years of the Byzantine Empire at Constantinople. 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION IS I 
This, in tum, shows the importance with which Neo-Platonism and 
Hermeticism were treated there. 
The belief in Egypt as a powerful, if not the most powerful, centre of 
magic survived the conversion of Western Europe to Christianity. Both 
scarabs and a barbaric head of a bull with a solar disc on his forehead, 
which has been identified with Apis, were found in the pagan tomb of 
Childeric - the father of Clovis, the first Christian king of France - who 
died in 48 1.88 Three hundred or so years later the great seal of 
Charlemagne represented the head of the late Egyptian Jupiter 
Serapis. 89 
Although -like every other cultural ac~vity at this period - interest in 
the Hermetic Texts was at a low ebb during the Dark and Early Middle 
Ages, it did not die out completely. However, there is little doubt that 
medieval thinkers were more interested in Hermetic magic and as­
trology than in its philosophy. Nevertheless, one philosophic text, 
Asclepius, had remained in circulation ever since its translation into 
Latin in the 2nd century.90 The number of copies of that text made in 
the 11th and 12th centuries indicates that interest in it seems to have 
increased in what has been called the 12th-century Renaissance of 
Western Europe. 91 It is also difficult to believe that the increase of 
humanism in the centuries that followed was not influenced by Asclepius 
and the few Neo-Platonic texts available. 
EGYPT IN THE RENAISSANCE 
EarlY-20th-century historians tended to picture the Renaissance as 
Greek and, though influenced by Plato, as somehow 'pure' until the late 
15th century and the introduction of Neo-Platonism. 92 However, the 
concern with Egypt and the Orient was integral to the whole movement 
from the beginning. It cannot be emphasized enough that, just as to 
Shakespeare the Ancient Greeks were quarrelsome Levantines, not 
demigods, the Italian Renaissance scholars, artists and patrons iden­
tified themselves with Greeks but were not centrally concerned with the 
Greece of Homer or Perikles, or even with the Olympian gods. They 
were interested in picking up from pagan Antiquity where it had left off. 
As the philosopher and historian David Hume wrote, with 18th-


--- PAGE 92 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
century sensibility, 'Learning, on its revival, was attired in the same 
unnatural garb which it wore at the time of its decay among the Greeks 
and Romans. ,93 
Central to this 'decadence' was a respect for Egypt and the East, an 
admiration for the 'Oriental' profusion and obscurity of the Neo­
Platonists' writings, and a passion for Egyptian and Oriental mystery. 
However, it is precisely from the Neo-Platonic and Hermetic traditions 
that the Renaissance drew its most characteristic vision of the infinite 
potential of man, and the belief that man is the measure of all things. 
Even in what the 19th- and 20th-century historians have seen as the 
'manly' 14th and early 15th centuries, there was an enormous respect 
for the Egyptians. 
By the beginning of the 15th century, Italian scholars had a good idea 
of the centrality of Egypt and the Hermetic Texts to the ancient learning 
they wished to revive. Scholars had long known about and read 
AscJepius, and Arabic Hermetic Texts were being translated into Latin. 
Furthermore, with the increase in contact between Italy and Greece, 
the Neo-Platonic and Hermetic writings of PselIos and the other 
promoters of the Byzantine Renaissance became available.94 In 1419 a 
copy of Hierog/yphika, a late-5th-century work on hieroglyphics by 
Horapollo, an Upper Egyptian, was brought to Italy and translated.95 
The author had combined a correct interpretation of a number of signs 
'with the most grotesque allegorical reasons for those meanings'. 96 The 
work was enormously popular and confirmed the belief that hiero­
glyphics was the script of the mystertes, superior to alphabets because 
one sign was seen to compress rich meaning within it and to be 
unencumbered with the phonetics of mundane speech. In general, 
hieroglyphs and the enigmas they were supposed to contain became 
enormously important in the early 15th century; see, for instance, the 
famous medal of the explicitly Egyptian winged eye made by the great 
painter, architect and theorist of art Leone Battista Alberti, who is 
sometimes regarded as a representatative of the 'uncontaminated' early 
Renaissance. 97 
The Egyptian priests' use of hieroglyphs was perceived as being 
linked to their use of allegories and the allegorical significance of the 
mysteries attributed to them by Plutarch and other Greek writers. As we 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 153 
have seen, I 9th- and 20th -century scholars insist that the Greeks 'got it 
wrong'. They believe that the Renaissance thinkers were equally 
mistaken. As the earlY-20th -century art historian Professor Wind wrote 
about a number of the latter: 
their concern was less with the original mystery cults than with their 
philosophical adaptation. Good judgement alone did not impose the 
restriction; it was largely a case of good luck, for it derived from a 
historical misconception: they assumed that the figurative inter­
pretation was part ()f the original mysteries.98 
. I believe that the 15th-century interpretation was accurate, at least for 
late Egyptian religion. In any event, its truth was never questioned by 
the Italians of the Renaissance. 
The Renaissance passion for Egypt came firstly from its ancient 
reputation of having been the place where the mysteries and sacred 
initiations were first established. Furthermore, with the possible excep­
tions Qf the Persian Zoroastrians and the Chaldaeans, of whom there 
was only a dim conception, the Egyptians were seen as the origin of all 
wisdom and arts; for all the sense of progress attributed to them by 
Romantic historians, Renaissance men and women were fundamentally 
interested in the past. They were searching forJontes or 'sources' - and 
so they looked behind Christianity to pagan Rome, behind Rome to 
Greece; but behind Greece there was Egypt, as Giordano Bruno put it 
in the following century: 'We Greeks own Egypt, the grand monarchy of 
letters and nobility, to be the parent of our fables, metaphors and 
doctrines. ,99 
However, lest it be thought that Bruno was atypical, or belonged to a 
generation that had been 'corrupted' by revived Neo-Platonism, let me 
quote Frances Yates on the foundation of the new Neo-Platonic school 
which necessarily reflects attitudes towards Egypt and Greece from 
before this took place: 
About 1460, a Greek manuscript was brought to Florence from 
Macedonia by a monk, one of those many agents employed by 
Cosimo de' Medici to collect manuscripts for him. It contained a 
copy of the Corpus Hermeticum ... Though the Plato Manuscripts


--- PAGE 93 ---
154 BLACK ATHENA 
were already assembled, awaiting translation, Cosimo ordered 
Ficino to put these aside and to translate the work of Hermes 
Trismegistos at once, before embarking on the Greek philosophers 
. .. Egypt was before Greece; Hermes was earlier than Plato. 
Renaissance respect for the old ... as nearest to the divine truth 
demanded that the Corpus Hermeticum be translated before Plato's 
Republic or Symposion ... 100 
The new translations were used as the centrepiece for the revived 
Platonic Academy established by the great translator, scholar and 
philosopher Marsilio Ficino in his villa at Carregio outside Florence. 
The same was true of the other academies that sprang up in all the 
major Italian cities, and later throughout Europe. Although these 
academies were consciously modelled on Plato's own in Athens, their 
members believed that this had been constructed on the model of an 
ideal priesthood in Egyptian temples. All European academies have had 
the election of new members as a central raison d'are. In the academy of 
15th- and 16th-century Rome, for instance, such elections were full of 
ritual paraphernalia. 101 The rituals of elevation to the rank of'immor­
tals' practised in the French Academy and elsewhere can be traced back 
to the mysteries and sacred initiations giving immortality concocted in 
the Renaissance on the basis of reports from Late Antiquity and 
believed - in my opinion rightly - to have derived ultimately from 
Ancient Egypt. 102 Moreover, the Renaissance scholars took much more 
than their organization from the Neo-Platonists. They looked beyond 
them to Plato himself, Pythagoras, Orpheus and Egypt for their 
philosophy, science and magic. 
In the late 15th century the Neo-Platonic thought was merged with 
that of the Kabbalah by the Renaissance thinker and mystic Pico della 
Mirandola. Pico's 'spiritual magic' was able to use the two systems in a 
way that could even sustain Christianity on a mystical basis of Egyptian 
hieroglyphics and Hebrew letters and numbers. 103 Pico had an enor­
mous influence at the time, particularly on the Borgias, who commis­
sioned works of art glorifying Egyptian religion and especially the Apis 
bull, whom they took to be their symbol. Much more important in the 
long run, however, was Pico's clear articulation of the Egyptian position 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 155 
that man as a 'magus' could, as Frances Yates put it: 'use ... both Magia 
and Kabbalah to act upon the world, to control his destiny by 
science.' 1M 
This and similar fusions of the Jewish and Egyptian traditions -
which, as mentioned above, were related to each other - appeared again 
at the tum of the 16th century, notably in the work of the Renaissance 
philosopher Tommaso Campanella. Kabbalism, too, continued to be a 
. . . . c 6th d th . d' 105 major mSpIratlOn lor 1 - an 17 -century magtc an SCIence. 
Nevertheless, as Frances Yates has pointed out, Kabbalah was never 
called a prisca theologia, an ancient or primary theology, on the grounds 
that it belonged to the biblical and not the Gentile tradition. Thus, 
Renaissance thinkers who wished to transcend Christianity had no 
alternative to Egypt. 106 
COPERNICUS AND HERMETICISM 
Frances Yates, in tune with recent writing on Copernicus, claimed in 
1964 that 
Copernicus is not living within the world-view of Thomas Aquinas 
but within that of the new Neo- Platonism, of the Prisci Theologi, with 
Hermes Trismegistos at their head, of Ficino. One can say, either 
that the intense emphasis on the sun in this new world-view was the 
emotional driving force which induced Copernicus to undertake his 
mathematical calculations on the hypothesis that the sun is indeed at 
the centre of the planetary system; or that he wished to make his dis­
covery acceptable by presenting it within the framework of this new 
attitude. Perhaps both explanations would be true, or some of each. t07 
Although, as I have said, the Hermetic Texts tend to work within the 
geocentral Ptolemaic system, in some texts, heliocentric cosmologies 
are invisioned. Furthermore, there are repeated references to the spe­
cial sanctity of the sun seen as the source of light and sometimes as 
the second god which governs the third god, the animate world and all 
its living creatures. 108 Thus the Texts shared the Ancient Egyptian 
focus on the sun as the chief divinity and life-giving force.


--- PAGE 94 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
A great deal has happened in Copernican studies since Frances Yates 
wrote the text cited above, and there have been attempts to mitigate her 
upsetting suggestion. Some objections, like those of the historian of 
science Professor Rosen, have continued to follow the conventional 
picture of the development of science as a succession of great men's 
heroic leaps from darkness into light. Hence, for Rosen, Copernicus 
was 'neither a Platonist nor a Neo-Platonist, nor an Aristotelian, he was 
C . , 109 M "fi a opermcan. ore Slgru cantly, a number of recent scholars have 
shown that Copernicus' mathematical modelling was very largely based 
on Islamic sources, notably the works of NasIr ad-Din at-TusI in the '. . 
13th century and Ibn ash Shatir in the 14th.l10 These, however, do not 
include heliocentricity itself, the idea of which came to Copernicus 
considerably before his mathematical proof ofit. It has been argued that 
Copernicus derived his heliocentricity from the mid-15th-century 
scholar Regiomontanus. The technical arguments concerned do not 
diminish the fact that Regiomontanus' opening of the possibility of 
heliocentricity may well have derived from his being in the thick of 
mid- 15th-century Platonism. Whether or not this is the case, Professor 
Yates' claim would still seem to hold true. III 
HERMETICISM AND EGYPT 
IN THE 16TH CENTURY 
It is generally implied that once the Texts were read, a disillusion set in. 
This is belied by the bibliographical facts that, as Professor Blanco has 
put it, 
Between 1471 and 1641 Marsilio Ficino's translation went through 
25 editions; that ofPatritius went through six; the bilingual edition of 
Fr De Foix appeared twice; the 'Asclepius' was edited forty times; 
the commentary of]. Faber Stapulensis on the 'Pimander' appeared 
in fourteen editions; that of Rosellius in six; the commentary of J. 
Faber Stapulensis on the 'Asclepius' passed through eleven editions etc. liZ , 
Bibliography also tells us something about relative concern with 
Greece and Egypt. For example, George Eliot, at the height of 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 157 
Victorian Romanticism, vividly pictured a Renaissance concern 
with the ruins of pagan Athens. 1l3 But this is an anachronism. West 
Europeans from the 15th to the 17th century were far more concerned 
with travels in Egypt than they were with those in Greece: the editors 
of a recent collection of reprints maintain that, between 1400 
and 1700, there were over 250 descriptions of Egypt by Western 
travellers.1l4 
In some circles, in fact, having travelled to the sources of knowledge 
in Egypt provided a legitimacy for attacks on conventional wisdom. The 
clearest example of this in the early 16th century was the great and 
original doctor and mining engineer Paracelsus, who claimed -
probably falsely - to have been to Egypt and called his medicine 
Hermetic. However, he was only near the beginning of a tradition 
which continued up to and included Newton, in which scientists 
justified turning to experiment as a way to retrieve the wisdom of 
Egypt and the Orient which the Greeks and Romans had failed to 
preserve. 115 
We have to remember that for the last hundred and fifty years the 
Renaissance has been seen as one of the twin peaks of European 
culture, only slightly less elevated than 5th-century Athens. Conse­
quently, 19th- and 20th-century scholars have experienced consider­
able difficulty and distress in dealing with the Renaissance admiration 
for Egypt and the Orient. For instance, although the gods were referred 
to by their Latin names, they were believed to be fundamentally 
Egyptian. TakeJean Seznec, the leading 20th-century scholar on pagan 
survivals in Antiquity, writing about the illustrated manuals of the pagan 
gods: 
But in our manuals [books of illustrations] divinities of the Oriental 
cults are given extraordinary prominence, especially in Cartari. 
First of all the Egyptians ... we have already had occasion to 
note in Picator the same unusual or even disproportionate 
place given to Oriental divinities; it is due, in our opinion, to a 
contemporary influence - that of the 'hieroglyphics' which 
drew the attention of humanists to Egypt and to the Orient in 
general. 116


--- PAGE 95 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Later on: 
Our manuals, in their manifest preference for the Eastern rather 
than ~e Olympic divinities - a preference furthered by the contem­
~orary Egyptomania and the taste for enigmas ... As for Mercury, he 
IS a sort of magus capped with a pointed bonnet. Small winged 
beings, who seem to emerge from a well, grasp a stalk of his 
enormous Caduceus, about which are entwined four serpents; other 
similar puttini seem to slip and fall back. What is this figure, which 
belongs, as Y riarte remarks, to neither Rome, Greece, Assyria nor 
Persia? It is reminiscent at once of Hermes, the guide of souls to the 
underworld, or psychopompos and of the Egyptian Thoth who teaches 
the soul to raise itselfby degrees to a knowledge of divine things. I 17 
It is not only the conventional historians who prefer to distance 
themselves from this 'unfortunate' aspect of the Renaissance. Frances 
Yates, who not only opened up but still towers over the study of 
Renaissance Hermeticism and championed heresies of all sorts, did not 
challenge the full force of the Aryan Model. While detailing the 
enormous and fruitful impact of Egyptian Hermeticism on 15th- and 
16th-century Italy, she seems to have felt it necessary to reassure her 
readers that she was not so unorthodox as to believe the men she was 
writing about with such sympathy. There are frequent remarks of the 
type: 'This huge historical error was to have amazingresults.,118 I think 
this is, in fact, far more appropriate as a description of the Aryan Model! 
There is no doubt that in the 16th century Hermeticism and concern 
with Egypt flourished as a respectable part of high Renaissance culture. 
In the view of later history, however, Hermeticism's most important 
pr.oduct of the period was an exception, Copernicus' great champion, 
GIordano Bruno. Bruno was acclaimed by 19th- and earlY-20th­
century historians of science as a pioneer and martyr for science and 
f~ee~om of intellectual enquiry, but Frances Yates has firmly situated 
hIm III the Hermetic tradition. Bruno was remarkable in that he went 
further than any of his predecessors or contemporaries. For all their 
enthusiasm, most early Hermeticists honestly or dishonestly kept 
within Christianity and the bounds set by St Augustine that Egyptian 
and its derived Gentile philosophies were later than, and inferior to, 
, 
L 
t r 
t 
~ . 
~ 
~ F 
~ 'c 
~ 
II 
II 
[CH. II] EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 159 
biblical wisdom. Bruno, however, went beyond not only Christianity but 
Judaism to reach Egypto-Paganism: 
Do not suppose that the sufficiency of the Chaldaic magic derived 
from the Kabbalah of the Jews; for the Jews are without doubt the 
excrement of Egypt, and no one could ever pretend with any degree 
of probability that the Egyptians borrowed any principle, good or 
bad, from the Hebrews. Whence we Greeks [by which he seems to 
mean Gentiles] own Egypt, the grand monarchy of letters and 
nobility, to be the parent of our fables, metaphors and doctrines. 1 19 
The social context of such radicalism was the failure of the Counter­
Reformation in the 1570S to overcome the limitations of Catholicism 
and heal the breach within Western Christianity, and the wars of 
religion which racked late-16th-century Europe. Bruno tried to attach 
himself to politically moderate and relatively tolerant rulers who wanted 
compromise. Paradoxically, this went with his extreme intellectual and 
theological radicalism. Thus, to bring spiritual and physical peace, 
Bruno saw it as necessary to transcend Christianity not merely intellec­
tually but politically. As Frances Yates put it: 'Bruno's Hermeticism 
becomes purely "Egyptian", with the Hermetic Egyptian religion not 
just as the prisca theologia foreshadowing Christianity but actually as the 
true religion.,120 
The fact that Bruno had gone beyond the bounds of Christianity and 
was burnt at the stake for his beliefs by the Inquisition should not lead 
one to exaggerate his eccentricity in 16th-century Italy. Given the 
passion for fontes (sources) and the belief that priority is superiority, it is 
not such a great leap from saying that Hermeticism preceded Christian­
ity to claiming that it transcended it. Nevertheless, while the balance 
between the Bible and Christianity, on the one hand, and Egypt and the 
Hermetic Texts, on the other, was fine and delicately shifting, the 
relation between the latter and Ancient Greece was more clear-cut. 
Erasmus' scepticism about the date of the Hermetic Texts, for instance, 
seems to have been based on a desire to protect Christianity rather than 
to assert the priority of Greece. 12l After the Reformation, the Calvinist 
Lambert Daneau even used the reputation of the Egyptians as teachers 
of the Greeks to pruve the superiority of Moses and the biblical tradition


--- PAGE 96 ---
/ 
160 BLACK ATHENA 
in 'natural philosophy', which was more or less what has later been 
described as 'science'. Quoting ancient sources, Daneau was able to 
establish the tradition that the Egyptians had learnt astronomy from the 
'Syrians'. He was also able to show that the latter had had a learned man 
called Moschos, whom he then claimed to be Moses. Thus Moses had 
taught the Egyptians, and hence the Greeks, astronomy. The tradition 
of identifYing Moses with Moschos continued well into the 18th 
century. 122 Thus there was no question at this stage of challenging the 
Egyptian superiority oflearning over the Greeks. 
To conclude this chapter with a familiar example. Shakespeare's 
portrayal of the Greeks in Tro;lus and Cressida as unreliable and 
scheming was firmly based in late medieval tradition and was not 
atypical in his own day. As I have tried to show in this chapter, most 
Renaissance thinkers believed that Egypt was the original and creative 
source and Greece the later transmitter of some part of the Egyptian 
and Oriental wisdom, and the veracity of the Ancient Model was not at 
issue. 
CHAPTER III 
THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT IN 
THE 17TH AND 18TH CENTURIES 
I
N THIS CHAPTER I shall be looking at the continuation of 
Hermeticism in the 17th century. While most modem scholars 
have maintained that the Hermetic Corpus was discredited by 
Casaubon's textual criticism, I believe that this had very little effect on 
its reputation. In the short run the texts continued to be believed, and 
their eclipse in the 18th century was the result of the general intellectual 
shift away from magic rather than of any specific criticism. Further­
more, loss of interest in Hermeticism did not mean any diminution in 
respect for Egypt. At the end of the 17th century Ancient Egypt became 
associated with the 'Radical Enlightenment' and was used to subvert 
Christianity and the political status quo. The image of Egypt remained 
central to the Freemasons, who dominated intellectual life in the 
18th century. Thus Egypt - often linked with the other great 
long-lived empire, China - maintained a high reputation for its 
philosophy and science, but above all for its political system, until the 
break-up of European political and intellectual order in the 1780s 
and 90S.


--- PAGE 97 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
HERMETICISM IN THE 
17TH CENTURY 
Giordano Bruno was burnt alive in Rome in 1600. His death, however, 
had a less significant long-term effect on Hermeticism than the work of 
Isaac Casaubon, the moderate Protestant scholar who attacked the 
antiquity of the Hermetic Texts in 1614. The surprising feature of 
Casaubon's work, for Frances Yates, was that the scholarly techniques 
of textual criticism which had been available since the late 15th century 
should have been applied so late to the Hermetic Texts. But given the 
necessary selectivity of the application of such techniques and the 
political and ideological uses to which they have later been put, I am not 
so surprised that at the end of the 16th century the threat posed by the 
Texts, not merely to Catholicism but to Christianity as a whole, should 
have encouraged a scholar to scrutinize them in a hostile way. 1 
Casaubon demonstrated the philosophical, theological and even 
textual similarities between the Hermetic Texts, the works of Plato and 
passages from the New Testament. He argued that the Egyptian texts 
must be derivative, firstly because there were no references to the texts 
in the Bible or in Plato, Aristotle or other ancient writers; and secondly 
because the texts referred to late institutions and cited Hellenistic 
authors. 2 Casaubon's attack is devastating against its target, the picture 
of the Corpus as the work of one man writing over a thousand years 
before the Christian era. Yet Casaubon's scholarly and ideological 
descendants have not answered the objections made by Ralph 
Cudworth in the 1670S, that the presence of later material does not 
make the Texts valueless as sources for Egyptian wisdom because they 
were written 'before the Egypti~n Paganism and their succession of 
. . ,3 pnests were yet extmct . 
Still less have the modern followers of Casaubon addressed them­
selves to the scheme set out by Flinders Petrie, who argued on specific 
historical grounds that the Texts form a relatively heterogeneous 
collection written between the 6th and 2nd centuries BC.4 Furthermore, 
the undeniable similarities between the Hermetic Texts, the works of 
Plato, and the 'Platonic' sections of the New Testament can easily be 
explained in terms of a common descent from Late Egyptian religion 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
and the Phoenician, Mesopotamian, Iranian and Greek ideas current 
throughout the East Mediterranean during this period. 
The reference to Erasmus at the end of the last chapter (see p. 159) 
shows that Casaubon's 'Christian Humanist' attack on the idea of 
Hermeticism as a source of Christianity was not altogether new. 
Nevertheless, the story of Casaubon's revelation is a perfect philologi­
cal counterpart to the I 9th- and earlY-20th-century myth of the history 
of science already mentioned: the heroic and lonely scientific genius 
standing out beyond his age to turn the darkness of superstition into the 
light of science and reason. 
Unfortunately for this example, however, Hermeticism and the 
passion for Egypt continued to flourish throughout the 17th century. 
Moreover, Frances Yates reflected the confusion between myth and 
reality when she wrote: 'It shattered at one blow ... ' but in the following 
paragraph continued: 'Casaubon's bombshell did not immediately take 
effect.' A little later she modified the impact still further by stating: 
Though other factors were working against the Renaissance tra­
ditions in the 17th century, Casaubon's discovery must, I think, be 
reckoned as one of the factors, and an important one, in releasing 
17th-century thinkers from magic.s 
It is true that the early- 17th -century philosopher and mathematician 
Marin Mersenne used Casaubon's dating to attack the Hermetic 
mysticism of the Elizabethan magician Robert Fludd, but it is hard to 
argue that this textual criticism had a major impact on society as a 
whole.6 It would seem more plausible, and put the horse before the cart, 
to say that belief in magic dwindled towards the end of the 17th century 
for large-scale social, economic, political and religious reasons; that this 
decline was a factor in the gradual loss ofinterest in the Hermetic Texts; 
and that to the extent that it did decline, belief in their great antiquity 
became a victim of the general increase of scepticism. 
Whether or not Casaubon's criticism had an impact on 17th-century 
thought as a whole, it had no effect whatsoever on Hermeticism in that 
century. Some scholars, like Kircher, ignored Casaubon altogether; 
others, like the Cambridge Platonists, confronted his criticism but 
argued that the Texts still contained ancient and valuable material.


--- PAGE 98 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
The purpose of Bruno's immolation was to preserve the Church 
from a direct challenge. Catholic interest in Egypt was too powerful to 
be stifled and Ancient Egypt became the obsession of one of the most 
influential intellectual and cultural figures in 17th-century Rome: the 
GermanJesuit Athanasius Kircher. Kircher was a Christian Hermeti­
cist concerned with such things as astrology Pythagorean harmonics 
7 ' 
and Kabbalah. He had no doubt about the great antiquity of Hermes 
Trismegistos, believing that he lived about the time of Abraham, and he 
was perfectly willing to accept Egyptian prefigurations of Christ. As he 
wrote: 
Hermes Trismegistos, the Egyptian, who first instituted hieroglyphs, 
thus becoming the prince and parent of all Egyptian theology and 
philosophy, was the first and most ancient among the Egyptians ... 
Thence, Orpheus, Mousaios, Linos, Pythagoras, Plato, Eudoxos, 
Parmenides, Melissos, Homer, Euripides and others learned rightly 
of God and of divine things ... 8 
A~ well as being interested in Egypt as the place of the prisca the%gia, 
Kircher was concerned with it as the home of the prisca sapientia, the 
'original wisdom' or 'philosophy', most of which the Greeks had failed 
to preserve. He corresponded with Galileo on the subject of a universal 
standard of measure which would naturally be that of the Egyptians, 
and used his powerful position at the papacy to send his agents to Egypt 
to determine it from the measur~ments of the Great Pyramid.9 His 
greatest effort - to which he devoted his whole life and his extraordinary 
linguistic talents - was the attempt to unlock the secrets of hiero­
glyphics, which he saw not merely as the repository of ancient wisdom 
but as the ideal script. Following Horapollo, Kircher believed the 
hieroglyphs to be purely symbolic and therefore vastly superior to all 
~lph~be.ts. Although unsuccessful in his attempt to decipher Egyptian 
IDscnptlons, he realized that Coptic was a descendant of the ancient 
language and might - despite the script's supposed lack of phonetic 
correspon~ences - provide help in the decipherment. Therefore, just 
~t the POIDt. when Coptic was dying out as a spoken language 
ID Egypt, Kircher established its study in Rome on a systematic 
basis.lO 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
ROSICRUCIANISM: 
ANCIENT EGYPT 
IN PROTESTANT COUNTRIES 
Protestants, too, continued to be interested in Egypt and Hermeticism. 
The elusive Rosicrucians, who sprang up in Germany, France and 
England in the 17th century, seem, like Bruno - to whom they may well 
have been connected - to have been promoting a 'true' religion for the 
elite. It appears to have been designed to avoid the bloody hostility 
between Catholics and Protestants that erupted so horribly in the 
Thirty Years War that ravaged Germany from 1618 to 1648.11 Like the 
16th-century Hermeticists, the Rosicrucians, or those who claimed to 
speak for them, advocated the direction of society by an elite of 
enlightened men in possession of true, magical and scientific knowl­
edge. In doing this they were following the now familiar succession 
from the Egyptian priesthoods to the Pythagorean brotherhoods to the 
Platonic Academy. In this respect Frances Yates makes the plausible 
claim that it was this Rosicrucian concept that lay behind the 'invisible 
college' seen by the founders of the Royal Society in England in the 
1650s.12 
With the Commonwealth's freedom of the press, the 1650S saw a 
striking revival ofinterest in Hermeticism. As the historian Christopher 
Hill has written: 'More Paracelsan and mystical chemical books were 
published in the 1650S than in the whole of the preceding century.' 13 In 
attacking the linked church and academic establishment, English 
Hermeticism became allied to political and religious radicalism. 14 
With the Restoration in 1660, however, many thinkers were swept up 
by the counter-revolutionary current and backed away from their 
radicalism. What is more, the king prudently took over science by 
becoming patron of the Royal Society, much as he was head of the 
established Church. Nevertheless, the Hermetic ferment during the 
Commonwealth provided an important impetus for the later advances 
of respectable science. Hermeticism now tended to be associated with a 
special form of millenarianism that grew up in 17th-century England, 
focused on the need to perfect or recover all knowledge; this was seen as 
a necessary precondition for the advent of the new millennium. IS


--- PAGE 99 ---
166 BLACK ATHENA 
The Cambridge Platonists, centred round Henry More and Ralph 
Cudworth, also came from this Hermetic and millenarian environ­
ment. 16 As mentioned above, this group, which flourished from the 
1660s to the 1680s, knew all about Casaubon's criticism but still 
maintained that the Hermetic Texts were valuable because they con­
tained elements of the prisca sapientia. Since they saw no reason to 
attribute the 'Platonic' aspects of Hermeticism to Greece, for them the 
essential function of the Greeks was as partial transmitters of ancient 
wisdom. As More wrote: 
Plato's school ... well agrees with learned Pythagore, 
Egyptian Trismegiste, and th'antique roll, 
Of Chaldee wisdome, all which time hath tore, 
But Plato and deep Plotin do restore. 17 
By far the best-known pupil of the Cambridge Platonists was Isaac 
Newton, although the degree to which he can usefully be considered 
Hermeticist continues to be fiercely debated. 18 There is no doubt, 
however, that he too was, as the modern intellectual historian Frank 
Manuel puts it, 'unruffled by Isaac Casaubon's revelation,.19 
Furthermore, whether or not he accepted a Hermetic prisca the%gia, 
he certainly believed in an Egyptian prisca sapientia, which he saw it as 
his mission to retrieve. For example, it ~as essential for Newton's 
theory of gravitation to have an accurate measurement of the circumfer­
ence of the world. As far as he knew, there had been no recent, accurate 
measurement of a degree of latitude. Thus he could rely only on the 
figures of the Hellenistic mathematician and astronomer Eratosthenes 
and his followers, and these did not fit Newton's theory. His next 
assumption was that although Eratosthenes had lived in Egypt he had 
failed to preserve the ancient measurements accurately. Therefore 
Newton needed to retrieve the exact length of the original Egyptian 
cubit, from which he could calculate that of their stadium which, 
according to Classical authors, bore a relation to a geographical degree. 
Earlier in the I 7th century Burattini, an Italian working for Kircher, 
and John Greaves, an English scholar with similar preoccupations, 
had spent years trying to obain accurate measurements of the Great 
Pyramid. (From ancient times, it had been believed - quite possibly 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
rightly - that the Pyramid enshrined perfect units of length, area and 
volume as well as geometric proportions such as Jt and 'the golden 
mean' <1>.) When Greaves returned to England he published his findings 
fully and was appointed Professor of Astronomy at Oxford; Newton 
used Greaves' figures to deduce that the Pyramid had been built on the 
basis of two cubits. One of these was far closer to the one he needed 
than that of the Greeks, but it still did not fit his theory. This was 
possibly because Greaves' and Burattini's measurements of the Pyra­
mid's base were inaccurate, since they were unable to penetrate the 
accumulated debris around it. Indeed it was not until 1671, when 
the Frenchman Picard accurately measured a degree of latitude in 
Northern France, that Newton was able to prove his general theory 
of gravitation. 20 
This question of measurement is only one example of Newton's faith 
in the prisca sapientia of Ancient Egypt. He was also convinced that 
atomic theory, heliocentricity and gravitation had been known there. 2l 
As he wrote in an early edition of his Principia Mathematica: 
It was the most ancient opinion of those who applied themselves to 
philosophy, that the fixed stars stood immovable in the highest parts 
of the world; that under them the planets revolved about the sun; and 
that the earth, as one of the planets, described an annual course 
about the sun ... The Egyptians were the earlielit observers of the 
heavens and from them, probably, this philosophy was spread 
abroad. For from them it was, and from the nations about them, that 
the Greeks, a people more addicted to the study of philology than of 
nature, derived their first as well as their soundest notions of 
philosophy; and in the Vestal ceremonies we can recognize the spirit 
of the Egyptians, who concealed mysteries that were above the 
capacity of the common herd under the veil of religious rites and 
hieroglyphic symbols.22 
In this passage, significantly, we have an epitome of conventional views 
of the 17th century on the themes that concern us. Newton's admiration 
and respect for the Ancient Egyptians as the greatest scientists and 
philosophers are clearly expressed. In view of these earlier attitudes it is 
striking to find that he spent the last years of his life trying to defend the


--- PAGE 100 ---
168 BLACK ATHENA 
argument set out in his Chronologies of Ancient Kingdoms Amended. This 
was that Egyptian civilization had been founded just before the Trojan 
War, and that the Great Sesostris was only the Shishak of the Bible, who 
had invaded Judaea after the time of Solomon. From Newton's point of 
view this account damned the Egyptians as relative latecomers, making 
them inferior to the much older biblical tradition. However, Newton was 
concerned only with asserting Israelite priority, and he had no desire to 
deny that Egypt was the fount of Greek wisdom. Thus his down-dating 
of Egypt led him to scrap all the Greek chronologies and make the 
Greeks later still.23 In the next chapter I argue that this attempt is best 
seen as part of the reaction by Christians and respectable deists like 
Newton to what the contemporary intellectual historian Margaret 
Jacobs has called the 'Radical Enlightenment'. 
But before coming to the Radical Enlightenment and the reformation 
of Freemasonry, it would seem useful to consider Late Renaissance 
beliefs in the significance of the Phoenicians, who have been so 
important in Masonic legend, because it was the half-Phoenician 
Hiram who built the Temple at Jerusalem which symbolizes the world 
and is at the core of Masonic rituals and beliefs. We should remember 
that while Egyptian remained a mystery locked in the hieroglyphs, the 
boom in Christian studies of Hebrew that followed the Reformation 
relatively quickly led to the realization that Hebrew and Phoenician 
were mutually intelligible dialects of the same language.24 Therefore, 
long before its alphabet was first read by the Abbe Barthelemy in the 
middle of the 18th century, scholars had a relatively clear idea of the 
Phoenician language. 
Hebrew was, of course, generally believed to have been the original 
language of mankind, the speech of Adam and the Tower of Babel. 
There was thus an intensive search for Hebrew words in other 
languages, especially the European ones, a search which received some 
encouragement from what most scholars today would consider to be 
remarkable coincidences between words. Some, in fact, may be the 
result of pure chance but, as I have said in the Introduction, I believe 
that others are the result of the genetic relationship between Afroasiatic 
and Indo-European languages, while others come from loaning from 
Canaanite or Phoenician into Greek, Etruscan or Latin. 25 
I 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
The Phoenicians were seen as a conduit by which Hebrew or other 
cultures and languages, which we should now call Semitic, were 
diffused into Europe. The 16th-century political theorist Jean Bodin, 
for instance, used linguistic evidence to back his claim that all civiliz­
ation and language had spread outwards from the Chaldaean. He saw 
the invasions of Danaos and Kadmos as essential steps in this process, 
and maintained that all the Greeks had originated from Asia, Egypt 
or Phoenicia. 26 But although Bodin remained a respected political 
thinker, his and similar philological theories were soon outmoded by 
the work of scholars like Joseph Scaliger and Casaubon at the turn of 
the 17th century - men who did not speculate broadly on Hebrew con­
nections and remain within~e canon of Classical studies even today. 
The Huguenot Samuel Bochart, however, an equally learned and 
cautious scholar, is not there. In the 1640s, working on the correct 
assumption that Hebrew and Phoenician were essentially the same lan­
guage, Bochart made an investigation of the plausibly Semitic place 
names around the Mediterranean that is still unsurpassed. He also con­
ducted serious research on Canaanite loan words in Greek and Latin, 
which significantly ceased to be authoritative only in the I 820S.27 
ANCIENT EGYPT 
IN THE 18TH CENTURY 
Newton is a pivotal figure. Coming from a world of astrology, alchemy 
and magic, he left a world in which these were no longer respectable. 
This change, of course, also reflects the social, economic and political 
transformation of the late 17th century, along with the triumph of 
capitalism in England and Holland, and statism in France. In this new 
world there was no place for Hermeticism, at least in its old form, but 
this did not mean that there was any less enthusiasm for Ancient Egypt. 
This enthusiasm soared in the century from 1680 to 1780. The 
best-known novel of the early part of the century, for instance, 
Fenelon's Tilbnaque, first published in 1699, features a Greek 
prince - Telemachus the son of Ulysses - as its hero, but it is full of 
animadversions about the material wealth, great wisdom, philosophy 
and justice of the Egyptians. These are specifically contrasted with


--- PAGE 101 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
the inferiority of the Greeks, though the pharaoh Sesostris favoured 
them and had benevolendy given them laws.28 
The middle of the 18th century was a high point ofEgyptophilia. As a 
French writer put it in 1740: 
The only things talked about are the ancient cities of Thebes and 
Memphis, the Libyan Desert, and the caves of the Thebaid. The 
Nile is as familiar to many people as the Seine. Even the children 
have their ears battered with its cataracts and openings. 29 
The writer was presumably part of the Christian reaction against Egypt 
(see Chapter IV). In this period, however, even Europocentric writers 
welcomed as pioneers in the 19th and 20th century paid obeisance to 
Egypt. The learned Giovanni Battista Vico, who flourished in early-
18th-century Naples and whose Romantic, Europocentric and histori­
cist view of history made him a hero among the 19th-century scholars, 
was in many ways hostile to the Egyptians. As a pious Catholic he 
explicidy excluded theJews from profane history, and put their history 
back to the Creation. He saw the Egyptians as only one among the 
earliest post-diluvian peoples. Nevertheless, they played a central role 
in his thinking. He maintained that his world historical scheme of three 
ages was based on Egyptian history as narrated by Herodotos: the stages 
of the gods, of heroes and of men. These stages he saw as paralleled by 
three types of ' language': hieroglyphics, 'symbolic' and 'epistolary'. He 
also discussed and accepted the myth of Kadmos, linking it to Egypt.3o 
Montesquieu, too, was forced to concede that 'the Egyptians were the 
best philosophers in the world,.31 
The mainstream of fashionable opinion in England and France 
seems to have been - as the French quotation above would suggest -
unequivocally enthusiastic about Egypt. One of the best-known English 
playwrights of the mid-18th century, for instance, was Edward Young, 
whose series of Egyptian plays have - not surprisingly - received very 
lime attention in later centuries. In 1752 the fifteen-year-old Edward 
Gibbon demonstrated his enthusiasm for Egypt by writing his first 
historical essay on 'the Age ofSesostris,.32 
This favourable opinion, and the continued conviction that Greek 
culture had come from Egypt and Phoenicia, was translated into new 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
non-mystical scholarship. In 1763 the brilliant Abbe Barthelemy, 
decipherer of Palmyrene and Phoenician, presented a paper entided 
'General reflections on the relations between the Egyptian, Phoenician 
and Greek languages'. In this his first correct asumption, based on 
Kircher - whose other work he considered fantastic - was that Coptic 
was a form of Ancient Egyptian. He also recognized the language family 
later known as Semitic, which he called 'Phoenician'. On these two 
bases, he established that Egyptian, although not a Semitic language, 
was related to the Semitic family. It is true that some of his lexical 
evidence can now be seen to have been faulty, as some Coptic words 
derive from Semitic loans into Late Egyptian. However, the main lines 
of his argument, based on ~imilarities between pronouns and gram­
matical features, are irreproachable. In this sense, then, Barthelemy 
was a pioneer of what we should now call Afroasiatic studies. 
Barthelemy admitted that he could see no such grammatical parallels 
between Coptic and Greek. Nevertheless he believed in the Egyptian 
colonization and civilizing of Greece and maintained that 'It is imposs- -
ible that in this exchange ofideas and goods, the Egyptian language did 
not participate in the formation of Greek.,33 He then gave a list of 
etymologies from Egyptian into Greek, several of which - such as the 
Coptic hoI, Demotic IJf to the Greek ophis (snake) - would seem 
plausible today.34 
Linguists were not the only scholars to maintain the priority and 
centrality of Egypt. The standard 18th-century work on ancient 
mythology, that of the Abbe Banier, continued the Classical and 
Renaissance traditions of deriving the Greek and Roman gods from 
those of the Egyptians.35 At the end of the century Jacob Bryant 
attempted to continue the work of Bochart, but he pointed out that the 
latter had not been completely successful because he had missed out 
the Egyptian component in Greek and Roman mythology and 
language.36 Bryant thus tried to explain their origins in terms of an 
'Amonian' culture that contained both Egyptian and Phoenician ele­
ments. Despite the many fantastic aspects of his work, I believe that his 
approach was fundamentally the right one, but that he failed because 
Egyptian was still undeciphered and he did not use Coptic. In any event, 
his A New System; or anAnalysis of AncientMythology, published in 1774,


--- PAGE 102 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
was enormously respected at the tum of the 18th century; it was a major 
source book for the Romantic poets and above all for Blake.37 
The same views dominated the history of philosophy. I have already 
mentioned that Europocentrists like Montesquieu saw the Egyptians as 
the greatest philosophers. EvenJacob Brucker, whose massive history 
of philosophy was a sustained attack on Plato, his Egyptian teachers and 
their esotericism and twofold truth, could not strip the Egyptians of the 
title 'philosophers,.38 
THE 18TH CENTURY: CHINA 
AND THE PHYSIOCRATS 
At the end of the 17th century there was a surge of European 
self-confidence. The Polish defeat of the Turks outside Vienna in 1683 
was followed by the rapid Austrian recovery of Hungary. These, 
together with the Russian advance to the Black Sea, removed the 
Turkish threat from Europe. From now on, Europeans were on the 
advance against Asians by land as well as by sea. With this security, 
the leaders of the Enlightenment now felt free to show a preference 
for non-European cultures in their reaction against feudalism and 
traditional Christianity. By far the most favoured were Egypt and 
China, which were seen as very similar to each other, if not directly 
linked. These two civilizations were not seen merely as anti-European 
utopias -like Turkey, Persia and the land of the Hurons - which could 
be imbued with some vague general nobility and used to satirize and 
criticize Europe. Egypt and China had a much greater significance 
because they provided positive examples of higher and finer civiliz­
ation.39 Both were seen to have had massive material achievements , 
profound philosophies and superior writing systems. 
Their most attractive features, however, were their model adminis­
trations. These were seen as being carried out rationally and without 
superstition by a corps of men recruited for their morality and wisdom, 
and required to undergo rigorous initiation and training. The secular 
French Physiocrats, on the one hand, felt closer to the Chinese: they 
liked to see Louis XV as a Chinese emperor and themselves as literati. 
Under their auspices China made a major cultural impact on France, 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 173 
and many if not most of the centralizing and rationalizing political 
and economic reforms of the mid-18th century followed Chinese 
models. 40 
THE 18TH CENTURY: ENGLAND, 
EGYPT AND THE FREEMASONS 
While the Physiocrats turned to China, the more mystical Freemasons, 
on the other hand, who included most of the major figures of the 
Enlightenment, preferred the Egyptians. All Masonic history is vague 
and that from before the reorganization of the craft in the early 18th 
century is doubly so, because it has to be gleaned from later writings that 
were deliberately distorted to create a mythological development. 
Nevertheless, a certain amount can be agreed. The Freemasons were 
originally secret societies of masons working on cathedrals and other 
major buildings in medieval Europe. In most parts of the continent they 
died out after the Reformation and the Wars of Religion; they survived 
in Britain but took on a very different character, with the entry of 
gentlemen members and the beginning of what was called 'speculative 
masonry,.41 However, even before this change, which took place in the 
late 17th century, the Freemasons had a special attachment to Egypt. 
The Christian encyclopaedist and historian Isidore of Seville's 
Originum sive Etymologiarum, written in the 620S, contained Herodotos' 
and Diodoros' statements that geometry had been invented by the 
Egyptians to measure land after the disappearance of boundary markers 
in the Nile Flood. For Isidore geometry was only one of the seven arts, 
but for masons it was centrally important as it was equated with masonry 
itself.42 Then again, several medieval Masonic manuscripts refer to 
Euclid's having founded masonry in Egypt for the Egyptian lords.43 
Before dismissing this quaint story it should be remembered that Euclid 
seems to have lived all his life in Egypt.44 
The Phoenicians, who were firmly linked to the Egyptians in the 
Bible - both are listed as sons of Ham - were at the core of Masonic 
mythology. Hiram Abif, the half-Phoenician craftsman of Solomon's 
temple, was probably part of Masonic legend by the 16th century.45 
Supposedly murdered after the completion of the temple, he was


--- PAGE 103 ---
174 BLACK ATHENA 
certainly a central figure of an Osiran type by the time the craft was 
re-formed at the beginning of the 18th. 
I have already mentioned that Frances Yates saw a connection , 
through Bruno, between the Renaissance Hermeticists and the 17th-
century Rosicrucians. She also saw one between the latter and the 
Freemasons in the person of Elias Ashmole - founder of the Ashmol­
ean Museum at Oxford - who petitioned to join the Rosicrucians and is 
also known to have been initiated as a Mason. 46 Frances Yates further 
showed the fundamental similarities between the Rosicrucians and the 
Freemasons in their use of the measurements and proportions of 
buildings - Solomon's temple or the Great Pyramid - to symbolize the 
structure of the universe and the desire to create a band of illuminati 
who could lead the world to a better, more peaceful and more tolerant 
way of life. 47 On the other hand, she did not make the link established 
by later scholars between this tradition and the widespread millenarian­
ism in the same circles. Many millenarians believed that knowledge had 
to be reassembled before the coming of the millennium. 48 Therefore 
the scholar could be the midwife of eschatology. It is from these schools 
of thought that the English 'scientific revolution' of the late 17th 
century seems to have evolved. 
\ 
Gentlemanly interest in Masonry increased in the 1670S and 80S. As 
well as contingent factors such as the massive rebuilding of London 
after the Great Fire of 1666, the growth of Freemasonry - like the 
contemporary rise of coffee houses and men's clubs - reflects changes 
in the urbanized commercial and landowning upper classes and the 
beginning of what one could call 'sub-political' activity outside the 
Restoration Court. During the reign of the Catholic James II from 1685 
to 1688, and after the Glorious Revolution of the latter year, there was a 
revival of radicalism which even brought back some of the survivors of 
the Commonwealth of the 1650s. However, in this movement which 
Margaret Jacob, as I have said, has called the Radical Enlightenment, 
the Puritanism and crude millenarianism of the earlier period was 
replaced by more modem ideas including deism, pantheism and 
atheism. 
In the 1660s and 1670S atheism was largely associated with Thomas 
Hobbes. Hobbes' political idea of the Leviathan was less shocking than -.. 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 175 
his atheism, which was based on the atomism and materialism of 
Demokritos and drew on the Epicurean tradition expressed most fully 
in the works of the great Latin poet Lucretius. At the same time atheism 
had been growing in Holland. In the long run, however, the most 
influential philosophy to emerge from there in the mid-17th century 
was the pantheism of the great Jewish philosopher Spinoza, which was 
influenced both by the Kabbalah and by Bruno. 49 
By the 1680s anew, equally radical intellectual force had emerged in 
England from the Hermetic and Rosicrucian traditions. The new 
movement argued for a twofold philosophy, for transcendence by the 
elite of the religious squabbles of the masses. The masses should be 
given toleration to practise their particular superstition, but political 
and intellectual power shoul,d be firmly in the hands of the enlightened 
few. 
This general attitude was perfectly compatible with 18th-century 
English society. The Radical Enlightenment, however, contained 
thinkers like John Toland, who not only drew from the Rosicrucian and 
Masonic traditions the notions of a prisca theologia, but also read Bruno. 
Toland had absorbed many of Bruno's cosmological Hermetic and 
Egyptian ideas of animate matter and a world spirit, ideas which lead to 
pantheism or even atheism. Long before this Newton himself had 
hesitated, in private, on the question of the activity or passivity of matter, 
but Newtonianism was not merely scientific. It had a consequent 
political and theological doctrine which depended on the passivity 
of matter, with motion coming only from outside. Otherwise, theologi­
cally, the universe would need no creator or 'Grand Architect', let alone 
a 'clock-minder'; while politically, England would need no king -
Toland was fully aware of the republican implications of his ideas. 50 
John Toland was a central figure in the establishment of the legends, 
rituals and theology of speculative Masonry, much of which was 
standardized and canonized by the fusion of various Masonic and 
Rosicrucian groups in 17 I 7 .51 By that time, however, the movement 
had been taken over by respectable Newtonians. Even bold figures like 
Newton's deputy and successor at Cambridge, William Whiston, who 
unlike his mentor openly proclaimed his Arianism - disbelief in the 
divinity of Christ - 'despised and actively combated' Toland and his


--- PAGE 104 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
ideas.52 Nevertheless, some of the aspects of the Radical Enlighten­
ment survived in respectable Masonry, which retained the essential 
elitism of the twofold philosophy and - in a new form - its 
Neo-Platonism. As in that tradition, ordinary people, and even most 
Masons, followed a partial faith, but the higher ranks transcended 
Christianity . 
For the Masons, as for the Hermeticists, the name of the Hidden 
God was too sacred or magically powerful to be revealed even to the 
lower grades, the craft. This name was J abulon, and - not surprisingly­
it is a triple name, its first two syllables being J a for Yahwe, the God of 
Israel, and Bul for the Canaanite Ba <al. 53 The last name came from 
)On, the Hebrew name of the Egyptian city )Iwnw, known in Greek as 
Heliopolis and now a suburb of Cairo. According to Classical writers, 
Heliopolis had been a major centre of learning where, for instance, 
Eudoxos had studied. 54 For the Freemasons, it was thus the epitome of 
ancient esoteric wisdom. 55 Even more significandy, the city was a major 
centre of the sun -cult and was associated particularly with Ra, who - as 
mentioned on p. I 15 - became associated with Osiris by the 18th 
Dynasty. The Hermetic Texts refer repeatedly to the perfect city 
founded by Hermes Trismegistos which is closely associated with the 
sun; while Citta del Sole, City of tlte Sun, was a term used by Bruno, 
it was better known in the utopia written by his contemporary 
Campanella. 56 
Campanella's city is populated by white-robed, pure and religious 
Solarians who are transparently Egyptian, and its buildings form an 
ideal model for the universe or a heliocentric system of planets. 57 Here 
it should be remembered that Masonic ideology was built around the 
notion of sacred buildings symbolizing the universe. In the City of the 
Sun Moses, Christ, Mahomet and other great teachers were revered as 
magi, but the city was ruled by Hermes Trismegistos as sun priest, 
philosopher, king and lawgiver.58 In this case, then, the Masonic claim 
of drawing their traditions from Ancient Egypt has a basis in fact. 
Through the Hermetic Texts, Bruno, Campanella, Toland and/or his 
friends, one can trace a line from the final syllable of the name of their 
ineffable God to )Iwnw, the cult centre ofRa in Lower Egypt. 
The ascending mystery of Jabulon - from Judaeo-Christian to 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 177 
Canaanite- Phoenician, to Egyptian and the Osiran rituals for the upper 
grades - does not mean that the centrality of Egypt to the Freemasons 
was hidden. Masonic temples have frequendy been built in an Egyptian 
style - architecture is naturally of great significance to the craft -
showing that the 'Lodges' are to be seen as Egyptian temples. Their 
symbols are the 18th-century conception of purely logical hieroglyphs. 
(Some, like the pyramid and eye still to be seen on the Great Seal of the 
United States and the dollar bill, were taken direct from Egypt.) There 
is thus no doubt that the Masons have seen themselves as the successors 
to the Platonic Guardians and the latter's own model, the Egyptian 
priests. 
If the impetus to identify with Egypt and some religious symbols 
came from earlier traditions, general knowledge of Egypt among 
18th-century Freemasons came from contemporary scholarship. 
However, before examiniiig these new sources of information I want to 
look at intellectual developments in this area in France. 
FRANCE, EGYPT AND 'PROGRESS': 
THE QUARREL BETWEEN 
ANCIENTS AND MODERNS 
The concept of , progress' had existed in Europe since the 16th century, 
when people began to realize that they now possessed products and 
inventions that the Ancients had lacked - sugar, paper, printing, 
windmills, the compass, gunpowder, etc. - all of them introductions 
from Asia. But during the devastating Wars of Religion from 1560 to 
1660, it was difficult for such a view to spread or even to take firm root. 
The century from 1670 to 1770, however, was one of great economic 
expansion, scientific and technical development, and increased con­
centration of political power. The popular writer Perrault and the 
'Moderns' in France were not merely fawning when they compared 
the age of Louis XIV to that of Augustus, and considered both the 
splendour and morals of their own times greater than those of the 
Ancients - especially those of the barbaric Homeric heroes.59 
The cult of Louis XIV as Le Roi Soleil, the Sun King, appears to 
have been instituted at his coming of age in 166 I and seems to have


--- PAGE 105 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
formed part of an attempt to create a national cult to which all the 
French, whether Catholic or Protestant, could rally.6o Indeed, as the 
triple godhead of Apollo, Herakles and God the creator, the cult or 
conceit clearly profited from Louis's youth and the end of the civil wars 
of the Fronde. The cult became central to the splendour and cultivation 
of Versailles, and served the political purpose of 'buying off' the nobility 
with the spectacles and pleasures of what was thought to the most 
splendid court on earth. 61 As the young Apollo Louis was patron of the 
arts, and as Herakles he was mighty in war. He was a traditional sun 
with his ritualJournee, 'day', beginning with a ceremonial lever (rising) 
and ending with an equally formal coucher (going to bed or setting); but 
at the same time a Copernican sun, around which the planets circled. 
The cult also had alchemical aspects. The modern historian Louis 
Marin has shown that the use of fireworks and projecting dust into the 
air, over water in a blaze of light, which was central to his spectacles, 
demonstrated Louis's ability as the Sun to mix and transcend the four 
elements. 62 
Nevertheless, although this combination of alchemy, sun worship 
and a divinized monarch associated with the sun looks very Egyptian, I 
have not been able to find any direct connections between them. On the 
other hand, we do know from y oltaire that Louis was identified with 
Sesostris, among other monarchs of Antiquity. 63 Thus when describing 
the splendours of Ancient Egypt French writers during the reigns of 
Louis XIV and Louis XV must have had some arriere pensee of their own 
society. 
This leads us back to the quarrel which dominated European 
intellectual life during the 18th century: that between the Ancients and 
the Moderns. As mentioned above, the crux was the issue of whether 
the Moderns were now morally and artistically superior to the Ancients, 
and its centre was on the moral and artistic qualities of the Homeric 
epics; it should be remembered that Homer was seen by the Ancient 
Greeks as a cultural 'founding father'. From the 15th to the early 17th 
century the Egyptians had represented true Antiquity, but at the same 
time the authority of Egypt had been used by innovators to challenge the 
ancient authorities of Aristotle, Galen, etc. In this respect, then, it had 
what one might call a double image. In late-17th- and earlY-18th-
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 179 
century France, the progressive aspect was dominant: Egypt, with its 
identification with the France of Louis XIV, was clearly on the side of 
the Moderns. 
Fenelon, the author of Telemaque, was too slippery a character to 
allow himself to be seen on one side or the other. He loved Homer and 
admired the simplicity of the Greeks but, as I have said, his praise of the 
vast wealth and cultural superiority of the civilization of the Egypt of 
Sesostris, compared to that of Homeric Greece, clearly distanced him 
from Madame Dacier, the translator of the Iliad and champion of 
Homer's eternal artistic and moral perfection. 64 
The Abbe Terrasson, on the other hand, was much more committed 
to the Moderns. He was born into a talented Catholic family, and his 
father seems to have shared the millenarian preoccupations which 
dominated 17th-century English science. The father had his sons 
educated 'to accelerate the end of the world'. Jean Terrasson became a 
priest and a leading figure in French intellectual life from the I690S 
until his death in 1750.65 As Professor of Greek and Latin at the 
College de France, and in key positions in both the Academie Fran~aise 
and the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, he dominated the 
study of ancient history in earlY-18th-century France. A major attack 
on the Iliad, published in 1715, put him in the forefront of the 
Moderns. 66 
Terrasson also achieved fame as the translator of Diodoros Sikeli­
otes, the detailed and favourable commentator on Egypt and the 
colonization of Greece. But he was best known for a novel which first 
appeared in 173 I: Seth os, histoire ou vie tiree des monuments: anecdotes de 
l'ancienne Egypte. With a relatively shallow pretence, Terrasson claimed 
that his work was that of an unknown Alexandrian of the 2nd century 
AD. Although a fake the novel incorporated, with references, a mass of 
material largely from the ancient writers from Herodotos to the Church 
Fathers, as well as from the novel Aithiopika, which really does seem 
to have been written in the 2nd century AD. 
Terrasson's hero, Sethos, is an Egyptian prince born a century 
before the Trojan War. There were in fact two pharaohs named Sety­
rendered Sethos in Greek - in the 13th century BC, while the traditional 
date of the Trojan War was 1209 BC. Terrasson seems to have taken the


--- PAGE 106 ---
180 BLACK ATHENA 
name from the Ptolemaic Egyptian historian Manetho, who used the 
name for the Great Pharaoh Ramesses II, the son of Sethos I. The fact 
that the name and date are reasonably accurate shows that the I 8th­
century scholars could at times make profitable use of Classical sources 
for the reconstruction of Egyptian history.67 The structure of the novel, 
however, is fictional and resembles that of Fenelon's Telemaquein that it 
is concerned with the adventures and education of a noble young 
prince. But it also reflects Diodoros' stories of the civilizing conquests 
of Osiris. After going through various mysterious initiations, Sethos 
travels around Africa and Asia setting up cities and establishing laws, 
later retiring to join a college of initiates. 68 
Like Ttlemaque, Serhos contained many animadversions on the glories 
of Egyptian civilization and, even more strongly than the former work, it 
insisted on the great superiority of Egypt over Greece. Terrasson 
described the academy at Memphis as far finer than that of Athens, 
giving details of all the arts and sciences in which the Egyptians excelled 
the Greeks. Using Classical quotations, he demonstrated that the 
founders of Greek politics, astronomy, engineering and mathematics 
had all studied in Egypt. Further, he also maintained that there were 
close parallels between Greek and Egyptian mythology and ritual and 
that the Greeks had derived their forms from Egypt.69 He saw the main 
cultural transmission as having come through Greek study in Egypt. 
Nevertheless, he also mentioned the colonizing activities of Kadmos 
and Danaos, and it is significant that he firmly attached the Phoenicians 
to the glories of Egyptian civilization. 70 
Seth os immediately became the standard Masonic source of infor­
mation about Egypt. As Masonry spread throughout Europe and North 
America the book was translated into English and German and was 
published in numerous editions throughout the 18th century. It became 
the source of many plays and operas, most of them Masonic, of which 
the best known is The Magic Flute. Both Schikaneder's libretto and 
Mozart's score are crammed full of Masonic-Egyptian symbolism.71 
For more than a century the novel was openly used as a source for 
Masonic history, and Seth os still remains the mainspring of its legend 
and ritual. The tradition of the primacy of Egypt has remained so 
important to the craft that Masonry has been unable to bow to popular 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
or academic fashion on this issue. As a Masonic writer put it in the 
extremely philhellenic I830s: 
All the ancient and modem historians agree that formerly Egypt was 
the cradle of sciences and arts and that contemporary peoples draw 
their religious and political principles from it. As the learned Dupuis 
has shown: 'Resembling a tree as ancient as the world, Egypt has 
lifted her magnificent head in the chaos of eternity and has enriched 
all parts of the world with her products. She has pushed her roots 
towards posterity under different forms and varied appearances but 
with a constant essence reaching up to us with her religion, her 
morality and her science.72 
MYTHOLOGY AS ALLEGORY 
FOR EGYPTIAN SCIENCE 
The idea that mythology is an allegorical interpretation of historical 
events or natural phenomena to the masses, who are capable of grasping 
only a partial truth, was well established in Antiquity. It is part of the 
general scheme of the twofold truth or philosophy, referred to so 
frequently above. Thus it was the dominant mode of understanding 
myth from the Renaissance to the end of the 17th century. 
Frank Manuel has sensitively described the way in which this 
approach was rejected and overthrown in the 18th-century swing 
towards common sense. Some 18th-century mythographers, like 
Freret and the Abbe Banier, did as the Greek euhemerists had done 
2,000 years earlier and tried to interpret myths as the clumsy telling of 
literal truths. 73 Myths were now supposed to have been taken at face 
value by the Ancients, just as the contemporary peoples of other 
continents appeared to take theirs. 
The change was linked to the growing sense of 'progress' and the 
increasing tendency, beginning with the 17th-and 18th -century writer 
Fontenelle, to revive an analogy - stated in Antiquity by St Augustine­
between human history and the growth of a child to maturity.74 In a 
complete reversal of the previous view of myth as the hidden signs of a 
higher civilization, it was now seen as the poetic expression of the


--- PAGE 107 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
childhood of mankind, to be valued not for its truth content but as a 
source of information about human psychology. 
Despite all this activity, however, the allegorical interpretation of 
myth as an expression of the ancient wisdom of the Egyptian priests 
survived and flourished among Freemasons and Rosicrucians. Manuel 
has shown how it was revived in print in the immense and immensely 
dull works of Court de Gebelin. 75 We, however, are far more concerned 
with the works of the scholar and revolutionary Charles Fran<;ois 
Dupuis. 
As the great 20th -century historian of science Giorgio de Santillana 
has pointed out, it is not accidental that Dupuis is so little known today. 
His beliefs continue to form a coherent challenge to both Christianity 
and the myth of Greece as a cultural beginning; thus he and his work 
had to be buried. 76 Dupuis was a brilliant scientist and the inventor of 
semaphore, and was also active in politics during the French Revolution. 
His great reputation as a scholar and his dedication to moderate 
revolutionary principles made him a natural choice for director of 
cultural events during the Directory from 1795 to 1799, and he became 
president of the legislative body during the Consulate under Napoleon 
that followed. 
Dupuis's most famous work was the massive Origin of all Cults, which 
appeared in 1795. In it he ar~ed that all mythologies and religions 
could be traced back to one source, Egypt. Furthermore, he believed 
that nearly all myths were based on one of two principles: the miracle of 
sexual reproduction, and the intricate movements of the stars and other 
heavenly bodies. Although myth was couched in spectacular and 
fantastic terms, he argued that it concealed an inner scientific truth 
which could be explained only in terms of science. Much of his gigantic 
work was in fact a detailed matching of myth to astronomy, which _ 
unfortunately for proponents of the Aryan Model - he knew much 
better than any later Classicist. Dupuis had two major themes. One of 
his thrusts was against Christianity, and he showed with massive detail 
the Near Eastern mythological background of the Gospels. For him the 
religion was built from the debris of the misunderstood priestly alle­
gories. His second major theme was the explanation of Greek myths _ 
which, following Herodotos and the ancient tradition, he took to be 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
fundamentally Egyptian - in terms of astronomy. Here again he 
produced a series of astounding correspondences, or coincidences, 
between such myths as the twelve labours of Herakles and the annual 
stellar movements through the twelve houses of the zodiac. 
Frank Manuel sees Dupuis as interesting, but ultimately absurd. 77 
De Santillana, by contrast, had a completely different view of 
him: 
Dupuis's work contains practically everything that has been found 
out since on Archaic astronomy. He had only the Classical sources to 
work with, practically no correct Oriental texts, and about other parts 
of the world only the occasional reports of travellers ... with these 
insufficient instruments, he worked out what seems to elude modem 
researchers. His knowledge of the pre-Sokratics is far more exten­
sive than what can be derived from Hermann Diels, that bible of 
current scholarship,' yet it remains this side of wrong guesses. His 
Origine may be judged extreme, but it is sound, coherent and 
impressive. 78 
In the twenty years following their publication Dupuis's views were 
enormously influential, and were seen as the ideological and theological 
parallel to the political challenge of the French Revolution. The 
Christian response to his attack will be examined in Chapter V, as well 
as the linked Hellenist challenge to his view of Greece as an appendage 
of Egypt, seen for instance in the statement that 'Egypt can be regarded 
as the mother of all theogonies and the source of all the fictions which 
the Greeks received and embellished, for it does not appear that they 
invented much.,79 
THE EXPEDITION TO EGYPT 
Whether or not Dupuis played a direct role in the decision to go to 
Egypt, there is no doubt that his presence as an important intellectual­
political figure reflects the general Egyptophil atmosphere in 
Napoleonic circles before 1798, when the great Expedition there was 
launched. It is known that he influenced its further penetration of


--- PAGE 108 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Upper Egypt, which he believed to have been the source of Egyptian 
and hence world culture. 80 
Plans for the colonization of Egypt had in fact been made long before 
the Revolution, in the 1770S at the height of French Masonic enthu­
siasm for Egypt. While there were important political and economic 
reasons for the Expedition, there is no doubt that the ideas of France 
reviving the 'cradle of civilization' that Rome had destroyed, and the 
desire to understand the Egyptian mysteries, also provided important 
motivation. 81 
It is uncertain whether or not Napoleon was a Mason himself. There 
is, however, no doubt that he was deeply involved in Masonic affairs, 
that there were many members of the craft in the higher ranks of his 
army, and that Masonry 'flourished exceedingly' under his rule.82 It is 
also clear that he took his imperial symbol of the bee from Egypt and 
probably through Masonic sources.83 His initial behaviour in Egypt also 
indicates this influence: he tried, for instance, to transcend Christianity 
and appear as a champion of Islam and Judaism, and he dutifully went 
into the Great Pyramid and had a mystical experience.84 
The whole Expedition is a fascinating turning point in European 
attitudes to the East. In many ways the elaborate surveys, maps and 
drawings, and the stealing of objects and cultural monuments to 
embellish France, was an earl~ example of the standard pattern of 
studying and objectifying through scientific enquiry that became a 
hallmark of European imperialism and a basis of the 19th-century 
'Orientalism' described so well by Edward Said.85 On the other hand, 
there were still many traces of the older attitude towards Egypt, and 
among the scientific members of the Expedition there was the belief 
that, in Egypt, they could learn essential facts about the world and their 
own culture and not just exotica to complete Western knowledge - and 
domination - of Africa and Asia. 
For instance, the mathematician Edme-Fran~ois Jomard made de­
tailed measurements of the Pyramids and surveys of Egypt on the basis 
of ancient sources that maintained that the Egyptian measures oflength 
were based on a detailed knowledge of the world's circumference; and 
that - as mentioned on pp. 166-7 in connection with Newton - the Great 
Pyramid incorporated specific fractions of latitude. When Jomard 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
published his findings in 1829, at a time of passionate Hellenism, the 
astounding correspondences which he discovered were quickly re­
jected on grounds of alleged inaccuracies. His conclusions seem much 
more credible in the light of recent and more precise measurement. 86 
Even in 1798 Neo-Hellenism and Romanticism were already major 
forces. Despite his Masonic concerns, Napoleon was very much a child 
of his age: he clearly imagined himself as Alexander - seen in a very 
Greek way - and he took Plutarch's Lives with him to provide Classical 
models. He also had a copy of the Iliad, whose hero Achilles had been 
an inspiration to Alexander. More directly relevant was the copy of 
Xenophon's Anabasis, depicting a succession of episodes in which 
European Greeks cut their way through much larger numbers of as­
sorted Asiatics. This suitable text became a 'bible' for 19th- and 
earlY-20th-century imperialism, although it took some decades for it 
to replace the democratic"orations of Demosthenes and the Iliad as 
the standard text for beginning the study of Ancient Greek. 87 
Napoleon's other reading provides a perfect sample of contemporary 
Romantic taste. There were the poems of Ossian, the central sig­
nificance of which to the Romantic movement will be discussed in the 
next chapter. Finally, there were the Bible and the Sanskrit Vedos 
representing the new Romantic craze for Ancient India, to be described 
in Chapter V.88 
Napoleon's position was, as usual, dramatic but his situation as 
someone living within the Ancient Model but caught up in the new 
paradigm of'progress' and Romantic Hellenism was quite typical of the 
age. Schikaneder and Mozart might still be celebrating Egyptian 
wisdom in The Magic Flute, written in 1791, but that was in remote 
Vienna. Things were different in Western Europe. By 1780 Edward 
Gibbon was referring in a staged progressive way to 'Egyptian theology 
and the philosophy of the Greeks', and before this he had burnt his 
'juvenile' essay on Sesostris, arguing that 'at a riper age I no longer 
presume to connect the Greek, the Jewish and the Egyptian antiquities, 
which are lost in a distant cloud. ,89 
In the same decade another distinguished scholar made a move in the 
same direction. Abbe Barthelemy's work on the decipherment of 
Phoenician and the comparison of Coptic, Hebrew and Greek has


--- PAGE 109 ---
186 BLACK ATHENA 
already been mentioned; in 1788, near the end of his long life, he 
published what was to become his best-known work, The Voyage of the 
Young Anacharsis. This story of the journey of a young Scythian prince 
through 4th-century Greece was an erudite and heavily annotated novel 
in very much the same style as Sethos, which, along with Telemaque, was 
one of its inspirations. 90 Anacharsis's success equalled that of Sethos: it 
came out in more than forty editions in French and was translated into 
eight languages.91 But the reversal it gives to the situation of Greece is 
fascinating. Where Fenelon's innocent young northerner Telemaque 
came from Greece to sophisticated Egypt, Anacharsis comes from 
virtuous Scythia to Greece in a period of sophistication and decadence, 
with Greece nevertheless the site of a great civilization. 
While glorifYing Greece, Barthelemy was too firmly rooted in the 
Ancient Model to neglect the civilizing roles of Egypt and Phoenicia. In 
his introduction to the novel, he saw the Egyptians as arriving as 
legislators for the primitive Greeks. Following Freret, he dated this 
arrival not merely to Kekrops, Kadmos and Danaos, but to 300 years 
earlier in the 20th century Be with Inachos and Phoroneus - whom 
Greek tradition tended to regard as Pelasgian or autochthonous. 92 
Further, he interestingly anticipated the argument put forward seventy 
years later - in the 1850S - by the great Semitist Ernest Renan that the 
I 
harsh Semitic character and its harsh monotheism were created by the 
desert sun. Barthelemy argued that the blazing Egyptian sun and 
contrasting deep shade produced a severe simplicity of thought and art, 
while the sparkling light of Greece had produced something that was 
lighter and more vital: 
Thus the Greeks, emerging from their forests, no longer saw objects 
under a frightening and sombre veil. Thus the Egyptians in Greece 
softened bit by bit the severe and proud expressions in their paint­
ings. The two groups, now making a single people, created a 
language that sparkled with vivid expressions. They clothed their old 
opinions with colours which changed their simplicity but made them 
more seductive.93 
This view puts Barthelemy in what we can now see as a transitional 
phase. That is, he accepted Winckelmann's Romantic Neo-Hellenist 
[CH. III] THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
view of the Egyptians as stiff, formal and somehow dead, while the 
Greeks were seen as laughing children. On the other hand, he did not 
see things as people in the 19th century did, in terms of the absolute 
need for Greek racial and linguistic purity. Thus he appears to have had 
no difficulty with the Ancient Model's descriptions of the colonizations. 
Not only was Anacharsis a major route for escapism during the 
French Revolution, but it was probably the most influential history of 
Greece during the peak of Phil hellen ism in France. The most influen­
tial English book, a massive History tifGreecewritten by Gibbon's friend 
William Mitford, was more straightforwardly academic. Mitford was 
much less impressed by Greece than Barthelemy had been. As a 
consistent conservative he rejected the idea of , progress' and was not at 
all sure that Greece had surpassed Egypt and the Near East; in fact, he 
generally preferred the latter. As he wrote in the first volume of his 
History, which remained Q1e standard work on the subject from its 
publication in 1784 until the 1830s: 
Assyria was a powerful empire, Egypt a most populous country 
governed by a very refined polity, and Sidon an opulent city abound­
ing in manufactures and carrying an extensive commerce when the 
Greeks, ignorant of the most obvious and most necessary arts, are 
said to have fed upon acorns. Yet it [sic] was Greece the first country 
in Europe that emerged from barbarism; and this advantage it seems 
to have owed intirely [sic] to its readier communication with the 
civilized nations of the East.94 
Mitford also maintained the Ancient Model's view of the colonization 
of Greece: 
It appears that in a very remote period some revolutions in Egypt, 
whose early transactions are otherwise little known to us, compelled 
a large proportion of the inhabitants to seek foreign settlements. 
Crete probably owed its civilization and polity to this event. Some of 
the best-supported of Ancient Grecian traditions relate to the 
establishment of Egyptian colonies in Greece; traditions so 
little accommodating to national prejudice and so perfecdy 
consonant to all known history, that for their essential cir­
cumstances they seem unquestionable. [my emphasis] 95


--- PAGE 110 ---
I
II 
[I 
, 
!I 
188 BLACK ATHENA 
The argument that traditions or legends are plausible if they are 
widespread, fit other historical patterns and outside information, and go 
against the interests of those who report them remains very powerful. 
However, it is interesting to note that there are no earlier defences of 
the Ancient Model. This is because the owl of Minerva flies only at 
dusk - that is, traditional beliefs are articulated only when they are 
under challenge. As with many embattled defenders of the status quo, 
Mitford argued that all serious scholars agreed with his position and 
believed with him in the Oriental origins of Greek civilization. He did, 
however, admit that a 'shallower' scholar, Samuel Musgrave, had 
argued that Greek culture was autochthonous. 96 It is to this kind of 
thinking that we must turn our attention in Chapter IV. 
CHAPTER IV 
HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT 
IN THE 18TH CENTURY 
W
E ARE NOW APPROACHING the nub of this volume and the 
origins of the forces that eventually overthrew the Ancient 
Model, leading to the replacement of Egypt by Greece as the 
fount of European civilization. I concentrate on four of these forces: 
Christian reaction, the rise of the concept of 'progress', the growth of 
racism, and Romantic Hellenism. All are related; to the extent that 
Europe can be identified with Christendom, 'Christian reaction' is 
concerned with the continuation of European hostility and intensi­
fication of the tension between Egyptian religion and Christianity. 
On the question of 'progress', I argue that its rise as a dominant 
paradigm damaged Egypt for two reasons. The country's great antiquity 
put it behind later civilizations; while its long and stable history, which 
had been a source of admiration, now· became reason to despise it as 
static and sterile. In the long run we can see that Egypt was also harmed 
by the rise of racism and the need to disparage every African culture; 
during the 18th century, however, the ambiguity of Egypt's 'racial' 
position allowed its supporters to claim that it was essentially and 
originally 'white'. Greece, by contrast, benefited from racism, im­
mediately and in every way; and it was rapidly seen as the 'childhood' of 
the 'dynamic' 'European race'.


--- PAGE 111 ---
190 BLACK ATHENA 
Racism and 'progress' could thus come together in the condem­
nation of Egyptian! African stagnation and praise of Greek/European 
dynamism and change. Such assessments fitted perfectly with the new 
Romanticism, which not only emphasized the importance of geo­
graphical and national characteristics and the categorical differences 
between peoples but saw dynamism as the highest value. Moreover, 
Greek states were small and often quite poor and their national poet was 
Homer, whose heroic epics fitted splendidly with the 18th-century 
Romantic passion for Northern ballads, most of which were extremely 
gory, like the Iliad. Here, as with language, a special relationship was 
seen between Greece and Northern Europe which was marred only by 
Greece's geographical position in the South-Eastern Mediterranean 
and the Ancient Model, which emphasized her close association with 
the Middle East. All in all, while Egypt, along with China and Rome, 
were the models of the Enlightenment, Greece became allied to the 
lesser, but growing 18th-century intellectual and emotional current of 
Roman_ticism. 
CHRISTIAN REACTION 
Here it should be emphasized that for most of the almost 2,000 years 
with which we are concerned, the tension or 'contradiction' between 
Christianity and the Egyptian 'twofold' philosophy was not - in the 
Leninist or Maoist sense - an 'antagonistic' one. As movements 
confined to the elite, Hermeticism and Masonry did not fundamentally 
threaten the social, political or even the religious status quo. However, 
the exclusive claims of Judaeo-Christian-Islamic monotheisms make 
any kind of unconformity difficult to tolerate, and there have been 
periods of bitter rivalry between the two traditions. 
The ruthless and bloody destruction of Gnosticism and Neo­
Platonism by the early Church was mentioned in Chapter II. In the 15th 
and 16th centuries, however, the Church generally tolerated or even 
encouraged Platonism and Hermeticism. The execution of Bruno was 
not surprising, given his blatant attacks on the Judaeo-Christian tra­
dition and his call for a return to Egyptian religion. Moreover, the 
burning was followed not by a ban on the study of Egypt but by the 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 191 
encouragement and massive funding of what Frances Yates calls 
Athanasius Kircher's 'reactionary Hermeticism' or, to put it more 
charitably, a Church-sanctioned 'Egyptology' which included 
Kircher's establishment of Coptic studies. 1 Although Hermeticism 
and Rosicrucianism were often influential in Northern European intel­
lectual circles, they did not loom large in the violence of the Thirty 
Years War in Germany, the Fronde revolts in France and the anti­
monarchical struggles in England and Holland. The religious struggles 
between Catholic and Protestant or High and Low Church had little or 
nothing to do with Hermeticism. 
Neo-Platonism and Hermeticism, as I have said, were often phil­
osophies espoused by moderates as attempts to transcend the raging 
political and religious battles of the time. Similarly, the atomist atheism 
associated with Thomas Hobbes grew up in an atmosphere of despair at 
competing brands of religion. Thus in England in the 1660s and 1670S 
moderate men like Ralph Cudworth, who were concerned with two 
main foes, Catholic superstition and Puritan Enthusiasm, saw Platon­
ism as an antidote to both. 2 Apart from its transcendence over sectarian 
squabbles, its doctrine that there was a light or life immanent in the 
world weakened the Enthusiasts' - or inspired believers' - claims to 
have a monopoly of holy spirit. Furthermore, Cudworth believed that 
the dangers of atheism from the Egypto-Platonic identification of spirit 
with matter, or the Creator with the Creation, was less acute than that 
from Hobbesian mechanical, atomist atheism.3 
Newton was intellectually formed in this atmosphere and it is in this 
context that his early admiration for the Egyptians, referred to in the last 
chapter, must be seen. However, his attitude towards Egypt changed 
drastically in the 1690S and the last years of his life were spent on 
chronological works, of which the most important was The Chronology of 
Ancient Kingdoms Amended. Here, as mentioned on p. 168, Newton 
prooed, on the basis of the Bible and astronomy, that the claims for anti­
quity made by the Egyptians and other peoples had been grossly exag­
gerated, and that the Israelites had existed long before all the others. 
Newton's most recent biographer, Professor Westfall, describes this 
as 'a work of colossal tedium' and believes that in it Newton had 
'produced a book with no evident point and no evident form'. The only


--- PAGE 112 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
explanation Westfall can give for it is that it had a concealed deist 
message.4 But the same could be said for most of Newton's works, and I 
do not think it provides a sufficient motive for the immense labour he 
put into his Chronology. Indeed, it could be argued that it was the most 
orthodox work Newton ever wrote: William Whiston, who can be 
described as Newton's deist conscience, fiercely attacked The Chron­
ology, as did the French atheist Freret. 5 Furthermore, as Westfall points 
out, Newton had effectively been co-opted by the Establishment by the 
end of his life. Thus I think it more useful to see The Chronology as the 
result of what the modem intellectual historian Professor Pocock 
describes as 'a complete reversal in Cudworth's attempt to demonstrate 
that ancient thinking was naturally in accord with Christian theology'. 
Pocock attributes this partly to the 'impact ofSpinoza', an attribution 
that has problems because, as the historian Professor Colie has shown, 
Cudworth was fully aware of Spinoza's thinking by the 1670s, and his 
greatwork The TruelntelleaualSystem of the Universe contained an attack 
on Spinoz~'s position.6 This is not to deny that Spinoza's pantheism 
continued to weaken the possibility of a Christian Platonism after the 
publication of Cudworth's work in 1679. However, the new factors 
after the 'Glorious Revolution' of 1689 were Toland and the Radical 
Enlightenment. All in all, I think Newton's later work and his lowering 
of the antiquity of the Egyptians and other ancient peoples should 
generally be seen as a 'respectable' deist and Christian defence against 
the Radical Enlightenment and the latter's use of the antiquity of Egypt 
and the Orient. As with Bruno in the 16th century, the peaceful 
coexistence between Christianity and esoteric Egyptian religion and 
philosophy, which had lasted through most of the Renaissance, broke 
down in the 1690S and the Christians struck back. 
THE 'TRIANGLE': 
CHRISTIANITY AND GREECE 
AGAINST EGYPT 
The defence ofNewtonianism brought Greek studies into alliance with 
Christianity, and this brings us to a central concern of this volume, 
which is less with the binary conflict between Egypt and the Bible than 
r " 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 193 
with the triangular relations between Christianity, Egypt and Greece. 
During the first centuries of the Christian era the main struggle was 
between Christians and pagans. As the dominant culture of the East 
Mediterranean during this period was Hellenic with a religion based on 
Egypt, both Christians and pagans - of whom the most influential were 
the Neo-Platonists - saw the distinctions between Egypt, the Orient 
and Greece as relatively unimportant. Jews like Josephus and Church 
Fathers like Clement of Alexandria and Tatian, on the other hand, 
scored points against the Greeks by pointing out the lateness and 
shallowness of Greek civilization in comparison with those of the 
Egyptians, Phoenicians, Chaldaeans, Persians and so on and, of course, 
the Israelites. They also stressed Greece's heavy cultural borrowings 
from the more ancient peoples.7 
The possibility of pitting Greeks against the Egyptians, Chaldaeans 
and others, in the defence of Christianity, did not occur until the 
Renaissance. I have already pointed out that Erasmus' hostility to 
Hermeticism in the early 16th century was essentially linked to 
his defence of Christianity and religion against magic. Erasmus, 
however, was also a champion of pure Latinity and the study of 
Greek. s 
During these same decades, Germans were becoming aware of 
striking similarities between their language and Greek. The nouns of 
both had four cases rather than the five of Latin. Both Greek and 
German used the definite article and made massive use of particles and 
of prepositions with verbs. After the Reformation, and the break away 
from Roman Catholicism, the relationship became much stronger, 
with the new image of Greek and German as the two languages of 
Protestantism. Luther fought the Church of Rome with the Greek 
Testament. Greek was a sacred Christian tongue which Protestants 
could plausibly claim was more authentically Christian than Latin. With 
the spread of the Reformation to England, Scotland and Scandinavia, a 
feeling developed that the Teutonic-speaking peoples were 'better' 
and more 'manly' than the Romance-speaking nations of France, 
Spain and Italy and that their languages as a whole were superior 
to Latin and on a par with Greek. As a 17th-century English writer 
put it:


--- PAGE 113 ---
194 BLACK ATHENA 
Our language was a dialect of the Teutonick, and although then but 
in her infancie, yet not so rude as hopefull, being most fruitfull and 
copious in significant and well-founding rootes and Primitives and 
withall capable and apt for diffusion from those her rootes into such a 
Greek-like ramosity [sic] of derivations and compositions, beyond 
the power of La tine and her off-spring dialects ... 9 
Greek studies flourished in Protestant schools and universities 
throughout the 16th and 17th centuries. It is striking, for instance, how 
many of the major French Hellenists of the 17th century - including 
Isaac Casaubon and Mme Dacier, who will be discussed when I come to 
the cult of Homer - were brought up as Huguenots. lO From using 
Greek to attack Roman Catholic superstition, it was not such a long step 
to employing it against Egyptian magic. Nevertheless, Casaubon's 
criticism of the antiquity of the Hermetic Texts was not juxtaposing a 
rational Greece to a magical and superstitious Egypt. It was using 
critical methods of approach to Greek texts to discredit the age, and 
hence the value, of Egyptian wisdom. 
A similar approach was used seventy years later by Richard Bentley. 
Known in his lifetime as the hated and tyrannical Master of Trinity 
College Cambridge, Bentley is, however, a hero in the history of 
Classics as the discoverer of the digamma, or rather of the fact that the w 
sound represented as F in some Greek alphabets had existed in 
Homeric and other Greek dialects, in which it was not written. This 
Bentley did with extreme ingenuity by observing that in certain cases 
words beginning with vowels did not elide or come together with the 
preceding syllables. He is even more respected for his rigorous critical 
scholarship which, though not particularly appreciated in his own day, 
has given him the later reputation as the greatest English Classicist of all 
time.II 
Richard Bentley was also the first man to popularize Newtonian 
physics and to spell out its theological and political implications: that, as 
matter could not move itself, a god - of generally regular habits - was 
needed to create and maintain the universe, just as a king was necessary 
to a Whig constitutional monarchy. Bentley put this scheme forward in 
1692 , when he preached the first series of sermons or lectures set up by 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 195 
the famous Anglo-Irish chemist Sir Robert Boyle against 'notorious 
infidels, namely, Atheists, Theists, Pagans, Jews and Mahometans,.12 
Bendey hardly mentioned the last two. His concern was clearly with the 
first three, and most of all with the Radical Enlightenment. He seems to 
have been especially concerned with the radical thinker and pioneer of 
Freemasonry John Toland's use of Bruno's Egyptian notion of animate 
matter, which the radical had used to attack Newtonian physics. Bentley 
and his circle also seem to have known about Toland's republicanism. 
Toland was fully aware of the interconnections between his physics and 
his politics. 13 Bentley used his own formidable intelligence and Classi­
cal scholarship not only to expound the Newtonian system and its 
implications, but also to cast doubt on the reliability and age of the 
Greek sources referring to Egyptian and Oriental wisdom and 
astronomy. 14- Thus he tried to deprive Toland and the radicals of one of 
their most powerful sources oflegitimacy. 
What most concerns us here, however, is the alliance between 
Newton and Bentley and the combination of the new science and 
critical Classical scholarship to defend the status quo. It is ironic that 
these two men, who were always on, if not over, the brink of Arianism or 
deism became two of the most effective defenders of the Christian 
Establishment. 15 
THE ALLIANCE BETWEEN 
GREECE AND CHRISTIANITY 
A more orthodox alliance between Christianity and Greece was present 
in the work of John Potter, a younger contemporary of Bentley at 
Wakefield Grammar School and later Archbishop of Canterbury. In 
1697 Potter brought out four volumes on Greek political institutions 
and religion which, with new editions, remained standard until replaced 
by Dr Smith's Diaionary in 1848}6 Working in a tradition that went 
back at least to Lucretius, Potter maintained not only that Athens, 
unlike the rest of Greece, had never been conquered by barbarians 
but also that Greek culture and institutions had come from Athens. 17 
In this way he was able to detach Greece from the Near East without 
challenging the ancient authority for the invasions.


--- PAGE 114 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
This tension is also present in his treatment of Greek religion. Here, 
though he tried to raise Thrace to equal status, he admitted that the 
religion had come from Egypt but went on to treat it as if it were purely 
Greek. 18 Throughout the 18th century one finds similar attempts, 
especially among Christian apologists, to reconcile a desire to play 
down Egypt and elevate Greece with an inability to confront the Ancient 
Model. 
'PROGRESS' AGAINST EGYPT 
While the proponents of the Radical Enlightenment in England used 
the antiquity of Egypt and Mesopotamia to bolster their position, they, 
like the French Moderns, seem to have felt themselves to be 'progress­
ive'. In the long run, however, Egypt was bound to lose from the 
establishment of the new paradigm of 'progress'. The transformation 
this brought about can be seen in the contrast between Newton's attack 
in the 17 lOS on the antiquity of Egypt and the East, and Bishop William 
Warburton's very different approach in the 1730S. Warburton saw his 
The Divine Legation of Moses as part of the struggle against deists, 
Spinozists and pantheists, whose opposition to Christianity he traced 
back to the N eo-Platonists. 19 Thus, in attacking the Radical Enlighten­
ment, Warburton gave defence of Christianity a progressive edge. As 
Pocock describes his position: 
far from seeing modern philosophy as threatening religion with its 
scepticism, he was much inclined to the view that only in modernity 
had philosophy attained to the sanctity and moderation compat­
ible with belief. Even the irreligion of modern times - which he 
identified with Jacob's Radical Reformation [Enlightenment] _ 
seemed to Warburton an archaistic revival of 'ancient' modes 
of philosophizing. 20 
Warburton's view of Egyptian religion itself was regressive, and not so 
far from that of Newton. Writing in the 1730S, he could not deny that 
Egyptian religion had once been a sublime monotheism, but he argued 
that it had fallen into appalling idolatry. In what Frank Manuel has 
described as a bishop's 'sense of solidarity with the priesthood of 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 197 
Egypt', he blamed this corruption on the politicians.21 In Warburton's 
eyes, however, priority was no advantage. He savaged Newton's 
chronology, even though this put him alongside such notorious deists as 
William Whiston and atheists like Nicolas Freret. 22 
For Warburton, the fact that the Greeks came later made them 
better. They had excelled their teachers. While he was obliged to admit 
that the Greeks had learnt the names of the gods and their rituals from 
the Egyptians, he emphatically denied that they were the same.23 He 
also maintained that while Pythagoras had studied in Egypt for twenty­
one years he had set out his theorems only on his return to Greece. On 
this basis, he argued that the Egyptians had been unable to hypothesize 
- a canon that survives today. 
A similar ambivalence towards Ancient Egypt was expressed by Jacob 
Brucker, the great German historian of philosophy of the mid-18th 
century.24 Unable to deny the massive ancient tradition that the 
Egyptians had been philosophers, Brucker nevertheless argued that 
they should more properly be called 'theogonists' who had invented and 
manipulated allegories. According to him, true philosophy had begun 
with the 'Pre-Sokratic' Ionians, but the real break with theogony had 
come with Sokrates himself. Sokrates' triumph, according to Brucker, 
was that, as Professor Pocock puts it, he 
abandoned the attempt to know nature, regarding it instead with 
reverent scepticism, and had focused philosophy on its proper 
object, the discovery of moral truths leading to the apprehension of 
the true god.25 
This anti-scientific 'philosophy', however, was betrayed by Plato, 
who had unluckily studied with Pythagoreans in Sicily and priests in 
Egypt. According to Brucker, Plato had reimported the allegory, poetry 
and esotericism from which the Ionians and Sokrates had tried to break 
away.26 Thus - by making a rather improbable categorical break 
between Sokrates and his devoted disciple and biographer, Plato -
Brucker was able to claim superiority for the Greeks, at the same time 
retaining the ancient view that all types of Platonism were integrally 
bound to the Egyptian tradition.


--- PAGE 115 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
EUROPE AS THE 
'PROGRESSIVE' CONTINENT 
The Turkish defeats of the 1680s and the general acceptance of 
Newto~an physics ~ansformed Europe's self-image. In the post­
Newtoman world wnters like Montesquieu, whose reference to the 
Egyptians as the greatest philosophers has been noted above, began to 
contrast Oriental 'wisdom' with the 'natural philosophy' of Europe.27 
Montesquieu wrote this in 1721; as the century continued, the notion 
of European superiority increased with European economic and 
industrial progress, and expansion into other continents. 
The position was far from that produced with the. triumph of 
imperialism in the 19th century, however, for no European of the 18th 
century could claim that Europe had created herself. Nevertheless, it 
was argued that Europe was now further advanced than any other 
continent, and here there was a close parallel with the situation in 
4th-century and Hellenistic Greece vis-a-vis the older civilizations. For 
instance: there is the frequently quoted passage in Epinomis, by Plato or 
one of hIs students, after a laudatory description of Egyptian and Syrian 
astr~nomy:. 'And let us note, that whatever the Greeks acquire from 
foreIgners IS finally turned by them into something finer.,28 
. The claim that some ineffable quality is added to imported tech­
mques, concepts or aesthetic styles often occurs in culturally peri­
pheral nations like England, Germany, Japan, Korea or Vietnam. 
Cultural pride needs to be maintained in the face of foreign borrowing 
that is so massive that it cannot be denied, or where borrowings run 
counter to a hierarchy of cultural or 'racial' superiority.29 As the 
popular writer Oliver Goldsmith wrote - in 1774 in his History of the 
Earth - strikingly paraphrasing Epinomis: 'Those arts which might 
have had their invention among other races of mankind have come 
to their perfection there [in Europe].,3o 
'PROGRESS' 
It is frequently said that the clearest 18th-century statement of the idea 
of 'progress' was that of Condorcet's Sketch of a historical table of the 
progress of the human spirit, written in 1793. However, most of the ideas 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 199 
Condorcet propounded there had been set out earlier in a speech On the 
Successive Progress of the Human Spirit, given in 1750 by the nineteen­
year-old Anne Robert Turgot. Turgot, who later became a finance 
minister of Louis XVI, was close to the leading Physiocrats and was a 
promoter of Chinese economic ideas. He was subsequently described 
as the founder of political economy. From the speech and unfinished 
draft histories, his ideas on 'progress' are quite clear.31 
These ideas are important in themselves and because of their bearing 
on the views held by Turgot and his contemporaries on the Egyptians, 
Phoenicians and Greeks. According to the new paradigm, these civi­
lizations had to be seen in ascending order as the human spirit 
'progressed'. But, as in all schemes of historical evolution - notably the 
Hegelian and the Marxist - each stage was seen as having started out 
beneficially 'progressive' but as having later slipped into decadence and 
opposition to the new forces. Thus Turgot saw Egypt and China as 
initially pioneering: 'they advanced with great strides towards 
perfection. ,32 
The Egyptians and Chinese were perceived as having been math­
ematicians, philosophers and metaphysicians. Unfortunately, in both 
civilizations these 'sciences' had been sapped by superstition and 
priestly dogmatism. Just as Bishop Warburton had tried to exculpate the 
priests on this issue out of 'clerical solidarity', so intellectuals like 
Turgot and Condorcet were delighted to have yet another stick with 
which to beat them, for here, as in the modern world, priests could 
largely be blamed for the decadence. 33 However, Turgot differed from 
the Physiocrats, who admired contemporary China, by condemning the 
country to the past; and this part of the 'progressive' scheme brought 
him - or kept him - very close to the old, regressive picture of the 
Egyptians as having been in possession - probably from the Israelites -
of a pure and true religion, but as having lost it. 
Turgot also saw the decadence as the result of the despotism of 
Egyptian and Chinese government. Like Montesquieu, however, who 
had attributed it to the morally improving effects of irrigation, Turgot 
maintained that Egyptian and Chinese governments were not as bad as 
their hot climates would seem to determine, or as the Mahometan 
forms actually were.34 Like Brucker and most 18th-century thinkers,


--- PAGE 116 ---
200 BLACK ATHENA 
Turgot included the Pythagoreans, N eo-Platonists and, by implication, 
Plato himself among the decadent Asiatic metaphysicians. 35 For him, 
the higher stages of the progress of the human spirit began with 
Aristotle's logic and continued directly to Bacon, Galileo, Kepler, 
Descartes, Newton and Leibniz. 36 As far as Greece was concerned 
Turgot, although encouraged by the country's disunity and liberty, 
believed that 'it was only after many centuries that one saw the 
appearance of philosophers in Greece.,37 
For Turgot the real Hellenic glory was in poetry, which derived 
directly from the richness of the Greek language. This richness had 
come about because 
The Phoenicians, inhabiting an arid coast, made themselves the 
agents of exchange between peoples. Their vessels spread through-
, out the Mediterranean. They began to reveal nation to nation, 
astronomy, navigation and geography perfected each other. The 
coasts of Greece and Asia Minor were filled with colonies ... From 
the mixtures of these independent colonies with the ancient peoples 
of Greece and with the remains of successive barbarian invasions the 
Greek nation was formed ... by these multiple mixtures this rich 
language was formed, expressive and sonorous, the language for all 
the arts.38 
The liberal denial of the Egyptians in favour of the Phoenicians was an 
indication of future attitudes on their relative importance. Otherwise, 
Turgot's statement reflects the contemporary linguistic research 
already mentioned in connection with Barthelemy, and Turgot's 
scheme also seems to reflect the origin of French from a mixture of 
Celtic, Latin and Germanic languages. 39 This does not, however, affect 
its competitive plausibility against the equally subjective image of Greek 
as a language that was somehow 'pure', like the idealized German. The 
picture of purity is extremely improbable, not only on geographical and 
historical grounds but also, as Turgot pointed out, on linguistic 
ones too. 
While Turgot and his contemporaries proclaimed and articulated the 
new vision of 'progress', they retained respect for the Egyptians and 
Phoenicians and never questioned the legends of their having colonized 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 201 
and civilized Greece. 4O Nevertheless, the introduction of the 'progress­
ive' paradigm was ultimately fatal to the reputation of the Egyptians. 
Their antiquity - which had previously been one of their major assets -
now became a liability. 
The obverse to the fall of the Egyptians was a rise in the status of the 
Greeks. Before coming to this, however, we must consider the two 
forces that aided Christian reaction and the 'progressive' paradigm in 
the overthrow of the Ancient Model: racism and Romanticism. 
RACISM 
All cultures have some degree of prejudice for, or more often against, 
people whose appearance is unusual. However, the intensity and 
pervasiveness of Northern European, American and other colonial 
racism since the 17th century have been so much greater than the norm 
tlfat they need some special explanation. 
It is difficult to say whether or not racism was unusually strong before 
the 16th century, the first in which Northern Europeans came into 
frequent contact with peoples from other continents. In the early 
anti-Semitic ballads about the alleged murder of Little Sir Hugh, the 
evil Jews do not appear to have been seen as particularly dark. 41 It is 
even possible that with the influx of French and Italians after the 
Norman Conquest, dark colouring had high status, and early ballads do 
sometimes contrast the poor fair girl with the rich brown one. On the 
other hand, there is no doubt that the 'fair maid' is seen as morally 
superior and the ballads of two sisters, which appear to have very old 
Norse antecedents, lay emphasis on the wicked dark sister as opposed 
to the good fair one.42 
By the 15th century, too, there is no doubt that clear links were seen 
between dark skin colour and evil and inferiority, when the newly 
arrived Gypsies were feared and hated for both their darkness and their 
alleged sexual prowess.43 Whether or not this concern with and dislike 
of the dark 'other' was exceptionally intense in medieval Northern 
Europe, it is generally accepted that a more clear-cut racism grew up 
after 1650 and that this was greatly intensified by the increased 
colonization of North America, with its twin policies of extermination


--- PAGE 117 ---
202 BLACK ATHENA 
of the Native Americans and enslavement of Africans. Both these 
presented moral problems to Protestant societies, in which equality of 
all men before God, and personal liberty, were central values which 
could be eased only by strong racism. 
:he Classical writer most often appealed to to justify slavery was 
Anstotle, who had argued at length in its favour. The appeal was linked 
to the fact that his work was shot through with the belief that Greeks 
were inherently superior to other peoples: 
The races that live in cold regions and those of Europe are full of 
coura~e and passion but somewhat lacking in skill and brainpower; 
for thiS reason, while remaining generally independent, they lack 
political cohesion and the ability to rule others. On the other hand, 
the Asiatic races have both brains and skill but are lacking in courage 
and willpower; so they have remained both enslaved and subject. 
\ The Hellenic race, occupying a mid position geographically, has a 
measure of both. Hence it has continued to be free, to have the best 
political institutions and to be capable of ruling others given a single 
constitution. 44 
In this way Aristotle linked 'racial superiority' to the right to enslave 
other peoples, especially those of a 'slavish disposition'. 
Similar perceptions of ' racial' differences appear to have been central 
to the thought of John Locke, the philosopher of the late-17th-century 
Whigs. There is no doubt that Locke, who was personally involved with 
slave-owning American colonies, was what we should now call a racist , 
as was the great 18th-century philosopher David Hume. Whether or 
not these attitudes affected their philosophies is more debatable, but 
Harry Bracken and Noam Chomsky's arguments for this connection 
seem very plausible. 45 
Locke's consistent disparagement of Native Americans was essential 
to his politics, because the land the indigenous population inhabited 
was needed to provide a wilderness available for English and other 
settlers. The possibility of such colonization was necessary to the 
argument that men had a choice as to whether or not they joined the 
Social Contract, with all its manifest inequalities. 46 Locke refused to 
justify the enslavement of people of the same nationality, and called 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 203 
what might appear to be slavery of this kind mere 'drudgery'. For him, 
as for most thinkers of the time, slavery was justified only when it was 
the result of capture as an alternative to a deserved death in a just war.47 
Christian European attacks on heathen Africans and Americans, for 
instance, were classed as 'just wars' because the latter were not 
defending their property, but merely 'waste land'. Furthermore, Locke 
had the curious but convenient belief that Africans and Americans did 
not practise agriculture and, according to him, the only entitlement to 
land came from cultivation.48 The general scheme allowed for the 
taking of black slaves by Europeans. Moreover, the very existence of 
large numbers of African slaves led to the belief that they were 'natural 
slaves' in the Aristotelian sense. 
By the 1680s there was in fact a widespread opinion that Negroes 
were only one link above the apes - also from Africa - in the 'great chain 
ofbeing,.49 This type of thinking was made easier by Locke's nominal­
ism: his denial of the objective validity of 'species' and view of them as 
subjective concepts. He was particularly sceptical of the inconvenient 
category of 'man': 
And I imagine none of the Definitions of the Word man, which we yet 
have, nor Descriptions of that sort of Animal, are so perfect and 
exact, as to satisfy a considerate inquisitive person; much less a 
general consent . . .50 
This position is in sharp contrast not only to the biblical 'God made man 
in his own image' but also to Descartes's insistence on a categorical 
distinction between unthinking animals and thinking man. Empiricism 
thus seems to remove an (admittedly flimsy) barrier against racism; 
however, there is no necessary connection between empiricism and 
racism. 51 
To recapitulate: it is certain that Locke and most 18th-century 
English-speaking thinkers like David Hume and Benjamin Franklin 
were racist: they openly expressed popular opinions that dark skin colour 
was linked to moral and mental inferiority. In Hume's case, racism so 
transcended conventional religion that he was a pioneer of the view 
that there had been not one creation of man but many different ones, 
because 'Such a uniform and constant difference could not happen in


--- PAGE 118 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
so many countries and ages, if nature had not made an original 
distinction betwixt these breeds of men. ,52 The centrality of racism to 
European society after 1700 is shown by the fact that this 'polygenetic' 
view of human origins continued to grow in the early 19th century, even 
after the revival of Christianity. 
Racism was not so clear-cut in 18th-century France. Nevertheless, 
the Aristotelian - and pseudo-Platonic - scheme of climatic and 
topographic determinism of races that had permeated the work of Jean 
Bodin in the 16th century was revitalized by Montesquieu in the 18th. 53 
Montesquieu became famous in 1721 through his Persian Letters. At 
one level he was using distinguished Persians to criticize and satirize 
Europe; at another, he was setting up the image of Europe as the 
'scientific' and 'progressive' continent. This primacy was explained as 
the result of her beneficent, temperate climate. His pro-European 
views and hostility to Asia and Africa came out more clearly in his Spirit 
of Laws, which was published in 1748.54 
Rousseau, in his Social Contraa, published in 1762, violendy attacked 
any justification of slavery. On the other hand, he followed the school of 
geographical determinism, believing that a people's virtue and political 
capacity depended on climate and topography. He was Europocentric 
and showed remarkably little interest in Egypt and China. This was a 
trait which persisted among later Romantics, whose predilections were 
nearly always for the misty and mountainous North of Europe, which 
was seen as the true repository of human virtue. 
ROMANTICISM 
After the defence of Christianity and the idea of , progress', racism was, 
I believe, the third major force behind the overthrow of the Ancient 
Model; the fourth was Romanticism. To put it crudely, Romanticism 
maintains, against the Enlightenment and the Masonic tradition, that 
reason is inadequate to handle the important aspects of life and 
philosophy. Romanticism is concerned with the local and particular, 
rather than the global and general. There is also an oversimplified, but 
useful, contrast to be made between the 18th-century Enlightenment, 
with its interest in stability and the ordering of space, and the Romantic 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 205 
passion for movement, time and 'progressive' development through 
history. Outstanding examples of Enlightenment achievement are the 
accurate mappings of the world's coasts, Linnaeus' systematic arrange­
ment of natural species, and the American Constitution, which is. 
supposed to last for ever. 
Apart from the extraordinary achievements of natural science during 
the period of Romantic dOIninance from 1790 to 1890 there was an 
enormous interest in history, and in both the chief model used was that 
of the 'tree'. Trees, which are to be found in Darwinian evolution, 
Indo-European linguistics and most 19th-century histories, provide 
the ideal Romantic image. They are rooted in their own soils and 
nourished by their particular climates; at the same time they are alive 
and grow. They progress and never tum back. Like the image of history 
as biography mentioned above, trees have a simple past and a compli­
cated and ramified present and future. Nevertheless, the image of the 
tree had disadvantages in the description of European and Greek 
history, and I shall return to this theme later.55 
It should be borne in mind that despite the enormous influence of 
Rousseau, Romanticism was never as strong in France as it was in 
Britain and Germany, and it is in these regions that one should look for 
the movement's further development. 
First, Germany: during the early part of the 18th century, Germany 
went through one ofits most acute crises of national identity. In striking 
contrast to France, Holland and England, for more than a century 
following the end of the Thirty Years War in 1648 there was continued 
military devastation, political fragmentation and economic backward­
ness. The same period saw the military and cultural rise of France to a 
point where it seemed about to become a 'New Rome', capable of 
absorbing all Europe. 56 The language and culture of the German 
courts, including that of Frederick the Great in Prussia, was French; 
most of the books published in Germany in the first half of the century 
were in Latin and French. Thus there was a reasonable fear, voiced by 
the late- 17th -century philosopher and mathematician Leibniz and 
later patriots, that German would never develop into a language capable 
of being used for cultural and philosophical discourse; it might even, 
like the Germanic Frankish language spoken by the early rulers of


--- PAGE 119 ---
II 
I 
206 BLACK ATHENA 
France, disappear altogether in the face of French. German culture and 
the German people were seen as being in mortal danger. 57 
The most significant response to this crisis on the part of the German 
Romantics was the attempt to return Germans to their cultural roots, 
and to create an authentic German civilization from the German soil 
and the German people. According to the new Romantic and progress­
ive views, peoples now had to be seen in their geographical and 
historical contexts. The racial genius or spirit belonging to the land and 
its people changed its forms according to the spirit of the age or, to use a 
term developed in the 1780s, its Zeitgeist; but a people always retained 
its immutable essence. The most powerful figure concerned with this 
aspect of the Romantic movement was Johann Gottfried Herder, who 
was also important in relation both to Neo-Hellenism and the develop­
ment of linguistics. Herder himself stayed within the universalist 
bounds of the Enlightenment, maintaining that all peoples, not merely 
,Germans, should be encouraged to discover and develop their own 
genii.
58 
Nevertheless, the concern with history and local particularity, 
and the disdain for rationality or 'pure reason' apparent in his views and 
those of other late-18th- and earlY-19th-century German thinkers 
including Kant, Fichte, Hegel and the Schlegels, provided a firm basis 
for the chauvinism and racism of the following two centuries. 
OSSIAN AND HOMER 
The two purest essences of a 'race' were seen as being its language and 
folksong. As sounds they were temporal, not spatial. They were not 
stable but moving, if not 'living', and they were seen as communicating 
feeling, not reason. Furthermore, they were felt to be expressions not 
merely of the whole race but of its most characteristic and vital period, 
its 'childhood' or primitive stage. At this point, then, we focus on 
folksong and ballads. 
In the concern with songs and epics and their relation to a people, the 
main impetus behind the German movement came from Britain or , 
more precisely, Scodand. The Act of Union with England in 170 7, the 
defeats of the Old Pretender and his son Bonnie Prince Charlie in 17 I 5 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 207 
and 1745 and the destruction of the Gaelic culture of the Highlands 
forced a major realignment of the old nationalism. Upper-class 
English-speaking Scots very quickly developed a safe literary sublima­
tion of nationalism, in which there was a cult of the simple, the 
backward and the remote combined with a nostalgia for a lost 
innocence. 59 The chief artistic expressions of this were genuine or 
newly manufactured ballads or folksongs. 
By far the most influential product of this movement was James 
MacPherson's forgery of a Gaelic epic cycle, allegedly by the 3rd­
century poet Ossian, about the heroic deeds of his father. Ossian was 
published in 1762 and, although soon shown to be a forgery, remained 
the most widely read poem in Europe for the next fifty years. It has been 
mentioned above (see p. 185) as being among Napoleon's books in 
Egypt. Even before Ossian, Bishop Percy had brought out his Reliques of 
Ancient English Poetry. This collection of genuine Scottish and English 
Border ballads also had a powerful influence throughout Europe, 
especially in Germany, where it inspired Herder to promote a new 
movement to collect and publish folksongs.6o The folksong movement 
became integrated with the 'storm and stress' school started by Goethe 
around novels (Romane in German - from which 'Romanticism' gets its 
name). 
For most of the later 18th century, Ossian was considered to be better 
than Homer. This does not mean, however, that Homer was unpopular. 
He had held a very special position in Ancient Greece: he was 'the Poet' 
and his epics were central to all Greek education and to the sense of 
being Greek. 61 In Rome, a Greek education always began with Homer. 
In the Renaissance - despite the dominance of the Platonic-Egyptian 
tradition - there was considerable concern for Homer, especially 
among Protestant scholars, with their attachment to Greek as a sacred 
and non-Roman language. As Tanneguy Le Fevre, a leading Huguenot 
scholar and the father of Anne Dacier, wrote in 1664: 
The Ancients - geographers, poets, rhetoricians, theologians, doc­
tors of medicine, moral philosophers, and even army generals -
regarded Homer as an ultimate source of wisdom in each of their 
professions. 62


--- PAGE 120 ---
208 BLACK ATHENA 
Madame Dacier herself translated Homer into French and cham­
pioned him against the Modems and the general public, whom she 
believed to be prejudiced against him. She and her husband made a 
well-paid and opportune conversion to Catholicism just before Prot­
estantism was banned, a conversion which is difficult to reconcile with 
her concern with morality and high principles. However, the tension 
seems to have been eased by her continued loyalty to her father's secular 
passion for Homer. 
In 17 14 Madame Dacier published her extremely influential On the 
Causes of the Corruption of Taste. In this she attacked the Moderns like 
Terrasson, who had criticized Homer and the Greeks as being too 
primitive and crude for civilized peoples like the modem French and 
the Ancient Egyptians. She saw Homer as the earliest poet who had 
expressed the feelings of an uncorrupted age, but to make him the 
earliest she had to deny the importance not only of Egyptian but of 
'Hebraic' civilization.63 However, Madame Dacier and the Ancients 
were not successful in promoting the Greeks in France, the centre of 
the Enlightenment. As Voltaire wrote in the middle of the century: 'It 
seems to me that the Greeks are no longer fashionable and that was true 
from the times of M. and Mme Dacier.,64 
Things were different in other countries. The Italian scholar and 
visionary Giovanni Battista Vico, writing in the 1720S, saw Homer as 
the epitome of 'poetic wisdom' in the first two 'divine' and 'heroic' 
stages of his historical scheme. 65 Then in the 1730S an Aberdonian, 
Thomas Blackwell - the teacher of MacPherson, creator of Ossian -
saw Homer as the poet of the primitive age, and the Greeks as the 
childhood of Europe. 66 
The new concept of 'childhood' that developed with such speed in 
the 18th century comes at the intersection of , progress' and Romanti­
cism. Childhood was seen as a period of emotion and feeling before 
rationality, but also as one that was without the sexuality and corruption 
of adulthood. Furthermore, it was a period of potential - looking 
towards the future and not tied to the past. Thus the growth of 
childhood went hand in hand with the growth of Romanticism and 
'progress'. Classical authority for the image of Greeks as children came 
from Plato's Timaios, in which, as I have already mentioned, Plato 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 209 
reports an aged Egyptian priest as telling Solon: 'You Greeks are always 
children: there is no such thing as an old Greek ... You are always 
young in soul, every one of you. For ... you possess not a single belief 
that is ancient ... ,67 
For ancient, medieval and Renaissance scholars such a statement 
was utterly damning. Even the 18th-century Modems were able to 
condemn the Greeks as childish and trivial. With the rise of the concept 
of , progress' this could be, and was, turned to the Greeks' advantage. 
ROMANTIC HELLENISM 
It is often assumed that as the country was part of the Classical world, 
study or admiration of Greece should be seen as a form of Classicism. 
In the 18th century, however, Hellenism is far more usefully seen as 
belonging to the Romantic camp. The gendemen of the Enlightenment 
were concerned with order, regularity and stability over wide regions. In 
the contemporary world they tended to be concerned with the 'big 
ones', concentrating their efforts at reform on France, Russia and 
Prussia. In Antiquity they preferred powerful states that had lasted over 
long periods of time, like China, Egypt and Rome. As Classicists they 
read most of the Latin authors, but litde or no Greek. By the 1790S, 
however, the upper classes were beginning to read Homer in the 
original. Thus the shift from reason to sentiment was associated with a 
shift of attention from Imperial Rome to Classical and Homeric 
Greece. 
Romantics longed for small, virtuous and 'pure' communities in 
remote and cold places: Switzerland, North Germany and Scodand. 
When considering the past, their natural choice was Greece. It clearly 
qualified in terms of smallness, and its states could, with some stretch­
ing of the imagination, be described as virtuous. Its lacks in the other 
respects could be temporarily overlooked, although in the long run it 
was more difficult to do this. In many ways the destruction of the 
Ancient Model and the establishment of the Aryan one can best be seen 
as attempts to impose these Romantic ideals of remoteness, cold and 
purity on this most unsuitable candidate. 68 
Romanticism had existed from the beginning of the Enlightenment,


--- PAGE 121 ---
210 BLACK ATHENA 
and in the very cosmopolitan 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, Locke's pupil, 
'sensibility' - combined with a cult of beauty and form - was associated 
with a Neo-Hellenism. 69 Then in the 1730S, British Romantic Philhel­
lenism increased with Blackwell's association of Homer with Scotland, 
mentioned on p. 208. In the same decade, the Society ofDiIettanti was 
founded. The Society, as its name suggests, started as a social club for 
rich young men, but it became more serious in the import of Classical 
statues from Italy to decorate the houses and parks of the British 
nobility. In 1750 it extended its activities, commissioning a thorough 
and accurate survey of the surviving works of ancient art in Athens. The 
commission reflected a great new enthusiasm for Greek art, which 
West Europeans had so far seen only in Roman copies. At the same time 
daring noblemen began to extend their Grand Tours from Italy to the 
Levant, which included Greece. 70 Enlightened scholars could study the 
general truths of the world by reading books in the comfort of their 
studies. 
But this was not good enough for Romantics, with their concerns for 
feeling and particular locality. They wanted to confront, and if possible 
even smell, the original documents and other remains of the period and 
place they wished to study.71 In the 1750s, for instance, Robert Wood 
went to the Troad - the region around Troy - and read the Iliad in situ. 
In his Essay on the Original Genius and Writings of Homer, which appeared 
in 1775, Wood saw Homer as the product of a particular people in a 
particular landscape. Although - unlike later Romantics - he still 
maintained that Homer was one man, he drew on the ancient tradition 
that Homer had been blind to stress his illiteracy. Wood's picture of 
Homer was very 'Ossianic' - that is, it was of a primitive and almost 
Northern bard, the poet of the childhood not only of Greece but of all 
Europe. 72 
By the middle of the century the Romantic mood, Europocentrism, 
and the concept of 'progress' were creating a considerable enthusiasm 
in Britain for the Greeks, who seemed to fit all these criteria. James 
Harris, the English grammarian - who, it is important to note, was 
concerned with spoken language - hated Orientals and saw the Romans 
as culturally inferior. By contrast he adored the Greeks, and in 1751 he 
wrote of them: 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 211 
In the short space of little more than a century, they became such 
statesmen, warriors, orators, historians, physicians, poets, critics, 
painters, sculptors, architects, and (last of all) philosophers that one 
can hardly help considering that Golden Period as a Providential 
event in honour of human nature to show to what perfection the 
h .. h d 73 uman specIes ffilg t ascen . 
Thus the concept of the 'divine Greeks' was already formed. The 
lateness and rapidity of their development were now seen not as signs of 
shallowness but as marks of extraordinary greatness. By 1767 Britons 
were even beginning to assert Greek superiority over the Egyptians. As 
another Aberdonian, William Duff, wrote in that year: 
In Greece the sciences made rapid progress and reached a very high 
degree of improvement ... if the Egyptians were the inventors, this 
proves them to be ingenious, but the Greeks shewed themselves to 
possess superior genius ... Arts and sciences have been known to 
the Chinese for many ages ... yet they have not ... 74 
The Classicist Samuel Musgrave led a disreputable life, and - as has 
been mentioned in the last chapter - Mitford called him a 'shallower' 
scholar. Nevertheless, Wilamowitz-Moellendorf gave him an honour­
able mention in his History of Classical Scholarship.75 In 1782 Musgrave 
published a 'Dissertation on Greek Mythology' in which he argued that 
Greek culture was autochthonous, and even denied the massive tra­
dition that Greek religion had been derived from Egypt. He did this on 
the basis of an oblique reference from Lucian, a prolific sophist and 
satirist of the 2nd century AD, and from the dissimilarities between the 
best-known names of the Egyptian and Greek gods.76 However, as we 
have seen, Musgrave's arguments were crushed by Mitford, and the 
Romantic breakthrough on this aspect of the Ancient Model was made 
in Germany.


--- PAGE 122 ---
212 BLACK ATHENA 
WINCKELMANN AND 
NEO-HELLENISM IN GERMANY 
The greatest champion of Greek youth and purity in the mid-18th 
century was the German Johann Joachim Winckelmann. This hard­
working and obsessional man had taught himself Greek in a period 
when the Hellenic scholarship of the 16th and 17th centuries had 
virtually disappeared. In order to get near the Greek works of art he 
loved, but had never seen, he converted to Catholicism and spent 
most of his life in Rome as a priest and an art expert for exquisite 
cardinals. 
Winckelmann specifically rejected the idea that the Greeks had a 
monopoly on philosophy.77 Their triumph was in something that for 
him was far more important: aesthetics. As early as 1607, the great 
Renaissance scholar Scaliger had tried to establish a periodization of 
four stages for Greek art and poetry, to which Winckelmann acknowl­
edged his debt.78 In many ways, however, his scheme seems closer to 
the contemporary notions of a staged history and in particular to 
Turgot's Progress of the Human Spirit, according to which there were 
three stages, very similar to those set out eighty years later by Auguste 
Comte as the theological, the metaphysical and the scientific.79 
Winckelmann's History of Ancient Art, published in 1764, was the first 
attempt to integrate the history of art into that of society as a whole. 
According to Winckelmann, Egyptian art had only reached the primi­
tive stage, in which the artist was forced to concentrate his attention on 
what was strictly essential. 80 
Egyptian art, the argument ran, was imperfect because it could not 
have been otherwise. Its development was blocked by unfortunate 
natural and social circumstances: in a very early example of modem 
racial discrimination against Ancient Egyptians, Winckelmann fol­
lowed Aristotle's claim that they were mostly bandy-legged and snub­
nosed.81 Thus they had no beautiful artistic models. Going against all 
Classical sources, and to some extent even against Montesquieu, he 
maintained that Egypt's geographical situation was unfortunate and not 
conducive to high culture. He also claimed - in the teeth of Hero dot os 
Plutarch, Diodoros and other ancient writers who had emphasized thei; 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 213 
passionate joy and grief - that the Egyptians were pessimistic and 
unenthusiastic. 
At one level this conviction reflected the prevailing view that the 
reason so many peoples of other continents gave up in the face of the 
European advances was that they had been debilitated by their environ­
ments, and were naturally weak and passive.82 At another it was an 
appreciation of the very real Egyptian concern with death which could 
be interpreted, within the 'progressive' paradigm, as reflecting the fact 
that Egypt had always been doomed to be surpassed by more 'vital' 
civilizations. 83 
Winckelmann did not approve of Greek art merely because it came 
later in the historical sequence. A Philh~llene of extraordinary passion, 
he loved every aspect of his image of Greece, seeing its two dominant 
essences as liberty and youth.84 According to him Greece epitomized 
freedom, while Egyptian culture had been stunted by its monarchism 
and conservatism and was the symbol of rigid authority and stagnation -
which also happened to be non-European. In his mind, the Greek 
city-states contained the liberty without which it was impossible to 
create great art. Winckelmann, and his followers, loved this liberty and 
youth for their freshness and vitality. Yet he insisted upon the soft 
gentleness of Greek art, and the 'noble simplicity' and 'serene great­
ness' of Greek culture as a whole, which he saw as the result of the 
equable Greek climate. Moreover, central to his love of Greece was his 
appreciation of Greek homosexuality. Winckelmann himself was 
homosexual, and the major homosexual strand which has persisted in 
modem Hellenism has continued to be associated with him.8s 
While Winckelmann's interpretation of the Greeks as liberal, serene 
and youth-loving has remained a central theme in later Hellenism, even 
in the 18th century there were other images of Greece. The beliefin the 
tragic and 'Dionysian' qualities of Greek culture, which culminated in 
the works of Nietzsche at the end of the 19th century, was already 
apparent among 18th -century thinkers, as well as in the poets HOlderlin 
and Heine at the beginning of the 19th. 86 Admiration for the austere 
and authoritarian Dorians was another strand of Hellenism. Neverthe­
less, all these late-I8th- and 19th-century schools of thought were 
united in their perceptions of the relationship between Egypt and


--- PAGE 123 ---
II 
il I' 
Ii'! I,: 
214 BLACK ATHENA 
Greece. Egypt represented an earlier, lower and strangely dead stage of 
human evolution which had been raised by the European genius of 
Hellas to a qualitatively higher and more vital level. 
The effect ofWinckelmann's work on Germany was electric. As the 
historian of Classics Rudolph Pfeiffer has written: 
A break was made with the Latin tradition of humanism and an 
entirely new humanism, a true new Hellenism, grew up. Winckel­
mann was the initator, Goethe the consummator, Wilhelm von 
Humboldt, in his linguistic, historical and educational writings, the 
theorist. Finally, Humboldt's ideas were given practical effect when 
he became Prussian Minister of Education and founded the new 
university of Berlin and the new humanistic gymnasium.87 
Goethe, himself generally credited as the founder of Romanticism, 
exuberantly called the 18th century 'the century ofWinckelmann'. 88 In 
the 1930s, in a grimmer mood, the brilliant English Germanist Miss 
Butler saw Winckelmann as the first figure in what she called 'the 
tyranny of Greece over Germany'. 89 
The second major response to the German crisis of identity in the 18th 
century, along with the desire to return to authentic German roots, was 
Neo-Hellenism. I have already discussed the long-standing perception 
of the 'special relationship' between Greek and German, and Greek's 
position as the Protestant religious opponent to Catholic Latin. In the 
18th century the threat to Germany was from Paris, a 'new Rome', and 
from French, a Romance language. In addition to the revival of this old 
cultural alliance between Greek and German, there was a new motive 
for the identification of Germany as the New Hellas. By the I 770S it was 
becOIning clear that Germany had the potential to be a major cultural 
centre; however, this was not reflected politically. The wars of 
Frederick the Great convinced contemporaries that Prussia could not 
unite Germany and that the Austrian Empire was equally incapable of 
this. The combination of cultural strength with political weakness and 
disunity seemed to indicate that, while Germany could not become a 
new Rome, she could be the new Hellas. 
The leading dramatist of the age, C. M. Wieland, wrote several 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 215 
plays about the Greeks during the 1760s and 1770S.90 Goethe was 
completely captivated by the Greeks, and in his middle age he made 
frequent, though not very successful, attempts to learn Greek. 91 
Herder, too, had a passionate admiration for the liberty and" artistic 
creativity of Athens, writing about Greek poetry and persuading 
Goethe to renew his study of the language.92 These thinkers and artists 
were not as obsessed by Greece as Winckelmann and the 19th-century 
Neo- Hellenists; but there is no doubt that Ancient Greece and its 
perceived intimate relationship with modem Germany were becoming 
increasingly central to German cultural life, including the newly formed 
'academia' . 
GOTTINGEN 
Winckelmann is generally recognized as the founder of the discipline of 
art history, and Goethe certainly accepted him as a scholar. Neverthe­
less he was not acceptable to the new kind of 'professional' academics 
beginning to emerge in late-18th-century Germany, particularly at 
Gottingen. Gottingen can well be considered the embryo of all later , 
modem, diversified and professional universities. It was established in 
1734 by George II, King of England and Elector of Hanover, was well 
endowed and as a new foundation was able to escape many of the , 
medieval religious and scholastic constraints that persisted in other 
universities. With its British connections it was a conduit for Scottish 
Romanticism as well as for the philosophical and political ideas of 
Locke and Hume, whose racism has been mentioned above (see 
pp. 202-4)·93 
It is true to say that while exclusive professionalism was the distinc­
tive form of Gottingen scholarship, the chief unifying principle of its 
content was ethnicity and racism. This, of course, was the result not 
merely of the English scholarly contacts but, much more importantly, of 
prevailing opinion in German cultivated society as a whole.94 Despite 
the Gottingen professors' insistence on their academic high standards 
and detachment, they were inevitably influenced by such 'popular' 
writers as Winckelmann, Goethe and Lessing. 
Europocentricism was strikingly apparent in the views of one of the


--- PAGE 124 ---
216 BLACK ATHENA 
university's founders, Kristophe August Heumann. As a pioneer of the 
new professionalism Heumann established a scholarly journal, Aaa 
Philosophornm, in the first issue of which, in 1715, he argued that 
although the Egyptians were cultivated in many studies they were not 
'philosophical'. This claim - which his contemporaries Montesquieu 
and Brucker, as we have seen above, did not dare to make - was both 
striking and daring in the light of the strong ancient association between 
philosophia and Egypt. 95 Heumann's categorical distinction between 
Egyptian 'arts and studies' and the Greek 'philosophy' is rather difficult 
to comprehend, as his definition of the latter was 'the research and 
study of useful truths based on reason,.96 Nevertheless its very impre­
cision made, and makes, the claim that the Greeks were the first 
'philosophers' almost impossible to refute. 
, It is true that there is one ancient assertion that only the Greeks were 
capable of philosophizing, that attributed to Epicurus by Clement of 
Alexandria; Clement went on to demonstrate the extreme implausibility 
of the claim.97 There is also the statement on the Greeks' making 
everything 'finer' from Epinomis, quoted on p. 198.98 These should not, 
however, detract from Heumann's daring in impugning the massive 
ancient and modem tradition which saw Egypt and the Orient as the 
seats of wisdom and philosophy. 
There is little doubt that Heumann's views on this were linked to 
his German nationalism and his Europocentricism. He advocated, 
and tried to practise, writing philosophy in German when this was 
almost unheard of; he was also a climatic determinist even ~ before 
Montesquieu. 99 According to Heumann, philosophy arose in Greece 
because it could not flourish in climates that were too hot or too cold; 
only the inhabitants of temperate countries like Greece, Italy, France, 
England and Germany could create true philosophy. 100 
Heumann's views on the Greek origin of philosophy, like his views on 
the philosophical capacity of the German language, were more than fifty 
years ahead of his time. His work on the history of philosophy was 
eclipsed by Brucker's massive works in which, as we have seen, the 
author took a compromise position but did not deny the Egyptians the 
title of 'philosophers' .101 Nevertheless, Heumann's influence persisted 
at Gottingen and it is not surprising that Dietrich Tiedemann, the first 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 21 7 
of a new wave of historians of philosophy of the 1 780s, had studied at 
that university.102 For this ethnic and 'scientific' school, as for all 
subsequent writers on the subject, it became axiomatic that 'true' 
philosophy had begun in Greece. 
By this decade historical studies were being revolutionalized, espe­
ciallyat Gottingen. One professor there, Gatterer, started a project of 
writing histories not of kings and wars but as 'biographies' of peoples. 
Another, Spittler, studied institutions as expressions and moulders of 
particular peoples.103 Still more important was the work of the histo­
rian and anthropologist Meiners, later to be honoured by the Nazis as 
a founder of racial theory. Between 1770 and 1810 Meiners devel­
oped the earlier general concept of the 'genius of the age' into an 
academic theory of Zeitgeist. 104 Possibly unaware of Vi co's earlier work 
along these lines, Meiners argued that each age and place had a special 
mentality determined by its situation and institutions. lOs 
The extent to which this approach was lacking among earlier his­
torians has been exaggerated, but there is no doubt that after the 1780s 
it became impossible for serious historians to judge an action or 
statement without taking into account its social and historical context. 
Closely linked to this development was another of Meiners' innovations 
- 'source criticism'. This involved the historian assessing the value of 
different historical sources according to their author and social context, 
and basing his interpretation largely or solely on the reliable ones. 
Meiners attacked earlier writers like Brucker for having accepted 
historical sources uncritically and indiscriminately, instead of choosing 
those that revealed 'the spirit of the age' in which they were written. 106 
This was an approach which fitted well with the new 'scientific' spirit 
of Gottingen and the tradition already apparent in Galileo, who argued 
that 'one necessary reason once found destroys utterly a thousand 
merely probable reasons.' The measure has proved extremely useful in 
experimental sciences; however, as Giorgio de Santillana has pointed 
out, 
as soon as we leave the territory of direct and continuous check -
what Galileo expressly called the ordeal - and take it as a philo-
h· I'd I' db' . 107 sop lca gul e to exp anabon, angers egm to anse.


--- PAGE 125 ---
218 BLACK ATHENA 
Meiners' procedures, which have come to dominate 19th- and 20th­
century historiography, do seem to be essential to a historian as opposed 
to a chronicler: it is inevitable that one should give different weight to 
different sources. The danger arises from a lack of self-consciousness 
and the awareness that by neglecting or rejecting certain sources 
because they are supposed to be 'out of tune' with the age concerned, 
the historian can impose almost any pattern he chooses. This increases 
the element of the history that merely reflects the age and concerns of 
the historian. In the case of the late 18th century, the situation was made 
worse by the 'modern' historians' confidence that they 'knew better'. 
They were convinced that, unlike earlier scholars, they were writing 
objectively. Furthennore, Meiners and his colleagues insisted on 
trusting what they confidendy saw to be the 'qUality' of their sources, 
rather than their quantity or even their analogical plausibility. 
When dealing with the areas with which BlackAthena is.concerned, 
these historians' refusal to accept the infonnation contained in the 
number, spread and plausibility of historical reports opened the door to 
the denial of the Ancient Model. The many ancient references to the 
Egyptian and Phoenician colonization and the later cultural borrowings 
could now be dismissed as 'late', 'credulous', or simply 'unreliable'. 
What is more, scholars could now use the facts that many ancient texts 
contradicted each other, or went against the newly established canons 
of natural science, to discredit anything they disliked. Nevertheless, the 
reason why the Model did not fall for another forty years is partly that it 
retained its formidable traditional hold on people's minds, and partly 
the fact that there were no ancient sources of good quality that 
challenged it. When the Ancient Model was overthrown, the new 
scholars were forced to rely on what they saw as the 'tacit dissent' and 
'refutation by silence' of those ancient authors who, for whatever 
reasons, had failed to mention the colonizations.108 
Despite the links between 'source criticism' and the new scientific 
spirit, it is important to note that the method did not arise in positivist 
France or empirical England but in Romantic Gennany. For example, 
Meiners himself used the new scholarly techniques to write 'progress­
ive' Romantic histories of peoples whom he divided categorically into 
the white, courageous, free, etc., and the black, ugly, etc. The spectrum 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 219 
ranged from chimpanzees through Hottentots and others to Gennans 
and Celts. 109 
A more cautious and systematic racial hierarchy was established by 
J. F. Blumenbach, a professor of natural history at Gottingen. His De 
Generis Human; Varietate Nativa, published in 1775, was the first 
attempt at a 'scientific' study of human races of the type Linnaeus had 
written for natural history a few decades earlier. Blumenbach could not, 
however, apply Linnaeus' definition of a species, a population that can 
breed and produce fertile offspring, to human beings. He was not a 
progressive or a believer in polygenesis, the denial of the biblical 
tradition of a single creation of man and the assertion that different 
'races' had been created separately. Blumenbach believed in a unique 
creation of a perfect man. In fact, Blumenbach's explanation for what 
he perceived as important 'racial' differences followed the Euro­
pocentric pattern set out earlier in the century by the naturalist Buffon. 
Buffon had argued that the normal type of species found in Europe had 
degenerated in other continents because of unfortunate climatic con­
ditions there: individuals· became too big, too small, too weak, too 
strong, too brighdy coloured, too drab, etc.110 
Blumenbach was the first to publicize the term 'Caucasian', which he 
used for the first time in the third edition of his great work in 1795. 
According to him the white or Caucasian was the first and most 
beautiful and talented race, from which all the others had degenerated 
to become Chinese, Negroes, etc. Blumenbach justified the curious 
name 'Caucasian' on 'scientific' and 'racial' grounds, since he believed 
the Georgians to be the finest 'white race'. However, there was much 
more to it than that. There was firsdy the religious belief - given 
publicity by Vico in the 18th century - that man could usefully be seen 
as coming after the Flood and, as everyone knew, that Noah's Ark had 
landed on Mount Ararat in the Southern Caucasus. 111 There was also 
the increasingly important German Romantic tendency to place the 
origins of mankind - and therefore of the Europeans - in Eastern 
Mountains, not in the river valleys of the Nile and Euphrates, as the 
Ancients had believed. As Herder put it: 'Let us scale the mountains 
laboriously to the summit of Asia.' 
Herder placed human origins in the Himalayas, while the general


--- PAGE 126 ---
220 BLACK ATHENA 
belief that mankind - at least in its purest form, the Aryans - came from 
the highlands of Asia remained dominant in the Romantic search for 
origins until the end of the 19th century. HZ One advantage of the 
scheme of Asiatic origins was that it placed Germans closer to the pure 
beginnings of mankind than the West Europeans; this was, however, far 
more effectively exploited in the 19th century. 
Blumenbach was conventional for his period in that he included 
'Semites' and 'Egyptians' among his Caucasians. However- although I 
have been unable to trace it precisely - it seems clear that there was 
already some sense in which the Caucasus was linked specifically to the 
Aryans, another new term that was coming into use from the 1790S.113 
The Caucasus was the traditional site of the imprisonment and cruel 
punishment of Prometheus, who was considered the epitome of 
Europe. Not only was he the son of lapetos, plausibly identified as the 
biblical Japhet, third son of Noah and the ancestor of the ~uropeans; 
but his heroic, beneficial and self-sacrificing action - of stealing fire for 
mankind - soon came to be seen as typically Aryan. Gobineau saw him 
as the ancestor of the principal white family and by the 20th century the 
ultra -Romantic Robert Graves was even suggesting that the name 
Prometheus meant 'swastika'. 114 
In the 1780s yet another Gottingen professor, A. L. Schlozer, tried to 
set up a 'Japhetic' linguistic family which included most of the lan­
guages later subsumed under the name Indo-European. He failed in 
this but succeeded in establishing a 'Semitic' one. I IS Semitic studies at 
Gottingen were, however, dominated by his teacher, J. D. Michaelis, 
who combined being the greatest Hebrew scholar of his day with strong 
anti-Semitism. I 16 
As must by now be clear, Gottingen, in the period from 1775 to 1800, 
not only established many of the institutional forms oflater universities, 
but its professors established much of the intellectual framework 
within which later research and publication within the new professional 
disciplines was carried out. In this very distinguished company, there is 
no doubt that the centre of the intellectual ferment was in Classical 
Philology, later to be given the more imposing and modem name 
Altertumswissenschaji or 'science of Antiquity' .117 
The field was dominated by Christian Gottlob Heyne, who married 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 22 I 
into the professorate of the town and was a brother-in-law of 
Blumenbach. From his appointment in 1763 to his death in 1812, 
Heyne was the central figure in both the town and the university. He ran 
the library, which rapidly became one of the best in Europe, and he was 
one of the chief proponents of 'modem' professional scholarship.IIB 
Heyne promoted the secular Seminar, taken from the Sokratic method, 
and source criticism was developed in this. 
Not surprisingly, one of the most frequent targets of source criticism 
was the Ancient Model and favourable references to Egypt in Greek 
texts. 119 Source criticism can helpfully be compared to the use of factor 
analysis in demography and the measurement of intelligence, about 
which Stephen Gould writes: 
virtually all its procedures arose as justifications for particular 
theories of intelligence. Factor analysis, despite its status as pure 
deductive mathematics, was invented in a social context, and for 
definite reasons. And, though its mathematical basis is unassailable, 
its persistent use as a device for learning about the physical structure 
of the intellect has been mired in deep conceptual errors from the 
start. 1ZO 
Heyne had known Winckelmann when he had been a young librarian at 
Dresden. As a 'professional' academic he made criticisms ofWinckel­
mann's writings, but there is no doubt that Heyne was heavily in­
fluenced by his passionate Neo-Hellenism. lzi As Rudolf Pfeiffer 
wrote: 
It was precisely the influence ofWinckelmann that distinguished the 
scholarship of Heyne and his friends and pupils from that of other 
contemporary scholars. 122 
The contemporary historian of science Steven Turner enlarges on this 
point in his important work on the transformation of the traditional 
German erudits Gelehrte into 'professional' academics: 
Through Heyne, Neo-Humanism had a similar invigorating effect 
upon Classical scholarship and its 'public image'. Throughout his 
career Heyne strove to forge new links between traditional


--- PAGE 127 ---
i 
! i 
222 BLACK ATHENA 
philological scholarship of the school and the academies and the 
currents of aesthetic Neo-Hellenism and Weimar Classicism 
building up outside academia. 123 
Heyne epitomized what one may usefully call 'Romantic Positivism'. As 
Frank Manuel has written about him: 
His scholarship was impeccable, his editing of texts in the great 
tradition, but for all the appurtenances of learning, the spirit that 
animated him and generations of German Gelehrte was the same 
Romantic Hellenism which possessed his literary compatriots in the 
18th century. 124 
Heyne was fascinated by overseas travel and by exotic peoples. Given 
the importance, in German academic life, of marrying the professor's 
daughter, the fact that Blumenbach was his brother-in-law was less 
significant than the fact that both Heyne's sons-in-law were concerned 
with extra-European travel. One of them, Heeren, will be discussed in 
Chapter VI; the other, who was much better known in the 18th century, 
was Georg Forster. Forster had sailed with Captain Cook and wrote a 
description of sailing round the world. His political radicalism and his 
dislike of exploitation - even of non-Whites - went together with a 
refusal to discount the possibility of polygenesis. Heyne and Forster 
adored each other and they had an extensive correspondence, much of 
which was concerned with tropical climes and anthropology.125 
Heyne was not particularly concerned about Christianity. However, 
when issues were polarized after 1789, he became passionately involved 
in preserving the status quo. His vehement denunciations of the French 
Revolution cannot be explained away simply as rage against Georg 
Forster, even though Forster had not merely gone to Paris to take part in 
the Revolution but had left his wife - Heyne's daughter - for the love of 
her best friend Caroline, the daughter of the Semitist Michaelis. 126 
The explanation for Heyne's fury also needs to be based on his 
profound involvement with the Hanoverian and German status quo, 
which is in no way diminished by his ability to work with the French 
occupying forces to protect his beloved university. Thus it is altogether 
appropriate that so many of Heyne's students and followers should have 
[CH. IV] HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 223 
worked for Prussia in the struggle against France and revolutionary 
ideas. Altogether, it is clear that the acknowledged ancestor of Alter­
tumswissenschaft, later transposed to Britain and America as the new 
discipline of 'Classics', was a typical product of Gottingen - with its 
desire for reform rather than revolution, its profound concerns with 
ethnicity and race, and its exhaustive scholarship. Furthermore, both 
the ancestor and the discipline itself shared the reaction against the 
French Revolution and its challenge to traditional order and religion 
and the concern with the differences and inequalities between different 
races. They also shared the passionate Romanticism and N eo­
Hellenism of progressive German circles of the late 18th century.


--- PAGE 128 ---
I 
i I 
CHAPTER V 
ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
The rise of India 
and the fall of Egypt, 1740- 1880 
W
E NOW TURN TO the fall of the Ancient Model which, 
although affected by a similar background and many of the 
same social and intellectual forces, should be distinguished 
from the rise of the Aryan Model some twenty years later. The chapter 
begins with the fascination of Sanskrit and other Indian languages that 
grew in the last quarter of the 18th century, and the impact this had on 
the understanding of relationships between European languages. By 
the 1830S this had led to a general perception of the Indo-European 
language family which, in the racist atmosphere of the time, developed 
quite quickly into the notion of an Indo-European or 'Aryan race'. The 
passion for India also meant that it replaced Egypt as the exotic ancestor 
of Europe. This time, however, the ancestry was not seen in terms of the 
transmission of philosophy and reason but as a Romantic one of , blood' 
and kinship. 
To return now to the Ancient Model. After the 1780s, the inten­
sification of racism and the new belief in the central importance of 
'ethnicity' as a principle of historical explanation became critical for 
perceptions of Ancient Egypt. The Egyptians were increasingly de­
tached from the noble Caucasians, and their 'black' and African nature 
was more and more emphasized. Thus the idea that they were the 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 225 
cultural ancestors of the Greeks - the epitome and pure childhood of 
Europe - became unbearable. There was also a new crisis between 
Egyptian mythology and Christianity with the works of Dupuis, which 
represented the ideological or theological counterpart of the French 
Revolution's attack on European social order. It is only with this 
background that one can make sense of the tormented career of 
Champollion during the years of reaction between 1815 and 1830. 
Although Champollion was an avowed revolutionary and an enthusi­
astic Bonapartist, one of his earliest discoveries discredited some of the 
theories of Dupuis's supporters, and he and his decipherment were 
therefore welcomed by the Church and the Restoration nobility. On the 
other hand, his championing of Egypt over Greece combined with his 
political beliefs to infuriate Hellenist and Indianist scholars, who 
continued to do all they could to block his academic career. 
Just before his premature death in 1831, Champollion challenged 
Christian orthodoxy by his high dating of Egyptian Antiquity. Thus by 
the time of his death he had antagonized both Christians and Hellen­
ists, and Egyptology, despite a popular fascination with Egypt as well as 
some continuation of the Masonic respect for it, went into a sharp 
decline for the next twenty-five years. Its slow recovery began only in 
the late 1850s. Between 1860 and 1880 there was a period of tension 
between the spirit of Champollion and the prevailing racism and the 
passion for Greece; after 1880, however, Egyptology tended to conform 
. and subordinate itself to the dominant discipline of Classics. 
Since then, there have always been some discordant voices and 
claims that Egyptian civilization really had possessed at least some of the 
high religion, philosophy and science claimed for it by the Ancients. 
Nevertheless, the predominant view has been maintained that although 
the Egyptians were technically proficient they were not 'truly civilized', 
and the Greek respect for their culture was based on delusion. The 
discrepancies between this 'official line' and the surviving monuments 
and the ancient reports has led to the emergence of a number of 
counter-cultures or counter-disciplines. 
Two of these are discussed at the end of the chapter: the first is the 
theory of'diffusionism' promoted by the anatomist and physical anthro­
pologist Elliot Smith, according to which Asian immigrants had


--- PAGE 129 ---
226 BLACK ATHENA 
established Egyptian civilization and spread it to Europe and the rest 
of the world. The second is the school of 'pyramidologists', the more 
cautious members of which maintain that the Great Pyramids were 
built according to the plans of architects with a very sophisticated 
understanding of astronomy and mathematics. The chapter ends with 
a discussion of the possibilities of a future meeting between these 
'heresies' and orthodox Egyptology. 
THE BIRTH OF INDO-EuROPEAN 
Language has always been a central concern to Romantics. According 
to them, languages are peculiar - that is, they are attached to a particular 
place, landscape and climate. They are therefore seen as the individual 
expression of a specific people, to be treasured as such. Herder was 
obsessed by language, and especially by speech. Following the English 
enthusiasm for Homer, Blackwell and the German mystic philosopher 
Hamann, Herder denied the priority of thought and reason over words; 
in this way he opposed the Enlightenment predilection for visual signs, 
Egyptian hieroglyphics or Chinese characters, which were thought to 
express universal ideas untrammelled by particular phonetics. For 
Herder and the Romantics, the chief purpose of language was not to 
transmit reason but to express feeling, and it was for this that both 
German and Greek were admired. As we have seen, Greek was valued 
in the mid - I 8th century not as a vehicle of philosophy but for its poetic 
qualities. 1 
This concern with language on the part of Herder and the other 
Romantics was important in the formation of historical philology. 
Furthermore, Romantic influence can be seen in the discipline's two 
chief models - the tree and the family - which, with their enormous 
aesthetic and progressive appeal, became widely popular throughout 
19th-century scholarship and science. In historical linguistics, the 
assumptions of simple beginnings and later ramification and divergence 
- through regular, though specific, shifts that can be charted - proved 
extremely useful in the early stages of the new discipline. On the other 
hand, the tree and the family do not allow for 'backtracking' or mixing 
and convergence and they have a tendency to teleology, the assumption 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 227 
that each language has an ultimate nature inbuilt in its beginnings which 
are not fundamentally affected by later contacts. 2 Anticipating dis­
cussion in Chapters VII and VIII, we can just note here that it was 
largely for these reasons that historical philology was moribund by the 
end of the 19th century. 
Before this, however, philology was one of the most exciting areas of 
intellectual life. SchlOzer's establishment of the Semitic language 
family has already been mentioned, in connection with both the work 
of the Abbe Barthelemy and developments at Gottingen. By 1820, 
scholars - notably the Dane Christian Rask and Herder's disciple 
Franz Bopp - had systematically traced the relationships between the 
phonetics and morphology of most European languages.3 
This endeavour was clearly related to the new systematic racial 
taxonomy. As the Caucasians had come from Asian mountains, the 
European languages were supposed to have had the same origin. It is 
significant that, just as the Germans were supposed to be purer 
Caucasians because they were the latest to leave the Urheimat or 
original homeland, German was thought to be purer and more ancient 
than other languages in the family. Hence the German name for the 
newly defined language family became Indogermanisch (Indo­
Germanic) - a term coined by the German Indianist H. J. Klaproth in 
1823.4 Franz Bopp himself, however, sided with scholars from other 
countries who preferred 'Indo-European', a title first used by Thomas 
Young in 1816.5 
THE LOVE AFFAIR 
WITH SANSKRIT 
The 'Indo-' was linked to the new passion for India and for Sanskrit. In 
his fascinating book The Oriental Renaissance, first published in 1950, 
the earlY-20th-century French intellectual Raymond Schwab traced 
the growing interest in ancient Indian and Iranian cultures and lan­
guages that accompanied French and British penetration of the 
subcontinent. As with so many 19th-century artistic and intel­
lectual developments, the first man to introduce the idea of an 
'Oriental Renaissance' was the linguist and ardent Romantic Friedrich


--- PAGE 130 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Schlegel. In The Speech and Wisdom of the Indians, Schlegel wrote 
that 
The study of Indian Literature requires to be embraced by such 
students and patrons as in the 15th and 16th centuries suddenly 
kindled in Italy and Germany an ardent appreciation of the beauty of 
Classical learning, and in so short a time invested it with such 
prevailing importance that the form of all wisdom and science, and 
almost of the world itself, was changed and renovated by the 
influence of that reawakened knowledge. 6 
Schwab's title, The Oriental Renaissance, is that of a chapter heading 
from a book by Edgar Quinet published in 1841. Quinet and, later, 
Schwab had two very similar bases. The first was the claim that the new 
Orientalism had overtaken Neoclassicism. 7 A modification of this - the 
claim that Orientalism, in alliance with Medi~valism, was surpassing 
Classicism - was a possible, though not very plausible, view in the 
I 840S. With the triumph of Greece and Rome and the abandonment of 
ancient India at the end of the 19th century, however, it became 
completely untenable and its revival by Schwab is merely antiquarian. 
The second concept behind the Oriental Renaissance belongs to the 
category of the myths of the history of science in which heroic men 
create light, order and science out of darkness, confusion and super­
stition. It assumes that before the Romantic age men and women did 
not know, or even care, about 'the Orient', and that it was first discooered 
in the late 18th century. It is true that Egypt, during the Enlightenment, 
was sometimes thought of as belonging to the West and not the Orient. 8 
On the other hand, as I have tried to show in earlier chapters, there was 
intense interest in Egypt and in China, and considerable knowledge 
about them, well before 1750. Though less central to the concerns of 
Enlightenment thinkers than Egypt and China, even India was known 
about in the 17th and early 18th centuries. The Indian Brahmins were 
less admired than the Egyptian priests or the Chinese literati, but they 
were in some ways their functional equivalents in the general criticism 
of European institutions and religion. 
Indian scholars had, of course, always known their Classical lan­
guage, Sanskrit, and there had been knowledge of it in the West since 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 229 
the late 17th century.9 With this came the general impression, explicitly 
stated by Sir William Jones in 1786, that Sanskrit, in relation to Greek 
and Latin, 
bears a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in the forms of 
grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so 
strong, indeed, that no philologer could examine all three without 
believing them to have sprung from some common source, which 
perhaps no longer exists; there is a similar reason, though not quite 
so forcible, for supposing that both the Gothick and the Celtick, 
though blended with a very different idiom, had the same origin with 
the Sanskrit. lO 
19th-century German and British scholars rejected the idea that 
their languages could be the result ofimpure mixture. Apart from that, 
however, this admirable and concise statement - which, it should be 
noted, is based on plausibility - has been the basis of Indo-European 
and all other historical philology ever since. 
The linguistic relationship meant that Indian language and culture 
could now be seen as both exotic and familiar, if not ancestral. This idea 
came about because, despite Jones' prudence on the subject - he 
argued that Sanskrit and the European languages probably had a 
common unknown ancestor - it was generally thought that Sanskrit 
itself was the original Indo-European language. This tie - and the 
knowledge, through the Indian tradition, that the Brahmins were the 
descendants of 'Aryan' conquerors who had come from the highlands 
of Central Asia - fitted wonderfully with the German Romantic belief 
that mankind and the Caucasians had originated in the mountains of 
Central Asia. I I This was a great force behind the extraordinary enthu­
siasm for all aspects of Indian culture that raged from the I 790S to the 
1820S. In the short run, however, Jones had an even greater impact 
through literature than through linguistics, and his translations of 
Indian poetry were received rapturously all over Europe. 12 The English 
Lake poets were all moved by Indian poetry, while in 1791 Goethe 
wrote: 'When I mention Shakuntala [an Indian poem translated by 
Jones] everything is said.,13 It will be remembered, too, that in 1798 
Napoleon had a copy of the Vedas with him on his Expedition to Egypt. 14


--- PAGE 131 ---
i I 
230 BLACK ATHENA 
The academic results of this enthusiasm were the establishment of 
many chairs of Sanskrit and the creation of a disciplinary base which, in 
alliance with Germanic studies as Indogermanisch, could threaten the 
monopoly of Latin and Greek as the only ancient languages. IS This is 
not to say that Sanskrit and Germanic studies were a serious challenge 
to the latter, though some scholars, like K. O. Muller in the 1820S and 
Salomon Reinach in the I 890s, perceived them as such. 16 
To begin with, the new academic studies were centred in Britain and 
France, both of whom had colonial interests in India. However, the 
British effort soon faded, and even the French study of Sanskrit and 
ancient India was overwhelmed by the German Romantic response to 
them. The dominant figures in this were Friedrich von Schlegel and his 
brother Wilhelm, who became the first Professor of Sanskrit at Bonn. 
Even a less passionate man like Wilhelm von Humboldt thanked God 
for having allowed him to live long enough to ~ecome acquainted with 
the Bhago:vad Gita.I7 
SCHLEGELIAN 
ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
Twenty years earlier, in 1803, Friedrich Schlegel's passion for India 
had been even less restrained: 'Everything, absolutely everything, is of 
Indian origin.,18 Schlegel was also the first to insist, against the biblical 
tradition of the Tower of Babel and most later thinkers, on linguistic 
polygenesis. Specifically, he argued that there was a categorical dis­
tinction between the Indo-European family and other languages, and 
he attacked William Jones and his contemporaries for having seen 
relationships between Indian and Semitic languages. 19 
Although he did not spell it out, the concept of an Aryan race can also 
be traced back to Schlegel. His Romantic passion and conviction of the 
superiority of the Ancient Indian Race were sufficient to surmount the 
total lack of evidence and provide a simple answer to what had now 
become 'the Egyptian problem': how could Mricans have produced 
such a high civilization? According to Schlegel, the answer lay in the fact 
that Egypt had been colonized and civilized by Indians. So confident 
was he of this scheme that he cited the magnificence of Egyptian 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 23 1 
architecture as proof of the greatness of the Indian race.20 This notion 
of Egypt's Indian origin was to remain powerful throughout the 19th 
century, and we will encounter it again in Gobineau. 
Despite his interest in race, Schlegel never lost sight of the centrality 
of language. He distinguished between two kinds of language - the 
'noble', inflected languages, and the less perfect ones that were not 
inflected. The former had a spiritual origin, while the latter were 
originally 'animal,.21 Only with the inflection of the Indian-based 
languages, he believed, could there be clear and penetrating intelli­
gence or high and universal thought. 22 
Somewhat surprisingly, Schlegel did not get high marks from the 
Nazis. The reasons for this were that he was not anti-SeInitic in his 
political views - he advocated Jewish emancipation - or personally, in 
that he married the daughter of the famous Jewish philosopher Moses 
Mendelsohn. 23 He also praised the 'lofty power and energy of the 
Arabic and Hebraic languages'. But, he continued, 'they indeed stand 
on the loftiest point of their particular branch. ,24 At times he even 
maintained that they were hybrids between the 'spiritual' and 'animal' 
languages.2s This, however, did not save them from their position in the 
lower category. Schlegel also supposed that Jewish culture had been 
influenced by the Egyptians - who, you will recall, had received their 
high civilization from the Indians. 26 Furthermore, as Friedrich 
Schlegel was one of the first men to link language to race, his views on 
the polygenesis of language were clearly linked to contemporary atti­
tudes to the polygenesis of man. 27 
By paving the way for the Aryan and Semitic races, Schlegel was 
definitely ahead of his time. These ideas were not taken up seriously for 
another forty or fifty years: externally, the forces of racial anti-SeInitism 
were still not strong enough, while internally, there was a great 
inconsistency in his approach. 28 Schlegel insisted that there was a 
categorical distinction between affixing - the external addition of 
suffixes or other particles to a word - and inflection, in which the 'root' 
was modified internally in what he saw as an organic way.29 Unfortu­
nately for Indo-European superiority, the SeInitic languages are modi­
fied in precisely this way, and the term 'root' itse1fis taken from Hebrew 
grammar.30 Thus later scholars were obliged to place Semitic along


--- PAGE 132 ---
232 BLACK ATHENA 
with Indo-European in the top rank. At the same time the suggestion 
made by Barthelemy in the 1760s, that there was a fundamental and 
exclusive relationship between the 'Phoenician' and Coptic languages, 
was seldom taken up seriously in the 19th century. Further, the idea of a 
Semito- Hamitic or Afroasiatic linguistic 'superfamily', including 
Semitic and Egyptian and other Mrican languages, was not generally 
accepted until after the Second World War. 31 
The other great modification of Schlegel's scheme made by mid-
19th-century linguists was on the matter of 'progress'. He played an 
important role in transforming philology from being the history of 
languages into becoming the interpretation oflanguage as a force in the 
making of history. He also partially incorporated 'progress' into his 
thinking. Nevertheless, Schlegel's views were old-fashioned in that he 
saw the 'spiritual' Indian languages as regressive. That is to say, having 
been formed as perfect, they had undergone more or less decay. Among 
the 'animal' languages, on the other hand, there was 'progress' as they 
became more complex.32 Here, too, later scholars who were more 
thoroughly steeped in the 'progressive' paradigm had to modify his 
ideas and explain superiority and inferiority of languages in terms of 
their relative places in evolution. 
English and French scholars were equally confident that Indo­
European languages were superior to any others. However, as they 
themselves spoke languages with relatively little inflection, they did not 
show much enthusiasm for Schlegel's ideas in this area, with their 
implication that Sanskrit, Greek, Latin and German were the only 
languages suitable for philosophy and religion. By contrast - and 
despite the modifications mentioned above - German scholars shared 
or accepted his new scheme. Wilhelm von Humboldt, for example, 
tended to see a progress from affixing or agglutinative languages to 
inflected ones, and he too saw the differences between the two as 
categorical. 33 
Wilhelm von Humboldt was a wide-ranging genius who established, 
among many other things, the bases for both Basque and Malayo­
Polynesian linguistics. Nevertheless, as has already been mentioned, he 
had a passion of a different order for Sanskrit. For instance, he thought 
that with its massive and intricate inflection, Sanskrit was a far better 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 233 
language than Chinese, which is 'isolating' and has even less inflection 
than English. In his brilliant essay on Chinese written in the 1820S, 
Humboldt was forced to admit that, despite its unmodified words, 
Chinese was the equal to the best Indo- European languages as a vehicle 
of logical thought. 34 On the other hand, he maintained that its lack of 
inflection 'prevented the free soaring of thought', which needed gram­
matical forms to guide it.35 Thus not merely was the Chinese script 
static, but the spoken language itself was seen to lack the full emotional 
power now demanded of language by German Romantics. Presumably 
because of their own languages' lack of inflection, English and French 
Romantics do not seem to have made this point. 
The equation of inflection with freedom neatly epitomized the 
distinction perceived by the Romantics between the rigid Sinophilia of 
the Enlightenment and their own free love for their Indian kin.36 By the 
1820S, even his limited admiration for Chinese and his studies of other 
non-Indo-European languages marked Humboldt out as a member of 
the older generation. Younger men cut off from the Enlightenment 
were more rigorous: they were almost exclusively concerned with 
Indo- European. 
THE ORIENTAL RENAISSANCE 
Quinet and Schwab claimed that this breakthrough in Indian studies 
was only the centre of a general 'Oriental Renaissance' - which Schwab 
rightly sees as integrally linked to Romanticism - and they linked this 
movement to the great decipherments of the 19th century.37 It is 
true that the decipherment of cuneiform was begun in 1800 by the 
Gottingen Romantic scholar G. F. Grotefend by reading the names of 
Persian kings, but I will try to show in this chapter that the much more 
impressive decipherment of hieroglyphics came not from Romanticism 
and the Oriental Renaissance but largely from the Egypto-Masonic 
tradition and the scientific spirit of the French Revolution.38 
Schwab's claim that the Oriental Renaissance was linked to the 
establishment of 'Orientalism' as an academic discipline, on the other 
hand, does seem partly justified. Arabic, having been a language of high 
culture in Early Medieval Europe, had been taught there from time to


--- PAGE 133 ---
234 BLACK ATHENA 
time ever since. However, its regular position as a modern academic 
study was established in 1799 with the appointment of Sylvestre de Sacy 
as the first teacher in the newly founded Ecole de Langues Orientales 
Vivantes, in a move that was associated with the Expedition to Egypt. 
There is no doubt that de Sacy, both as a teacher of the new aracane 
Orientalism and as a supporter of the monarchy, fits the Romantic and 
conservative pattern of the Oriental Renaissance very well.39 While 
France needed Arabic, both for the Egyptian Expedition and for the 
conquest of Algeria which began in 1830, Germany did not, and there 
was very little interest in Arabic in that country. Furthermore, as 
Edward Said has pointed out, Orientalism inherited much of the 
traditional hatred of Islam as the enemy of Christendom. 40 In this 
context, it is important to note that the 1820S, a crucial decade in the 
formation of Orientalism, were dominated by the Greek War of 
Independence between Christian Greeks and, MosYem Turks and 
Egyptians. There were, however, religious and linguistic senses in 
which the Semitic cultures were considered to be if not the equals, at 
least on the same plane as those of the Aryans (see Chapter VII). 
The Oriental Renaissance did not include China. Many Jesuits had 
known Chinese well since the 16th century and by the tum of the 18th, 
through their translations and scores of travellers' reports, Europeans 
knew about China in some detail.41 The language had been taught 
intermittently at Paris since then, but it was only in the late 19th century 
that regular chairs were established elsewhere in Europe. It is particu­
larly striking that while the first chair of Sanskrit was established at 
Berlin in 18 I 8, Chinese studies remained in a parlous state in Germany 
until the end of the century. As a French Sinologue wrote in 1898: 
'Germany and Austria have not occupied in Sinology the brilliant place 
that belongs to them in some branches of Oriental studies.'42 
Although German scholars came to dominate Egyptology after the 
1880s, in the period of the Oriental Renaissance the mainstream of 
German academics would have nothing to do with the new discipline. 
The French Orientalists' hostility towards Champollion will be de­
scribed below. Here, it is sufficient to point out that Raymond Schwab 
calls one of his sections 'The Prejudice for Egypt' and writes in it: 'This 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 235 
view of Egypt as the first and the essential Oriental influence on the 
West is totally erroneous. In point of fact, the Egypt of the scholars was a 
relative latecomer, arriving only in the 19th century.,43 In a footnote 
Schwab makes it clear that what he means by this is that 'the I 9th­
century infatuation with Egypt replaced its infatuation with India. ,44 
These statements are misleading in so many directions· that it is 
difficult to know where to begin. First there was the Orientalists' 
hostility to Egypt and the slowness of the establishment of Egyptology. 
Secondly, as we have seen, Egypt had been perceived as 'the essential 
Oriental influence on the West' since Antiquity, far longer than there 
had been any comparable interest in India. Thirdly, although there was 
considerable curiosity about Egypt in the first half of the 19th century, 
the country was seen then as exotic and alien - that is to say, very 
differently from Egypt's earlier position as the ancestral culture of 
Europe. It was precisely from the latter niche that it was replaced by the 
Romantic view of India. 
All in all, it is clear that academic Orientalism, most strikingly in 
Germany but elsewhere as well, began with quite definite limits. The 
only regions of the Orient for which the early Orientalists showed 
respect were Central Asia, seen as the mountainous European 
Urheimat, and India, seen as the home of kin from whom Europeans 
could learn about themselves. By the end of the 19th century, even the 
respect for these had disappeared. 
Edward Said and R. Rashed have shown that Orientalism, at a 
fundamental level and from the beginning, has combined interest in 
Asian societies with a contempt for them and the conviction that 
'Orientals' were unfit to analyse and arrange their own cultures. 45 
Orientalist scholars concurrently tried to emphasize the ancient civi­
lizations of other continents, and to play down their medieval and 
modem continuations and developments. 46 Other ancient civilizations 
could be completely appropriated by Western scholarship because the 
modern inhabitants, it was argued, were either new interlopers them­
selves or, in their decadence, had 'lost' the high culture of their 
ancestors. The later civilizations, which could not be taken over in this 
way, were dismissed and ignored - even though, in nearly every case, 
the Europeans had been able to learn about the ancient ones only


--- PAGE 134 ---
'I 
BLACK ATHENA 
through them.47 It was asserted above all, and despite overwhelming 
evidence to the contrary, that only Europeans had a true sense of 
history!S 
There is no doubt about the extraordinary efforts of the early 
Orientalists, and of their great and lasting achievements. Nevertheless, 
the growth of Orientalism did not simply go with a broadening of 
horizons, as Quinet and Schwab claimed. In many respects it involved a 
narrowing of the imagination and intensified feelings of the innate and 
categorical superiority of European civilization. It has served to distance 
and objectify non-European cultures, lumping their very different 
characteristics into a general category of ' Oriental' merely because they 
are not European. These have been seen as 'exotic', and viewed as inert 
or passive in the face of European dynamism. Indeed, since the 19th 
century it has become literally unthinkable to Europeans that peoples of 
any other continent could be 'scientific' in the waythey themselves are, 
or that Asians or Africans could have contributed in any profound way 
to the making of Europe. 49 The only apparent exceptions here were 
ancient Iran and India, but these, of course, were seen as part of the 
Indo-European family. As such they filled the niche of 'exotic ances­
tors' that had previously been occupied by Egypt and Chaldaea. 
Gobineau, for instance, was sure that 'the nations of Egypt and Assyria 
took a place behind the men of Hindustan. ,50 
Naturally, the institutional rise of Orientalism must - at least in 
England and France - be associated with the huge expansion of 
colonialism and other forms of domination over Asia and Africa taking 
place at the same time. Not only was a systematic understanding of 
non- European peoples and their spoken languages needed to control 
these peoples but a knowledge of their civilizations, by seizing and 
categorizing their cultures, ensured that the natives themselves could 
learn about their own civilizations only through European scholarship. 
This provided yet another rope to tie the colonial elites to the metro­
politan countries, which has been an increasingly important factor in 
the retention of European cultural hegemony since the decline of direct 
colonialism in the second half of the 20th century. 51 
Raymond Schwab has brilliantly shown how frequently Oriental­
Romantic themes appear in 19th-century culture. His implication, 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 237 
however, that this was a new phenomenon in European art is entirely 
misleading. Interest in other continents long antedates the I 8th­
century enthusiasms for Egypt, Abyssinia and China described above. 
Furthermore, the establishment of arcane Orientalist academic disci­
plines in the 19th century relieved the cultured generalist of the 
distasteful duty of coming to grips with Oriental civilizations and 
treating them with respect. Unlike the 17th- and 18th-century artists 
and politicians, who took Egypt and China very seriously indeed, those 
of the 19th could simply collect china or introduce exotic romantic 
themes into their literature and art. 
These intellectual and educational changes can be related to specific 
national configurations of European colonization and expansion into 
other continents. For instance, the initial development of ancient 
Indian studies in the 17th and 18th centuries grew out of the East India 
Company's need to understand their subjects and 'native' allies. It is 
equally significant that the romanticizing of India was carried out by 
Germans, who had no direct interest in the subcontinent. Even 
in England the dOIninant Indianist of the second half of the 19th 
century was Max-Muller, who was appointed at the instigation of the 
. Prussian ambassador Baron Christian Bunsen and who remained very 
German throughout his fifty years as Professor of Indian Languages at 
Oxford. 52 
THE FALL OF CHINA 
The historiographic fall of Indian culture, like that of the ancient 
Semites, took place only at the end of the 19th century. Here we are 
concerned with the beginning of the century and the degradation of the 
Chinese and the Egyptians. The complete triumph of racism and 
'progress' and the Romantic 'return' to Europe and Christianity took 
place as European manufacturers began to replace Chinese luxury 
goods such as furniture, porcelain and silk with their own products. 
Europe's gain from this was not merely cultural satisfaction. As Britain 
began to penetrate the Chinese market with Lancashire cottons and 
Indian opium the balance of trade tipped against China, and Europe's 
commercial advantage was soon followed by military initiatives.


--- PAGE 135 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
From 1839 - when the British went to war to protect their opium 
trade from an official Chinese ban - until the end of the century, 
Britain, France and the other 'powers' made successive attacks on 
China to extract more and greater concessions. The need to justify 
these actions and exploitation, the real social breakdown in China -
itselflargely the result of European pressure - together with the general 
racism and 'return to Europe', were the forces that led to a transform­
ation of the Western image of China. From being a model of rational 
civilization China became seen as a filthy country in which torture and 
corruption of all sorts flourished. With obscene irony, the Chinese 
were especially blamed for their consumption of opium. De 
Tocqueville, writing in the 1850s, found it incomprehensible that the 
18th-century Physiocrats should have had such an admiration for 
China. 53 
The fall in China's reputation can also be traee4 in linguistics. As an 
isolating language, Chinese - together with Coptic and to some extent 
even English - was difficult for Humboldt to fit into his evolutionary 
progress from agglutinative to inflected languages. He toyed with, but 
rejected, the idea that Chinese was a baby talk and therefore the 
language of the babyhood of mankind. 54 By the middle of the century 
men like the great Indo-European linguist August Schleicher had no 
such qualms. Schleicher saw a three-stage evolutionary hierarchy from 
isolating Chinese, to agglutinative Turanian (Turkish and Mongol), 
culminating in inflected Semitic and Indo-European. 55 
Baron Christian Bunsen, whose ambivalence about Egypt was agon­
ized, had no hesitation about the linguistic and hence the historical 
position of Chinese. According to him, Sinism (China) was the most 
primitive stage in world history; it was followed by Turanism and then 
Khamism (Egypt). After that came the Flood and the beginning of true 
history, which consisted of the dialectic between the Semites and the 
Indo-Germans. 56 Thus, on the 'scientific' basis of historical linguistics, 
both Egypt and China were kicked out of history into the antediluvian 
past. As I have stressed, relations between race and language were 
extremely close during the 19th century. Thus the fall in the linguistic 
position of Egypt and China was paralleled by one in their anatomical 
and racial one. 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 239 
RACISM IN THE 
EARLY 19TH CENTURY 
The extraordinary growth of racism in the early 19th century included 
the increasingly pejorative 'racial' classifications of the Chinese and 
Egyptians. With the reaction to the French Revolution and the revival 
of Christianity, one key area of doctrine in which Christianity was not 
able to restore its position was on the unity of mankind. Even poly­
genesis somewhat revived after a setback in the Evangelical I 820S, while 
the period from 1800 to 1850 in general was one of intense activity to 
find anatomical bases for the racial differences which every cultivated 
European 'knew' existed. 57 The lack of clear-cut results of this research 
did not affect general opinion on the matter; it may, however, have been 
a factor in making a number of more cautious scholars continue to use 
language to explain what they saw as the obvious inequalities between 
different peoples. Whatever form it took, the new principle of ethnicity 
pervaded all areas of life and scholarship.58 
A Renaissance traveller, Andrea Corsalis, described the Chinese as 
'of our quality'. 59 For the most part, 17th- and 18th-century writers 
considered them to belong to a distinct but not necessarily inferior 
race.60 By the period of the Opium Wars in the middle of the 19th 
century, however, the Chinese were racially contemptible. As a jingle 
published in Punch put it in 1858: 
John Chinaman a rogue is born, 
The laws of truth he holds in scorn; 
About as great a brute as can 
Encumber the earth is John Chinaman. 
Sing Yeh, my cruel John Chinaman, 
Sing Yeo, my stubborn John Chinaman. 
Not Cobden himself can take off the ban 
By humanity laid onJohn Chinaman. 
With their little pig-eyes and their large pig-tails, 
And their diet of rats, dogs, slugs and snails, 
All seems to be game in the frying pan 
Of that nasty feeder John Chinaman.


--- PAGE 136 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Sing lie-tea, my sly Chinaman, 
No fightee, my coward John Chinaman, 
John Bull has a chance -let him, if he can 
Somewhat open the eyes ofJohn Chinaman. 61 
19th-century scholars were only slightly less damning. However 
many divisions of humanity the new anthropologists envisioned, the 
'yellow' races came out in the middle, below the white and above the 
black. What is more, the Chinese were now condemned for what the 
Enlightenment had considered admirable, their stability. According to 
Baron Cuvier, the great naturalist of the early part of the century: 'This 
race has formed mighty empires in China and Japan ... but its 
civilization has long appeared stationary.,62 For the racist pioneer the 
Comte de Gobineau, the yellow tribes 
have little physical vigour and tend towards a~thy ... feeble desires, 
a will that is obstinate rather than extreme ... In everything they tend 
to mediocrity. They have an easy enough understanding of what is 
not too elevated or too profound . . . The Yellows are a practical 
people in the strict sense of the word. They do not dream or enjoy 
theories. They invent little, but they are capable of appreciating and 
adopting what they can use ... 63 
It should be remembered that Gobineau became notorious only as an 
antecedent of Hitler; during the 19th century, although some might 
disagree with him, he was accepted as an eccentric but reputable 
scholar. The new racial position of the Chinese was quite sufficient to 
exclude them from the Romantic picture of dynamic world history, and 
there was no doubt in anyone's mind that racially the 'Chinaman' was 
mediocre. 
WHAT COLOUR WERE THE 
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS? 
The racial position of the Ancient Egyptians was much more precarious 
than that of the Chinese for two reasons: scholars differed greatly on 
their 'race', and the Egyptians themselves were balanced between the 
white acme of mankind and its black pit. For Cuvier, 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
The Negro race . . . is marked by black complexion, crisped or 
woolly hair, compressed cranium and a flat nose. The projection of 
the lower parts of the face, and the thick lips, evidently approximate it 
to the monkey tribe: the hordes of which it consists have always 
remained in the most complete state of barbarism. 64 
While for Gobineau, 
The black variety is the lowest and lies at the bottom of the ladder. 
The animal character lent to its basic form imposes its destiny from 
the moment of conception. It never leaves the most restricted 
intellectual zones ... Ifits faculties for thinking are mediocre or even 
nonexistent, it possesses in its desire and as a consequence in its will 
an intensity that is often terrible. Many of the senses. are developed 
with a vigour unknown in the other two races: principally taste and 
smell. It is precisely in the greed for sensations that the most striking 
mark of its inferiority is found ... 65 
If Europeans were treating Blacks as badly as they did throughout the 
19th century, Blacks had to be turned into animals or, at best, sub­
humans; the noble Caucasian was incapable of treating other full 
humans in such ways. This inversion sets the scene for the racial and 
main aspect of the 'Egyptian problem': Ifit had been scientifically 'pruved' 
that Blacks were biologically incapable of civilization, how could one explain 
Ancient Egypt - which was inconveniently placed on the African continent.1>6 
There were two, or rather, three solutions. The first was to deny that the 
Ancient Egyptians were black; the second was to deny that the Ancient 
Egyptians had created a 'true' civilization; the third was to make doubly sure 
by denying both. The last has been preferred by most 19th- and 20th-century 
historians. 
To what 'race', then, did the Ancient Egyptians belong? I am very 
dubious of the utility of the concept 'race' in general because it is 
impossible to achieve any anatomical precision on the subject. More­
over, even if one accepts it for the sake of argument, I am even more 
sceptical about the possibility of finding an answer in this particular 
case. Research on the question usually reveals far more about the 
predisposition of the researcher than about the question itself. Never-


--- PAGE 137 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
theless I am convinced that, at least for the last 7,000 years, the 
population of Egypt has contained African, South-West Asian and 
Mediterranean types. It is also clear that the further south, or up the 
Nile, one goes, the blacker and more Negroid the population becomes, 
and that this has been the case for the same length of time. As I stated in 
the Introduction, I believe that Egyptian civilization was fundamentally 
African and that the African element was stronger in the Old and 
Middle Kingdoms, before the Hyksos invasion, than it later became. 
Furthermore, I am convinced that many of the most powerful Egyptian 
dynasties which were based in Upper Egypt - the 1st, IIth, 12th 
and 18th - were made up of pharaohs whom one can usefully- call 
black.67 ( 
The actual African nature of Egyptian civilization, however, is not 
relevant to our present discussion, which is concerned with the ambi­
guities in the perceived 'racial' position of the Egyptians. In Classical 
times the Egyptians were seen as both black and white or yellow; 
Herodotos referred to them as having 'black skins and woolly hair'. 68 
On the other hand, portraits of Bousiris on vases tend to show him as 
Caucasian, though he has black as well as white attendants. 69 
Professor Jean Devisse has expressed surprise at how many Blacks 
there appear to have been in early Christian portrayals of Egyptians. 70 
He has also shown how the Egyptians were 'blackened' in the 15th 
century, when they were very much admired. There also appears to 
have been a relation between blackness and Egyptian wisdom. Many 
medieval and Renaissance paintings portray one of the magi - presum­
ably an Egyptian - as a Black.71 On the other hand, representations of 
Hermes Trismegistos from the Renaissance picture him as a European, 
though sometimes with vaguely Oriental features. 72 
In England, the fact that the name Gypsy (or Egyptian) was given to 
people from North-West India shows that in the 15th century the 
Egyptians were seen as an archetypally dark people.73 The Talmudic 
interpretation that 'the curse of Ham' (the father of Canaan and 
Mizraim, 'Egypt') was blackness was widespread in the 17th century. 74 
On the other hand, with the late-17th-century combination of in­
creased racism and growing respect for the Ancient Egyptians, their 
image tended to be whitened. Bernier, the author of New Division of the 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 243 
Earth by the Different Species or Races who Inhabit it, published in 1684, 
maintained that the Egyptians were part of the White Race.75 
There is little doubt that many Masons have been racist. The facts 
that they were directly or indirectly involved with the slave trade and 
were less tied to monogenesis than orthodox Christians tended to 
override their anthropocentric tradition and the Masonic tenet that 'all 
mankind are brothers plighted'. With their focus on Egypt, they needed 
to make a drastic separation between the 'animal' Blacks and the noble 
Egyptians. In The Magic Flute, for instance, Mozart made a striking 
contrast between the lustful Moor Monostatos and the Egyptian phil­
osopher Sarastro. 76 Indeed, if we note the stress on the benefits of 
Egyptian colonization, which was a central theme of Seth os , and the 
stark contrasts drawn in it and in many other 18th-century writings 
between the 'acorn-eating' Pelasgians before the Egyptians' arrival and 
the glories of Greek civilization after it, we can suggest that these were, 
to some extent at least, justifications of contemporary European 
activities. 
In the second half of the 18th century, however, there were also 
tendencies to pull the Egyptians back to Africa, tendencies linked to an 
enthusiasm for Ethiopia reflected in Dr Johnson's translation of the 
17th-century travels of Father Lobo in that country and his novel 
Rasselas.77 Although the medieval legend of the Kingdom of Prester 
John, Europe's Christian ally beyond Islam, had been applied to various 
regions of Asia and Mrica, Ethiopia as an exotic, remote mountain and 
Christian kingdom was an admirable candidate. Furthermore, Ethiopia 
could very plausibly be linked to Ancient Egypt. 
It should, however, be made clear that the name 'Abyssinia' was used 
precisely to avoid 'Ethiopia', with its indelible associations with black­
ness. The first American edition of Johnson's work, published in 
Philadelphia in 1768, was entitled The History of Rasselas Prince of 
Abissinia:AnAsiatic Tale! Baron Cuvier equated Ethiopian with Negro, 
but categorized the Abyssinians - as Arabian colonies - as 
Caucasians. 78 Nevertheless, this was too fine a distinction to be effec­
tive. The great Scottish explorer James Bruce, who was inspired by the 
vision of Abyssinia/Ethiopia and the quest for the sources of the Nile, 
learnt better. For him the inhabitants of the Ethiopian mountains were


--- PAGE 138 ---
, , 
II! 
'I i 
BLACK ATHENA 
black and - on the whole - beautiful. His fascinating discoveries 
encouraged admirers of Egypt like Bruce himself, the traveller and 
savant the Comte de Volney, Dupuis and Champollion to stress the 
importance of Upper Egypt or even Ethiopia as the sources of Egyptian 
civilization. 79 
Despite its obvious Romantic charm, Germans did not get swept up 
in the Ethiopian craze. Their extra-European fantasies were always 
fixed on Asia, and when they linked Egypt to black Africa it was to 
denigrate it. Winckelmann's dislike of the appearance of the Egyptians 
has been mentioned; the following quotation illustrates how damning 
he believed an Mrican connection could be to Egypt: 
How can one find even a hint of beauty in their figures, whe~ all or 
almost all of the originals on which they were based had the form of 
the African? That is they had, like them, pouting lips, receding and 
small chins, sunken and flattened profiles. And not only like the 
African but also like the Ethiopian, they often had flattened noses 
and a dark cast of skin ... Thus all of the figures painted on the 
mummies had dark brown faces.8o 
Similar attitudes were held in England and France. Charles de Brosses, 
for instance, writing at almost the same time as Wickelmann, argued 
that the Ancient Egyptians resembled contemporary Blacks in that their 
zoolatry - which the Masons, following a tradition at least as old as 
Plutarch, saw as allegorical- was simply 'Negro fetishism'. 81 Neverthe­
less, at the end of the 18th century the predominant view was that of 
Mozart and his librettist Emanuel Schikaneder in The Magic Flute: that 
the Egyptians were neither Negro nor essentially African. Similarly 
Herder, with his great admiration for the East, saw them as an Asian 
people.
82 
The anthropologist and pioneer of racial studies Lord 
Monboddo, who is famous for having included the orangutan with 
humankind, had a great admiration for the Egyptians.83 Blumenbach 
placed the Egyptians, together with the Arabs and Jews, as members 
of the Caucasian race.84 A few decades later, Cuvier saw them as 
'probably' white. 
The dominant Ethiopian languages are Semitic, and it seems to have 
been on these grounds that the position of the Abyssinians as members 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 245 
of the superior race was actually more secure than that of the 
Egyptians.85 With the huge increase of pictorial representations of 
Ancient Egyptians available to Europeans during the first half of the 
19th century, which showed them to have been a thoroughly mixed 
population, the Egyptians tended to be seen as increasingly African and 
black. 
By the middle of the 19th century, Gobineau was reviving the biblical 
- or to be more precise, the Talmudic - scheme, and categorizing the 
Egyptians as Hamites and virtually black. He thus found it useful to 
accept Schlegel's theory that Egyptian 'civilization' - to the extent that 
Gobineau conceded that it had existed - derived from the implantation 
of Indian 'Aryan' colonists.86 Before then, two compromises between 
the blackness of the Egyptians and their high civilization were reached, 
with the help of the long stretches of time seen to be involved. The first 
was the same as that generally agreed for India - that the original 'pure' 
Egyptians had been white but that there had later been considerable 
mixture from other races, and this mixture or miscegenation had been 
the major cause of their decadence. 87 
The second compromise, advanced by the early- 19th-century 
anthropologist W. C. Wells, was just the opposite. Wells was linked to 
the humanitarian movement and opposed extreme racism and 
polygenesis, and he argued for the improvement of the black race. 
While he accepted the correlation between colour and degree of 
civilization, he maintained that it tended to be civilization that deter­
mined colour, rather than the other way round. He noted, for instance, 
that Ancient Egyptian art showed people who were clearly Negroid, yet 
the modem Egyptians were not Negroes. Thus, he argued, it was 
possible that their skins had become lighter with the advance of 
civilization.88 
Wells, writing in 1818, shows how completely the intellectual atmos­
phere had changed since the Enlightenment. The notion of a higher 
Ancient Egyptian civilization was dismissed in the face of a completely 
triumphant 'progress' which could even transcend the biblical epitome 
of permanence: 'can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his 
spots?,S9 However, Wells was right in two ways. In the first place, the 
perception of the early Egyptians in the late 18th and early 19th


--- PAGE 139 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
centuries was as Negro - see, for instance, the famous representations 
of the Sphinx being measured by the French scientists of the 
Expedition.90 Secondly - whether or not Wells was aware of it - Egypt, 
in 18 I 8, was at the beginning of a 'national renaissance'. 
THE NATIONAL RENAISSANCE 
OF MODERN EGYPT 
Here we come to a subject that appears to be a non-issue in the history 
of the reputation of Ancient Egypt. However, as with 'the dog that did 
not bark in the night' in the Sherlock Holmes story, the failu~ of the 
Egyptian renaissance to affect scholars' racial stereotypd of the 
Ancient Egyptians tells us something very significant about them. 
Egypt had been part of the Turkish Empire since the 16th century. 
However, the Turks continued to rule through the previous rulers, the 
Mamelukes, a corps of slaves largely from the Caucasus, who made up 
the most formidable section of the army and had controlled Egypt since 
the 13th century. Mameluke history is extremely bloody, and power at 
the top shifted frequently. By the end of the 18th century, however, 
commercial agricultural production, trade and manufacture had 
reached a level that made Egypt wealthy by world standards. 91 
Mameluke rule and Turkish suzerainty were then severely weakened 
by Napoleon's conquest in 1798, which had largely been carried out by 
manipulating class, religious and ethnic divisions in Egyptian society. 
By 1808 - after great confusion following the French withdrawal and 
British intervention - the British had been driven out and power had 
been seized by Mohamed Ali, the Albanian general of the Turkish 
forces. Some years later he had the Mamelukes massacred and became 
viceroy, virtually independent of the Turks. 
Mohamed Ali began a state-led modernization of the Egyptian 
economy and society that can be compared only to those of Peter the 
Great in Russia and the Meiji Emperor in Japan. The land of the 
Mamelukes and tax farmers was seized and distributed directly to 
peasants, who now paid a combination of rent and tax to the state. Huge 
irrigation projects were set up, and the commercial cropping of cotton 
and sugar was established on a large scale. Furthermore, with the help 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 247 
of foreign experts modern factories were built to process these crops 
but, as in Russia and Japan, the industrial centrepieces were the 
arsenals established to supply the modern army and to make it indepen­
dent of foreign weapons.92 It can be claimed, with some justice, that 
there were harmful effects of this programme in that it made the 
country too dependent on cotton and built up a class of rich commercial 
landowners whose influence became very detrimental to national de­
velopment. In the short term, however, the programme had a startling 
success. By the 183 os Egypt was second only to England in its modem 
industrial capacity. 93 
With these economic and political bases, Mohamed Ali began to 
create an Egyptian empire overseas. His modem army subdued many of 
the Turkish dependencies in Western Arabia, and by 1822 his generals 
had conquered the Sudan. He also looked towards the north, to Syria 
and Greece: as common subjects of the Ottoman Empire, many Greeks 
lived in the Delta and they became particularly involved in the new 
commercial sectors of the economy. After Mohamed Ali's rise to power 
more Greeks came both to join his new army and to take part in the 
economic boom.94 
With the beginning of the Greek War of Independence in 1821 the 
Turkish Sultan, in desperation, gave Mohamed Ali the pashaliks or 
provincial governorships of Crete and the Morea (the contemporary 
name for the Peloponnese) with a commission to exterminate the 
rebels. For four years the Egyptians were unable to invade because of 
the skilful and ferocious Greek fleet. In 1825, however, the Egyptians 
took advantage of the Greek fleet's mutiny over lack of pay, and landed a 
disciplined army under Mohamed Ali's son Ibrahim. This force was 
able to crush the ferocious resistance of the Greek guerrillas, but only 
with increasingly savage repression. Ibrahim then moved north to 
Missolonghi, where the Greek patriots were being besieged by the 
Turks. 
The arrival of the superior Egyptian army tipped the balance in 
favour of the Turks, and this centre of the Greek Revolution was taken, 
but only after a heroic defence which, with Byron's death there, was 
critical in bringing the governments of Europe round to the position of 
the Philhellene students and artists supporting the Greek cause. The


--- PAGE 140 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Rising now became a continental struggle between Europe on the one 
hand, and Asia and Africa on the other. 95 To some, declining Turkey 
was seen as less of a threat to Greece and Europe than Egypt. As the 
Austrian chancellor Metternich wrote, when considering the possibility 
of Egypt's gaining complete independence from Turkey, 'In this way 
one would see the realization of what has so often been announced as 
the most redoubtable danger to Europe - a new African power ... ,96 
To counter such a possibility, the British and French governments 
tried to split Egypt from Turkey. They also attempted to persuade 
Mohamed Ali to withdraw from Morea and to force the Turkish 
government to grant him the pashalik of Syria in compensation. In 1827 
squadrons of the British, French and Russian navies deftroyed the 
Turkish and Egyptian fleets at Navarino, and Greek independence was 
assured. An agreement was made by which the Egyptians withdrew 
from the Peloponnese and released their Greek slaves. Despite this 
humiliation and defeat Mohamed Ali was granted Syria, and continued 
with his economic and military expansion. 
During the 1830S the Egyptians controlled Syria and began a 
modernization of the country and an establishment of a new power base 
there. At the same time, Mohamed Ali and his son Ibrahim were able to 
establish colonial rule over Crete. The island's population had suffered 
huge casualties during the savage fighting between Greeks and Turks 
during the Greek War of Independence: the only relative truce had 
been that established by Ibrahim's army when it controlled Crete for 
eighteen months as a stepping stone to the Peloponnese. 97 
After the defeat at Navarino in 1827, the Christian Cretans rose 
again under the protection of the European fleets. England, however, 
did not wish to tip the balance too far, and in 1829 Mohamed Ali was 
allowed to re-establish his government over the island. After three years 
of relative quiet Christian Cretans, dissatisfied with their subjection to 
Moslems while other Greeks were independent, rose in another revolt, 
but this was brutally suppressed. After 1834 strict colonial rule in which 
no favouritism was given to the Moslems was imposed, and connections 
with the large Greek population of Egypt were established. The 
economy was restored, and developed for the mutual benefit of 
Mohamed Ali and the Cretans. Diseases were controlled and both the 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 249 
wealth and the population greatly increased in what - after decades of 
Turkish misrule - later seemed to have been a golden age for the 
island. 98 
In 1839 Mohamed Ali declared his independence from the Porte and 
invaded Turkey. Five days later the Sultan died, and soon after this the 
Turkish fleet mutinied and joined the Egyptians. The threat of the East 
Mediterranean under the control of non-Europeans was too terrible to 
contemplate, and in a show of unity not paralleled until the Boxer Rising 
in China, some sixty years later, Austria, England, France, Prussia and 
Russia came to the aid of Turkey. Mohamed Ali was forced - under 
threat of blockade - to hand back North Syria and Crete and, once 
more, to become a vassal of the Turks. 99 
The new settlement dealt an even more severe blow to the Egyptian 
economy than that imposed after Navarino. During the 1830S 
Mohamed Ali's state-centred autarky had been weakened by European 
commercial penetration; after the new settlement in 1839, the Egyptian 
economy was forced to go back in the direction of the traditional 
Turkish pattern. This reversal laid it completely open to the European 
manufactures which weakened and often destroyed Egyptian 
induStry.100 Nevertheless, Mohamed Ali's descendants retained con­
siderable wealth and power until their political and military defeat by 
the British. Indeed, a further and much more severe collapse of the 
modern economy came only after the British takeover in 1880.101 
The fact that this episode of modern history is so little known is not at 
all surprising. It does not fit the paradigm of active European expansion 
into a passive outside world. The Egyptian Empire of the 19th cen­
tury was like the equally obscure, short-lived success stories of the 
Cherokees in the Appalachians, the Maoris in New Zealand and the 
Chinese in California. It was an example of non-Europeans beating 
Europeans at their own games and therefore being coerced into giving 
them up.IOZ Where the racial stereotype of~atural European superiority 
failed, artificial intervention was necessary to preserve it. 
Where these events fit with our concerns is that no mention of the 
greatest Egyptian Empire since the time of Ramesses II appears in the 
contemporary writing about ancient history. It is still more remarkable 
that at precisely the time when Egyptians were controlling large areas of


--- PAGE 141 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Greece, the invasion of Danaos the Egyptian should have been denied, 
at least partly, on grounds of 'national character' .103 To some extent, the 
failure to see any anomaly in this can be explained in terms of contem­
porary 'media coverage'. Although official reports noted the relative 
efficiency of the Egyptian rule, in popular reports Egyptian involvement 
in massacres was assimilated to the much more widespread killings by 
both Turks and Christian Greeks. Furthermore, the image of Blacks 
on the soil of Greece was seen as particularly appalling. 104 
The failure on the part of contemporary ancient historians to men­
tion the contemporary Egyptian successes in general, and conquests in 
Greece in particular, cannot be entirely explained away on)he grounds 
that recent events are no concern of the professional hist&rian, or that 
there had been a complete rupture in Egyptian history with the coming 
ofIslam. Early- 19th-century historians were at the heart of the Roman­
tic age, in which peoples were supposed to have permanent essences 
and characteristics. There was no hesitation at that time, for instance, in 
associating the pagan Goths and Vikings with Christian English and 
German triumphs of the 19th century. The reason for the double 
standard is obviously racist. It was inconvenient at the time, and even in 
retrospect, for historians who were convinced that Africans were 
racially and categorically inferior to admit that - even when led by 
renegade Europeans like Mohamed Ali and Ibrahim - Egyptians could 
form heroic conquering armies on a par with those of Napoleon, 
Wellington or Bliicher. 
DUPUIS, J OMARD 
AND CHAMPOLLION 
Racism was, from the beginning, an important factor in the down­
playing of the Egyptians and the dismissal of the Ancient Model, and 
after 1860 it became the overriding one. In the 1820S and 30S, however, 
the old rivalry between Egyptian religion and Christianity continued 
to playa significant role. I have already discussed the threat posed to 
Christianity by Charles Fran~ois Dupuis, both as a cultural adviser to 
revolutionary regimes and through his Origin of All Cults, which set out, 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
with massive corroborative detail, the claim that Christianity had arisen 
from the misunderstood debris of Egyptian astronomical religious 
allegory. 
Such thinking became anathema after the French Revolution and the 
revival of Christianity as a necessary bastion of social order. It was not 
only crude reactionaries but 'critical apologists' for Christianity 
who were distressed by Dupuis. Coleridge declared himself to be a 
'Berkeleyan' after reading him; Berkeley's defence against challenges 
to the historicity of the Gospels was to argue, from the position that all 
history is myth, that they were as reliable as any other texts. 1OS Just as 
Newton, Bentley and Whiston had been frightened by Toland and the 
Radical Enlightenment, even the enlightened in the early 19th century 
felt threatened by Dupuis. Ex-PresidentJohn Adams, for instance, was 
obsessed by him. In 1816 he wrote to his friend Thomas Jefferson to say 
that, instead of spending money on missionaries, 'we should project a 
society to translate Dupuis into all languages, and offer a reward in 
diamonds to any man or body of men who should produce the best 
answer to it.,106 The diamonds should have gone to Jean Fran~ois 
Champollion. 
The intensity of the dread of Dupuis and Egypto- Masonry with their 
links to the French Revolution, together with the complicated triangu­
lar relations between Christianity, Greece and Ancient Egypt, appear in 
the tortuous career of Champollion. The antithesis of the Oriental 
Renaissance, Champollion should in many ways be seen as the cul­
mination of the Masonic Enlightenment. He seems to have discovered 
his mission to decipher the hieroglyphs at very much the same point in 
his adolescence at which he became steeped in Masonic thought, and 
by the time he was twenty he had mastered Hebrew, Arabic and 
Coptic to prepare himself for the task. 107 
A decipherment was now made possible by the availability of copies 
of new texts, including the newly discovered Rosetta Stone on which 
the same text was inscribed in Greek, Demotic and hieroglyphics. 
However, as Gardiner put it, Champollion was 'always inclined to hark 
back to his incompatible theory of the purely symbolic character of the 
hieroglyphics' .108 The fact that he overcame this illustrates that while 
his decipherment required the Masonic impulse, it could have


--- PAGE 142 ---
II: 
i BLACK ATHENA 
succeeded only when the Egyptian ideal was starting to crack and 
Romantic linguistics beginning to triumph. Only at this point could he 
discard the central Masonic tenet that hieroglyphs were purely 
symbolic and without phonetic function. 
A further irony was that Champollion's first substantive discovery, in 
1822, was to date to Roman times the zodiac at Dendera, which 
Edme-Fran~oisJomard, a follower of Dupuis and a leading scholar on 
Napoleon's Expedition, had claimed to have come from many 
thousands of years BC.109 The help that this was seen to give Christian­
ity appears in a report made by the French ambassador to Rome on the 
attitude of the Pope, who was reported as having said that 
[with this] ... important service rendered to r[.igion: 'He 
[Champollion] has ... humbled and confounded the pride of this 
philosophy which claimed to have discovered in the zodiac of 
Dendera a chronology earlier than that of the Holy Scriptures.' The 
Holy Father has therefore requested that M. Testa, a man most 
learned in the studies of Antiquity, set out in detail for him the 
arguments whereby M. Champollion establishes: (1) that this zodiac 
was constructed under Nero; and (2) that no monument exists from 
before 2200 BC, dating back, that is, to the time of Abraham, so that, 
in accordance with our faith, there remain approximately eighteen 
centuries of darkness through which interpretation of the Holy 
Scriptures alone can guide us.110 
This help against the threat of Dupuis explains the striking change of 
attitude exhibited after 1822 by the Ultra nobles, as well as Louis XVIII 
and Charles X, towards Champollion and his elder brother, whom they 
had detested for their J acobinism and support for Napoleon, and the 
considerable patronage the younger brother received from a regime he 
despised. Champollion prudently restricted his historical discoveries to 
the post- Hyksos dynasties, then dated to 2200 BC, thus allowing biblical 
primacy. While this gained him support from the defenders of Chris­
tianity, his drawing attention to Egyptian triumphs from long before the 
earliest Greek civilization roused the hatred of the Hellenists. So for a 
time he split the alliance between Christianity and Hellenism. 
Champollion had many enemies in academic circles including rival 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 253 
Egyptologists like Jomard, whose dating of the zodiac he had dis­
credited, and the Romantic and conservative founder of Orientalism, 
Sylvestre de Sacy. The backbone of the resistance that kept him out of 
the Academy and the College de France, however, was made up of 
Hellenists like Jean Antoine Letronne and Raoul Rochette, who by this 
time were passionately anti-Egyptian. 1ll Nevertheless, by 1829 royal 
patronage and the plausibility and use of his decipherment won enough 
of them over, and Champollion received long-overdue recognition. 
Then, in the liberal atmosphere after the July Revolution in 1830, 
Champollion felt free to publish his conclusion that the Egyptian 
calendar, and hence Egyptian civilization, went back to 3285 BC. This 
reunited the Christians and the Hellenists against him and after his 
death in 1831 Egyptology went into recession for a quarter of a cen­
tury, while his Hellenist and Orientalist enemies went on to dominate 
the French Academic Establishment. Indeed, the ultimate irony was 
that his eulogy was read not by Champollion's friend and patron 
Dacier, the permanent Secretary of the Academy, but by Dacier's suc­
cessor, Champollion's arch-enemy de Sacy.112 
It was not until the late 18 50S that translations of Egyptian texts were 
considered reliable by ancient historians. This absence of any serious 
consideration of Egyptology between 1831 and 1860 is of great import­
ance to the theme of this book, as it was precisely during this period that 
the Egyptian-based Ancient Model was destroyed and the Indian­
based Aryan Model erected. A good example of this process and of the 
general decline in the reputation of Ancient Egypt can be seen in 
George Eliot's Middlemarch, which, though written in the 1 860s, was a 
careful reconstruction of intellectual life around 1830. In the novel the 
old scholar Casaubon's interest in Ancient Egypt was made to typify his 
obscurantism. Young Ladislaw, by contrast, fresh from the centre of 
Romanticism, the German community in Rome, did not criticize 
Casaubon for his failure to take Champollion's new decipherment into 
account. He was scornful of his failure to read the new German 
scholarship and for being interested in Egypt at all.113 
The official heads of the German community in Rome during the 
teens and twenties were Barthold Niebuhr - the great historian of 
Rome and, for a time, the Prussian Minister at the Vatican - and his


--- PAGE 143 ---
254 BLACK ATHENA 
secretary and successor Christian Bunsen. Both were fully in favour of 
the new Romanticism and passion for ethnicity. Nevertheless, together 
with Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt, they were among the 
handful of German scholars who were convinced by Champollion's 
decipherment in the 1820S. Even they, however, had serious reser­
vations about Egyptian culture. In 1833, as organizer of the new 
national museum in Berlin, Wilhelm von Humboldt insisted that 
while Egyptian objects were valuable to scholars - including him­
self - they should not be given equal status in a national museum 
which, for the public improvement, should be devoted ;0 Kunst 
by which he meant Greek and Roman antiquities and Rehaissanc~ 
art. 114 
Christian Bunsen had studied at Gottingen, and later became the 
Prussian ambassador to Britain at a critical time in the 1840S. He learnt 
hieroglyphics and championed Egyptology in the 30S and 40S against 
the 'resolute mistrust and indifference of his countrymen', keeping the 
discipline alive during its doldrums, but only at the price of having 
Ancient Egypt turned into an alien object of study. lIS When he first 
contemplated working on Egyptian he wrote to Niebuhr that he had 'a 
kind of shrinking from it'.1l6 Describing a trip to the Villa Albani 
outside Rome, he recorded: 'nothing beautiful or Grecian could be 
looked at but everything Egyptian was sought out.' 117 
Bunsen's support of the German Egyptologist Reichardt Lepsius 
and the English Egyptologist and Assyriologist Samuel Birch have 
earned him a permanent place of honour in the history of Egyptology. 
Birch's short Dictionary of Hieroglyphics - the first of its kind in any 
language - was published in 1867 only as an appendix to the second 
edition of the fifth volume of Bunsen's massive Egypt's Place in Universal 
History. Indeed, it was for these volumes that this Egyptological aspect 
of Bunsen's many-sided career was chiefly known during and im­
mediately after his lifetime. 
Although he wrote the work in the 1840S, Bunsen claimed that his 
basic ideas on the subject had in fact been developed long before the 
decipherment, when he was a student at Gottingen in 1812. Thus they 
can be traced back to the intellectual world of Heyne, whom Bunsen 
met, and Blumenbach, under whom he studied. Nevertheless, there are 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 255 
clearly traces of later intellectual developments in his scheme, 
according to which the Egyptian was an African version of the common 
root of both the Aramaic (Semitic) and Indo-Germanic races. Bunsen 
maintained that 
The civilization of the human race is principally due to two great 
families of nations whose connection is a fact which is as beyond the 
possibility of mistake as is their early separation. What we call 
universal history necessarily appeared to me as the history of two 
races ... of these the Indo-Germanic seemed to me the mainstream 
of history; the Aramaic crossed it and formed the episodes of the 
divine drama. IIS 
Elsewhere he made this point in another form: 'If the Hebrew Semites 
are the priests of humanity the Helleno- Roman Aryans are, and ever 
will be, its heroes.' 119 
This perceived inequality between the two 'master races' will be 
discussed further, but here it is worth emphasizing that despite 
Schlegel's earlier claim that the two language families were absolutely 
distinct, the idea of a common origin for the Aryans and the Semites was 
still acceptable in the 1840S. It became less acceptable as the century 
wore on, but persisted until the climax of anti-Semitism in the 192 0S 
and 30S.120 Bunsen, maintaining that his framework fitted the new 
information coming from Champollion's work, saw clear links between 
Egyptian and Semitic, and significant ones between them and Indo­
European. 121 
Much of Egypt's Place is concerned with chronology. For this Bunsen 
added new Egyptian and astronomical data to the Classical and biblical 
sources. His conclusion followed that of Champollion - that the 
Egyptian calendar had begun in 3285 BC. By contrast, the dates he used 
for universal history bore no relation to this system and would today be 
considered utterly fantastic. Bunsen belonged to the new generation of 
fervent Christians, and maintained that world history had gone through 
three stages before the Flood: Sinism, 20-15,000 BC; Turanism, 
d Kh . 122 
15-14,000 BC; an anusm, 14-11,000 BC. 
The historical sequence - from China to Central Asia, to Egypt and 
finally to Europe - was rather different from that set out in his first draft,


--- PAGE 144 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
which consisted of three stages: the East, then the Greeks and Romans 
and finally the third stage, that of the Teutonic nations. The two 
schemes, put together, look very like Humboldt's 'progress' from 
agglutinative to inflected languages or Hegel's grand sweep of the 
'Phases of World History', both of which were made at very much the 
same time. With Hegel, just as the sun moves from east to west, so the 
state or Universal Idea moved from the intuitive, 'theocratic despotism' 
of Mongolia and China, to the 'theocratic aristocracy' of India and the 
'theocratic monarchy' of Persia; while Egypt was a point of transition 
between east and west. All these comprised the first phas70fhumanity, 
which Hegel explicidy likened to childhood. 123 The second phase, 
humanity's adolescence, was that of Greece, when there was ethical 
freedom for the first time. The third was that of Rome and the final 
climax was in the Germanic World. 
It is noticeable that Hegel wrote exceptionally litde about Egypt in 
this scheme, and his placing it above India seems to have been a shallow 
device to keep the overall direction of the Universal Idea from east to 
west. In his Leaures on the History of Philosophy , given between 18 I 6 and 
1830, he wrote at some length on Chinese and Indian thought, but 
touched on Egypt only when dealing with the origins of Greek 
philosophy.124 Staged histories in which Oriental cultures were sur­
passed by European ones were thus all the rage in earlY-19th-century 
Germany. 
To return to Bunsen. His Aryo-Semitism and his belie fin Egypt as a 
remote source of civilization place him firmly in the early 19th century; 
such ideas lost ground during his lifetime (1791-1860), and became 
unacceptable in academic circles after 1880. Although Bunsen and lrls 
contemporaries saw the Chinese and Egyptians as pioneers of civiliz­
ation, Bunsen kicked them far downstairs into the antediluvian past. 
For him, as for nearly all mid - I 9th -century historians, true history 
consisted of the dialogue between Aryans and Semites. Hence Bunsen 
flady denied the Greek legends of Egyptian setdements in the Aegean. 
Like most of his contemporaries he admitted that Greek mythology 
contained some Semitic influences; however, following the latest Ger­
man scholarship, he believed that these were indirect. According to his 
scheme, the Semitic Hyksos had been called Peleset or Pelasgoi when 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 257 
they were expelled from Egypt in the 16th century Be. Some had setded 
in Crete and the South Aegean, driving out the Aryans who had lived in 
the islands. These Aryan islanders took the names of their expellers and 
moved to Mainland Greece, where they became the ancestors of the 
Ionians. It was they who, having been subjected to Semitic influence, 
introduced fragments of Near Eastern culture into Greece. 125 
In this intricate and cumbersome way - for which there was no 
ancient authority - Bunsen tried to incorporate both the Greek legends 
about Phoenician setdement and the apparent Semitic influences in 
Greece, while at the same time preserving Hellenic Aryan purity. Here, 
however, we are going into the age of anti-Semitism which is discussed 
in Chapters VIII and IX, where these differentiations between 
Egyptians and Phoenicians on the one hand, and Ionians and 
Dorians on the other, will be treated at length. 
At this point it is important to note that knowledge of Egyptian as a 
language became available for comparative purposes only many dec­
ades after scholars had given up any idea that Egyptians had colonized 
Greece, or that Egyptian culture had had any significant impact on the 
Archipelago. Hence while Renaissance and Enlightenment scholars 
longed to make comparative studies with Egyptian, they were unable to 
do so. By contrast late- 19th-century scholars, who possessed the tools, 
were convinced that any detailed comparison would be futile. By the 
1840S Egyptian language and culture were seen as the products of a 
categorically inferior and more backward race, inherendy incapable of 
having made contributions to the great Aryan civilization and the noble 
languages oflndia, Greece and Rome. 
EGYPTIAN MONOTHEISM OR 
EGYPTIAN POLYTHEISM 
It is sometimes suggested that a major reason for the fall in Egypt's 
reputation was disillusion with the content of Egyptian texts once they 
were read. This, however, does not hold for Champollion, whose 
enthusiasm for Egypt increased as his life went on. With the revival of 
the study in the late 1850s, Egyptologists were tom between their 
admiration for Champollion - the acknowledged founder of their


--- PAGE 145 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
disci~l~e - and acceptance of his reverence for Egypt, and the 
prevadmg Romantic-Positivist ethos and contempt and condescension 
towards the culture. Although the congruence between the two is not 
exact, the key issue over which this tension was manifested was on the 
nature of Egyptian religion. As the historian of religion Karl Beth wrote 
in 1916: 
Monotheism or polytheism? This has been the great issue in 
Egyptol~gy since the discovery of the first Egyptian texts. The survey 
I have glVen here shows that both answers have their justification; it 
also shows th~t the proponents of both use these <fncepts like 
slogans, yet neIther concept can characterize the true individuality of 
Egyptian religion. 126 
If, as he plausibly argued, the corpus of Egyptian texts can be read in 
either sense, what was - and is - the argument about? Its essence would 
seem to be a continuation of the old struggle between Egyptian religion 
and Christianity. If Egyptian religion were monotheist, it could be seen 
as the basis or origin of Christianity. In the late 19th century, however, 
the racial question was more salient. If Egyptian religion were 
monotheist, it would impinge on the Aryo-Semitic monopoly of 
civilization. 
Emmanuel de Rouge and Heinrich Brugsch, the leaders of the 
second wave of Egyptology in the 1860s and 70S, both followed 
Champollion, and the Hermetic and Platonic tradition behind him in 
believing. that the pure Egyptian religion was sublime and essenti~lly 
m~nothelst, as de Rouge said: 'one idea predominates, that of a single 
prImeval God; everywhere and always it is One Substance, self-exi~ent 
and an unapproachable God.,127 
Brugsch was appointed to the chair of Egyptology at Gottingen in 
1868, the first professor of the subject since the death of Champollion. 
He too maintained that the Egyptians had originally been monotheist 
as initially did Sir Peter Ie Page Renouf, the leading Egyptologist i~ 
England. 128 However, by the time the second edition of his Leaures on 
the Origin and Growth of Religion appeared in 188o, Renoufhad changed 
his mind, denying that he had stated: 'the Egyptians commenced with 
monotheism.' 129 Internalists like the modern Egyptologist and historian 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 259 
of Egyptology Erich Hornung argue that this change of opinion came 
from increased knowledge of Ancient Egypt.13o I find it more useful to 
see the denial of Egyptian monotheism as part of the process in which 
the racism and Romantic Hellenism that prevailed in Classics and 
ancient history as a whole took over in Egyptology. 
The intermediate stage in this process can be seen in a passage from 
the work of Professor Lieblein. In a passage written in 1884, Lieblein 
attempted to fit the old view of monotheism into the new linguistic 
and historical schemes, and came up with the compromise that the 
Egyptians might have only had a proto-God or no God at all: 
All things considered it is possible, even probable, that the idea of 
God has developed itself in an earlier period of languages than the 
Indo-European. The future will perhaps be able to supply evidence 
for this. The science oflanguages has been able pardy to reconstruct 
an Indo-European prehistoric language. It might be able also to 
reconstruct a prehistoric Semitic, and a prehistoric Hamitic, and of 
these three prehistoric languages, whose original connection it not 
only guesses, but even commences to prove, gradually, [sic] it will, we 
trust in time, be able to extract a still earlier prehistoric connection, 
which according to analogy might be called Noahitic. When we have 
come so far, we shall most likely, in this prehistoric language, also 
find words expressing the idea of God. But it is even possible that the 
idea of God has not come into existence in this prehistoriC language 
either. l31 
Thus for Lieblein the Egyptians were relegated to the distant and 
primitive past. The last traces of the Platonic, Hermetic and Masonic 
respect for Egypt were being expelled from academia, and a full-scale 
attack on the older Egyptology was launched a few years later by the 
French Egyptologist Maspero. As he described the situation in 1893: 
I believed at the beginning of my career, which will soon be 
twenty-five years ago, and I maintained for a long time like M. 
Brugsch that the Egyptians arrived during their earliest period at the 
notion of divine unity and they took from this an entire religious 
system and symbolic mythology ... this was the period when I had


--- PAGE 146 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
not myself tried to decipher religious texts and when I limited myself 
to reproducing the texts of our great masters. When I was forced to 
tackle them ... I had to admit that they did not show any of the 
profound wisdom that others had seen in them. I cannot be accused 
of wanting to depreciate the Egyptians and I am convinced that they 
were one of the great people of humanity, one of the most original 
and the most creative, but they always remained semi-barbarians ... 
They invented, produced and above all, promised much in art, in 
science, and in industry, but their religion presents the same mixture 
of coarseness and refinement that one finds in the zest. 132 
What is significant about this statement by a liberal Frenchman and 
heir to the Enlightenment is not the description of the Egyptians, most 
of which would seem eminendy fair. It is the implication that there were 
other, presumably Indo-European and Christian civilizations that were 
entirely refined and lacking in barbarism. 133 Elsewhere in the same 
passage, however, Maspero showed his racist colours quite clearly: 
Time, which has done so much harm to other nations, has shown 
itself most favourable to the Egyptians. It has spared their tombs, 
their temples, their statues, and the thousand small objects which 
were the pride of their domestic life, and it has led us in such a way 
that we judge them by the most beautiful and the prettiest of the 
things which they made, and has at length caused us to place their 
civilization on the same footing as that of the Romans or the Greeks. 
But if it be looked at more nearly, the point of view changes; to speak 
quite shortly, Thothmes III and Rameses II resemble Mtesa of 
Central Africa more than they do Alexander or Caesar ... 134 
The argument that one should not be deceived by mere appearances 
into breaking the 'scientific' laws of racism is also interesting as an 
indication of the complete rupture between the scientific and pre­
scientific period seen by late-19th-century scholars. For Maspero and 
his contemporaries, Ancient Egypt was a modern discovery. Anything 
written about it before Napoleon's Expedition and Champollion's 
decipherment had no relevance whatsoever. 
Moreover, Maspero continued: 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
Most of its myths it holds in common with the most savage tribes of 
the Old and the New Worlds. The Egyptian possessed the spirit of a 
subde metaphysician, a fact which he proved when Christianity 
furnished him with a subject worthy of his subde powers. 135 
One might think that having been stripped of civilization, religion and 
philosophy, the Egyptians might be allowed the shred of metaphysics. 
However, the tidal wave of racism could not even tolerate this. Ten 
years later, in 1904, the English Egyptologist Wallis Budge added: 
The Egyptians, being fundamentally an African people, possessed 
all the virtues and vices which characterized the North African races 
generally, and it is not to be held for a moment that any African 
people could become metaphysicians in the modern sense of the 
word. In the first place, no African language is suitable for giving 
expression to theological and philosophical speculations, and even 
an Egyptian priest of the highest intellectual attainments would have 
been unable to render a treatise of Aristode into language which his 
brother priests, without teaching, could understand. The mere 
construction of the language would make such a thing an impossi­
bility, to say nothing of the ideas of the great Greek philosopher, 
which belong to a domain of thought and culture wholly foreign to 
the Egyptian. 136 
Here, as well as using the common 19th-century strategem of justifying 
his racism on linguistic grounds, Budge was being subde! It is true that 
nothing like Aristode is attested in Egyptian thought, but Budge used 
this absence to imply that there was a categorical distinction between 
Greek and Egyptian thought as wholes. He could not, for instance, have 
used Plato as an example. 
Elsewhere Budge attacked Brugsch's argument that the commonest 
Egyptian word for 'divine', nJr, was identical with the Greek <pum~ and 
the Latin natura: 
It is difficult to see how the eminent Egyptologist could attempt to 
compare the conception of God formed by a half-civilized African 
people with those of such cultivated nations as the Greeks and 
Romans. 137


--- PAGE 147 ---
II 
BLACK ATHENA 
There is no doubt that this contempt is at some level related to the 
British occupation of Egypt and dislike of the inhabitants of that 
country. Indeed, after 1880 Egypt became - with the exceptions of 
Ireland and Somaliland - the most troublesome British possession. 
Budge's own identification with imperialism is typified by the dedi­
cation of his great work The Gods of the Egyptians to Lord Cromer, who 
presided over the destruction of the Egyptian manufacturing economy, 
as 'The Regenerator of Egypt'. 
Gennan scholars were not behind the British and French in their 
scepticism about the Egyptians. Lieblein's que~tioning of their 
monotheism was followed by forthright criticism and ~orn for any idea 
of their having had an ancient wisdom.138 Moreover, by the 1880s 
some Egyptologists shared the Indo-Europeanists' concepts of Aryan 
linguistic purity. As Professor A. Bezzenberger, editor of the leading 
journal in Indo-European studies, Beitriige zur Kunde tier indogermanis­
chen Sprachen, described the situation in 1883: 
It is maintained by many that Egypt had a very significant influence 
on Ancient Greece. However, this assumption has up to now never 
had the least proof from the point of view of language. Given the 
seriousness of the question, such a proof is definitely called for. I 
therefore directed myself to Herr Dr Adolph Ennan [later to become 
the doyen of Gennan Egyptology] and asked him to collect and treat 
the true and supposed Egyptian loan words in Greek. 
Ennan, who had a good - though heavy - sense of humour, replied: 
'In theory I should be delighted to go along with your proposal- but 
it appears to me that the most important requisite is lacking: the loan 
words themselves. One can find enough "supposed" ones in 
Egyptological works. But as far as my understanding reaches I 
cannot see a single one that is sure.,139 
Ennan admitted that some Egyptian words for Egyptian objects had 
been used in Greek, but these-were not true loans. In the next issue 
of the journal Ennan was challenged on this. His response to the 
challenge was to make two concessions: 
leH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
I never claimed that there were no Egyptian loan words in Greek. I 
merely stated that I did not know of any secure cases. I do not believe 
that the names of Egyptian objects that appear here and there in the 
Greek authors should be seen as accepted Greek loan words. 140 
His second concession was to admit that the word f3dQL~ (small boat), 
which clearly came from the late Egyptian and Demotic br (small boat), 
had been assimilated into Greek. He ended defiandy, however: 
After this all that remains is essentially negative; there are a few 
'culture words' and probably one true loan word, f3dQL~, and that is 
all; the conventional view of a deep Egyptian influence on Greece 
does not reach the same results. I do not doubt that broad-minded 
colleagues could find substantially more, as I could have. I must in 
this case remind them that in a script in which the vowels are 
unmarked, and with a vocabulary in which the meanings are very 
precarious, with some good will, one can find an Egyptian origin for 
every Greek word ... This is a sport that I happily leave to others. 141 
Although this attitude was typical among Egyptologists of the time and 
later, it must be admitted that Ennan's attitude of condescension 
towards the Ancient Egyptians was notorious among Egyptologists. 
Alan Gardiner reported the following story about him: 
Once Ennan asked Maspero to get collated for him a passage in the 
Pyramid Texts, of which a set of squeezes existed in Paris. On 
reception of the collation Ennan wrote to Maspero: 'What a pity it is 
that even at this early period the Egyptians could not write correcdy!' 
On which Maspero's caustic comment - not communicated to 
Ennan, needless to say - was: 'What a pity that the Egyptians of the 
Old Kingdom had not read M. Ennan's grammar!,142 
Nevertheless, despite Ennan's extremism on this, I think it is fair to 
say that this essentially racist attitude of scepticism about, and scorn for, 
Egyptian achievements was predominant in Egyptology throughout the 
high tide of imperialism between 1880 and 1950. It would, however, be 
oversimplifying to say it was the only one. Resistance to this view on or 
beyond the fringes of academia will be touched on later in this chapter,


--- PAGE 148 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
but there were exceptions to it even in the heart of the discipline. It was 
precisely at the peak of racism in the first decade of the 20th century, for 
instance, that Professor James Henry Breasted published the Memphite 
Theology, which I discussed in Chapter II. Its conception of the world, 
he concluded, 
forms quite a sufficient basis for suggesting that the later notions of 
nous and logos, hitherto supposed to have been introduced into Egypt 
from abroad at a much later date, was present at this early period. 
Thus the Greek tradition of the origin of their philosophy in Egypt 
undoubtedly contains more of the truth than hasm-recent years been 
conceded. 
He continued: 
The habit, later so prevalent among the Greeks, of interpreting 
philosophically the functions and relations of the Egyptian gods ... 
had already begun in Egypt before the earliest Greek philosophers 
were born; and it is not impossible that the Greek practice of the 
interpretations of their own gods received its first impulse from 
Egypt. 143 
This conclusion would seem to have been forced on him by the text 
itself, however, and seems to have been anomalous even in Breasted's 
own thinking. Later on, in his The Development ojReligion and Thought in 
Ancient Egypt, he wrote in the standard linguistic racist terms: 
The Egyptian did not possess the terminology for the expression of a 
system of abstract thought, neither did he develop the capacity to 
create the necessary terminology, as did the Greek. He thought in 
concrete pictures. 144 
A still more striking exception to the prevailing fashions in academia 
at the tum of the 19th century was the work of the French Classicist 
Paul F oucart, who knew a considerable amount about Egypt and whose 
son Georges was an Egyptologist. Foucart's detailed work on the 
mystery cult at Eleusis led him not only to the conclude that the cult had 
been introduced from Egypt but also to make an articulate defence of 
the Ancient Model which will be discussed in the next chapter. 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
From the point of view of the 20th-century orthodoxy, however, the 
difficultywith F oucart has been that his work on Eleusinian inscriptions 
was so superb that later scholars working in the field have found it 
indispensable. Hence, subsequent workers have tended to distinguish 
the brilliant epigrapher from the cranky theorist. As one put it: 'One can 
only be sincerely sorry that such a significant scholar should hold this 
error. ,145 
Despite these aberrations or heresies, there is no doubt that during 
the first two-thirds of the 20th century most 'sound' scholars did not 
take the Egyptians too seriously. Interestingly, however, there was 
a significant change in their pejorative image. Most 19th-century 
scholars accepted the view, propounded by Winckelmann and others, 
that the Egyptians were an old and strangely dead people. With the firm 
establishment of the paradigm of 'progress', and with the analogy 
between history and biography, the Egyptians were pushed into pre­
cisely the opposite position. They now began to be thought of as 
children, and came to occupy a rather similar niche to that of 
Winckelmann's carefree Greeks. In his Egyptian Grammar, published in 
1927 and generally accepted as the 'bible' of modem Egyptology, Alan 
Gardiner wrote: 
Despite the reputation for philosophic wisdom attributed to the 
Egyptians by the Greeks, no people has ever shown itself more averse 
from speculations or more wholeheartedly devoted to material 
interests; and if they paid an exaggerated attention to funerary 
observances, it was because the continuance of earthly pursuits and 
pleasures was felt to be at stake, assuredly not out of any curiosity as 
to the why and whither of human life. 
He later described the Egyptians as 'a pleasure-loving people, gay, artis­
tic and sharp-witted, but lacking in depth of feeling and idealism' .146 
Thus both the ancient reputation of profound wisdom and the old 
one of passivity and gloom were stood on their heads. Nevertheless, the 
Egyptians remained categorically inferior to Europeans. Elsewhere, 
however, Gardiner admitted that Egyptologists were under some con­
straints: 'Classical scholars have not in the past taken very kindly to the 
idea of Hellenic dependence on Egyptian civilization.' 147


--- PAGE 149 ---
II 
I 266 BLACK ATHENA 
Given the centrality and strength of Classics within the universities, 
there was nothing the Egyptologists in a small peripheral discipline 
could do about the denigration of Egypt, even if they wanted to. Few, if 
any, did. Nearly all of them had had a thorough Classical education 
before beginning their own subject. Thus Gardiner was clearly reflect­
ing the views of most of his colleagues when he wrote: 'The supposed 
Greek dependence on Egyptian philosophy proves on examination to be 
the merest moonshine.' 148 
The denial of Egyptian philosophy and suspiciop of Egyptian religion 
dominated Egyptology until the I 960s. Hornung(for instance, refers to 
'half a century of abstinence' from considering the problem of the 
fundamental nature of Egyptian religion. 149 There were, in fact, one or 
two other scholars like Margaret Murray who continued to take 
Egyptian religion seriously, but they were considered by 'sound' scho­
lars to be on the fringes of Egyptology. 150 
However, cracks in the orthodoxy began to appear after the Second 
World War. In 1948 Abbe Etienne Drioton, Director General of the 
Egyptian Antiquities Service, began to see genuine religion in the 
Egyptian Wisdom Literature and to consider the possibility of an earlier 
monotheism. 151 
Since the 1960s this more open attitude has begun to establish itself, 
especially in France and Germany. In these countries the possibility of 
real Egyptian spirituality and originality began to be considered once 
more. Some Egyptologists, like the German Hellmut Brunner, are even 
calling for a 'new picture of Egypt', and Brunner maintains that there 
was a qualitative intellectual and spiritual leap in Egypt around the tum 
of the 3rd millennium. IS2 Despite this new flexibility, however, there is 
still a considerable gap between the discipline of Egyptology. and what 
one could call its 'counter-cultures'. 
POPULAR PERCEPTIONS OF 
ANCIENT EGYPT IN THE 19TH 
AND 20TH CENTURIES 
Before going on to examine the counter-currents on the periphery of 
academia to this prevailing view of Egyptian intellectual and spiritual 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
life, I want to consider attitudes towards Ancient Egypt in society at 
large. It is commonly believed that as a result of the Napoleonic 
Expedition there was a period of Egypt om ani a in the early 19th century. 
Indeed, this picture fits the general pattern best articulated by Raymond 
Schwab, according to which the Romantic-Positivists were the first 
Europeans to be truly aware of the outside world. This view in tum 
derives from and reinforces the notion that the only proper relationship 
between Europe and other continents is one of clear-cut superiority, 
which did not exist until the 19th century. Nevertheless, the conven­
tional view of a period of Egypt om ani a does contain an element of truth 
and there was, in fact, great curiosity about Egypt in the early 19th 
century. 
However, as we have seen, there was considerable interest in, and 
knowledge about, Egypt long before that period. 153 Furthermore, Egypt 
exerted much more influence on Europe from the 15th to the 18th 
century than it did in the 19th. There is also no doubt that 19th -century 
'Egyptomania' was weaker than 'Indomania', and trivial in comparison 
to the 'Hellenomania' or passion for Greece that swept Northern 
Europe and America in the same period. What is more, Greece was 
seen, in the eyes of most people, as a revered and beloved ancestor, 
while Egypt was now perceived as essentially alien or exotic. 
It remains true, however, that there was intense interest throughout 
Europe in the publications of the French Expedition and the results of 
further explorations and discoveries. 154 Not surprisingly these focused 
on pyramids and tombs, and in the second half of the century there were 
translations of the Egyptian guide book for the soul, The Book of the 
Going Forth by Day, generally known as The Book of the Dead. All this 
increased the by now well-established impression of Egypt as a gloomy 
and dead kingdom, and as such it was given one domain that was very 
important in the middle and late 19th century - that of death. Egyptian 
styles appeared in all the cemeteries of Europe and North America. 155 
What is more, mummification became widespread in the United States 
during the I860s and 70S. Although this development is often at­
tributed to the higher requirements of hygiene in urban societies, it is 
still interesting to contrast the American (Egyptian) way of death with 
the spread of cremation - the Greek form of disposal- adopted in much


--- PAGE 150 ---
III 
I' 
I 
268 BLACK ATHENA 
of Northern Europe at the same time. 15b Was this because of the much 
greater influence of Freemasonry in the USA? 
Masonry remained the great repository of respect for Egypt. Indeed, 
Masonic architecture, symbols and rituals continued - and continue _ 
to follow their Egyptian traditions rather than the dictates of academic 
fashion. 157 In the USA Masonry, Egypt and hieroglyphics were central 
to the foundation of Mormonism in the I820S, and had a major 
influence on mid- and late-19th-century American writers. Melville's 
novels - especially Moby Dick - are fuij of Egyptian symbols and 
hieroglyphs, while Hawthorne's The s/arlet Letter bears the same 
stamp.15S 
Although Masons were very influential in Europe as well, there the 
craft's concern with Egypt was almost completely confined to its inner 
or spiritual life. Like the rest of the European upper and middle classes, 
Masons were much more taken up with the prevailing Hellenomania. 
Other, much smaller groups also retained a central position for Egypt in 
their beliefs: the Rosicrucians, both as an inner ring of the Masons and 
as a separate spiritual organization, kept and keep Egypt as the centre 
and origin of their beliefs. The mystical Swedenborgians of the 18th 
and 19th centuries and the later Theosophists and Anthroposophists 
also placed Egypt in a central position. 159 
In the first half of the 19th century, however, the St Simonians were a 
much more influential group. These disciples of the pioneer 'socialist' 
and proto-Positivist Claude Henri Comte de St Simon followed a 
typical tripartite view of world history, in which the third and final 
'epoch of the positive system' involved the unification of the world. 
Such a unification required opening up communications throughout 
the world and for St Simon, as for Napoleon and most thinkers of the 
time, Egypt was the bridge between east and west. 160 Thus he and 
his successor Prosper Enfantin were particularly concerned with the 
country, not just from the spiritual and but also from the practical point 
of view. 
Enfantin arrived in Egypt in 1833 with a number of disciples 
including engineers, doctors, businessmen and writers. He had official 
approval from the new French regime of Louis Philippe for what he saw 
as the second French intellectual and scientific expedition; however, he 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 
also had a mystic mission as 'the father', to marry the mysterious 
'mother' in the Orient. The mission, in turn, was linked to the practical 
project of building the Suez Canal. Articulating the imagery of piercing 
a canal, and in a travesty of the general belief that European domination 
of non-Europeans was somehow a heterosexual sexual act, Enfantin 
wrote: 'Suez is the Centre of our life work. We shall carry out the act for 
which the world is waiting to proclaim that we are male!,161 The canal 
was built by a member of this group, Ferdinand de Lesseps, but not 
until the I 860s. In the meantime St Simonians played key roles as 
engineers, doctors, teachers and so on in Mohamed Ali's state-led 
modernization of Egypt, and the image of their project was very much 
like that of Napoleon's Expedition - that of France reawakening Egypt, 
the ancient source of civilization. 162 
It was in this St Simonian atmosphere that Mohamed Ali's grandson 
Ismail commissioned Verdi, the composer of the Italian Risorgimento, to 
create an Egyptian national opera, Aida. The opera's plot - devised by 
the French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette, who was employed by 
the Egyptian government - glorified Ancient Egypt in a Western 
manner. However, the difference from the 18th century is clear: where 
Mozart glorified the priests who possessed Egyptian wisdom and 
morality, Verdi placed his priests in opposition to Aida and her lover 
Radames. 163 
Aida became a great success all over Europe. This continued accept­
ance of a favourable view of Egypt - as essentially white and as a fount of 
civilization - was especially widespread in France and Italy, but it can 
also be seen in the art of England and the United States. 1M Together 
with the Egyptophilia of the second generation of Egyptologists of the 
1860s and 70S, it explains the defensiveness or defiance noted above in 
the statements of the scholars of the I880s, like Maspero and Erman. 
They, like the Classicists but unlike the general public, had an overall 
and systematic view and could see the threat that too favourable a 
picture of Egypt could pose to the uniqueness of Greek civilization and 
that of Europe as a whole.


--- PAGE 151 ---
270 BLACK ATHENA 
ELLIOT SMITH AND 
'DIFFUSIONISM' 
There were, however, two other threats to the new conventional 
wisdom from within academia itself. We will first consider the one that 
arose later because so far, at least, it has had a less serious impact on 
Egyptology; it came from the 'diffusionist' ideas of Elliot Smith. Born in 
Australia in 1871, Smith qualified as a doctor and went to England, 
where he became a distinguished anatomist. In 1901 he was appointed 
Professor of Anatomy at Cairo, w~e he set up a medical school. 
During his next eight years there he became fascinated by early Egypt­
not only its physical anthropology, but its culture. 165 It was in this period 
that he became convinced that Egypt had been the source of Near 
Eastern and European culture. 
Elliot Smith was a man of his racist times. Thus, while he could not 
avoid the fact that the bulk of the Egyptian population had always been 
very much like that of the rest of East Africa, he was convinced that in 
the 'Pyramid Times' - the Old Kingdom - there had been a critical 
in~ux ?fbroad-skulled - non-Semitic - Asiatics. 166 According to him, 
this nuxed race had migrated around the Mediterranean and on into 
Northern Europe, bringing the megalithic culture whose impressive 
monuments he saw as reflections of the Pyramids. This part of Elliot 
Smith's theories is now completely untenable, as carbon dating has 
shown that the European megalithic culture began over 1,000 years 
before the Pyramid Age. 167 
Elliot Smith's views were received with interest by the British public 
because 'diffusionism' fitted so well with contemporary Imperialism. 
because his Egyptians were not African; and because he was a~ 
anatomist. Anatomy was considered to be a 'hard' science whereas the 
disciplines of history and archaeology did not have tha; status. Pro­
fessional ancient historians and Egyptologists were naturally much 
more .war:. As fa~ as I am aware, there was no attempt to incorporate his 
~eone~ mto theIr academic disciplines. Nevertheless, he did not get 
mto senous trouble until he expanded his scope to claim that Egypt had 
been the source not only of European culture, but ~lso that of the rest of 
the world. He found Egyptian origins for the Pyramids of Mexico, and 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 27 1 
for the mummification techniques of Peru and the Torres Strait Islands 
near New Guinea. 
Paradoxically, this part of his theories stands up today rather better 
than does that about the megalithic cultures of Europe. On the one 
hand, increased archaeology and carbon dating have shown that the 
metal-using cultures of South-West Asia and the Neolithic cultures of 
Europe were considerably older than those of Egypt, thus invalidating 
his theories in these areas. On the other, the increased evidence of 
African influence on Pre-Columbian America after about 1000 BC, and 
discoveries such as the fact that the Meso- American Pyramids were not 
merely bases for temples but could contain burials, strengthen the 
possibility of indirect Egyptian influence on these much later 
civilizations. 168 
At the time, however, Elliot Smith's second great book in this field, 
The Ancient Egyptians and the Origin of Civilization, published in 1923, 
led to attacks from conservatives who retained the Romantic views of 
local peculiarity, and hardline racists who sawall civilization as 
stemming from the pure Aryans. There were even more violent 
struggles with the liberals, who were beginning to turn anthropology 
from a racist stronghold - whose practitioners were used to maintain 
empires cheaply - into one that could bring cultural relativism home to 
Europe. Nevertheless, during the 1920S the battle was not uneven. 
Elliot Smith had the backing of most in his own discipline, and his 
students gained important positions in physical anthropology. He even 
converted W. H. R. Rivers, one of the founders of social anthropology, 
to his beliefs. Furthermore, there were at that time no senior social 
anthropologists who had been trained in the discipline who could 
outrank Smith.169 Even more important, he had good connections 
with the Rockefellers, whose foundations provided massive funding 
for both Egyptology and anthropology in the 1920S and 30S. With 
all these resources Elliot Smith had considerable clout inside 
academia. 170 
Even so, the combination of forces arrayed against him proved too 
strong. Rivers died prematurely in 1922, and Elliot Smith himself in 
1937 at only sixty-six. Even if they had lived longer, the connection 
between his ideas and racism could never have survived the revulsion


--- PAGE 152 ---
272 BLACK ATHENA 
against the latter during and after the Second World War. Neverthe­
less, the threat to anthropology that Elliot Smith represented at a 
vulnerable stage in the discipline's development can still be seen: it is in 
the shudder or grimace at the mention of his name or the word 
'diffusionism' that is still a necessary sign of orthodoxy or 'competence' 
in the field. 
JOMARD AND THE 
MYSTERY OF THE PYRAMIDS 
Although they generally disliked an interloper trampling over their 
territory, Egyptologists and ancient historians were much less involved 
in this struggle than anthropologists. This was possibly because Elliot 
Smith never even approached language, the sanctum sanctorum of 
Romantic- Positivism. They were, however, much more concerned with 
the second threat to Egyptology, which was far longer-lasting than 
'diffusionism'. This academic heresy had its ultimate origin in the 
ancient view that the Egyptians had been the possessors of an superior 
wisdom, which the Greeks had been unable to learn and preserve in its 
entirety. 
This was revived in the early 19th century by the work of Cham­
pollion's bitter and lifelong rival Edme-Fran~ois Jomard, the math­
ematician and surveyer attached to Napoleon's Expedition whom we 
have already encountered. J omard put together the results of his own 
surveys of the Great Pyramid at Giza and its precise geographical 
position, with ancient descriptions of the mathematical significance of 
its measurements. He became convinced that the Ancient Egyptians 
must have had an accurate knowledge of the earth's circumference and 
based their units of linear measurement upon it, which, of course, put 
him firmly in the camp of Dupuis. There were criticisms of details in his 
work, but in the Masonic atmosphere of the Napoleonic Empire his 
views were treated very seriously; having become a member of the 
French academic Establishment before the Restoration, he was able to 
survive it. 171 
Despite the blow to Jomard's reputation over flte dating of the zodiac 
at Dendera, his ideas survived or were frequently rediscovered and 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 273 
developed throughout the 19th century. In Differences between this 
heterodox school and academic Egyptology became sharp after the 
discipline's establishment in the 1860s, and acute in the 1880s after it 
accepted the dominance of Classics. At no stage, however, were there 
formal debates between the two. This was firstly because of the general 
principle that no group holding academic power will willingly 'dignify' 
outsiders in this way; and secondly because the two groups were 
speaking different scholarly languages. In fact, they reflected the 
differences between Champollion and J omard. The Egyptologists were 
primarily philologists applying the new techniques of linguistics to the 
Egyptian written material. The heretics, however, were mathema­
ticians, surveyors and astronomers, few of whom gained any fluency in 
Egyptian. On the other hand, 19th-century Egyptologists were unable 
to follow, let alone refute, the heretics' technical arguments. 
The struggle was unequal from the start, for the heretics were 
fighting against the two principal paradigms of the 19th century -
'progress' and racism. If they were right, an ancient African or semi­
African people had had better mathematics than any European until the 
19th century itself. At a more mundane level the heretics, lacking the 
discipline and sanctions of formally organized academic knowledge, 
sometimes slipped into religious fantasy. The tendency to do this was 
increased by the genuine difficulty the heretics had in accounting for 
the astounding achievements they found in the ancient mathematics 
and astronomy, which led them to explanations in terms of divine 
revelation. This in tum sometimes encouraged beliefs that the 
Pyramids contained divine prophecies. 173 All this served to discredit 
such 'Pyramidiocy', as it came to be called. 
Another grave disadvantage for the heretics was the fact that Classics 
and linguistics had a higher status in 19th -century Germany and 
England than mathematics. In France, with its Poly techniques, the 
situation was more finely balanced, and here Egyptologists seem to have 
been under some pressure to consider arguments in the tradition of 
Jomard. In the 19th century, for instance, Maspero was forced to 
concede that he had been convinced by the astronomer Sir Norman 
Lockyer's detailed arguments for the case that the Egyptian temples 
had been very carefully built for astronomical purposes. 174 What is


--- PAGE 153 ---
274 BLACK ATHENA 
striking, however, is that so many men - including such distinguished 
and well-established astronomers as Professor Piazzi Smyth, the As­
tronomer Royal for Scotland, and Sir Norman Lockyer - should have 
risked or given up their careers to pursue these ideas. In the case of 
Piazzi Smyth it can partly be explained in terms of religious enthusiasm, 
but here, as with Lockyer, sheer excitement over the mathematical 
elegance of the correspondences seems to have been the major 
motivation. 175 
The 'pyramidologists' regiived their biggest setback with the defec­
tion of Flinders Petrie, mentioned on p. 138 for his early dating of the 
Hermetic Texts. Petrie had an engineering and surveying background, 
as well as an enthusiasm for the ideas of Smyth and other successors 
of J omard, and in 1880 he was able to go to Egypt with the latest 
surveying equipment to check for himself the accuracy of previous 
measurements. 
His conclusions were inconclusive. On the one hand, he agreed that 
the Great Pyramid had been aligned to the cardinal points of the 
compass with more accuracy than any later building, and that the 
measurements of the inner chamber demonstrated a knowledge of Jt as 
22/7 and of Pythagorean triangles. In general, too, he was astounded by 
the technical and mathematical skills that had gone into the Pyramids' 
construction. On the other hand, he disagreed with Piazzi Smyth on the 
length of the cubit used in the construction, and he did not accept 
Smyth's claim that the building incorporated the precise length of the 
year. 176 Moreover, given the changes taking place within Egyptology in 
the 1880s and the general professionalization in academia and else­
where between 1880 and 1960, 'pyramidologist' theories were pushed 
into the new category of crankiness or pseudo-science. 
With his superb surveying and his development of typologies for the 
ordering of different styles of pottery, Petrie became the founder not 
only of Egyptian but of all modem archaeology. Later knighted, he was 
incorporated into academic Egyptology and provided it with essential 
support. Nevertheless, the relationship was never easy. 177 He had to be 
given a chair by an outside donor, and remained a maverick until the 
end of his long life in 1942. 
Petrie's defection did not stop the investigation of the Pyramids and 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 275 
other Egyptian constructions in the belief that they could reveal a higher 
ancient wisdom. Lockyer continued to develop his ideas on the soph­
isticated astronomical knowledge demonstrated in Egyptian buildings, 
and these were taken up in the 20th century by a number of scholars, 
most notably by the brilliant amateur Schwaller de Lubicz. De Lubicz's 
books, published in the 1950S and 60S, have had a wide success 
particularly in mystic circles, but also among the public at large. 178 
Meanwhile, a new and still more accurate survey of the Pyramids had 
been made by the engineer J. H. Cole in 1925. This survey confirmed 
many of the claims made by earlier 'pyramidologists' - even those of 
Jomard, who appears to have arrived at relatively accurate estimates for 
lengths for the Egyptian units of measurement as the result of two 
countervailing errors. The imprecision of his measurement was coun­
terbalanced by his failure to realize that the Great Pyramid must have 
had a peak or pyramidion on its top. Moreover, since the 1920S there 
have even been two significant defections to the 'pyramidological' 
position from 'straight' academia. The first of these was Livio Catullo 
Stecchini, an Italian who studied in Germany and gained a doctorate in 
ancient mensuration at Harvard. In a number of studies published in 
the 1950S and 60S Stecchini demonstrated, with some plausibility, that 
the Egyptians had had a very precise knowledge of global measurement 
and that this knowledge had been applied in Egypt and elsewhere with 
extraordinary exactitude. 179 
The second conversion to the belief in a higher ancient wisdom was 
much more spectacular: it was that of one of the greatest, if not the 
greatest, historians of Renaissance science, Giorgio de Santillana. 
Having written a major book on Galileo, de Santillana became in­
terested in the Hermetic Egyptian tradition; then, late in life, he read 
Dupuis's Origine de tous les roltes, and was convinced by its argument 
that much of ancient mythology was indeed allegory for scientific 
astronomy. However, de Santillana went beyond Dupuis and Egypt to 
claim an even earlier knowledge, traces of which could be found in 
myths from all over the world and which, by using the precession of the 
equinoxes, he dated to before 6000 Be. 
Despite de Santillana's enormous reputation, Hamlet's Mill - the 
book in which he and a younger German colleague set out this scheme -


--- PAGE 154 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
was not accepted by any university press and was published commer­
cially. This means that respectable scholars are not obliged to take such 
work into account. ISO In addition, de Santillana's having stuck his neck 
out so far lessened his effectiveness as a proponent of the school of 
Dupuis and Jomard. Furthermore, his work - like that of Stecchini 
and Tompkins - could be lumped together with a more or less 
'lunatic fringe'; this allowed or even compelled orthodox scholars to 
ignore it. 
Through the influe,e of archaeology, Egyptologists and ancient 
historians tend to be more numerate now than they were fifty or a 
hundred years ago. Nevertheless, few of them have the combination of 
time, effort and skill necessary to take on the very technical arguments 
of Schwaller de Lubicz, Stecchini or de Santillana. Rather, over the 
last thirty years the tendency within these disciplines has been to rely on 
the refutations by another grand old man of the history of science, 
Professor Otto Neugebauer, whose name has almost tantric power 
among defenders of the status quo. 
Neugebauer's range is astounding. He has already been mentioned 
in connection with Copernicus, but his best-known work has been on 
science in Antiquity. Here he has been more broad-minded than most 
and, just as he has been prepared to concede the Islamic science behind 
Copernicus, he has demonstrated some significant Mesopotamian 
influences on Greek mathematics and astronomy.181 He has also 
published several works on Egyptian astronomy in collaboration with 
orthodox Egyptologists, but in these, in sharp contrast to his treatment 
of Mesopotamia, he shares his collaborators' condescending and con­
temptuous attitude towards Egypt and Hermeticism. 182 Indeed, in all 
his works Neugebauer has insisted that the Egyptians had no original or 
abstract ideas. The accurate alignments of the Pyramids and temples, 
and the use of Jt, are all explained as the results of practical knacks 
rather than of profound thought; an example of this being the following: 
'It has even been claimed that the area of a hemisphere was correcdy 
found in an example of the Moscow papyrus, but the text admits also of 
a much more primitive interpretation, which is preferable' (my italics). 183 
Interestingly, however, Neugebauer does not take on the Pyramid 
school. He simply denounces them: 
[CH. V] ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 277 
Important mathematical constants, e.g. an accurate value of Jt and 
deep astronomical knowledge, are supposed to be built into the 
dimensions and structure of this building. These theories contradict 
flady all sound knowledge obtained by archaeology and by Egypto­
logical research about the history and purposes of the Pyramids. 184 
He then recommends that those interested in what he admits to be 
'the very complex historical and archaeological problems connected 
with the Pyramids' read the books by Edwards and Lauer on the 
subject. ISS 
The Egyptian archaeologist Edwards does not involve himself with 
the 'pyramidologists' and their calculations. The surveyor and archae­
ologist Lauer did, in the face of opposition from Egyptologists, who 
were 'astonished that we should give so much importance to the 
discussion of theories which have never had any credit in the 
Egyptological world' .186 
All told, Lauer's work had a certain contradictory quality. On the one 
hand, he admitted that the measurements do have some remarkable 
properties; that one can find such relations as Jt, <p, the 'golden number' 
and Pythagoras' triangle from them; and that these generally corre­
spond to what Herodotos and other ancient writers claimed for them. 187 
On the other, he denounced the 'fantasies' of Jomard and Piazzi 
Smyth; he attacked, rather implausibly, Jomard's reconstructed cubit; 
and claimed that the formulae and the extraordinary degree of side­
real accuracy with which the Pyramids were aligned were purely the 
result of 'intuitive and utilitarian empiricism' .188 
The contradiction between an acceptance of the extraordinary 
mathematical precision of the Great Pyramid and a 'certainty' that the 
Greeks were the first 'true' mathematicians runs throughout Lauer's 
many writings on the subject. The tension is made still more unbearable 
by the facts that the Greeks had been told about many of the Pyramid's 
extraordinary features and that they believed the Egyptians to have been 
the first mathematicians and astronomers. Finally, there is the problem 
that so many of the Greek mathematicians and astronomers had studied 
in Egypt. Lauer's honest attempt to deal with these difficulties was the 
following:


--- PAGE 155 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Even though up to now no esoteric Egyptian mathematical document 
has been discovered, we know, if we can believe the Greeks, that the 
Egyptian priests were very jealous of the secrets of their science and 
that they occupied themselves, Aristotle tells us, in mathematics. It 
seems, then, reasonably probable that they had been in possession of 
an esoteric science erected, little by little, in the secrecy of the 
temples during the long centuries that separate the construction of 
the pyramids, towards the year 2800, to the eve of Greek mathemat­
ical thought in the §ill century BC. As far as geometry is concerned, 
the analysis of buildings as famous as the Great Pyramid would take a 
notable place in the researches of these priests; and it is perfectly 
conceivable that they could have succeeded in discovering in it, 
perhaps long after their erection, chance qualities that had remained 
totally unsuspected to the constructors. 189 
Lauer was a discoverer of the actual existence of the 3rd-dynasty 
architect Imhotep, previously dismissed as a late Egyptian legend, and 
he excavated some of the latter's superb buildings at Saqqara. He also 
spent a lifetime admiring the extraordinary achievements of the Pyra­
mids. It is difficult to see why he should then baulk at the simplest 
solution, believe the Greeks and accept, with the German Egyptologist 
Professor Brunner, that there was an Achsenzeit or 'axial age' 
around 3000 Be. Thus one or two centuries later, in the 3rd and 4th 
Dynasties, there was a sophisticated knowledge of mathematics, some 
features of which were built into the Great Pyramid. Traditions of this 
were retained by later Egyptians and hence told to visiting Greeks. 190 
Why - if one discards racist and crudely 'progressive' arguments -
should this be any more improbable than the Greeks having achieved a 
qualitative intellectual breakthrough in the 4th century BC? Indeed, 
there is nothing to back the second hypothesis, approximating to 
the actual achievements of the Pyramids and the consistent ancient 
tradition of a superior Egyptian mathematics. 
However, such a perspective was not available to conventional 
scholars at the height of imperialism. It is nevertheless clear that Lauer 
was anguished on the issue and ultimately seems to have been con­
strained by social forces. To accept the. simplest answer would have 
[CH. VI ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS 279 
made him a crank, likeJomard and Piazzi Smyth. Thus he preferred to 
atttibute the exquisite mathematical relationships in the Great Pyramid 
and their place in ancient tradition to mere chance which Egyptian 
priests had later discovered and exploited. 
However, even Lauer's solution still allowed some later Egyptians to 
have been capable of some relatively advanced thought. He continued: 
For the whole length of the 3,000 years of her history, Egypt thus, 
little by little, prepared the way for the Greek scholars who - like 
Thales, Pythagoras and Plato - came to study then even to teach, like 
Euclid, at the school in Alexandria. But it was in their philosophic 
spirit, which knew how to draw from the treasure amassed by the 
technical Positivism of the Egyptians, that geometry came to the 
stage of a genuine science. 191 
How could Lauer be sure, against the ancient writers who insisted on 
the spirituality and unworldliness of the Egyptian priests, that the 
Egyptian secret wisdom - about which he had no evidence - was merely 
'technical Positivism'? It is hard not to see this simply as an article of 
faith for all who work in the Aryan Model. 
The nameless Egyptologists who disapproved of Lauer's discussion 
of the 'pyramidologists" theories were quite right to do so. By fighting 
the 'pyramidologists' he came to resemble them - or at least to accept so 
many of their arguments as to make his own defence of the orthodoxy 
seem hopelessly cumbersome. 
Lauer was not alone in his difficulty. The Abbe Drioton, who has 
been mentioned above for his acceptance of Egyptian spirituality, 
wrote: 'one should pay no attention to the ... renewed delusions of 
Charles Piazzi Smyth that the measurements of the Great Pyramid 
reveal a mysterious science of the Ancient Egyptians.,192 Elsewhere, 
however, he wrote that because they fail to pay attention to the 
'pyramidologists', Egyptologists are being treated like 'naif, blind, 
refractory dabblers in a science whose quiet routines have been 
disturbed,.193 There have been other hints that a number of'respect­
able' Egyptologists feel pressure from the outside - or the material they 
handle? - and have toyed for more or less long periods of time with the 
heresies. 194 In this important skirmish between an Ancient and an


--- PAGE 156 ---
280 BLACK ATHENA 
Aryan Model, I believe that the Ancient will- with some modifications 
- prevail. In the meantime, however, there is no doubt that the field as a 
whole still basically follows the linguistic tradition of Champollion as 
transformed by Maspero, Erman and the other scholars of the late 19th 
and early 20th centuries who brought their discipline into line with the 
predominant Romantic-Positivism, and that the mathematical and 
surveying school of J omard is still very much on the outside. 
) 
CHAPTER VI 
HELLENOMANIA, 1 
The fall of the Ancient Model, 
1790 - 1830 
T
HIS CHAPTER IS ALMOST entirely concerned with social and 
intellectual developments in Protestant North Germany dur­
ing a period of forty years. The time-span may be short but 
it covers the French Revolution, the Napoleonic conquests, the cres­
cendo of German nationalism against the French, the years of reaction, 
and the establishment of Prussia as the dominant German state and the 
focus of all German nationalism. 
It is precisely at this critical period that the new discipline of Philologie 
or Altertumswissenschafi (Science of Antiquity) was established as the 
pioneer discipline in the modem sense. It was the first to establish 
clear-cut meritocratic networks of student-teacher relationships, 
Seminars or departments capable of manoeuvring to secure as large a 
portion of state funding as possible, and journals written in a profess­
ional jargon designed to maintain barriers between the practitioners of 
the discipline and the lay public. 
I argue that the intellectual and academic developments have to be 
seen together with the social and political ones. It is striking to note 
that some of the key leaders on linguistic and historical issues, like 
Humboldt and Niebuhr, played active roles not only in setting up the 
new discipline but in the establishment of the new university system


--- PAGE 157 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
as a whole. They were also important politicians on the national 
scene. 
It is extremely significant that the period of their greatest political 
influence was during the reforms which the Prussian government felt 
obliged to make after its catastrophic defeat by Napoleon's armies at 
Jena in 1806. The development and widespread promotion of the new 
AltertumswissenschaJt, which Humboldt put at the centre of his Bildung 
(educational formation), should be seen as one of these reforms. He 
and his friends saw s~dy of 'Antiquity in general and the Greeks in 
particular' as a way in which to integrate students and the people as a 
whole, whose lives they saw as being fragmented by modem society. 
More immediately, Humboldt and the others saw the study as a way of 
promoting an 'authentic' reform, through which Germany could avoid 
revolution of the type that so horrified them in France. From the 
beginning, then, AltertumswissenschaJt in Germany -like its equivalent, 
Classics, in England - was seen by its promoters as a 'third way' 
between reaction and revolution. In actuality, however, its effect was to 
shore up the status quo. The educational institutions and the Classical 
Bildungthat infused them became pillars of 19th-century Prussian and 
German social order. 
At the core ofAltertumswissenschaJtwas the image of the divine Greek, 
both artistic and philosophical. Greeks also had - like the idealized 
image of the Germans themselves - to be integrated with their native 
soil, and pure. Thus the Ancient Model, with its multiple invasions and 
frequent cultural borrowings and the implicit consequences of racial 
and linguistic mixture, became increasingly intolerable. It is only within 
this political and social context that one can understand the attack by 
one of the first products of the new system, Karl Otfried Miiller, on the 
overwhelming ancient authority-of the Ancient Model. 
In 1821, the year after the publication of The Minyans, the book in 
which he set out his arguments, the Greek War ofIndependence broke 
out and Western Europe was swept by Philhellenism. In such anti­
Asian and African Hellenomania, defence of the Ancient Model 
became almost unthinkable; paradoxically, its only major champion was 
the great ancient historian Barthold Niebuhr, who had done so much to 
introduce Romanticism and racism into the writing of history. After 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
Niebuhr's death in 1831 it became hard, if not impossible, for 'sound' 
scholars to argue that Egyptians had colonized Greece or played an 
important role in the formation of Greek civilization. 
FRIEDRICH AUGUST WOLF 
AND WILHELM VON HUMBOLDT 
Having considered the 'fall' of Egypt, we should now tum to the 'rise' of 
Greece. Christian Gottlob Heyne's best-known student, Friedrich 
August Wolf, studied at Gottingen only for the two years 1777-9. But 
from this experience, and from the Zeitgeist, he became in many ways 
the epitome of Romantic-Positivism. 1 He was a disciple of Winckel­
mann, a believer in staged history and a lover of Greece. A German 
patriot, he was deeply influenced by the movement for authenticity, 
with its emphasis on folksong. He also saw himself in the Romantic 
tradition of Homeric studies that we encountered in the discussion of 
Mme Dacier and Vico, and in this connection Wolfbelieved that he had 
an especial affinity with Bentley. 2 
Wolf brought all these strands together. Setting his work in a context 
of detailed textual analysis, he envisioned the Iliad and the Odyssey as 
coming from the childhood of the Greek and, by implication, the 
European race. Basing himself on these feelings, and on the ancient 
tradition that Homer had been blind, Wolf was convinced that the epics 
had been composed orally, long before the Greeks had possessed an 
alphabet. 3 According to him, the epics were too long to have been the 
work of one illiterate bard. Hence they must have been created by a 
number of folk poets and put together only when they were edited or, as 
he supposed, first reduced to writing in 6th-century Athens. With these 
hypotheses Wolf arrived at the perfect Romantic conclusion. The 
Homeric epics should now be seen not as the work of a single author but 
as the product of the childhood of the Greek/European Volk as a body.4 
Many of these ideas came from the Scottish writers and from Robert 
Wood, the Romantic dilettante who - it will be remembered - had read 
the Iliad in situ. With his textual expertise and his status as a professor, 
however, Wolf gave them an academic authority which was essential in 
the new world of 'professional' knowledge.5 On the other hand, we


--- PAGE 158 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
should not overlook the fact that on paper at least, Wolf's scholarship 
seems rather shallow. Although extremely stimulating, his Prolegomena 
to Homer has been regarded as a 'hurried piece' and his written works as 
a whole 'make little show in a library'. 6 
Wolf's achievement was in the tradition of Altertumswissenschafi that 
he established. On his matriculation at Gottingen in 1777 he had called 
himself a 'student of philology', considered a radical step at the time. 7 
Later, however, he called the study of ancient texts - rounded out with 
Classical art and archaeology - Altertumswissenschafi, or 'science of 
antiquity'. Wolf has bqen called its founder, though he clearly derived 
the disciplinary form from his teacher Heyne and the content ultimately 
from Winckelmann, while the name was drawn from the new vocabu­
lary of science and progress promoted in Germany by Kant. 8 Wolf's 
forte was teaching, and as a professor at Halle in the I 780s he promoted 
both the new discipline and the seminar as a teaching method and 
as an institutional basis for research. Wolf's fame was secured 
by his connection with the young Prussian aristocrat Wilhelm von 
Humboldt. 
Before examining their friendship and its extraordinary scholarly and 
institutional results, however, I want to consider for a moment the 
political positions of both Romantic Hellenism and Gottingen Positiv­
ism. These, as I have been arguing, were closely related. The pro­
ponents of both considered themselves 'progressive' and were in favour 
of small 'free' states. However, there was considerable ambiguity on the 
meaning of 'free'. Furthermore, when the test came with the French 
Revolution, nearly all holders of these views and sentiments recoiled 
from it because of its threat to privilege, its violence and what they saw 
as its 'unnatural' or 'inorganic' approach to 'freedom'. It is with this 
background in mind that one should view the reforms they planned and 
later carried out. 
Wolf and Humboldt became close friends during 1792-3, at the 
height of the Revolution. From their discussions Humboldt produced a 
Skizze or sketch, 'On the Study of Antiquity and of the Greeks in 
Particular,. 9 Although not published in his lifetime, it was read and 
criticized by Wolf and the great poet, playwright and philosopher 
Schiller. The sketch also became extremely important because it 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
expressed the ideas which Humboldt was later to try to put into practice 
as Prussian Minister of Education. 
Humboldt gave two justifications for making the study of Antiquity 
central in general education. There were obvious aesthetic reasons for 
studying the Greeks, he argued, but far more important was his faith 
that learning about the unalienated men of Antiquity would create a 
new society of better men today. Such a study would be the centre of 
Bildung, or educational and moral formation. With the Romantic 
concern for growth and formation through time, Humboldt valued the 
study of the Ancients not so much as a goal but as a process. He believed 
that grasping the complex organic development of Antiquity would 
somehow stretch and strengthen the creative powers of the student. lO 
It is possible that Humboldt originally intented this Bildung for the 
whole population. In the event, however, it became the stamp of a 
meritocratic elite.ll As such, it challenged the nobility. Its purpose was 
to reform Prussia within German culture, avoiding the horrors of the 
French Revolution. For 'On the Study of Antiquity' was written during 
the trial of Louis XVI, about which Humboldt wrote at the time: 'this 
execution and horrible trial have left stains that can never be 
obliterated.,12 In France the upper classes read Barthelemy'sAnachanis 
as an escape from the tensions and horrors of the Revolution, and there 
is no doubt that study of the Greeks also provided an escape for 
Humboldt and his friend Schiller. 13 However, it was much more than 
that; they saw study and imitation of the Greeks as a way of transcend­
ing the extremes of revolution and reaction. Similarly, in Schiller's 
famous series of letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man the fifth letter, 
concerning the chaos of the French Revolution, was followed by the 
sixth, on the harmonizing function of studying the Greeks. 14 
HUMBOLDT's 
EDUCATIONAL REFORMS 
Objectively, whatever their subjective political positions, Humboldt 
and Schiller helped defend the status quo. It was precisely to this kind of 
safe radical that the Prussian monarchy turned after the humiliation of 
the traditional government and its beloved army after their catastrophic


--- PAGE 159 ---
II 
286 BLACK ATHENA 
defeat by Napoleon at Jena in 1806. In 1809, among other reforms 
undertaken to face the French Revolutionary challenge, Humboldt was 
entrusted with the reorganization of the educational system. He based 
the new structure on Bildung, which he believed would reanimate the 
German people after their crushing defeats. In higher education he 
consciously rejected the French Poly techniques, with their emphasis on 
mathematics and natural science, in favour of schools teaching the 
much broader concept of Wissenschaft. Ostensibly the new Prussian 
curriculum was to contain the three disciplines of mathematics, history 
and languages. !fIumboldt's priorities, however, can be seen from the 
fact that no mathematics was taught for the first five years at his chief 
creation, the new university at Berlin. 15 
The leading scholar Humboldt recruited to Berlin was Wolf, who, as 
we have seen, introduced the Seminar, which spread from there to 
Prussia, then to Germany and then beyond. This system, with its 
insistence that students learn actively through their own research, 
would seem to give the students far more freedom and scope for 
originality than do traditional lectures. Over the past 180 years, how­
ever, while the form has produced great scholarly achievements, 
it . is apparent that it can be and is used as a very effective tool to 
control both the choice and the treatment of topics of academic 
concern. 
Wolf's practice of Altertumswissenschaft followed that of Heyne and 
the Gottingen school. He rejected what he saw as the conceptualizing 
and abstract search for universals of the Enlightenment, in favour of 
direct confrontation with particulars and detailed source criticism. 
Completely oblivious to what can be seen, with hindsight, as his own 
intense Romanticism, he was able to write: 'All our research is historical 
and critical not of things to be hoped for but for fadS. Arts should be 
loved but history revered.' 16 
This simple-minded approach has dominated the practice of most 
history and Classics ever since. Humboldt, at least by the end of his life, 
was far more sensitive. In his essay 'The task of a historian', he 
recognized that comprehension of the past required far more than 
external description. What was needed was a balance between 'rational 
observation' (beobachtender Verstand) and 'pqetic imagination' (dichtende 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
Einbildungskraft). The historian, however, unlike the poet, must sub­
ordinate his imagination to the investigation of reality, and 'must of 
necessity yield to the power of form, while keeping constandy in mind 
the ideas which are its laws.,17 In the 19th century these ideas certainly 
included the 'scientific laws of race'. 
Humboldt also tried to wresde with the difficulties of the relationship 
between subject and object in historical enquiry, which he believed 
required some feelings of kinship such as those existing between 
Germany and Ancient Greece. It was thus possible to write a history of 
Antiquity. At the same time, however, the Greeks were seen to 
transcend history. As he wrote in another piece: 
Our study of Greek history is therefore a matter quite different from 
our other historical studies. For us the Greeks step out of the circle 
of history. Even if their destinies belong to the general chain of 
events, yet in this respect they matter least to us. We fail entirely to 
recognize our relationship to them if we dare to apply the standards 
to them which we apply to the rest of world history. Knowledge of the 
Greeks is not merely pleasant, useful or necessary to us - no, in the 
Greeks alone we find the ideal of that which we should like to be and 
produce. If every part of history enriched us with its human wisdom 
and human experience, then from the Greeks we take something 
more than earthly - almost godlike. 18 
Humboldt's view of the transcendent quality of Greek history was 
matched by his view of its language. He saw Greek not as an Ursprache, 
or 'original language' like Sanskrit, but as a perfect balance between 
youthful vitality and philosophical maturity - reflecting the double 
qualities of aesthetics and philosophy that had been attributed to the 
Greeks since the 1780s.19 
The central importance of language, its fundamental relationship 
with nation and national character, and the Romantics' fascination with 
all three have already been touched on.20 Humboldt, who though 
many-sided was fundamentally a linguist, tended to regard language as 
an essentially independent fixed variable.21 For him the nature of the 
Greek language was of paramount importance. Furthermore, as always 
- or at least since the 15th century - concern with Greek paralleled that


--- PAGE 160 ---
288 BLACK ATHENA 
with German. 22 Thus with the crescendo of German nationalism 
towards the climax of the War of Liberation against Napoleon in 
18 I 3 -14 came an increasing glorification of the German language; its 
chief virtue was seen to be that it was, unlike French, somehow echt 
(authentic) and rein (pure). 23 
Well before this, in his Skizze of I 793, Humboldt had argued that the 
excellence of Greek lay precisely in its being uncontaminated by foreign 
elements. 24 Thus the superb linguist, who was particularly fascinated 
by the complexities of linguistic mixing, suspended his critical faculties 
when it came to Greek, holding it as an article of faith that the language 
was 'pure'. This inherently implausible notion would have been con­
sidered absurd before the triumph of Romantic-Hellenism but, with 
ce,ain provisos, it now became canonical in Altertumswissenschaft and 
modem Classics. Since then only the names of clearly Oriental luxury 
goods have been exempted from the otherwise complete embargo on 
Afroasiatic loan words. . 
While Humboldt and other Romantics insisted on the infinite variety 
of societies, and the absence of the universals proclaimed by the 
Enlightenment, they saw a general direction provided by an inner 
order, supreme force or being.2s The Greeks were perceived 
as having transcended mundane chaos and being closer to the inef­
fable best. In some sense, then, they were themselves the human 
universal. 
It was precisely this and their supposed transcendence of historical 
and linguistic laws that made the Greeks the central concern of Bildung, 
through which the young leaders of Germany were to understand and 
remake themselves. It was for equivalent purposes that Altertums­
wissenschaft and Classics spread to the rest of Europe and its offshoots 
beyond: despite its scholarly trappings, its role in the ideological 
formation of the ruling class has continued to be more important than 
historical or linguistic enquiry. Thus, while earlY-19th-century 
Philhellenism - though consistently racist - had both radical and 
reactionary aspects, the discipline of Classics was conservative from the 
start. The educational reforms of which it formed the centrepiece were 
. 'd I 0' 26 systematIc attempts to avOl or prevent revo u on. 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
THE PHILHELLENES 
To make some sense of the fall of the Ancient Model in the 1820S, we 
sh uld start by considering the general political and ideological en-
. • 0 oment in which the change took place. Central to it was the 
~elleniC movement which, in the 19th century, occupied what might 
~e called the 'radical wing' of the Romantic movement. Philhellenism 
tended to share the Romantic rejection of urban industrialization, the 
universalism and rationality of the Enlightenment, and the French 
Revolution. On the other hand, while the mainstream of Romanticism 
turned towards the medieval past and Christianity - especially Catholi-
. cism - Philhellenes were sometimes religious sceptics or atheists, and 
political radicals.27 As young men, for instance, Hegel and Friedrich 
Schlegel loved the Greeks, but as they grew older and increasingly 
conservative they turned to Christianity.28 The Left Hegelians, includ­
ing Marx, preserved the young Hegel's passionate interest in Greece. 
The reason for the radicals' enthusiasm seems obvious. Compared to 
Rome - or, for that matter, Egypt or China - the Greek states were 
indeed models of liberty. Moreover, this tension within the Romantic 
movement has persisted. Both the revived public school system, in 
which the future leaders of England were supposed to become 'Chris­
tian gentlemen' by studying the pagan Classics, and the movement to 
create an Indo-Germanic or Hellenic Christianity, can usefully be seen 
as attempts to bring together these two wings of the Romantic 
movement. 29 
The experience of the French Revolution and the triumph of 
reaction after 1815 caused much bitter disillusion among upper-class 
Romantics. However, the love of freedom revived - if only in an 
alienated form - with the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence 
in 182 I, and the Germans were the nationality most quickly and deeply 
involved.3D Indeed, their movement in support of the struggle provided 
the only important centre for liberalism in the country: over 300 
Germans went to fight in Greece, but they were only the tip of the 
iceberg in a movement that involved tens of thousands, mostly students 
and academics.31 Many French and Italians also went, supported by 
numerous philhellenic committees; and the movement was even


--- PAGE 161 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
powerful in the United States. Though only sixteen North Americans 
reached Greece, the widespread philhellenic feelings arising from the 
War provided a big boost for the 'Hellenic' - Greek letter - fraternities 
in the United States. The other chief influence on the American 
student organizations came from the book-burning German student 
fraternities revived between 181 I and 18 19, by the eccentric teacher 
and promoter of exercise 'Father' Jahn, to support the Romantic 
nationalism of the War of Liberation. Fraternities in both countries 
have preserved this chauvinism with the strong physical and anti­
intellectual bias envisaged by their founders. 32 
Britons, too, were deeply involved in the Greek cause. We have seen 
th~t the English and Scottish poets had been passionately concerned 
with Greece since the mid - I 8th century. When the Parthenon or 
'Elgin' Marbles were exhibited in London in 1807 there was a craze for 
pure Greek art, which had never before been seen there. 33 Henry 
Fuseli saw the Marbles and shouted: 'De Greeks were godes. De 
Greeks were godes! ,34 
Fuseli, ne Fiissli, was a Swiss artist and art historian living in London, 
where he promoted the ideas of Winckelmann. His passion for 
Greece and hatred of Egypt seem to have been equally intense. For 
him, Greece was 'that happy coast, where, free from an arbitrary 
hieroglyph, the palliative of ignorance, from a tool of despotism or 
a ponderous monument of eternal sleep, art emerged into life, motion 
and liberty. ,35 
It should be noted, however, that the idea of Greece emerging from 
Egypt implies an acceptance of the Ancient Model which later Phil­
hellenes were unwilling to concede. Although Fuseli was foreign, his 
ideas on Greece were not that far from general cultivated opinion in the 
first quarter of the 19th century. 
With the beginning of the War in 1821, enthusiasm for Greece 
rose to fever pitch. As Shelley wrote: 
We are all Greeks. Our laws, our literature, our religion, our arts all 
have their roots in Greece. 'But for Greece ... we might still have 
been savages and idolators . . . The human form and the human 
mind attained to a perfection in Greece which has impressed its 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
images on those faultless productions whose very fragments are the 
despair of modern art, and has propagated impulses which can never 
cease, through a thousand channels of manifest or imperceptible 
operation, to enable and delight mankind until the extinction of the 
race.36 
Hellenomania was well and truly launched! 
Despite Shelley's passionate eloquence and his dramatic drowning 
just when he was about to go to Greece, the most famous philhellenic 
poet of the Romantic age was Byron. It was no coincidence that he was 
from Scotland: the 18th-century links between that northern country 
and Romanticism have already been noticed. In the early 19th century 
they involved not only Byron but Sir Walter Scott, the herald of the 
medieval revival, and the invention of a fictitious sentimental national 
tradition at which even Scott baulked. 37 Although a coarse Regency 
rake, Byron linked Scottish Romanticism to Greece. He had called for 
the country's independence a decade before the revolt broke out, and to 
crown it all- with mixed but essentially Romantic motives - he joined 
the War in order to die in it.38 
Throughout Western Europe, the Greek War of Independence was 
seen as a struggle between European youthful vigour and Asiatic and 
African decadence, corruption and cruelty: 
The barbarians of Genghis Khan and Tamerlane are revived in the 
19th century. War to the death has been declared against European 
religion and civilization.39 
Even in the 18th century, Turkish rule in Greece and the Balkans 
had begun to be seen as unnatural, the result of the conquest of a 
superior race by an inferior one. It will be remembered that Christian 
Bunsen placed the 'Turanians' or Turks between the Chinese and the 
Egyptians in his historical hierarchy of races; in the 19th century rule by 
this race was seen as bound to fail in the end, and could certainly never 
result in any advance of civilization. 
By the end of the century this principle was being applied systemati­
cally throughout history, and perceptions of the Arab and Berber rule of 
Spain provide a clear example of the change. Before 1860, English and


--- PAGE 162 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
North American writers were sympathetic towards the Moors because 
Islam was less pernicious to them than Catholicism. By the end of the 
century, 'racial' considerations had transcended the religious ones; 
hence Arab rule of Spain was seen as sterile and 'doomed' throughout 
its 800 generally flourishing years.40 
The intensification of these racial feelings with the Greek War of 
Independence thus had a direct effect on the Ancient Model. As first 
the Egyptians and then the Phoenicians were increasingly perceived as 
'racially' inferior, the Greek legends of their having not only colonized 
but civilized 'sacred Hellas' became not merely distasteful but paradig­
matically impossible. Like the stories of sirens or centaurs, they had to 
be di~ssed because ~ey offend~d ~gainst th~ bi~logical and historical 
laws of 19th-century sCience. Ob)ecnons to this picture were made still 
greater by another aspect of the change from the Enlightenment to 
Romanticism. Since the Enlightenment placed much emphasis on 
cultivation and improvement, it was no great slur on the Greeks for 
their civilization to be attributed to Egyptian and Phoenician col­
onization. Romantics, on the other hand, stressed nature and distinct, 
permanent national essences, so that it was now intolerable to suggest 
that the Greeks had ever been more primitive than Africans and 
Asians. 
DIRTY GREEKS AND THE DORIANS 
The Philhellenes were more concerned with the Classical Greeks than 
with their heroic, but superstitious, Christian and dirty 'descendants', 
whom some tried to explain away as 'Byzantinized Slavs'. 41 Philhellenes 
sought the pure essence of Greece before it had been tainted by 
Oriental corruption, and with their apotheosis - as we have seen in 
Humboldt and Shelley - even the Ancient Greeks themselves began to 
fall short of the new exalted standards. These standards increasingly 
began to call for cultural, linguistic and finally 'racial' purity, and such 
new paragons had been found as early as the 1790S by Friedrich 
Schlegel in the Spartans or the larger tribal grouping to which they 
belonged, the Dorians. Elizabeth Rawson, the modem historian of the 
image of Sparta, has described Schlegel's writing about them: 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 293 
From the start, however, language reminiscent ofWinckelmann on 
the Greeks in general is used for the Dorians; we are told of their 
miMe Grossheit, 'serene greatness', and indeed in contrast to the more 
easily Orientalized Ionians they form the older, purer and more 
truly Hellenic branch chiefly responsible for those two essential 
procedures for the Greek spirit, music and gymnastics.42 
Notice that Schlegel and many other later writers took these two 
nonverbal, irrational and - dare I say it - 'German' aspects of Greek 
culture as the essential ones. Nietzsche's Birth of Tragedy, published in 
1872, in which music and Dionysian tragic passion are emphasized over 
. Apollonian reason, is often seen as a radical break away from Winckel­
mann's view of the 'serene greatness' of the Greeks. In fact it belongs 
to a German tradition which goes back through the poems of Heine 
in the I 840s, to Heyne and the playwright Wieland in the 18th 
century.43 
During the 19th and 20th centuries the German cult of, and 
identification with, the Dorians and Lakonians continued to rise until it 
reached its climax in the Third Reich.44 By the end of the 19th century 
some vo/kische (populist, nationalist) writers saw the Dorians as pure­
blooded Aryans from the north, possibly even from Germany, and they 
were certainly seen as very close to the Germans in their Aryan blood 
and character. 45 
Such enthusiasm was not restricted to Germans. As John Bagnell 
Bury wrote in his History of Greece, first published in 1900 and still 
considered standard, 
The Dorians took possession of the rich vale of the Eurotas, and, 
keeping their own Dorian stock pure from the mixture of alien blood, 
reduced all the inhabitants to the condition of subjects ... The 
eminent quality which distinguished the Dorians ... was that which 
we call 'character' and it was in Lakonia that this quality was most 
fully displayed and developed itself, for here the Dorian seems to 
have remained most purely Dorian. 46 
It is interesting to note that Bury - like many of the leading British 
Classicists of the tum of the 19th century, including John Pendand


--- PAGE 163 ---
294 BLACK ATHENA 
Mahaffy and William Ridgeway - came from the Protestant Ascend­
ancy in Ireland. All three men were enthusiastic about the pure 
northern, and possibly Germanic, blood of the Dorians. Thus, apart 
from participating in the general racism of the period, it is clear that they 
saw an analogy between the Teutonic English relationship with the 
Irish, whom they saw as 'marginally European', and that between the 
Dorians and their subject populations, the Pelasgian native inhabitants 
and the Helots. 47 Ridgeway was an altogether consistent racist who, 
though his family had lived in Ireland for 200 years, boasted that he 
had 'not a drop of Gaelic blood in his veins'.48 By 1900, then, the 
Spartans - the 'true' Greeks - were seen as racially pure and some­
how northern. The situation was not so extreme in the early 19th cen­
tury, tJvt the pressures were building up. 
TRANSITIONAL FIGURES, I: 
HEGEL AND MARX 
Another prerequisite to examining the full-out attack on the Ancient 
Model in the I 820S is to look at thinkers who straddled the changes. To 
do this I have taken three examples: Hegel and Marx; A. H. L. Heeren; 
and Barthold Niebuhr. 
Hegel was born in 1770 and was at the height of his power and 
influence in the 1820S, but he was not accepted by the philologists, 
whose power kept him out of the Pruss ian Academy for many years. 
Nevertheless, not only was he central to German philosophy of the 
time, but he also had a profound effect on the Romantic historians. 49 
There is also no doubt that Hegel was typical of his age. He loved 
Europe or, as he put it, the temperate zone; he respected the Asian 
mountains and India; he hated Islam and had complete contempt for 
Africa.5o His trajectory of the World Spirit from east to west obliged 
him to claim that being further to the west, Egypt was more advanced 
than eastern India. 51 
Hegel's true feelings seem to emerge in his Lectures on the History of 
Philosophy, given between 1816 and 1830. In these he wrote at some 
length on Chinese and Indian thought, but touched on Egypt only when 
dealing with the origins of Greek philosophy:52 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 295 
From Egypt Pythagoras thus without doubt brought the idea of his 
Order, which was a regular community brought together for pur­
poses of scientific and moral culture ... Egypt at that time was 
regarded as a highly cultured country, and it was so when compared 
with Greece; this is shown even in the differences of caste which 
assume a division amongst the great branches oflife and work, such 
as the industrial, scientific and religious. But beyond this we need not 
seek great scientific knowledge amongst the Egyptians, nor think 
that Pythagoras got his science there. Aristotle (Metaph.l) only says 
that 'in Egypt mathematical sciences first commenced, for there the 
nation of priests had leisure.,53 
Elsewhere Hegel wrote: 
The name of Greece strikes home to the hearts of men of education 
in Europe, and more particularly is this so with us Germans ... They 
[the Greeks] certainly received the substantial beginnings of their 
religion, culture ... from Asia, Syria and Egypt; but they have so 
greatly obliterated the foreign nature of this origin, and it is so much 
changed, worked on, turned round and altogether made so different, 
that what they - as we - prize, know and love in it is essentially their 
own. 54 
Thus, following the tradition from Epinomis, he admitted the massive 
borrowings but argued that the Greeks had qualitatively transformed 
them. 55 
Hegel's argument that the Orient was the childhood of mankind and 
Greece its adolescence strongly resembles, of course, the views of the 
Young Hegelian Karl Marx. 56 Marx argued that it was only in Greece 
that the individual had cut the umbilical cord from his community, and 
had changed from a Gattungswesen (species being) to a zoon politikon 
(political animal! city-dweller). With his lifelong love for the country, he 
completely accepted the prevailing view that in every aspect of its 
civilization Greece was categorically different from - and superior to -
all that had gone before. 57 However, Marx went beyond this to claim -
just as clearly as Shelley had done - that Greece towered over its 
posterity. Such a claim then caused a problem, in that it made Greece


--- PAGE 164 ---
~ III 
I 
BLACK ATHENA 
go against the stream of progress. In an attempt to deal with this Marx 
wrote in the introduction to his sketched outline for Das Kapital, the 
Grundrisse: 
In the case of the arts, it is well known that certain periods of their 
flowering are out of all proportion to the general development of 
society, hence also to the material foundation ... For example, the 
Greeks as compared to the modems or also Shakespeare. 
He nevertheless saw the paradox that 'in their world-epoch-making 
classical stature ... certain ... forms ... of the arts are possible only at 
an underdeveloped stage of artistic development.' 
Marx went on to argue that mythology was impossible once it had 
b~n overtaken by reality, as with the triumphs of capitalist industry. 
However, he was adamant that mythology could be produced only by a 
given society, with its distinctive social forms: 
Greek art presupposes Greek mythology, i.e. nature and the social 
forms already reworked in an unconsciously artistic way by the 
popular imagination. This is its material. Not any mythology what­
ever, i.e. not an arbitrarily chosen unconsciously artistic reworking of 
nature ... Egyptian mythology could never have been the foundation 
or womb of Greek art. 58 
My interpretation of this opaque passage, inasmuch as it concerns the 
theme of this book, is this: even in the 18sos when he wrote the 
Grundrisse, Marx was still sufficiently aware of the Ancient Model to 
have to face the possibility that Greek mythology - hence art - did not 
come from Greek social relations but from Egypt. To accept this would, 
of course, make nonsense of his scheme. 59 And he was living in an age 
when everybody felt in their bones that Greece was categorically apart 
from, and above, Egypt. Thus the destruction of the Ancient Model 
gave his generation a freedom on this question that was not available to 
Hegel. Marx was able to deny Egyptian influence on Greece outright. 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 297 
TRANSITIONAL FIGURES, 2: 
HEEREN 
A. H. L. Heeren was born in 1760, ten years earlier than Hegel, but he 
outlived him by eleven years, dying only in 1842. Heeren was a 
son-in-law of Heyne, and was a distinguished Professor of History at 
Gottingen in the 1820S and 30S. His scholarship, which focused on 
economic and technical developments, was exhaustive in the approved 
Gottingen fashion. Like his father in-law Heyne and his brother-in-law 
Georg Forster, Heeren was fascinated by the 18th-century explorations 
and his magnum opus, Reflections on the Politics, Intercourse, and Trade 
of the Principal Nations of Antiquity, combined these explorations of 
Africa and the Near East with ancient writings on the subjects. 
His conclusions stressed the importance of Carthage, Ethiopia and 
Egypt, and - somewhat apologetically, because he admired Greece 
greatly - he felt obliged to retain the Ancient Model to explain 
the striking parallels he saw between these cultures and that of 
Greece. 60 
Heeren was not treated well by those of his contemporaries who have 
had an influence on posterity. Humboldt considered him a 'rather dull 
man', and he is best known today for the poet Heinrich Heine's 
merciless caricature of Heeren in his Pictures ofTravel.61 Heeren was 
punished by the Romantics not merely for his choice of subject but for 
staying with the Ancient Model too long. Only black historians read him 
today. 62 
TRANSITIONAL FIGURES, 3: 
BARTHOLD NIEBUHR 
Niebuhr's reputation has fared much better than that of Heeren. He is 
generally and rightly recognized as the founder of modem ancient 
history. But from the point of view of this book, the interesting thing 
about him is that he remained within the Ancient Model. I treat 
Niebuhr in some detail because he represented advanced German 
thinking at the tum of the 18th century, and because of his enormous 
influence on 19th-century understanding of ancient history and good


--- PAGE 165 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
historical 'method'. Through him we can realize how saturated both 
were in Romanticism and racism. 
However, I have also included Niebuhr as a transitional figure, for 
although he provided massive help to the intellectual and ideological 
forces that overthrew the Ancient Model, he himself was still maintain­
ing it at the end of his life. It is possible that he did so out of his intense 
conservatism at this stage, or for reasons of personal or professional 
rivalry. The cogency with which he argued in favour of the Ancient 
Model, however, suggests otherwise. 
Barthold Niebuhr, born in 1776, had a wide Teutonic background. His 
family were Frisians of German culture living in Holstein, then in 
D)umark. His father, Carsten Niebuhr, was a famous traveller in the 
East employed by the Danish court and Gottingen. He was also an 
Anglophile and the boy's first foreign language was English while, 
almost alone in his generation, Barthold studied in Britain. Carsten 
Niebuhr also encouraged his son to read not only Latin and Greek, but 
Arabic and Persian as well. Thus Barthold had an exceptionally broad 
scholarly background. As a Wunderkind he was taken up by cultivated 
neighbours, including the Homeric scholar Voss and the Romantic poet 
M. C. Boie, both products ofGottingen. 63 
Barthold was in correspondence with Heyne, and both wanted him to 
study at Gottingen. Carsten Niebuhr, however, preferred to send 
Barthold to the University of Kiel, which was then Danish; this could 
lead to official posts in Denmark. From Kiel he went for a year to 
Edinburgh; he then spent six years in Copenhagen as an extremely 
successful civil servant specializing in finance and continued his stu­
dies, now focused on Roman history. In 1806 he joined the Prussian 
government at its lowest ebb, working for the reforms that helped the 
monarchy survive. Here too he made time for scholarship and in 
1810-11 wrote his History of Rome, quickly recognized as being the 
foundation of modern and 'scientific' ancient history. Then in 1816 he 
was sent as the Prussian representative to Rome, where he remained 
until 1823. After that Niebuhr went into semi-retirement at Bonn 
where, though still deeply concerned with politics, he devoted most of 
his time to scholarship until his death at fifty-four, early in 183 I. 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 299 
Niebuhr was primarily a historian of Rome. The reason for this 
concern has been explored by the intellectual historian Zvi Yavetz. 
Yavetz points out that the picture painted by the earlY-20th-century 
literary historian Miss E. M. Butler, in her great book The Tyranny of 
Greece over Germany, needs some qualification. Although, Yavetz 
admits, there had long been the special association with Greece, and the 
country had obsessed late- 1 8th -century Germans and its image con­
tinued to dominate 19th-century poets and 'progressives', the great 
conservative and liberal German historians concentrated on Rome - its 
rise and not its fall- which they identified with Prussia. 64 Nevertheless, 
Niebuhr was also passionately concerned with Greece. 
It is worth spending some time considering Niebuhr's general 
ideological position. The Finnish scholar Seppo Rytkonen describes 
Niebuhr as a man who 'found his own way between the Enlightenment 
and Restoration'; however, Rytkonen's definition of 'the Enlighten­
ment' is so broad as to include not only Montesquieu but Burke and the 
German conservative Moser. 65 His notion of 'Restoration' is pro­
portionately narrow. It seems to be restricted to the poetic and Indo­
philiac absurdities of Heidelberg, ruling out the much more formidable 
Gottingen tradition to which Niebuhr so clearly belonged. 
The great Classicist Professor Momigliano, who towers over the 
history of Classical studies, is always eager to dissociate his discipline 
from Romanticism and German nationalism. He claims that the basis of 
Niebuhr's thinking came from English - not even British -
economists.66 Momigliano cites Niebuhr's protege F. Lieber to the 
effect that Niebuhr had told him that most of his British friends were 
Whigs and that Whigs had saved England in 1688.67 As most of 
Barthold Niebuhr's friends in Britain were men from the East India 
Company who had known his father Carsten, their political persuasion 
is not surprising. 
Furthermore, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 was, for Niebuhr, the 
model of political change with minimal disorder. In his youth he had 
believed that this kind of event could take place only among superior 
northern races; by middle age, however, he despaired even of these. 
Frances Bunsen, the wife of Niebuhr's secretary, Christian - later 
Baron - Bunsen, who knew Niebuhr intimately after 18 I 6, described


--- PAGE 166 ---
300 BLACK ATHENA 
him as the most rigid reactionary and as 'ultra-Tory'. She wrote that in 
general it was his 'inclination to trust government rather than the 
nations governed,.68 Niebuhr acted on these principles, and his con­
tempt for Southern Italian 'Polcinellos', when he went beyond the call 
of duty as a Prussian official to help the Austrians crush the Carbonari 
rising in Naples in 1821.69 It also seems very likely that his early death 
was hastened, if not caused, by his terror at the French and Belgian 
Revolutions of 1830.70 Thus there is no doubt that after 1817 Niebuhr 
was reactiQnary even by the standards of the counter-revolutionary age, 
and that this affected his later historiography. 
Does this mean that he was already a conscious conservative in 181 1 
when he first wrote his History? Rytkonen believes that Niebuhr's 
ideology seemed more conservative than it actually was, while Professor 
Momigliano refers to Niebuhr's early 'democratic sympathies' and his 
support for the liberation of serfs in Denmark and Prussia. 71 In fact, 
Niebuhr's sympathies for the French Revolution were remarkably 
shallow and short-lived at a time when such sympathies were all the 
rage.72 Indeed, the idea that his conservative ideas were always fun­
damental is strengthened by the fact that they were those of his father. 
Carsten Niebuhr always disliked the French, and political disturbances 
of any sort. The combination of the two appalled him. Coming from 
peasant stock himself, Carsten had great sympathy with that class in his 
native Dithmarsch, which of course fitted the Romanticism of the 
times; in Barthold such feelings were reinforced by Carsten's friend 
Boie, who combined activity in poetic circles with passionate support 
for authentic 'German' freedom and opposition to the French 
Enlightenment. 73 
Momigliano sees Niebuhr's ideas as. containing a 'mixture of con­
servative and liberal attitudes quite unusual on the continent', this being 
'a consequence of his British experience,.74 These ideas, however, 
appear to have been the same as those of his father and his circle, and 
were perfecdy Romantic. As a young man, Niebuhr seems to have 
believed not only that northern peasants were worthy of authentic 
traditional freedom, but that they could be a bastion against revolution­
ary and Catholic forces.75 This combination of ideas occurred in 
Britain, but it was equally German and Scandinavian; hence there 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 301 
would seem no reason to challenge mainstream historiography, which 
labels Niebuhr as a Romantic and a conservative.76 
No one has ever compared Niebuhr to Adam Smith, Bentham or 
James Mill. The Briton he turned to was Burke. As he wrote in the 
introduction to the third edition of his History of Rome: 'Not one of the 
bases of the political judgement in my work cannot be found in 
Montesquieu or Burke.,77 The close parallels between Niebuhr and 
Burke have been accepted by virtually all writers - with the exception of 
Momigliano - from Baroness Bunsen and the conservative German 
nationalist of the late 19th century Heinrich von Treitschke, to the 
modem historians Witte and Bridenthal. 78 Thus, as an example of 
Niebuhr's enlightened spirit, Professor Momigliano argues that he 
went to Edinburgh because, unlike London, it had a university. This 
practical reason may well have played a role in his decision, but Niebuhr 
told a friend that he was going to Scodand to learn the language of 
Ossian!79 
While consistendy Romantic Niebuhr was, until about 1810, a 
reform-conservative, arguing for reform to save Denmark and Prussia 
from revolution. (It is in this context that his promoting the abolition of 
serfdom should be seen.) For these ideas he was sometimes attacked by 
the whole-hog reactionaries with whom he later sided. 8o Rytkonen, for 
instance, maintains that Niebuhr was linked to the Enlightenment by 
his lack of historical relativism, and belief in an ahistorical human 
nature. At other points, however, he sees Niebuhr as having had a 
concept of Romantic growth later overshadowed by a Traditionalismus, a 
'stasis' very different from the permanent rational order to which the 
Enlightenment aspired. 81 
Niebuhr's cross-cultural comparisons were, moreover, within strict 
bounds. His central one - between early Rome and his beloved native 
Dithmarsch - was possible only because he viewed both peoples as 
purely authentic and the products of their environments. Thus here too 
he was in the mainstream of Romanticism. At no point did he accept the 
universalism, deism or atheism and belief in reason of the Enlighten­
ment, let alone the liberty, equality and fraternity of the Revolution. 
Furthermore Niebuhr's promotion of Romanticism was not restricted 
to his history. As mentioned in Chapter V, he presided over the German


--- PAGE 167 ---
302 BLACK ATHENA 
community in Rome when it was the seedbed of the new Romantic 
movement. 82 
How did Niebuhr's conservatism and Romanticism affect his writing 
of history? Firstly, like Humboldt, he saw the broad study of Antiquity­
which he still called Philologie - as a way of providing Bildung and so 
promoting the fatherland. 83 His method was that of the Gottingen 
source critics, a 'combination of rational criticism and imaginative 
reconstruction from text analysis, analogy and intuition'. 84 Or, as the 
very favour.able article on him in the 11th edition of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica described it: 'He brought in inference to supply the place of 
discredi ted tradition and showed the possibility of writing . . . ,85 How 
these traditions had been 'discredited' was not specified, but clearly the 
least reliable were those that broke the canons of early- 19th-century 
science - including its racial branch. This aspect of Niebuhr's method 
is linked to the crucial point, made by Momigliano, that Niebuhr was 
the first to challenge the great ancient historians on their own turf. Even 
Gibbon had only begun where Tacitus left off, but Niebuhr wrote on 
early Rome, which was well covered by Livy and others. 86 
Niebuhr took Humboldt's views on the necessity of inference and 
imagination a step further. He is cited by the earlY-20th-century 
intellectual historian G. P. Gooch as having written: 'I am an historian, 
for I can make a complete picture from separate fragments and once I 
know where the parts are missing and how to fill them up, no one 
believes how much of what seems to be lost can be restored. ,87 Though 
cast in positivist terms, Niebuhr's is an honest confession and would 
seem to fit all historians. Even so, it is difficult to see how, ifhis method 
contained so much subjectivity, one can proclaim Niebuhr as the first 
'scientific' historian and claim that he raised his discipline to a categori­
cally higher plane, above such 'prescientlfic' historians as Herodotos, 
Thucydides, Sima Qjan, Tacitus, Ibn Khaldun, Voltaire, and Gibbon! 
All these, at least, wrote clearly! 
What were Niebuhr's specific contributions? At the time, and since, 
the best-known aspect of his work has been - pace Rytkonen and 
Momigliano - the hypothesis that Roman history had been taken from 
lost 'lays' or epic poems. As many writers have pointed out, Niebuhr's 
idea clearly derives from the Romantic belief in the centrality of 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 30 3 
folksong at the origins of nations. 88 Given his view of Niebuhr as 
essentially a product of the Scottish Enlightenment, it is not surprising 
that Professor Momigliano downplays the significance of the 'lays'. For 
him the most important innovation in Niebuhr's work was on a second 
topic: the nature of early Roman land law and the Ager Publicus (Public 
Field). He demonstrates that Niebuhr gained his ideas on this 
from information about India, which he learned from his father's 
Scottish friends. 89 Momigliano admits, however, that Niebuhr's 
motive for studying the topic was what he saw as the misuse of 
Roman precedents by the French Revolutionaries in their - very 
mild - land reform. As Niebuhr himself put it, he wrote to refute 'the 
mad and detestable sense given to the agrarian law by a criminal 
gang,.90 
For Niebuhr Rome, like Britain, was a model of how internal 
conflicts could be worked out in a gradual and constitutional manner. In 
the development of this idea he introduced his third major new theory, 
which was that the Patricians and the Plebeians were not merely 
different classes but different races. The idea that class differences 
originated from race differences - which Niebuhr applied to other 
situations as well- had been used earlier in France; there the belief that 
the nobility were the descendants of the Germanic Franks, while the 
Third Estate were native Gallo-Romans, had played a significant role 
in the development of the Revolutions of 1789 and 1830. Still 
another pattern that is likely to have influenced Niebuhr is the Indian 
caste system, which is supposed to have originated from the Aryan 
conquest and to have been an attempt to maintain the purity of the 
conquerors. 
It was Niebuhr, however, who gave this theory academic cachet, and 
he was credited with having introduced it. The great Romantic French 
historian Michelet saluted Niebuhr tor having discovered the ethnic 
principle of history 'as early as 181 1'.91 This was also the message taken 
from Niebuhr by his English disciple Dr Arnold, the famous head­
master ofRugby.92 Despite doubts abut the 'lays', the Ager Publicus, the 
racial origin of the Roman classes and another theory on the Northern 
origin of the Etruscans, the anonymous writer on Niebuhr in the 191 1 
edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica wrote:


--- PAGE 168 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
if every positive conclusion of Niebuhr's had been refuted, his claim 
to be the first who dealt with the history of Rome in a scientific spirit 
would remain unimpaired, and the new principles introduced by him 
into historical research would lose nothing of their importance. 
One of these 'new' principles was the Romantic-Positivist one, cham­
pioned at Gottingen, of studying peoples and their institutions rather 
than individuals. However, Niebuhr was even more admired for his 
introductio.9-Qf race into history: 
By his theory of the disputes between the Patricians and the 
Plebeians arising from original differences of race, he drew attention 
to the immense importance of ethnological distinctions and contri­
buted to the revival of these divergences as factors in modem history. 
In addition, Niebuhr was adamant about the desirability of national and 
racial purity: 
It seems to be the course of the history of the world that conquest and 
divers intermixtures are to fuse numberless original races together 
. .. Seldom will a particular people be the gainer by such an 
intermixture. Some sustain the irreparable loss of a noble national 
civilization, science and literature. Even a less cultivated people will 
hardly find that the refinements thus imported - which, moreover, if 
they are suited to its genius, it might have attained for itself - will 
make amends for the forfeiture of its original character, its national 
history and its hereditary laws.93 
It is no surprise, then, that ancient historian Ulrich Wilcken - who 
flourished under the Nazis - was able to celebrate Niebuhr as a 
'founder of critical-genetic historiography,.94 In a letter written to his 
parents in 1794, when he was eighteen, Niebuhr described the deleteri­
ous effects of racial mixture, and there is no doubt that this Romantic 
ethnicity was based on what he saw as physical and fundamental racial 
differences. At this stage, at least, he believed in polygeny: 
I maintain that we must make very cautious use of differences of 
language as applied to the theory of races and have much more 
regard for physical conformation ... [race is] one of the most 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
important elements of history still remaining to be examined - that 
which is, in truth, the very first basis upon which all history is reared 
and the first principle upon which it must proceed. 95 
Niebuhr's preference for physical rather than 'linguistic' racism may 
well have come from his father, and through him from the British in the 
East. It put him beyond Humboldt and the tradition later upheld by 
Niebuhr's own secretary Bunsen and the great French Semitist and 
historian Ernest Renan, which insisted that the manifest differences 
between peoples were caused not by physical conformation but by 
adequacy of language.96 Physical racism was essential to Niebuhr's 
principle of the racial nature of class, given that different classes and 
even castes speak the same languages. It is remarkable to note how 
constant he was to this principle, and also on the undesirability of racial 
mixture. 
Niebuhr brought together the Romanticism and the racism of the 
1790S. The alliance was an easy one. In many ways Rasse (race) or 
Geschlecht (kind) were merely the 'scientific' terms for the Romantic 
Volk (people) or Gemeinschaft (community). In his classic statement of 
historicism and progressive relativism Also a Philosophy of History, 
published in 1774, Herder insisted that the Volk was the source of all 
truth. 97 This notion appears in the 19th century as the 'racial truth' 
which supersedes all others. 98 
Despite the fundamental congruence between Romanticism and 
racism, there is a contradiction between the Romantic ideal of racial 
authenticity and the racialist right of a master race to conquer. 
Niebuhr's early belief in the desirability of backward peoples - that is, 
Germans - developing autochthonous cultures did not extend to lesser, 
non-European breeds. In 1787, at the age of eleven, he supported the 
Austrians - for whom he otherwise had no great love - against the 
Turks, and in 1794 the worst insult he could devise for Revolutionary 
France was 'New Tartary,.99 In 1814 he called for European and 
Christian unity to fight Islam, and in lectures given near the end of his 
life he is recorded as having said: 
European dominion naturally supports science and literature, 
together with the rights of humanity, and to prevent the destruction


--- PAGE 169 ---
il: I I', 'I 
BLACK ATHENA 
of a barbarous power would be an act of high treason against 
intellectual culture and humanity. 100 
The occasion for this defence of imperialism was a future European 
conquest of Egypt. Like the Humboldt brothers and Bunsen - but 
unlike most German Classicists and Orientalists - Niebuhr accepted 
Champollion's decipherment. This led him to attack the great F. A. 
Wolf, who had, he said, 'investigated the antiquity of writing among the 
Greeks coIJlPJ.etely independently of the art in the East'; this one-sided 
view Niebuhr attributed to Wolf's 'prejudice against the high antiquity 
of writings in the East'. 101 
Niebuhr, himself in touch with Rome, followed Champollion's 
compromise with the Church on the dating.102 Thus he put Egyptian 
history back to 2200 BC, the date then assumed for the Hyksos. 
However, showing the cultural, racial and temporal arrogance or 
Bessenvissen of the critical method, which has been a bane to the writing 
of ancient history ever since, he claimed that the thirteen dynasties 
reported before the Hyksos had been invented by the Egyptians, who 
'ought to have been contented with possessing a history as far back­
wards as the age of Abraham, but they wanted to ascend still higher in 
accordance with the spirit of Eastern nations. , 103 
Niebuhr was also in the Romantic-racist mode when he made a 
categorical distinction between the free and creative Greeks and the 
Egyptians, who, 'like many oppressed people, were very far advanced in 
their arts while their intellectual culture remained behindhand.' 104 He 
also attacked the Phoenicians for their rootlessness. This cardinal sin 
against the Romantic canon was, of course, used against the Jews until 
the triumph of Romantic Zionism, and there is no doubt that Niebuhr 
shared the growing anti-Semitism of his social circles. lOS 
Nevertheless, as I have said, Niebultr remained within the Ancient 
Model. In his attack on Wolf, he wrote: 
Admitting that .... intolerable abuse has been made of the influence 
exercised upon the Greeks by the Eastern nations ... Wolf too much 
ignores the fact that relations did exist between Greece and the East 
and that, though afterwards they were independent, in earlier times 
the Greeks were influenced and instructed by Eastern nations. 106 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
Niebuhr believed that the myth of Kekrops' Egyptian settlement at 
Athens in some way reflected Egyptian influence there, as did the 
legends of Danaos and Aigyptos for the Argolid. He had no doubt 
whatever about Kadmos' foundation of Thebes. 107 There is, on the 
other hand, a tone of defensiveness in these assertions that must be 
attributed to the influence of Wolf and his ideas and, in the 1820S, of 
Wolf's follower Karl Otfried Muller. I shall return to Muller after 
considering the first 19th-century attack on the Ancient Model, that of 
the Abbe Petit-Radel. 
PETIT- RADEL AND THE FIRST 
ATTACK ON THE ANCIENT MODEL 
Petit-Radel was a scholar greatly interested in art and architecture. In 
1792 he emigrated to Rome, already the centre of Romantic aesthetics, 
and while in Italy he became fascinated by the country's pre-Roman 
ruins. Following an ancient tradition he called these 'Cyclopean', 
seeing them as irregular and hence 'free' in a way that Egyptian and 
Oriental architecture was not.108 On the basis of the occurrence of 
these buildings, he became convinced that a common European 
civilization had been established in both Italy and Greece before the 
. dPh" 109 arrival of the EgyptIans an oemClans. 
In 1806 Petit-Radel presented a paper, 'On the Greek origin of the 
founder of Argos', to the Institut de France in Paris. His argument was 
based on the early dating by Dionysios of Halikarnassos, a Greek 
historian of the I st century BC, of an Arkadian settlement in Italy which 
Petit-Radel linked to the Cyclopean buildings. The Frenchman 
attacked Freret and Barthelemy, as exponents of the Ancient Model, 
regarding the cultural level of the native Greeks when the Egyptians 
had settled. He backed this view with his contention that the Cyclopean 
architecture antedated the arrival of the Egyptians, and his Romantic 
faith that the glorious Greeks could never have been so backward. 
In addition, Petit-Radel specifically challenged the traditions that 
kings Inachos and Phoroneus of Argos had been Egyptian.110 He 
showed how weak this tradition had been in Antiquity - and it is true 
that even among the shadowy figures of the legendary period, these two


--- PAGE 170 ---
308 BLACK ATHENA 
are outstandingly murky. The tone of the paper casts some doubt on the 
extent of his boldness, as there are suggestions that what he was saying 
I hi P .. d' III Th was we come to s anslan au lence. e paper appears to have 
been well received, and Petit-Radel went on to playa distinguished role 
in Restoration academic life. 
KARL OTFRIED MULLER 
AND THE OVERTHROW 
OF THE ANCIENT MODEL 
Where Petit-Radel tried to bypass ancient authority and the Ancient 
Model, the first direct challenge to them came from Karl Otfried 
Muller. In general terms, there is no doubt about the Romanticism of 
Muller's scholarship and life. The earlY-20th-century historian of 
Classics Rudolf Pfeiffer saw him as the 'radiant figure of a happy young 
scholar', while to the otherwise sober English intellectual historian 
G. P. Gooch he was 'the Shelley of the modern renaissance, the young 
Apollo in the historical pantheon,.II2 
Muller was one of the first generation to be trained in Humboldt's 
educational system. Born in Silesia in 1797, he studied at its capital, 
Breslau, attending the new Seminar which had been established on the 
Berlin model. His teacher, Heindorf, was an estranged pupil of Wolf, 
and Muller himself worked for a year under Wolf in Berlin. Although 
Muller thoroughly disliked him, his writings are, nevertheless, per­
meated with Wolf's influence. 
For both men, the key words were the Kantian Prolegomena and 
Wissenschaft.1l3 Adopting Wolf's progressive and scientific mode, 
Muller stressed the pioneering nature of his own studies, which he 
believed would be superseded by the collective labours oflater scholars. 
But, while deferential to the future, he was arrogant towards the past. 
The only previous works he considered worthy of favourable note were 
publications from Gottingen and the writings of French Royalist 
scholars like Petit- Radel and Champollion's great enemy, the Classicist 
Raoul Rochette. In this contempt, Miiller was a perfect example of the 
professional 19th-century philologists who despised the generalist 
b-udits or Gelehrte of the 18th century whom they were replacing. I 14 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
Muller's thesis was a local history of the island of Aigina. Though 
partly inspired by the marbles recently brought to Germany from there, 
the project was a perfect example of Romantic-Positivism. First, as 
Gooch pointed out, this first local history of Ancient Greece resembled 
the first German one: that of Osnabriick by the Romantic conservative 
Justus Moser .115 Secondly, Aigina is an island - the perfect finite space 
and convenient for exhaustive study. Still more significant is the fact 
thatit was inhabited by Dorians and faced Athens, the chief city of the 
'corrupt' Ionians. 
On the strength of this work, and at an astoundingly young age, 
MUller was appointed to a chair at Gottingen. This, in a surprisingly 
Hebrew turn of phrase, he called 'the place of places for me' .116 From 
then on his academic position - unlike that of many of his contempor­
aries - was secure. He received money and recognition from the 
governments of Hanover and other German states until his untimely, 
but Romantic, death from fever in Athens in 1840.117 
Despite his professionalism, Muller's scholarly range was pro­
digious. He was able to round out philology in the approved new 
manner, and as well as producing a major work on the Etruscans he 
wrote voluminously on ancient art and archaeology. I 18 The works that 
became the pillars of Altertumswissenschaft, however, were his Histories 
of Greek Tribes and Cities, published between 1820 and 1824, and his 
Introduction to a Scientific System of Mythology, published in 1825. His 
attack on the Ancient Model was explicit in both. The first volume of 
his Histories of Greek Tribes and Cities, Orchomenos and the Minyans, be­
gan with a quotation from Pausanias: 
Greeks are terribly prone to be wonders truck by the expense of 
home-products; distinguished historians have explained the 
Egyptian Pyramids in the greatest detail and not made the slightest 
mention of the treasure house of Minyas [at Orchomenos] or the 
walls of Tiryns, which are by no means less marvellous.119 
The quotation is pivotal: it directs the readers' attention both to the 
Minyans, whom Muller saw as an invading northern tribe related to the 
Dorians; and it denounces what he believed to be the besetting sin of 
the Greeks, later given the pathological names 'Egyptomania' and


--- PAGE 171 ---
31 0 BLACK ATHENA 
'barbarophilia,.I20 These disorders were manifested in the 'delusion' 
that Egyptians and other non-European 'barbarians' had possessed 
superior cultures, from which the Greeks had borrowed massively. 
Miiller had enemies on two fronts: the Ancient Model and the uses 
made of it by the Masons and Dupuis; and the Indophilia of Schlegel 
and the Romantic Heidelberg group around the mystical philosophers 
and mythologists Creuzer and Garres. Where Schlegel had seen Egypt 
as an Indian c.ol?ny, Creuzer - seeing otherwise inexplicable similar­
ities between Indian and Greek religion, especially in their symbolism -
went on to argue, completely without evidence, that Indian priests had 
somehow brought their philosophy to Greece. 121 Although - unlike the 
champions of the Ancient Model- they were certainly more influential 
in Germany after 1815, the Indophils could provide no specific 
evidence of transmission for Miiller to attack. 122 
In dealing with the Ancient Model, Miiller frequendy referred to the 
Verbindungen (combinations) and Verknupfungen (liaisons) between 
Greek and barbarian priesthoods. These, he maintained, had 
suggested fundamental relationships between the various religious 
systems and myths. According to Miiller, it was these 'late' contacts that 
had created the false impression that Greece had derived its religion, 
myths and civilization as a whole from the Near East, and here his main 
technique for removing what he saw as these late ;f(;cretions was the 
'argument from silence' .123 In principle, he recognized that genuinely 
ancient traditions sometimes appeared only in 'late' sources - indeed, 
he himself sometimes relied on such evidence. Thus, to deny the 
authenticity of a legend he required an additional criterion: that there 
must have been a strong contemporary reason for fabricating it.124 In 
practice, however, lack of attestation alone was seen as damning, 
especially when Miiller was attacking the Ancient Model. Indeed, he 
and his successors have employed Homer and Hesiod not as broad­
ranging poets but as encyclopaedias. In this way the common phrase 
'unknown to H.' was used not in the sense 'unattested in the surviving 
corpus of H.', but to mean' did not exist in the time of H.' . 
Miiller's second technique for demolishing the Ancient Model was 
dissection or analysis: he maintained that this was rectifying what 
he saw as a general tendency in Antiquity towards syncretism.125 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 311 
Championing Romantic particularism against Enlightenment univer­
salism, he argued that 'Separation, therefore, is one main business of 
the mythologist.'126 Reduced in this way to local specifics, the earliest 
myths could be viewed as rooted in the soil of Greece. Nevertheless, 
Miiller maintained that there was need for 'combination' not of 
the 'late' or priesdy kind already mentioned, but through tracing 
cultic and mythological patterns that had spread with conquering 
races. 
The prime example of this process was what Miiller saw as the 
association between Apollo and the Dorians - that the cult of the god 
had spread with the Dorians' conquests. Such an interpretation was 
typical of the general Romantic belief that vitality flows from north to 
south and not vice versa}27 In this way, Miiller maintained that if 
similar cults, myths or names were found in Greece and the Near East, 
they must be Greek; while if they had existed in Greece and Thrace or 
Greece and Phrygia, which were to the north-east of Greece, they 
originated from the latter. I28 The same was true within Greece, 
according to Miiller: if similar features were found in both the north 
and the south of the country, they nearly always came from the former. 
Furthermore, if cults or names were widespread in Greece or the 
Aegean, they had to be indigenous and not the result of foreign 
introduction. 
Miiller's first attack was against the legends surrounding Kekrops 
and his supposed colonizations of Athens and the region of Lake 
Kopais in Boiotia, which included Orchomenos, the city after which the 
first volume of his History was named. 129 These traditions were only 
attested 'late', thus fulfilling Miiller's first condition of spuriousness. 
There were also close relations between Greeks in general and Athens 
in particular and the Egyptian 26th Dynasty, 664- 520 Be, whose capital 
was Athens' sister city Sai~ thus satisfying his second. Furthermore, 
Miiller pointed out that the main sources of the legend were a book 
claimed by Pausanias to have been a forgery, and stories told to 
Diodoros by Egyptians, whose manifest self-interest discredited 
them. 130 What is more, Herodotos, who firmly believed in foreign 
setdements elsewhere, saw Kekrops as autochthonous. l3 1 Finally, 
Miiller quoted Menexenos, in one of Plato's dialogues, to the effect


--- PAGE 172 ---
312 BLACK ATHENA 
that the Athenians were pure-blooded, unlike the Thebans and the 
Peloponnesians, who had been colonized by Easterners. 132 
Miiller did not refer to this passage when challenging the legends 
surrounding Danaos' acquisition of the Argolid; he did this by showing 
genealogical discrepancies in the mythic cycle. He also maintained that 
Danaos could not have been Egyptian because he was the eponym of the 
Danaans, who were clearly Greeks. 133 However, he admitted that 
'While Kekrops' Egyptian origin is merely historical sophism, that 
of Danaos -'is genuine myth.,134 Miiller could hardly avoid the con­
cession, since he knew about the lines referring to Danaos' daughters 
from the Danais epic.135 This, however, did not grant the legends 
historical status, given the 'facts' of the general north-south direc­
tion of cultural flow and 'the Egyptian abhorrence of all travel and 
seafaring'. 136 
Miiller conceded that the legends surrounding Kadmos presented 
even more difficulties. In the first place they concerned the 
Phoenicians, whom he saw as an 'active merchant people [who] were 
more ancient than the ... xenophobic and bigoted Egyptians' .137 
Nevertheless, convinced of the permanence of national characteristics, 
Miiller thought it inconceivable that seafaring merchants could have 
conquered inland Thebes. He attacked the legends around Kadmos by 
separating the alleged Phoenician colonies in Boiotia from those in the 
Aegean. He then dismissed the legends of ancient as opposed to 'later' 
Phoenician settlements on Samothrace and Thasos in the Northern 
Aegean, because Herodotos had seen the ancient cult of the Kabeiroi 
there as Pelasgian. 
Here, although he did not admit it, Miiller was in difficulties, because 
17th- and 18th-century scholars knew that the name Kabeiroi came 
from the Semitic kabir (great) - the Greeks called them Megaloi Theoi 
and the Romans Dei Magni, meaning 'Great Gods' .138 Miiller pre­
ferred to derive the name from the Greek kaio (burn), linking it to the 
undoubted associations between the· cult and metalwork. He also 
pointed out a connection between Kadmos and Kadmilos, one of the 
Kabeiroi, and noted that the latter was worshipped near Thebes. 
However, instead of seeing the cult in both places as Near Eastern, he 
used the 'proof' that the Aegean one was Pelasgian to argue that the cult 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 31 3 
and the name Kadmos at Thebes came from the same 'substratum' and 
therefore had nothing to do with Phoenicia. 139 
At the time, this confused and confusing argument was no more 
successful than Miiller's attack on the Indophils and, as on the latter, his 
views on the Phoenicians became predominant only in the 20th century. 
In 1882, for instance, the great Classicist and Indo-Europeanist 
Hermann Usener attacked Miiller's denial of the 'now obvious in­
fluence of the Middle East' .140 Miiller did better with the Egyptians. 
F. C. Movers in his The Phoenicians, published in the 1840S, tried to 
salvage the legends of Danaos on the grounds that Danaos' Hyksos 
connections made him Semitic, not Egyptian; but he was largely 
discredited, and by 1840 it became impermissible to accept any story of 
Kekrops' Egyptian origin. 141 Thus, after Miiller, all 'reputable' scho­
lars have worked in what I call the 'Broad Aryan Model', believing that 
while there mayor may not have been Phoenician settlements on 
Mainland Greece, there were certainly no Egyptian ones. 
Most later historians, and some of his contemporaries, have regarded 
Miiller as essentially Romantic in maintaining a categorical distinction 
between Greek and other cultures. In Orchomenos he denied the charge 
and, after apologizing for having treated Greek mythology as if it were 
all mythology, he claimed that Greece was part of the world, and that 
therefore Greek mythology had the same basis as that of the rest of 
mankind. 142 What he objected to was the belief in colonial bonds and 
the wholesale borrowing of Greek religion and mythology from the 
East. He was convinced that he had shown these to be unhistorical, 
though illusions about them had led all previous research astray. 
In Prolegomena, Miiller made an eloquent appeal for scholars to do 
what he had failed to do, and investigate all mythologies for insights into 
the Greek one.143 The 'anthropological' school of the Cambridge 
Classicists James Frazer and Jane Harrison, which flourished at the 
beginning of the 20th century, in no way overstepped these bounds. 144 
What Miiller outlawed was any special relationship between Greek and 
Eastern myth. Indeed, as he put it, 'the entire book is opposed to 
the theory which would make the majority of myths importations 
from the East.' He continued with a splendid example of Romantic­
Positivism:


--- PAGE 173 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
In order to assume this just for one [myth] even, distinct proof is 
required either of so great internal agreement as only to be explained 
by transplantation or, secondly, that the mythos is absolutely without 
root in the soil of local tradition, or, lastly, that transplantation is 
expressed in the legend itself.145 
A demand for 'distinct proof', as opposed to competitive plausibility, is 
dubious in any branch of knowledge. It is absurd in such a nebulous 
region as the origins of Greek mythology. 
Muller's second sleight of hand was to switch the onus of such 
'proof' on to proponents of the Ancient Model. As the earlY-20th­
century scholar Paul Foucart argued, it would be more reasonable to 
require proof from those who challenge the ancient consensus that 
there had been Near Eastern colonization than from those who de­
fend it.l46 The fact that Muller's bluff was so successful only shows 
how much his audience, during and after the Greek War of Indepen­
dence, wanted to hear it. With Muller's capture of the academic 'high 
ground' from which he could demand 'proof' from challengers, the 
destruction of the Ancient Model was secure. 
Miiller admitted that one of the best ways of distinguishing the 
historical elements of myth or legend was through etymology, especially 
the etymology of names. 147 He himself was able~to make very little 
headway with this in the case of Greece, and after some feeble attempts 
he exclaimed: 
But alas! Etymology is still a science in which blind guesswork is 
more practised than methodical investigation; and in which because 
we wish to explain everything too soon, our labours more frequently 
result in confusion than elucidation. 148 
This failure explains why, as two of Muller's modem admirers put it, 
'philology in Muller's work is usually subordinate to mythology.,149 
Typically, however, Muller had faith iri the advance of science: 'yet ... 
there is no folly in hoping for still more im~ortant solutions from this 
quarter' .150 Unfortunately for the Aryan Model, however, Indo­
European philology has failed, over the last 160 years, to be of any help 
in explaining Greek myth and religion. This state of affairs is in striking 
[CH. VI] HELLENOMANIA, I 
contrast to the hundreds of plausible etymologies from Semitic and 
Egyptian.151 Many of these, including those for Thebes, Kadmos, 
Kabeiroi and the element Sam - in Samothrace - were known to 
Muller, but he seldom confronted them directly, preferring to dismiss 
them out of hand. 152 
Now we come to the later reception of Miiller and his ideas. He was 
admired in his own time; his was the first memorial tablet erected in 
Gottingen in 1874, and by the end of the 19th century he was 
. f ' d ' . hi 153 I h' n' t ,/' considered a pIOneer 0 mo em ancIent story. n IS IS ory OJ 
Classical Scholarship, published in 192 I, the great Wilamowitz­
Moellendorf said, after mentioning Miiller's name, 'We have at last 
arrived at the threshold of the 19th century, in which the conquest of the 
. Id b . I d ,154 ancIent wor y sCIence was comp ete . 
We should note that this statement - apart from the colonizing image 
it conjures up - casts Muller as the heroic figure in the conventional 
history of science, who turns chaos and dark into order and light and 
creates a new scientific field. And in the field of mythology, this image of 
him was well established during his lifetime. Thomas Keightley's The 
Mythology of Ancient Greece and Rome, published in 1831, and William 
Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, which 
appeared between 1844 and 1849, both took on his new methods. The 
historian of Classics F. M. Turner refers to Keightley and Smith as 
'serious British commentators on Classical myths',155 while the main­
stream of students of mythology continue to accept Miiller's self­
definition as 'scientific', and consider him a 'serious' and 'scrupulous' 
c. d fth· d' . l' 1'\6 loun er 0 elf ISCIP me .. 
In the past twenty years, however, knowledgeable Classicists have 
tended to be more sensitive to his more questionable aspects. Rudolf 
Pfeiffer, for instance. admitted that Muller's massive two volumes on 
The Dorians were 'more an impressive hymn on the excellence of 
. fh' , 157 M . l' . ki everything Doric than a narratlon 0 IStOry. OmIg lano, m see ng 
to stress the rational aspects of his discipline, emphasizes the import­
ance of Niebuhr, whose Romanticism he tries to deny, but omits Muller 
. . f th CI' . t 158 from hIS many portraIts 0 19 -century asslcls s. 
The most striking feature of Muller's work for us is that it was based 
entirely on traditional material that had always been available to


--- PAGE 174 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
scholars. None of the 19th-century extensions of knowledge was 
involved. Naturally he could not take into account the reading of 
cuneiform or Schliemann's archaeological discoveries - these took 
place after his death. However, unlike Heyne and Heeren, he was not 
particularly interested in the 18th-century explorations; and unlike 
Humboldt, Niebuhr and Bunsen he disregarded the sensational 
scholarly developments between 1815 and 1830. There is no indication 
that he paidany attention to Champollion's decipherment, and his 
hostility to India meant that despite his close contact with the Grimm 
brothers and other Indo- Europeanists, he did not apply the new 
Indo- European linguistics to his work. All this means that the destruc­
tion of the old model took place entirely for what historians of science 
call 'externalist' reasons. The Ancient Model fell not because of any 
new developments in the field but because it did not fit the prevailing 
world-view. To be more precise, it was incompatible with the 
paradigms of race and progress of the early 19th century. 
CHAPTER VII 
HELLENOMANIA, 2 
Transmission of the 
new scholarship to England 
and the rise of the 
Aryan Model, 1830-60 
T
HE FIRST HALF of this chapter is concerned with the trans­
mission of Miiller's work to England. This has to be seen 
in the context of the introduction of Altertumswissenschaji to 
England and the establishment of the discipline of Classics, in which 
contemplation of all aspects of Greek and Roman life was supposed to 
have a beneficial educational and moral effect on the boys who were to 
be the rulers of Britain and the Empire. 
Classics became the centre of the reformed public school system, and 
dominant in the universities. These reforms were led by Dr Arnold and 
other early Victorian reformers who saw in German education and 
scholarship a 'third way' that broke away from the stagnation of Tory 
and Whig England while avoiding French radicalism. However, as with 
Humboldt and his colleagues in Germany thirty years earlier, there is 
no doubt that the English reformers were much more afraid of revolu­
tion than of reaction. This did not, however, save them from attack by 
conservatives. 
Connop Thirlwall and George Grote, the two men who challenged 
Mitford's defence of the Ancient Model, belonged to slighdy different 
factions of this reforming elite. Both were very impressed by Miiller's 
work, but both shied away from his iconoclastic radicalism. Thirlwall


--- PAGE 175 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
refused to reject the Phoenician settlements, while Grote cut the 
Gordian knot and completely refused to speculate about the veracity of 
the Greek legends about their past. Despite the differences in their 
approaches, the net effect of their work was to discredit the traditions of 
colonization and to enhance the independent creativity of the Greeks, 
who were now looked upon as semi-divine. This, of course, was 
very welcome to public opinion, which was becoming increasingly 
Philhelleneand contemptuous of all non-European cultures. 
The second part of Chapter VII is concerned with the reconciliation 
of Indophilia and Indo-European studies with Philhellenism and 
Altertumswissenschaft. After Miiller's demolition of the Ancient Model, 
it was relatively easy to fill the vacuum with the model ofIndo- European 
conquest from the north. In this case, unlike the destruction of the 
Ancient Model, there was a good internalist explanation for the change: 
the need to explain the Indo-European basis of Greek. Nevertheless, 
there is no doubt that German and English scholars were particularly 
attracted to ideas of northern invasion, which fitted so well with the 
prevailing racism and with Niebuhr's scheme of ethnic history. There is 
also no doubt that the contemporary passion for India drew Europeans' 
attention to the Aryan invasions of the subcontinent from the north. It 
took very little imagination to transpose fro!D these invasions - which 
are attested in Indian tradition - to Greece, where there were no extant 
records of such a conquest. 
THE GERMAN MODEL 
AND EDUCATIONAL REFORM 
IN ENGLAND 
Just as Isokrates had viewed the Athenians and Greeks in the 4th 
century Be, so by the beginning of the 19th century AD Germans were 
convinced that they were the 'intellectual instructors of mankind'. 1 It 
was a self-assessment accepted by most 'progressive' Europeans and 
North Americans. German philosophy and education provided a 
middle way between bankrupt traditions and the French Revolution 
and atheism. As the contemporary literary historian Elinor Shaffer 
writes about one aspect of it: 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA,2 319 
The German criticism was learned and technical, unsuitable to sen:e 
the handbook of a working-class movement . .. moreover, It as .. . 
was susceptible of many interpretations, among the~.a re~sl~ms~ re-
form from within that left ecclesiastical and pohncal mstltutlons 
apparently intact, and real power where it was before. From the 
1830S in England knowledge of the m~st advanced. contine~tal 
scholarship was a stick to beat the AnglIcan academtc establish-
t The nature of this mode of thinking tells us much about men ... 
the double face of political Romanticism and even more about 
the nature of Victorian compromise. From one point of view it 
might be seen as a major intellectual monument to bourgeois 
h . 2 ypocnsy. 
In France this Germanic trend is best represented by the popular 
philosopher and politician Victor Cousin, who flourished under the 
grand bourgeois, compromise regime of Louis Phi~ippe. Cousin es~b­
lished French primary education on the Prussian model, and like 
Humboldt, whom he greatly admired, he reserved a special place in ~e 
whole educational system for the Ancients, and for the Greeks m 
particular. He was also an ardent believer in the categorical distinction 
between the primitive, 'spontaneous' philosophy of the East and the 
'reflective' philosophies of the pagan and Christian worlds.
3 
While some English reformers were ready for the Prussian Bildung 
almost as soon as it was articulated, the power of conservatism held back 
the 'Germanizing' of education for many decades. In fact, it could begin 
only in the second third of the century, after nonconformist and 
industrialist pressure had forced the establishment of new universities, 
and the need for reform of the public schools and Oxbridge became 
blatant. Even after the university reforms, however, Seminars did not 
take root, and professors at Oxbridge were prevented by the Colleges 
and liberal feelings among the reformers from establishing an autocracy 
of the German type.4 Furthermore, in England, the Bildung of the 
German system was taken much more seriously than its research. It is 
striking that Jowett, the leading Classicist in the second half of the 19th 
century, left a lasting impression on his students but was much les~ 
competent as a scholar than many of his unreformed predecessors.


--- PAGE 176 ---
320 BLACK ATHENA 
The production of research from the English universities was negligible 
compared to that of the formidable German professorate. 6 
Study of Latin as a language and reading of the Ancients had been 
central to the basic curricula of medieval universities. In England the 
relative importance of these aspects of education grew during the 18th 
century with the decline of the interest in religion and theology and the 
disdain for mathematics shown by the increasingly aristocratic students. 
Moreover, as we have seen, after 1780 more attention began to be paid 
to Greek. Knowledge of Latin had always marked the upper classes; 
now Greek became the inner or first circle. Nevertheless, the first use of 
Classics - the study of all aspects of Antiquity as moral and intellectual 
training for the elite - emerged only in the first half of the 19th century, 
directly or indirectly following the German pattern. 
The most prominent figure in its promotion was Thomas Arnold, 
best known as the promotor of that improbable hybrid, the 'Christian­
Gentleman'. As headmaster of Rugby and with a keen interest in 
university reform, he became immensely influential in the last ten years 
or so of his life, between 1832 and 1844. Like Humboldt and Cousin, 
Arnold belonged to what one might call the pugnacious middle, hating 
both revolution and reaction. 7 Central to all his ideas of reform for the 
purpose of preserving the best of tradition was his love of Germany: he 
had met Bunsen in Rome in 1827 and the two became fast friends; and, 
though somewhat concerned about Niebuhr's historical scepticism, he 
became a fervent admirer and wrote a popular digest of his Roman 
History.8 Arnold also shared Niebuhr's enthusiasm for race as the 
primary principle of historical explanation, and his inaugural lecture as 
Regius Professor of Modem History at Oxford in 1841 was devoted to 
this theme. 9 Dr Arnold and his son Matthew are especially significant 
because of their 'trendiness'; they articulated and reinforced feelings 
already present in fashionable opinion. IO 
A much more original group of scholars emerged from Cambridge. 
Indeed, the possibility of reform ,in this slightly more flexible Whig 
university is shown by the fact that the Classical Tripos of the modem, 
'all-round' type was established there in 1822; and it was through 
Cambridge that the new German scholarship and AltertumswissenschaJt 
were introduced into England. The key figures in their transmission 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA,2 321 
were two close friends at school and university,Julius Hare and Connop 
Thirlwall. Hare had spent time as a child in Germany, where he learnt 
German and developed a lifelong enthusiasm for its culture, which he 
passed on to Connop Thirlwall. Together with the mathematician 
William Whewell, they were active in the first attempt to found the 
Cambridge Union and after the student debating society was closed 
down in 1817 as subversive, Whewell and Thirlwall devoted them­
selves to learning German from Hare. By the time he went down the 
following year, Thirlwall had not only learnt German but had read 
Niebuhr's History. He soon went to Rome, where he attached himself to 
the German community and established a friendship with Bunsen that 
'had a most important influence on his life' .11 
On his return to England Thirlwall translated St Luke, a difficult 
theological treatise by Schleiermacher, a Romantic and 'Aryanist' 
theologian who was a favourite of Humboldt and Bunsen. I2 This 
caused a mild scandal among conservative clerics opposed to all 
German theology, but it did not prevent Thirlwall's returning to his 
college, Trinity, and taking the required holy orders. In 1827 he and 
Hare began the translation of Niebuhr's History; one volume appeared 
in 1828, a second three years later, but their extraordinary patience and 
dedication were exhausted and the third was left unfinished. 
By 1830, Thirlwall and Hare had come into contact with a small 
exclusive and secret student society, the Apostles, which had been 
founded as a Christian social club ten years earlier. They helped to 
transform it and give it the distinctive metaphysical liberal character 
that-with some deviations-has lasted ever since. The two encouraged 
the younger 'brethren' to revere the Romantic poets and German 
scholarship.13 According to a member elected in 1832, 'Coleridge and 
Wordsworth were our principal divinities and Hare and Thirlwall were 
regarded as their prophets'; another source claimed that 'Niebuhr was 
for them a god who for a lengthy time formed their sentiments.' 14 The 
Romantic ethos of the group was intensified in 1833 by the death of 
Hallam, a brilliant young man loved by Thirlwall and many of the 
brethren; his cult, symbolizing their own lost youth and beauty, was 
immortalized in Tennyson's In Memoriam and remained central to 'the 
Society' for the next forty years.


--- PAGE 177 ---
322 BLACK ATHENA 
There is no doubt that Thirlwall saw himself as the Sokrates of the 
group, consciously training the best minds of the younger generation to 
feel Romantically and think sceptically. Thus from the Apostles in 
particular, and the Zeitgeist in general, Romantic-scepticism became 
the ethos of what the contemporary social historian Noel Annan has 
called the 'intellectual aristocracy' or the 'new intelligentsia'. 15 Indeed, 
Thirlwall's Sokratic reputation was increased by his principled stand 
for the admission of dissenters to Cambridge degrees. Let down by 
Hal'e'\and betrayed by Whewell, he was forced to resign his fellow­
ship. His hemlock, however, was not so bitter since he had Whig 
friends in high places: he immediately received a rich living in 
the East Riding which gave him the leisure to . write his History of 
Greece. 
In 1840 Thirlwall was appointed Bishop of St Davids, the most 
ancient see in Wales. This must be seen as one of a series of pro­
German moves that included th°e appointment of Dr Arnold to the 
Regius Professorship and Bunsen's special mission from the Prussian 
government to England to further his great religious scheme - which 
had strong Teutonic racial overtones - to unite the Lutheran and 
Anglican Churches. The scheme took tangible form in the foundation 
of the joint Evangelical bishopric ~Jerusalem, and it was this move that 
finally drove the future Cardinal Newman to Catholicism. His conver­
sion provides a good illustration of the division within the Romantic 
movement between the 'progressive' lovers of Greece and Germany, 
and the 'reactionary' passion for Christian ritual and the Middle Ages 
that could lead the unwary to Rome. 
As a bishop, Thirlwall championed the liberalism of the 'new 
intelligentsia' and its ecclesiastical wing, the 'Broad Church'. In this he 
was often alone, and his first action astounded his peers. He was the 
only bishop to vote in favour of civil rights for Jews. His motives for 
making this brave stand were mixed. They combined genuine liberal­
ism with the belief that assimilation would be the fastest road to 
conversion. (Conversion of the Jews was in fact a major purpose of the 
Evangelical bishopric atJerusalem.)16 For the rest of his life, Thirlwall 
continued to combine this principled liberalism with unpleasantness to 
all around him, apart from children and pets. 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA, 2 32 3 
Through all his courageous reformism - culminating in an extraordi­
narily eloquent speech in which he routed the champions of anti­
disestablishmentarianism - it must be emphasized that Thirlwall 
remained a Romantic and a counter-revolutionary. His Primitiae, 
essays written at the age of eleven, were fulsomely praised by the 
Anti-Jacobin Review and were dedicated to Bishop Percy, whose Reliques 
of Ancient British Poetry we saw as having been central to the Romantic 
interest in ballads in both Britain and Germany. Then, during the 
1820S, he and Hare revered Wordsworth and Coleridge in the poets' 
extreme reactionary phases. Thirlwall was also terrified of the revolu­
tion he thought he detected in the Daughters of Rebecca - Welshmen 
who dressed up as women to burn hated tollbooths - and during the 
American Civil War, much as he deplored slavery, he found still more 
alarming the prospect of an 'ascendancy of a military democracy in 
which the basest bear rule'.17 Furthermore, he had what his friend 
Thomas Carlyle described as 'almost frantic apprehensions of the 
French menace' .18 All in all, Thirlwall's political views seem to have 
been close to those of Bunsen, Thomas Arnold and the young Niebuhr. 
Thirlwall's eight-volume History of Greece, which began to appear in 
1835, was the first major work in English to incorporate the results of 
the new German scholarship. It was also the first to replace Mitford's 
massive History, published between 1784 and 1804. However, the 
attack on the conservative Mitford, who was very sceptical of Greek 
achievements, had begun ten years earlier during the Greek War of 
Independence in reviews appearing in 1824 and 1826. The first, by 
Thomas Babington Macaulay, was a ferocious critique on the extremely 
reactionary anti-Athenian and pro-Spartan views he attributed to 
Mitford. Above all, however, Macaulay objected to Mitford's having 
treated the Greeks as just another people: like Shelley, or Schiller and 
Humboldt in Germany, Macaulay was convinced that the Greeks were 
above such forms of analysis. As he put it, when thinking about Greece, 
he loved to 'forget the accuracy of a judge in the veneration of a 
worshipper'. 19 0 
The second attack, in 1826, came from George Grote, a young 
radical banker. Grote had read Mitford more carefully than Macaulay 
and conceded that Mitford was not pro-Spartan and -like Aristotle-


--- PAGE 178 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
had actually favoured mixed constitutions. What Grote objected to was 
what he saw as Mitford's pro-English bias and his failure to recognize 
the special nature of Greece which he, Grote, derived from its free in­
stitutions: 'It is to democracy alone (and to that sort of open aristocracy 
which is, practically, very similar to it) that we owe that unparalleled 
brilliance and diversity of individual talent which constitutes the charm 
and glory of Grecian history.' He went on to make the circular argument 
that Greece should be given special treatment because its special 
posit\on was already institutionalized. He stressed 'the extraordinary 
interest which the Classical tum of English education bestows on all 
Grecian transactions ... ,20 Thus both critics agreed that Ancient 
Greece should be placed beyond the normal bounds of scholar­
ship. Macaulay went on to other things, but Grote pursued his 
mission, and twenty years later produced his own massive history of 
Greece. 
Before that, however, Thirlwall's had appeared. The usual compari­
son made is that while Mitford's conservative scorn for Greek democ­
racy made his work a 'five-volume tract' for the Tory Party to which 
Grote's History was a Radical challenge, Thirlwall's is supposed to have 
held the balance.21 On the issue that concerns us, however, the contrast 
is between Thirlwall's and Grote's attack on the Ancient Model and ( , 
Mitford's defence of it. As we saw in Chapter III, earlier scholars, 
accepting the Model without question, had never needed to justify it. By 
the 1780s, however, Mitford had felt obliged to articulate a defence of 
the orthodox view that Greece had been colonized by Egyptians and 
Phoenicians. There was every reason to believe the Greek reports of 
colonization, he had argued, because they were so detailed and wide­
spread, and because the Greeks would have been unlikely to invent 
stories that were against their own interest. 22 
Against this plausible case Thirlwall summarized Miiller's argu­
ments, though without mentioning him by name. He also added a 
fascinating note on Miiller's motivation: 
In a comparatively late period - that which followed the rise of 
historical literature among the Greeks - we find a belief generally 
prevalent, both in the people and among the learned, that in ages 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA, 2 32 5 
of very remote antiquity, before the name and dominion of the Pelas­
gians hacl given way to that of the Hellenic race, foreigners had been 
led by various causes to the shores of Greece and there had planted 
colonies, founded dynasties, built cities, and introduced useful arts 
and social institutions, before unknown to the ruder natives. The 
same belief has been almost universally adopted by the learned of 
modern times ... 1t required no litde boldness to venture even to 
throw out a doubt as to the truth of an opinion sanctioned by such 
authority and by prescription of such a long and undisputed posses­
sion of the public mind, and perhaps it might never have been ques­
tioned, if the inferences drawn from it had not prfJVoked a jealous enquiry 
into the grounds on which it rests. (my emphasis) 23 
Thirlwall did not specify what these inferences were but, given Miiller's 
work, it is hard to see any alternatives to Romantic and racial ones. 
This statement by someone in close contact with the German scholars 
is important, because it suggests that the criticism was applied 
not because there were formal inconsistencies - as Miiller himself 
claimed in the case of Danaos - but because the legends' content was 
objectionable. Thirlwall continued: 
When, however, this spirit once awakened, it was perceived that the 
current stories of these ancient settlements afforded great room for 
reasonable distrust, not merely in the marvellous features they ex­
hibit but in the still more suspicious fact that with the lapse of time their 
number seems to increase and their details [seem] to be more accur­
ately known and that the further we go back the less we hear of them, till, 
on consulting the Homeric poems, we lose all trace of their existence. z.4 
Like Miiller before him, Thirlwall was unable to find any explicit 
challenge to the Ancient Model among the early Greek writers and was 
forced to make do with the 'argument from silence'. Thus he claimed to 
detect a 'tacit dissent' from Greek authors, and believed that the 
legends were 'refuted by the silence of the older Greek poems and 
historians' .zs 
In true Apostolic spirit, Thirlwall could usually see two or more sides 
to any question, and on this one he seems to have been torn between


--- PAGE 179 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Miiller's radical yet satisfying conclusions, and the orthodoxy which 
Niebuhr had defended. Thus he wrote: 'it seems possible and even 
necessary to take a middle course between the old and the new 
opinions.,26 His compromise was the standard one - Egyptians no! 
Phoenicians maybe? - and he denied the truth of the legends surround­
ing the Egyptian Kekrops and Danaos on racial grounds: 'settlers of 
purely Egyptian blood, crossing the Aegean and founding maritime 
cities, appears inconsistent with everything we know about national 
characters.,27 Note the 'purely' and the 'maritime'! Thirlwall chose his 
wopis very carefully, to avoid contradiction by the contemporary actions 
of Mohamed Ali and Ibrahim, but this systematic racism shows how 
easily ideology can transcend mere facts. 28 
On the other hand, Thirlwall did accept the legends concerning 
Kadmos and the Phoenicians, not only in the islands but in Boiotia too. 
Another reason for distinguishing him from the late-19th- and 20th­
century racists and anti-Semites is that, although a true Romantic who 
talked in terms of 'blood' and 'race', he was insisting in the 1830S that 
It is in itself of very little importance whether a handful of Egyptians 
or Phoenicians were or were not mingled with the population of 
Greece. All that renders this enquiry interesting is the effect which 
the arrival of these foreigners is supposed to have produced on the 
state of society in their new country. 29 
I 
Such a lack of concern with purity was much less acceptable eighty 
years later. 
GEORGE GROTE 
Thirlwall's History was soon eclipsed by that of George Grote, which 
appeared in 1846. The two men had been near-contemporaries at 
school at Charterhouse, and Grote claimed that he would never have 
begun his project if he had known about Thirlwall's. Thirlwall, for his 
part, accepted his supersession with striking cordiality.30 Momigliano 
has pointed out the similarities between Thirlwall's circle and that 
of Grote's banking Radicals: 'Both societies disliked Mitford, read 
German, and were attacked by the Quarterly Review. Both aimed at 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA,2 32 7 
liberalization of English political and intellectual habits and wanted 
them to be founded on firm philosophical principles. ,31 
Yet Momigliano went on to claim a fundamental difference: while 
Thirlwall and Hare wanted to introduce a Romantic philosophy of 
history and replace the empirical studies carried on at Oxbridge, Grote 
was himself an empiricist and a positivist. 32 In fact the distinction 
between the two should not be taken too far. Many Utilitarians shared 
the Romantic passion for Greece, which by the 1 830S and 40S was held 
by women and men of all shades of opinion, except for extreme 
reactionaries. (Momigliano cites John Stuart Mill on Greece, but the 
Hellenic passion of Mill's Utilitarian father - who had his son taught 
Greek at three! - is still more telling.)33 Grote's admiration for the 
Greek polis, for instance, seems in many ways similar to that of 
Rousseau. Indeed, as Momigliano points out, Grote's 'sympathy for 
small states ... led him later to make a close study of the politics of 
Switzerland.,34 On the other hand, as a Radical and a Utilitarian, Grote 
was naturally in sympathy with the scientific spirit which, in the 1830s, 
was being articulated in France in the positivism of Comte. Grote was 
thus able to demand 'proof' from ancient history with more consistency 
than either Niebuhr or Miiller, and he deplored what he saw as the 
'German licence to conjecture,.35 
Momigliano maintains that Grote, by making a sharp distinction 
between legendary and historical Greece, 'broke with K. O. Miiller and 
his English admirers,.36 However, Miiller began his Prolegomena with 
the state~ent that there was 'a tolerably distinct boundary' between the 
two.37 Also, both Miiller and Grote followed Wolf in believing that 
writing had not existed in Greece before the 8th century and that there 
had been no priestly instruction, as there had been in the East. Thus the 
links with earlier times were extremely tenuous. 38 Furthermore, both 
men agreed that while myth could contain historical elements, it was not 
useful to think of a nucleus of pure reality upon which mythical 
elements had been imposed; rather, the two elements should be seen as 
having been integrated from the beginning.39 Here too, then, the 
distinction between Grote and the Romantic historians does not seem 
to be as great as Professor Momigliano supposes. There was, however, 
one important difference between Grote and the German Romantics,


--- PAGE 180 ---
328 BLACK ATHENA 
who were concerned with Greece as the infancy of Europe: as a Radical 
rather than a conservative he did not regret the passing of the mytho­
poeic age. LikeJames Harris the grammarian a century earlier, Grote's 
passion was for the late and sudden flowering of Athenian democracy 
and, as we have seen, his main concern was to refute Mitford's Tory 
scepticism about Greek institutions. 4O 
Momigliano also argues that Grote was stricdy neutral on the 
question of the historicity of Greek myths: it was simply that he 
demanded 'collateral evidence' before accepting them. 41 Apart from 
the inappropriateness of this requirement of 'proof' , Grote's neutrality 
on this issue is in serious doubt, because the tone of his discussion of 
hist9ricity is sceptical, if not scoffing. Thus he· approvingly cited the 
late-18th-century historian and mythographer Jacob Bryant, who had 
argued that it was impossible to take seriously the accounts of people 
who believed in centaurs, satyrs, nymphs and horses that could speak.42 
Byrant's argument would seem plausible. It should, however, be 
remembered that every period has general beliefs which in later times 
are considered absurd. I maintain that in this case, what we now believe 
to be the mistaken beliefs in centaurs and other mythical creatures are 
less misleading - on the issues with which we are concerned - than the 
19th-century myths on race, unchanging national characteristics, the 
productiveness of purity and the deleterious effects of racial mixture -
and, above all, the semi-divine status of the Greeks, which made them 
transcend the laws of history and language. Thus, while we should be 
wary of the ancient reports, we should have a still greater suspicion of 
Igth- and earlY-2oth-century interpretations of them. 
Momigliano claims that because of his 'neutrality', Grote's views on 
mythology have in no way been invalidated by later archaeological 
discoveries that would seem to confirm legendary accounts. 43 This 
excuse does not apply if, as I maintain, his views were sceptical. 
Moreover, such scepticism seems more justifiable in Grote than in his 
20th-century successors: having been bitten over Troy, Mycenae and 
Knossos and so on, one would expect them to give the benefit of the 
doubt at least to those traditions that were uncontested in Antiquity. It 
would have seemed prudent, for instance, to have retained as working 
hypotheses the idea that Boiotia had a special relationship with 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA, 2 32 9 
Phoenicia, or that the lengendary Sesostris and Memnon - the Egyptian 
pharaohs called Senwosret and Ammenemes - had made widespread 
expeditions around the East Mediterranean in the 20th century BC 
rather than denying them as absurd, only to be humiliated when 
archaeological or inscriptional evidence is found to confirm both 
traditions. 44 
Nevertheless, Grote's contempt for tradition's failure to satisfy the 
requirements of 'proof' has been immensely influential. His insistence 
_ added to that of Muller - that Greece must be assumed to have been 
isolated from the Middle East until proven otherwise has been useful as 
a tool to expel heretics from the Aryan Model out of the academic 
fold.45 Similarly, by starting Greek history with the first Olympiad in 
776 BC, Grote powerfully reinforced the impression that Classical 
Greece was an island in both space and time. Greek civilization was 
seen to have come from nothing, springing up almost fully armed in a 
way that was rather more than human. 
Grote's history immediately became standard for scholars, not only 
in England but in Germany and elsewhere on the continent. 46 Exhilar­
ating as Grote's procedure on myth might have been, however, it did not 
satisfy other historians, who still felt obliged to present some opinion on 
early Greek history. In general they seem to have followed Thirlwall's 
compromise position: that while Greek legends maintained that there 
had been both Egyptian and Phoenician invasions, the 'scientific' 
evidence oflinguistics now suggested that the Greek language was pure 
and autochthonous. Sir William Smith's History of Greece, the standard 
English textbook on the subject from its first publication in 1854 until 
the I 880s, demonstrated the difficulties of this position: 
The civilization of the Greeks and the development of their language 
bear all the marks of home growth, and were probably litde affected 
by foreign influence. The traditions, however, of the Greeks would 
point to a contrary conclusion. It was a general belief among them 
that Pelasgians were reclaimed from barbarism by Oriental strangers, 
who setded in the country and introduced among the rude inhabitants 
the first elements of civilization. Many of these traditions, how­
ever, are not ancient legends but owe their origin to a later age.
47


--- PAGE 181 ---
330 BLACK ATHENA 
Given the ideological roots of the notion of the 'purity' of the Greek 
language, discussed in Chapter VI, it is fascinating to note that lan­
guage, several decades later, was being used as the 'scientific' basis for 
the denial of the Ancient Model. Like Thirlwall, Smith had made the 
compromise of accepting the Kadmeian Phoenician settlement of 
Thebes while rejecting any stories of Egyptian colonization. 
While Romantics had toyed since the 18th century with the idea of a 
northern origin for the Greeks, scholarly attacks on the Ancient Model, 
from Samuel Musgrave to Karl Otfried Muller and Connop Thirlwall, 
had insisted on the autochthony of the Greeks and on the affinities 
between Hellenes and Pelasgians. By the 1850s, the Indo-European 
language family and the Aryan race had become established 'facts'. 
With a coherent racial theory, and the concept of an original Aryan 
lromeland somewhere in the mountains of Central Asia, the picture of 
Greek origins was transformed. 
ARYANS AND HELLENES 
Niebuhr, Miiller and the Indo-Europeanists had, between them, pro­
vided all the elements necessary for the construction of the Aryan 
Model. Niebuhr had made it legitimate to reject ancient sources, and 
had introduced the French and Indian models of northern conquest 
into Antiquity. Miiller had removed the Ancient Model from Greece. 
More powerful than either of these, however, had been the work of 
linguists in relating Greek to Sanskrit, and making it clear that Greek 
was an Indo-European language. Some historical explanation of this 
relationship was necessary, and the model of northern conquests from 
Central Asia fitted well. Thus a clear distinction has to be made 
between the fall of the Ancient Model, which can be explained only in 
externalist terms - that is, through social and political pressures - and 
the rise of the Aryan one, which had a considerable internalist compo­
nent - that is to say, developments within scholarship itself played an 
important role in the evolution of the new model. 
I also want to emphasize that the Ancient and Aryan Models are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive. In fact, for much of the 19th century the 
two coexisted in what I call the Broad Aryan Model. This held that the 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA,2 33 1 
early Greeks, who emerged as the result of Indo-European conquest 
of Pre-Hellenes, had been conquered again by Anatolians and 
Phoenicians, and the latter left significant cultural traces. I myself 
argue, in my Revised Ancient Model, that there may well have been 
early invasions or infiltrations by Indo-European speakers into the 
Aegean basin before the Egyptian and West Semitic colonizations.48 
On the whole, however, the supporters of the Aryan Model have been 
concerned with racial hierarchy and racial purity, and the idea of 
Egyptian and Phoenician colonization always seems to have been 
distasteful to them. 
There was one great drawback to the new Aryan Model: the lack of 
ancient attestation. Thucydides had mentioned tribal movements in 
which the Hellenes from northern Greece had moved south and 
absorbed other peoples. His dating of this process is obscure, but he 
emphasized that it had not been completed at the time of the Trojan 
War; this left the origins of the Danaans, Argives, Achaians and many 
other Greeks unexplained. 49 Similar problems oflateness mar the other 
possible tradition of northern conquest - the Return of the Heraklids or 
the Dorian Invasion - in which tribes from the north-west of Greece 
swept south and captured most of the Peloponnese and much of the 
South Aegean. 
These events were consistently reported to have happened after the 
Trojan War, which took place around 1200 Be. Thus - if one accepted 
them as constituting the 'Aryan Invasion' - Agamemnon, Menelaos and 
most of the Homeric heroes could not have been Greeks. This was a 
price few Hellenists were willing to pay, even before the decipherment 
of Linear B proved that Greek was being spoken in Greece long before 
the Trojan War.so Hence the only possibility has been to argue that the 
Dorian Invasion was only the last in a series of invasions - but this still 
leaves the initial conquest unreported. 
Ernst Curtius, Miiller's devoted junior colleague, admitted that there 
was no ancient authority for the Aryan conquest and, as he put it, 'the 
notion of autochthony is developed among them [the Greeks] in the 
greatest variety of traditions.,s1 However, Philologie was now a 'scien­
tific' discipline and was above such things; lack of ancient authority did 
not bother the new historians. As Theodor Mommsen, the great


--- PAGE 182 ---
( 
i 
,I 
332 BLACK ATHENA 
historian of Rome of the mid - and late 19th century, is reported to have 
written: 'History must first make a clean sweep of all these fables which, 
though purporting to be history, are little more than improvisations. ,52 
Given the rise of Indo- European studies, the saliency of the Indian 
Model of Aryan conquest, and Miiller's destruction of the Ancient 
Model, the application of an Aryan Model for Greece was so obvious 
that it appears to have occurred generally in the 1840S and 50S. It is, 
therefore, difficult to know to whom to credit it. The most likely 
candidates, however, are the Curtius brothers, and breaking the rule of 
primogeniture we will consider Georg the younger first. 
Georg Curtius was born in Liibeck in 1820, studied at Bonn and 
Berlin and was a professor at Prague . (already a great centre of 
linguistics), Kiel and Leipzig. His many books were applications of the 
new PF~iples of Indo- European linguistics to Greek. He worked on 
comparatIve grammar and on the Indo-European component in Greek, 
in both of which he set out the elegant and regular sound shifts 
according to which much of Greek can be derived from the hypothetical 
Proto-Indo-European. s3 During the 18sos Georg Curtius established 
a firm basis beyond which it has been hard to go. The earlY-20th­
century lexicographer H. Stuart Jones described the situation in the 
1920S in his preface to the 9th edition of the standard Greek-English 
dictionary of Liddell and Scott: 
After careful consideration, it was decided that etymological infor­
mation should be reduced to a minimum. A glance at Boisacq's 
Dictionaire etymologique de la langue grecque will show that the specu­
lations of etymologists are rarely free from conjecture; and the 
progress of comparative philology since the days of G. Curtius 
(whose Griechische Etymologie was the main source drawn upon by 
Liddell and Scott) has brought about the clearance of much rubbish , 
but little solid construction. 54 
This is as true today as when he wrote it in 1925. Much of the 
'rubbish' was, of course, Semitic, which was impossible to tolerate in 
the I 92os. 55 
. If Georg Curtius linked Greece to the Indo-Europeans linguistically, 
his older brother Ernst did so historically. Ernst Curtius was born in 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA, 2 333 
1814. He studied at Bonn and at Gottingen, where he became attached 
to Miiller. He spent the years from 1836 to 1840 in Greece and was 
with Miiller when he died. Curtius wrote a detailed historical descrip­
tion of the Peloponnese and gained a post at Berlin; he was next a 
professor at Gottingen from 1856 to 1868; he then took up a chair at 
Berlin and spent the last twenty-eight years of his life there. 56 
Ernst Curtius shared Miiller's passion for the landscape of Greece 
and for its monuments, archaeology and art. His was thus the first major 
history of Greece to be written by someone who had actually been to the 
country. Moreover, Curtius always maintained his mentor's romantic 
view of Greece. As Wilamowitz-Moellendorf points out, he 'never 
outgrew his faith in that ideal conception, but proclaimed it to his dying 
day.,s7 Unlike Miiller, however, Curtius was swept up in the new 
enthusiasm for Indo- Europeans and Aryans, and his Romanticism was 
extended to them. 
Such a vision permeates his History of Greece, the first volume of 
which was published in 1857. Curtius accepted the linguists' idea of an 
Indo- European Urheimat somewhere in the mountains of Central Asia; 
it was from there that, just as the Aryans had swept south to conquer 
India, the Hellenes had descended into Greece. Unlike the Ancients 
and his predecessors, however, Curtius emphasized the distinction 
between Pelasgians and Hellenes: 'The Pelasgian times lie in the 
background - a vast period of monotonony: impulse and motion are first 
communicated by Hellen and his sons; and with their arrival history 
commences. ,58 
This view would seem to parallel the distinction between Aryan and 
non-Aryan. In fact, however, Curtius saw the Pelasgians as a first wave 
of inferior Aryans who came through Anatolia and over the Hellespont 
to Greece, leaving traces in Phrygia. The later Hellenic invasions were 
smaller, but 'though less in number they were, by their superior mental 
powers, rendered capable of collecting scattered elements ... advanc­
ing it to a higher development. ,59 The analogies between the 
pre-Dorian natives of Sparta and Messenia and the 'off-Aryan' Irish 
have been mentioned on p. 294.60 Curtius' historical scheme of 
Aryan Hellenes conquering semi-Aryan Pelasgians has the advan­
tage of combining two ideologically desirable features - northern


--- PAGE 183 ---
334 BLACK ATHENA 
conquest by a master race, and the preservation of essential racial 
purity. 
The new invaders were thoroughly northern. One of their groups 
'took the land way through the Hellespont's ancient portal of the 
nations: they passed through Thrace into the Alpine land of Northern 
Greece, and there, in mountain cantons, they developed their peculiar 
life in social communities ... under the name ofDorians. ,61 The reason 
for this picturesque description of isolated mountain life in 'cantons' _ 
making them almost Swiss - seems to have come from the long­
standing Romantic need to derive a people's character from the 
landscape of its homeland. It was an embarrassment for proponents of 
such a view to find that the 'soft' Ionian Athenians were formed in 
rugged Attica, while the Spartans lived in the lush valley of the Eurotas. 
Cu9fus was much more brief on Ionian origins, noting simply that 
the Ionians had come straight from Phrygia to the east coast of the 
Aegean.62 Greek tradition stated clearly that Anatolian Ionia was settled 
by Ionians from Greece only in the I I th century, but Niebuhr had 
defied the Ancients on this point. In this way Curtius had the authority 
of the new scholarship behind him when he denied the tradition and 
claimed that Greeks had lived there much earlier. In conclusion to this 
section he argued that their separate migrations had differentiated the 
Dorians from the Ionians: hence 'the first foundations had been laid of 
the dualism which pervades the whole history of this people.' They 
were, however, racially united: 'an inner sense of kinsmanship attracted 
them to one another. ,63 
Above everything else, Curtius' mystic feelings about the Aryan 
Hellenes were concerned with language: 
The people which knew in so peculiar a manner how to develop the 
common treasure of the Indo-Germanic language was ... the 
Hellenes. Their first historic deed is the development of this 
language, and this deed is an artistic one. For above all its sister­
tongues the Greek must be regarded as a work of art . . . if the 
grammar of their language were the only thing remaining to us of the 
Hellenes, it would serve as a full and valid testimony to the extraor­
dinary natural gifts of this people ... The whole language resembles 
[CH. VII] HELLENOMANIA,2 335 
the body of a trained athlete, in which every muscle, every sinew, is 
developed into full play, where there is no trace of tumidity or of inert 
material, and all is power and life.64 
This 'pure' language had to be fully formed in northern mountains 
before the descent into Greece. Curtius saw this early completion as 
especially necessary, for he believed that languages were direcdy 
related to landscapes: 'One class of sounds is wont to predominate on 
the hills, another in the valleys, and again another on the plains. ,65 It was 
unthinkable that such an object of beauty and purity as the Greek 
language could have developed on the Mediterranean; still less could it 
be the result of Hellenes mixing with Egyptians and Semites. 
Curtius did admit that in early times, Phoenicians had traded in 
Greece and had introduced certain new inventions. He maintained, 
however, that they had soon been driven out by the more dynamic 
Ionians. And he was convinced that the legends of Egyptian and 
Phoenician settlement had been demonstrated by 'racial science' to be 
absurd: 
It is inconceivable that Canaanites proper, who everywhere shyly 
retreated at the advance of the Hellenes, especially when they came 
into contact with them, when far from their own homes; and who as a 
nation were despised by the Hellenes to such a degree as to make the 
latter regard intermarriage with them in localities of mixed popu­
lation, such as Salamis or Cyprus, as disgraceful; it is inconceivable, 
we repeat, that such Phoenicians ever founded principalities among 
a Hellenic population.66 
The anti-Semitic implications of this passage, and the very different 
attitudes towards the Phoenicians held in Britain at the time, will be 
discussed in the next chapter. For his part, Curtius explained away the 
references to the Phoenicians in a manner similar to and equally as 
cumbersome as Bunsen's. According to Curtius,· the Greek tra­
ditions of Phoenician settlement had arisen either from a natural 
confusion between Phoenicians and Ionians who had been abroad and 
learnt some foreign ways, or from the 'facts' that Caria had been called 
Phoinike and the Carians seem to have been a type of Eastern Greek. 67


--- PAGE 184 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
The only exception he allowed was Crete, where he admitted the actual 
Phoenicians might have settled in larger numbers, although they never 
displaced the native Pelasgians there.68 In the 1850s, with the island 
still under Turkish rule, this did not seem improbable; it was only after 
Evans' discovery of 'Minoan' civilization on the island in 1900 that 
Crete became a territory too valuable to be conceded to the 
Phoenicians. 
I should like to conclude this chapter with a vignette. The fonnidable 
and bigoted William Ridgeway has been mentioned above, in connec­
tion with the image of Spartans as Ulstennen. He was the dominant 
figure in early Greek history at Cambridge at the beginning of the 20th 
century.69 In his Early Age of Greece, published in 1901, he gave his 
intellectual pedigree when he referred to: 'four historians whose 
scepticism or sober-mindedness no one has yet called into question _ 
Niebuhr, Thirlwall, Grote and E. Curtius,.70 No one can doubt their 
scepticism towards theories they did not like. On the other hand there is 
also no doubt that all were racist and that all were Romantics with a 
passio~e love for their images of Greece. It must now be clear that I 
should like to call their sober-mindedness, balance and objectivity into 
question. 
CHAPTER VIII 
THE RISE AND FALL 
OF THE PHOENICIANS, 
1830 - 85 
W
E NOW COME to an intenned.iate stage in the establishm~nt of 
the Aryan Model: Egyptian involvement in the fonnanon of 
Greece had been dismisse<\, while that of the Phoenicians 
was still generally admitted. I argue in this and the following chapters 
that the essential force behind the rejection of the tradition of massive 
Phoenician influence on early Greece was the rise of racial- as opposed 
to religious - anti-Semitism. This was because the Phoenicians were 
correcdy perceived to have been culturally very close to the Jews. 
In the intennediate period with which we are concerned, however, 
the situation was complicated by another parallel seen between past and 
present - that between the English and the Phoenicians, the proud 
manufacturing and merchant princes of the past. This identification 
was accepted both by the English and by their enemies - the French 
at the beginning of the 19th century and the Gennans at its end. 
Thus there were distinct differences in the historical treatment of the 
Phoenicians on the opposite sides of the Channel: the English tended to 
admire them, while the continentals were more or less violendy hostile. 
French interest in the Phoenicians increased with their colonial and 
military involvement in both Lebanon (the old Phoenicia) and North 
Africa (the new one). French hostility to the Phoenicians came to a


--- PAGE 185 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
climax in Flaubert's enormously popular historical novel Salammbo, 
which vividly portrayed the luxury and cruelty of Carthage in the 3rd 
centuryBc. 
Salammbo also spectacularly raised the issue of the horrible ritual.of 
Moloch and the sacrifice of the first-born that is mentioned so often in 
the Bible. Flaubert's spectacular reminder of the association of the 
Carthaginians and the Phoenicians with this ultimate abomination 
made it difficult even for British and Jewish scholars to champion them. 
The last three sections of the chapter are concerned firstly with 
Gobineau's views of Greece as a largely Semitized and hence 
corrupt culture; and secondly with Schliemann's discovery of Bronze 
Age 'Mycenaean' civilization and the discussions about the racial and 
linguistic nature of its rulers and inhabitants. I am particularly 
concerned, here, with the widespread belief that the whole culture was 
heavily 'Semitized'. 
The third and final topic is the influence on historiography of the 
East Mediterranean of the decipherment of cuneiform and the dis­
covery first of the Semitic-speaking Assyrians and Babylonians, and 
then 6f'the non-Semitic Sumerians. By attributing all aspects of 
Mesopotamian civilization to the Sumerians, the anti-Semites who by 
the I 890S dominated much of the writing of ancient history were able to 
maintain their general tenet that Semites were essentially uncreative. 
PHOENICIANS AND 
ANTI -SEMITISM 
There has always been considerable overlap between religious hatred 
of the Jews and ethnic hostility to them. Nevertheless, it is equally true 
that there was a shift in emphasis during the 19th century from the 
traditional Christian JudenhafJ (hatred of the Jews) to a modern 'racial' 
anti-Semitism. The transition was a complicated process, however, 
and it took place at various speeds in aifferent places. In Germany, for 
instance, the gap between the two hatreds was minute, and existed only 
in Enlightened and Masonic circles before the French Revolution. 
JudenhafJ revived, and the seeds of anti-Semitism grew rapidly, in the 
early 19th century with the return to Christianity and the terror of the 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 339 
revolutionary consequences of the Enlightenment; the latter was closely 
related, in the minds of reactionaries, to Jewish rationalism. 
Changes taking place among the most cultivated of the elite r~present 
the tip of the iceberg for the German ruling classes as a whole. Thus 
Wilhelm von Humboldt and his wife Caroline moved in Jewish circles 
before the Revolution, but by the end of her life Caroline's vehemence 
against Jews gained her recognition by the Nazis as a pioneer anti­
Semite. Humboldt himself still advocated giving the Jews civil rights, 
but he wrote in 1815: 'I like the Jews en masse; en detail, 1 very carefully 
avoid them.'! There is also no doubt, however, that the situation 
became far more acute in the 1870S and 80S, and many distinguished 
liberals like Wilamowitz-Moellendorf and Mommsen, and others like 
Nietzsche, vehemently opposed the . new intensification of anti­
semitism. 
In France - with many fewer Jews - the double links between Jewish 
rationalism and the Enlightenment, and the Revolution's having given 
civil rights to Jews, have firmly associated Jews with the Republican 
strand of French politics ever since. It has also meant that Jews have 
been more violently hated by Royalists and Catholics in France than 
anywhere else in Europe. On the other hand, while liberals and 
'progressives' often shared the new racism and anti-Semitism, they 
did at times see Jews as the outer bulwark of the Republic; thus Jews 
had important allies in French society, and frequently in French 
government. 
In England, from which Jews had been expelled until the 1650s, 
there were theoretically philo-Semitic tendencies as well as the anti­
Semitic ones. There was a medieval tradition of the English as having 
descended from Noah's son Shem - the ancestor of the Jews - rather 
than from Japhet, forefather of the Europeans. There was also the 
Puritan vision of England as the new Jerusalem, which survives today 
in Blake's moving hymn.2 These traditions - and the important 
role played by Jews in establishing Britain's financial and colonial 
supremacy in the late 17th and 18th centuries - meant that here, as in 
France, the transformation fromJudenhaB to anti-Semitism was slow, 
and opened an extraordinary 'window of opportunity' in the middle of 
the 19th century. Converts like Disraeli could reach the highest office


--- PAGE 186 ---
340 BLACK ATHENA 
in a way that was impossible both before and after, and practising Jews 
gained civil rights and a social acceptability which did not return until 
the 1950S or 60S. 
WHAT RACE WERE THE SEMITES? 
Although we have seen how the name 'Caucasian' was related through 
Prometheus to Japhetic, as opposed to Semitic, its inventor J. F. 
Blumenbach introduced the term only in the third edition of his great 
De Generis Humani Varietate Nativa, in 1795. We know that his first 
conception of the superior White Race included both Arabs and Jews, 
and this was the sense in which many English writers took the word 
Caucasian until the end of the 19th century.3 In the 1 840S, for instance, 
Disraeli described Moses as 'in every respect a man of complete 
Caucasian model', while he wrote that the European Jews could not 
have borne all their suffering if they had not been' of the unmixed blood 
of the Caucasus'; later, in the 1870s, George Eliot referred toJews as 
'purer Caucasians,.4 Even in Germany the violently anti-Semitic 
Christian Lassen, a pupil of the Schlegels, did not refuse the Jews 
Caucasian status. 5 
In the same decades, however, new attitudes were developing. 
Professor Robert Knox, the anatomist, became infamous as the em­
ployer of the grave-robbers Burke and Hare. It is alleged that he asked 
for fresh corpses, complaining that the bodies they brought him for 
dissection were too old and scrawny. In any event, he was happy to 
accept the victims of their murders. Burke and Hare were hanged but 
Knox, though banned from anatomy, went on to become a pioneer 
pampleteer of racism. Paraphrasing the wise Sidonia in Disraeli's 
Tancred, who had said: 'all is race, there is no other truth', Knox 
maintained in 1850 that 'the race is everything, is simply a fact, the most 
remarkable, the most comprehensive, which philosophy has ever 
announced. Race is everything: literature, science, art - in a word, 
civilization depends on it.,6 
Knox gloried in the opportunities for white men to commit genocide: 
'What a field of extermination lies before the Saxon Celtic and 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 34 1 
Sarmatian [Slav] races!,7 He described 'the Jew' as a 'sterile hybrid', 
accusing the people of having always been uncreative parasites: 
But where are the Jewish farmers, Jewish mechanics [and] 
labourers? Why does he dislike handicraft labour? Has he no inventive 
power, no mechanical or scientific tum of mind? ... And then I 
began to enquire into this and I saw ... that the Jews who followed 
any calling were not really Hebrews, but sprung from a Jewish 
father and a Saxon or Celtic mother: that the real Jew had never 
altered since the earliest recorded period; ... that the real Jew has 
no ear for music, no love of science or literature, pursues no enquiry, 
etc .... 8 
Knox had clearly passed from religious hatred of the Jews to modern 
racial anti-Semitism. Although - as the modem historian of anti­
Semitism Poliakov has pointed out - such racial arguments were novel 
in Great Britain, advanced thinkers like Darwin and Herbert Spencer 
(the creator of Social Darwinism) were working along very similar lines, 
and the former quoted Knox with approval. 9 
Let us return to France. In 1856 the great Semitist Ernest Renan 
complained that 'France believes very little in race, precisely because 
race has almost disappeared from her breast ... all this [concern with 
race] can only be born in a people like the Germans, who still keep 
to their primordial roots.,l0 The comparison between France and 
Germany may be just, but the French, too, were concerned with race. 
By the 1850s, the idea of a 'Semitic race' had long been incorporated 
into the new racism of France. I have already mentioned the linguisti­
cally based theory of history as a dialogue between Aryans and Semites; 
Niebuhr's French disciple Michelet, on the other hand, saw this as a 
racial struggle to the death. As early as 1830 he wrote in his Roman 
History: 
It is not without reason that the memory of the Punic Wars has stayed 
so popular and so alive. The struggle was not merely to decide the 
fate of two cities or two empires; it was to settle which of the two 
races, the Indo-Germanic or the Semitic, was to rule the world ... 
On the one side the genius of heroism, of art and oflaw; on the other


--- PAGE 187 ---
342 BLACK ATHENA 
the spirit of industry, navigation and commerce ... The heroes 
fought - without ceasing - their industrious and perfidious neigh­
bours. They were workers, smiths, miners, magicians. They loved 
gold, hanging gardens and magic palaces . .. They constructed 
towers with titanic ambition, which the swords of the warriors broke 
up and effaced from the earth. I I 
This passage must be seen at two levels, both of which were to 
become very important. First, there was the surface level of the racial 
struggle between Aryans and Semites. Secondly, at another level, the 
words 'perfidious neighbours' point to 'perfidious Albion', the French 
name for England. There is no doubt that when writing about the Punic 
Wars, Michelet was thinking about the Napoleonic Wars of his own 
day. Thus, although heroic France had been beaten by the English 
Industrial Revolution, the parallel with the Punic Wars gave the 
promise of revenge. This analogy reflected the perception of a close 
relationship between England and the Semites in general - and the 
Phoenicians in particular - which to some extent explains the positive 
English images ofJ ews just mentioned, and to which we shall frequently 
return. 
We shall see Michelet's ideas on the Phoenicians in Gobineau and 
Flaubert. For the moment, however, we shall continue to look at the 
development of racist anti-Semitism in France, the clearest example of 
which comes in the work of Emile Louis Burnouf. Emile Bumouf was a 
distinguished Hellenist, - he was director of the French School at 
Athens - a Sanskritist, and an enthusiast for Indo-European connec­
tions. He was also the cousin of Eugene Bumouf, one of the founders of 
Indian studies in France and the hero of Schwab's The Oriental 
Renaissance. Emile Burnouf, writing in the I860s, described the Semitic 
race as follows: 
A real Semite has smooth hair with curly ends, a strongly hooked 
nose, fleshy pro~ecting lips, ~assive extremities, thin calves, and flat 
feet. And what IS more, he belongs to the occipetal races: that is to 
say, those whose hinder part of the head is more developed than the 
front. His growth is very rapid, and at fifteen or sixteen it is over. At 
that age the divisions of the skull which contain the organs of 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 343 
intelligence are already joined, and in some cases even welded 
together. From that period the growth of the brain is arrested. In the 
Aryan races this phenomenon, or anything like it, never occurs, at 
any time of life .. }2 
According to Bumouf, the Semitic race was a mixture of the white and 
the yellow races. His contemporary Gobineau, the ferocious reaction­
ary later acknowledged as the father of European racism, had an even 
more complicated view of Jews and Semites. The Comte de Gobineau 
was tom between his conservative support for the Church and his 
excitement at the new theory of racism. This conflict led to all kinds of 
difficulties, the most fundamental of which centred on the question of a 
single or multiple creation of man. Poliakov rightly describes him as 'a 
monogenist in theory and a polygenist in practice', for Gobineau did see 
the three races - white, yellow and black - as separate species.13 
Personally tom between a rigid noble father and an 'adventuress' 
mother, Gobineau was explicit in his sexual imagery of race. 14 Accord­
ing to him, the 'Whites' were essentially 'male' while the 'Blacks', on the 
other hand, were 'female'. Despite his disgust for them, he saw 'the 
black element ... [as] . . . indispensable for developing artistic genius in 
a race, for we have seen what outbursts of ... vivacity and spontaneity 
are intrinsic to its soul and how much the imagination, that mirror of 
sensuality, and all cravings for material things, prepare it ... ,15 
The same tension was reflected in Gobineau's overall historical view, 
a hybrid of the Bible and the new Indo-Europeanism. According to 
him, the three races represented by the sons of Noah - Ham, Shem, and 
J aphet - had all originated in Sogdiana, or some such region in Central 
Asia, and, rather like the Three Little Pigs, they had all set out to seek 
their fortunes. 16 The first to head south were the Hamites. After 
founding some civilizations and attempting to keep their blood pure, the 
Hamites had become hopelessly mongrelized by the native and inferior 
Blacks.17 The next to leave were the Semites. Though these too had 
made attempts to preserve their purity of line, they were heavily 
polluted with black blood; this was partly from direct contact with the 
Blacks, but more from that with the 'mulatto' Hamites. 18 Only the 
J aphetites, or Aryans, had stayed in the north and retained their purity.


--- PAGE 188 ---
344 BLACK ATHENA 
Although Gobineau's whole work was a lament for a lost purity, the 
mixture was essential to his scheme. Only if a race were mixed could 
one explain both its good and its bad features. Thus Gobineau 
attributed what he liked about the Jews - their prowess in fighting and 
their good cultivation of land - to their Semitic blood, but their skill in 
trading, their love of luxuries, cruelties, use of mercenaries and so on 
were due to Hamitic influence. 19 
In 1856 Gobineau's patron Alexis de Tocqueville wrote to console 
him about the slow response to his great work in France. Like their 
mutual friend Ernest Renan, de Tocqueville thought that the book 
would have a better reception in Germany, with its 'enthusiasm for 
abstract truth ... ', and he reassured his protege that the work would 
'return to France, above all by way of Germany'. 20 The book was, in 
fact, immediately reprinted after the German conquest of France in 
1940 . 
) THE LINGUISTIC AND 
GEOGRAPHICAL INFERIORITIES 
OF THE SEMITES 
Jews and Phoenicians had long, and rightly, been seen as closely 
related. Well before the decipherment of the Phoenician alphabet by 
Barthelemy in the middle of the 18th century, scholars like Samuel 
Bochart in the 17th had been fully aware that Hebrew and Phoenician 
were dialects of the same language.21 By the 17 80S the two had been 
subsumed with Arabic, Aramaic and Ethiopic under the title 'Semitic'. 
Many early-19th -century scholars, reacting against the biblical picture 
of Hebrew as the language of Adam and the speech of all mankind until 
the fall of the Tower of Babel, fiercely denied that it was perfect or 
original. Hebrew was now felt to be primitive. Humboldt, for instance, 
urged that it be taught in the gymnasia just for that reason. 22 We saw in 
Chapter V how Friedrich Schlegel defined the Semitic languages 
as the highest form of 'animal' language, but since inflection was 
considered to be the touchstone of the superior 'spiritual' languages, 
there was no way of avoiding the fact that the Semitic languages were 
the inflected languages par excellence.23 Thus, as Humboldt and others 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 345 
created more or less 'progressive' linguistic hierarchies, Semitic had to 
be put on the same top rung as Indo-European. This situation, which 
reflected the relative toleration of Jews in earlY-19th-century Europe, 
was used as a basis for the academic view of 'true' history as a dialogue 
between Aryans and Semites. 
Physiological racists perceived the Semites as both 'female' and 
'sterile' - superficially intelligent and imaginative, but fundamentally 
incapable of creative thought or action. Ernest Renan, disagreeing with 
his friend Gobineau, followed the older strand of the Romantic tradi­
tion, which maintained that there were essentially linguistic reasons for 
the incapacities of particular peoples. Generally acknowledged to be the 
leading French expert in Semitic languages, and the 19th-century 
founder of Phoenician studies, Renan was greatly concerned with what 
he saw as the inadequacies of Semitic. Expressing himself with the 
long-windedness of the German scholars he so much admired, he 
wrote: 
The unity and simplicity of the Semitic race is found in the Semitic 
languages themselves. Abstraction is unknown to them, metaphysics 
impossible. Language being the mould necessary for the intellectual 
operations of a people, an idiom almost denuded of syntax, lacking 
any varieties of construction, without the conjunctions which estab­
lish such delicate relations between the elements of thought, paint­
ing all objects with their exterior qualities, it ought to be eminently 
suitable for the eloquent inspirations of seers and the painting of 
fugitive impressions, but it ought to refuse all philosophy and all 
purely intellectual speculation. Imagine an Aristotle or a Kant with a 
similar instrument ... 24 
The other reason for the Semitic inferiority was, for Renan, geo­
graphical. Europeans, living in a rainfall climate (he was a Breton), had 
been given a subtle and multiform nature. Semites, coming from the 
desert with its pitiless sun and sharp distinctions between light and 
shade, had been made simple and fanatical: 
The Semitic race appears to us as incomplete through its simplicity. 
It is, dare I say it, to the Indo-European family what drawing is to


--- PAGE 189 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
painting or plainsong to modem music. It lacks that variety, that 
scale, that superabundance of life that is necessary for 
perfectibility. 25 
On the other hand, this simplicity and intensity had been the sources 
of religion, which the Semites had given to the world; and Renan saw it 
as his mission to bring science, which was Aryan, to religion, which was 
Semitic.26 Hence his philological and racial studies of the origins of 
Christianity. Religion, however, should not be thought of as giving the 
Semites equality: 
Thus the Semitic race is to be recognized almost entirely by negative 
characteristics. It has neither mythology, nor epic, nor science, nor 
philosophy, nor fiction, nor plastic arts, nor civil life; in everything 
there is a complete absence of complexity, subdety or feeling, except 
for unity. It has no variety in its monotheism. 27 
Rena!ys attitude is crucial, not only because his extraordinary public 
recognition indicates that he was articulating commonly held views 
but also because of his dominant position in Semitic, biblical and 
Phoenician studies. The combination meant that he both reflected and 
focused popular opinion and scholarly attitudes in these disciplines. 28 
Indeed, there are striking parallels between Renan's relations with the 
Semitic languages and those of Humboldt, Niebuhr and Bunsen in 
their promotion of Egyptology . In both cases the scholars appear to have 
feared the charge of having too much sympathy with the object of their 
study. Any implication of treachery to Europe was of course unjustified, 
as the very act of , scientific' study of a non-European culture made that 
culture qualitatively inferior, exotic and inert. 29 Renan, however, in­
sisted that the Semites were not like the other non- Indo- Europeans, 
about whom there was nothing good to be said. The Semites had 
good qualities which, he maintained, they shared with the English; 
and his hostility to both, unlike tIlat of Michelet, was tempered. 
According to him, both peoples possessed 'a great uprightness of 
mind and an enviable simplicity of heart, an exquisite sentiment of 
morality ... ,30 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 347 
THE ARNOLDS 
The contrasts between Thomas and Matthew Arnold provide an 
instructive example of the changes that were taking place in English 
racism in the 19th century. Dr Thomas Arnold was preoccupied in the 
1820S and 30S with the conflicts between Teuton and Gael- including 
Gallo- Roman - and notably those between the English and the French 
and Irish. He was proud to be known as 'that Teuton of Teutons, the 
Celt-hating Dr Arnold,.31 His son Matthew in the 1850s, 60S and 
70S favoured both the Irish and the French, believing that he had 
transcended his father's narrow-mindedness. 32 Fully aware of the new 
linguistic advances, he was a systematic supporter of Indo- Europeans 
and Aryans. He loved them all. Indeed, leading another school of 
mid-19th-century English thought, he was even enthusiastic about the 
Gypsies or Bohemians. These Indo-European speakers were now seen, 
rather like Winckelmann's Greeks, as gay, charming, feckless, childish 
- yet somehow philosophical - Aryan cousins. They were the lighter 
side of Indo-European culture. 33 
Matthew Arnold recognized that Renan, after his own father, was the 
greatest intellectual influence on his life.34 He had accepted Renan's 
belief - shared by most advanced thinkers of the time - that the 
fundamental divide in world history was between Hellene and Hebrew, 
between Aryan and Semite. 35 However, he was faced with a problem 
which did not affect the continental racists: he was forced to recognize 
the validity of their charge that the English shared qualities with the 
Semites. Furthermore, as I have mentioned, Britain had a philo­
Semitic tradition which became particularly strong with the rise of the 
bourgeoisie in the mid-19th century. Thus many Victorians saw them­
selves as biblical patriarchs, priding themselves on their diligence, 
thrift, discretion, respect for forms and - above all- their sense of rigid 
righteousness. 
Arnold was tormented by this affinity, which cut across linguistic and 
racial lines. His explanation for the anomaly was that the English 
'Hebraic' spirit was chiefly the result of the Reformation and of 
Puritanism. That is, the division between Hellene and Hebrew was that 
of the Civil War, the continuing struggle between High and Low


--- PAGE 190 ---
! 
II 
BLACK ATHENA 
Church, Church and Chapel, and between the industrialized north and 
the agricultural south.36 Like Renan, Matthew Arnold claimed to 
recognize many virtues in the 'Hebraic' tradition; nevertheless, he 
called upon England to turn away from the bourgeois philistinism of the 
latter-day Puritans and look towards the Greeks. The Greeks -
following the major tradition, that of Winckelmann - he saw as 
spontaneous, light, artistic and serene. But - as a man of the 19th 
century - Arnold also added clear thinking and a unique capacity for 
philosophy. By turning towards the Hellenic spirit, England could join 
the progress of her European neighbours. Arnold's ultimate appeal, 
made in his famous Culture and Anarchy, was to race: 'Hellenism is 
of Indo-European growth. Hebraism is of Semitic growth, and we 
English, a nation of Indo-European stock, seem to belong naturally 
to the movement of Hellenism.,37 
Although Victorian Hellenism was a vital and complex movement 
with many facets, there is no doubt that all images of Greece after 
Matthew Arnold published Culture andAnarchy in 1869 were developed 
"in relation or reaction to his restatement of German N eo-Hellenism. 
Where Dr Arnold's love of Greece meshed with his Protestantism, 
Teutonism and anti-Semitism, his son's Hellenism was explicitly 
linked to the vision of the Indo-European or Aryan race in a perpetual 
struggle with the Semitic one, or to the conflict between 'cultivated' and 
bourgeois values. And in this, of course, he was following a well-beaten 
path. In theory - like Michelet, Renan and others - he accepted, as 
Bunsen put it, that 'If the Hebrew Semites are the priests of humanity, 
the Helleno- Roman Aryans are, and ever will be, its heroes. ,38 All, how­
ever, dearly felt that in granting the Semites religion they were granting 
them too much. As Matthew Arnold noted in a letter to his mother: 
Bunsen used to say that our great business was to get rid of all that 
was purely Semitic in Christianity and to make it Indo-Germanic, 
and Schleiermacher that in th~ Christianity of us Western nations 
there was really much more of Plato and Sokrates than ofj oshua and 
David; and on the whole Papa worked in the direction of these ideas 
of Bunsen and Schleiermacher and was perhaps the only powerful 
Englishman of his day who did so.39 
I' 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 349 
Without wishing to detract from Dr Arnold's pioneering spirit on this 
issue, it will be remembered that in 1825 Thirlwall had translated 
Schleiermacher's St Luke, which contained many of these ideas. What 
is more, in France Victor Cousin had been proclaiming the Hellenic 
nature of Christianity as early as 1818.40 
While one cannot always blame fathers for the sins of their sons, it is 
interesting to note that during the 1870S Bunsen's son Ernst invented a 
form of Aryan sun worship, based on biblical tradition, in which Adam 
was Aryan and the serpent Semitic!41 By the end of the century there 
had been a number of different attempts to found an Aryan or 
Germanic Christianity. The most successful of these was created by the 
fringe academic Semitist and passionate German nationalist Paul 
Lagarde. Lagarde argued that Jesus had been an 'Aryan Jew' from 
Galilee who had been crucified by the 'Semitic Jews' of Judaea. To 
make matters worse, Christianity had been taken over and perverted by 
another Jew, Paul, and there was thus a need to strip the true Aryan 
religion of its Semitic excrescences. Lagarde was a passionate anti­
Semite who called repeatedly for the destruction of Judaism and the 
exile of the Jews in Madagascar, which later became one of Hitler's 
schemes. Lagarde's movement in general has been convincingly 
described as one of the sources ofNazism. 42 
In England, things were never so crude. Even so, towards the end of 
the century there was a desire to strip the Semites of their one 
contribution to humanity. One of the chief themes of Hardy's Tess of the 
d'Urbervilles, first published in 1891, is the conflict between the true, 
ever-vital Saxon England in its heartland of Wessex, and the decadent 
French descendants of the conquerors. However, Hardy's Germanism 
was also linked to Hellenism, which he saw as battling with the 
Semitism and the philistinism of the new bourgeoisie. The hero, Angel 
Clare, wants to return to the land and wed a pure Saxon maid. At the 
same time, he has the Dionysian qualities of one of Winckelmann's 
Greeks: he likes dancing, eating and drinking and generally frolicking 
in the blissful countryside. Angel's father and brothers are archetypal 
Semites: moral, upright, and completely out of touch with nature and 
life. Hardy describes the crucial moment of their conflict in these 
terms:


--- PAGE 191 ---
350 BLACK ATHENA 
Once upon a time Angel had been so unlucky as to say to his father 
... that it might have been better for mankind if Greece had been the 
source of religion for modem civilization and not Palestine, and his 
father's grief was of that blank description which could not realize 
that there might work a thousandth part of truth, much less a half 
truth or a whole truth, in such a proposition. 43 
Here, then, though he did not share their love of the Gaels, Hardy 
aligned himself with Matthew Arnold and Renan. 
PHOENICIANS AND ENGLISH, I: 
THE ENG LISH VIEW 
Despite the association between the English and the Semites, no one 
compared the English to the Arabs or the Ethiopians. The 'Semites' 
they had in mind were Jews and/or Phoenicians, and in this part of the 
chapter we will concentrate on the identification with the Phoenicians. 
~ While Michelet's discussion of the perpetual war between the Indo­
Europeans and Semites focused on the conflict between Rome and 
Carthage, the parallels between Carthage and England were very clear 
for 19th-century readers on both sides of the Channel. Many Victorians 
had a positive feeling towards the Phoenicians as sober cloth merchants 
who did a little bit of slaving on the side and spread civilization while 
making a tidy profit. Thus William Gladstone, who came from very 
much this kind of mercantile background, was an ardent champion of 
the Phoenicians. 44 This may seem surprising in view of his passion for 
Homer's aristocratic values, his love for European Greece, and his 
hatred for Asiatic Turkey.45 Such enthusiasms, however, were quite 
compatible in the 1840S, when Gladstone's future rival, Disraeli, was 
proclaiming the superiority of thr Semitic race. And as late as 1889, the 
respected historian G. Rawlinson produced a very favourable history of 
Phoenicia in which he described the Phoenicians as 'the people who of 
all Antiquity had the most in common with England and the English.,46 
There was also a widespread - and quite reasonable - belief that the 
Phoenicians had come to Cornwall to trade for tin, and Matthew Arnold 
seems to have seen this as an early source of English Hebraism. In his 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 351 
famous poem beginning 'Some grave Tyrian trader ... ', the Phoenician 
slips shyly away from the new Greek master race, 'the young light­
hearted masters of the wave'. The Phoenician is then driven out of the 
Mediterranean to the Atlantic and Britain, and the same sympathy for 
the doomed Phoenician appears over fifty years later in 'Death By 
Water' in T. S. Eliot's The WasteLand: 
Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead, 
Forgot the cry of gulls and the deep sea swell 
And the profit and loss. 
A current under sea 
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell 
He passed the stages of his age and youth 
Entering the whirlpool. 
Gentile or J ew 
o you who tum the wheel and look to windward, 
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.47 
The Waste Land belongs to the 'post-Berard' era, which 1 shall discuss in 
the next chapter. Nevertheless, it is indicative of longer-term Anglo­
Saxon attitudes as well, in its relating Phoenicians to their own activities 
on the sea and in banking. Its ambiguity on the Phoenicians' Semitic 
nature is also telling, for if Semites were the epitome of parasitism and 
passivity, then the Phoenicians - who were active in sailing, manu­
facture and trade rather than the Jewish 'financing' - could not have 
been truly Semitic. 
In extreme old age, Gladstone felt the need to defend his beloved 
Phoenicians from the now crippling charge of being Semitic: 'I have 
always believed that the Phoenicians were at bottom a non-Semitic 
stock.,48 Indeed, by the beginning of the 20th century Britain was 
quickly catching up with the rest of Europe in its anti-Semitism, and 
attitudes to the Phoenicians became even more complicated. Belief that 
Britain could have a special connection with even marginal Semites 
became increasingly suspect. So to look for it, as Sherlock Holmes 
intended to do during his retirement in Cornwall, was now considered 
the epitome of crankiness. On the other hand, even the attribution of 
crankiness implies a certain fondness for the notion and for the


--- PAGE 192 ---
352 BLACK ATHENA 
Phoenicians; very different attitudes towards them had developed 
elsewhere in Europe. 
PHOENICIANS AND ENGLISH, 2: 
THE FRENCH VIEW 
Michelet's implicit - and ultimately comforting - analogy between the 
French and the Romans, and the English and the Carthaginians, has 
been mentioned above. Elsewhere, however, he was explicit: 
Human pride personified in a people, that is England. What happens 
when the barbarians (Normans and Danes) are transplanted to this 
powerful island, where they become fat on the richness of the land 
and the tribute of the ocean? Kings of the sea, of the world without 
law and without limit, uniting the savage hardness of the Danish 
pirate and the feudal arrogance of the 'Lord' son of the Normans ... 
How many Tyres and Carthages would one have to pile up to reach 
~ the insolence of titanic England?49 
The ferocity behind this analogy can be seen from his references to the 
Phoenicians: 'The Carthaginians, like the Phoenicians from which they 
came, appear to have been a people who were hard and sad, sensual and 
greedy, and adventurous without heroism.' After this splendid example 
of having it both ways, he continued with the view that 'at Carthage too 
the religion was atrocious and full of frightful practices.,50 
The damning parallels between the English and the Phoenicians in 
general, and the Carthaginians in particular, remained a strand in 
French thinking throughout the 19th century. This contrast can be seen 
from the fact that when Gladstone said that the Phoenicians were not 
Semites, he meant that they were better than Jews. For most French 
and German writers, on the other hand, they were much worse, and 
J 
here it would be useful to consider Gobineau's attitudes towards the 
Phoenicians. Gobineau is important for two reasons: he had a consider­
able influence on French and German thought as well as on Matthew 
Arnold, and he seems to have expressed, in extreme form, many views 
that friends of his like de Tocqueville and Renan held, but did not dare 
publish. 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 353 
The position of the Phoenicians in Gobineau's scheme of the three 
invasions of the Hamites, Semites and J aphetites, or Aryans, was 
complicated. The Bible clearly placed them as descendants of Ham but, 
as we saw in Chapter III, scholars have known about the extremely close 
relationships between Phoenician and Hebrew at least since the 17th 
century.51 For Gobineau in the 19th century, this li~gui~tic affi~a~on 
was both crucial and distressing. The powerful combmatIon ofbIbhcal 
tradition, his reluctance to have the holy language too closely rel~t~d to 
that of the Phoenicians, and his mixed - but in many ways pOSItIve -
attitude towards the Jews impelled him to portray the Phoenicians as 
Hamites and not as Semites. Thus the only way for Gobineau to 
reconcile the biblical and linguistic sources was through outright 
falsehood. In 1815, the great German Semitist Wilhelm Gesenius had 
divided the Semitic languages into three subfamilies: (I) Aramaic and 
Syriac; (2) Canaanite, including Hebrew and Phoenician, from which 
came Punic; and (3) Arabic, from which he derived Ethiopic. 52 At 
another point, however, Gesenius had mentioned that Phoenician had 
been spread to the widespread Phoenician colonies and markets, and 
Gobineau cited this page to claim that Gesenius had classified the 
Semitic languages into four categories: 
The first contains Phoenician, Punic and Libyan, from which the 
Berber dialects are derived; the second Hebrew and its variations; 
the third ... Aramaic ... the fourth, Arabic ... 53 
Apart from the separation of Phoenician and Hebrew, the linguistic 
outrage in this classification is Gobineau's association of Phoenician 
with the Berber languages. No Semitist, then or now, would accept 
these as Semitic. However, both violations were essential to his scheme 
in order to define the Phoenicians as Hamitic, according to the biblical 
pattern. That is, their initial 'white' nature had allowed them to 
establish a certain degree of civilization, but by the time the Semites 
arrived from the north-east the Phoenicians had become virtually 
'black' and were therefore responsible for the corruption of the Jews: 
'At the time of Abraham, Hamite civilization was in a full bloom in its 
..c.. d··· ,54 peuectIon an m Its VIces. 
Gobineau spent much more time on the vices than on the perfection.


--- PAGE 193 ---
354 BLACK ATHENA 
Near the beginning of the whole work, and using the images of rats and 
disease that the Nazis applied to the Jews, he asked the rhetorical 
question: 'Did the Phoenicians owe their downfall to the corruption 
that gnawed at them and which they spread everywhere? No, quite the 
contrary, their corruption was the chief instrument of their power and 
their glory.'sS To what extent, then, did Gobineau have England in 
mind when he wrote this? Gobineau knew English well and frequently 
cited English sources, and he dedicated his Essay on the Inequality of 
Human Races to the English-born king of Hanover. Nevertheless, it is 
interesting to note that in all his travels around the world, from 
Scandinavia to Persia, Brazil and many other places, he never went 
across the Channel to England. Furthermore, Gobineau is strangely 
silent about the country that dominated the world of his time - and here 
there is a striking contrast with his bubbling enthusiasm for Germany. 
Following his patron de Tocqueville, Gobineau obviously approved 
of the Anglo-Saxon sense of categorical superiority over the native 
~ Americans and Blacks in North America; he was equally scathing about 
the hypocrisy surrounding slavery. 56 He was much more concerned 
with and appalled by American immigration policies, and in this 
connection he compared New York unfavourably to Carthage, which 
had at least been settled by noble Canaanite families. Furthermore: 
'Carthage gained everything that Tyre and Sidon lost. But Carthage has 
not added a jot to Semitic civilization, nor did it prevent its eventual 
fate.,s7 Elsewhere Gobineau compared the mercantile functions of 
Tyre and Sidon to London and Hamburg, and the manufacturing ones 
to Liverpool and Birmingham.58 The analogy between the Anglo­
Saxons and the Canaanites, and his dislike of both, would seem clear. 
Nevertheless, it is obvious that he detested the Hamites and the impure 
Semites in their own right. He saw the later Phoenicians as the result of 
a mixture of 'mulatto' Hamites and Semites, in which of course 
) 
the latter, being more 'white', were superior. Yet, with the tragic 
irony which he found throughout history, the 'black' and inferior 
'female' races conquered and corrupted the 'white', 'male' ones. 
Thus the Phoenicians created cities in which incredible luxury and 
splendour were mixed with barbarous customs; and above all there 
were the hideous religious rites, including prostitution and human 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 355 
sacrifice, which, he assured his readers, 'the white race has never 
practised'. 59 • 
In their government, the Phoenicians were not no~le and f~~e like the 
'Whites', but ruled either by despots or by democratic mobs. 'Y orst of 
all was Carthage - without a history and founded after the Hanutes had 
completely degenerated, and then exposed to still more African 
influence.61 Gobineau saw the arrival of the Semites as a great step 
forward, but they too were seduced by 'black' culture, and in general he 
was tom in his attitudes towards theJews. At times he argued that they 
had preserved some of their white nature; at others he. maintained. that 
the Hebrews changed from martial herdsmen mto effennnate 
merchants.62 But worst of all, they hired other peoples as mercenaries. 
About this practice Gobineau wrote: 
One of the principal characteristics of the degradation of the 
Hamites and the most apparent cause of their fall ... was their loss of 
warrior courage and the practice of no longer taking part in military 
activities. This scandal, profound in Babylon and Nineveh, was 
hardly less in Tyre and Sidon ... 63 
SALAMMB6 
Michelet gave the same message in 1830, when describing the revolt of 
the Carthaginian mercenaries after their defeat in the First Punic War 
in 241 BC. Basing himself on Classical sources - mainly the Greek 
historian Polybios - Michelet gave a vivid report of this mutiny of an 
army that was extraordinarily mixed ethnically and was led by a Black, 
Matho, and a Greek, Spendios. It was defeated after campaigns of 
extraordinary violence and cruelty in which both the mercenaries and a 
number of their Carthaginian opponents were put to death in scenes of 
exceptional horror. 64 
Michelet's text became the basis for Gustave Flaubert's novel 
Salammba. Flaubert had long been fascinated by the exoticism of the 
'Orient'. He had been to Egypt, and after the success of Madame Buvary 
he had wanted to write a novel about that country called Anubis.
65 
At 
some point before March 1857, however, he changed his mind and


--- PAGE 194 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
decided to use the plot that eventually became Salammbo. The Italian 
scholar Benedetto suggested that he dropped Anubis because 
Theophile Gautier brought out a novel on Ancient Egypt in the same 
year. But neither he nor other 'Flaubertians' have been able to 
determine what caused Flaubert to choose his new topic.66 
Despite the fact that it does not appear in his correspondence, the 
answer would seem to be the 'Indian Mutiny' which broke out in 
February that year. Britain - the great empire of the modem Phoeni­
cians - had succeeded, through its greed and brutality and by its use of 
beef and pork fat on cartridges which had to be licked by the soldiers, in 
the difficult task of uniting its Hindu and Moslem mercenaries in revolt 
against it. Even at its outbreak it became clear that the 'Mutiny' was 
being fought on both sides with exceptional ferocity and cruelty. Thus 
the parallel between England and Carthage was in Salammbo from its 
inception. 
In May 1861, when Flaubert felt that his book was ready for his 
friends, he invited the famous Parisian literary figures the Goncourt 
brothers to come to a reading with the following programme: 
1\ I begin to shout at 4 o'clock punctually, sometimes about 3 
o'clock. 
2 At 7 o'clock, Eastern dinner. You'll be served human flesh, 
bourgeois brains, tigress's clitoris fried in rhinoceros butter. 
3. After the coffee, a resumption of the Punic bawling until after the 
listeners croak.67 
Baudelaire, the poet of decadence, was a particular friend while 
Flaubert was writing the novel, and Salammbo is a study in deca­
dence. 68 From the viewpoint of the French upper class in the 1850s, 
Flaubert had chosen the most decadent aspect (mercenaries) of the 
most decadent city (Cartha~e) and of the most decadent people (the 
Phoenicians). Or, to put it another way, he pictured the accumulation of 
all the opposites of decent masculine white society: the ethnic potpourri 
of mercenaries led by a Black on the one hand and a Greek who was 
a traitor to his race on the other; against the Carthaginians, who 
were themselves seen as a hideous mixture of Negroes, Hamites and 
Semites; with a luxurious subtropical background containing priests, 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 357 
eunuchs and sensuous, corrupting women; all locked in cruel and 
frightful conflict. 
There was, as I have said, genuine historical material with which to 
build up such a case. Flaubert reinforced his reading of Michelet and 
Polybios with a trip to the site of Carthage; but also, and much more 
importantly, he used material from the latest French Orientalist 
scholarship, notably that of Renan. Following this, he became fully 
aware of the close cultural relations between all Canaanite speakers, 
and used biblical information about the Israelites and their neighbours 
to eke out the meagre material available about the Phoenicians and 
Carthaginians. 69 
Benedetto, writing in 1920, showed that Flaubert's reconstruction 
had stood the test oflater scholarship quite well.7o Despite the fact that 
Benedetto was associated with the exceptionally anti -Semitic School of 
Classics in Rome and was writing at a period of intense racialism and 
general anti-Semitism, much of what the Italian claimed would still 
seem true today.71 Where I do think Flaubert was fundamentally 
misleading, however, was in two of his implications. One was that 
Carthage in the 3rd century BC was in some way typical of Oriental 
culture; hence not only did it deserve the genocide it received from the 
Romans ninety years later, but there was little moral objection to the 
colonial destructions of non-European civilizations in the 19th century. 
(Here, moreover, we have another reason why Flaubert dropped his 
scheme of writing on Ancient Egypt, which was far too lacking in vice 
and cruelty for his purposes.) 
Secondly, Flaubert implied that Europeans - with the possible 
exception of the English - were incapable of such things. In fact, the 
Romans outdid the Carthaginians in virtually every luxury and outrage, 
while the Macedonians were not far behind. And in specifics, the 
Carthaginian Mercenary War in the 3rd century BC, with its social 
revolutionary component, was comparable to the Roman War -less than 
200 years later - against the armies of slaves led by Spartacus, which 
were fought and exterminated with equal horror. 72 Flaubert's own 
society, the France of the Second Empire, was inflicting incredible 
outrages on the populations of China and Indo-China and, even more 
to the point, on those of Algeria. In some ways, furthermore, the


--- PAGE 195 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
exploitation, luxury and corruption of SalammbO's Carthage were very 
similar to the same features in Flaubert's Paris, as described so vividly in 
the novels of Emile Zola.73 
Salammh6 was an immense success. When Flaubert had tried to 
portray French bourgeois life realistically in Madame Bovary, his book 
had been mutilated by the publisher and he was put on trial for 
'outraging public morals'. SalammbO was far more scabrous in every 
respect, but this time it made Flaubert the lion of Parisian high society 
and enabled him to become a friend of the Imperial family.74 Flaubert 
had hit a literary jackpot; his 'realism' applied to the 'Orient' allowed 
readers to get their sexual and sadistic thrills, while maintaining their 
sense of innate and categorical superiority as white Christians. It also 
increased the urgency of France's mission civilisatrice to save the peoples 
of other continents from their own cruelty and wickedness.75 
MOLOCH 
Flaubert made much of one horrific aspect of Carthaginian culture 
sharedl)y neither the Romans nor the 19th-century Europeans. It was 
the special sacrifice of children either through cutting the throat, or 
burning, or both. Following the exegetical tradition of the time, he 
referred to it as a sacrifice to the terrible god Moloch. It has since been 
established that the root Ymlk in this case refers not to a divinity but to 
the name of the sacrifice itself.76 In Carthage the victims were meant to 
be the sons of the ruling families but Flaubert, following Classical 
sources, recounted that some of the rich obtained substitutes from the 
children of the poor or of slaves.77 Here, though he added gruesome 
details of his own, he was following Greek and Roman historians; and 
here too the later excavation, at Carthage and many of its colonies, of 
hundreds -of urns full of burnt children's bones and dedicated to the 
God Ba cal would seem to confirm his reconstruction. 78 
There is no doubt that in both the Jewish and Christian traditions, 
this child sacrifice was felt to be the ultimate abomination. The huge 
success of Salam mhO, in France and in the rest of Europe - which partly 
resulted from its depiction of Moloch - reopened the biblical horror 
with extraordinary force. For many this feeling extended to a complete 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 359 
condemnation of the society that practised it, and provided powerful 
ammunition for all those who hated Carthage and the Phoenicians with 
their Jewish and English associations. 
Furthermore, there is no doubt that such feelings extended into 
academia. Nearly all 20th-century historians of Carthage and Phoeni­
cia have had to take Flaubert into account. 79 On the Jewish side, 
SalammbO and its emphasis on Moloch would seem to have revived and 
intensified the biblical and religious hatred of the Canaanites and their 
abominations, and to have led even non-religious and assimilated Jews 
to keep their distance from the Canaanites and Phoenicians. 
In 1870, the chief enemy of Carthage and England changed. France 
went into the Franco-Prussian War as an empire and emerged as a 
republic, while the King of Prussia came out of it as the Emperor of 
Germany. Many Germans now believed that the mande of the Holy 
Roman Empire and of Rome itself had fallen upon them. Even in the 
18th century, Herder is reported as having said that Carthage was so 
flawed by its abominations that it should be compared to a jackal which 
the Roman she-wolf should destroy; by the late 19th century the 
deserved destruction of the city was a platitude. 8o Great stress was laid 
upon the finality of the Roman Destruction of the city. The sentence 
'Carthage, which was destroyed by the Romans, was never rebuilt' -
incidentally, completely untrue - appears to have been a commonplace 
expression.81 
This principle - of a final solution - was extended in propaganda 
towards England in the two World Wars, and in actuality towards the 
Jews in the Holocaust. 82 In this, however, I am going ahead of myself 
into the period of intense 'racial' anti-Semitism after the 1880s, and 
here we should consider mid- 19th-century attitudes towards the idea 
of Phoenician setdement in Greece. 
THE PHOENICIANS IN GREECE: 
1820-80 
K. O. Muller, who denied the Phoenician role in the formation of 
Greece, was probably anti-Semitic. 83 As we have seen, however, his 
attack on Kadmos was not generally accepted at the time. In fact, with


--- PAGE 196 ---
, I 
I 
BLACK ATHENA 
the decline of admiration for the Egyptians there was increased interest 
and respect for the Phoenicians. The change was reflected in F. C. 
Movers' The Phoenicians, which appeared during the I 840S, whose huge 
volumes were based on the compilation of every Classical and biblical 
reference to the people. Like Julius Beloch in the 19th and Rhys 
Carpenter in the 20th century - whose careers we shall consider in the 
next chapters - Movers tended to attribute Phoenician dynamism to 
northern influences, and especially those from the Assyrians.84 Like 
many later historians he had a great admiration for this brutal culture, 
which is often portrayed as in some way less 'Semitic' than its purely 
Semitic language would suggest. In the 19th century, Assyrian military 
prowess was credited to 'white' influences. 85 On the other hand, if the 
Semites lost credit to the north and east, they gained it to the south. As 
far as the presence of Phoenicians in Greece was concerned, not only 
did Movers accept all the credit given to the Phoerucians by the 
Ancients, but he also annexed that of the 'Egyptian' Danaos. This 
position can to some extent be justified by the real complexity of the 
mixed culture of Lower Egypt in the Hyksos period. However, as his 
admirer Michael Astour puts it, Movers had grasped this point by 
'intuition rather than with the aid of the evidence at his disposal'. 86 
Jhus we should judge his conclusion historiographically - and in this 
way it fits the era following the fall of the Egyptians, but before that of 
the Phoenicians. 
GOBINEAU'S IMAGE OF GREECE 
This is also the period in which we should situate Gobineau's attitude to 
the origins of Greece. Gobineau, as we saw, was working within the 
Aryan Model, but in the 1850S the model was still very 'broad' and 
allowed for Semitic influences. He analysed the Greeks in the following 
way: 
I. Hellenes - Aryans modified by yellow principles, but with a great 
preponderance of white essence and some Semitic affinities. 
2. Aborigines - Slav/Celts saturated with yellow elements. 
3· Thracians - Aryans mixed with Celts and Slavs. 
[CU. VIII) THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 
4. Phoenicians - Black Hamites. 
s. Arabs and Hebrews - very mixed Semites. 
6. Philistines - Semites, possibly more pure. 
7. Libyans - almost black Hamites.. .. ... 87 
8. Cretans and other islanders - Senutes similar to the Philistmes. 
It is enough to make even the most stout-hearted racist throw u~ 
his hands in despair! Gobineau, however, persisted, though he found It 
impossible to be consistent in such a complex situation. 
To say this of him is not to disparage him entirely. If one translates 
from 'race' to culture there is no. doubt of the reality of some of the 
shifting mixtures involved. Gobineau was quite right to say: 'no country 
presents, in primitive epochs, such ethnic convulsions, such sudden 
displacements and multiple immigrations.,88 Furthermore, his scheme 
has far greater explanatory value than the Extreme Aryan Model. He 
believed that the Greek Aborigines had been invaded from the north by 
the Aryan 'Titans' sometime in the 3rd millennium; at around the same 
time, however, they had been invaded from the south by Canaanites, 
whom he saw both as Semitic Arabs and Hebrews and as black 
Phoenicians. 89 He followed Movers in seeing the Phoenicians as having 
gained their civilization from Assyria, which had white elements. 90 
Given the corruption of Greek blood by black Phoenicians, the issue 
of whether or not there had been Egyptian colonies was not very 
important to Gobineau. Nevertheless, he accepted the recent 
scholarship that had denied the existence of Egyptian colonies in 
Greece. 91 While he followed Schlegel's theory that the greatness of 
Egyptian civilization had come from Indian colonization, he also be­
lieved that the racial mongrelization of the Egyptian population - which 
included considerable black and even Negroid elements - had given the 
country a static and passive nature. 92 For Gobineau saw Greek history 
as a struggle between the Aryan Greek spirit based to the north of 
Thebes, and the Semitic spirit of the south, both being reinforced by 
their racial cousins from outside the country.93 In this way he had no 
problem with the traditions of Kadmos and Danaos or with the 
excellence of the Dorians. 94 
It must be noted, however, that despite his enthusiasm for the


--- PAGE 197 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
character and institutions of the Aryan Hellenes, Gobineau was con­
vinced that Ancient Greece as a whole had been thoroughly 'blackened' 
and 'Semitized'. He was among those who maintained that the modern 
Greeks were so mongrelized that they could no longer be considered as 
descendants of the Ancients. 95 Indeed, his belief in the Phoenician 
influence on Greece was part of his general belief that Southern Europe 
had been irredeemably 'Semitized' and that only the Germanic peoples 
of the north had retained their 'white' purity.96 In this, however, he was 
clearly in the minority. While they were coming to share his views on 
Aryan superiority, most Northern Europeans were not prepared to give 
up Greece and Rome. 
All in all, there was increasing reluctance to believe in the Phoenician 
settlements. We have seen in the last chapter how Grote avoided the 
issue; how Bunsen and Curtius wriggled around the legends; and 
how William Smith and George Rawlinson equivocated on them. 97 
Others, however, though they would not go as far as Gobineau, still 
saw no reason to doubt the Ancient Model where it touched on the 
Phoenicians. As Gladstone wrote in 1869: 
... )a further prosecution of the subject with respect to the Phoeni­
cians has brought out much more clearly and fully what I had only 
ventured to suspect or hint at, and gives them, if I am right, a highly 
influential function in forming the Greek nation. The detection, if it 
be a real one, of these powerful Semitic influences, both in the 
Greece of Homer and as they had operated before his time, opens a 
new perspective into the ancient history of the world.98 
SCHLIEMANN AND THE DISCOVERY 
OF THE 'MYCENAEANS' 
Of course Gladstone was primarily a politician and not an academic; 
therefore his views were not completely up to date. However, it is 
noteworthy that his remarks came just before Heinrich Schliemann's 
startling discoveries at Mycenae and Tiryns in the 1870s. Schliemann 
himself insisted that he had 'gazed upon the face of Agamemnon', and 
that the remains were those of the Homeric heroes, who were of course 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 
Greek. Initially, however, his finds had exacdy the opposite effect. They 
strengthened the hands of those who maintained that there had been 
significant Phoenician influence in Greece. 
The Mycenaean finds were certainly very unlike any previous notion 
of Greek art, and it was generally agreed that they were ugly. Therefore 
it was variously assumed that they were Byzantine, Gothic, or - most 
commonly of all- Oriental; and in the last case either imports or made 
in Greece by Eastern craftsmen or their Greek apprentices. 99 
The obvious conclusion, then, was that these were traces of the 
Phoenician colonists of the Greek tradition. As the eminent German 
ancient historian Max Dunker wrote in 1880: 
The examination of the most ancient monuments on the soil of 
Greece has afforded proof of an extensive commerce of the 
Phoenicians on the coasts of the country; not only the objects found 
within the monuments, but the monuments themselves, spoke 
incontestably in favour of the influence, and therefore of the pres­
ence, of Phoenicians in Greece. There are further traces, signs, and 
remains of Phoenician settlements on Greek soil, and of Phoenician 
influence on the Greeks. The Greek tradition itself tells us of the city 
and dominion which a Phoenician king's son founded in their land. 
This is the only settlement of which it speaks: but we are in a position to 
prooe that there existed a whole series of Phoenician colonies on the coast of 
ReI/as. (my emphasis) 100 
Other German scholars, like the historian of Greece Adolf Holm, 
disagreed. Holm, who avowedly saw the Greeks as an 'exceptionally 
high type of humanity', followed Ernst Curtius' 'most recent scientific 
revision of the traditionary epoch' . Writing in the I 880s, he set out his 
own view of the scholarly dilemma: 
Onate a decided reaction has set in against the popular theory of the 
great influence exercised by the Phoenicians on Greece, which is 
perfecdy justifiable, but it is not always to the point. The real reason 
why people contest the existence of Phoenicians in Greece is that they objea 
to make the Greeks indebted to Phoenicia for anything of importance. We 
believe we have proved that the widespread influence ascribed to


--- PAGE 198 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
them . . . originates solely in caprice. But why should there be a 
reluctance to admit the existence of mere settlements of Phoenicians 
in Greece, when supported by historical criteria which are considered valid 
in other cases? Phoenicians were once there, but their influence was 
inconsiderable. (my emphasis) 101 
Holm's words show with wonderful clarity the outside pressures on 
the ancient historians, and the reason for the compromise taken by 
scholars like Connop Thirlwall in the 1 830S and Frank Stubbings in the 
1 960s. 102 However, it was not acceptable in the high tide ofimperialism 
and anti-Semitism from 1885 to 1945, which was also the period of the 
professionalization of Classical archaeology. 
The tone that was to predominate throughout that period had already 
been set. As a writer put it in the first issue of The American Journal of 
A rchaeology in 1885: 
The Phoenicians, so far as we know, did not bring a single fructify­
ing idea into the world ... their arts ... hardly deserve to be called 
arts; they were for the most part only traders. Their architec­
ture, sculpture, painting were of the most unimaginative sort. 
neir religion, so far as we know it, was entirely an appeal to the 
senses. 103 
BABYLON 
By the 1880s, however, there was a new type of less objectionable 
'Semite'. Since the beginning of the century there had been consider­
able interest in the ancient ruins of Mesopotamia, while the sympathy of 
men like Movers and Gobineau for the Assyrians, who conquered and 
slaughtered in a very 'unSemitic' way, has been mentioned above. 
Furthermore, the 1840S and 50S saw the gradual decipherment of the 
cuneiform scripts in which Old Persian, the Assyrian and Babylonian 
dialects of Akkadian, atld the ancient non-Semitic language Sumerian 
were written. The decipherment generated great scholarly excitement, 
which intensified over the following decades as Akkadian texts with 
striking biblical parallels began to be read. 104 With the increasing 
[CH. VIII] THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS 
secularization of the 1870S and 80S, these texts were welcomed as 
.providing a background fot the Old Testament. They coul~ also be 
used to confirm the belief that the culture of the West Senutes - the 
Jews and Phoenicians - was, as one would expect from Semit.es, 
essentially derivative, and had come from the much older Babyloruan 
civilization. This tendency became greater still in the 1890s, when it 
was established to everyone's satisfaction that Mesopotamian civiliz­
ation had been created not by Semites but by the Sumerians, and that 
'when the Semites appeared in Babylonia, civilization was fully 
developed.' 105 
Scholars who, for various reasons, wanted to avoid giving credit to the 
Phoenicians began to attribute irreducible Semitic elements in Greek 
and other European cultures to the Assyrians and Babylonians. 106 Even 
here, however, there was the problem that the normal route of trans­
mission would be by sea, through Phoenicia - or at least North Syria. 
Indeed, from the late 19th century there has been a tendency to 
attribute Oriental influences on Greece to Anatolia, whose 'Asianic' 
populations were not Semitic-speaking. Ancient tradition does refer to 
Greek contacts with Asia Minor, and it was from there that Pelops was 
supposed to have conquered much of Southern Greece. According to 
the Ancient Model, however, this conquest was consistently placed 
after those ofK.admos and Danaos, and Pe10ps was not given the credit 
for any cultural innovations - apart from chariot-racing. After the 
language of the ancient Anatolian " empire of the Hittites was discovered 
to be related to Indo-European in 1912, it was taken up with much 
enthusiasm by German Orientalists. Both they and Classicists have 
attempted to give Anatolians as much credit as possible for 'Oriental' 
influence on Greece. For instance, the British Classicist and historian 
P. Walcot, whose important work Hesiod and the Near East was pub­
lished in 1966, devotes his first chapter to the Hittites, and his 
second to the Babylonians; however, neither of these - in striking 
contrast to the Egyptians and Phoenicians - are mentioned in Antiquity 
18 sources of Greek mythology and religion. 107 Indeed, in the years with 
which the next chapter is concerned - 1885 to 1945 - what little 
,cholarly attention there was on Oriental influences on Greece concen­
rated on the transmission of Babylonian influence to Greece overland,


--- PAGE 199 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
avoiding Syria and following the Gennan preference for land rather 
than sea transport and communication. It is to this period that we shall 
now tum. 
( 
CHAPTER IX 
THE FINAL SOLUTION 
OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM, 
1885-1945 
T
HIS CHAPTER IS CONCERNED with the consolidation of the 
Aryan Model and the denial of both E-gyptian and Phoenician 
influence on the fonnation of Greece. The denial of Phoeni­
cian influence is clearly related to the strong anti-Semitism of the 
period, and in particular to its two climaxes or paroxysms - in the 1 880s 
and 90S and the 1920S and 30S. The first of these followed the mass 
migration of East EuropeanJews into Western Europe and crystallized 
around the Dreyfus Affair; the second came after the critical role of 
Jews in international Communism and the Russian Revolution and 
during the economic crises of the 1920S and 30S. 
In the 1890S in scholarship, initial salvos against traditions of 
Phoenician colonization were fired by an.. assimilated French Jew, 
Salomon Reinach, and a Gennan exile in Italy, Julius Beloch. These 
were followed by a lull during which the great French scholar Victor 
Berard had a great success in promoting his ideas of a fundamental 
Semitic penetration of Greece among the lay public - but not among his 
Classical colleagues. 
In the same period, however, Arthur Evans' sensational discoveries 
in Crete, and his differentiation of the 'Minoans' from the Semitic 
speakers who had previously been thought to have been the native


--- PAGE 200 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
population of the island, encouraged great interest in the 'Pre-Hellenic' 
populations of the Aegean. All aspects of Greek culture that could 
not be explained in terms of Indo-European were attributed to this 
mysterious 'Minoan' people, allowing Greece to be culturally self­
sufficient and removing any need to explain developments in terms of 
influences from the Near East. 
In the 1920S this rejection of any Semitic influence in the Aegean 
included a strikingly successful attempt to diminish the importance of 
the one Phoenician borrowing that could not be denied: the alphabet. 
Indeed, by 1939 supporters of the Extreme Aryan Model dominated 
the field to such an extent that for someone to suggest that the legends 
about the Phoenicians in Greece contained a kernel of truth meant an 
immediate loss of scholarly status. 
THE GREEK RENAISSANCE 
It was only in the late 1880s that Schliemann's views on the nationality 
of the 'Mycenaeans' began to be accepted, and their remains began 
to be labelled as European; the most active proponent of the new 
classification was the Greek archaeologist C. Tsountas. 
Since the establishment of independence, Greek intellectuals had 
mare a heroic effort to return their country to its 'Hellenic' past. 
Classical place names were revived and Turkish, Venetian and even 
Byzantine buildings were levelled to reveal ancient ruins. At the same 
time, 19th-century Greeks could not claim that Greeks had always been 
like the idealized image of 5th-century Athenians. Thus the Hellenic 
genius, though constantly shaped by its past and by the Greek climate 
and landscape, was seen to have taken many forms, while preserving its 
national essence. With this background, then, it is not surprising that 
Tsountas was excited by the new discoveries, which could be inter­
preted as showing that Greek genius was not limited to its Clas~ical 
form, but could have others which were equally genuine. 
Tsountas was conVinced that the Mycenaean remains were traces of 
Greek antecedents of Classical civilization, and strongly denied that they 
had anything to do with the Orient. 'This indigenous art, distinct and 
homogeneous in character, must have been wrought out by a strong and 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 369 
gifted race. That it was of Hellenic stock we have taken t~ be self­
evident.,l At other points, however, he did attempt to prove his case. In 
1891 the American Journal of Archaeology published a summary of one 
of his articles: 
Dr Tsountas' conclusions are unfavourable to the Asiatic origin of 
Mycenaean civilization. His main points are as follows: (I) The 
representation of divinities may be explained according to Greek 
ideas; (2) At Mykenai and Tiryns, there are no remains of eatable 
fishes but there are oysters, and the Greeks of Homer were not 
ichthyophagous, while there is one word in the Arian tongues to 
designate the oyster; (3) The Mycenaeans are connected on the one 
hand with the Italiotes and other Arians, and, on the other, with the 
Greeks of the historic period whose civilization is a continuation of 
theirs; (4) The type of Mycenaean house is adopted for a rainy 
climate and was imported from the north. 2 
The error in the first point has been touched on in the Introduction, and 
will be treated at length in the other two volumes. The second is too 
tenuous to assess. The third is circular, and in any event was completely 
outdated by the discovery of , Minoan' civilization in Crete. It is difficult 
to say what the fourth was based upon, as pitched roofs occur through­
out Syria and flat ones appear to have been the most common in the 
Bronze Age Aegean. All in all, very few ancient historians or archaeol­
ogists would take these arguments seriously today, though nearly 
all would accept the conclusions Tsountas ostensibly drew from 
them. 
Support for Semitic influence on Greece did not disappear im-
mediately. More common sense prevailed at the popular level. An 
American textbook published in 1895 contained the following: 
The nucleus of fact in all these legends is probably this - that the 
European Greeks received the primary elements of their culture 
from the East, and this in two ways: first, directly through the 
settlement in Greece in prehistoric times of Semitic races, particu­
larly the Phoenicians; and secondly indirectly, through Oriental 
Greeks who, settled on the shores of Asia Minor, in Crete and


--- PAGE 201 ---
370 BLACK ATHENA 
Cyprus, and possibly lower Egypt, came into contact with peoples of 
Semitic or semi-Semitic race ... and transmitted these germs of 
culture to their kinsmen in European Greece. 3 
By 1898, the independent scholar Robert Brown was fully aware of the 
issues involved. He attacked the 'Aryanists', who for a century had 
'almost wholly ignored or denied the existence of that great mass of 
Semitic influence, which the Aryo-Semitic School hold is to be found 
throughout the length and breadth of Hellas.,4 It is interesting that 
Brown's point of view, which had in fact been acceptable through much 
of the 19th century, now seemed eccentric and his whole book, read 
today, gives a sense of embattlement. 
SALOMON REINACH 
From the 1880s onwards the intellectual atmosphere of Europe was 
transformed by the triumph of racial anti-Semitism in Germany and 
Austria, and its sharp rise elsewhere. This change clearly had many 
causes, the most significant of which was the mass migration of East 
European] ews to Western Europe and America. They were used as a 
scapegoat for the sufferings of the urban workers, in building up an 
identif;ication of the urban workers and the peasants with the capitalists 
and landowners against these 'aliens'. Anti-Semitism also gained from 
the secularization and loss of faith after the late 185 as, and the success 
of other types of racism. 
The surge of racism was linked to imperialism and the sense of 
national solidarity built up in the metropolitan countries against the 
barbarous non-European 'natives'. Paradoxically, the 1880s and 90S 
were also the decades in whi€h Europe and North America gained 
complete control of the world. The indigenous peoples of America and 
Australia had been largely exterminated, and those of Africa and Asia 
were totally subdued and humiliated; there was no reason for 'the White 
Man' to take them into any political account. In this respect anti­
Semitism can be seen as a European luxury, to be indulged in only when 
there are no outside enemies. 
This, then, was the situation in 1892 when the French polymath 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 371 
Salomon Reinach wrote of Tsountas' writings: 'these ideas are in the 
air.'s The following year he himself published a key article along the 
same lines. The fact that Reinach should champion 'these ideas' shows 
that they were no longer the sole preserve of Romantics. Salomon 
Reinach and his distinguished brothers could hardly have been less 
Romantic. They came from a rich, assimilated] ewish family living in 
Paris, and Renan and other fashionable intellectuals were frequent 
visitors to their father's house. The brothers' attitude towards Judaism 
was complicated. Without religious education themselves, they be­
lieved that both it and Christianity were outdated superstitions. On the 
other hand, Salomon was concerned with preserving] ewish culture and 
was a patron of the Revue des Etudes Juives for many years. With his 
brother] oseph he was active in the Dreyfus case, being diametrically 
opposed to the Catholic Royalist forces behind the new anti-Semitism 
in France. 6 
Salomon Reinach was a scholar of extraordinary breadth and depth. 
His central interests, however, were in the new disciplines of archae­
ology and anthropology. Although he was knowledgeable about India 
and the Near East, his greatest concern was with the explosion of 
archaeological information coming from Northern, Central and West­
ern Europe. Since he was always adamant that language could not be 
linked to physical type, his writings in the early 1890S were a double 
declaration ofindependence: of Europe from the mirage oriental, and of 
'scientific' archaeology and anthropology from philology and its 
Romantic associations. In Reinach one can see both the virtues and the 
vices of 20th-century archaeology and Classics: the virtues are common 
sense and scepticism, while the vices are the requirement of proof -
when it concerns your opponents - low dating, and contempt for the 
Ancients. 
His long article 'Le mirage oriental' was a two-pronged attack on 
both India and the Semitic Near East. To use a military analogy of the 
type favoured by Reinach himself, the demotion of China, Egypt and 
the Turks had been achieved by an Indo-European-Semitic alliance. 
In the 1820S only K. O. Miiller, whom Reinach described as 'always in 
advance of his times', had had the courage to discard Europe's allies.
7


--- PAGE 202 ---
372 BLACK ATHENA 
By 1885 Europe's conquest of the world was so complete that this 
courage had become commonplace and could now cast the Indians and 
the Semites aside. 
When the history of the evolution of the historical sciences of the 
19th century is told, it will be rightly emphasized that it was in the 
period from 1880 to 1890 that - timidly at first, but later with an 
assurance that was better and better justified by the facts - a reaction 
against the 'mirage oriental' was set in motion; the revindication of the 
rights of Europe against the claims of Asia in the obscurity of the first 
civilizations. 8 
Reinach attacked the Indianist Romantics on three scores. First, he 
demonstrated that the attempts to link Indian to Greek mythology had 
failed. Secondly, on language, he cited the young linguist Ferdinand de 
Saussure, who had developed one of the ideas of the so-called Neo­
Grammarians, who had seen themselves in general revolt against the 
older generation of scholars. Reinach maintained that Saussure had 
dethroned Sanskrit from its position as the oldest and purest Indo­
European language; Saussure now identified 'Proto- Indo- European' 
as European and, specifically, with Lithuanian. Connected with this 
was the general shifting of the Urheimat of the Proto-Indo-European 
language family to the steppes of the Ukraine, or even to the Baltic.9 In 
anyevent, and as his third point, Reinach insisted that the Indo­
European speakers, if they ever had been a 'race', had been physi­
cally absorbed by the indigenous peoples of Europe and that 
the impressive prehistoric cultures of Western Europe were 
essentially autochthonous. 10 
The externalist reasons for Reinach's hostility to Aryan racism and 
his belie fin the assimilative capacities of Europe are obvious. His attack 
on Semitic influences is more complicated. This would seem to be 
related to a desire to assure"his own cultural identity as an assimilated 
European, with a consequent lack of Semitic cultural baggage. It may 
also have been partly derived from the new secular desire' to distance 
European Jews from the Phoenicians and Carthaginians that we saw 
above in connection with Moloch. Apart from an assertion of his 
integrity, his support of Judaic studies should be seen as serving the 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUT,ION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 373 
double function of , preserving for science by killing' that permeated all 
19th-century natural science. . . 
Reinach denied 'absolutely' that there had been any Serrullc or 
'Cushitic' (Egyptian) influence on Europe up to the later 'Metallic Age'. 
He did, however, admit that from the beginning of Phoenician com­
merce, which he put in the 13th century BC, 'Occidental civilization 
became ... to a certain extent ... tributary to that of the Orientals.' 11 
Nevertheless, he maintained that the basis of the civilization had 
remained resolutely indigenous. Furthermore, he believed that the 
great prehistoric civilizations of Europe had influenced those of 
the Orient, and if scholars tried boldly enough this 'passage from the 
defensive to the offensive' would be successful.12 Reinach agreed with 
Tsountas that Mycenaean civilization was European, as, he maintained, 
were similar cultures found around the Mediterranean and Black Sea; 
and he saw temporal and local differences as the results of super­
positions of different tribes 'of the same stock which had reached 
different degrees of culture'. 13 
JULIUS BELocH 
Despite his radicalism, by admitting Semitic influence after 1300 BC 
Reinach had not returned all the way to K. O. Muller. This was 
achieved in the following year, 1894, by Julius Beloch in a short but 
immensely influential article, 'The Phoenicians on the Aegean Sea' .14 
Beloch was yet another German living in Rome. He taught at its 
university for fifty years, from 1879 to 1929, and like Humboldt, 
Niebuhr and Bunsen, he loved travelling in Italy and cataloguing its 
. d ,. . I li ltu' 15 monuments; like them he remame Impemous to ta an cu re. 
For all his success as a teacher and the massive volume of his 
publications, Beloch seems to have regarded himself as a failure 
condemned to exile. He appears to have been kept out of German 
academic life by the great German historian of Rome, Mommsen. 
Another reason for Beloch's inability to find a satisfactory position in 
Germany was that he was suspected, rightly or wrongly, ofbeingJ ewish. 
Despite - or more probably because of-this suspicion, he was not only 
a passionate German nationalist but also a virulent anti-Semite.
16


--- PAGE 203 ---
374 BLACK ATHENA 
Furthermore, he extended his anti-Semitism into his writing of history: 
'A Negro who speaks English is not for that reason an Englishman, and 
a Jew who spoke Greek was as little a Greek as a Jew who speaks 
German passes today for German.' 17 
Julius Beloch wrote prodigiously on both Greek and Italian history, 
and he is best remembered and respected for his introduction of 
modern statistical methods into ancient history.18 This application of 
hard treatment to soft - if not liquid - data went with a rigid require­
ment for proof, an ultra-critical approach to ancient sources and a 
passion for low dating. It also went with what I described in the 
Introduction as 'archaeological positivism', an absolute faith in 
archaeology as the one 'scientific' source of information on Antiquity. 
This in turn is related to the punning belief that dealing with objects 
somehow makes one 'objective', and Beloch and his successors have 
shown little sensitivity to the fact that archaeological interpretations can 
be just as susceptible to subjective influences as the interpretation of 
documents, linguistics and myths. 
Professor Momigliano, in his essay on Beloch, refers to 'the implicit 
conflicts between his liberalism and his nationalism ... between his 
racism and his cult of numbers,.19 While not denyirig the implicit 
contradictions, I believe that they are usually 'non-antagonistic'. If one 
broadens 'cult of numbers' to a positivist requirement of proof, these 
'implicit conflicts' have been the staple of 19th- and 20th-century 
Classics. They make up the 'critical-genetic writing of history' for which 
the right-wing ancient historian Wilcken righdy praised Niebuhr. 20 
Although Beloch was attacked by more liberal colleagues like Momm­
sen and Wilamowitz-Moellendorf - as he is now by Momigliano - his 
views were only an extreme version of those held by the discipline as a 
whole. Leaving aside for the moment his treatment of the Semites, few 
Classicists would disagree with his notion that 'science has nothing to 
do with mere possibility', which, like him, they combine with frequent 
use of the word 'probably'. 21 
Like most 20th-century Qassicists, Beloch knew no Semitic lan­
guage. Nevertheless, citing recent German scholarship, he felt able to 
deny Phoenician loans into Greek language and place names, however 
'alluring' the correspondences might appear. For instance, 'he even 
[CU. IX] FINAL SOLUT~ON OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 375 
denied the previously widely recognized relationships between the 
Jordan and the river name Iardanos, found in Crete and Elis; or 
between Mt Tabor in Israel and Mt Atabyrion in Rhodes. 22 He found 
Eduard Meyer - himself a stalwart German nationalist - useful in this 
respect. Meyer was like Adolf Holm in that while radical in his purging 
of Semitic influences from Greece, he did not deny the Phoenician 
setdements in the Aegean. Thus he could be cited as objective on the 
issue.23 Beloch followed K. O. Muller in attributing the Greek and 
Near Eastern references to common cultic origins to contacts in late 
Classical or Hellenistic times. 24 
Beloch took from another scholar the idea that the Phoenicians could 
not have taught the Greeks to make ships, because there were supposed 
to be no Semitic loans among Greek nautical terms. Hence they could 
not have arrived early in the Aegean.25 This argument is doubly 
misleading. In the first place, the presence of Phoenicians in the Aegean 
in, say, the 2nd millennium does not mean that the Proto-Greeks 
before then lacked ships; secondly, there are, as it happens, a number of 
quite plausible Semitic etyma for Greek nautical terms which have no 
known Indo-European roots. Although everybody had conceded the 
Egyptian origin for baris (skiff), Beloch and his contemporaries did not 
consider the possibility of other Egyptian roots in this semantic area. In 
actuality these can explain an equally large number of the terms, which 
would tally well with the fact that the earliest detailed representations of 
boats from the Aegean, those from the mid-2nd-millennium murals at 
Thera, are clearly of Egyptian types.26 
Beloch also maintained that Phoenician boats had been too small and 
inexperdy sailed to brave the open sea. Thus, while they might have 
been able to creep along the coast to North Africa, they could not have 
reached the Aegean before the 8th century. Apart from the massive 
ancient tradition to the contrary, there is now overwhelming archaeo­
logical evidence to suggest that they did.27 Here, like most Extreme 
Aryanists, Beloch naturally preferred to attribute any unavoidable 
Oriental influences to, or at least through, Anatolia and the land route. 
In general, one way of distinguishing Broad from Extreme Aryanists 
is by their attitude to Thucydides. While the Broad Aryanists are 
uncomfortable with Herodotos' 'Egyptomania' and 'interpretatio


--- PAGE 204 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Graeca', they deeply respect Thucydides. Thucydides did not mention 
any Egypto- Phoenician colonies on mainland Greece; he did, however, 
refer to Phoenician settlements on the Greek islands and all around 
Sicily. Beloch utterly denied their existence, demanding archaeological 
'proof' for the 'unsubstantiated' though widespread ancient testimony 
about them.
28 
His chief concern, however, was over Homer's relatively 
frequent references to Phoenicia(ns) and Sidon(ians). Like Miiller, 
Beloch tried to diminish the former by pointing out that phoinix had 
many different meanings in Greek; he dealt with the irreducible 
references to Phoenicians by postulating that they belonged to the latest 
layer of the epics which, following Wolf and Miiller, he saw as accretive 
rather than as single creative acts. Beloch firmly denied that there were 
any references to Phoenicians at the epics' core, and justified this belief 
by citing the absence of Phoenicians from the list of Troy's barbarian 
allies in the Iliad, which he took to be exhaustive for the Aegean and 
Anatolia.
29 
Thus he was able to maintain that Phoenicians could not 
have come to the Aegean before the end of the 8th century and 
therefore could not have played a significant role in the formation of 
Greek civilization. 
The modem Belgian scholar Guy Bunnens has written about the 
men who founded Extreme Aryanism: 
In reading their work, one cannot help thinking that these authors 
were not always ruled by scientific objectivity alone. Reinach and 
Autran [a French scholar with similar views] insisted on reserving a 
place in the most distant past for the peoples who dominated world 
politics in their own period: that is to say, for the Europeans. They 
maintained that it was unbelievable that nations so important today 
should have played no role in the past. It was therefore necessary to 
'assert the rights of Europe over the claims of Asia'. The historical 
background at the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th 
centuries explains these new theories. For this was the epoch when 
the colonialism of the European powers was triumphant ... There 
was another non-scientific factor. The end of the 19th century saw a 
great current of anti-Semitism in Europe, particularly in Germany 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 377 
and France ... this hostility against the Jews extended in history 
against those other Semites, the Phoenicians. 3o 
VICTOR BERARD 
Interestingly, the pattern Bunnens describes was visible to the percep­
tive at the time. In 1894, the year in which Beloch published his article, 
Victor Berard brought out his much more substantial On the Origin of the 
ArkmJian Cults; this had precisely the opposite interpretation of Greek 
relations with the Phoenicians. 
Berard, born in the mountains of the Jura near the Swiss border, 
made his way by scholarships to a lycee in Paris and the Ecole Normale. In 
1887 he went to the French school at Athens and for three years he was 
involved in excavations in Arkadia, the archetypal rustic and archaic 
mountainous province in the centre of the Peloponnese; he travelled 
widely in this remote province, and throughout Greece and the Balkans 
as well. Berard was a man of extraordinary energy and determination -
not only did he continue with his academic career, but he published 
many books on the contemporary Balkans, Near East and Russia and 
for some years edited a political journal, the Revue de Paris. He was later 
elected senator for the Jura. Although radical in politics, he became 
closely attached to the French navy and developed a fascination for the 
sea.31 
He attributed the themes of his first book on Arkadian cults to two 
revelations that came to him while living in the province. The first was 
the extraordinary accuracy of Pausanias, wherever it was possible to 
check his work by surveying or archaeology. It may seem rather strange 
that Berard should have been surprised at this discovery when the 
2nd-century guidebook had just been so spectacularly vindicated by 
Schliemann's discoveries in Mycenae and Tiryns, precisely where 
Pausanias had indicated that there would be significant sites. However, 
the academic spirit of Besserwissen epitomized by Reinach and Beloch 
was not so easily disconcerted. Pausanias, like other ancient historians 
and geographers, continued to be treated with the affectionate con­
descension considered appropriate for children. In any event, Berard 
Was convinced that Pausanias had visited the sites he said he had, and


--- PAGE 205 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
had described them accurately, and this encouraged the Frenchman to 
believe other ancient writers too.32 
Berard also saw that the Arkadian cults were unHellenic. This was 
not controversial, because Arkadia had always been associated with 
the Pelasgians. What did surprise him, and outrage his colleagues, 
was his conclusion that they were Semitic. For by the late 1880s 
it was axiomatic that the Phoenicians, as a seafaring people, could 
not go inland, and Beloch was only systematizing a general belief that 
Phoenician influence in Greece was very late. Both these suppositions 
were violated by the idea of substantial Semitic influences in an inland 
province proverbial for its archaic customs. 
Berard fully realized the incongruities. Convinced of his conclusions, 
he began to question the orthodoxy against which they offended, and to 
look for modern analogies. It led him to make a statement which I shall 
quote in full, because it beautifully summarizes the main theme of Black 
Athena. When justifying the Phoenician presence in poor, remote and 
inland 'Pelasgian' Arkadia, he wrote: 
... many Europeans today go to Pelasgians, who are no less distant 
or savage, and for equally slight gains, to discover African Arkadias. 
The taste for voyages and adventures is not the monopoly of anyone 
period or anyone race, and the extraordinary dispersion of Semites 
in the contemporary world ... It is true that modem travellers have 
two motives that the Sidonians do not appear to have possessed, at 
least to the same degree: scientific curiosity and religious zeal. 
Furthermore, this comparison between the Pelasgians and the 
modem Congolese may be surprising. However, one should be on 
guard against two preconceived ideas, or rather two little-reasoned 
and almost unconscious feelings: ... our European chauvinism and 
also what one could call, without too much irreverence, our Greek 
fanaticism. 
From Strabo [the 1st-century geographer] to [Carl] Ritter [the 
early -I 9th -century geographer trained at Gottingen], all the geogra­
phers have taught us to consider our Europe as a land favoured above 
all others, unique and superior to all the others in beauty . . . in 
e~egance of forms and power of civilization ... This way oflooking at 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 379 
the world perhaps can influence a large number of our most habitual 
thoughts, despite ourselves or almost without our knowledge. We 
put Europe on one side and Asia or Africa on the other - and 
between the two, an abyss. When we talk about Asiatic influences on 
a European country we cannot imagine ... that barbarians could 
have dared to come to us. Harsh reality forces us to admit that they 
have som~times flooded in. Certain people even maintain that the 
cradle of our first ancestors was far from our Europe, in the centre of 
Asia. But for our Aryan fathers we have the indulgence of good sons 
in that even if they came from Asia, they were not Asiatics, they were 
for all eternity Indo-Europeans. By contrast, an invasion from 
Semitic Asia to our Aryan Europe is repugnant to all our prejudices. 
It seems really as if the Phoenician coast was further away from us 
than the Iranian plateau. It also appears that the Arab invasion 
throughout the Mediterranean was only a unique fluke, an unfortu­
nate chance ... which one should not for an instant suppose could be 
repeated. That the Phoenicians occupied Carthage and possessed· 
half Tunisia only concerns Africa. That the Carthaginians in their 
tum conquered Spain and three-quarters of Sicily is [all right 
because they are] only, as we say, Africa. But when we find Phoe­
nician traces at Marseilles, Praeneste, K ythera, Salamis, Thasos and 
Samothrace, in Boiotia and in Lakonia at Rhodes and in Crete we do 
not want, as in Africa, real occupations; we only talk about temporary 
landings or simple trading posts ... If we go as far as pronouncing 
the words fortresses or Phoenician possessions we hasten to add that they 
were only coastal establishments ... This European chauvinism be­
comes a veritable fanaticism when it is not in Gaul, Etrnria, Lucania 
or Thrace but in Greece that we meet the stranger. At the beginning 
of this century, all Europe rose up ... the generous Philhellenism 
of 1820 is no longer fashionable. But one can say that the sentiment 
has not greatly changed ... We can only conceive of Greece as the 
country of heroes and gods. Under porticos of white marble ... 
In vain does Herodotos tell us that everything comes from Phoenicia 
and Egypt. We know what we should think of dear old Herodotos. 
After twenty years of Archaeology have provided us, every day and in


--- PAGE 206 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
all the Greek states, with indisputable proofs of Oriental influence 
we are still not allowed to treat Greece as an Oriental province lik~ 
Caria, Lycia or Cyprus because of this. If in our geography we 
separate Europe from Asia, in our history we separate Greek history 
from what we call ancient history. We see, nevertheless, from their 
material and tangible monuments that the Greeks . . . were the 
pupils of Phoenicia and Egypt, and we see that they borrowed from 
the Semitic Orient right up to their alphabet; yet we recoil with some 
shock at the sacrilegious hypothesis that their institutions, their 
customs, their religions, their rituals, their ideas, their literature and 
all their primitive civilization could also be inherited from the Orient. 
(his italics)33 
It is interesting to note that for all his boldness, Berard did not - unlike 
his contemporary, Foucart - seriously propose Egyptian influence; nor 
did he challenge the holy of holies, the Greek language. 
I found it very moving to discover this articulate statement of the 
beliefs behind my own work written at the height ofimperialism and the 
beginning of the Extreme Aryan Model. However, this fact itself 
appears to pose a challenge to my method of explaining these scholarly 
developments in externalist terms - that is, as being heavily influenced 
by outside social and political developments and the overall intellectual 
atmosphere. To overcome this challenge, I think it would be useful to 
look at three tiers of scholarship: the thoughts of individual scholars; 
their ability to teach and publish; and the general developments in 
scholarship. I believe that the sociology of knowledge can make only 
approximate predictions of attitudes and behaviour at the first level. It 
can do rather better at the second, but it comes into its own only at the 
third and most general level. 
This case belongs to the first and second levels. I believe that a 
German Berard would have been impossible and an English one 
unlikely. Schliemann gives a neat example of the· Romantic confines 
within which even the most creatively radical German could think on 
these matters. Gladstone, Frazer and Harrison show the relatively 
broader bounds possible in Britain. Only the professional heretic and 
brilliant anthropologist of Semitic religion Robertson Smith could 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 381 
begin to go beyond them. It was solely in France - with its post-1 870 
suspicion of German Aryanism - and among republicans - with their 
hatred of Catholic Royalist anti-Semitism - that such thoughts could be 
thought. One might even say, in a Romantic way, that Berard's regional 
.. origin was important in that there was a strong tradition of secular and 
socially radical individualism in both the French and Swiss Jura which 
made it the model for the 'big three' social anarchists, Proudhon, 
Bakunin and Kropotkin.34 Another important factor was that Berard 
was not a 'pure' academic: he had his outside, journalistic and political 
worlds to give him a wider perspective, and we should note similar 
. features in Schliemann and Gladstone. 
This last factor is crucial at the second level. It is only when he or she 
has a wider, public status that the academic heretic can have any hope of 
publishing their 'unsound' ideas. In the 19th and early 20th centuries 
conformist academia did not have the near monopoly on 'respectable' 
publication now available to the orthodoxies through university presses, 
which allows academics to ignore arguments published elsewhere. 
Even then, however, it was difficult for nonconformist scholars and 
outsiders to obtain a hearing. 
Going beyond the bounds of orthodox academia has another dis­
advantage in that it is difficult for the scholar without a discipline, 'going 
it alone', to know where to stop. On the principle that one might as well 
be hung for a sheep as for a lamb, there is a great temptation to 'tell it 
like it is', regardless of the preconceptions of one's audience. The 
scholar can easily go beyond not only the bounds of what is possible for 
the most broad-minded of the orthodox to accept, but also of what is 
useful to the rigorous development of his or her ideas. 
Berard, for instance, developed the theory that as there was a 
Phoenician Mediterranean behind the Greek Mediterranean, there 
was a Phoenician Odyssey behind the Greek one.35 This wild hypothesis 
provided 'sound scholars' with an ideal weapon to discredit him and all 
his ideas. Nevertheless, in the course of his massive and detailed 
researches on the topic he discovered a large number of plausible 
Semitic etymologies for Greek place names, and he also established the 
useful principle of the toponymic 'doublet'. This referred to situations 
where two apparendy different place names were used for the same or


--- PAGE 207 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
nearby places. In such cases he argued that the names were simply 
Greek and Semitic words for the same thing. 
Take, for example, the Island of Kythera, to the south-east of the 
Peloponnese. A Mesopotamian inscription dating back to the 18th 
century BC had been discovered there in 1849; Herodotos wrote that 
the temple of Aphrodite Ourania was founded there by the 
Phoenicians; Aphrodite was frequendy portrayed as wearing a crown.36 
Berard noticed that the name of the island's chief harbour was Skan­
deia, which the best ancient Greek lexicographer, Hesychios, said 
meant 'a kind of head-dress'. Berard then pointed out that Kythera, 
the name of the island and its chief city, which had no Indo-European 
etymology, could be plausibly derived from the Semitic root ""ktr 
found in the Hebrew keter or kiiteret, 'crown or tiara'. 37 
Despite the very plausible nature of this and many other toponymic 
and cultic parallels, the orthodox were able to dismiss Berard and all 
his works because of the evident impossibility of Odysseus' being a 
Phoenician. By the time of Berard's death in 1931 his name had become 
a byword for crankiness in scholarly circles, but it should be noted that 
an underground movement continued to hold such ideas 'in the closet' . 
Furthermore, his books were widely read and appreciated by the public 
at large, among whom there seems to have been the feeling, expressed 
by Gobineau fifty years earlier, that Odysseus was in some way Semitic. 
Berard was particularly well received in Britain, with its remaining 
identification with and affection for the Phoenicians, and his influence 
has left a permanent mark on literature inJamesJoyce's Ulysses, which is 
aboutJews, not Greeks. 
Nevertheless, Berard was unable to stop the steamroller of Extreme 
Aryanism in scholarship, and at this third and most significant level the 
sociology of knowledge can be used with some accuracy. I am convinced 
that European politics and society from 1880 to 1939 were so steeped 
in racism and anti-Semitism, and Classics was so central to the 
educational and social systems, that - regardless of the historical and 
archaeological evidence - it would have been impossible to change the 
image of Ancient Greece in the way Berard wanted to. It was not 
until after the decline of colonialism and the official delegitimiz­
arion of racism and anti-Semitism between 1945 and 1960 that any 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTI?N OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 383 
dent could be made in the models of ancient history based upon 
them. 
AKHENATON AND THE 
EGYPTIAN RENAISSANCE 
Neither Berard nor Foucart refers to each other in their works. 
Although one can only speculate, it is almost as if they felt that one 
heresy was enough - that it would have been too much to champion 
both the Egyptians and the Phoenicians at the same time. Neverthe­
less, it is clear that with the rise of anti-Semitism and hostility to 
the Phoenicians, there was increasing room for toleration of the 
Egyptians. Professional Egyptologists now preserved the orthodoxy 
of the Egyptians' categorical inferiority, but among lay people 
they were now seen as so exotic as to pose no threat to European 
civilization. 
The figure of the heretic king Akhenaton was particularly admired. 
As Amenophis IV, this 18th-dynasty pharaoh of the 14th century BC 
broke away from his family's and dynasty's worship of Amon and the 
other gods, and tried to establish a monotheism based on the sun disc 
~tn, Aton. From Aton he took the new name Akhenaton. He moved from 
the traditional capital at Thebes to a new one, built at a site now known 
as EI Amarna. Soon after his death, however, the reform was ended, the 
worship of Amon was re-established and the capital returned to 
Thebes. The destroyed and deserted EI Amarna was left as a perfect 
site for archaeology and when, in the 1880s, the site was excavated by 
Flinders Petrie and the outline of the events around the attempted 
reform was established, a great European enthusiasm for Akhenaton 
developed. 
Egyptologists paid particular attention to giving him and his new 
religion Aryan, or at least northern, credentials. Petrie claimed that the 
religion had originated in the Hurrian-speaking northern kingdom of 
Mitanni, from where, he alleged, Akhenaton's grandfather, mother and 
wife had all come.38 These beliefs - or modifications of them -
remained very popular for the next fifty years, as in the following 
statement by an Egyptologist who was able to turn the reforms into a


--- PAGE 208 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
racial matter: 'It must always be remembered that the king had 
much foreign blood in his veins. On the other hand those with 
whom he spoke, though highly educated, were but superstitious 
Egyptians ... ,39 
It is generally, and reasonably, agreed today that if the members of 
the royal family of the 18th Dynasty were foreign, they were Nubian. It 
is equally probable, however, that they were Upper Egyptian, and from 
their portraits they would seem to have been Blacks.40 On the question 
of the new religion, it was argued that the cult of > itn came from a Semitic 
cult of> dn, ) adOn (lord). Nevertheless, here too the consensus is that the 
religious reforms can be more piausibly explained as a native Egyptian 
development, and the schema of Mitanni origin was clearly designed to 
explain the racial 'impossibility' of 'static' African Egyptians having 
made a drastic reform - in what Christians had to admit was a positive 
direction. 41 
On the other hand, the enthusiasm for Akhenaton and his reforms -
even on the part of those who were reconciled to his being Egyptian -
would seem to indicate that other forces were involved. One of these 
was a revival of the old belief that the Jews as a people, or Moses as a 
man, had learnt their religion from Egypt. Scholars were cautious on 
the issue, but the existence of a monotheism in the 14th century BC in a 
neighbouring country made it altogether natural to derive the Israelite 
form from there. Some writers even believed that worship of Aton was 
superior to Judaism: 'By no other religion in the world is Christianity so 
closely approached as by the faith of Akhenaton.,42 Thus Christianity, 
either spiritually or historically, could be ultimately derived not from the 
Semites but from an actual or honorary Aryan, and this is the context in 
which one should view Freud's Moses andMonotheism, written in the late 
1930S. Freud, however, wanted precisely the opposite of Akhenaton's 
Christian admirers. In order to alleviate the intense anti-Semitism of 
the times he appears to have hoped to excuse Judaism and Jews from 
responsibility for the repression of Christian monotheism, and put the 
blame on Akhenaton and the Egyptians.43 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 385 
ARTHUR EVANS AND THE 'MINOANS' 
S after the beoinning of the 20th century, scholarly discussions had oon o~ • f" 
to include a new factor: the 'Minoan' civilization of Crete. EVlden~e 0 It 
came from Arthur Evans' sensational discoveries at Knossos In the 
8 os and the other excavations quickly undertaken elsewhere on the 
I 9 , I . . land. With the realization that the Mycenaean cu ture was In many 
:ays simply a debased form of the Cretan one, the linguistic identifi-
O·on of ancient Cretan culture naturally became critically important. 
a > h In Classical times, the Egyptian use of the name Kftiw seems to ave 
shifted from 'Cretan' to 'Phoenician', and the Greeks seem to have 
referred to 'Minoans', as well as Phoenicians, as Phoinikes.
44 
This 
would suggest a Semitic connection. In any event, it seems to have been 
accepted, at least in Hellenistic times, that the chief language of early 
Crete was Phoenician. Lucius Septimius, for instance, wrote in the 4th 
century AD that when an earthquake in 66 AD had revealed ancient 
Cretan documents, the Emperor Nero had called in Semitists to 
interpret them. 45 Then, as we saw in Chapter VII, Ernst Curtius was 
willing to concede that there had been considerable Semitic settlement 
in Crete, while denying that the local Pelasgians had ever been 
completely overcome. 46 Arthur Evans himself believed that there was 
a relationship between ancient Cretans, whom he now called the 
'Minoans' - after the legendary king Minos of Crete and the common­
place name Minoa - and the Phoenicians; though we should remember 
that he agreed with Gladstone that the Phoenicians were not purely 
Semitic, and had received Aegean influence:1-7 
Evans was born in 1851 and, though educated at Oxford and 
Gottingen, belonged to the older and more broad-minded generation. 
Thus he accepted the possibility of Semitic, and even Libyan, influence 
on Crete, and hence on the Aegean as a whole. Nevertheless, his 
coining of the name 'Minoan' encouraged people to think of Crete as a 
unitary culture which was completely detached from the civilizations of 
the Middle East. It was easy, therefore, for the academic consensus to 
come to the conclusion that the Minoan language was neither Hellenic 
nor Semitic; nor, despite the huge number of Egyptian objects found at 
every level in Crete, was it thought to be Egyptian. 'Minoan' was


--- PAGE 209 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
generally considered to be related to various Anatolian languages; 
therefore it was or was not Indo-European, according to one's 
definition of the latter., 
There was an equal determination to show that the Minoans were 
'racially' not Semites. As one scholar wrote in 1911, describing a 
well-known Minoan fresco: 
The cupbearer may indicate their physique, black curly hair, straight 
nose, long skull; and I, for one, decline to believe that this fine fellow 
is a Semite or Phoenician, as has been suggested. We know that these 
people were extraordinarily gifted, especially in the sense of form, 
and that they were capable of very rapid development. 48 
By this time the Minoans were seen as the most civilized Pelasgians, and 
the prevailing line was spelled out by two historians of Western Asia: 
Probably no discovery of more far-reaching importance to our 
knowledge of the history of the world generally, and of our own 
culture especially, has ever been found than the finding of Mycenae 
by Schliemann, and the further finds that have resulted therefrom, 
culminating in the discoveries of Mr Arthur Evans at Knossos. 
Naturally, these discoveries are of extraordinary interest to us, for 
they have revealed the beginnings and first bloom of the European 
civilization of today. Our culture ancestors are neither the Egyptians 
nor the Assyrians, nor the Hebrews, [note the omission of the 
Phoenicians even as a possibility!] but the Hellenes; and they, the 
Aryan Greeks, derived most of their civilization from the Pre­
Hellenic people whom they found on the land before them. 49 
Everything now depended on the Pre-Hellenes! 
I have mentioned the old compromise that Phoenicians may have 
come to Greece but that it did not matter, because they had had no 
effect on the development of Greek civilization. Despite the growing 
strength of the Extreme Aryan Model, there were still holdouts from 
the Broad Aryan Model who took this line, and these included Evans; 
Schliemann's old colleague, the brilliant architect and surveyor 
Wilhelm Dorpfeldt; and the great polymath Eduard Meyer. They 
maintained, with Thucydides, that there had been genuine Phoenicians 
[CH. IX) FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 387 
in the islands, and possibly even at Thebes. so Such thinking was 
intolerable to the younger generation who had come to maturity after 
1885. As the leading earlY-20th-century British historian of Greece -
and a leading liberal- J. B. Bury put it in 1900, in hisA History of Greece, 
which remains standard today: 'The Phoenicians, doubdess, had marts 
here and there on coast and island; but there is no reason to think that 
Canaanites ever made homes for themselves on Greek soil or intro­
duced Semitic blood into the population of Greece.,51 Note the use of 
the two key Romantic and racist words 'soil' and 'blood'! Such attitudes 
survived up to and beyond the Second World War. 
THE PEAK OF ANTI-SEMITISM, 
1920-39 
The atmosphere became even harsher in the 1920S. Anti-Semitism 
intensified throughout Europe and North America following the per­
ceived and actual centrality of Jews in the Russian Revolution. There 
had always been Jewish bankers and financiers to blame for economic 
crises and national frustrations; now in the Bolshevik party the pre­
viously vague image of a Jewish conspiracy to subvert and overthrow 
Christian morality and order seemed to have taken visible form.52 
Such feelings were not restricted to Germany, or to vulgar extremists 
like the Nazis. All over Northern Europe and North America, anti­
Semitism became the norm in 'nice society', and 'nice society' included 
the universities. The contemporary social historian Professor Oren has 
recendy provided detailed background to the imposition of tight quotas 
to reduce the number of Jewish students at Yale and at associated 
professional schools during the 1920S, and there is no reason to 
Suppose that what he describes there did not apply to other colleges and 
universities in the US, and - in a more disorganized way - in Britain 
tOO.53 
It is true that in the 1 930S there were a number of very distinguished 
anti-Fascist Classicists whose love of Greek liberty went with their 
opposition to Nazi and Fascist tyranny. But we have seen that Philhel­
lenism has always had Aryanist and racist connotations, and Classics its 
conservative bias. Thus there is no doubt that the discipline as a whole


--- PAGE 210 ---
II BLACK ATHENA 
shared the prevailing anti-Semitism, if it did not go beyond it. An 
example of the atmosphere of the times in Classics can be seen in th 
following letter, found in 1980 on the desk of Professor Harry Caplan o~ 
Cornell, who was for many years the only Jewish tenured professor of 
the subject in the Ivy League: 
My dear Caplan: I want to second Professor Bristol's advice and urge 
you. ~o get into secondary teaching. The opportunities for college 
pOSItlOns, never too many, are at present few and likely to be fewer. I 
can encourage no one to look forward to securing a college post. 
There is, moreover, a very real prejudice against theJew. Personally, 
I do not share this, and I am sure the same is true of all our staffhere. 
But we have seen so many well-equipped Jews fail to secure 
appointments that this fact has been forced upon us. I recall Alfred 
Gudeman, E. A. Loew - both brilliant scholars of international 
reputation, and yet unable to obtain a college position. I feel it is 
wrong to encourage anyone to devote himself to the higher walks of 
learning to whom the path is barred by an undeniable racial preju­
dice. In this I am joined by all my Classical colleagues, who have 
authorized me to append their signatures with my own to this letter. 
(signed) Charles E. Bennet, C. L. Durham, George S. Bristol, E. P. 
Andrews [27/ 3/1 919] Ithaca. 54 
In this atmosphere, it is hardly surprising that scholarship should 
emphasize both the complete separation of Greece from the Near East 
and scepticism about Phoenicia's ever having played a positive culturai 
role in the Mediterranean. 
20TH-CENTURY ARYANISM 
Despite the beginnings of a new attack on racism, there was an increase 
of Aryan racism not only among the extreme and disreputable right, 
typified by the Nazis, but in regular academic circles. Even the great 
Marxist prehistorian Gordon Childe shared in it, devoting a whole book 
to TheAryans, the preface of which linked language and physical race: 
'The Indo-European languages and their assumed parent speech have 
been throughout exceptionally delicate and flexible instruments of 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 389 
thought ... It follows then that the Aryans must have been gifted with 
exceptional mental endowments, if not in the enjoyment of a high 
material culture.' Childe also referred to the 'certain spiritual unity' of 
those who share a common tongue. He explained the superiority of the 
Aryan spirit with the following example: 'Anyone who doubts this would 
do well to compare the dignified narrative carved by the ... (Aryan) 
Darius on the rock at Behistun with the bombastic and blatant self­
glorification of the inscriptions of the (Semitic) Ashurbanipal or 
Nebuchadrezzar. ,55 
An equally crude racism pervades the first edition of the Cambridge 
Ancient History, published under the editorship of Bury and his col­
leagues in 1924. Intended as a model of the 'new', 'objective' history 
written collectively by experts about their own particular fields, it 
quickly succeeded in gaining canonical status, and the same model of 
'Cambridge History' has now been applied to many regions and 
cultures in the world. The introductory section of the entire Ancient 
History is dominated by race. In its first chapter, John Myres, Professor 
of Ancient History at Oxford, proclaimed his position in the Niebuhrian 
ethnic tradition of ancient history: 
Ancient peoples come upon the stage of history ... in a certain order 
... each with a make-up congruous with the part they will play ... 
history presupposes the formation of that character, ... in the 
greenroom of the remoter past: and the sketch which follows ... is 
intended ... to describe how men came by these qualities of build 
and temperament ... 56 
Accepting the common tripartite view of human races, Myres described 
'the Mongol' as 'parasitic', 'infantile' and like 'a quadruped seen from 
behind'! Having made this jocular reference to their cowardice, Myres 
proceeded to have his cake and eat it, stating that their group psychology 
was of a 'peculiar' type which did not 'set much value on human life ... 
Almost inhuman in his normal apathy, the Mongol can display almost 
equine savagery when provoked by panic or ill-usage. ,57 Blacks came 
off surprisingly lightly, though 'the Negro' was described as having a 
'carnivorous-looking jaw' and 'great physical strength'. 58 
Professor S. A. Cook, in his chapter on 'the Semites', also reflected


--- PAGE 211 ---
390 BLACK ATHENA 
the attitudes of the times. Since Semites were fundamentally different 
from Aryans, there was something very wrong about them. Cook 
accused them of extremes of optimism and pessimism, of asceticism 
and sensuality. They possessed great energy, enthusiasm, aggressive­
ness and courage, but no perseverance, little civic or national loyalty, 
and little concern about the ethical value of actions: 'Personal feeling is 
the source of action, not common sense, or plan or morality.,S9 
There is a striking contrast between Cook's 'unethical' Semites and 
Renan's 'moral' Semites sixty years previously. This would seem to 
reflect both the additional impact of the Arabs on the amalgam of 
'Semites', and of the fear of the Jewish-led, Bolshevik hordes following 
their Hebrew prophet, Marx. Cook was, on the other hand, closer to 
Renan when he argued that discursive thought was lacking among the 
Semites: 'In the Hebrew prophets and in Mohammed's Koran we have 
enthusiasm, eloquence and imagination rather than logical exactness, 
sustained thought and sweeping comprehension ... The thought does 
not proceed step-wise, nor is it detached or objective.,6o 
This type of thinking continued well beyond the Second World War, 
forming the basis for the archaeologist, art historian and philosopher of 
ancient history Henri Frankfort's distinction between the 'mythopoeic' 
thought of the Ancient Egyptians, Semites and 'modem savages' as 
opposed to the 'rational' thought of the Greeks and later Europeans. 61 
A categorical distinction of this kind, of course, plays down the huge 
extent of'mythopoeic' thought in modem society; but more than this, it 
is invalidated by the 'objective accuracy' achieved by Mesopotamians 
and Egyptians in their measurement of space and time, and the extent to 
which they allowed measurement to dominate their lives. 
To return now to Cook's vision of the Semites in the Cambridge 
Ancient History as 'middlemen, copying foreign models ... , reshaping 
what they adopt ... and stamping themselves on what they send out. ,62 
Here, paradoxically, we have something that sounds remarkably like the 
tradition of Epinomis, according to which the Greeks had 'perfected' 
everything they took from other cultures. 63 For Cook, however, the 
Greeks - together with the Pre-Hellenes - were no longer seen in this 
way. They were the originators of their own culture. 
The basic views of the scholars who started the Cambridge Ancient 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOL~TION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 391 
History can be seen from these introductory chapters. They made it 
clear that everything now hinged on the Pre-Hellenes, and during the 
1920S they and other 'modem' scholars made a determined effort ~o 
find out as much as possible about these Pre-Hellenes and theIr 
. relations with the Hellenes themselves. It was in this decade that 
the great Swedish scholar Martin Nilsson began to demonstrate the 
links between' Classical Greek mythology and the iconography of the 
Mycenaean and Minoan civilizations. With this link established, he 
could no longer accept the easy-going attitudes towards Minoan and 
Mycenaean contacts with the Middle East held by Evans and the older 
generation. Fundamental contacts across the East Mediterranean in 
the Bronze Age were now impossible. The difficulties posed to this 
denial by the manifest similarities between the architecture and ma­
terial cultures of Crete, Egypt and Syria were insignificant when 
compared to the issues at stake, which were nothing less than the 
integrity and purity of Greek civilization itself. 64 
We have seen that since the late 19th century there had been a 
widespread belief that the language or languages of the Pre-Hellenes 
were in some way 'Asianic' or Anatolian. By the 1920S, however, as 
Hittite was beginning to be read and Lydian, Lycian and Carian 
inscriptions became available, the hypothesis was increasingly difficult 
to sustain, as it was impossible to find parallels with the non-Greek 
elements in Greek. Nevertheless, this seemed to be the only possible 
lead, and in 1927 it was used in an attempt to pin down the Pre­
Hellenes geographically. In an article written in the new approved 
collaborative 'scientific' fashion in two parts by an archaeologist, Carl 
Blegen, and a Classicist, J. Haley, the authors took from the German 
linguist Paul Kretschmer the hypothesis that there were two Pre­
Hellenic place-name elements, -i(s)sos and -nthos, which could be 
seen as related to the elements -ssa and -nda found in Anatolia. This 
suggested, they argued, that all these place names came from the 
ancient pre-Indo-European stratum. Their further claim - that the 
distribution of these and other non-Hellenic Greek place names 
corresponded with that of Early Bronze Age settlements - was seen to 
fit nicely with the hypothesis that the Indo-Europeans had invaded at 
the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age.65 (The consensus has since


--- PAGE 212 ---
392 BLACK ATHENA 
developed that the invasion came not at this point but with the 
archaeological break seen in material cultures between Early Helladic 
II and Early Helladic III.) 
The two authors' evidence for toponymic and archaeological corre­
spondence is not impressive. They themselves admitted that the place 
names also fit closely with the area of Late Bronze Age Mycenaean 
culture. 66 Their linguistic arguments were even more shaky. First of all, 
toponymic suffixes usually have meanings: -ville (town), -ham (village), 
-bourne (stream), -ey (island), etc. However, -s(s)os and -nthos refer to 
all kinds of geographical features, suggesting heterogeneous origins. 
Secondly, as the contemporary Anatolian linguist Professor Laroche 
has claimed, the suffixes -ssa, etc., can be explained as Hittite or Luvian 
and not as Pre-Hellenic. 67 Now this argument can be overcome if one 
sees a close similarity between these Anatolian languages and Pre­
Hellenic - though difficult, it is just possible. There is, however, an 
insuperable obstacle, raised by Paul Kretschmer in later work, which 
was available before Blegen and Haley published theirs. This was the 
fact that the suffixes were sometimes attached to Indo-European 
stems. 68 Thus, even though they might in certain circumstances be very 
old, they could not be taken as indicators of the language and culture of 
the Aegean population before the arrival of the Indo-European­
speaking Greeks. 69 It says something for the weakness of Ancient 
Greek toponymic studies that Blegen and Haley's fundamentally 
flawed article could become a classic study, to which students interested 
in such subjects are still referred. 
Blegen and Haley's work illustrates the inabilities of scholars to get to 
grips with the 'Pre-Hellenes', despite the fact that so much depended 
on them. They remained essential if it was absolutely impossible that 
Egypt or Phoenicia had had a fundamental influence on the formation 
of Greece, and so the late 1920S and early 1930S saw an intensification 
of attacks on Phoenicians. The non-Semitic nature of the Minoans was 
by now so secure that the ancient identification of the Minoans with the 
Phoenicians could be reversed along the lines suggested by Bunsen and 
Curtius in the 19th century; now it was claimed that when Greek myths 
mentioned the Phoenicians, they were really referring to Minoans. 7o 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 393 
TAMING THE ALPHABET: 
THE FINAL ASSAULT 
ON THE PHOENICIANS 
. The leading figure in the climax of the Extreme Aryan Model ~as the 
American archaeologist Rhys Carpenter, who was a great ad~rer of 
Julius Beloch and an opponent of the mirage ori~tal throughout his long 
life. By 1930 legends of Phoenician settlement m Greece were largely 
discredited and nearly all the Semitic etymologies for Greek names 
and words had been ruled out. There remained only the Phoenician 
alphabet. The poet and novelist Robert Graves co~ld claim an Aryan 
origin for it but, try as they did, scholars could not Ignore ~e ~act that 
the Greek letters looked like Semitic letters, sounded very SImIlar, and 
most had corresponding names: alpha/) alep (ox); baa/bet (house), and 
so on. These had obvious meanings in Late Canaanite, but made no 
sense in Greek. 71 Thus, even though the new scholars would have felt 
free to dismiss the massive and unanimous ancient testimony that the 
Greeks had been given their alphabet by the Phoenicians, they could 
not avoid admitting its Semitic origin. 
According to a great range of ancient writings on the subject, the 
introduction of the alphabet was attributed to Danaos from Egypt or 
Kadmos from Tyre. This put it in the middle of the 2nd millennium Be. 
However, there was also a passage in the writings of Josephus, the 
Jewish apologist, in which he asserted - in an anti-Greek tirade 
specifically attacking the Greeks for their lack of cultural depth - that 
the Greeks were only boasting when they claimed that they had learnt 
letters from Kadmos. In fact, according to him, they had been illiterate 
at the time of the Trojan War. 72 Not surprisingly,J osephus' version was 
preferred by the Romantic Hellenists when considering their imge of 
Homer the illiterate bard. Nevertheless, most scholars preferred to 
accept the ancient consensus, for the authenticity of the legends 
surrounding Kadmos' foundation of Thebes was not seriously chal-
lenged until the end of the century. . 
This early date, however, was not acceptable to Reinach and Beloch. 
Reinach lowered the period of transmission to the 13th or 12th century, 
at which time he believed Phoenician influence had begun.73 Beloch


--- PAGE 213 ---
394 BLACK ATHENA 
suggested the 8th century as his date for the first contacts, and he 
supported this with four arguments. In the first place, he maintained 
that there were no datable Greek inscriptions from before the 7th 
century; secondly, he stated that the only reference to writing in Homer 
was obscure, and it was possible that the poet and his audience did 
understand reading; thirdly, he claimed that the way from Phoenicia to 
Greece went through Cyprus, which did not use the alphabet until 
Alexander's time; and fourthly, he argued that the names of the letters 
resemble Aramaic, not Phoenician, forms; thus the alphabet must have 
been borrowed after Aramaic became dominant in the Levant in the late 
8th century?4 
The dubiousness ofBeloch's first point, the argument from silence, 
has been and will be discussed elsewhere in BlackAthena. On the second 
point, despite the assurances ofBeloch and many later scholars that the 
reference is of no consequence, there is no doubt that Homer did once 
refer to semata /ygra (baneful signs) which were 'written,.75 The lack of 
an alphabet in Cyprus was the result of local conditions which meant 
that the island failed to respond at the time when the alphabet was 
transmitted from the Levant to the Aegean. It gives us no indication, 
one way or the other, of when the transmission took place. Finally, we 
have already seen that Beloch knew no Semitic languages, and he was 
wrong when he claimed that the Greek letter names reflect Aramaic 
pronunciations. The 0 in the letters iota and rho reflect a sound shift 
which took place in Canaanite, but not in Aramaic. 
In any event, Beloch's ideas on the alphabet were not taken seriously 
by his contemporaries, and the debate on the dating of the alphabetic 
introduction was even more fluid during the first quarter of the 20th 
century than that between the Broad and Extreme Aryan Models as a 
whole. A likely cause for this openness was the relative influence of 
Semitists and Jews in the study of Semitic epigraphy, which was 
essential for any serious dating. In general, however, there is no doubt 
that the tendency was for the date of the transmission to be lowered, for 
the same reasons that brought the Extreme Aryan Model at power; not 
forgetting the now familiar and increasing 'positivist' desire for 'proof', 
as well as the desire to give archaeology and ancient history what was 
thought to be the certainty of natural sciences. 
[eH. IX] FINAL SOLU!ION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 395 
The lowering process culminated in 1933 when Professor Rhys 
Carpenter, an archaeologist and an avowed outsider to epigraphy, 
proposed a date around 720 Be for the date of ~e in~oduction of the 
alphabet to Greece. The reasons he gave for domg this were twofold: 
that the earliest Greek letters resembled those of 8th-century Phoeni­
cian; and that no Greek alphabetic inscriptions had been found from 
before that date, 'the argument from silence'. 76 This lowering of the 
date was only one of three attempts Carpenter made to diminish the 
importance of the introduction of the alphabet and to make it less likely 
that it could have been accompanied by any other significant cultural 
borrowings. Another attempt took the form of making a categorical 
distinction between consonantal and vocalized alphabets. The inven­
tion of vowels was attributed - in my opinion wrongly - to the Greeks.
77 
Making it clear that he thought vowels were beyond the capacity of 
Semites, Carpenter referred to 'that brilliantly Greek creation of the 
vowels', thus crediting the Greeks with having invented the first 'true' 
alphabet.78 
Carpenter's third attempt was to remove the place of borrowing as far 
as possible from Mainland Greece. He suggested Crete, Rhodes and 
later - most implausibly, for the reason I have given above: that it did not 
use an alphabet- Cyprus. In the late 1930S, however, the archaeologist 
Sir Leonard Woolley showed to his satisfaction that there had been an 
8th-century Greek colony at AI Mina on the Syrian coast, and sug­
gested that the Greeks could have learnt the alphabet there. 79 Despite 
the tenuousness of this claim - and the complete lack of early Greek 
inscriptions within 500 miles of the site - Classicists and archaeologists, 
including Carpenter, enthusiastically accepted this as the point of 
transmission. 8o 
Why should Carpenter, who made such a fetish of the need for 
attestation when it came to time, have been so lax in regard to place? 
One reason was that he saw it as more befitting the 'dynamic' Greek 
culture to have brought the alphabet home rather than to have received 
it passively. His second reason was still more sinister. His leading 
successor in the field of epigraphy, Professor Lilian Jeffery, has 
summarized the case:


--- PAGE 214 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
The second point was well brought out by Professor Carpenter: that 
only in an established bilingual settlement of the two peoples, not 
merely a casual Semitic trading post somewhere in the Greek area, 
will the alphabet of one be taken over by the other. 81 
This imaginative reconstruction takes it as axiomatic that 'Semitic' 
colonization was categorically more 'casual' than that of the Greeks, a 
contention for which there is little ancient authority, and for which see 
Berard's discussion on pp. 378-80.82 However, the reason for insisting 
on the small scale and transitory nature of Phoenician settlements has a 
powerful ideological aspect: they had to be so if Greece was to remain 
the racially pure childhood and quintessence of Europe. Lest any­
one should think that this is exaggerated, I should like to repeat the 
passage from Bury, which was written in connection with the trans­
mission of the alphabet: 
The Phoenicians, doubtless, had marts here and there on coast and 
island; but there is no reason to think that Canaanites ever made 
homes for themselves on Greek soil or introduced Semitic blood into 
the population of Greece. 83 
Alphabetic transmission had to have taken place outside Greece; 
otherwise it would have required substantial Phoenician settlement, 
and hence 'racial' mixing. 
To return to the question of the time of transmission. Why did Rhys 
Carpenter insist on a late-8th -century date which could be - and has 
been - so easily falsified by later discoveries? Its first advantage was that 
it could explain why the essentially 'passive' Phoenicians had sailed 
west; they had been directed by the Assyrians, who had a major impact 
on the Phoenician coast only in the mid-8th century. We saw the 
preference for only 'partially Semitic' Assyrians when discussing 
Movers and Gobineau.
84 
What is more, the late date meant that what 
Phoenician influence there had been in Greece had come not in the 
country's formative period, but only after the establishment of the polis 
and the beginning of colonization - two institutions that could other­
wise be construed as Phoenician. 85 
When challenged, Rhys Carpenter acknowledged that his late dating 
[CH. IX] FINAL SOLUTI<?N OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 397 
required a uniquely rapid spread and diversificatio~ of the alphabet 
throughout not only the Aegean but Italy and Anatoha as well. Never­
theless, he responded: 
I hold it worse than absurd. I hold it unGreek and hence unthinkable 
that it [the alphabet] should have lingered for any considerable lapse 
of time among this intensely active people, in passive abeyance, 
known but unutilized. Truly the Greek climate does miracles to a 
• • 86 young alphabet; we can almost see It growmg. 
Apart from the Romantic images of climate, trees: youth and gr~~, 
the passage illustrates the power and the continUIty of the tra~ltlOn, 
already present in Humboldt, that all normal laws and ana~o~e.s are 
suspended when it comes to the Ancient Greeks and that It IS map­
propriate - if not improper - to judge them as one would other peoples. 
Not all scholars were swept away by Carpenter's rhetoric. Hans 
Jensen, for instance, the broadest alphabetic scholar of the 8~oth cen­
n.rry: continued to maintain a IOth- or 11th-century date. But the 
onl; direct challenge to Carpenter came from the A~erican Semiti~t 
B.J. Ullman, who - in an article Carpenter did not CIte - had preVi­
ously proposed a date of the 12th century or earlier. Ullman agreed 
that many Archaic Greek letters deviated from the forms on the 9th­
century Phoenician or Moabite inscriptions; but he saw them as de­
riving from earlier Levantine types, not as resembling later on~s, a~d 
insisted that an alphabet was as old as its oldest letter. Ullman Identi­
fied the letters of the earliest datable Phoenician ins~ription, that on 
the sarcophagus of Ahiram King of Byblos, as being very similar to ~e 
9th-century ones, but said that where the letters differed, the earlIer 
ones were closer to the Greek forms.88 
In his rejoinder to Ullman, Carpenter implicitly took the opposite 
position - that an alphabet should be seen as being as recent as its latest 
letter. That is, he focused on K and M, the Greek forms of which do 
resemble the later Phoenician ones.89 Even though this did not address 
Ullman's arguments about the 'older' letters, Ullman could not with­
stand Carpenter's vigorous forensic style, the anti-Semitic Zeitgeist and 
the relative power of Classics and Semitic studies. Indeed, Classicists


--- PAGE 215 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
welcomed Carpenter's conclusions enthusiastically. They confirmed 
the belief at the Romantic heart of the discipline that Homer(s) had 
been illiterate. For there had been some disconcertion at Evans' 
discovery of writing on Crete and evidence pointing in the same 
direction from the Mainland. However, the linear scripts could plaus­
ibly - if wrongly - be said to have died out with the destruction of 
the Mycenaean palaces; hence Carpenter's low date was very 
welcome in that it established a long 'Dark Age' of illiteracy in which 
folkish Homer or Homers could have sung with barbaric northern 
vigour. It is interesting to note that it was during the 1920S that 
Professor Milman Parry began his study of Serbian folk epics to 
show that the Iliad and Odyssey could have been composed without 
writing.90 
Carpenter's securing of an illiterate and impermeable 'Dark Age' 
held another attraction for upholders of the Aryan Model. The break in 
cultural continuity it imposed allowed people to discount what Greeks 
of the Classical and Hellenistic periods had written about their distant 
past. This completed the discrediting not only of the Ancient but of the 
Broad Aryan Model. 
In the spirit of the age, then, Classicists were won over by Carpenter. 
Where Beloch had failed in the 1890s, Carpenter - using very much the 
same arguments - succeeded in the 1930S. Most Semitists made 
accommodations to the line laid down by the hegemonic discipline, but 
some - particularly the Jewish ones - were less happy. Ullman re­
mained unconvinced, and he and others - notably Professor Tur-Sinai 
in Jerusalem - continued to see it as obvious that the Greek alphabet 
could not have derived from Iron Age Phoenicia but must have 
originated from an earlier Canaanite script.91 
From 1938 to 1973 there was no serious challenge to Carpenter's 
ultra-low dating of the Greek borrowing of the alphabet. The reduction 
of the alphabet removed the last serious obstacle to the establishment of 
the Extreme Aryan Model, and by the outbreak of the Second World 
War Classicists and ancient historians were convinced that their disci­
plines had entered the scientific age. To put it in modem terms, a 
paradigm had been established. It was no longer tolerable for a 'scholar' 
to suggest that there had been any significant Egyptian or Phoenician 
IX) FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM 399 [CH. , 
influences on the formation of Greece. Anyone who now did so was - if 
possible _ expelled from the academic community, or at least labelled 
'cranky'.


--- PAGE 216 ---
CHAPTER X 
THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
The return to the 
Broad Aryan Model, 1945 -85 
W
ITH THIS CHAPTER we have come full circle. I started this 
v~lume with conce~s about ~e present, ~ut since then have 
tned to make them mtrude as httle as possIble. At this point, I 
hope the reader who is essentially interested in the world today will gain 
some reward for her or his hard work with the last nine chapters. I hope 
too that she or he will have been convinced of the contemporary 
relevance of history and historiography. 
This chapter contains two stories. I believe that the first is close to a 
happy ending: it is the movement, led mainly by Jewish scholars, to 
eliminate anti-Semitism in the writing of ancient history, and to give the 
credit due to the Phoenicians for their central role in the formation of 
Greek culture. In the terms used here, these scholars are close to 
re-establishing the Broad Aryan Model. 
Without going into the internalist factors involved in this shift, we can 
say that from a~ externalist point of view, the successful restoration of 
the Phoenicians' reputation required two preconditions, both of which 
have been fulfilled. The first was the reincorporation of Jews into 
European life; the second has been the great emphasis, within Jewish 
culture, on intellectual pursuits and the respect for academia. The 
former has removed the conceptual barriers of anti-Semitism that 
[CH.X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 401 
made it impossible to recognize the Phoenician and Canaanite achieve­
ments; the latter means that even the tiny number of Jewish scholars 
concerned with these issues can have a powerful effect on the academic 
status quo. 
The second story contained in Chapter X concerns the rejection of 
the tradition of Egyptian colonization in Bronze Age Greece; its end is 
not so clearly in sight. One or two German scholars are trying to 
reinstate the tradition of Egyptian colonization, but there is no broad 
movement within academia for the restoration of the reputation of 
Ancient Egypt in this respect. Moreover, the Ancient Egyptians, unlike 
the Phoenicians, have no 'natural' champions. Islamic Egyptians have a 
deep ambivalence about Ancient Egypt, made more acute by the uses 
made of its image by corrupt and pro-Western governments to promote 
a non-Arab idea of modern Egypt. Possibly because of this - but more 
likely because of an acceptance of the massive power of Western 
scholarship - Egyptian scholars have not challenged the orthodoxy on 
the world role of Ancient Egypt or investigated its influence overseas. 
The only likely champions of Ancient Egypt are Copts and small 
groups of Mrican and American Blacks. The former have been remark­
ably quiet on this issue and the latter are much more concerned with 
proving that Egypt is truly Mrican and black than with its influence on 
Greece. And where they are concerned with this influence, they have 
focused on transmission through Greeks' studies in Egypt, and what they 
see as the wholesale plundering and appropriating of Egyptian philoso­
phy and science after the Alexandrian conquest. 
An even more powerful inhibitory factor to the restoration of the 
Egyptian aspect of the Ancient Model has been the fact that, unlike the 
champions of the Phoenicians, these black scholars have been outside 
academia. Thus most of the writing on what G. G. M.James called the 
Stolen Legacy - Egyptian cultural achievements stolen by the Greeks -
has been circulated among friends or published in very small editions; 
rapidly sold out to a passionately concerned public, but not considered 
as scholarship by academics, and not even stocked by libraries. An 
illustration of this is the fact that I had been studying these issues for 
eight years before I became aware of this literature. 
After making this contact, I found myself very torn. On the one hand, 
my training made me recoil at the lack of so many of the outward


--- PAGE 217 ---
402 BLACK ATHENA 
trappings of scholarship; on the other, I found that my intellectual 
position was far closer to the black literature than it was to orthodox 
ancient history. 
I believe that my feelings are significant. There must be other 
scholars who have been shaken by the revelation of the Phoenician role 
in the formation of Greece and the political aspects of its suppression, 
and have begun to question not only the Extreme Aryan Model but the 
Broad one too. And from the hundreds of discussions I have had on this 
subject, I know that the ideological objections to the Ancient Model can 
no longer be stated in public. In private they may still be believed in, but 
I am convinced that even this attitude - though common in society at 
large - is not very frequendy found in liberal academia. 
It seems, then, that the Aryan ·Model is being maintained very largely 
by its own tradition and academic inertia. Neither of these forces should 
be underestimated; nevertheless, they have been considerably 
weakened by a number of starding internal developments - all of which 
show that the Bronze Age civilizations were much more advanced and 
cosmopolitan than had been thought, and that in general the ancient 
records are more reliable than more recent reconstructions. Given 
these externalist and internalist contexts, I am convinced that even the 
Broad Aryan Model is untenable and that the Ancient Model will be 
restored at some point in the early 21st century. 
THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
The Second World War and the public revelation of the Holocaust 
removed the legitimacy of anti -Semitism and racism, but the new stated 
value of racial equality took a long time to be institutionalized. In 
practice, in both Europe and North America, anti-Semitism remained 
prevalent throughout most of society, including academia, despite the 
distinguished role' played by Jewish scholars who had fled to Britain and 
the United States. Many American universities continued to exclude 
Jews or to impose strict quotas on them until the late 1950S or early 
1960s.
1 
As with the anti-Semitism between the Wars, the British 
institutions are less easy to pin down, but it would seem likely that a 
similar situation existed there. From the late 1950S, however, Jewish 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
students and academics became completely accepted in the leading 
universities. This process also took place in Classics, and by the 1970S 
many of the dominant figures in the field were Jewish. 
Racial prejudice against Africans and Asians was - and is - a far more 
formidable barrier. The American Supreme Court did not begin to 
move against legal racial discrimination until the mid - I 950S, and it was 
not until the 1960s that most - though by no means all - US Blacks 
gained the right to vote. These legal and political reforms have not 
changed other aspects of the situation of Blacks and South Asians. 
Some Blacks and non-European immigrants in industrial countries 
'gained economically during the sustained boom from 1945 to 1973, but 
the differentials between races remained the same, or worsened. With 
the slump of the 1970S and 80S non-Europeans have lost more, and lost 
it faster, than Whites throughout Europe and North America. 
, The writing of history has also been affected by events in the Third 
World, which I shall discuss below. Here it would seem fair to say that 
the foundation and military expansion of Israel after 1949 did more to 
reduce anti-Semitism than the revelation of anti-Semitism's conse­
quences in the Holocaust. For their part, Whites were generally not 
impressed by Indian independence in 1947 or the 'wind of change' of 
the 1950s, in which Britain and France found it expedient to grant 
political independence to their tropical colonies. In any event, neo­
colonialism maintained the economic power of the metropolitan coun­
tries. Moreover, real problems in the quasi- or newly independent 
countries and the media's racist treatment of them continued to sustain 
the dogma that only Whites had the capacity for self-rule. However, 
even more important from our point of view was the maintenance of 
European cultural hegemony: there was no real change in the under­
standing and teaching of history. The 'European chauvinism' de­
nounced by Victor Berard still flourished. As late as the 1960s, for 
instance, the only course on the Third World taught in the Cambridge 
History Tripos was on 'The Expansion of Europe' . 
There were, however, significant changes - first, the extraordinary 
economic success ofJapan. This was coupled with the reunification of 
China and its becoming a major power which, after 1970, the West 
courted as an ally against the Russians. Hider had given the Japanese


--- PAGE 218 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
'honorary Aryan' status in the 1930S, and his view became generally 
accepted by 1960. During the 1970s, the Chinese too began to receive 
this accolade, and there would now seem to be a general Western 
perception of East Asians as somehow different but equal. Indians, too, 
received slightly more respect as the subcontinent recovered from the 
horrors of partition. On the other hand, the image of the Romantic Arab 
sheikh has changed into one of bloated oil princes and Palestinian 
'terrorists'. All the old Christian hatred of Islam has been revived and 
turned against Arabs, and - unlike the 19th-century European admir­
ation of the Persians - Islamic Iran is portrayed in diabolical terms. 
Moreover, despite independence, Africa and its diaspora are still seen 
as hopeless, and Blacks are thought of as the lowest form of humanity. 
I have listed these crude stereotypes not because most academics 
accept them - though some clearly do - but because all of us, except for 
Moslems but including many Asians and Africans, are at some level 
influenced by them. Many of the Third World movements, of which 
Negritude is an example, have accepted the European conceit that only 
Europeans can think analytically; as a result of this many black and 
brown intellectuals have tended to deny their own analytical intelli­
gence and retreat into the 'feminine' qualities of community, warmth, 
intuition and artistic creativity - which, interestingly, Gobineau was 
prepared to concede to the Blacks. In other words, it has not only been 
white Gentiles who have found it easy to accept the myth of the 'Greek 
miracle' and the consequent categorical superiority of 'Western' civi­
lization. Nevertheless, there has been some peeling away from this 
consensus, and we shall look at it later in this chapter. 
DEVELOPMENTS IN CLASSICS, 
1945- 65 
Even in the 19th century, cautious historians had often opened their 
work by stating that linguistic and racial boundaries did not always 
coincide - before going on to treat them as if the two were identical. 2 
After 1945 this became the only acceptable approach, and scholars 
always referred to linguistic divisions rather than racial ones. On the 
other hand, while racism was damaged by the War, science came out of 
[eH. Xl THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
it triumphant. Thus the passage of time gave the Extreme Aryan Model 
increasing legitimacy, as almost no one doubted that it was the 'scien­
tific truth' arrived at by archaeology and other modern methods. The 
Ancient Model, no longer seen as a coherent scheme to be confronted 
and overcome, had disintegrated into a collection of ludicrous legends 
which 'no one today' could begin to take seriously. 
The debates on early Greek history, which were fought with great 
passion, took place almost entirely within the Extreme Aryan Model. 
There was great discussion as to when the Hellenes had arrived in 
Greece: until the 1950S a significant minority of scholars maintained, 
m'the legends about the 'Return of the Heraklids' and the Dorian 
Invasion, that the Aryans had swept south only at the end of the Bronze 
Age. Despite the overwhelming discrediting of this view by Michael 
Ventris' decipherment of Linear B as Greek, a number of diehards 
continued to hold these views until the 1970S.
3 
This decipherment is accepted as being the greatest internal de­
velopment in the field since the discoveries of Schliemann and Evans 
and, as with Schliemann, it was made by an amateur. Michael Ventris, 
an architect, had attempted to crack the published corpus of Linear B 
texts cryptographically, assuming that they were written in a language of 
the mysterious Pre-Hellenes. In 1952, however, he tried to match them 
with Greek, and with that combination he succeeded in deciphering 
them. 
I want to return to a theme raised in my Introduction to this volume. 
Why should both these breakthroughs have been made by outsiders? In 
Schliemann's case there was his simple-mindedness and his faith in the 
Ancients, both of which scholars of his period had been taught to avoid 
at all costs. Ventris, too, was 'simple-minded' in his juxtaposition of the 
Linear B corpus with Greek, rather than with some abstruse and 
scarcely understood Anatolian language or some concoction made from 
'Pre-Hellenic' elements in Greek. 4 Furthermore, there was the fact 
that Linear B represented Greek in an extremely crude way: to read it as 
Greek did violence to all the refinements that Classicists have spent 
their lives striving for. 
The view that no Classicist could have done it is strengthened by a 
comparison with the Cypriot syllabary: this was used to represent Greek


--- PAGE 219 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
on Cyprus until Hellenistic times and was almost equal to Linear Bin 
the roughness of its approximation of Greek phonetics. It was de­
ciphered by George Smith, who knew little Greek, and Samuel Birch 
who, though a competent Hellenist, was essentially an Egyptologist and 
an ASsyriologist, and therefore used to the looseness of connections 
required for such work.5 This argument - that Hellenists are too 
refined for such work, at least in its initial stages - will come into play in 
the secon~ :olume o~ BlackAthena, when I shall try to establish Egyptian 
and SenutiC loans 10 Greek with correspondences that would be 
acceptable to most comparative linguists but appallingly crude to 
Hellenists. 
Given the threat he posed to professionalism, it is remarkable how 
rapid~y and w~rmly Ventris' work was accepted. 6 This can partly be 
explamed by his personal charm; his astuteness in asking a sound and 
essentially conservative Classicist, John Chadwick, to· be his collabor­
ator; and the discovery of corroborative evidence to support his inter­
pretation from newly discovered tablets. On the other hand, there is no 
doubt that when they came to consider the matter, Classicists saw the 
new decipherment as supporting the Extreme Aryan Model, because it 
extended both the time depth and the geographical range of the Greeks. 
There were, however, some flies in the ointment. The first of these was 
that the name of the god Dionysos was found on a Linear B tablet. In the 
Greek tradition, Dionysos was generally supposed to be a latecomer. 
therefore Classicists had argued about his cult having arrived 0; 
developed in the 6th; or 7th century BC. His appearance in the 13th 
cen~ry pushed things back almost to the date suggested by the 
AnCIents - the 15th. However, this has been all too confusing and 
although no one could deny the attestation, most scholars continue to 
argue along the old lines. 
More serious than this, however, was the discovery in Linear B of 
Semitic and Egyptian personal names and many of the admitted 
Se~tic loan words for allegedly exotic goods - spices, gold, and so on _ 
which ~~d been thoug~t since the I 920S to have been introduced by the 
Phoeruclans after theIr supposed arrival in the late 8th century. Here 
too the. incongruity with the Extreme Aryan Model was not noted by 
Hellemsts until Semitists confronted them with it. In general, the 
[CU. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
decipherment strengthened the Extreme Aryan Model and encouraged 
scholars to continue looking to the north for origins by invasion. During 
the 1950S a consensus developed that Indo-European-speaking Proto-
Greeks had arrived in the Aegean basin at the end of the Early Helladic 
n ceramic period, in approximately 2200 BC. 
THE MODEL OF 
AUTOCHTHONOUS ORIGIN 
The only scholars who both accept the reading of Linear B as Greek 
and reject the idea of this Hellenic invasion are the proponents of what 
, they call 'the model of autochthonous origin'. Led by the grand old man 
of ancient history in Bulgaria, Vladimir Georgiev, and the distinguished 
but ultra-isolationist archaeologist Colin Renfrew, they deny that 
Indo-European was brought to Greece from a homeland north of the 
Black Sea. Instead they argue that Proto-Indo-European was never 
anything but a congeries of dialects spoken over Anatolia and the 
Balkans, of which the Greek spoken in Greece was one.7 This model 
belongs to the isolationist or anti-diffusionist paradigm which has been 
dominant in archaeology and anthropology since the 1940s; its domi­
nance seems to be related to a reaction against colonialism, of which 
diffusionism is clearly an academic reflex.8 Linguists and Classicists 
tend to be less ready than these other scholars to abandon the concept of 
diffusion, however, because it frequently provides a satisfactory ex­
planation for the relationships within known language families. They 
have also used the powerful argument that diffusion through conquest 
and migration has played an important role in recorded history, and 
there is no reason to suppose that prehistory was significantly different 
in this respect. 
The Model of Autochthonous Origin represents a return to the 
position of Karl Otfried Miiller in the 1820S and 30S, before the 
development of the Aryan Model. As with Miiller, however, its pro­
ponents are very much in the northern and European modes of thought, 
and if anything they are more hostile than the Aryanists to the traditions 
of colonization from the Near East at the end of the Middle Bronze Age. 
But this denial and its lack of a Pre-Hellenic substratum leaves the


--- PAGE 220 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Model of Autochthonous Origin without any explanation for the 
non- Indo- European elements in Greek, a weakness that is exploited by 
defenders of the Aryan Model. 9 Nevertheless, probably because they 
are working within the dominant paradigm in archaeology, proponents 
of the Model of Autochthonous Origin feel able to neglect this 
apparendy fundamental flaw. And since both it and the Aryan Model 
exclude the possibility of Near Eastern setdement, the clash between 
them is not direcdy relevant to the topic of BlackAthena, where the focus 
has been on the conflict between the Ancient and Aryan models. 
EAST MEDITERRANEAN CONTACTS 
Up to the mid- 1 960s, hatred of the Phoenicians seems, if anything, 
to have increased. Rhys Carpenter pressed on with his campaigns to 
lower the dates of alphabetic transmission and to limit the extent of 
Phoenician colonization, and his proposals were generally accepted. 10 
The possibility of colonization at Thebes was generally dismissed. In 
fact, the most determinedly Aryan interpretation of the Kadmeian 
legend, that by the French scholar F. Vian, appeared in 1963. II Many 
writers continued to deny or at least minimize the extent of contact 
around the East Mediterranean; in 1951 the English ancient historian 
R. Meiggs felt able to write, in his revision of Bury's history, 
There would seem to be a coherent body of literary evidence 
that there were close relations in the Bronze Age between the 
Mycenaeans and the Phoenicians, or other Semites. Unfortunately 
this evidence is less coherent and less cogent than it appears to be ... 
More serious is the increasing doubt whether any of the Near 
Eastern peoples came into the Aegean or the Western 
Mediterranean during the Bronze Age.12 
As increasing archaeological evidence of contacts between the 
Aegean and the Levant accumulated, it was assumed that these must 
have been the result of Greek initiative: ' ... after the close of the MM 
[Middle Minoan] II period, and throughout the later part of the 2nd 
millennium, only the sailors, merchants and craftsmen of Mycenaean 
Greece can justifiably lay claim to the honour of forming the links 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
connecting the Aegean with the Orient.,13 For the reasons touched on 
in Chapters VIII and IX, many Semitists seem to have been unwilling 
to study Phoenician history, which until the 1960s was largely left to 
Classicists and Philhellenes. In 1961 the Lebanese scholar D. Baramki 
revived the theory - put forward by Evans at the tum of the century and 
Woolley in the 1920S and 30S - that what success the Phoenicians did 
have came from an infusion of Aryan blood; while the Classically 
trained D. B. Harden, in his The Phoenicians, published in 1962, 
accepted the idea of Mycenaean control of the sea during the Bronze 
Age} 4 
'\ In the face of new archaeological discoveries of contacts, and the fact 
that the flow of influence would appear to have been from east to west, 
there were reactions not only against the theories that denied all 
contacts, but also against those that attributed these contacts entirely to 
the activity of the Mycenaeans and later Greeks. The great American 
scholar William Foxwell Albright, doyen of Semitic studies until his 
death in 1971, argued for the 9th or even lOth century for Phoenician 
colonization.ls The Australian ancient historian William Culican, in a 
strikingly bold work, stressed the centrality, originality and influence 
of the Levant in the 2nd millennium, but he studiously avoided 
the Ancient Model and the question of whether or nor the West 
Semites had had a profound and/or long-lasting impact on Greek 
civilization. 16 
Furthermore, the denial of the tradition ofKadmos, the weak link in 
the Extreme Aryan Model, continued to provoke doubt. The great 
Marxist Classicist George Thomson in 1949, and his colleague R. F. 
Willetts in 1962, maintained that the Kadmeioi were a Semitic tribe 
who went from Phoenicia to Crete and on to Thebes. 17 Also in the 
1960s, the Lebanese historians D. Baramki and Nina Jidejian also 
believed that there had been a Phoenician setdement at Thebes, though 
they maintained that this had taken place during the Iron Age.18 Some 
historians went beyond this, accepting not only the Kadmeian legends 
but those concerning Danaos too. The Classicist G. Huxley argued for 
these propositions in his Crete and the Luvians, published in 1961; as his 
tide suggests, however, he was more concerned with the respectable 
Anatolian connection than he was with those to Egypt and the Levant. It


--- PAGE 221 ---
410 BLACK ATHENA 
is also interesting to note that the book was published privately.19 A 
much more startling development was the publication the following 
year of the Classical archaeologist Dr Frank Stubbings' chapter on 
'The rise of Mycenaean civilization' in the 3rd edition of Volume 2 of 
the CambridgeAncient History.20 Here, Stubbings accepted the Ancient 
Model to the extent that he argued for an invasion from Egypt and that 
Hyksos principalities had been established in Greece; he also claimed 
that this interpretation was backed by recent archaeological evidence to 
prove that there had been Near Eastern and Egyptian influence in 
Greece at the beginning of the Mycenaean period. 21 
Another Classical archaeologist went even further. Emily Vermeule, 
Professor of the subject at Harvard, suggested that Mycenaean civiliz­
ation had retained contacts with Egypt and Phoenicia throughout its 
existence. In 1960, when describing the causes ofits collapse, she wrote 
as follows: 
... it is clearly not the Mycenaeans who disappeared, but Myce­
naean civilization. The strength of that civilization depended greatly 
upon invigorating contact with Crete and the East, from the time of 
the Shaft Graves [the earliest tombs discovered by Schliemann at 
Mycenae] onward. When contact was broken, Mycenaean culture 
drifted so far in sterility that it is hard to recognize.22 
But we should remember that these views were, and are, by no means 
typical. Most modern British archaeologists and historians of 
Mycenaean Greece - Chadwick, Dickinson, Hammond, Hooker, 
Renfrew and Taylour, for instance - maintain that Mycenaean civiliz­
ation was the ~esult of indigenous development. The evident Greek 
cultural borrowings from the Near East and Africa have been seen as 
introductions through Greek initiative: the return of mercenaries, 
trade, or even tourism in the Middle East.23 
Having absolutely ruled out the possibility of Egyptian or Canaanite 
influence on Greek culture or language, the academic Establishment 
could use this 'fact' to attack invasion hypotheses based on Greek 
tradition or archaeological parallels. Dr Stubbings tried to get around 
this in connection with the Hyksos: 
THE POST-WAR SITUATION 411 
That their arrival is not accompanied by any more wholesale 
Egyptianizing is perfectly compatible with what we know of the 
Hyksos in Egypt. There they had introduced little but new military 
techniques and organization, they do not represent a mass move-
ment of population, rather they were a warrior caste ... They 
24 
introduced no new language ... 
I think there are real problems with his analysis of the impact of the 
Hyksos in Egypt. We know very little directly about the Hyksos period 
there. In the long term, however, there is no doubt that despite the 
"' resurgence of Egyptian nationalism and culture in the 18th Dynasty, a 
. major cultural transformation took place during the period of foreign 
rule. Dr Stubbings does seem to be right in seeing the Hyksos as a 
warrior caste; but like the Mongols, who churned up the cultures of 
Eurasia, the Hyksos seem to have been culturally formative in transmit­
ting other civilizations - Semitic into Egypt, 'Minoan' and Egyptian into 
Greece, etc. Greece, however, lacking the massive tradition of civiliz­
ation of Egypt, was much more susceptible to change; therefore the 
Hyksos were likely to have had an altogether greater influence in the 
Aegean. 
Historiographically, on the other hand, Stubbings' position was a 
return to the argument of Connop Thirlwall in the 1830S and Adolf 
Holm in the 1880s: that though there may have been Egyptians and 
Semites in Greece, it did not matter because they had had no long­
term effects. Although breaking with the crude racism of the period 
1885-1945, Stubbings, like his predecessors, firmly rejected the 
Ancient Model. 
The 'recent' archaeological evidence upon which Stubbings had 
based his claim was not enough to shake the well-entrenched Extreme 
Aryan Model. During the 1960s, however, a number of new finds did 
have a significant bearing on the relative importance of Levan tines and 
Greeks in the East Mediterranean. In 1967, the marine archaeologist 
George Bass published his report on the only Late Bronze Age ship 
then excavated in the region. Although he maintained that this trading 
vessel, sunk off Cape Gelidonya in Southern Turkey, was Syrian, Bass 
did not go on to claim that this indicated that all shipping at this period


--- PAGE 222 ---
412 BLACK ATHENA 
was Canaanite. However, from this and other evidence he argued that it 
was clear that Levantine trade had been centrally important during the 
Late Bronze Age.25 This undercut the widely accepted but unbased 
claims for non-Semitic Minoan and Mycenaean thalassocracies or sea 
kingdoms and finally destroyed the argument, used by Beloch, that 
Phoenician boats were incapable of reaching the Aegean before the 8th 
century. 
In 1963 and succeeding years a large number of Near Eastern 
objects, including thirty-eight cylinder seals, were found in a stratum 
dating to about 1300 Be in the Kadmeion or royal palace at Thebes. 26 
Most archaeologists were cautious, but this find, in a city so closely 
linked by tradition to Phoenicia, naturally reopened the possibility that 
the legends around Kadmos might contain some truth. It also provided 
ammunition for a radical challenge to the anti-Phoenician aspects of the 
Aryan Model. 27 Then, again, in the I 960s work by art historians on the 
many motifs and techniques common to the Near East and the Aegean 
in the Late Bronze Age demonstrated close contact; while the direction 
of influence in the earlier part of the period seemed to indicate that they 
have travelled westward. 28 
Interestingly, Classical and Aegean archaeologists were not overtly 
hostile to this work.29 On the other hand, there is no doubt that 
archaeological indications of Near Eastern influence in the Aegean 
have generally been played down. And, by contrast, the large amounts 
of Mycenaean pottery found in the Levant from the end of the Late 
Bronze Age have been widely interpreted as indicating Greek presence, 
if not colonization, in the region.30 While Michael Astour and some of 
the Semitist critics object to this, I accept that there does seem to have 
been considerable Greek cultural influence on the Levant in the 14th 
and 13th centuries. But I still think it right to draw attention to the 
double standards applied when scholars maintain this influence but 
deny that of the West Semites on the Aegean.3] 
MYTHOLOGY 
It should be emphasized that Hellenists have found evidence of 
contacts in material culture between the two civilizations less disturbing 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
than those in what are seen as the more fundamental areas of mythology 
and language. In mythology, there were two ways of dealing with the 
increasing evidence of striking parallels between Near Eastern and 
Aegean forms, while staying in the Extreme Aryan Model. The first and 
most satisfactory of these was the 'anthropological' approach advocated 
by Karl Otfried Miiller and pioneered by the Cambridge Classicists of 
the turn of the century,James Frazer and Jane Harrison: this entailed 
seeing the parallels as coincidental manifestations of the human psyche. 
The similarities between Greek myths and cults and those of the 
Middle East could also be obscured by flooding works on the subject 
~ with parallels from allover the world.32 The other major approach was 
the one mentioned on p. 365, adopted by the modern Classicists 
Professors Walcot and West. This consisted of attributing Oriental 
influence to the Indians, Iranians, Hittites, Humans and Babylonians, 
in descending order of desirability.33 
A third technique, that of the American Classicist and mythographer 
Professor F ontenrose, was to combine the two and postulate both 
universals and borrowings over the land route.34 Yet another approach, 
attempting to deal with the problems posed by the close parallels seen 
between Greece and the West Semitic culture of Ugarit, was to 
postulate Greek colonies in the Syrian city and the transmission home 
by the colonists of Semitic myths and stories.35 In all these approaches, 
the trick was to explain the parallels in any way except for that set out in 
the Ancient Model - the Egyptian and Phoenician colonization of 
Greece. 
LANGUAGE 
Throughout this volume I have been stressing that language is the 
sandum sandorum of the Aryan Model. Not only is there the Romantic 
belief that language is the fundamental expression of the unique spirit 
of a people; there is also the position of language at the core of an 
academic discipline. Ability to use the language is the sine qua non for 
making any statements in the area, and it is largely through the 
necessarily authoritarian process oflanguage teaching that students are 
inculcated with the bounds of the discipline. Thus it is not surprising


--- PAGE 223 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
that while there has been considerable relaxation of the ban on Near 
Eastern influences in the area of material culture, and some movement 
on mythology, when it comes to language the prohibition on fun­
damental Afroasiatic influences is still rigidly maintained. Here again, 
'respectable' scholars attributed the irreducibly 'Oriental' items in the 
Greek vocabulary to Indian, Iranian, Hittite, Hurrian, Babylonian, 
West Semitic and Egyptian sources, in the same descending order of 
desirability.36 
There are, however, two modem American scholars with equal 
facility in Greek and Hebrew, Saul Levin and John Pairman Brown, 
who have worked with great caution and soundness to re-establish a 
number of Canaanite loans into Greek. In so far as Classicists are aware 
of their work, Levin's is dismissed because he maintains that there are 
genetic links between Semitic and Indo-European languages, a pos­
ition that became anathema at the same time as the establishment of the 
Extreme Aryan Model- and for very much the same reasons.37 Brown's 
work, which is largely published in journals of Semitic studies, is simply 
ignored. 38 This is, in fact, the traditional way of dealing with such 
irrefutable work. 
There had also been the forced recognition that the admitted loan 
words found in Linear B had been introduced in the Bronze Age. 
Despite this, the most widely acknowledged and praised work on 
Semitic loaning into Greek was a booklet by the French linguist E. 
Masson which restricted confirmed loans to words for material objects 
attested in the minute corpus of Phoenician inscriptions, excluding 
those found in Ugaritic or the Bible.39 Thus the already exiguous 
number of admitted loans was lessened. 
UGARIT 
Nevertheless, a reaction to this Aryanism was emerging. Before we 
come to it, however, we should briefly consider the major intemalist 
development weakening the Extreme Aryan Model: the discovery of 
Ugaritic civilization. Ugarit, a port on the Syrian coast, was excavated 
with great thoroughness after its discovery in 1929. Almost immedi­
ately, in the first archaeological season, large numbers of baked clay 
. [CH. X] TH~ POST-WAR SITUATION 
tablets were unearthed in strata dating to the 14th and 13th centuries 
BC. Some were in Akkadian, the lingua franca of the Late Bronze Age; 
others, however, were in an unknown cuneiform script. This was 
deciphered with great speed, for two reasons: first, because unlike other 
forms of cuneiform, which are syllabic, this writing was alphabetic; and 
secondly, because the language was a previously unknown form of West 
Semitic very close to Canaanite. 
This 'new' language has been extremely valuable to linguists. Most of 
the texts are economic and provide precious information on the 
structure and trade of a major entrepot. Others concern legends and 
~ritual, and these have been of outstanding importance because of their 
striking parallels to both Bible stories and Greek mythology. This 
causes immense problems for the Extreme Aryan Model, with its 
central belie fin a categorical separation between the Aryan Greeks and 
the Semitic Levantines. 
SCHOLARSHIP AND 
THE RISE OF ISRAEL 
Hellenic scholarship was not direcdy affected by the foundation and 
military expansion of Israel, even though they provided a clear-cut 
demonstration that Canaanite speakers were not ipso facto incapable of 
conquest or the establishment of overseas colonies. The immediate 
effect on mostJ ewish historians was to narrow the focus of their studies 
to Palestine and to neglect the Diaspora. Equally, there was an increas­
ing tendency to emphasize the distinctions rather than the similarities 
between the Israelites and their Canaanite and Phoenician neighbours, 
thus limiting extremely important comparative studies.4O 
The indirect impact of the foundation of Israel was critically import­
ant. It renewed Jews' pride in secular Jewishness. Furthermore, by 
providing two poles - the religious and the secular nationalist - it 
allowed more room for manoeuvre within the Jewish tradition. A few 
scholars were able to make use of this new scope to become indepen­
dent, and in the area with which we are concerned the two most 
outstanding of these, Cyrus Gordon and Michael Astour, are working 
in America. Both men are self-consciously Jewish, but outside the


--- PAGE 224 ---
I I 
, I 
'I 
BLACK ATHENA 
mainstreams of religion and Zionism. The major motive behind Gor­
don's work appears to be a drive for assimilation. This is not the 
assimilation of scholars like Reinach, who wanted Jews to conform to 
Christian or Hellenic culture. Gordon seems to see assimilation as a 
partnership in which both sides, aware and proud of their roots, create a 
richer civilization.4l Astour's views are similar, but there seems to be a 
stronger element of pan-Semitism in his work and a reluctance to 
concede any creativity to Indo-European or Egyptian speakers. 
CYRUS GORDON 
Cyrus Gordon is a brilliant linguist and one of the greatest living 
Semitists. Despite attempts by his enemies to replace it, his pioneering 
Ugaritic Grammar remains the standard work on the first new Semitic 
language to be discovered this century. Nevertheless, for the past thirty 
years he has been on the fringes of academia and most scholars consider 
him to be a crank. This is partly because his sins or errors are not ones of 
omission - towards which academia is extremely lenient - but of 
commission, which are considered irredeemably heinous. Moreover, 
his attempts to demonstrate the existence of Phoenician or even early 
Jewish influence on America are so far from conventional wisdom as to 
make him appear ludicrous. This means that all his original work can 
be, and has been, brushed aside with contempt. 42 
A much more serious and immediate threat to the academic status quo 
has come from Gordon's attempts to link Semitic and Greek cultures. 
He sees two bridges between them in Ugarit and Crete, and it was on 
the basis of his massive work on U garit that he wrote a monograph, 
published in 1955, which he entitled Homer and the Bible. He concluded 
at the end of this that 'Greek and Hebrew civilizations were parallel 
structures built on the same East Mediterranean foundations.' 
Although this was relatively similar to Evans' ideas at the beginning of 
the century, it was not tolerable to scholars working in the Extreme 
Aryan Model. As Gordon describes it, the reaction to this work was 
sharp: some of the reviewers were lavish in their praises, while others 
were scornful. But this much was clear: I was no longer a sedate 
[CH. X) ,HE POST-WAR SITUATION 
scholar whom specialists accepted as another quiet specialist. I had 
become a disturber of the academic peace, and at the same time a 
scholar whose writings and lectures had become of interest to a wider 
bli 43 pu c. 
Here, as with Victor Berard fifty years earlier, there was a division 
between lay opinion, with its 'lumper' preferences for simple and large 
combinations, and professional opinion with its 'splitter' ones. The 
professional needs narrow, unrelated topics suitable for indi~dual 
research and 'private ownership' of knowledge. In respondmg to 
Berard and Gordon other specialists felt threatened, precisely because 
of the plausibility of the case made against the academic status quo. 
To a layperson, the idea of close connections between Homeric 
Greece, Ugarit and biblical Palestine seems perfectly plausible in view 
of their historical and geographical proximity, especially after the Nazis 
had discredited the notion that Aryans were categorically distinct and 
superior. For the professional, things were 'not so simple', and laymen, 
who had no idea of the details of the situation contained in the scholarly 
literature, had no right to challenge the experts. Unfortunately, how­
ever, much as academics would like it to be so - because their status and 
livelihood depend on it - the obvious is not always false! Sometimes it is 
possible to say in retrospect that members of the lay public have known 
better than the professionals: I mentioned the case of Continental Drift 
in the Introduction. 
Crete, Gordon's second connection between the Semites and the 
Greeks, was still more upsetting. Excited by Ventris' decipherment of 
Linear B, Gordon proceeded on the assumption - criticized at the time, 
but, now generally conceded - that its signs had the same phonetic 
values as its predecessor Linear A, the linear writing system of at least 
later Minoan civilization.44 Following this principle, Gordon was able 
to read several Semitic words and discern Semitic sentence patterns in 
the earlier script. To do this, he assumed that as in Linear B there was 
little distinction made between voiced and unvoiced stops ~s and QS; PI 
and QS and ks and gs). He also drew, for his vocabulary, from both West 
Semitic and Akkadian. Gordon published preliminary results of his 
reading of Linear A in the very respectable journalAntiquiO' in 1957; in


--- PAGE 225 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
the 1960s he developed his ideas on this and on Semitic readings for 
later Eteocretan inscriptions written in the Greek alphabet. 45 The 
procedures he adopted were generally considered illegitimate, but they 
were spectacularly vindicated by the discovery in 1975 of Eblaite, a 
West Semitic language of the 3rd millennium BC. Eblaite combines 
Akkadian archaisms with features found in Ugaritic and Canaanite. 46 
Gordon's work on Homeric and biblical parallels, like his work on 
Linear A, has been considered 'controversial'. Interestingly, however, 
Gordon received immediate support from two white 'English' South 
African scholars and this, I believe, can be explained by externalist or 
ideological forces. Whereas after 1885 most Northern Europeans and 
Americans felt free to indulge in anti-Semitism, the Afrikaners, be­
cause of their fundamentalist tradition, felt both love and hate towards 
theJews.
47 
The combination turned to anti-Semitism with the system­
atization of their racism and their alliance with the German Nazis.48 
On the other hand, 'English' South Africans could never neglect the 
threat of non-Europe, and they preserved the 19th-century ambiv­
alence towards the Jews. Furthermore, they had a specific need to 
explain away the massive stone ruins of Zimbabwe, after which the 
country is now named. Even before the carbon dating of these remains 
in the 1960s to the 15th and 16th centuries, it was pretty clear that they 
had been built by the Shona people, who still live in the region. Such a 
conclusion was impossible, however, because racial stereotypes forbade 
Africans to carry out such undertakings; so the buildings were attri­
buted to the Phoenicians. 49 Thus in Southern Africa the positive 
feelings of the Victorian period towards the Phoenicians had been 
preserved, and would seem to be a factor in the open-mindedness of 
South African Classicists on this issue. 
However, both scholars withdrew their support and took more 
orthodox positions on Linear A in favour of agnosticism and Anatolian 
connections. The change must be seen in the light of the harsh 
reactions against a Semitic connection among European Hellenists, 
notably from Ventris' collaborator John Chadwick, the doyen ofMyce-
. naean linguistic studies. In neither his article on Linear B for the 
Cambridge Ancient History, nor his massive Documents in Mycenaean 
Greek, does Chadwick make any mention of Gordon's work on Linear 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
A, much of which is published in standard journals. Interestingly, 
Chadwick specifically claims that omission from his bibliography 
'must not be construed as criticism'. Nevertheless the importance of 
Gordon's hypothesis - not only to the interpretation of Linear A but 
also to the nature of Mycenaean script, language and society - makes 
the failure to refer to it very significant. 50 
So far at least, Gordon has suffered the fate of many radicals. Even 
now that the Extreme Aryan Model, against which Gordon had 
offended in the 1950s, is beginning to crumble; and although it is now 
acknowledged that Linear A can be read with the sound values of 
'\ Linear B; that 'mixed' Semitic languages have existed; that there are 
Semitic words in Linear A and Eteocretan, and that there is no inherent 
reason why they should not be Semitic; it is still denied that they are 
Semitic and that Gordon deserves any credit for having suggested 
thiS. 51 
Although Cyrus Gordon is in many ways an academic pariah, his 
language and teaching skills have meant that his pupils are the best 
equipped of their generation, and they have now become a major 
force in American Semitic studies. One of the lessons they have learnt 
is the high cost of stepping out of line, and only one of them has pub­
lished on Crete. 52 Nevertheless, most retain a basic sympathy with his 
views and the conviction that the role of Canaanites and Phoenicians 
has been systematically neglected. 53 There is no doubt that their in­
fluence is sapping the academic status quo, and in the United States is 
leading to a refusal to accept the previously unquestioned dominance 
of Classics over Semitic studies. 
ASTOUR AND HELLENOSEMITlCA 
In the short run, however, Gordon's colleague Michael Astour has had 
a much greater impact. Astour was in Paris in the I 930s, where he was a 
student of the French decipherer of Ugaritic, Charles Virolleaud; 
Virolleaud had been influenced by Berard and privately believed in the 
basic truth of the Phoenician references in the Kadmeian myths. From 
1939 to 1950 Astour was in Soviet prison camps; he spent the next six 
years in a Siberian city, where he was able, in his free time and


--- PAGE 226 ---
42 0 BLACK ATHENA 
overcoming great difficulties, to continue research on Greek - Se­
mitic relations. In 1956 he left the Soviet Union for Poland and there, 
a year later, he read Gordon's first article on Linear A. Soon after this 
he went to the United States, where he was given a post by Gordon in the 
latter's department at the great Jewish university of Brandeis.54 In 
1967 he published Hellenosemitica, a book containing major studies on 
the myth cycles of Danaos, Kadmos and what he called the 'healer 
heroes', who included Jason and Bellerophon. In these he tried to 
show detailed similarities between Greek, Ugaritic and biblical myths 
in both structure and nomenclature, and here he followed and went 
beyond the work of Berard. 
As I have mentioned, other scholars during the late 1950S and the 
early 1960s, like F ontenrose and Walcot, had traced detailed parallels 
between Greek and Near Eastern mythology, never doubting that the 
Greek forms were derivative. 55 Why was Astour's work considered 
so much more offensive? First, it offended at a formal level, 
because it challenged the academic hierarchy; this was a reflection of 
the relative power of the two disciplines. Although Classicists had 
previously discussed Eastern parallels to Hellenic mythology, it was 
entirely different and unacceptable for Orientalists to pronounce on 
Greece. 
There were also fundamental objections to the content of Astour's 
work. Scholars like F ontenrose and Walcot had made broad sweeps of 
world mythology - including India, Iran and so on - and they gave 
preference, if possible, to the less offensive sources. By contrast, 
Astour's derivation of Greek names from Semitic not only poached on 
the sacred ground oflanguage, but also made the connections between 
West Semites and Greeks disturbingly close and specific. Furthermore, 
two of the myth cycles he treated - those ofKadmos and Danaos - were 
concerned with Near Eastern colonization in Greece, and he made a 
plausible case for their having a historical kernel of truth. The fourth 
section of Hellenosemitica was even more provocative in that it went into 
the sociology of knowledge, and its sketch of the history and ideology of 
Classics and Classical archaeology has been the basis of all later 
writings on this subject, this volume included. In doing this Astour 
injected relativism into subjects that had previously been impervious to 
[CH. X] ~HE POST-WAR SITUATION 421 
the forces of probabilism and uncertainty that have transformed other 
disciplines since the 1890S. 
Astour has proved - pace Ruth Edwards et al. - that there were 
fundamental links between West Semitic and Greek mythology. 56 But 
this is clearly only part of his aim. Like Movers and the other mid - I 9th­
century scholars who maintained the Broad Aryan Model, Astour 
believes that the Ancient Model's picture of colonization is substantially 
correct, except that the latter attributed to the Egyptians what were 
essentially West Semitic conquests. In general he maintained that 'Not 
only was Phoenician spoken in several parts of Mycenaean Greece, but 
the entire Mycenaean civilization was essentially a peripheral culture of 
the Ancient East, its westernmost extension. ,57 
Although he pointed out the presence of the loan words in Linear B, 
proving significant Semitic influence before the 14th century Be, 
Astour did not look for any further examples at other stages in the 
development of Greek. Moreover, he never considered the possibilities 
of Egyptian cultural influence; or of a general Near Eastern influx 
capable of explaining most of the non- Indo- European elements in the 
Greek language, toponyms and mythological nomenclature which 
would thus do away with the need for the hypothetical substratum of the 
Pre- Hellenes. Nevertheless, Astour has permanently changed the 
historiography of the ancient Mediterranean. 
Hellenosemitica has sold exceptionally well. The reviews, however, 
were so hostile that Astour has given up work on the subject. The critics 
were led by one of the few scholars with the necessary skills to debate 
him - J. D. Muhly, an American archaeologist with a knowledge of both 
Greek and Akkadian. Muhly claimed that 'Hellenosemitica is a profound 
disappointment. Instead of a fresh treatment of the problem, based 
upon the wealth of new material, the reader is served with a rechauffage 
of the theories of Victor Berard.,58 According to Muhly, Astour had 
proved nothing about Greek relations with the Levant during the 
Bronze Age. Muhly also claimed that in attacking the anti-Phoenician 
excesses of scholars like Beloch in the 1890S, Astour was setting up a 
straw man whose views were unlike those of modem Classicists. 
However, the force of this argument was weakened by another of 
Muhly's statements: 'I do not propose to defend the absurdities which


--- PAGE 227 ---
~ I 
422 BLACK ATHENA 
have been published and are still being published about Near Eastern 
Civilization by eminent Classicists' (myemphasis).59 
Muhly's second statement should be allowed to stand, because 
Beloch is still widely respected in some quarters of his discipline and 
because there is very little to choose between his anti-Phoenicianism in 
the 1890S and that of Rhys Carpenter in the 1950s.60 Muhly was 
undoubtedly right, on the other hand, to point out that the majority of 
modern Classicists do not share the racism and anti-Semitism endemic 
among their teachers or their teachers' teachers. But he was still asking 
his readers to swallow the implausible idea that the Extreme Aryan 
Model grew up pure and uncontaminated by the Zeitgeist in which it was 
formed or the views - which would now be considered unacceptable -
of those who created it. 
Three years later, in 1970, Muhly returned to the attack in an article 
entitled 'Homer and the Phoenicians'. In this he argued along the lines 
of the conventional wisdom that has been outlined earlier in this chapter 
- that there was no archaeological proof of Phoenician presence in the 
Mediterranean before the 8th century, and that Levantine objects 
found in Bronze Age levels there had been brought by Greeks through 
mercenary service, trade or even as tourists' bric-a.-brac. He asserted 
that Homer's Phoenicians were those of Homer's own period, which 
Muhly saw as the 8th century; they were not contemporary with the 
Trojan War or the Late Mycenaean period. Muhly was clearly and 
passionately maintaining the arguments of Be loch and Rhys Carpenter 
that Phoenician influence on Greece was late and shalloW.61 We shall 
return later to Muhly's partial change of heart in the 1980s. 
ASTOUR'S SUCCESSOR? 
J. C. BILLIGMEIER 
Although Astour did not have much immediate impact on Classics, his 
work did elicit some response among ancient historians. In 1976 a short 
PhD thesis by]. C. Billigmeier, entitled Kadmos and the Possibility of 
a Semitic Presence in Helladic Greece, was approved at the University of 
California, Santa Barbara. In fact the thesis was more daring than its 
title suggests, for not only did it accept Astour's work on the Kadmeian 
[CH. X] ,THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
and Danaan legends but it went beyond him to consider, favourably, the 
traditions of Danaos' Egyptian origin. Billigmeier also reiterated a 
number of the accepted Semitic etymologies for Greek words and place 
names and revived several of those that had been discarded in the 19th 
62 century. 
Seven years later, in 1983, it was announced that a small Dutch 
publisher was going to bring out Billigmeier's work as a book. However, 
the promised book was withdrawn at the last moment and it has not 
appeared since. Without knowing the specifics of the case, it is imposs­
ible to say anything definitive - on the other hand, the sequence would 
appear to fit a general pattern by which publishers are 'discouraged' 
from publishing books advocating this particular academic heresy. 63 
Saul Levin, for instance, wrote: 
The search for a willing publisher proved to be slower than the actual 
research had been, and as disagreeable as the research had been 
exhilarating. Experience taught me to wait for a year or more for 
nothing better than a letter of rejection with a brief explanation or 
none.64 
This is a good description of my own experience too, while Cyrus 
Gordon has published all his later books with a small press owned by a 
family member. Ruth Edwards, whom I come to next, thanks her 
publisher 'for accepting this work for publication at what proved to be a 
difficult time,.65 This pattern shows the way in which control of 
university presses, and major influence over the commercial ones, 
allows academics supporting the status quo to 'maintain standards' - as 
they would express it - or, in other words, to repress opposition to 
orthodoxy. 
AN ATTEMPT AT COMPROMISE: 
RUTH EDWARDS 
No Classicist has felt it worthwhile - or perhaps been able? - to make a 
full-scale defence of their position against the challenge coming from 
Gordon and Astour. On the other hand, one scholar has tried to 
establish a compromise by which the positive aspects of the Semitists'


--- PAGE 228 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
work could be incorporated into 'respectable' scholarship. This was Dr 
Ruth Edwards, a pupil of Dr Stubbings, who was mentioned on p. 410 
for his belief in the Hyksos conquests. Ruth Edwards' thesis was 
completed in 1968, but her book only appeared over ten years later. Her 
work Kadmos the Phoenician is of central importance to the topics with 
which we are concerned. 
Her attitude to Astour is critical. She savagely attacks his linkages 
through mythological parallels because, she argues, many are loose; 
based on dubious readings of Ugaritic texts; come from different 
periods; or are simply the result of common folkloric motifs.66 She is 
also sceptical about his etymologies, because of the laxity that is 
inevitable when dealing with purely consonantal West Semitic 
alphabets. On the other hand, she is equally scathing about the 
source-critics' denial of the antiquity of the Kadmeian and Danaan 
legends: as no early Greek writer attacked them, she points out, the 
source-critics had to rely on the dubious 'argument from silence'. She 
goes on to prove that the legends of Phoenician colonization are indeed 
veryold. 67 
In general Dr Edwards maintains that all legends should be treated 
with extreme caution and that, as far as possible, common folkloric 
motifs should be factored out. But she is convinced that the legends 
about Kadmos and Danaos contain genuine Mycenaean elements and, 
moreover, she follows Astour in his argument that evidence from 
legends is no more subjective than that from other sources. As she 
puts it: 
It is sometimes assumed by those who urge us to disregard legend 
and concentrate on these other sources that they are in some way 
more objeaive than the traditions. But we must emphasize that 
archaeology, language and documents are objective only within a 
very restricted compass, in fact only so long as they are concerned 
with mere observation and description of data. Once they aspire to 
interpretation, a subjective element enters in. This is particularly 
worth illustrating in regard to archaeology: the same assemblage of 
artefacts, the very same destruction levels, may be interpreted in 
different ways by different archaeologists. There is, moreover, a 
[CH.X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
tendency for archaeological interpretations to run in fashions. Thus 
in British prehistory it was customary in the first part of this century 
for certain changes in material culture to be explained by invasion; 
today this view is generally rejected in favour of explanations through 
indigenous development. Similarly in Greek prehistory we can see 
how up to the 1890S there was a tendency to interpret many Bronze 
Age achievements as the work of Phoenicians or other Orientals ... 
how shortly afterwards the Cretan hypothesis became almost univer­
sally accepted, and how at the present time the independence of 
Mainland Greece is generally stressed. The other sources, then, are 
not in themselves objective for the purpose of reconstruaing prehistory; 
they are subject to limitations of precisely the same order as the 
legendary tradition. The prehistorian is always working from imper­
fect and ambiguous material and there is . . . nothing basically 
illogical or unsound about using legendary evidence, provided one 
. h . d' 68 recognIZes w at one IS omg. 
Thus, while she accepts that there is a historical kernel to the Kadmeian 
legends - and, by implication, to the Danaan ones too - Dr Edwards 
is uncertain whether they refer to a 16th-century Hyksos coloniz­
ation or to a 14th-century trading settlement. She also believes that 
the legends allow for a Kadmeian foundation at Thebes coming 
from either Crete or the Near East, and prefers the latter.69 But -
following her teacher, Dr Stubbings, and the 'Thirlwall tradition' 
that 'while there may have been Semitic invasions, it did not make 
any difference' - she makes it clear that the only thing about which 
she is nearly certain is that there was no large-scale migration to 
Greece: 
If settlement on a large scale from the Orient had occurred in 
Mycenaean Greece, one would expect either more specific traces of 
it in the archaeological record, or some record of it in the Oriental 
documents. But evidence of this sort is lacking, and no good support 
is given by linguistic material, since (pace Astour) the Semitisms 
which occur in Greek are comparatively few and explicable as loan 
words.7o


--- PAGE 229 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
One should note here the use of 'the argument from silence' for 
archaeology and the circularity of the linguistic argument, which runs 
something like: 'It is pointless looking for Near Eastern etymologies for 
Greek words because there is no evidence of sustained contacts 
between the two cultures. As there are so few loan words, there cannot 
have been significant contacts ... ' 
Nevertheless, despite her caution and her desire to keep them at 
arm's length, there is no doubt that Ruth Edwards has been profoundly 
influenced by the work of Gordon and Astour. It is striking that' 
Billigmeier, who was completely unaware of her thesis, should have 
worked along such similar lines. Taken together, they indicate to me 
that the Extreme Aryan Model is crumbling. Edwards and Billigmeier 
both accepted without question that contemporary anti-Semitism had 
affected historical writing about the Phoenicians. Futhermore - and 
here Edwards was also following her teacher, Dr Stubbings - both 
maintained that legends were a legitimate source of information about 
prehistory. 
THE RETURN OF THE 
IRON AGE PHOENICIANS 
While Astour and his successors have been reviving the Bronze Age 
Phoenicians or Canaanites, there have also been moves to reinstate the 
Phoenicians in the Early Iron Age Aegean. The Belgian Classicist O. 
Van Berchem's articles on 'The sanctuaries of Hercules-Melqart: 
contributions to the study of the Phoenician expansion in the 
Mediterranean', published in 1967, showed the extent, depth and high 
dating of Phoenician influence in the Mediterranean in the early 1St 
millennium BC. 71 Then, in 1979, a major work on Phoenician expan­
sion by another Belgian scholar, Guy Bunnens, appeared. In this the 
author combined the Francophone philo-Phoenician tradition of 
Berard with the academic self-consciousness of the 1 960s and Astour's 
political analysis of Classics. 72 
By 1980 even Muhly's bailiwick, the University of Pennsylvania, had 
been infected. A thesis by one of his students, P. R. Helm, lists the 
considerable amount of recent archaeological evidence suggesting a 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
Phoenician presence in the Aegean as early as the lOth century BC. And 
in a paragraph which shows signs of the difficulties involved when a 
student comes to conclusions that run counter to the strongly held views 
ofhis professor, he writes: 
All of this is not to suggest that the theory of aN ear Eastern maritime 
monopoly - rejected as a model for Aegean-Oriental commerce in 
the Late Bronze Age - should be revived to describe conditions in 
the Early Iron Age. Nor is it proposed to resurrect the 'days when 
scholars saw Phoenician traders everywhere in the 8th-century 
Aegean, bringing their goods to Greece and instructing the Greeks 
in the higher arts of civilization', even if Phoenician traders are now 
to be dubbed 'Cypro-Phoenicians'. There is abundant evidence to 
demonstrate that Athens and the other Greek states regularly 
engaged in maritime enterprises at this period. What is suggested is 
that the Oriental trade was largely, if not exclusively, in the hands of 
merchants from Cyprus (and probably the Levantine coasts as well) 
[elsewhere he writes that Cypriot wares were 'actually of Phoenician 
origin'] who traded regularly with the South-Eastern Aegean and 
occasionally with the Cyclades, Euboea andAttica. (my emphasis) 73 
Now, in the mid-198os, Muhly himself is shifting ground. In a paper 
published in 1984 - and apparently overwhelmed by the archaeological 
evidence - he sees massive West Semitic influence on Mycenaean 
Greece. 74 However, despite this volte-face and Helm's conclusions, he 
remains obdurate on the issue of Phoenicians in the Aegean during 
the Early Iron Age.75 
NAVEH AND THE TRANSMISSION 
OF THE ALPHABET 
It is not surprising that the 'revolt' of the Semitists has been most 
successful at the weak point of the Aryan Model, the alphabet; for we 
have seen how the attacks on the Extreme Model of the 1950S and 60S 
were clearly linked to the rise of Jewish self-confidence after the 
establishment of Israel. Moreover, on the alphabet the challenge came 
from Israel itself. During the 1940s, the Semitist and epigrapher


--- PAGE 230 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Professor Tur-Sinai at Jerusalem had continued to oppose Rhys 
Carpenter's ultra-low dating; then in 1973 a new start came with a 
path-breaking article by an archaeologist turned epigrapher, Joseph 
Naveh, entitled 'Some Semitic epigraphical considerations of the 
Greek alphabet'.76 Working purely from epigraphy, Naveh argued that 
the uncertain direction of the early Greek inscriptions resembled not 
the regular right to left of the Phoenician alphabet, but the irregularities 
of the Canaanite one that had preceded it. Similarly, the stances of a 
number of Greek letters, notably A and ~, were not those of Phoenician 
but paralleled those of the earlier period. Naveh further maintained that 
the early Greek Hand 0 were identical to the Canaanite, not the 
Phoenician, forms and that .1,E,N,2,ll, Q,P and possibly El, though 
not identical to the earlier Semitic shapes, could be much more 
plausibly derived from the Late Canaanite forms than from the Phoeni­
cian ones.77 
Naveh could see that his scheme faced difficulties over K and M, the 
earliest examples of which seemed to resemble Phoenician forms from 
around B 50 BC rather than the earlier ones. He had rather cumbersome 
explanations for these, and despite the complications was convinced 
that the older letters and the bulk of the evidence pointed conclusively 
to a date from before the standardization of the Phoenician alphabet. As 
he - wrongly, in my opinion - accepted Albright's low dating of the 
A1)iram inscription of just after 1000 BC, according to the validity of'the 
argument from silence' he cautiously postulated this date as the time of 
standardization, and put the date of transmission fifty years earlier, at 
about 1050.78 
Naveh's article appeared in The American Journal of Archaeology, in 
which Carpenter and Ullman had published their pieces. Even so, as so 
often happens with fundamental challenges to academic orthodoxies, 
his argument met with almost no response. Rhys Carpenter's leading 
successor, the Oxford Classicist and specialist in early Greek alphabets 
Dr L. Jeffery, limited her criticisms to short comments of the type: 
'Naveh, an article deserving serious attention by Greek epigraphers, 
though the blank on the Greek side before the Bth century remains a 
problem (and his argument is wrong in assuming that the tailless forms 
of mu and psi are early).' 79 On the whole, she and her colleagues have 
[CH. X] THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
continued to base themselves on 'the fundamental work of Rhys 
Carpenter'; though now, since the discovery of datable Greek inscrip­
tions from the Bth century, they tend to think in terms of around Boo 
rather than 700 BC.80 Incidentally, this concession removes one of the 
main props of Carpenter's argument - the need for the Assyrians to 
propel the Phoenicians westward. It also takes away one of his main 
motivations to show that Phoenician influence came after the formation 
of the Greek polis. 
The situation has been rather different among Semitists. The 
biblical scholar and epigrapher Professor Kyle McCarter, a pupil and 
colleague of the great Albright's successor, Professor Frank Cross, 
the leading Semitic epigrapher at Harvard, tried to find a compromise 
between Naveh and Carpenter, concluding with the uncertain 
declaration: 
While the Greeks may have begun to experiment with Phoe­
nician writing as early as the II th century BC, they did not, for 
whatever reason, develop a true independent tradition until the 
beginning of the Bth century. The Greek system, therefore, is 
best described as descended from a Phoenician prototype of 
c.Boo BC ... 81 
I believe that Professor McCarter is right to stress two periods of 
borrowing. Where he is transparently misleading, however, is in his 
protestations of orthodoxy and his apparent acceptance of Carpenter. 
McCarter did, in fact, concede Naveh's argument - for what can 
an alphabetic 'experiment' be, if not an earlier borrowing of an 
alphabet? On the other hand, McCarter's dilemma has been a general 
one, and many Semitists have increasingly blurred their dating 
of the transmission, putting it somewhere between 1100 and 
750 BC.82 
Other Semitists, however, have been moving towards a higher date. 
Professor Cross is becoming increasingly assertive towards the Classi­
cists. As he put it in 1975, beautifully demonstrating the integral 
relationship between the low dating of the alphabetic transmission and 
the Extreme Aryan Model:


--- PAGE 231 ---
430 BLACK ATHENA 
From the standpoint of the Orientalist, certain standard arguments 
of the Classicists for a late date of borrowing no longer carry weight: 
(I) The argument that the Phoenicians were not in the west until the 
Bth century or later is simply wrong, a classic instance of the fallacy of 
argumentum e silentio. The Phoenicians were in contact with the 
islands and shores of the West Mediterranean from the I I th century 
on ... 
(2) The theory of the prolonged Dark Age of Greek illiteracy 
appears to be crumbling . " To the Orientalist this theory ... 
appears most precarious ... 
(3) The widely held view that the Greek script was borrowed 
immediately before the earliest extant Greek inscriptions (now dated 
to the second half of the Bth century BC) is wrong ... We must posit a 
considerable time-span between the time the script was borrowed 
and its appearance in the earliest known Greek inscriptions to 
explain the distance between the earliest Greek scripts and any point 
in the sequence of the Proto-Canaanite and Linear Phoenician 
script types . . . 
(4) No theory of the Greek script will long stand which does not 
offer an adequate explanation of archaic features (i.e., typologically 
old) in the alphabet of Crete, Thera and Melos. I am strongly 
inclined to believe that Phoenicians in the West rather than Greeks 
in the East were the primary agents in the initial spread of the 
alphabet. 83 
Professor Cross's convictions have been still further strengthened by 
recent discoveries in Israel; notably of a I ~th-century abecedarium or 
complete alphabet found at the village ofIzbet Sartah outside Tel Aviv, 
the letters of which look far more like those of Greek and Roman than 
the later Phoenician ones.84 
However, there are still Semitic epigraphers who are frightened by 
such boldness and they have leapt with some glee upon the recent 
discovery of an inscription at Tell Fekheriye, some 200 kilometres 
inland on the Syrian-Turkish border. Because the letters of this 
inscription - which has tentatively been dated on non-epigraphic 
grounds to the mid -9th century - have many 'pre-Phoenician' features, 
[CH. X] .THE POST-WAR SITUATION 43 1 
it has been argued that the archaic characteristics found in the early 
Greek alphabet could have been transmitted at a much later date.85 But 
even these scholars admit that the Levantine coast and its immediate 
hinterland were writing with standard Phoenician letters by the 9th 
century. Thus for an alphabet of the Tell Fekheriye type to have 
reached Greece would have required a leapfrog over Phoenicia, the 
richest and most prestigious region in the Near East of the time. The 
implausibility of such an argument only underlines the power of 
conservatism and the vested interests involved. 
Despite this eddy, however, there is no doubt that the general trend 
for the date of the transmission is now upward, and dates of the lOth 
century are now relatively common even from those who claim to be 
opposed to Naveh.86 There have even been attempts to raise the date 
beyond the 11th century. In 19BI, Gordon's pupil Robert Stieglitz 
published an article which argued that Naveh had been too minimalist 
in assuming that the alphabet had been transmitted only at the last 
possible date before the formation of the Phoenician alphabet. In any 
event, Stieglitz showed that evidence from late Ugaritic writing indi­
cated the presence of a Phoenician alphabet of the 22-letter type on the 
Levant by 1400 BC. Furthermore, he demonstrated that there were 
strong Greek traditions pointing to their having had an alphabet before 
the Trojan War. Thus he maintained that the alphabet had been 
transmitted through a Semitic-speaking Eteocretan population in 
Crete in the 14th century.87 
In 1983 I proposed a still earlier date for the transmission, based on a 
new find at Kiimid el Loz, in the Bek<a valley in Lebanon, that firmly 
placed the so-called South Semitic Alphabet in the 14th century BC. 88 
Inscriptions in the South Semitic scripts, of which the Ethiopian 
alphabets are the sole survivors today, occur throughout the Arabian 
and Syrian deserts. One of their most significant differences from the 
22-letter Canaanite alphabet and its descendants - which include 
Phoenician, Aramaic and Aramaic's derivative, the modem Arabic 
alphabet - is that the South Semitic scripts have up to 30 letters for all 
the consonants of Arabic and Proto-Semitic. Indeed, the German 
Semitists and epigraphers Professors Rollig and Mansfeld have plaus­
ibly argued, on the basis of the find at Kiimid eI Loz, that the Canaanite


--- PAGE 232 ---
432 BLACK ATHENA 
alphabet was derived from an earlier one of the South Semitic 
type.B9 
In 1902 the German Semitist Praetorius pointed out the striking 
visual and phonetic correspondences between letters from Thamudic 
and Safaitic - two of the most archaic South Semitic alphabets, but 
not present in Canaanite - and the so-called 'new letters' c;I> X lp , , , 
and Q at the end of the Greek alphabet. These occur in many of the 
earliest Greek inscriptions, but no origin for them has been discovered. 
Praetorius went on to argue that these letters were derived from an 
earlier alphabet of the South Semitic type. Although a number of 
scholars, including Sir Arthur Evans and the great French Semitist 
Rene Dussaud, acknowledged the similarities, the hypothesis was 
dropped in the 1 920S and 30s.90 The reasons for this seem to have been 
the incompatibility of these ideas with the Extreme Aryan Model and 
the archaeological positivism of these decades, which led scholars to 
demand proof of the early existence of the South Semitic alphabets. 
Now that there is early attestation, I believe the time is ripe to reopen 
the debate. I have proposed that the Anatolian, Aegean and other 
alphabets - and alphabetically derived syllabaries from around the 
Mediterranean - originate from one in use in the Levant from before the 
development of the 22-letter Canaanite one in the Phoenician cities in 
the 15th or 14th century Be.91 To accept this would merely return us to 
the Ancient Model; to the position of Hero dot os and the other ancient 
writers - with the exception of) osephus - who argued that the alphabet 
had been introduced to Greece by Kadmos or Danaos, sometime in the 
middle of the 2nd millennium Be. This return would also destroy the 
concept of an illiterate Dark Age; while the survival of alphabetic 
literacy from before the Trojan War would in turn strengthen confi­
dence in the reliability of the Classical Greeks' reports of their Bronze 
Age past - notably the traditions of colonization. 
The assault on the low dating of the transmission of the Semitic 
alphabet to Greece is only one aspect of the general attack on the 
Extreme Aryan Model as a whole. There is no doubt that with the 
tergiversation of Professor Muhly, the active heart of opposition to an 
early West Semitic presence in the Aegean has collapsed. This is not to 
say, however, that there is not still considerable inertia working for the 
[CH. X] 'f.HE POST-WAR SITUATION 433 
maintenance of the Extreme Aryan Model. It is striking, in this context, 
that the latest edition of the CambridgeAncientHistory, Volume 3, Part 1 
_TheMiddleEastandtheAegean World, Tenth to Eighth Centuries Be-has 
chapters on Assyria, Babylonia, Urartu, the Neo-Hittite states of Syria 
and Anatolia, Israel and Judah, Cyprus and Egypt - but none on 
Phoenicia, which was the dominant power in the Mediterranean of the 
time. 
However, although this volume was published in 1982, its planning 
represents scholarship from well before the rethinking that began in the 
late 1970s. The bibliography on Eastern influences on Greece, for 
instance, compiled by the Oxford Classicist Oswyn Murray in 1980 
shows how pathetically little work has been done on this crucial subject. 
And, as one would expect, most authors refer loosely to Babylonia and 
prefer the 'land bridge', thus avoiding Phoenicia. Murray himself 
represents the trend away from the Extreme Aryan Model, and seems 
much more open on the subject of Phoenician influence. However, 
even he dates that influence to the period after 750 Be; whereas both 
. the heyday of Phoenicia, and the apparent Greek adoption of such 
Phoenician institutions as the city-state and colonization, came before 
that. 
THE RETURN OF THE EGYPTIANS? 
Whether or not these ideas, or those ofNaveh and Cross, are accepted, 
the fact that they are being debated means that the paradigmatic 
monopoly of the Extreme Aryan Model has been shattered. I believe, 
therefore, that despite the conservative tide and revived racism of the 
1980s, the attack on the Extreme Aryan Model is likely to succeed 
relatively quickly. The battle to restore the Ancient Model and the 
position of the Egyptians, on the other hand, will take rather longer. 
Indeed, the only accepted academic to back the claims that there had 
been Egyptian colonies, and significant later borrowings from Greeks 
studying in Egypt, has been the East German Egyptologist Siegfried 
Morenz. Morenz, a recognized and extremely productive scholar who 
is best known for his works on Egyptian religion, published in 1969 
a very important work on Europe's Encounter with Egypt.


--- PAGE 233 ---
434 BLACK ATHENA 
This work covers several of the areas approached in this volume. 
However, it fundamentally differs from Black Athena in a number of 
important ways: it does not set up a scheme comparable to the Ancient 
and Aryan Models; and it specifically rejects spelling out a sociology of 
knowledge, though the author is apparently aware of some of the forces 
involved.93 Furthermore, Morenz does not consider the possibility of 
significant linguistic borrowing; nor does he mention Greek borrowings 
from West Semitic culture. Nevertheless, he does maintain that there 
was significant cultural contact between Greece and Egypt, especially 
through Crete. 94 He also explicitly claims that the legends around 
Danaos contain 'a historical kernel,.95 He insisted that 'the Greeks did 
not only learn about the Egyptian gods in Egypt (for example as 
craftsmen and merchants in Naukratis) [a Greek colony established in 
Egypt in the 6th century] but also early in their own territory.,96 He is 
also convinced that Plato studied in Egypt and that he had learnt from 
the experience. 97 
Given the social, intellectual and academic forces involved, it is not 
surprising that Professor Morenz's powerful combination of boldness 
and detailed scholarship has had so little response. The work was 
written in conjunction with Swiss scholars, and has been published in 
the West. Nevertheless, it does not seem to have had a major impact 
on the mainstream of West German Egyptology as represented by 
Professor HeIck, the intellectually and academically powerful specialist 
in Ancient Egypt's relations with the outside world. This work of 
Morenz has not been translated into English or French, and as far as I 
am aware it is scarcely known outside German-speakingMitteleuropa. 
Europe's Encounter with Egypt has had no effect whatsoever on the only 
other group of scholars who believe that Egypt had a major cultural 
influence on Greece: black Americans. While the - mainly Jewish -
Semitists fought against the Extreme Aryan Model from the fringes of 
academia, the American champions of the Egyptians, who are largely 
Blacks, have challenged the Aryan Model from outside the system 
altogether. 
A very small number of black academics, notably Frank Snowden, 
the leading professor in the field at the chief black university, Howard, 
have been successful within Classics. They have concentrated 
[CH. X] 'THE POST-WAR SITUATION 435 
on gleaning what little credit the Aryan model allows to Blacks 
while accepting both its prohibitions: the non-acceptance of a black 
component of Egyptian culture, and the denial of the Afroasiatic 
formative elements in Greek civilization.98 Other scholars, more keenly 
aware of the degree to which racism has pervaded every nook and 
cranny of I9th- and 20th-century European and North American 
culture, have been more sensitive. The pioneer in this effort was 
George G. M. James, a professor teaching at a small college in 
Arkansas. In 1954 he published a book entitled Stolen Legacy: The 
Greeks were not the authors of Greek Philosophy, but the people of North 
Africa, commonly called the Egyptians. Stolen Legacy was not concerned 
with the Bronze Age foundations of Greece but, relying heavily on 
ancient sources, showed the extent to which the Greeks admitted they 
had borrowed their learning from the Egyptians during the Iron Age.99 
In a rather looser way James claimed that the Egyptians had been 
Blacks, and the work ended with a moving appeal calling for a change in 
black consciousness: 
It really signifies a mental emancipation, in which the black people will be 
liberated from the chain of traditional falsehood, which for centuries 
incarcerated them in a prison of inferiority complex and world 
humiliation and insult. (his emphasis)l00 
I had to try twice to have a copy of Stolen Legacy accepted by the 
university library at Cornell before it was finally placed in a smaller 
branch library. It is not recognized as a proper book. Nor has it been read 
outside the black community. 101 Within intellectual circles in this 
community, however, it is highly prized and very influential. 
Stolen Legacy is generally linked in people's minds to the school of 
thought pioneered by the late Senegalese nuclear physicist Cheikh 
Anta Diop. Diop wrote prolifically on what he saw as the integral 
relationship between black Africa and Egypt, and in the course of this 
generally assumed the Ancient Model of Greek history and James' 
theories in Stolen Legacy to be true. However, what most concerned him 
was the great achievements of Egyptian civilization; the systematic 
denigration of them by European scholars; and his faith that the 
Egyptians were, as Herodotos had specified, black. 102


--- PAGE 234 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
In an interesting analytical essay, the contemporary black scholar 
Jacob Carruthers has divided black scholars on this subject into three 
schools. The first are 'the old scrappers', who 
without any special training, but with a sincere dedication to ferret­
ing out the truth about the black past and destroying the big lie of 
black historical and cultural inferiority, took whatever data were 
available and squeezed enough truth from them as circumstances 
allowed. 103 
The second group, which includes George Washington Williams, 
W. E. B. Dubois, John Hope Franklin, Anthony Noguera and Ali 
Mazrui, have 
argued only that Blacks had a share in building the Egyptian 
civilization along with other races. This strain . . . is completely 
enthralled to European historiography ... also demand a black share 
in Greek Antiquity which properly understood is true, but for the 
most part these 'Negro Intellectuals' have no grasp of the true 
meaning. 104 
Carruthers sees the third group as an extension of the 'old scrappers'. 
They include Diop, BenJochannan and Chancellor Williams. He sees 
these as having' developed the multidisciplinary skills to take command 
of the facts of the African past which is a necessary element for the 
foundation of an African historiography ... ,105 
There is no doubt, however, that the time for the 'old scrappers' is 
past and that most Blacks will not be able to accept the conformity to 
white scholarship of men and women like Professor Snowden. How­
ever, despite calls for unity, made necessary by the embattled position of 
black intellectuals, I suspect that the battle between Carruthers' second 
and third groups will continue for a long time. 
Thus, at the end of the I980s, I see continued struggle among black 
scholars on the question of the 'racial' nature of the Ancient Egyptians. 
On the other hand, there is no serious division among them on the 
question of the high quality of Egyptian civilization and of its central 
role in the formation of Greece. Furthermore, there is a general 
hostility among them to Semitic culture, especially when it is supposed 
[CH. X] ;rHE POST-WAR SITUATION 437 
to have affected Egypt. Meanwhile, where white scholars - with the 
exception of Morenz - are increasingly prepared to admit that West 
Semites played a substantial part in the creation of Greek culture, there 
is still a far greater reluctance to admit fundamental Egyptian influence 
upon it.106 One aspect of my work is an attempt to reconcile these two 
hostile approaches. 
THE REVISED ANCIENT MODEL 
Interestingly, I find it easier to place myself and my promotion of the 
Revised Ancient Model in the spectrum of black scholarship than 
within the academic orthodoxy. I see myself in Carruthers' second 
class, whom he damns as 'Negro intellectuals'. I am happy to be in the 
excellent company of Dubois, Mazrui and the others who, while they do 
not picture all Ancient Egyptians as resembling today's West Africans, 
do see Egypt as essentially African. 
This is an indication of the isolation within academia of the ideas 
which form the background to this volume. However, I believe that the 
outrage the Revised Ancient Model causes among Classicists and some 
ancient historians today is a temporary phenomenon. Why do I think so? 
First, I believe that the disintegration of the Extreme Aryan Model and 
the introduction of externalism and relativism into ancient history are 
having generally subversive effects on the status quo as a whole. 
However, the fundamental reason I am convinced that the Revised 
Ancient Model will succeed in the relatively near future is simply that 
within liberal academic circles the political and intellectual under­
pinnings of the Aryan Model have largely disappeared. 
Since the I940S both racism and anti-Semitism have lost their re­
spectability with the 'racial' and 'anti-Semitic' policies of Nazi Ger­
many. Since then anti-Semitism has had to become more complicated 
and subterranean. Racism, too, has had to become more devious since 
the emergence of the Third World. Equally important have been the 
liberal loss of faith in the mystique 'science' and the deep suspicion of 
positivism since the 1960s. Thus - except possibly in the field of lan­
guage - the Extreme Aryan Model's claim to be proven scientifically 
by experts no longer suffices to protect it from common sense.


--- PAGE 235 ---
I! 
BLACK ATHENA 
As I have gone on with my research, people outside the fields concerned 
have frequently told me that they find my historical schemes more 
convincing than those provided by the academic Establishment. They 
cannot see why the colonizations reported by tradition should be so 
improbable; why the Greek language should not be treated like any 
other language and why it should not have been heavily influenced by 
Egyptian and West Semitic; why the Greeks should not have taken their 
religion from Egypt, as Herodotos and other Ancient Greeks main­
tained, or why Greek scientists and philosophers should not have learnt 
much of their science and philosophy in Egypt? In short, the racist and 
scientistic raisons d'etre of the Aryan Model no longer provide respect­
able props. Without them, it will fall. This, however, is a matter for the 
Conclusion. 
CONCLUSION 
I
T IS ABSURD to try to summarize this book in a dozen paragraphs, 
when even the previous hundreds of pages in which I have at­
tempted to set out some of the complications of this vast and 
extraordinarily ramified theme can best be described by the Chinese 
expression 'looking at flowers from horseback'. 
In the Introduction I set out the general way in which I see Western 
Asian and Northern African history over the past 10,000 years, and - in 
some more detail - my vision of cultural exchanges across the East 
Mediterranean in the 2nd millennium Be. In this conclusion, I want to 
concentrate on the theme of Volume I, The Fabrication of Ancient Greece; 
which is the change in the models through which the origins of Greek 
civilization have been perceived. Before I go any further, however, I 
should like to repeat that the Ancient and Aryan Models are not 
necessarily incompatible. Indeed, while the Revised Ancient Model 
which I propose is, as its name states, a form of the Ancient Model, it 
accepts a number of features from the Aryan one, including the central 
belief that at some time a significant number of Indo-European 
speakers came into Greece from the north. On the other hand, there is 
no doubt that in practice there has been considerable rivalry between 
the two models, and it is this that I have tried to investigate here.


--- PAGE 236 ---
440 BLACK ATHENA 
~he main body of the book began with a description of the ways in 
which Classical, Hellenistic and later pagan Greeks from the 5th 
century Be to the 5th century AD saw their distant past. I attempted to 
trace their own vision of their ancestors' having been civilized by 
Egyptian and Phoenician colonization and the later influence of Greek 
study in Egypt. I tried to show the ambivalent relationship between 
Christianity and the Jewish biblical tradition on the one hand and 
Egyptian religion and philosophy on the other: despite all the centuries 
of potential and actual rivalry, there was no doubt on either side that up 
to the 18th century, Egypt was seen as the fount of all 'Gentile' 
philosophy and learning, including that of the Greeks; and that the 
Greeks had managed to preserve only some part of these. The sense of 
loss that this created, and the quest to recover the lost wisdom, were 
major motives in the development of science in the 17th century. 
I went on to show how at the beginning of the 18th century the threat 
of Egyptian philosophy to Christianity became acute. The Freemasons, 
who made much use of the image of Egyptian wisdom, were at the 
centre of the Enlightenment in its attack on Christian order. And it was 
in opposition to this 18th-century notion of 'reason' on the part of the 
Egyptophils that the Greek ideal of sentiment and artistic perfection 
was developed. Further, the development of Europocentrism and 
racism, with the colonial expansion over the same period, led to the 
fallacy that only people who lived in temperate climates - that is, 
Europeans - could really think. Thus the Ancient Egyptians, who _ 
though their colour was uncertain -lived in Africa, lost their position as 
philosophers. They also suffered through the establishment of the new 
'progressive' paradigm because they had lived so far in the past. 
In this way, by the tum of the 18th century the Greeks were not only 
considered to have been more sensitive and artistic than the Egyptians 
but they were now seen as the better philosophers, and indeed as the 
founders of philosophy. I suggested that as the Greeks were now viewed 
as such paragons of wisdom and sensitivity, intelligent counter­
revolutionary intellectuals saw the study of them as a way of reintegrat­
ing people alienated by modem life; and even of re-establishing social 
harmony in the face of the French Revolution. Classics as we know it 
today was created between 1815 and 1830 - an intensely conservative 
CONCLUSION 441 
period. The same period also saw the Greek War of Independence, 
which united all Europeans against the traditional Islamic enemies from 
Asia and Africa. 
This War - and the philhellenic movement, which supported the 
struggle for independence - completed the already powerful image of 
Greece as the epitome of Europe. The Ancient Greeks were now seen 
as perfect, and as having transcended the laws of history and language. 
Thus it was now thought profane to study any aspect of their culture as 
one would the culture of other peoples. Moreover, with the rise of a 
" passionate and systematic racism in the early 19th century, the ancient 
notion that Greece was a mixed culture that had been civilized by 
Africans and Semites became not only abominable but unscientific. Just 
as one had to discount the 'credulous' Greeks' stories about sirens and 
centaurs, so one had to reject legends of their having been colonized by 
inferior races. Paradoxically, the more the 19th century admired the 
Greeks, the less it respected their writing of their own history. 
I see this destruction of the Ancient Model as entirely the result of 
social forces such as these, and the requirements put upon the Ancient 
Greeks by 19th-century Northern Europeans. My belief is that no 
internalist force - or advance in the knowledge of Ancient Greece - can 
explain the change. Having said this, I accept that the establishment of 
the Aryan Model was greatly helped by the working out of the Indo­
European language family, which - though inspired by Romanticism -
was an internalist achievement; and by the undoubted fact that Greek is 
fundamentally an Indo-European language. But here, too, the same 
social and intellectual forces that had brought down the Ancient Model 
in the 1820S were even more intense in the 1840S and 50S, and they 
clearly played a role in the increasingly 'northern' picture of Ancient 
Greece that developed in the late 19th century. At the same time, the 
sense that only 19th -century men knew how to think 'scientifically' gave 
the - mainly German - scholars the confidence both to dismiss ancient 
descriptions of early Greek history and to invent new ones of their own 
without any regard to the Ancients. 
With the intensification of racism in the 19th century there was 
increasing dislike of the Egyptians, who were no longer seen as the 
cultural ancestors of Greece but as fundamentally alien. A whole new


--- PAGE 237 ---
442 BLACK ATHENA 
discipline of Egyptology could thus grow up, to study this exotic culture 
and at the same time maintain and reinforce Egypt's distance from the 
'real' civilizations of Greece and Rome. 
The status of Egypt fell with the rise of racism in the 1820S; that of 
the Phoenicians declined with the rise of racial anti-Semitism in the 
1880s and collapsed with its peak between 1917 and 1939. Thus, by the 
Second World War, it had been finnly established that Greece had not 
significandy borrowed culturally or linguistically from Egypt and 
Phoenicia and that the legends of colonization were charming absurdi­
ties, as were the stories of the Greek wise men having studied in Egypt. 
Indeed, these beliefs survived the years between 1945 and 1960, even 
though their ideological underpinnings of racism and anti-Semitism 
were generally being discredited in the academic community. 
Since the late 1960s, however, the Extreme Aryan Model has been 
under heavy attack, largely by Jews and Semitists. The important role of 
Canaanites and Phoenicians in the formation of Ancient Greece is now 
being increasingly acknowledged. However, the traditional attribution 
of much of Greek civilization to Egypt is still denied; and in Greek 
language studies - the last bunker of Romanticism and the Extreme 
Aryan Model- any talk of significant Afroasiatic influence on Greek is 
ruled absurd. 
The main point I have been trying to make throughout this book is 
that the Ancient Model was destroyed and replaced by the Aryan Model 
not because of any internal deficiencies, nor because the Aryan Model 
explained anything better or more plausibly; what it did do, however, 
was make the history of Greece and its relations to Egypt and the Levant 
conform to the world-view of the 19th century and, specifically, to its 
systematic racism. Since then the concepts of 'race' and categorical 
European superiority which formed the core of this Weltanschauung 
have been discredited both morally and heuristically, and it would be 
fair to say that the Aryan Model was conceived in what we should now 
call sin and error. 
However, I insist that its conception in sin, or even error, does not 
necessarily invalidate it. Darwinism, which was created at very much 
the same time and for many of the same 'disreputable' motives, has 
remained a very useful heuristic scheme. One could perfecdy well 
CONCLUSION 443 
argue that Niebuhr, Miiller, Curtius and the others were 'sleepwalking' 
in the sense in which Arthur Koesder used the term - to describe useful 
'scientific' discoveries made for extraneous reasons and purposes which 
are not accepted in later times. All I claim for this volume is that it has 
provided a <;ase to be answered. That is, if the dubious origin of the 
Aryan Model does not make it false, it does call into question its 
inherent superiority over the Ancient Model. It is for this reason that 
the next volume in this series is concerned with the competition 
between the two models as effective tools for understanding Ancient 
Greece.


--- PAGE 238 ---
APPENDIX 
WERE THE PHILISTINES GREEK? 
T
HE PLAUSIBILITY OF A LINK between the two ethnic names 
. Pelasgoi and Peleset or Philistine was discussed in Chapter I, 
so it would be useful to consider the connections between the 
Philistines and Crete. l No one doubts that the people the Egyptians 
called the Prst came from the north-west, but there is considerable 
debate as to whether they came from Crete and the islands or from 
Mainland Anatolia. 
The British archaeologist Dr Sandars argues that Egyptian texts 
indicate that the Prst (philistines) came to the Levant by land. This 
would indicate an Anatolian invasion rather than an Aegean one. 
Furthermore, the Prst were associated in an Egyptian text with the Trs, 
who would seem to be the Trojans or Tyrsenoi from North-Western 
Anatolia.2 In the Bible the Philistine princes were known as lrdnim, a 
tide that could come from the Neo-Hittite Sarawanas/Tarawanas or 
the Greek tyrannos (from which comes our tyrant), which was sup­
posedly borrowed from the Lydian. The helmet of the Philistine giant 
Goliath was called a qoba<, which may come from the Hittite kupabbi 
with the same meaning.3 The name Goliath itselfhas been linked to the 
Lydian name Alyattes.4 Finally, the Lydian historian Xanthos related 
that a Lydian hero, Mopsos, went from Lydia to Philistia.5 All these


--- PAGE 239 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
pieces of evidence are used to indicate that the Philistines came from 
Anatolia rather than Crete. 
These arguments, however, are not as strong as they appear. Given 
the activities of Greeks in Cyprus and in Pamphylia and Cilicia in 
Southern Anatolia at this time, the late 13th and 12th centuries Be, 
there is no reason why some of them should not have come overland. 
According to the poet Kallinos, writing in the 7th century Be: 'Peoples 
led by Mopsos [a Greek hero of the Trojan War] passed over the 
Taurus, and that though some of them remained in Pamphylia, the 
others were dispersed in Cilicia, and also in Syria as far even as 
Phoenicia.,6 This account looks remarkably similar to the inscription of 
Ramesses III written early in the 12th century Be: 
. . . as for the foreign countries, they made a conspiracy in their 
islands. All at once the lands were on the move, scattered in war. 
No country could stand before their arms: Hatti [Hittite Central 
Anatolia], Qode [Cilicia], Karkemesh [Upper Euphrates], Arzawa 
and Alashiya [Cyprus]. They were cut off, a camp was set up in Amur 
[Syria] ... Their league was Prst, Ikr, Skis, Dnn and WSS.7 
Note that Ramesses III saw the conspiracy as having begun 'in their 
islands', which suggests the Aegean, Sicily or even Sardinia. It would 
also seem to indicate the presence of the Prst in this last campaign of the 
'Sea Peoples'. 
It should be noted, too, that the Prst are linked here to the Ikr, 
who also settled in Palestine and who may have been associated with the 
Greek hero Teukros. The name Skis is almost certainly connected to 
Sicily, and Dnn to Danuna and the Danaans. The Trs were not listed 
on this occasion.8 
The word Smm meaning 'princes' appears in Ugaritic texts showing 
that whether or not it had Anatolian links, the word sCrdnim was current 
on the Levant before the invasions and cannot be directly related to 
Anatolians among the invading 'Sea Peoples,.9 Qoba( may be related to 
the Hittite kupabbi, but Hittites appear frequently in biblical Palestine 
and there is little doubt that Hittite influenced the Canaanite dialects 
spoken there. lO Wearing qoba(, moreover, was not restricted to Philis­
tines. Astour has pointed out that this headgear was also worn by Saul, 
APPENDIX 447 
Egyptians, Babylonians, Tyrian mercenaries and even Yahwe 
himself. I I A connection between Goliath and Alyattes is possible, but 
according to the Book of Samuel, Goliath belonged to the R epa)Aun of 
Gath, who may have been Canaanite in the opinion of J. Strange, a 
modem student of the subject. I2 This suggestion seems unlikely to me. 
It would seem more probable that, like the West Semitic Ditanu and the 
Greek Titans, the RCpa>tm were the giant spirits of the dead. I3 Hence 
the title RCpa>tm may merely have referred to Goliath's size, and the 
connection Goliath! Alyattes is a possibility. 
The strongest argument in favour of an Anatolian migration remains 
the Lydian tradition that Mopsos the Lydian went from Lydia to 
Ashkelon in Philistia. However, as we have seen, there were also 
traditions of expeditions led by a Greek Mopsos, and by other Greek 
heroes, through Anatolia and Cyprus to the Levant. Apparent con­
firmation of the Greek Mopsos legends came with the discovery at 
Karatepe in Cilicia of an 8th-century bilingual inscription in hiero­
glyphic Hittite - or Luvian - and Phoenician. This refers to a kingdom 
, of Dnnym and to an ancestor called Muksas in Luvian and Mps in 
Phoenician. 14 Confusingly, the ethnic name points to a Greek settle­
ment, while that of the founder of the dynasty indicates an Anatolian 
one, which would give support to the Anatolian legend. Thus there 
are indications that Anatolian elements were involved in the Levant 
at the time of the 'Invasions of the Sea Peoples' in the 13th and 12th 
centuries Be. 
Evidence for the involvement of Greek speakers is even stronger. 
Firstly, there is the consistent biblical tradition that the Philistines came 
from Kaphtor, Crete or the southern Aegean.I5 There are also refer­
ences to mercenaries called KCretl and PCletl, who are always men­
tioned together and sometimes paralleled to the Philistines; it is 
generally thought that these are' Cretans and Philistines. They are 
usually associated with David, who fought not only against Philistines 
but for them. I6 It should be noted that Hebrew contained perfectly 
adequate names for Anatolian peoples: I:Iittl, Hittites who appear 
frequently, Tubal, Mesek and Tiras - the last may well be the 
same as the Egyptian Trs and the Trojans. Nevertheless, the Philistines 
were linked to none of these, but repeatedly and specifically to Kaphtor;


--- PAGE 240 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
thus there seems no reason to doubt the biblical links between the 
Philistines and Crete. 
From the archaeological point of view it is striking that the so-called 
'Philistine pottery', found largely in the areas associated with the 
biblical Philistines, is locally made but resembles the style known as 
Mycenaean III C lB. The closest parallels come from Tarsus in Cilicia , 
Cyprus, and Knossos in Crete. There is no question, however, that the 
style originated in the Aegean and that the other regions where it has 
been found correspond well with the reports of Greek settlement at this 
period. 17 The fact that the culture ofPhilistia from the 12th to the lOth 
century BC shows strong Egyptian influence is not surprising in view of 
its closeness to Egypt, and the fact that many Sea Peoples served as 
mercenaries for the Egyptians. Thus the written and the archaeological 
evidence connecting the Philistines to the Aegean agree to an extent 
that is rare, if not unique. Despite this, however, the Israeli archae­
ologist Dr Dothan admits in her massive work on the Philistines 
that their material culture came from the Aegean, but insists that the 
Philistines were Illyrians, Thracians or Anatolians; anything, in fact, 
other than Greeks. 18 
Working on the probable assumption that the bulk of the Philistines 
originated from Crete and the Aegean and made Mycenaean pottery, it 
becomes extremely likely that they spoke Greek. Although a non­
Hellenic Eteocretan survived in Crete until Hellenistic times, as men­
tioned above, we know from Linear B that Greek was the dominant 
language on the island well over a century before the earliest reference 
to the Prst. 
There are other indications, too, that the Philistines were associated 
with Greece. Assyrian texts refer to a certain la-ma-ni or la-ad-na, two 
different forms both meaning 'Greek', who seized the throne of the 
Philistine city of Ashdod and rebelled against Assyria in 7 I 2 BC. There 
has been considerable debate as to whether this man was a Greek or a 
local leader.
19 
But although it has been clearly established that the 
Philistines were rapidly Semitized, the problem of la-ma-ni could be 
resolved by following the hypothesis that some influential 8th-century 
Philistines were of Greek descent. 
After the Scythian invasion of the 7th century and the Neo-
APPENDIX 449 
Babylonian deportations of the 6th, the name 'Philistine' seems to have 
been partially replaced by Gazan (' azzdti) and Ashdodite e afrMdi), from 
the two chief cities of the region. In about 400 BC Nehemiah con­
demned Jewish marriage to the women of Ashdod and referred to the 
'language of Ashdod', JafrMdit, as a threatto the 'language of the Jews', 
yehudit.2o The meaning of the latter term is uncertain but, because both 
Aramaic and Hebrew were spoken by Jews at this time, it is unlikely that 
Nehemiah was concerned about a West Semitic language. On the other 
hand, Greek, which was expanding rapidly throughout the East 
Mediterranean, would seem to be a much more likely threat. There is 
no biblical word for 'Greek' as a language. Therefore it would seem 
plausible to propose that by ) asrMdit Nehemiah meant 'Greek' - yet 
another indication oflinks between Greeks and Philistines. 
A further indication of contacts between Philistia and Greece at this 
period is that in about 400 BC Gaza was the only city east of Athens 
minting coins according to Attic weights. It should be noted, however, 
that they were inscribed with Phoenician letters - some even with an 
inscription reading either Yhd 0 ew) or Yhw (Yahweh) - and a depiction 
of a seated figure who would seem to be the god of Israel. 21 Other coins 
from the town have the inscription MEINQ, which is supposed to be 
related to Minos of Crete. 22 
Despite the fierce defences of Jaffa and Gaza against Alexander, 
subsequent Hellenization of the region was far more complete than in 
either Phoenicia or Judaea. As Victor Tcherikover, the great historian 
of the Hellenistic period, implies, this would seem to indicate a 
propensity to Greek culture. 23 Stephanos of Byzantium, for instance, 
writing in the 5th century AD, stated that the god Marna, worshipped at 
Gaza, was Zeus Kretogenes, 'born in Crete'. 24 
To sum up: the closest analogy to the invasion of the 'Sea Peoples' 
would seem to be that of the Crusades. Waves of northern invaders 
came by land and sea in a period of great confusion; bands crisscrossed 
each other in their search for plunder and land to settle. The Crusaders 
were largely Romance-speaking but of different dialect nationalities, 
and they also included Germans and English. Similarly, the Sea 
Peoples seem to have been made up of different linguistic groups, 
including both Greek and Anatolian speakers. The likelihood is that


--- PAGE 241 ---
450 BLACK ATHENA 
although other groups may have been largely made up of Anatolian 
speakers, the Philistines were predominantly Greeks. Until the de­
cipherment of Linear B as Greek, however, the Philistines' Cretan 
connection provided no embarrassment; it wc1s easy to see them as 
Pre-Hellenes. The failure of scholars since 1952 to recognize the 
powerful evidence linking the Philistines to the Greeks can be ex­
plained only in terms of the 19th- and 20th-century view of 'Philistines' 
as the exact opposite of the Hellenes - as enemies of culture. 
NOTES 
INTRODUCTION 
I. See ch. VI, Notes 143-4· 
2. See below and ch. X, Notes 7-9· 
3. For a discussion of this literature see p. 54 below and vol. 2. . . 
4. Bernal (1980). For the Uruk tablets, G. Pettinato (personal commUnicatIon, 
Cornell,J Dec. 85). 
5. See below, ch. X, Notes 7-9· 
6. Goodenough (1970)' 
7. Bernal (1989a). 
8. Warren (1965, p. 8); Renfrew (1972 , pp. 345- 8). 
9. Bernal (1983a, 1983b; see also 1987 and most fully in 1990)' 
10. Bernal (1980). 
II. Spyropoulos (1972; 1973)' 
12. Bernal (1986a, pp. 73-4)· 
13· See vol. 3. 
14· Herodotos, VI.53-5· ., . 
B k ( P 43) refers to Spyropoulos' hypothesis but dismisses It. Symeono-15· uc 1979, . .. .. h' . 
glou (1985) fails to cite the former's articles contammg It m . IS massive 
bibliography. Without mentioning the pyramidal form or any Egypuan connec­
tions, he snipes at Spyropoulos' dating (pp' 273-4)· Heick (1979) neglects 
Spyropoulos' work altogether. 
16. Bernal (1988a). 
17. Farag (1980).


--- PAGE 242 ---
452 BLACK ATHENA 
18. La Marche and Hirschbeck (198.+, p. 126). For the Irish oaks: personal 
communication M. G. L. Baillie to P. Kunihohn, Athens, April 1985. 
19· Michael and Weinstein (1977, pp. 28-3 0). 
20. For the correlation with China, see Pang and Chou (1985, p. 816). For the Shang 
date, see Fan (1962, p. 24). For a low revisionist date, see Keightley (1978); for a 
high one, see Chang (1980, pp. 354-5). 
21. Stubbings (1973, pp. 635-8). 
22. Bietak (1979). 
23· C. Miiller (1841-70, vol. III, p. 639). 
24· Hemmerdinger (1969); McGready (1969); Pierce (1971). 
25· For Foucart and the responses to him, see below, ch. V, Note 45. 
Chapter I 
THE ANCIENT MODEL IN ANTIQUITY 
I. Trans. A. de Selincourt, 1954, p. 406. The text refers to the kingships of Argos 
and Sparta. For the later Spartan kings' beliefin their Hyksos ancestry, see vol. 2. 
2. Iliad, 11.68 I. For an almost complete list of Classical references to the Pelasgians, 
see F. Lochner-Hiittenbach (1960, pp. 1-93). 
3· Iliad, 11.841; X.429 and XVII.290. 
4· The tentative identification was made from inscriptional evidence by Professor 
Bietak, the excavator of Tel ed Daba<a (Avaris) (1979, p. 255). The phonetic 
problems with the derivation ofLaris(s)a from R-3~t are not great. The Egyptian 
initial r was usually rendered as I in Greek. In Middle Egyptian 3, the double 
> aleph, was transcribed in Semitic as r. Mediallaryngeals like ~ often disappeared 
and there are many instances of the Egyptian final t being rendered as -is in 
Greek. For the details and phonetic parallels, see vol. 2. 
5· Iliad, 11.841 and XVII.301. 
6. Strabo, XIII.62 1 .c, cited with other references to the connections of Laris(s)ai 
with mud, rich soil and Pelasgians by K. O. Miiller (1820, p. 126). 
7· For Danaos' associations with the Larisa and Argos, see Pausanias, 1119,3 (see 
Frazer, Levi in Bibliography). 
8. Strabo, VIII.6.9. 
9· See Ahl (1985, pp. 158-9). 
10. For >Inb ~!!, see Gauthier (1925, vol. I, p. 83) and Gardiner (1947, vol. II, pp. 
122-6). The Hittite capital Hattus or Hattusas also meant 'Silver'. Whether the 
Greek and Anatolian names are calques for the much older Egyptian one or 
whether they come from the actual colour of the city or citadel walls is impossible 
to say. 
I I. Iliad. 11.681. 
12. Iliad. XVI.233. For further discussion of Dodona, see vol. 3. 
13· Odyssey. XIX.175. 
. NOTES TO CHAPTER I 453 
1-4. Aigimios, fro 8, in White (1914, p. 275)· 
15. V.80.1. 
16. On the whole I accept the arguments of C. Gordon (1962a, I 963a-b, 1966, 
1967, 1 968a-b, 1969, I 970a-b, 1973, 1975, 198o, 1981),paceDuhoux (1982,p. 
232). For implausible attempted etymologies of 'Eteocretan' see Duhoux, .pp. 
16-20. The word -eteos itself has no Indo-European etymology. A plausible 
derivation would be from the Egyptian It found in Demotic and as riot in Coptic 
meaning 'barley'. ;t m ;t in Middle and Late Egyptian, literally 'barley in barley', 
means 'really barley' - presumably referring to the grain or kernel. In Greek one 
finds the term eteokrithos (good or genuine barley). For the centrality and 
seriousness of wordplay in ancient civilization, see below. Whether or not 
Eteokretes is a pun on eteokrithos, it would seem a plausible etymology for "'eteos. 
There is probably, however, some contamination from the Egyptian ;t(y), Coptic 
riot, 'forefathers'. This would seem to be the origin of the clan-name 
Eteoboutades, the hereditary priests of the temple of Athena Polias in Athens. 
17. J. Berard (1951, p. 129) and Lochner-Hiittenbach, p. 142. For the Cretan origin 
of the Philistines, see the Appendix. 
18. W. F. Albright (1950, p. 171); for the early transmission of the alphabet, see 
Bernal (1987a). 
19. For the influence of writing on spoken languages, see Lehmann (1973, pp. 178 
and 226) and Polome (1981, pp. 881-5). 
20. See the Appendix. 
21. Fr. 16, The GTeat Eoiai (White, p. 264). 
22. Strabo. V.2.4. 
23. Akousilaos, fro II, quoted in Ridgeway (19°1, I, p. 90). At another point, 
however, he restricted the meaning to the Peloponnese, as did Ephoros in the 4th 
century. See Apollodoros, 11.1.1. For Aischylos, see his The Suppliants, 25 I-6o. 
24. Herodotos, 1.58 and 11.50. 
25. Herodotos, 11.50-5; 1V.145; VII.94. For other surveys of his views on Pel­
asgians, see Abel (1966, pp. 34-44) and A. B. Lloyd (1976, pp. 232-4). For the 
early Athenians as 'Pelasger und Barbaren', see Meyer (1892, vol. I, p. 6). 
26. M. Pallotino (1978, pp. 72-3). 
27. Thucydides, 1.3.2: 
28. Herodotos, 11.50-5 and Diodoros, 111.61.1. 
29. Herodotos, VIII.44. For Kekrops as an Egyptian, see vol. 2. For this belief of 
Erechtheus, see Diodoros, 1.29. I and schol. Aristeides, XIII.95, quoted in 
Burton (1972, p. 124). The predominant view was that he was indigenous. 
30. Euripides,ATchelaos, (lost) fragment, quoted in Strabo, V.2.4. 
31. The Suppliants, 911 - 14. 
32. Strabo, V.2.4. and IX.2.3. 
33. Pausanias, 1.28.3; III.20·S; 1V.36.1; VIII. 1.4-5 and 2.1. 
34. Pausanias, VIII. I .4.


--- PAGE 243 ---
III 
il 
!I! 454 BLACK ATHENA 
35· Niebuhr (1847a, vol. I, p. 28). 
36. Meyer (1928, vol. 2, Pt I, p. 237, n.). 
37· For a survey of modem views, see Abel (1966, pp. 1-6). 
38. See ch. VII, Note 59. 
39· Thucydides,1.3.2. 
40 . Ridgeway (1901, vol. I, pp. 280-9 2); Grumach (1968/9, pp. 73- 103, 400-30); 
Hood (1967, pp. 109-34). 
41. Herodotos, 1.58. 
42. See Grote (1846-56, vol. 2, p. 350, etc.); Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 663); 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorf(193 I, vol. I, pp. 60-3). 
43· V. Berard (1894); ch. IX, Note 33. 
4+ See below and vol. 2. 
45· Sandars (1978, p. 185); Snodgrass (1971, pp. 180-6); Wardle (1973). 
46. See the Appendix. 
47· Herodotos, 1.58. Abel (1966, p. 13) points out that the fact that this information is 
introduced by the particle gar (for) indicates that Herodotos was referring to 
conventional wisdom and not to a discovery of his own. 
48. Herodotos, VII'94-5 trans. p. 473. 
49· Chantraine (1968-75, vol. I, p. 475b); T. Braun (1982, pp. 1-4). 
50. The Greek letter upsilon required an initial 'breathing', or h. Thus it would have 
been impossible to have a form ·Yantes. Further confirmation of the Egyptian 
etymology would seem to come from yet another Greek name for primitive people 
- which is also particularly associated with Attica - Paion. Scholars are generally 
agreed that it is cognate with Ion or Iaon but they cannot understand the 
supposedly 'Pre-Hellenic' mechanism by which the two are related; see the 
bibliography in Cromey (1978, p. 63). The source could simply be explained as 
the Egyptian p3 iwn (the barbarian). 
51. For Xouthos, see Herodotos, VII.94; VIII.44 and Pausanias, VII.1.2. For 
Poseidon as patron of the Ionians, see Farnell (1895-19°9, vol. 4, pp. 10-II, 
33-4, etc.). The uncertainty of the initial sibilant in Xouthos and Zethos, which is 
probably also a variant of Seth, may well come from confusion with the Canaanite 
~id - the god of the sea and hunting - and the Semitic root y'~wd (hunt), an 
activity which was of central importance to both Seth and Po!eidon, whose name 
was sometimes written Po!.eido/an. See vol. 3. 
52. Gomme (1913). For a description of his continuing influence, see Muhly (1970, 
esp. p. 40) and R. Edwards (1979, p. 65, n. 63). 
53· See R. Edwards (1979, p. 77, n. 70). 
54· K. O. Muller (1820-4, vol. I, pp. 113-21). 
55· R. Edwards (1979, p. 77, n. 70); Chantraine (1968-75, vol. I, p. 21). The West 
Semitic root first found in the Eblaite adana would seem to come from the 
Egyptian tdn(w) (deputy, governor). 
56. Merkelbach and West (frs 141 and 143). 
. NOTES TO CHAPTER I 455 
C __ I .r Women fr 16 and that quoted in Strabo, VIII.6.8 and fro 17. 57· aUlJ,ogue OJ ,. d d ( 
For the fragment of the Danais, see Kinkel (1877, fro I) and R. E war s 1979, 
P·75)· . f 
58. Parian Marble, 1.11.44-5 and Herodotos, IV·53· For. an ancient survey 0 
estimates see Tatian, 1.31. For a study of the ancient datmgs of both poets, see 
Jacoby (1904, pp. 152- 8). . 
59. Forrest (1982, p. 286). For good surveys, and a bibliography on modem lIterature 
on Hesiod and his dates, see G. P. Edwards (1971, pp. 1-10,200-28. For more 
on Homer, see ch. VI, Note 3 below. For discussion of the low dating of the 
transmission, see ch. IX, Notes 74-91. 
60. For all these dates and their political implications, see Bernal (1987a; 1988). 
61. For this widespread argument, see Finley (1978, pp. 32-3). The references to 
the Phoenicians have led some scholars to claim that the Odyssey was composed 
considerably later than the/liad(Nilsson, 1932,PP. 130-7; Muhly, 1970). Muhly 
(p. 20, n. 6) points out that this theory had already been proposed in Antiquity 
(Longinus,DeSublimitate,IX.13)· 
62. See Albright (1950, pp. 173- 6; 1975, pp. 516- 26); Cross (1974, pp. 490-3; 
1979, pp. 103-4; 1980,PP· 15- 17; Sznycer (1979,PP· 89-93); Naveh (1982, pp. 
40-1); Helm (1980, pp. 95-6, 126). 
63· Finley (1978, p. 33)· 
64. See vol. 3. 
65· Finley (1978, p. 33)· 
66. Forrest (1982, pp. 286-7). 
67. Walcot (1966, p. 16) accepts this possibility. 
68. Walcot (1966, pp. 27-53). It should be pointed out that while Zeus was never 
confused with Marduk in Greece, he was frequently identified with Am(m)on. 
Therefore it is quite possible that theogonies focusing on him may well have been 
taken from 2nd-millennium Egypt. For the significance of Walcot's playing down 
of Egypt and Phoenicia, see ch. X, Note 33. 
69. Works and Days, p. 589. There is no reason to doubt that Biblinos means from 
Bilyblos. 
70. The idea that The Suppliants belonged to a trilogy was first suggested by A. W. 
Schlegel in 1811. See Garvie (1969, p. 163). For its themes, see Apollodoros, 
11.1.3 and 111.1.1, Nonnos (Dionysiaka, 11.679-98, IIL266-319), and the Scho­
liast on Euripides' The Phoenician Women. All these are neatly summarized in R. 
Edwards (1979, pp. 27-8). See also Garvie (1969, p. 163). For references to the 
story of Amymone, see Frazer (1921, vol. I, p. 138, n. 2). 
71. F. R. Earp (1953, p. II9), cited by Garvie (1969, p. 29). 
72. 'Garvie (1969, pp. 1-28). 
73· Garvie (1969, pp. 29- 140). . 
74. The Suppliants, I.154. For a discussion of this, see Johansen and Whittle (1980, 
vol. 2, p. 128).


--- PAGE 244 ---
456 BLACK ATHENA 
75· Scholiast on Hekabe 886. See the article inPaubl-Wissowa IV 2 2094 8 F . . . '-' ", -. or Its 
ambiguity, see Garvie (1969, p. 164, n. 3). 
76. The Suppliants, IS. 911-14, trans. Weir Smyth pp. 89-9 1. 
77· Diodoros, 1.24.8. His informants clearly identified 10 with Isis. 
78. 46.20. Astour (1967a, pp. 86-7, 388). 
79· johansen and Whittle (1980, vol. 2, p. 171). 
80. Is. 155- 8,228-34,822-4. See Johansen and Whittle (1980, vol. 2 p. 184). 
81. See Ahl (1985, especially pp. 17- 63). 
82. Garvie (1969, pp. 71-2). Herodotos, IV.199, wrote that bounos (hill) - which, 
although the standard term for mountain in modem Greek, is rare in the 
Classical language - came from Cyrene in what is now Libya. See Garvie (p. 7 I) 
and Johansen and Whitde (1980, vol. 2, pp. 105-6). It would seem to me 
legitimate to link it, at least at a punning level, to the Egyptian root V bn, found in 
the words wbn (rise like the sun) and bnbn (point or peak) or the (primeval hill). 
See A. B. Lloyd (1976, pp. 318- 19). 
83· Garvie (1969, p. 72). 
84· ]. Berard (1952, p. 35). 
85· Astour (1967a, p. 94)· Johansen and Whittle, (1980, vol. 2, p. 45) cite, without 
giving reference, an objection by j. R. Harris to the quantity of this vowel which 
given the distortions caused in the shift and the putative loaning, seems a ve~ 
weak case. johansen and Whittle themselves refer to the 'disregard of quantity in 
Aeschylaean etymologizing' (p. 105). Harris's main charge, however, is made on 
the purely ideological grounds that a connection between Epaphos and Aphophis 
'makes no sense'. 
86. Iliad, 1.270; 3.49 and Odyssey, 7.25; 16.18, cited in Johansen and Whittle (1980, 
vol. 2, p. 105). 
87· For the ancient knowledge see, for example, Freret (1784, p. 37). For the 
modem, see Sheppard (191 I, p. 226). 
88. Vercoutter (1975, cols 338-50). 
89· Van Voss (1980, cols 52-3). 
90 . TheSuppliants, 260-70 (trans. Weir Smyth, 1922, vol. I, p. 27). 
91. Van Voss (1980, cols 52-3); Budge (1904, vol. I, p. 198). 
92. Castor, cited in Eusebius, 1866, p. 177. For the complications of Eusebius' 
text, see A. A. Mosshammer (1979, pp. 29-112). See also Freret (1784, p. 20). 
See above, Notes 8-10, for the many different meanings of the name Argos 
itself. 
93· Num. 13:22-33; Deut. 1:28,2:10-21, 9:2;Josh. 11:21-2,14: 12-15,15:14 and 
15:13-14;judg. 1 :20. For the Philistines, see Appendix. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, 
p. 663) saw Inachos and anax as coming from the Semitic (dndq. 
94· In Num. 13:22 it is specified that Hebron -which was probably the later name of 
~riat ) Arba - was founded seven years before Zoan, which seems to have been 
the Hyksos capital Avaris, founded in the 17th century BC or earlier. 
, NOTES TO CHAPTER I 457 
95. Freret (1784, p. 37). The derivation from Y<nq ('necklace', or possibly 'neck') 
would seem to be a folk one. 
96. The detailed phonetics of the loan will be argued in vol. 2. 
97. Apollodoros, 11.1,4· For the variants see Frazer (1921 , vol. I, pp. 134-5). The 
idea of water of 'life', or 'living' or flowing water, is, of course, natural. It occurs in 
later Greek thought as MWQ 1;&v, and even more strongly in the Jewish and 
Christian traditions. One finds it, for instance, in the Hebrew 0" ~ n 0 ~ ~ 
(Leviticus 14:5,6, etc.). See also Danielou (1964, pp. 42-57). For further Latin 
complications of Io's relationships to her father Inachos (river water),jlumen and 
the fulmen (thunder) of her ravisher, Zeus, in Ovid's Metamorphosis, see Ahl 
(1985, pp. 144- 6). 
98. See Astour (1967a, p. 86). 
99. Johansen and Whitde (1980, vol. 2, p. 65)· 
100. I accept the point made by T. T. Duke (1965, p. 133)· 
101. Ahl (1985, pp. 151-4). For the Egyptian and Greek roots of the identification of 
Isis with the moon, see Hani (1976, p. 220). 
102. The Egyptian origins of Athena, like those of Libya's husband Poseidon, have 
been touched on in the Introduction and will be discussed in more detail in 
vol. 2. 
103. Meyer (1892, vol. I, p. 81) cited in Astour (1967a, p. 80). Meyer claims that the 
vocalization of Belos indicates that the name could not have come from the 
Canaanite ba(albut must come from the Aramaic befit; it must therefore be late. It 
could equally, however, have changed from "'Balos to Belos in Greek. 
104. The great intricacies of the Egypto-Semitic roots and the word phoinix will be 
discussed in vol. 2. 
105. Astour (1967a, p. 81). 
106. In two parallel texts dating to around 2500 BC, one from the Syrian city of Ebla 
and the other from the Mesopotamian site of Abu Salabikh, one finds the two 
names Am-ni and DA-ne ki in matching places in what seems to be the western 
region (G. Pettinato, 1978, p. 69, no. 186). The author has suggested to me 
(personal communication, March 1983) that the former could be related to the 
Cretan city of Amnisos, the name of which is now attested in both Linear Band 
Egyptian from the 2nd millennium. In this case - or even if Am-ni were merely a 
generic term for 'the west', which in Egyptian is >imn - the land ofDa-ne could 
well refer to Crete. 
107. See HeIck (1979, pp. 31-5; Gardiner (1947, vol. I, pp. 124-6). For more on 
these problems, see vol. 2. 
108. Astour (1967a, pp. 1-80). 
109. See Gordon (1962b, p. 21); Yadin (1968); Arbeitman and Rendsburg (1981) for 
a survey on the literature on this and some important new points. 
110. Gardiner (1947, vol. I, p. 126); Morenz (1969, p. 49). The rootJni (to grow old) 
would seem to be the origin, through the common euphemisms surrounding


--- PAGE 245 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
death, of the Greek root VOv found in thanatos and elsewhere, meaning 'die' but 
with connotations of ageing. For Egyptian confusion of old age and death, see 
Hornung (1983, pp. 151-3). 
1 I I. For doubts about this tradition see above, pp. 43-5. 
112. Johansen and Whittle (1980, vol. 2, p. 5). 
113· Farnell (1895, vol. I, pp. 72-4); A. B. Cook (1925, vol. 2, pt 2, pp. 1093- 8). 
I 14. The other being that by Euripides. 
115· The Phoenician Women, 202-49. For other plays, see The Bakchai, 170-2, 1025 
and Phrixos, frs 819 and 820. 
116. For a general survey, see R. Edwards (1979, pp. 45-7). 
117. Herodotos, 11.I82 (trans. p. 201). 
118. Herodotos, 1V.147 (trans. p. 319). 
119· Herodotos, 11.171 (trans. p. 197). 
120. Herodotos, V.S8 (trans. p. 361). 
121. Herodotos, 11.49-52 (trans. pp. 149-5 I). For recent detailed attempts to explain 
this all away, see Froidefond (1971, pp. 14S-69); A. B. Lloyd (1976, vol. 2, pp. 
224- 6). 
122. Herodotos, 11.55-8. 
123. Plutarch, De Malig. For the seriousness with which some modern scholars have 
begun to treat Herodotos in the last fifteen years, see A. B. Lloyd (1976). 
124. Herodotos, 11.49 (trans. p. 149). 
125. Thucydides, 1.8. 
126. Herodotos, VI.S3-4. 
127. Thucydides, 1.3.2. 
128. See, for instance, Snodgrass (1971, p. 19). 
129. Thucydides, 1.3.2; for a discussion of this, see Strabo, VIII.6.6. The formula 
xaO 'EAAuba xat "EOOV vAQYo~, (through Hellas and Middle Argos) is 
frequently used for Greece in the Odyssry, 1.343-4; 1V·726, 816; XV.80. 
130. Thucydides,I.I. 
13 I. Panegyrikos, So (trans. Norlin, p. 149). For the context of the speech, see Bury 
(1900, pp. 540-1, 568-9). See also Snowden (1970, p. 170), who welcomes it as 
a sign of the Greek lack of racialism. 
132. Diogenes Laertius, VIII.86-9; de Santillana (1963, pp. 813-IS). 
133. Helen, X.68 (trans. p. 226). 
134· Bousiris, 30. Pace Smelik and Hemelrijk (1984, p. 1877), who wear their 
anti-Egyptian colours clearly on their sleeves. 
I3S. Bousiris, 16-23. 
136. Bousiris, 28. 
137· See Cicero, Tusculanae Disputationes, V.3.9; the derivation of the word sophia 
from the Egyptian sbJ (teaching, learning) will be discussed in vol. 2. 
138. Bury (1900, p. 541); Gardiner (1961, p. 374) and Strauss (forthcoming, ch. 6). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER I 459 
The name Salamis - which was given to sheltered harbours in both Cyprus and 
the Salamis, just west of Athens - clearly comes from the Semitic salam (peace), 
found today in the Arabic toponym Dar es Salam (Harbour of Peace). Athens 
proved to be the alliance's weak reed. 
139. Wilamowitz-Moellendorf(19 19, vol. I, pp. 243-4; vol. 2, p. 116, n. 3)· 
140. Plutarch, de Iside, 10; Lykourgos, 4; Froidefond (1971, pp. 243- 6). In footnote 77 
he confesses that Strabo - I st century - also referred to Lykourgos' indebtedness 
to Egypt. 
141. See vol. 2. 
142 • Bousiris, 18 (trans. p. 113)· 
143. Froidefond (1971, p. 247)· 
144. Herodotos, 11.81. For a later affirmation, see Diogenes Laertius, VIII.2-3· For 
an attempt to deny it, see Delatte (1922, p. IS2 and elsewhere). 
145. Bousiris, 28. Isokrates, p. 119· 
146. See, for instance, Norlin's trans., p. 112, n. I. 
147. See the discussion in Froidefond (197 1, pp. 240-3). 
148. For surveys on the controversies among Aryanist scholars as to whether or not 
Plato went to Egypt, see Froidefond (197I,P. 269,n. 24) and Davis (1979,P· 122, 
n. 3). It should be noted, however, that as Davis points out: 'the tradition [is] 
never explicitly contradicted by any of our Classical authorities.' It should also be 
noted that some of the greatest scepticism about Plato's visit came in the work of 
T. Hopfner, especially in his Plutarch uber Isis und Osiris. 
149. Phaidros, 274 D (trans. H. N. Fowler, p. 563). 
150. Philebos, 16C; Epinomis, 986E-9 87A. 
151. Davis, 1979, pp. 121-7· 
152. Cited in Proklos, In Tim. LXXVI (trans. Festugiere, 1966-8, vol. I, p. I II). 
Plato's telling of the legend of Atlantis will be referred to below. 
153. Marx, Kapital, vol. I, Pt 4 (1983, p. 299)· 
154. Popper (1950, pp. 495,662). 
155. For the former, see A. E. Taylor (1929, pp. 275-86). For the latter, see for 
instance Lee (1955, Introduction). 
156. Herodotos, 11.29, 62; Plato, Timaios, 21E. For details on the real relationship 
between Sais and Athens, see vol. 2. See also Bernal (198Sa, pp. 78-9). 
157. Timaios, 22B (trans. Bury, 1913, p. 33)· 
158. Timaios, 23A. It is possible that Plato really is recording an old tradition here. The 
content of legends of disaster will be discussed in vol. 2. It is also possible that 
there was a sacred paranomasia, or pun, in that by Athens the priest meant I:It Nt, 
the religious - and hence the earlier - name of Sais. See the Introduction and 
vol. 2. See also Bernal (1985a, p. 78). 
159. For Isokrates, see Note 133 above. For Plato, seeMenexenos, 24SD. 
160. See Note 132 above.


--- PAGE 246 ---
I BLACK ATHENA 
161. Meteorologika, 1.I4.35Ib, 28. 
162. Metaphysika,1.1.98I b. 
163. De Caelo, 11.1 4·298a. For modern attempts to remove astronomy from the list, see 
Froidefond (1971, p. 347. n. 35). 
164. Froidefond (1971, p. 350, n. 61). 
165. G. G. M. James (1954, pp. 112-3°) claims that this position gave him acess to 
Egyptian libraries, which in turn could explain the almost incredible quantity and 
range of Aristotle's writings. This argument, and the general one that the Greek 
conquest of the Middle East was similar to that of the Arabs a thousand years later 
- in that they took over and Hellenized! Arabized much of the earlier culture and 
lost the rest - though extremely hard to test, is worthy of serious examination. 
166. H.-]. Thissen (19So, cols I ISO-I). 
167. Quoted in Diodoros, XL.3.2, trans. F. R. Walton and R. M. Geer, vol. XII, 
p.281. 
168. This letter is quoted in both I Maccabees XII:20-2 and Josephus, Antiquities, 
XII.226. Professor Momigliano, who believes in the authenticity of most of the 
documents contained in I Maccabees, maintains that this letter is apocryphal. 
Working within the Aryan Model, he naturally treats the idea of a relationship 
between the Jews and the Spartans as absurd (1968, p. 146). E. Rawson (1969, 
p. 96) is equally incredulous. Neither refers to E. Meyer's thoughtful work on it 
(1921 , p. 30), in which he accepts its genuineness and links it to the work of 
Hekataios.]. Klausner (1976, p. 195) has no doubts about its authenticity. See 
also Astour (1967a, p. 9S). 
169. For a debate on whether Kadmos was an Egyptian or a Phoenician, see 
Pausanias, IX.12.2. For the competing dates of the ancient chronographers for 
his landings, see R. Edwards (1979, p. 167). 
170. Zenodotos, quoted in Diogenes Laertius, VII.3 and 30 (trans. Hicks, vol. II, 
p. 141). 
17 I. Diodoros Sikeliotes, 1.9.S-6 (trans. Oldfather, vol. I, pp. 33-S). 
172. Diodoros Sikeliotes, V.S7.I-S (trans. Oldfather, vol. III, pp. 2SI-3). 
173· Diodoros Sikeliotes, V.S8. 
174· Oldfather, vol. III,pp. 252-3. 
175· Diodoros Sikeliotes, 1.9.5-6 (trans. Oldfather, vol. I, pp. 33-S). 
176. Diodoros Sikeliotes, 1.28-30 (trans. Oldfather, vol. I, pp. 91-7). 
177· Pausanias, II.30.6 (trans. Levi, vol. I, p. 202). 
178. Pausanias, 1I.3S.4 (trans. Levi, vol. I, pp. 222-3). 
179· The identification of Poseidon with Seth has been touched on in the Introduction 
and will be discussed in detail in vol. 3. 
180. Pausanias, IV.3S.2 (trans. Levi, vol. II, p. 187). 
181. Pausanias, IX.S.I (trans. Levi, vol. I,p. 317). 
182. See Note 50 above. 
183. De Malig. 13-14 (trans. Pearson and Sandbach, pp. 27-9). 
,NOTES TO CHAPTER I 
184. L. Pearson and F. H. Sandbach, p. S· 
185. Pausanias, IX.16.1 (trans. Levi, vol. I, p. 339, n. 75)· 
186. Pausanias, ll1.I8.3 (trans. Levi, vol. II, p. 62). This oracle will be discussed in 
vol. 3. 
187. Pausanias, ll1.I8.3 (trans. Levi, vol. II, p. 62 and Levi's note 153). 
188. F. Dunand (lg73, p. 3); S. Dow (1937, pp. 183-232). 
189. Arrian,Alexantier, III.3.2; Lane-Fox (1980, pp. 202, 207. For the horns, see the 
striking siInilarities between an Alexandrian coin and an earlier one of Ammon 
from Cyrene, a Greek colony on the Libyan coast, in Lane-Fox (lg80, pp. 
200-1). Cyrenian coins sometimes portrayed Ammon in such a way as to suggest 
'a touch of Negro blood'. See Seltman (lg33, p. 183). 
190. Arrian, IV.g.g; Lane-Fox (1980, pp. 388-g). 
191. Hornung (1983, pp. 93-5)· 
192. Diodoros Sikeliotes, III.68-74. See vol. 3 for a discussion of this very important 
syncretism in Greek, and especially Cretan, religion. 
193. Diodoros Sikeliotes, 1.17.3-1.20. For the link between Osiris, the voyaging 
civilizer, and Dionysos, see also Plutarch, De Iside ... 13, 365B. HeIck (lg62, 
col. 505) denies that the legend of Osiris' conquests has any basis in Egyptian 
tradition. As J. Hani (1976, p. 44) writes, 'it is curious to note' that HeIck has 
omitted the Hymn to Osiris of the Louvre, which refers to the tradition. This kind 
of omission does not surprise me in that bastion of the Aryan Model, the 
encyclopaedia of Pauly Wissowa. 
Ig4. Bakchai, 13-20. See the discussion in Frazer (lg21, pp. 324-5). 
Ig5. Arrian, IV.9.5, 10.6; VII.20.1. 
196. Arrian, V.2. 1 (trans. Robson, vol. II, p. 7). 
197. Arrian, V1.27.2 (trans. Robson, vol. II, p. Igl). 
Ig8. Lane-Fox (1980, pp. 121-3; for the Egyptian style of his funeral cortege see pp. 
408-g). 
199. See Parke (1967, pp. 222-30). For a much more extreme Aryanist view, see 
Wilcken (1928; 1930). For Wilcken's successful career under the Third Reich, 
see Canfora (1980, p. 136). 
200. See also Hani (1976, p. 8), for a bibliography of this process. A long series of 
volumes edited by M. J. Vermaseren is devoted precisely to this topic (Etudes 
priliminaires awe religions orientales dans l'empire romain. Leiden: Ig61). 
201. Zucker (1950, pp. ISI-2); Froidefond (1971, p. 228); Dunand (1973, p. 5). 
202. Pausanias, 1.41.4; Dunand (1973, pp. 13,99)· 
203· Dunand (1973, p. 89)' 
204. Pausanias, 1.41.4; 11.3.3; 11.32.6; III.g.13; III.I4.5; III.I8.3; IV·32.6; VII.25·5; 
X·3 2 ·9· 
205. For the spread of the cult of Isis, for instance, see the massive but incomplete 
bibliography by J. Leclant (1972,1974). 
206. Smelik and Hemelrijk, Ig84, pp. 1931-8.


--- PAGE 247 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
207. See R. Lambert, 198f, esp. pp. 121-7 and 157-60. 
208. Smelik and Hemelrijk (198f, pp. 19f3-f). 
209. De Republica, 111.9· If (trans. Smelik and Hemelrijk, 198f, p. 1956). 
210. Smelik and Hemelrijk (198f, pp. 1965-7 1). 
2 I I. S~e ~ as one example among many - Plutarch's reference to hymns calling Osiris 
hIm. who is hidden in the arms of the sun' (Sf.372B) and Ancient Egyptian 
allUSIOns to the embrace of the spirit of Re and the spirit of Osiris. Hani (19 6 
) . f tho 'H . 7 , p. 219 wntes 0 IS: ere agam one can note the reliability of Plutarch's 
information. ' 
212. Gwyn Griffiths (1980, col. 167). It should be pointed out that Griffiths dis­
approves of discounting the Greek sources on Egyptian civilization as strongly as 
other scholars such as Froidefond. 
213. Froidefond (1971). 
214. Plutarch, On Isis . .. 35.364.E (trans. Babbit, p. 85). There are many other 
sources indicating an especially close connection between Delphic and Egyptian 
religion in this work and elsewhere. See Jeanmaire (195 I, p. 385); Hani (1976, 
p. 177)· See also Heliodoros, 11.28. 
21 5. 13,356B; 28,362B. 
216. Griffiths (1970, pp. 320-1). 
21 7. See Clement of Alexandria, Protreptikos, I1I3. 
218. Snodgrass (1971, pp. 116- 17). 
21 9. Heliodoros, 11.27.3. 
220. Apuleius, XI.5 (trans. Griffiths, 1975, p. 75). 
221. Iamblichos, VI1.5.3 (trans. T. Taylor, 1821, p. 295). 
Chapter II 
EGYPTIAN WISDOM AND GREEK TRANSMISSION 
FROM THE DARK AGES TO THE ENLIGHTENMENT 
I. Gibbon (1776-88, vol. 3, pp. 28, 199-200; vol. 5, pp. 109-10). It should be 
pointed out that the first library of the Ptolemies had been destroyed accidentally 
by Julius Caesar's army. The second, however, was still the greatest in the world 
of its time. 
2. See, for example, Baldwin Smith (1918, p. 169). 
3· Juster (1914, vol. I, pp. 209-1 1,253-9 0). 
f· Juster (1914, vol. I, p. 21 I); Baron (1952, vol. 2, pp. 93- 8, 103-8). 
5· Herodotos,III.27-f3. 
6. For the great wealth of the Egyptian temples and their many slaves, see Cumont 
(1937, pp. 115-44). 
7· Ezra I: 2-4. 
8. Neusner (1965, vol. I, pp. 70-3). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER II 
9. For two opposed views on this, see de Santillana (1969); Neugebauer (1950, 
pp.I-8). 
10. Virgil, Eclogues, IV. lines 4-10 (trans. Fairclough, 1932, vol. I, p. 29)· 
II. Pulleybank (1955, pp. 7-18). I 
12. See Finkelstein (1970, p. 269). 
13. See especially chs fl-f5, 367C-369C. Hipparchos, who lived in Egypt in the 
2nd century Be, is conventionally supposed to have discovered the phenomenon. 
If. Gardiner (1961, pp. 64-5); von Bekarath (pp. 297-9)· 
IS. See Griffiths (1970, p. 3f). Coptic has an interesting tenn, hasie, which Cerny 
derives from the older ~si (praised drowned person). This is clearly linked to 
these legends. The Greek stem hosio-(sacred, free from pollution) would seem to 
derive from this rather than from the Indo-European root Yes (be). This will be 
discussed in more detail in vol. 3· 
16. Lambert (198f, pp. 126-42). 
17. Gamer-Wallert (1977, pp. 228-34); Griffiths (1970, pp. 342-3, 422-3). 
18. Although Dagon would seem to be related to the Greek drakon-, (fish) or 
(dragon), it has been traditionally identified with the Hebrew dJg (fish). However, 
dJgan means 'grain', and there is an old Semitic god Dagan, who in fact seems to 
have been pre-eminent in 3rd-millennium Ebla (Pettinato, 1981, pp. 246-8). 
Clearly, punning went on between the two. In any event, the Israelites considered 
fish as neither sacred nor taboo. 
19. John 21:1-14· 
20. Baldwin Smith (1918, pp. 129-37). 
21. De Baptismo, I. For more on the fish in 'living water' in early Christian thought, 
see Danielou (1964, pp. 42-57). Tertullian may, at another level, have been 
alluding to the fact that Pisces follows or comes out of Aquarius, the 'Water 
Carrier'. 
22. Hornung (1983, p. 163). 
23. Corpus Hermeticum, 11.326-8 (trans. F. Yates, 1964, pp. 38-9). 
2f. For what is still an excellent survey of this, see Dupuis (1822, vol. I, pp. 75-322). 
Aspects of the parallels are discussed in Chapter VIII. 
25. The attempt to reduce Hermeticism and surrounding philosophies to one system 
has been made by several scholars - notably J. KroIl- with infinitely greater 
knowledge of the field than me. However, as modem scholarship generally 
depends on making finer and finer distinctions, the splitters have so far defeated 
the lumpers here. See Blanco (1984, p. 2268). 
26. For a survey of the concept of 'three' in late Antiquity and the Renaissance, see 
Wind (1980, pp. fl-6). 
27. Des Places (1984, p. 2308). 
28. Hobein (vol. 2, p. 10, trans. Murray, 1951, p. 77. n. I); cited in Wind (1968, 
pp. 219-20). 
29. Pagels (1979, p. xix).


--- PAGE 248 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
30. Porphery, VitaPlotini, X. 
3 I. Des Places (1975, pp. 78-82). 
32. See Plato, Republic, XI. 
33· The prominence of women in their theology, and among the Gnostics them­
selves, fits well with the freedom gained by upper-class women in late Antiquity. 
See Pagels (1979, pp. 48-69). Equally, there is no doubt that the social status of 
women was traditionally far higher in Egypt than in either Canaan or Greece. 
Pagels (pp. 63-4) cites Professor Morton Smith as saying plausibly that Christian 
attitudes to women hardened as the predominant social class within the religion 
shifted from the lower class - in which, because women were necessary to the 
economy of the family, they had a certain equality - to the middle class, where 
they were secluded at home. 
34· Blanco (1984, p. 2242). 
35. See, for instance, the well-read Hermetic literature - sometimes bound in the 
same volume - found in the Gnostic library at Nag Hammadi (Blanco, 1984, 
pp. 2248-9, 2252). For a recent bibliography on Hermeticism and its relations 
to other schools, see Blanco, pp. 2243-4. For examples of Neo-Platonic 
relations with Hermeticism, see Des Places (1975, pp. 336-7); Dieckmann 
(1970, pp. 18- 25). 
36. For a bibliography on the influence of Hermeticism on Gnosticism, see Blanco 
(1984, p. 2278, n. 102). For influence on Neo-Platonism, see Des Places (1975, 
pp. 76-7; 1984, p. 2308). 
37· Bloomfield (1952, p. 342), cited in Yates (1964, p. 2, n. 4). 
38. Blanco (1984, p. 2264). 
39. Blanco (1984, p. 2272). It is interesting to note that while Elaine Pagels does not 
mention the influence of Egyptian, or even Hermetic, thought on Gnosticism in 
her excellent popular book on the subject, she finds space to speculate - on the 
basis of tiny scraps of evidence - on the possibility of Indian influence (1979, 
pp. xxi-xxii). See also Schwab (1984, p. 3). 
40. Yates (1964, p. 3). For surveys of Hermetic studies in the 20th century and 
a bibliography of Festugiere's works on the subject, see Dieckmann (1970, 
pp. 18-19); Blanco (1984, pp. 2268-79). 
41. For the Gnostic Texts' having been written originally in Coptic, see Doresse 
(1960, pp. 255-60). 
42. Blanco (1984, p. 2273). 
43· For summaries of Casaubon's work, see Yates (1964, pp. 398-4°3); Blanco 
(1984, pp. 2263-4). The technique of denying a thing's existence because it is 
not attested in surviving literature will be discussed below. 
H. Festugiere (19H-9, vol. I, p. 76). 
45· Kroll (192 3, pp. 21 3-2 5). 
46. Cumont (1937, pp. 22-3). 
47. For Cumont's historical role and achievement, see Beck (1984, pp. 2003-8). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER II 
48. Petrie (1908, pp. 196, 224-5; 1909, pp. 85-9 1). Petrie's argument and my 
acceptance of it are based on plausibility rather than certainty. It is possible that 
writers in the 2nd century AD deliberately set their writings in the Persian period, 
just as Heliodoros appears to have done in his novelAithiopika. However, the lack 
of ostentation, the intricacy and consistency of the setting of the Hermetic Texts, 
the universal attribution to them of antiquity and the clear ideological purpose 
of those who have wished to down-date them, make the earlier date more 
likely. 
49. Scott (1924-3 6, vol. I, pp. 4S- 6). 
So. Stricker (1949, pp. 79-88); P. Derchain (1962, pp. 175-9 8). See Griffiths 
(1970, p. S20) and Morenz (1969, p. 24)· 
~ SI. T. G. Allen (1974,P. 280); Boylan (1922,p. 96-he does not give a date). See also 
Baumgarten (1981, p. 73)· 
52. Plutarch, 61, 375F. Clement, Stromata, VI.4.37. For a discussion of Plutarch on 
this, see Griffiths (1970, pp. SI 9-20). 
53. For the Esna inscription, see M.- T. and P. Derchain (1975, pp. 7- 10). For 
Saqqara, see Ray (1976, p. 159). See also Morenz (1973, p. 222). 
54. Ray (1976, pp. 136-45). 
55. T. G. Allen (1974, p. 280). 
56. John 1:1. For the denials, see Festugiere (1944-9, vol. I, p. 73); Boylan (1922, 
p.182). 
57. Breasted (1901, p. 54). G. G. M.James (19S4,PP· 139- I SI) is fully aware of the 
significance of the Memphite Theology. The Greek vooe; (mind as employed as in 
thinking and perceiving) would seem to come from the Egyptian nw or nw3 (see, 
look), which is also the origin ofvoto> (perceive, observe). 
58. See the epithetp3 nb n p3~3ty (the lord of the heart), which Ray finds 'enigmatic' 
(1976, p. 161). Thoth was also seen as the heart of Ra (Budge, 1904, vol. I, 
PP·4 00- 1). 
59. Budge (1904, vol. I, pp. 400-1). 
60. Pyramid Texts, 1713 C. See Griffiths (1970, p. 517)' For the earlier attestation, 
see Hani (1976, pp. 60-1). 
61. For a compilation of these references, see Froidefond (197 1, pp. 279- 84). 
62. Jacoby (1923-9, vol. 3, p. 264); frags 25, IS, 9; 16, I. 
63. Fragments of Philon's work were quoted by the Church Father Eusebius in the 
3rd century AD in his Praeparatio EvangeJica, 1.9.20-29 and 1.10. 
64. Albright (1968, pp. 194-6, 212-13; Eissfeldt (1960, pp. 1-15)· The mixed 
Semitic and Egyptian roots of the cosmogony of Taautos will be discussed in 
vol. 3. 
65. Baumgarten (1981, pp. 1-7, 122-3). In vol. 3 I shall try to show that many of the 
names in Philon that cannot be explained in terms ofUgaritic and Semitic have 
plausible Egyptian etymologies.


--- PAGE 249 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
66. Albright (1968, p. 225). Baumgarten (1981, pp. 108-19) also sees close parallels 
between the two cosmologies. 
67· Budge (1904, vol. I, pp. 292-3); Hani (1976, pp. 147-9). Derchain (1980, cols 
747-5 6). 
68. Gardiner (1961, pp. 47-8). 
69· Renan (1868, p. 263); Albright (1968, p. 223). For others, see Baumgarten 
(1981, p. 92, n. 94). 
70. Albright (1968, p. 193); Eissfeldt (1960, pp. 7-8). See also Baumgarten (1981, 
pp. 107-10). For euhemerism in Canaanite culture and its influence on Greece, 
see G. Rosen (1929, p. 12). 
71. Jacoby (1923-9, vol. 3, p. 812, 15-17). See also Baumgarten (1981, p. 69). 
72. Jacoby (1923-9, vol. 3, p. 810, 2-5)· See also Baumgarten (1981, p. 192). 
73. Pope (1973, p. 302). I do not accept his monist ruling out of the cock, which in 
Late Egyptian religion does seem to have had some associations with the cult of 
Thoth. The crucial link between Thoth, Anubis and Hermes and the planet 
Mercury will be discussed in vol. 2. 
74· Seznec (1953, p. 12). 
75· See Devisse (1979, pp. 39-40); Morenz (1969, p. 115). 
76. City o/God, 18.39. 
77. Blanco (1984, pp. 2253- 8). 
78. Scholem (1974, p. I I). For the scrolls, see Gaster (1964). 
79. Festugiere (1961-5, esp. vol. I). 
80. Scholem (1974, p. 9); see also Sandmel (1979). 
81. Scholem (1974, pp. 8-30). 
82. Scholem (1974, p. 9). 
83· Scholem (1974, pp. 30-42). 
84. Lafont t't aI. (1982, pp. 207-68). 
85· Scholem (1974, p. 45)· 
86. Scholem (1974, p. 31). 
87. Zervos (1920,P. 168, trans. in Blanco, 1984,PP. 2258-9). See this work also fora 
later bibliography on Psellos. 
88. The story of these scarabs gives a nice illustration of the Aryan Model at work. 
The very richly furnished tomb of Childeric was found in 1653, and although 
some of the objects rapidly disappeared, the bulk were soon published with 
illustrations by Jean-Jacques Chiflet, an eminent doctor interested in archaeol­
ogy. In the 19th century the objects went through many vicissitudes. Thus, 
although some of the treasure is now in the Cabinet des Medailles in Paris, 
modem scholars have had to rely on the 17th- and 18th-century publications. On 
the whole - and where they still have the objects for comparison - modem 
scholars are very much impressed by the accuracy of their early observations. 
However, Dr Dumas, the latest writer on the subject, rejects Chiflet's attribution 
of the bull's head to Apis and writes that there is no need to look for Egyptian or 
NOTES TO CHAPTER II 
even Roman origins, as one can find them among the Scythians, Persians and 
Hittites. She rightly points out that there are 'more or less similar' Scythian 
parallels (1976, pp. 42-3). The reasons for mentioning the Hittites, whose 
Anatolian culture had died out over 1,000 years earlier, can only be the barbaric 
heaviness of their art and the fact that they were Indo-European speakers. Given 
the facts that Childeric was for most of his life a client of the Romans and spent 
some time at the court of Attila in Hungary, and that Egyptian religion had been 
influential in the Northern provinces of the Late Empire in what are now 
Germany, Austria and Hungary well into the 5th century (Selem, 1980; Wessetz­
ky, 1961), as well as the fact that the Christian Charlemagne considered Serapis 
ofimportance, there is nothing outrageous in the idea that there could have been 
Egyptian influence. 
However, this outrage also appears when she considers Chiflet's report of 
Egyptian scarabs in the tomb. As she explains this 'howler': 
Dealing with silver coins, some of which were pierced, Chiflet had repro­
duced, as a comparison, certain examples from his collection, but also 
scarabs. In the 18th century, the learned Benedictine Bernard de Montfaucon 
(one of the greatest scholars of the time) inadvertently included these scarabs, 
considered as Frankish coins ... this error was repeated because of the 
authority that Montfaucon enjoyed. It was thus that the tomb of Child eric was 
once augmented with twenty or so Egyptian scarabs! (1976, p. 6) 
Why should she see her forerunners as having made a chain of such improbable 
errors? There are, in fact, powerful ideological reasons why 19th- and 20th­
century scholars should have wanted to remove the scarabs. The Germanic 
Frankish kings who founded the French monarchy are very dear to the heart of 
the French Right, and to those believing in collaboration between France and 
Germany. It is no coincidence that the symbol of Vichy France was thefrancisque, 
the Frankish double-headed axe - a splendid example of which was found in 
Childeric's thomb. Thus the presence of Egyptian scarabs in such a shrine to 
Aryan, northern barbarian vigour was intolerable. 
89. Seznec (1953, p. 55)· 
90. Blanco (1984, p. 2260; Wigtil (1984, pp. 2282-97)· 
91. Festugiere (1945, vol. I, pp. xv-xvi; vol. 2, pp. 267-75). Scott (1924-3 6, vol. I, 
pp. 48-50); pace Dieckmann (1970, pp. 30-31), who seems unaware of these 
copies and the Hermetic aspects of pre- 15th-century humanism. 
92. Blunt (1940, pp. 20-1). 
93. Cited in Wind (1980), p. 10. 
94. Blanco (1984, pp. 2256- 60). 
95. Dieckmann (1970, pp. 27-3 0); Iversen (1961 ,p. 65); Seznec (I953,PP· 99- 100) 
and Boas (1950 ).


--- PAGE 250 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
96. Gardiner (1927, p. I I). 
97· See Wind (1980, pp. 230-5); Dieckmann (1970, pp. 32-4), and pace Blunt 
(1940, pp. 1-22). 
98. Wind (1980, p. 7). 
99· Bruno, Spaccio, Dial. 3, in Dialeghi italiani, pp. 799-800, cited in Yates (1964), 
p.223· 
1 00. Yates (1964, pp. 12-14); there is an anachronism in her choice (Jf the examples of 
the Symposion and the Republic. For the Renaissance as for Late Antiquity, Plato's 
best-known text was the Timaios which, unlike the other two, had explicit 
references to Egyptian wisdom. 
101. Wind (1980, p. 245). 
102. The argument that such mysteries and initiations existed in Middle if not Old 
Kingdom Egypt will be set out in vol. 3. 
103. Yates (1964, pp. 84-116); Dieckmann (1970, pp. 38-44). 
104. Yates (1964, p. 116). 
105. Yates (1964, pp. 360-97). 
106. Yates (1964, p. 85). 
107. Yates (1964, p. 154); see also Rattansi (1975, pp. 149-66); Kuhn (1970, esp. 
pp. 128-3 0 ). 
108. Festugiere (1945-1954, vol. 2, p. 319), quoted by Yates (1964, p. 36). 
109. E. Rosen (1970; 1983). 
110. For a survey of this influence, see Swerdlow and Neugebauer (1984, pp. 41-8). I 
am very grateful to Dr J amil Ragep for help in this section. 
I I I. See Swerdlow and Neugebauer (1984, pp. 50-I). The influence of Hermeticism 
on astronomy did not end with Copernicus. A century later, the great astronomer 
Johann Kepler was deeply immersed in Neo-Platonism or Neo-Pythagorean­
ism. See Haase (1975, pp. 427-38); Fleckenstein (1975, pp. 519-33). The 
Hermeticism of Bruno and 17th -century scientists will be discussed below. 
112. Blanco (1984, p. 2261). 
113. Eliot (1906, ch. 6, pp. 80-4). 
114. See Sauneron et a/. (1970-1, Introduction). See also Khattab (1982). 
115· Hill (1976, p. 3); Rattansi (1963, pp. 24-32). 
116. Seznec (1953, p. 238). 
117· Seznec (1953, pp. 253-4)· 
118. Yates (1964, p. 6). 
119. See Note 99 above. 
120. Yates (1964, p. 351). 
121. Yates (1964, pp. 164-5). 
122. Daneau, 1578, p. 9, cited in Manuel (1983, p. 6). I have been able to trace the 
connection as late as Warburton (1736-9, vol. 3, p. 398). See also McGuire and 
Rattansi (1966,p. 130), who trace the association back to the Frisian scholar Ar­
cerius in a note to his translation of Iamblichus' Devita Pythagorae, published in 
NOTES TO CHAPTERS II-III 
1598. They also point out his linking of Moschos to Mochos (see above, Note 
70). These arguments are not quite as crazy as they seem. There certainly was a 
tradition of Egypt's having borrowed knowledge from 'Syria', which we can now 
reasonably equate with Phoenicia, Syria and Mesopotamia. Furthermore, there 
is no substantial objection to linking Moschos with the Hebrew or Aramaic 
Moseh, as sin was sometimes transcribed into Greek as sch and the -os is clearly a 
Greek nominal ending. This is not to say that the Israelites had comparable -let 
alone superior - 'scientific' knowledge to the Egyptians. Furthermore, tran­
scriptions s>sch are late; this would provide phonetic backing to the hypothe­
sis that these traditions are from Hellenistic times, when there was a belief that 
the Jews were great astronomers (see Theophrastos, Peri Euseb, 1.8, cited in 
M. Stem (1974, vol. i, p. 10). See also Momigliano (1975,PP· 86-6). 
Chapter III 
THE TRIUMPH OF EGYPT 
IN THE 17TH AND 18TH CENTURIES 
I. Yates (1964, p. 401); see also Dieckmann (1970, pp. 104-5). 
2. Scott (1924-36, vol. I, pp. 41-3); Blanco (1984, pp. 2263-4). 
3. Cudworth (1743, p. 320); cited in Yates (1964, p. 429); Dieckmann (197°, pp. 
105-7). For more on the Cambridge Platonists and Hermeticism, see Rattansi 
(1975, pp. 160-5); Patrides (1969, pp. 4-6). Scholars writing before Frances 
Yates do not seem to have seen their Hermetic interests as significant. See 
Cassirer (1970 -written many years earlier) and Colie (1957)· 
4. See above, ch. II, Note 48. 
5. Yates (1964,PP· 398-9). See also Blanco (1984, p. 2264); Scott (1924-36, vol. I, 
P·43)· 
6. Yates (1964, pp. 432-55); Blanco (1984, p. 2264); for Fludd and hieroglyphics, 
see Dieckmann (1970, pp. 76-7). 
7. See Godwin (1979); Iversen (1961, pp. 89-9 0); Dieckmann (1970, pp. 97-9)· 
8. Kircher (1652, vol. 3, p. 568; trans. Yates, 1964, pp. 417- 18). 
9. Tompkins (1973, p. 30). It is a tragedy that Tompkins's brilliant and scholarly 
book has been stripped of its scholarly apparatus. See also Iversen (1961, 
PP·94- 6). 
10. Gardiner (1957, pp. 11-12); Iversen (1961, pp. 90- 8). 
1 I. For the possibility of the connection, see Yates (1964, pp. 4°7-15); Dieckmann 
(1970, pp. 71-5). 
12. Yates (1972, pp. 180-92); see also Dieckmann (1970, pp. 103-4). 
13. Hill (1976, p. 8). 
14. Hill (1968,p. 290); Rattansi (1963,PP· 24- 6). 
15. For the impact of millenarianism, which was also very important in these circles, 
see Popkin (1985, pp. xi-xix). I have not covered the literature on the subject, but


--- PAGE 251 ---
470 BLACK ATHENA 
I feel sure someone must have made the connection between this kind of 
millenarianism and the Kabbalist attempt to recover - through study - the light 
fragmented at the Creation. 
16. Yates (1964, pp. 423-31); Popkin (1985, p. xii). 
17· Bullough (1931, p. 12), quoted in Patrides (1969, p. 6). For Cudworth and 
hieroglyphics, see Dieckmann (1970, pp. 105-7). 
18. For arguments in favour, see Rattansi (1973, pp. 160-5). Against this, see 
McGuire (1977, pp. 95-142). 
19· Manuel (1974, pp. 44-5). 
20. Tompkins (1978, pp. 30-3). 
2 I. See McGuire and Rattansi (1966, p. I 10). 
22. For the bibliographic complications, see Westfall (1980, p. 434). See also 
Pappademos (1984, p. 94). 
23· Shishak is now put in the 9th century Be. For a full discussion of the details, see 
Manuel (1963, esp. pp. 101-2). See also Westfall (1980, pp. 812-21); Iversen 
(1961 , p. 103). 
24· Friedrich (1951, p. 4) saw the relationship between Phoenician and Hebrew as 
similar to that between Dutch and High German. Albright (1970, p. 10) 
described Hebrew 'as a dialectical variant of Canaanite'. Menahem Stern \\-Tites 
(1974, p. 12): 'Since there is practically no difference between the Hebrew and 
Phoenician languages ... ' 
25· This topic will be discussed in detail in vol. 2. 
26. Bodin (1945, p. 341). 
27· Bochart (1646). 
28. Fenelon (1833, Bk 2, pp. 22-40). 
29· Cited in Charles-Roux (1929, p. 4). 
30. Vieo had formed the basis for this scheme by 1721, when it appeared in his De 
Constantia Jurisprudentia (conclusion). The parallel with writing systems came in 
the first edition of his ScienzaNuuva (see Bk 4, ch. 3) in 1725. For the discussion 
ofKadmos, see De Constantia, ch. 17. See also Dieckmann (1970, pp. 119- 24). I 
am indebted to Gregory Blue for these references. 
3 I. Montesquieu (1748, 15.5). 
32. Gibbon (1794. vol. I, pp. 41-2). For more on the 18th-century enthusiasm for 
Egypt, see Iversen (1961, pp. 106- 23). 
33· Barthelemy (1763, p. 222). 
34· Barthelemy (1763, p. 226). For a hostile assessment of this paper, see Badolle 
(1926, pp. 76-8). 
35· Banier (1739). 
36. Bryant (1774, esp. vol. I, p. xv). 
37· Frye (1962, pp. 173-5); F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 78-9). 
38. Braun (1973, pp. 119-27); Pocock (1985, pp. 19- 23). 
39· As early as 1712 de la Croze had tried to link the two scripts. See his letter quoted 
,NOTES TO CHAPTER III 471 
in Barthelemy (1763, p. 216). The most famous attempts were those made by de 
Guignes (1758) and). T. Needham (1761). 
40. Not surprisingly, this extremely fertile field has received very little attention from 
19th- and 20th-century historians. But see Pinot (1932); Maverick (1946); 
Appleton (1951); and Honour (1961). Raymond Schwab (1950) is profoundly 
misleading in this respect; see below, ch. V, Notes 7-10. 
41. R. F. Gould (1904, pp. 240-5)· 
42. Knoop and Jones (1948, pp. 64- 6). 
43. For an extended discussion of these manuscripts, see Gould (19°4, pp. 262-85). 
44. See Lumpkin (1984, p. I I I). 
45. This is indicated by the fact that the craftsman was called Hiram Abif in 
Coverdale's translation of the Bible in the I540s. The name does not appear in 
the KingJames Version of the early 17th century. 
46. Gould (1904, p. 243)· 
47. Yates (1972, p. 210). These two beliefs were also central to the Knights 
Templars, who made a cult of the Dome of the Rock as the successor to the 
Temple. They also saw themselves as an elite, transcending the religious 
differences - in this case those between Christianity and Islam - of the vulgar. 
They were active from I I 18 until they were broken up as heretical by the king of 
France in 1314 after the fall of Acre, their last stronghold in Palestine. The 
Freemasons consider themselves to be descended from the Templars (Steel­
Maret, 1893, p. 2). 
48. Popkin (1985, pp. xii-xiii). 
49. For Spinoza and his influence on the Cambridge Neo-Platonists, see Colie 
(1957, pp. 66-116). 
50. Jacob (I976,PP· 201-5 0; 1981, esp. pp. 15 1-7); Manuel (1983, pp. 36-7); Force 
(1985, pp. 100, 113). 
51. Manuel (1983, p. 36). Later Masonic discomfort about the important role of 
Toland in the reformation of the craft can be seen from his omission from their 
standard histories. 
52. Force (1985, p. 100). 
53. Knight (1984, pp. 236-4°). 
54. Diogenes Laertius, VIII. 90. 
55. Tompkins (1973, p. 214). 
56. For a discussion of this see Yates (1964, pp. 55-7)' 
57. Yates (1964, pp. 370-2). 
58. See Yates (1964, pp. 367-73). 
59. For the intricacies of the querelle, see Farnham (1976, pp. 171-80); Furhmann 
(1979, pp. 107-28); Simonsuuri (1979, pp. 1-45)· 
60. For earlier attempts to merge the two cults, see Farnham (1976, p. 39). For 
other attempts to set up national religious festivals, see Bloch (1924, pp. 
360-7°).


--- PAGE 252 ---
472 BLACK ATHENA 
61. Some thinkers were aware of the greater splendour of the court of the Manchu 
Emperor Kang Xi (Honour, 1961, pp. 21-5, 93). 
62. Marin (1981, pp. 246-7). 
63· Voltaire (1886, ch. 32, pp. 408-9). 
64. Fuhrmann (1979, p. 114)· Dr Farnham (1976, p. 177) exaggerates his commit-
ment to Homer and the Ancients. 
65· Beuchot (1854, pp. 169-71). 
66. Terrasson (1715). 
67. Manetho was quoted by Josephus in ContraApionem, 1.98. 
68. Terrasson (173 I). For a thoroughly hostile assessment of Shhos, see Badolle 
(1926, pp. 275-6). See also Iversen (1961, pp. 121-2). For a discussion of this in 
the context of the theme of the Bildungsroman in the 18th century, see Honolka 
(1984, pp. 144-54)· 
69. Terrasson (1731, esp. Bk 2). 
70. Terrasson (173 I, Bk 7, p. 4). 
71. Chailley (1971); NettI (1957). The other major source for The Magic Flute was 
Ignaz von Born's 'Uber die Mysterien der Agyptier', in Journalfor Freymaurer, 
vol. I (1784). Seelversen (1961, p. 122); Honolka (1984, p. 144). In 1773, when 
he was seventeen and before he became a Mason, Mozart wrote the score for an 
opera by Gebler called Thamos, King of Egypt, which was also based on Sethos. See 
K. Thomson (1977, pp. 24-31); Honolka (1984, pp. 142-4). Apart from its 
intrinsic merit, the survival of TheMagicFlute-despite the fact that its libretto was 
unsuitable for the Romantic period - would seem to be linked to the fact that it 
was the first major opera in German. In the years immediately following its 
production there was no objection to its theme .. Goethe wrote a sequel to it in 
1795. See Iversen (1961, p. 122). 
72. Rheghellini de Schio (1833, pp. 7-8). 
73· Manuel (1959, pp. 85- 125). 
74· Manuel (1959, pp. 44-5)· 
75· Manuel (1959, pp. 245-5 8). 
76. De Santillana (1963, p. 819). 
77· Manuel (1959, pp. 259-7 0). 
78. De Santillana (1963, p. 819). 
79. Dupuis (1795, vol. I, p. 14). He cited Tatian, an Assyrian Christian of the 2nd 
century who wrote a Letter to the Greeks in which he mentioned Persian magic, 
Phoenician letters and Egyptian geometry and historical writing (ch. I). 
80. Auguis (1822, p. 10). 
81. Charles-Roux (1929, p. 13; 1937, p. 2). Another - though 'lesser' - factor 
was the tradition of St Louis's ill-fated expedition to Egypt during the 
Crusades. 
82. R. F. Gould (1904, pp. 451-5); Beddaride (1845, pp. 96-140). 
83· See Iversen (1961, p. 132). 
NOTES TO CHAPTERS III-IV 473 
84. Madelin (1937, pp. 235-7)· La Decade Egyptienne (1798, vol. I, pp. 1-4); 
Tompkins (1978, pp. 49-5 0). 
85. Said (1978, pp. 113- 226). 
86. Tompkins (1978, pp. 45-5 1, 201-6). 
8 . For the deficiencies ofXenophon as a writer andAnabasis as a text as introduc-
7 rions to Greek, see Pharr (1959, pp. xvii-xxxii). The Latin equivalent to 
Xenophon was Caesar's Gallic Wars. 
88. Madelin (1937, vol. 2, p. 248). 
89. Gibbon (1794,PP· 41,137). For his consistent anti-Semitism, see Pocock (1985), 
p.12. 
90. For a comparison with Sethos, see Badolle (1926, p. 275)' 
91. Badolle (1926, pp. 397- 8). 
92. Barthelemy (1789, pp. 2-5). For Freret's views, see ch. I, Note 92. 
93. Barthelemy (1789, p. 62). 
94. Mitford (1784, vol. I, p. 6). For the influence of Mitford's history, see F. M. 
Turner (1981, pp. 203-7)· 
95. Mitford (1784, vol. I, p. 19). We now know that Cretan palatial civilization was 
set up long before Mitford's 'Egyptian upheavals', which must refer to the Hyksos 
period. 
96. Musgrave (1782, pp. 4-5)' 
Chapter IV 
HOSTILITIES TO EGYPT IN THE 18TH CENTURY 
I. See ch. III, Note 7; Iversen (1961 , pp. 5, 89-99); Blanco (1984, pp. 2263-4); 
Godwin (1979, esp. pp. 15- 24). 
2. Colie (1957, pp. 2-4); Pocock (1985, p. 12). 
3. Pocock (1985, p. 13). This is not to say that the Cambridge Platonists were 
unconcerned by Spinoza and by what they saw as his pantheist or 'hylozoick' 
atheism (Colie, 1957, pp. 96-7). 
4. Westfall (1980, p. 8 15). 
5. Ibid.; Manuel (1959, pp. 90-5). 
6. Pocock (1985, p. 23); Colie (1957, p. 96). 
7. SeeJosephus,AgainstApion; Clement, Stromata. For Tatian, see also ch. II, Note 
76. 
8. See above, ch. II, Note 121. 
9. Hare (1647, pp. 12-13), quoted in MacDougall (1982, p. 60). 
10. For a survey of the historiography of this link between Protestantism and Greek 
studies, see Lloyd-Jones (1982b, p. 19)· 
1 I. Pfeiffer (1976, pp. 143-58; Wilamowitz-Moellendorf (1982, pp. 79- 81). It is 
generally considered that the digamma is an ancient letter because it does not exist 
in the Ionian alphabet, which became standard in Greece at the end of the


--- PAGE 253 ---
I! 
474 BLACK ATHENA 
Peloponnesian War in 403 BC. I argue in Bernal (1987a; forthcoming, 1988) that 
the Ionian alphabet is much older than the Dorian alphabets which contained the 
P, and that the letter was therefore introduced into the Greek alphabet around 
1000 BC - much later than c. 1600, when I date the transmission of the alphabet as 
a whole. That is not to deny Bendey's discovery of the phoneme w, although I 
believe that some of the failures to elide may be the result of Greek borrowing, or 
at least reflexes or awareness, of a Semitic or Egyptian '/D';n. See vol. 2. 
12. Bendey (1693). 
13. Jacob (1981, p. 89)· 
14. Bendey (1693). For more on Bendey and the Boyle Lectures, see Pfeiffer (1976, 
PP·14 6-7)· 
15. For the deist implications of Bendey's Boyle lectures theInselves, see Force 
(1985, pp. 65-6). For further doubts about his orthodoxy, see Westfall (1980, 
pp. 650-1). There were, of course, Christians who objected to both Newton 
and Bendey; see Force (1985, p. 64). 
16. Potter (1697); B. H. Stem (1940, p. 38, n. 49); Smith (1848). For some later 
ramifications of the alliance between Ancient Greece and Christianity, see Bernal 
(1986, pp. 11-12). 
17. De Rerum Nat, VU. As mentioned above, Lucretius was an Epicurean. For the 
Greek nationalism or chauvinism of this school, see ch. I, Note 170. 
18. Potter (1697, Bk I, pp. 1-3; Bk 2, pp. 1-2). 
19. Warburton (1739, vol. 4, p. 403)· For more on Warburton and Egypt, see 
Dieckmann (1970, pp. 125-8); Iversen (1961, pp. 103-5). 
20. Pocock (1985, p. II). 
21. Manuel (1959, pp. 69, 191-3). 
22. Warburton (1739, vol. 4, pp. 5-26); Manuel (1959, pp. 1°7- 12). 
23· Warburton (1739, vol. 4, pp. 229-4 1). 
24. For a bibliography on Brucker, see L. Braun (1973, p. 120). 
25. Pocock (1985, p. 22). 
26. Ibid. 
27· Montesquieu (1721, Letters 97,104,135; cited by Rashed, 1980, p. 9). 
28. Epinomis,987D. 
29. See, for instance, the Kokusai (national essence) movement which arose in 
reaction to the rapid Westernization ofJapan in the 1870S and 80S (Pyle, 1969, 
pp. 60-9); Teters (1962, pp. 359-71). 
30. Goldsmith (1774, vol. 2, pp. 230-1). 
31. Turgot (1808-15, vol. 2, pp. 52-92, 255-328). 
32. Turgot (1808-15, vol. 2, pp. 55,315). 
33· Manuel (1959, p. 69)· 
34· Montesquieu (1748, Bk 18, ch. VI). This is, of course, in direct contradiction 
to the later 'hydraulic theory' - hinted at by Marx and developed by Wittfogel -
that water control leads to 'Oriental Despotism'. Unlike the 19th- and 20th-
, NOTES TO CHAPTER IV 475 
century thinkers, Montesquieu had the example of Holland on his side. For a 
bibliography on the Asiatic Mode of Production, see Bernal (I 987b}. 
35. Turgot(1808- 15, vol. 2,pp. 65, 253, 314-16). Elsewhere (p. 71) he wrote: 'Plato 
sowed flowers; the charm of his eloquence even embellished his errors.' For the 
persistence into the 19th century of the view of Plato as a seductive poet rather 
than a philosopher, see Wismann (1983, p. 496). 
36. Turgot (1808-15, vol. 2, pp. 276-9). 
37. Turgot (1808- 15, vol. 2, p. 70). 
38. Turgot (1808-15, vol. 2, pp. 66-7). 
39. See ch. III, Notes 33, 34· 
40. Turgot (1808-15, vol. 2, pp. 330-2). 
.f.!. Child (1882-9 8, vol. 3, pp. 233-54). This lack of concern with the Jews' colour is 
in stark contrast to Walter Scott's reconstruction of the period in Ivanhoe, in 
which their darkness is repeatedly emphasized. This, of course, was written in the 
early 19th century, when there was obsessive interest in 'ethnic' or 'racial' 
differences. 
42. For a general survey of medieval attitudes to Blacks, see Devisse (1979, pt I). See 
also Child (1882-98, vol. I, pp. 119-21). 
43· Child (1882-9 8, vol. 3, pp. 51-74)· 
44· Politics. VII·7 (trans. Sinclair, 1962, p. 269). 
45· Bracken (1973, pp. 81-96; 1978, pp. 241-60). See also Poliakov (1974, 
PP·145- 6). 
46. See, for example, Locke (1689, Bk 5, p. 41). 
47. Locke (1689, Bk4)· 
48. Locke (1689, Bk 5, pp. 25-45). For a discussion of this, see Bracken (1973, 
p.86). 
49· Jordan (1969, p. 229)· 
50. Locke (1688, Bk 3, p. 6, quoted and discussed inJordan, 1969, pp. 235-6). For 
other examples of Locke's racism, see Bracken (1978, p. 246). 
51. See Bracken (1978, p. 253). 
52. Footnote to 'Of National Characters', cited inJordan (1969, p. 253); Bracken 
(1973, p. 82); Popkin (1974, p. 143); and S.). Gould (1981, pp. 40-1). 
53· For the reference to Pseudo-Plato, see Epinomis, 9870. For Bodin, see ch. III, 
Note 26. 
54· See, for instance, Montesquieu (1748, Bk 8, p. 21). 
55· For a more extended attack on trees, see Bernal (forthcoming, 1988). 
56. To some extent, the 18th-century French cultural conquest of Europe was 
shared by the Italians, who were generally acknowledged to be the finest 
musicians and painters, and still had a formidable scientific tradition. 
57· See Blackall (1958, pp. 1-35). 
58. Berlin (1976, pp. 145-216); Iggers (1968, pp. 34-7). 
59· Trevor-Roper (1983).


--- PAGE 254 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
60. Berlin (1957, pp. 145-216). 
61. For a description of Homer's role in Classical Greek culture, see Finley (1978, 
pp. 19-25). Homer's title of 'the poet' can be linked to the plausible derivation of 
his name from the Egyptian ~m(JlJ)t-r, Coptic hmir (spell, act(or) of speech). 
62. Le Fevre (1664, p. 6); cited in Farnham (1976, p. 146). 
63. Dacier (1714, pp. 10-12); quoted in Simonsuurl (1979, pp. 53-5). See also 
Farnham (1976, pp. 171-9). 
64. Voltaire (letter to M. Damilaville, 4 Nov. 1765); cited in Santangelo (n.d., p. 6). 
65. Vico (1730). For discussions of this, see Manuel (1959, pp. 154-5); Simonsuuri 
(1979, pp. 90- 8). 
66. See Blackwell (1735); Simonsuuri (1979, pp. 53-5). 
67. Timaios, 22B (trans. Bury, 1925, p. 33). Despite the problems with the early 
dating of the word id (child) and the late dating of PJ (the), the most plausible 
etymology for the Greek word pais, paidos is pi id (the child). The 1ndo- European 
root ·pu or ·pur seems much less likely. The Egyptian id is almost certainly the 
origin of the Greek suffix -ad (children) and the patronymic -ides. 
68. For the first use of the term 'Romantic Hellenism' see H. Levin (1931). See also 
B. H. Stem (1940, p. vii). 
69. Simonsuuri (1979, pp. 104-6). Shaftesbury was also hostile to Egypt and 
hieroglyphics. 
70. St Clair (1983, p. 176). See also Jenkyns (1980, pp. 8-9); B. H. Stern (1940); 
Simonsuuri (1979, pp. 133-4 2). 
7 I. For a vivid description of this process, and the results it can produce, see Edmund 
Wilson's description of the historian Michelet (1960, pp. 12-3 I). 
72. Jenkyns (1980, pp. 8-9); Turner (1981, pp. 138-40); Simonsuuri (1979, 
pp. 133-42); Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (1982, p. 82). 
73· Harris (1751, p. 417)' 
74· Duff (1767, pp. 27-9)' 
75· Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (1982, p. 83)· 
76. Musgrave (1782, esp. pp. 4-5). He coupled this dissertation with another 
criticizing Newton's Chronology. 
77. Winckelmann (1764, p. 128). 
78. Winckelmatm (1764, p. 97). 
79. Turgot (1808- 15, vol. 2, pp. 256-61). See also L. Braun (1973, pp. 256-61); 
Comte (1830-42). 
80. For a devastating debunking of this ridiculous view, see Jean Capart (1942, 
pp. 80-119). For a discussion on the confusion of Winckelmann's ideas on 
hieroglyphics, see Dieckmann (1970, pp. 137-41). 
81. These views were not restricted to Aristotle. See, for instance, the very unflatter­
ing portraits of Egyptians on the Caeretan hydria illustrating the legend of 
Bousiris (Boardman, 1964, plate I I and p. 149). While both point out that 
Bousiris has black attendants and that Bousiris himself is portrayed as one on 
~OTES TO CHAPTER IV 477 
another vase, neither Boardman nor Snowden (1970, p. 159) mentions the fact 
that the 'Greek hero Herakles' is depicted as a curly-haired African Black! This is 
something that the Aryan Model is completely unable to handle. For reasons 
Herakles should have been seen in this way, see vol. 3. 
82. Winckelmann (1764, Bks I and 2). See also Iversen (1961, pp. 114-15). For 
British predecessors holding these general beliefs, see B. H. Stem (1940, 
PP·79- 81). 
83. See ch. V, Notes 155-6 for the 'Egyptian way of death' in the 19th century. 
84. See Butler (1935, pp. 11-48); pace Pfeiffer (1976, p. 169). 
85. SeeJenkyns (1980, pp. 148-54); F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 39-4 1). 
86. See Butler (1935, pp. 294-3 00); Kistler (1960, pp. 83-9 2). 
87. Pfeiffer (1976, p. 170). 
88. Quoted by Pfeiffer (1976, p. 169). 
89. Butler (1935, pp. 11-4 8). 
90. See Clark (1954). 
91. Trevelyan (1981, p. 50); Lloyd-Jones (1981, pp. xii-xiii). 
92. Trevelyan (1981, pp. 50-4); Butler (1935, pp. 70-80); Pfeiffer (1976, p. 169). 
93. L. Braun (1973, p. 165). 
94. For the Romanticism in late-18th-century Germany, see above; for the racism, 
see Gilman (1982, pp. 19-82). 
95. Three of the earliest four references to philosophia are associated with Egypt. As 
mentioned above, (ch. I, Note 136), Isokrates specifically derived it from that 
country. The difficulty modern scholars have in recognizing this can be seen in 
Malingrey (1961), who consistently translates philosophia as the 'civilization' of 
Egypt. See Froidefond (1971, pp. 252-3). 
96. Quoted in L. Braun (1973, p. I II) from Heumann (1715, p. 95), which I have 
been unable to see. 
97. Stromateis, 1.4· For Epicurean chauvinism and the possibility that it was linked to 
rivalry with the 'Phoenician' Stoics, see above, Note 17. 
98. See Note 28 above. 
99. For the low status of German at the beginning of the 18th century, see above, 
Note 57. 
100. 1715, vol. I, p. 637 (quoted in L. Braun, 1973, p. 113). 
101. See Notes 24-6 above. 
102. See Tiedemann (1780); L. Braun (1973, pp. 165-7). 
103. See Hunger (1933); Butterfield (1955, esp. p. 33); Marino (1975, pp. 103- 12). 
104. Marino (1975, pp. 1°3- 12); L. Braun (1973, pp. 165-7). 
105. For the degrees to which 18th-century Germans were aware ofVico's work and 
to which they denied his influence, see Croce (1947, vol. I,pp. 5°4-15). See also 
Momigliano (1966c, pp. 253-76). 
106. Meiners (1781-2, vol. I, p. xxx), quoted in L. Braun (1973, pp. 175- 6). 
107. De Santillana (1963, p. 823).


--- PAGE 255 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
108. See below, ch. VII, Note 25. 
109. Meiners (1781-2 vol. I, pp. 123-4, 1811-15). See also Poliakov (1974, 
PP·17 8-9)· 
110. Baker (1974, pp. 24-7); Jordan (1969, p. 222); Bracken (1973, p. 86); Gerbi 
(1973, pp. 3-34)· 
II I. For Vieo and the post-diluvian population of the world, see Manuel (1955, 
PP·I54-5)· 
112. Herder (1784-91, Bk 6, p. 2 and Bk 10, pp. 4-7), cited by Harris-Schenz (1984, 
p. 28). The explorer Georg Forster, who was very much part of the Gottingen 
circle, assumed that 'Whites' carne from the Caucasus (Forster, 1786). 
113. Arya is, of course, an ancient term in the Indo-Aryan languages and Greek. Its 
earliest modem use seems to have been in Sir William Jones (1794, sect. 45). 
114. Gobineau (1983, p. 656); Graves (1955, vol. 2, p. 407). 
115. Moscati et al. (1969, p. 3). The idea that there was a relationship between 
Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic was, of course, known since Antiquity and was used 
by scholars long before Schlozer. See, for example, the references to Barthelemy 
in the last chapter. 
116. Poliakov (1974, p. 188). 
117. See R. S. Turner(198s). 
118. For a short bibliography on Heyne, see Pfeiffer (1976, p. 171, n. 5). 
119. See, for example, the attack led by Heyne on the authenticity of Iliad, IX.383-4, 
which praises the riches of the Egyptian Thebes. See P. Von der Miihl (1952, 
P·173)· 
120. S. Gould (1981, p. 238). 
121. Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (1982, p. 96). 
122. Pfeiffer (1976, p. 171). 
123. R. S. Turner (1983a, p. 460). 
124. Manuel (1959, p. 302). 
125. For Forster and Heyne, see Leuschner (1958-82, esp. vol. 14). For Forster's 
anthropology, see vol. 8, pp. 133, 149-53; Harris-Schenz (1984, pp. 30-1). 
126. For Heyne's vehemence and the personal explanation, see Momigliano (1982, 
p. 10). For the claim that Gottingen took a 'middle way' between the extremes of 
revolution and reaction, see Marino (1975, pp. 358-71). For the hostility of the 
Gottingen school to the Revolution, see ch. VI, Notes 9-16 below. Another 
reason for Forster's going to Paris was to study Indian languages and prepare for a 
voyage there. For this and the Romantic entanglement, see Schwab (1984,P· 59). 
After Forster's death, Caroline worked with and married August Wilhelm 
Schlegel, the translator of Shakespeare and Sanskritist. On their divorce she 
married the philosopher Friedrich WIlhelm Schelling. Her fame today comes 
from her letters, which provide a brilliant portrait of the early German Romantics 
(Nissen, 1962, pp. 108-9). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER V 479 
Chapter V 
ROMANTIC LINGUISTICS: THE RISE OF INDIA AND THE FALL OF EGYPT, 
1740-1880 
I. Herder did in fact write at length on Egypt and hieroglyphs. However, as 
Liselotte Dieckmann puts it: 'The whole long discussion of Egypt serves only the 
urpose of showing how the Song of Creation was nationalized in Egypt' (1970, 
:. 153; see also pp. 146-54). For the 18th-century attitude to Greek as a purely 
poetic language, see ch. IV, Note 38. 
2. For an attack on the traditional approach, see Masica (1978, pp. I-I I). See also 
Scollon and Scollon (1980, pp. 73- 176). 
3. For Rask and Bopp, see Pedersen (1959, pp. 241-5 8). 
4. For Indo-German, see Meyer (1892, pp. 125-3 0), cited in Poliakov (1974, 
p. 191). 
5. For Indo-European, see Siegert (1941-42, pp. 73-99), cited in Poliakov (1974, 
p. 191). For Bopp's use of Indo-European, see Intro. to Bopp (1833), cited in 
Poliakov (1974, p. 191) and Pedersen (1959, p. 262, n. 2). 
6. Schlegel (1808, p. x, trans. Millington, 1849, p. 10). 
7. Schwab (1984, p. I I); Rashed (1980, p. 10). 
8. As illustrations, see the following, written by Sir William Jones in 1784: 'Since 
Egypt appears to have been the grand source of knowledge for the west~ and 
India for the more eastern parts of the globe .. .' (1807, p. 387). In the hbrary 
catalogue of Gottingen as established by Heyne in the 1760s and 70S, Egyptian 
mythology was placed under 'Western' . At some point in the 19th century it was 
transferred to the 'Oriental' section. 
9. Boon (1978, pp. 334-8); Schwab (1984, pp. 27-33)· He portrays this merely as a 
'prehistory' to 'true' scholarship. 
10. Jones (1807, p. 34). See also Schwab (1984, pp. 33-4 2). 
II. See Thapar (1975; 1977, pp. 1-19). See also Leach (1986). 
12. Schwab (1984, pp. 51- 80). 
13. Schwab (1984, pp. 195-7)· 
14. Schwab (1984, p. 59) and see above, ch. III, Note 88. 
15. Schwab (1984, pp. 78- 80). 
16. See below, chs VI and IX. 
17. Schwab (1984, p. 59)· 
18. Letter to Ludvig Tieck, 15 Dec. 1803 (Tieck, 1930, p. 140; cited in Poliakov, 
1974, p. 191). 
19. Schlegel (1808, p. 85); see Schwab (1984, p. 175); Timpanaro (1977, pp. 
xxii-xxiii). For my conviction thatJones was rightand Schlegel- and later Bopp­
wrong on this, see the Introduction, p. 1 I and vol. 2. 
20. Schlegel (1808, trans. Millington, 1849, pp. 506-7); cited in Poliakov (1974, 
P·19 1). . .. ,. 
21. Schlegel (1808, pp. 60-70). See also Timpanaro (1977, pp. XXIl-1l1).


--- PAGE 256 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
22. Schlegel (1808, pp. 68-9; trans. Millington, 1849, pp. 456-7). See also Rashed 
(1980, p. I I). 
23. Poliakov (I974, p. 191). 
24. Schlegel (I808, p. 55; trans. Millington, 1849, p. 45 I). 
25. Timpanaro (1977, p. xix). 
26. Poliakov (1974, p. 191). 
27. Timpanaro (1977, p. xx-xxi). 
28. See below, chs VII and VIII. 
29. Schlegel (1808, pp. 41-59; trans. Millington, 1849, pp. 439-53); Timpanaro 
(1977, p. xix). 
30. Timpanaro (1977, p. xix). 
31. For the Afroasiatic language family, see the Introduction and vol. 2. For 
Barthelemy, see ch. III, Note 34 above. 
32. Schlegel (1808, pp. 55-9, trans. Millington, 1849, pp. 451-3). 
33. Humboldt (I903-36, vol. 4, pp. 284-313)' See Sweet (1978-80, vol. 2, pp. 
403-4). In his review of Sweet, Professor Lloyd-Jones points out that Humboldt 
was not always consistent on this (1982a, p. 73). 
34· Humboldt (1903-36, vol. 5, pp. 282-9 2). 
35. Humboldt (1903-36, vol. 5, p. 293). Schlegel had made a similar comparison 
between the two languages (1808, pp. 45-50. 
36. See Humboldt's letters, reprinted in Schlesier (1838-1840, vol. 5, p. 300) and 
in von Sydow (1906-16, vol. 7, p. 283). See also Sweet (1978-80, vol. 2, 
PP·4 18- 25)· 
37. Schwab (1984, pp. 482-6). 
38. For Grotefend and his successors, see Pedersen (1959, pp. 153-8); Friedrich 
(1957, pp. 50- 68). 
39. Said (1974, pp. 123-30). There is a misprint on his p. 124: '1769' should read 
'1799'· 
40. Said (1974, pp. 59-9 2). 
41. See Cordier (19°4-24). 
42. Cordier (1898, p. 46). 
43. Schwab (1984, pp. 24-5). Schwab shared many of the prejudices of the men he 
wrote about. His own distaste for Egypt is apparent throughout the book. 
44. Schwab (1984, p. 488), citing the Russian writer V. V. Bartold. 
45. Said (1974, pp. 122-48); Rashed (1980,PP. 10-1 I). 
46. See Rahman (1982, pp. 1-9). 
47. In the cases oflslamic, Indian and Chinese civilizations, the borrowing from their 
later forms is quite clear. Even the undoubted Western achievements in read­
ing and understanding the languages written in cuneiform would have been 
impossible without the continuity of Persian, Jewish and Arabic cultures. For 
Champollion's use of the Hermetic tradition and Coptic in his decipherment of 
hieroglyphics, see below. 
,NOTES TO CHAPTER V 
.s. It is absurd to deny the tide of , historian' to Sima Q!an and the succeeding writers 
and compilers of the Chinese dynastic histories, or to the great Ibn Khaldun and 
later Moslem 'historians'. For a discussion of this in the Islamic context, see 
Abdel-Malek (1969, pp. 199-230). A survival of the view that only Aryans can 
write history comes in the claim that the Indo-European-speaking Hittites 
invented it in the Ancient Near East. See, for instance, Butterfield (1981, 
pp.60-7 1). 
49. The impact of Mrica and Asia on ancient Europe is the theme of this work. 1 hope 
in the future to work on later extra- European influences. For Europe as the only 
'scientific' continent, see Rashed (1980). 
50. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 221). 
51. Said (1974, esp. pp. 73-110). 
52. Chaudhuri (1974)· 
53. De Tocqueville (1877, p. 241; trans. Gilbert, 1955, p. 163). For an excellent 
survey of this transformation, see Blue (1984, p. 3)· 
54. Humboldt (1826; 1903-3 6, vol. 5, p. 294). 
55. Schleicher (1865), cited inJespersen (1922, pp. 73-4)· 
56. C. Bunsen (1848-60, vol. 4, p. 485). The notion that true history did not exist in 
the East goes back at least as far as Hegel. 
57. For the uphill struggle of orthodox Christians on this, see Curtin (1964, 
pp. 228-43). For 19th-century supporters of polygenesis, see Gould (1981, 
pp. 30-72). See also Curtin (197 1, pp. 1-33)· 
58. See ch. VI below for its use by Niebuhr and other historians. 
59. Cordier (1899, p. 382). 
60. See, for instance, Bernier (1684), cited in Poliakov (1974, p. 143)· 
61. Punch, 10 Apr. 1858, cited in Dawson (1967, p. 133) and Blue (1984, p. 3)· 
62. Cuvier (1831, vol. I, p. 53); quoted in Curtin (197 1, p. 8). 
63. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 340-1). 
64. Cuvier (1831, vol. I, p. 53); quoted in Curtin (197 1, p. 8). 
65. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 339-4 0). 
66. Gobineau wrote: 'I need not add that the word honour, like the concept of 
civilization which contains it, are equally unknown to the Yellows and the Blacks' 
(1983, vol. I, p. 342). 
67. See Introduction. 
68. Bk 11.104. 
69. See ch. IV, Note 81 above. 
70. See Devisse (1979) I, p. 43 for the early Christian picture; 2, pp. 82-4· 
71. Devisse 2, pp. 136-94. 
72 • See Yates (1964, Frontispiece and pIs 3-5)· 
73. For parallels between images of Blacks and Gypsies see Child (1882-9 8, vol. 3, 
pp. 51-74). The fact that there was clearly considerable confusion in this area is 
shown by the traditional English depiction of a Turk's head as that of an African 
Black. See above, ch. IV, Notes 42-50.


--- PAGE 257 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
74· This tradition, and its use in the 17th century, are discussed by Jordan (1969, 
p.18). 
75· Bernier (1684); cited in Poliakov (1974, p. 143). 
76. Gilman (1982, pp. 61-9). 
77· J~hnson (17~8). See.also Moorehead (1962, p. 38). Fifty years later, Coleridge 
stlll toyed WIth the VIew of Abyssinia as the centre of an idealized Orient. See 
Shaffer (1975, pp. 119- 21). 
78. Cuvier (1831, vol. I, p. 53); quoted in Curtin (1971, pp. 8-9). 
79· See Hartleben (1909, vol. 2, p. 185); Bruce (1795, vol. I, pp. 377-4 00); Volney 
(1787, pp. 74-7); Dupuis (1822, vol. I, p. 73). 
80. Winckelmann (1964, p. 43); trans. in Gilman (1982, p. 26). 
81. De Brosses (1760). See Manuel (1959, pp. 184-209). I can find no 18th- or, for 
that matter, 20th-century references suggesting the obvious thought that the 
'Negro fetishes' themselves could have symbolic or allegorical functions. See 
Horton (1967,1973). Such is the power of racism! 
82. Herder (1784, vol. I, p. 43). 
83· See Rawson (1969, pp. 350-1);Jordan (1969, p. 237). 
84· See Blumenbach (1865, pp. 264-5). 
85· Curtin (197 1, p. 9). 
86. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 347). For Schlegel's theory, see below. 
87· Jordan (1969, pp. 580-1). 
88. Wells (1818, pp. 438-1); cited in Curtin (1964, p. 238). 
89· Jeremiah 13:23. 
90. See its reproduction as the Frontispiece to Diop (1974) and in Tompkins (1973, 
P·7 6). 
91. Gran (1979, pp. 11-27). 
92. Abdel-Malek (1969, pp. 23-64); Gran (1979, pp. I I 1-3 1). 
93· Abdel-Malek (1969, p. 31). 
94· Sabry (1930, pp. 80-2); St Clair (1972, pp. 232-8). 
95· Sabry (1930, pp. 95-7); St Clair (1972, pp. 240-3). 
96. Quoted in Sabry (1930, p. 135). 
97· Sabry (1930, p. 396). 
98. Sabry (1930, pp. 395-4 01). 
99· Sabry (1930, pp. 405-541); R. and G. Cattaui (1950, pp. 138- 216). 
100. Abdel-Malek (1969, pp. 32-46). 
10I. Abdel-Malek (1969, pp. 47- 64). 
102. De Tocqueville reconciled his racialism with the undeniable economic and social 
successes of the Cherokees by attributing their progress to a large number of 
half-breeds (1837, vol. 3, p. 142). See Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 207, footnote). 
The big exception to this pattern is Japan, the scale and power of which would 
have made it extraordinarily difficult to fit into the colonial system and which 
must be seen in conjunction with what, to the Westerners, was the much bigger 
N;OTES TO CHAPTER V 
fish of China. Even so, evident Japanese successes were explained away as some 
form of 'cheating'. And until the Second World War it was insisted, on the 
grounds of racial stereotypes, that the Japanese were physically incapable of 
fighting Western Europeans. 
103. See below, ch. VII, Note 27. 
[04. See, for instance, the triumphant Black standing behind the open-breasted, 
white Greece in Delacroix's famous picture Greece Expiring 011 the Ruins of 
Missolonghi. 
105. For reading Dupuis, 'Letter to Thelwall', 19 Nov. 1796; for liking Berkeley, 
'Letter to Poole', I Nov. 1796 and 'To Thelwall', 17 Dec. 1796. This and the 
following section are closely based on Bernal (1986, pp. 21-3). 
106. 4 November 1816, cited in Manuel (1959, p. 278). 
107. Hartleben (1906, vol. I, p. 140). Iversen (1961, p. 143) notes the king;s 
reconciliation with Champollion, but does not explain it. 
108. Gardiner (1957, p. 14). 
109. For Jomard's interpretation of the zodiac, see Tompkins (1973, p. 49). For the 
possibility that it did in fact represent a much older tradition, see pp. 168-75. 
110. Letter of Montmorency-Laval, 22Jun. 1825, in Hartleben (1909, vol. I, p. 228). 
III. See, for instance, Champollion's letters to the Abbe Gazzera, 29 Mar. and 19 
Aug. 1826; and his journal for 18 Jun. 1829 (Hartleben, 1909, vol. I, pp. 304, 
348; vol. 2, p. 335). See also Marichal (1982, pp. 14-15). 
112. Marichal (1982, p. 28); Ledant (1982, p. 42). 
113. Middlemarch. Eliot gave a splendid double message in her choice of the unusual 
name Casaubon. She knew all about the 17th century scholar from her friend 
Mark Rutherford who was working on Casaubon's biography in the early 18705 
while she was writing Middlemarch. 
114. Humboldt, Gegen Aenderungdes Museumsstatuts, 14Juni 1833 (1903-1936, 
vol. 12, pp. 573-81); cited in Sweet (1978-80, vol. 2, pp. 453-4). 
115. F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 244). This was at least pardy because it would involve 
learning Coptic. 
116. F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 254). 
117. Letter to his sister Christina, 28 Dec. 1817, in F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 137). 
118. F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 244); C. Bunsen (1848-80, vol. I, pp. i, ix). 
119. C. Bunsen (1868-70, vol. I, p. 210). 
120. See, for instance, the embatded tone ofR. Brown (1898). For the later develop­
ments see below, ch. IX, Note 4. 
12 I. For the plausibility of these views in the light of the mass of more recent informa-
tion, see the bibliography on the subject in vol. 2. 
122. C. Bunsen (1848-60, vol. 4, p. 485). 
123. Hegel (1975, pp. 196- 202). 
124. Hegel (1892, vol. I, pp. 117-47, 198). 
125. C. Bunsen (1848-60, vol. 4, pp. 440-3). 
126. Beth (1916, p. 182).


--- PAGE 258 ---
I 
,I 
BLACK ATHENA 
127. De Rouge (1869, p. 330); cited in Hornung (1983, p. 18). According to Budge 
(1904, voL I, p. 142), Champollion Figeac, the devoted elder brother of 
Jean-Franrrois, believed in Egyptian monotheism. Hornung (1983, p. 18) uses 
the significant phrase 'had already proposed'. This supposes that the modern 
discipline of Egyptology should be cut off completely from its 'prehistory', and 
that everything in it was a new discovery. 
128. Brugsch (1891, p. 90); cited in Hornung (1983, p. 22) and Renouf(1880,p. 89). 
Hornung (1983, p. 23). 
129. Preface to 2nd edn, cited in Hornung (1983, p. 19). 
130. Hornung (1983, p. 24). 
13 I. Lieblein (1884), quoted in Budge (1904, vol. I, pp. 69-7 0). 
132. Maspero (1893, p. 277). 
133· It is interesting to note that an enlightened interest in non-European civilizations 
was maintained when Maspero's son Henri became a distinguished Sinologist. He 
was killed by the Gestapo in the Second World War. 
134· Maspero (1893, p. 277, trans. Budge, 1904, vol. I, p. 142). 
135. Ibid. 
136. Budge (19°4, voL I, p. 143). 
137· Budge (1904, vol. I, p. 68). For a derivation of the Greek aveo~ (flower) but 
originally (growth) from n]r, see voL 2. 
138. See Hornung (1983, pp. 24-3 2). 
139· Bezzenberger (1883, p. 96). 
14°· Erman (1883, p. 336); the challenge came from Weise (1883, p. 170). 
14I. Erman (1883,PP· 336-8). Naturally, I maintain that the reason it is so remarkably 
easy to find correspondences between Egyptian and Greek words is that between 
20 and 25 per cent of the Greek vocabulary does in fact derive from Egyptian! 
142. Gardiner (1986, p. 23). 
143· See ch. II, Note 57. 
144· See ch. II, Note 57. 
145· Kern (1926, p. 136, n. I). 
146. Gardiner (1927, pp. 4, 24)· It must be emphasized that Gardiner's Egyptians 
were categorically different from Winckelmann's Greeks in their lack of poetry 
and spirituality. Late-19th- and earlY-20th-century Egyptology was very reluc­
tant to recognize the sophistication of Egyptian literature. See the recent 
di.scussion of the 'prosaic' Tale of Sinuhe (Baines, 1982). Similarly, there was a 
tendency to describe Egyptian 'Wisdom Literature' as utilitarian and not reli­
gious. This has been abandoned in the last twenty years. See R. J. Williams (198 I, 
p. II). 
147· Gardiner (1942, p. 53). 
148. Gardiner (1942, p. 65). 
149· Hornung (1983, p. 24). 
150. Murray (193 I; 1949). See Cerny (1952, p. I). 
. NOTES TO CHAPTER V 
151. Drioton (1948). 
152 . Brunner (1957, pp. 269-70). See also the bibliography in Hornung (1983, 
pp.28-9)· 
153. Curl makes this point (1982, p. 107). . 
154. See Iversen (1961, pp. 131-3); Curl (1982, pp. 107-52); Tompkins (1978, 
PP·37-55)· 
155. Curl (1982, pp. 153-7 2). 
156. Farrell (1980, pp. 162-70). He does not discuss the possible influence of 
Masonry in the 'Egyptianizing' of American funeral customs. It would be 
interesting, for instance, to consider the impact of Washington's splendid 
Masonic funeral. It may be inevitable that scholars, like everyone else, should kick 
their predecessors in the teeth, but it is still sad that Professor Farrell should be so 
contemptuous towards Jessica Mitford (p. 2 13), who opened up this important 
field, and from whom he stole his title. 
157. Mayes (1959, p. 295); Wortham (1971, p. 92). 
158. Brodie (1945, pp. 50-3); Franklin (1963, pp. 70-9); Irwin (1980). This is not to 
deny the significance of hieroglyphs in 19th-century European literature (see 
Dieckmann, 1970, pp. 128-37); I merely claim that they were more central in the 
USA. 
159. Iversen (1961, p. 121). 
160. Manuel (1956, pp. 155-6); for the centrality of Egypt to Swedenborg's thought, 
see Dieckmann (1970, pp. 155-60); for Theosophy, see Blavatsky (1930; 193 I). 
16I. Abdel-Malek (1969, p. 190). In n. 4 on that page, he cites a letter from 
Jean Dautry in which the latter wrote: 'In neither his published nor his 
unpublished works did St Simon ever mention the Suez canal, but he must 
almost certainly have referred to it in his conversations about transoceanic 
communications.' 
162. Abdel-Malek (1969, pp. 189-98). For a visual image of the awakening, see the 
bronze medallion struck commemorating the publication of La Description de 
l'Egypte, dated 1826. The obverse portrays the rediscovery of Egypt: an Egyptian 
queen is unveiled by a standing figure of Gallia, represented as a victorio~s 
Roman general. The reverse shows a series of Egyptian gods and goddesses. ThiS 
is on the dust jacket of Curl (1982). 
163. See Abdel-Malek (1969, p. 302); Curl (1982, p. 187). Verdi also composed an 
Egyptian national anthem. 
164. Curl (1982, pp. 173-94). 
165. Black (1974, pp. 4-6). 
166. Elliot Smith (191 I, pp. 63-13°). 
167. It does not, however, rule out the possibility that monuments from the 3rd 
millennium - like Silbury Hill - or from the 2nd - like the later stages of 
Stonehenge - were influenced by developments in Egypt and the East Medi­
terranean.


--- PAGE 259 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
168. This is in no way to deny the fundamentally local nature fAm' . d th 'viliza' 0 encan agnculture an e CI tions based upon it, or the possibility that the mummifi . 
found in the Atacama desert could be from the 4th mill . cation 
. d' 0 enruum BC, and therefore m Igenous. n the other hand, it is also veIY likely that Am' I It' th DIm encan co tures - at 
eas s~ce . e ec civilization, found in Eastern Mexico and dating to the earl 
1st millenruum BC - have received considerable Mrican influe . V Y S . ( 6 nce, see an emma 197 ; 1984). For equally compelling evidence fior East A' . fl Am . SIan In uence 
~n enca, see Needham and Lu (1985). For an attack on extracontinentaI 
infl~ences on Pre:Columbian America, see Davies (1979). He is especiaU 
~~sti1e. to. th~ notion of Mrican initiative and influence (pp. 87-93). Whil~ 
. diffusl0rusm has been greatly influenced by imperialism, in this case isolation­
ISm would seem to be related to the belief that only Europe the" I . , , uruversa continent, can connect the others. 
169. Langham (1981, pp. 134-99). 
170. Elkin (1974, pp. 13-14); Langham (1981, pp. 194-9). 
17I. Jomard (1829a; 1829b); see also Tompkins (1978, pp. 44-5 1). 
172. See above, Note 109. 
173· See Tompkins (1978, pp. 93-4). 
174· Tompkins (1978, p. 169). 
175· Tompkins (1978, pp. 77- 146). 
176. Tompkins (1978, pp. 96- 107). 
177· Petrie (193 I); Tompkins (1978, p. 107). 
178. Schw~e.rde Lubicz (1958; 1961; 1968). See also Tompkins (1978,PP. 168-75). 
179· Stecchini (1957; 1961; 1978). 
180. See de. Santillana (1963); de Santillana and von Derchend (1969). For the 
preceSSIOn of the equinoxes, see ch. II, Note 9. 
181. See Neugebauer (1945). For Copernicus, see ch. II, Notes 110-11. 
182. Neugebauer and Parker (1960-9). For the contempt, see for instance Neuge-
bauer (1957, pp. 71-4). 
183. Neugebauer (1957, p. 78). 
184. Neugebauer (1957, p. 96). 
185. Ibid. 
186. Lauer (1960, p. II). 
187. Lauer (196o, p. 10). 
188. Lauer (1960,PP. 4-5; 13- 14; 21-4). For the question of the cubit, see Tompkins 
(1978, p. 208). 
189. Lauer (I 960, pp. 1-3). 
190. Brunner (I 957, pp. 269-70). He does not specify the Pyramids in his claim here. 
19I. Lauer (1960, p. 10). 
192. D~oton and Vandier (1946, p. 129); cited in Lauer (1960, p. 4). 
193· Dnoton, preface to Lauer (1948); cited in Tompkins (1978, p. 208). 
194· See Brunner (1957); Brunner-Traut (1971). 
Chapter VI 
HELLENOMANIA, I 
NOTES TO CHAPTER VI 
I. For this, see ch. IV, Notes 123, 124 above. 
2. See above, ch. IV, Notes 63-7. For Wolf and Bentley, see Wilamowitz­
Moellendorf{1982, pp. 81-2). 
3. There is no doubt that Homer was thought to be a oral performer in Antiquity; 
this tradition is strengthened by the most plausible Egyptian etymology for his 
name, or a general word for poet, from 'art of utterance'. See above, ch. III, Note 
61. Wolf did not go into the problems of the origin of the Greek alphabet. His 
supposition on this was shared by the promoters of the Extreme AIYan Model in 
the 20th centuIY. I believe that, despite the undoubted associations with orality, 
the epics are sophisticated written documents coming from a long literate 
tradition. For more on Homer, see ch. I, Note 59 above. For a discussion of the 
20th-centuIY scholars and my arguments in favour of placing the introduction of 
the Greek alphabet in the middle of the 2nd millennium BC, well before Homer, 
see Bernal (1987a; forthcoming, 1988). 
4. Wolf (1804); see also Pfeiffer (1976, pp. 173-7); F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 
138-9). 
~. For the Scots and Wood, see ch. IV, Notes 71-2 above. For the professional-
ization, see R. S. Turner (1983a; 1985). 
6. Monro (191I, p. 771). 
7· See Pfeiffer (1976, p. 173). 
8. See above, ch. IV, Notes 122-3. 
9· Humboldt (1793)· 
10. Humboldt (1793); see also Sweet (1978-80, vol. I, p. 126). 
I I. For the initial idea of Bildungfor the masses, see Hohendahl (1981, pp. 250-72). 
For the actual result, see R. S. Turner (1983b, p. 486). 
12. Letter, 6 Feb. 1793, in Humboldt (1841-52, vol. 5, p. 34); quoted in Sweet 
(1978-80, vol. I, p. 131). For more on the subject, see Seidel (1962, pp. 
xix-xxix). 
13. See above, ch. III, Note 91. Pace Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, who attributes much 
ofits success to its oblique references to contemporary Frenchmen. However, he 
also admitted (1982, p. 103) that it gave a good picture of Classical Athens. 
14. Schiller (1967, pp. 24-43). For Gottingen's allegedly middle way between 
revolutionary and reactionary extremes, see Marino (1975, pp. 358-71). 
15. Sweet (1978-80, vol. 2, p. 46). 
16. Wolf (1804, 2nd edn, p. xxvi); quoted with complete approval by Pfeiffer (1976, 
P·174)· 
17· Humboldt (1903-36, vol. 4, p. 37, trans. Iggers, 1967, p. 59). For further 
discussion of this piece, see Iggers (1968, pp. 56-62); Sweet (1978-80, vol. 2, 
PP·43 1-40). 
18. Humboldt (1903-36, vol. 3, p. 188, trans. in Cowan, 1963, p. 79).


--- PAGE 260 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
19. See above, ch. IV, Note 102. 
20. See above, ch. IV, Notes 57-8; ch. V, Notes 1-3. 
21. R. L. Brown (1967, pp. 12-13); Humboldt (1903-36, vol. IV, p. 294). 
22. See above, ch. IV, Note 9. 
23· Poliakov (1974, p. 77)· For the poet Klopstock on this, see p. 96. There is a 
translation of one ofFichte's speeches on this in R. L. Brown (1967, pp. 75- 6). 
24. Humboldt (1903-36, vol. I, p. 266). 
25. Iggers (1967, p. 59). Ideas of this type occurin Hegel and many other contempor­
ary thinkers. 
26. The only possible objection to this is the utopian aspect of Humboldt's original 
concept of Bildung (see above, Note I I). Professor Canfora (1980, pp. 39-5 6) 
argues that there was a right -wing usutpazione of Classics at the tum of the 19th 
century. However, he takes the Jacobin use of Antiquity as his base. Following 
conventional wisdom in Northern Europe, I do not include this in the tradition of 
A ltertums11JissenschaftlClassics. 
27. Another conservative avenue was, of course, 'the Orient' and India. See above, 
ch. V, Notes 6-36. This section is closely based on Bernal (1986, pp. 24-7). 
28. Highet (1949, pp. 377-436); St Clair (1972, pp. 251-62). 
29. For the public schools, see below, ch. VII, Notes 4-10; for Aryan Christianity, 
see ch. VIII, Notes 38-42. 
30. For the degree of this alienation and concern with the Mediterranean in these 
circles bqorethe Greek War ofIndependence, see M. Butler(198I,PP. 113-37). 
3 I. St Clair (197 2, pp. 119-27). 
32. St Clair (1972, pp. 334-47). The great exception to this is cl>BK, which was 
founded before the others and has always retained a very different character. For 
'Father' Jabn, his exercises and his book burnings see Mosse (1964, pp. 13-30); 
F. R. Stern (1961, pp. 1-25). 
33. For the impact of the Marbles on British appreciation of Greek art and Greece 
itself in this period, see St Clair (1983, pp. 166-202). 
34. Haydon (1926, p. 68). 
35· Knowles (1831, p. 241). 
36. Shelley (1821, Preface). 
37. In Flaubert's Madame Bovary, set in the 1820S, the heroine had read Scott and 
had a cult of Mary Queen of Scots (ch. 6). For the invention of the tradition, see 
Trevor-Roper (1983, pp. 29-30). 
38. St Clair (197 2, pp. 164-84). 
39. CourTier Franfais, 7 Jun. 1821, p. 2b, quoted in Dimakis (1968, p. 123). 
40. For the first view, see Borrow (1843); Irving (1829) and Prescott's many works on 
Spanish history. For the later 'racial' interpretation, see Hannay (1911). 
41. See Fallmerayer (1835); and St Clair (1972, esp. pp. 82-4). 
42. Rawson (1969, p. 319)' 
43. See Kistler (1960); E. M. Butler (1935, pp. 294-300). 
, NOTES TO CHAPTER VI 
44. See Rawson (1969, pp. 338-43). See the constant references to the Dorians as 
models in Speer (1970, esp. pp. 63,159)· 
45. Rawson (1969, pp. 330-43). 
46. Bury (1900, p. 62). 
47. Cartledge (1979, p. Jl9) cites a marginal note by Professor Wade-Geary 
referring to Mothone, a city in Messenia conquered by the Spartans, as 'the 
Ulster in the Messenian Ireland'. Cartledge himself uses the analogy elsewhere 
(p. 116), hut in an anti-English/Spartan sense. 
48. Ridgeway also wrote books on Scottish history and ballads (Conway, 1937)· See 
also Stewart (1959,PP. 17- 18). 
49. Michelet was a student of his. Hegel (1892, vol. I, trans.' note). 
50. Hegel (1975, pp. 154- 209). 
5 I. Hegel (1975, ch. 6, n. 127). 
52. Hegel (1892, vol. I, pp. II7-47)' 
53. Hegel (1892, vol. I, pp. 197- 8). 
54. Hegel (189 2, vol. I, pp. 149-5 0). 
55. See above, ch. IV, Note 28. 
56. For more on this, see Bernal (1988a). 
57. Marx (1939, pp. 375-413, trans. 1973, pp. 47 1-5 13). For more on this, see 
Bernal (1987h). 
58. Marx (trans. 1973, p. Jlo). 
59. While I am convinced that the vast majority of Greek mythological themes came 
from Egypt or Phoenicia, it is equally clear that their selection and treatment was 
characteristically Greek, and to that extent they did reflect Greek society. 
60. See esp. Heeren (1832-4, vol. I, pp. 470-1; vol. 2, pp. 122-3)· 
61. Humboldt to his wife Caroline, 18 Nov. 1823, in von Sydow (1906- 16, vol. 7, 
pp. 173-4). See also Heine (1830-31, vol. 2, p. 193)· 
62. See, for instance, Hansberry (1977, pp. 27, 104, 109)· 
63. C. Bunsen (1859, pp. 30-5); Witte (1979, pp. 17- 19). 
64. Yavetz (1976, pp. 276-96). 
65. Rytkonen (1968, pp. 21, 222). See also Witte (1979, p. 191). 
66. Momigliano (1980, p. 567). 
67. Momigliano (1982, p. 8). 
68. C. Bunsen (1859, pp. 336-7, 340); F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 195)· 
69. Witte (1979, p. 136). Letter to Mme Hensler, 17 Mar. 1821. 
70. Rytkonen (1968, pp. 280-2); C. Bunsen (1859, pp. 485-9). 
71. Rytkonen (1968, p. 220); Momigliano (1982, pp. 8-9)' 
72. Witte (1979, p. 21); C. Bunsen (1859, pp. 38-42). 
73. Witte (1979, p. 18). 
74. Momigliano (1982, p. 7)· 
75. He made it clear that the latter was the lesser evil; see C. Bunsen (1859, 
P· 12 5)·


--- PAGE 261 ---
490 BLACK ATHENA 
76. E. Fueter (1936, pp. 467-70); C. P. Gooch (1913, pp. 16-17); H. Trevor-Roper 
(1969). 
77· p. xiii, cited in Rytkonen (1968, p. 306). 
78. F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 337). For the others, see Witte (1979, p. 185) and 
Bridenthal (1970, p. 98). 
79· Letter to Moltke, 9 Dec. 1796, cited in Bridenthal (1970, p. 98). 
80. Witte (1979, p. 167). 
81. Rytkonen (1968, pp. 67, 219). 
82. See ch. V, Note 115. 
83· See his letters to Altenstein, 41an. 1808 and Schuckman, 2 May 181 I; see Witte 
(1978, p. 20) and Rytkonen (1968, pp. 175-6). 
84· Witte (1979, p. 185). 
85· Anon. article on Niebuhr in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, I I th edn, 191 I. 
86. Momigliano (I 966d, pp. 6-9). M. Pallotino (1984, p. 15) righdy points out that 
Mitford and Giuseppe Micali, the historian of ancient Italy, anticipated 
Niebuhr's 'modern' historical methods. 
87· Cited without reference by Gooch (1913, p. 19). 
88. Bridenthal (1970, p. 2); Fueter (1936, p. 467); Witte (1978, p. 82); Trevor-Roper 
(1969). Professor Momigliano's case that Niebuhr could have been right (1957, 
pp. 104-14; 1977, pp. 23 I-5 1) in no way diminishes the importance of the 
Romantic influence. Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome, first published in 1842, was 
based on Niebuhr's hypothesis. 
89· Momigliano (1982, pp. 3-15). 
90. Quoted in Momigliano (1982, p. 9). 
91. Michelet{1831,vol. I,p.xi). 
92. See ch. VII, Notes 7-10. 
93· Niebuhr (1847-51, vol. I, pp. xxix-xxxi). 
94· Wilcken (193 1), cited in Witte (1979, p. 183). ForWilcken under the Nazis, see 
Canfora (1980, p. 136). 
95· Letter from Kiel, in C. Bunsen (1868, pp. 35-4 0). 
96. See above, ch. V, Notes 56-8. See also below, ch. VIII, Notes 24-8. 
97· See Iggers (1968, p. 30); Shaffer (1975, p. 85). 
98. See the quotation from the wise Sidonia in Disraeli's Tancred, vol. 3, ch. I: 
'All is race, there is no other truth.' 
'Because it includes all others,' said Lord Henry. 
'You have said it.' 
99· See Witte (1979, p. 20). 
100. See Rytkonen (1968, p. 182); Niebuhr (1852, Lecture, VII, Pt I, vol. I, pp. 
98-9). Some years earlier Niebuhr had expressed the wish to setde Asia with 
Europeans: 'I imagine German colonies in Bithynia etc.' See his letter to Mme 
Hensler, 16 Aug. 1821, in C. Bunsen (1859, p. 410). 
101. Niebuhr (1852, Lecture, XX vol. I, pp. 222-3). 
~OTES TO CHAPTER VI 491 
102. See above, ch. V, Notes 111-12. 
103. Niebuhr (18S2, Lecture, V, vol. I, p. 77). See also Lecture, VII, pp. 97-9· 
104. Niebuhr (1852, Lecture, VI, vol. I, pp. 83-4)· 
105. See, for instance, his letter to Mme Hensler, 17 Mar. 1821, in C. Bunsen (1859, 
P·40 S)· 
106. Niebuhr (1852, Lecture, xx, vol. I, p. 223)· 
107. Niebuhr (1852, Lecture, IX, vol. I, p. 117). 
108. Hoefer (1852-77, vol. 8, cols 721-5). 
109. These 'Cyclopean' buildings may well have a common ancestry in Anatolia. The 
walls and gates of Mycenae and other Mycenaean cities and fortifications would 
seem to be the result of the wave of Anatolian influence associated in legend with 
the conquest of Pelops in the 14th century Be. The buildings of this type in Italy 
can be associated with the Etruscans, whom ancient tradition maintained had 
come from North-West Anatolia. Thus I believe that this style was introduced 
after the major Egyptian influence on Greece at the beginning of the Late Bronze 
Age, but before the chief Phoenician one in the lOth and 9th centuries. 
110. For a discussion oflnachos, see ch. I, Notes 93-7. 
II I. See Petit-Radel (18IS). 
112. Pfeiffer (1976, p. 186); Gooch (1913, pp. 16-17); Wilamowitz-Moellendorf 
(19S9, pp. 67; 1982, p. 127) describes him in similar tenns. 
113. See Miller's tide Prolegomena zu einer wissenschaftlichen Mythologie, translated by 
Leitch (1844) as Introduction to a Scientific System of Mythology. For a discussion of 
this, and Kant's use of the tenns, see Neschke-Hentschke (1984, p. 484). 
114. See R. S. Turner (I983a). 
115· Gooch (1913, p. 35). 
116. Donaldson (1858, p. vii). 
I 17. Donaldson (1858, pp. vii-xxxix). It is striking that Miiller was not dismissed along 
with his friends and colleagues - including the Grimm brothers - 'the Gottingen 
Seven', who in 1837 had protested the illiberal actions of the King of Hanover. 
118. His work on the Etruscans won the prize offered by the Prussian Academy: 'To 
explain and exhibit critically the nature and constitution of the training of the 
Etruscan nation'. See Donaldson (18S8, p. xxii). Beyond reflecting the Etrusco­
mania of the turn of the 18th century, which was especially promoted by the 
Bonapartes, who may have seen themselves as Etruscans, some Germans 
identified themselves with this ancient people (see Poliakov, 1974, pp. 65-6; 
Borsi, 1985). Niebuhr claimed, in his first edition, that the Etruscans had come 
from north of the Alps, which would explain the interest of the Prussian 
Academy. Note also the concern with the Bildung of the Etruscans, about which 
virtually nothing was known. 
119. Pausanias, X1.36.3 (trans. P. Levi, 1971. vol. I, p. 387). 
120. Plutarch had used the word philobarbaros, to attack Herodotos. See above, ch. I, 
Note 183. Another modern term for this is the interpretatio Graeca, for a


--- PAGE 262 ---
492 BLACK ATHENA 
remarkably balanced view of which see Griffiths (1980) 1m' taO th th '. . am m at e name 
~yans - found m the rich plains of Boiotia ('cattle country') and Messenia 
m the Peloponnese - came from the Egyptian mn,w meaning 'herd ' ( vol. 2). smen see 
121. For Indophilia, see above, ch. V, Notes 6-17. See also Creuzer (1810-12)' 
Momigliano (1946, pp. 152-163, repro 1966, pp. 75-9 0). For a short bibli~ 
ography on F. Schlegel, Creuzer and Gorres, see Feldman and Richardson 
(1972, pp. 383, 389). 
122. For an attack on Creuzer, see Muller (1825, pp. 331-6); for one on Dupuis, see 
Muller (1834, pp. 1-3 0). 
123. For the 'argument from silence', see the Introduction, p. 9. 
124. Muller (1825, pp. 128-9; trans. 1844, pp. 68-9). 
125. Muller (1825, pp. 218-19; trans. 1844, pp. 158-9). This certainly existed in 
Antiquity, but I see no reason to doubt that there were more or less equivalent 
forces for differentiation. 
126. Muller (1825, p. 221; trans. 1844, p. 161). 
127. Muller (1825, pp. 232-4; trans. 1844, p. 173-4). 
128. Muller (1825, pp. 239-40; trans. 1844, p. 179). 
129. For the possibility that Kekrops' colonizations represent Egyptian influence from 
expeditions during the 12th Dynasty, see vol. 2. See also the Introduction, p. 19. 
130. Muller (1820-4, vol. I, pp. 106-8). 
131. For Herodotos on the other settlements, see above, ch. I, Notes 117- 24; for 
Kekrops, see VIII.44. 
132 • Menexenos, 245·C- D; Muller (1820-4, vol. I, p. 107). For the distinction 
between Athenian 'purity' and the Eastern conquests of other parts of Greece, 
see above, ch. IV, Note 18. 
133· For my opinions about the name Danaos, see ch. I, Notes 107- 10. 
134· Muller (1820-4, vol. I, p. log). 
135· For this see above, ch. I, Note 57. 
136. Muller (1820-4, vol. I, p. 112). 
137· Muller (1820-4, vol. I, pp. 108, 113). 
138. Herodotos, 11·51. Mr Casaubon knew about this connection with the Kabeiroi 
(see Middlemarch, ch. 20). See also Astour (1967a, p. 155); Dupuis (1795, vol. I, 
P·95)· 
139· Muller did not mention Herodotos (111.37) having implied a link between the 
Kabeiroi and the cult of Ptah, the Egyptian god of metalwork. 
140. Usener (1907, p. I I). For a fascinating study ofUsener, see Momigliano (lg82, 
PP·33-4 8). 
141. For Movers, see below, ch. VIII, Note 86. 
142. Muller (1820-4, vol. I, p. 122). 
143· Muller (1825. pp. 282-3; trans. 1844, pp. 221-2). 
144· Despite the obscurity of her publications on the issue of Near Eastern influence 
N01'ES TO CHAPTERS VI-VII 493 
on Greek mythology, Jane Harrison (1925, p. 84) saw beyond this when she 
compared the brilliant SeInitist Robertson-SInith - whose religious background 
had allowed him to stay within the Broad Aryan Model and maintain that there 
had been Near Eastern influence on Greece - to the Classicist Frazer, who 
argued much less threateningly for anthropological parallels: 
Robertson-SInith, exiled for heresy, had seen the star in the East; in vain, we 
classical deaf adders stopped our ears and closed our eyes. But at the mere 
sound of the magical words 'Golden Bough', the scales fell - we heard and 
understood. 
145. Muller (1825, p. 285; trans. 1844, p. 224)· 
146. Foucart (IgI4, pp. 2-3). For more on Foucart, see above, ch. V, Note 145; and 
vol. 3. 
147. Muller (1825, pp. 285-6; trans. 1844, pp. 224-5). 
148. Muller (1825, p. 2g0; trans. 1844, p. 229). 
149. Feldman and Richardson (Ig72, p. 417). 
150. Muller (1825, p. 290; trans. 1844, p. 22g). 
15 I. See the Introduction and vols 2 and 3. 
152. See Astour (1967a, pp. 128-58); R. Edwards (1979, pp. 64-114). 
153. See Nissen (1962, pp. 12, 117). 
154. Wilamowitz-Moellendorf(19 82, p. 105)· 
155. F. M. Turner (lg81, p. 79). 
156. Feldman and Richardson (1972, pp. 416-18). See also the bibliography in F. M. 
Turner (1981, p. 79). Turner also takes Muller very seriously. 
157· Pfeiffer (1976, p. 187). 
158. For an attempt to justify this, see MoInigliano (1982, p. 33). 
Chapter VII 
HELLENOMANIA,2 
I. For Isokrates' claim, see ch. I, Note 13 I. The quotation comes from C. Bunsen; 
see F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. II I). 
2. Shaffer (lg75, p. 25). 
3. Cousin (1841, pp. 35-45). Cousin appears to have developed his central idea on 
'eclecticism' and the central role of Plato from Combes-Dounous, who wrote at 
the beginning of the century; see Wismann (1983, pp. 503-7). Though he seems 
to have been reluctant to do so, Combes-Dounous could not deny Plato's 
borrowing of the idea of the immortality of the soul from Egypt and the East. See 
Combes-Dounous (1809, esp. vol. I,p. 141). By the I 830s, it was safe for Cousin 
to attribute it to Greek genius. 
4. Bunsen, letter to Arnold, 4 Mar. 1836 (F. Bunsen, 1868, vol. I, pp. 420-2). For 
the Prussian professorial autocracy, see R. S. Turner (lg83a; Ig85).


--- PAGE 263 ---
494 BLACK ATHENA 
5· See Lloyd-Jones (1982a, pp. 16- (7). 
6. See the lett~r ~m. H. G. Liddell (Alice's father, and writer of the first great 
Greek-English dictionary) to H. H. Vaughan, 18 Dec. 1853, cited in Bill (1973, 
P·13 6). 
7· This was set out by Bolgar (1979, pp. 327-38). 
8. He found Germans less attractive. See his letter to Bunsen, Easter Monday 1828, 
in F. Bunsen (1868, pp. 316- 19). 
9· See T. Arnold (1845, pp. 44-50). Race was also the only detectable historical 
principle of Arnold's star pupil Vaughan when he became professor at Oxford' 
see Bill (1973, pp. 182-5). ' 
10. See Bill (1973, pp. 8-10). 
I I. See anon. on Thirlwall in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (19 I I) and J. C. Thirlwall 
(1936, pp. 1-24). 
12. For more on Schleiermacher, see Shaffer (1975, pp. 85-7 and elsewhere). For 
his beliefin an Aryan Christianity, see ch. VIII, Notes 29-30. 
13· J. C. Thirlwall (1936, pp. 56-7). 
14· Merrivale (1899, p. 80); cited in J. C. Thirlwall (1936, p. 57); Brookfield (1907, 
p.8). 
15· See Annan (1955, pp. 243-87); P. Allen (1978, p. 257). 
16. Thirlwall (1936, p. 200); F. Bunsen (1868, vol. I, p. 601). 
17· Thirlwall (1936, p. 165). This is not a bad description of the situation in 1987! 
18. Cited in Thirlwall (1936, p. 164). 
19· Macaulay (1866-7 1, vol. 7, pp. 684-5); cited in]enkyns (1980, p. 14). See the 
interesting discussion in F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 204-6). 
20. Grote (1826, p. 280). See F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 207-8). 
2 I. Cited in Thirlwall (1936, p. 97); F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 203-16); Momigliano 
(1966b, pp. 57-61). 
22. For these arguments, see above, ch. III, Notes 94-5. 
23· C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 63). 
24· C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 64). 
25· C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 67). 
26. C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 71). 
27· C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 74). 
28. For Egyptian activities in the Aegean at the time, see above, ch. V, Notes 91-9. 
29· C. Thirlwall (1835, vol. I, p. 74). 
30. J. C. Thirlwall (1936, pp. 98- 101). 
3 I. Momigliano (1966b, p. 61). 
32. Ibid. 
33· MomigIiano (1966b, p. 60); Pappe (1979, pp. 297-3 02). 
34· Momigliano (1966b, p. 61). 
35· Momigliano (1966b, p. 62). 
36. Momigliano (1966b, p. 63). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER VII 495 
37. K. O. Muller (1825, p. 59; trans. 1844, p. I). 
38. Miiller (1825, pp. 249-51; trans. 1844, pp. 189-90); Grote (1846-56, vol. 2, 
pp. 157-9, 182- 204). 
39. Miiller (1825, p. 108; trans. 1844, pp. 189-9 0); Grote (1846-5 6, vol. 2, p. 477)· 
40. F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 90-1); Momigliano (1966b, pp. 56-74). 
41. Momigliano (1966b, p. 63)· For a discussion of Grote's approach to mythology 
and the influence ofMiiller upon it, see F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 87-8). 
42. Grote (1846-56, vol. I, p. HO). 
43. Momigliano (1966b, pp. 63-4)· 
H. For a bibliography concerning Canaanite and Phoenician finds at Thebes, see 
R. Edwards (1979, p. 132, n. 145); Porada (1981). For the 12th-dynasty 
expeditions, see Farag (1980, pp. 75-81). For my ideas on this, see the 
Introduction (po 19) and vol. 2. 
45. This refers to the treatment of Paul Foucart, Victor Berard, Cyrus Gordon, 
Michael Astour, Saul Levin, Ruth Edwards and others. 
46. Momigliano (1966b, pp. 64-7). 
47. Smith (1854, pp. 14-15). 
48. See Introduction, pp. 14-21. The Revised Ancient Model will be discussed at 
more length in vol. 2. 
49· Thucydides,1.3· 
50. See above, ch. I, Notes 39-41. 
51. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 26; trans. 1886, vol. I, p. 39). 
52. Quoted without specific reference by Pallotino (1978, p. 37). For a fascinating 
description of Mommsen's sceptical position and others' opposition to it, see 
Gossman (1983, esp. pp. 21-41). 
53· See Sandys (1908, vol. 3, p. 207). 
54. Stuart-Jones (1968, p. x). 
55. For more discussion of this, see vol. 2. 
56. See Sandys (1908, vol. 3, pp. 228-9). 
57· Wilamowitz-Moellendorf(19 82,P· 153)' 
58. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 27; trans. 1886, vol. I, p. 41). 
59. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 30; trans. 1886, vol. I, p. 45). 
60. See above, ch. VI, Notes 46-7. 
61. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, pp. 30-1; trans. 1886, vol. I, pp. 45-6). I can find no 
explicit mention of it, but it would seem overwhelmingly likely that Curtius and 
other German scholars saw analogies between the land-based and morally 
superior Germans and Dorians and their sea-based talented - but unreliable­
'cousins', the Englishllonians. 
62. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 31; trans. i886, vol. I, pp. 45-6). 
63. Ibid. 
64. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 20; trans. 1886, vol. I, p. 32). 
65. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 19; trans. 1886, vol. I, p. 34).


--- PAGE 264 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
66. Curtius (1857-67, vol. I, p. 41; trans. 1886, vol. I,p. 58). 
67· Curtius (1857-67, vol. I,pp. 41-3; trans. 1886, vol. I,pp. 58-61). For Bunsen's 
scheme, see ch. V, Note 125. Homer's single mention of 'barbarian' _ i.e. 
non-Greek - was in reference to Carians (Iliad, 11.867). 
68. Curtius (1857- 67, vol. I, pp. 58-61; trans. 1886, vol. I, pp. 81-3). 
6c). For a vivid portrait of him, see Stewart (1959, pp. 16-18). 
70. Ridgeway (1901, vol. I, p. 88). 
Chapter VIII 
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE PHOENICIANS, 1830 - 85 
I. Humboldt to Caroline, 29 Feb. 1816 (Sydow, 1906-16, vol. 5, pp. 194-5; cited 
in Sweet, 1978-80, vol. 2, p. 208). 
2. Poliakov (1974, pp. 37-46, 210- 13). 
3· See ch. IV, Notes 113- 14. 
4· Disraeli (1847, Bk 3, ch. 7; Bk 5, ch. 6); Eliot (1876, Bk 5, ch. 40). 
5· Poliakov (1974, p. 197). 
6. Knox (1862, p. I); quoted in Poliakov (1974, p. 232). 
7· Quoted in Curtin (1971, p. 16); see also Curtin (1964, pp. 375- 80). 
8. Knox (1862, p. 194); quoted in Poliakov (1974, p. 362). 
9· Poliakov (1974, p. 233). 
10. Letterto Gobineau, 26Jun. 1856, cited in Boissel (1983, pp. 1249-5 0). 
I I. Michelet (1831, Bk 2, ch. 3). 
12. Burnouf(1872, pp. 318-19; trans. 1888, pp. 190 -1). 
13· Poliakov (1974, p. 234)· For Gobineau's images of the Yellows and Blacks, see 
above, ch. V, Notes 63-5. 
14· See Gaulmier (1983, pp.lxxii-xi). 
15· Cited in Poliakov (1974, p. 235). For the relationship seen in the 19th century 
among all deviants from the white, adult, male norm - non-Whites, children, the 
mad and women - see Gilman (1982, pp. 1-18). 
16. For a general survey ofGobineau's scheme, see Poliakov (1974, p. 234). 
17· Gobineau (1983, pp. 349- 63). 
18. Gobineau (1983, pp. 364-47 8). 
19· Ibid., especially pp. 415- 17. 
20. Letter of 30Jul. 1856, quoted in Poliakov (1974, p. 238). 
21. For Barthelemy, see ch.lII, Note 24; for Bochart, see ch.lII, Note 27. 
22. R. L. Brown (1967, p. 57). 
23· See ch. V, Note 25. 
24· Renan (1855); cited in Gaulmier (1977, p. 48). Most of this is cited in Rashed 
(1980, p. 12). See also Said (1978, p. 139). It is interesting that Renan chose a 
Greek and a German as examples of true European philosophers. He would have 
, NOTES TO CHAPTER VIII 497 
found himselfin difficulties ifhe had cited Locke and Hume, who wrote largely in 
English, an isolating language. 
25. Renan (1855); cited in Gaulmier (1977, p. 47)· 
26. For Renan's notion that by studying Semitic culture he was in some sense 
creating it, see Said (1978, p. 140). 
27. Renan (1855); cited in Gaulmier (1978, p. 47); see also Faverty (1951, p. 169). 
28. See Faverty (1951, pp. 167-74); Said (1978, pp. 137-48). 
29. See above, ch. V, Notes 117-20. This is, of course, the theme of Said (1978). 
30. Renan (1858, p. 359). As far as I am aware, Renan never faced up to the problems 
these parallels posed for this theory of climatic determinism. The English could 
hardly have developed these characteristics from the blazing sun! 
31. Cited in Faverty (1951, p. 76). 
32. See Faverty (1951, esp. pp. 111-61). 
33. See M. Arnold (1906). The great 19th-century romanticizer of the Gypsies, 
George Borrow, was extremely interested in their language and those of other 
Eastern Indo-European speakers like the Armenians (1851, chs 27,47). Bor­
row's descriptions of the Gypsy natural philosopher Jasper Petulengro (1857, ch. 
9) were extremely popular in Victorian and Edwardian England; see Borrow 
(1851; 1857). The British cult of the Gypsy/Bohemian was not accepted in 
Germany. When it came to the Holocaust, their Indo-European language was no 
more protection to them than the Jews' Germanic one, Yiddish. 
34· See Faverty (1951, p. 167). 
35· Faverty(195 1,PP· 162- 85). 
36. For Matthew Arnold's 'Hellenism' as a major factor in Britain's decline in the late 
19th and early 20th centuries, see Wiener (1981, pp. 30-7). 
37. M. Arnold (1869, p. 69). Note the use of the Saxon word 'growth' and the 
dynamism implied in 'movement'. For links between Hellenism and Aryanism, 
see Hersey (1976). 
38. See above, ch. V, Note 119. 
39. Russell (1895, vol. I, p. 383). 
40. For more on Schleiermacher in England, see Shaffer (1975, esp. pp. 85-7). For 
Cousin, see Gaulmier (1978, p. 21). 
41. Poliakov (1974, p. 310). There is an interesting 20th-century parallel to this in 
the progression from Kenneth Clark's 'soft-core' racism to the 'hard-core' 
version ofhis son. 
42. See Poliakov (1974, pp. 307-9); Mosse (1964, pp. 15-30); F. R. Stern (1961, 
pp. 35-52). Many of Lagarde's ideas were extensions of those ofRenan. 
43. Hardy (1891, ch. 25). 
44. Gladstone (1869). 
45. See F. M. Turner (1981, pp. 159-70); Lloyd-Jones (1982a, pp. 110- 25). 
46. Rawlinson (1889, p. 23). 
47. M. Arnold (1906, p. 25). These were very much the words of Arnold's contem-


--- PAGE 265 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
porary Ernst Curtius when writing about the 'retreat' of the Semites. See above, 
ch. VII, Note 6. See also T. S. Eliot (1971, pp. 46-7). 
48. Quoted by Evans (1909, p. 94). Evans, who was by this time projecting non­
Semitic Minoans everywhere, including Phoenicia, agreed with the Grand Old 
Man. 
49. Michelet (1962, p. 68). 
50. Michelet (1831, pp. 177- 8). 
51. See ch. III, Note 27. 
52. Gesenius (1815, p. 6). The classification of Semitic languages is in fact a very 
disputed subject which has been made much more complicated today by the 
discovery of several more ancient and modern ones. For more discussion of my 
views on this, see Bernal (1980). There has never been any doubt about 
Gesenius' identification of Phoenician with Hebrew rather than with the Berber 
languages. 
53· Gesenius (1815, p. 4); Gobineau (1983, pp. 380- 1). 
54. Gobineau (1983, p. 388). 
55· Gobineau (1983, p. 149)· 
56. Gobineau (1983, p. 1135)· 
57. Gobineau (1983, p. 1141). 
58. Gobineau (1983, p. 396). 
59· Gobineau (1983, pp. 369-7 2). 
60. Gobineau (1983, pp. 399-401). 
61. Gobineau (1983, pp. 401-5). 
62. Gobineau (1983, pp. 195,413-17). 
63· Gobineau (1983, pp. 378-9, 379, n. 2). 
64. Michelet (183 I, pp. 203 -I I). According to Polybios, Spendios was a Campanian 
from Southern Italy. 
65. See Benedetto (1920, pp. 21-39); A. Green (1982, pp. 28-31). For a critical 
treatment of this fascination, see Said (1978, esp. pp. 180-97). AsJean Bruneau 
points out (Flaubert, 1973, vol. 2, p. 1354): 'Of all Flaubert's works, SalammbO is 
without doubt the least studied. There is no good edition and its genesis is badly 
known.' See also Bruneau's bibliography on the subject. 
66. Benedetto (1920, p. 39); A. Green (1982, p. 28); Starkie (197 I, p. 14). My claim 
that the Mutiny triggered Flaubert's interest in this topic and remained an 
important modern parallel in his mind does not in any way try to discredit the 
important parallels Dr Green has shown between SalammbO and the French 
Revolution of 1848; see A. Green (1982, pp. 73-93). 
67. Letter, early May 1861; quoted in English by Starkie (1971, p. 22). 
68. See Starkie (197I,PP. 20-2). 
69· See Starkie (1971, pp. 58-9). 
70. See Benedetto (1920). For the anti-Semitism of this School, which was domi­
nated by Julius Beloch, see below. 
NOl'ES TO CHAPTER VIII 499 
71. I agree here with Professor Lloyd-Jones. See WIlamowitz-Moellendorf (1982, 
p. 103, n. 405). 
72. Michelet, who revelled in describing the horrors of the Mercenary War, d~-
scribes the Third Servile one in a very matter-of-fact way. He completely OImts 
the lining of the road from Capua to Rome with 6,000 crucified slaves after the 
Roman victory (1831, vol.z, pp. 198- 203). 
73. Although Zola published Nana only in 1880, he began his realistic novels of 
Parisian life and corruption in the I 860s. 
74. See Starkie (1971, pp. 23- 6). 
75. See Said (1978, pp. 182-5)· 
76. This was established by Eissfeldt (1935). See also Spiegel (1967, p. 63); A. R. W. 
Green (1975, pp. 179- 83). 
77. Flaubert (1862, ch. 13). The many and crucially important ramifications of this 
subject have, for obvious reasons, been very little studied. They deserve serious 
and detailed treatment, which I am unable to give them here. 
78. See Benedetto (1920, pp. 196-215); Spiegel (1967, pp. 62-3); A. R. W. Green 
(1975, pp. 182-3)· 
See Harden (1971, p. 95); Herm (1975, pp. 118- 19); Warmington (1960, p. 164) 79· 
is very hostile to Flaubert. 
80. Cited by Herm (197S, p. 118). While I have no reason to doubt it, I have not been 
able to find the original. See Kunzl (1976, pp. IS-20). 
81. See Lohnes and Strothmann (1980, p. S63). The authors make it a point of 
principle to quote wherever possible from German sources. 
82. After the fall of the German Empire in 1918 and the rise ofMussolini in 1922, the 
latter's identification with Rome led to an Italian revival of the identification of the 
enemy, England, with Carthage. See Cagnetta (1979, pp. 92-S)· 
83. See, for instance, 1820-4, vol. I, p. 8. 
84. Movers (I840-S0, vol. 2, pt I, pp. 265-3 02). 
8S. Movers (1840-so, vol. 2, pt I, pp. 300-3,4 20). 
86. See Astour (I9 67a, p. 93)· 
87. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 664-S)· 
88. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 663)· 
89. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 663)· 
90. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 367). 
91. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, p. 662). 
92. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 420-63). For Schlegel on this, see ch. V, Note 20. 
93. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 660-8S)· 
94. He had more trouble explaining Odysseus, the epitome of Semitic Greece from 
northern Ithake (vol. I, p. 661). 
9S. See the articles he wrote on this theme, mentioned in Gaulmier (1983, p.lxx). 
96. Gobineau (1983, vol. I, pp. 716-93 2).


--- PAGE 266 ---
500 BLACK ATHENA 
97· Fo~ Bunsen, see above, ch. V, Note 125; for Curtius, ch. VII, Notes 67-8; for 
Snuth, ch. VII, Note 47; and Rawlinson (1869, pp. 119- 20). 
98. Gladstone (1869, p. 129). 
99· Gardner (1880, p. 97); Vermeule (1975, p. 4). 
100. Dunker (trans. 1883, vol. I, p. 59). 
101. Holm (trans. 1894, pp. 47, 101-2). 
102. For Thirlwall, see ch. VII, Note 29; for Stubbings, see ch. X, Note 24 below. 
103· Marsh (1885, p. 191). 
104. See Friedrich (1957, pp. 59- 69). 
105· Winckler (19°7, p. 17)· See also T.Jones (1969, pp. 1-47). For my views on this 
see the Introduction, pp. II and 12. ' 
106. See, for instance, Reinach (1893, pp. 699-701). This will also be noted below. 
107· Walcot (1966, pp. I-54). 
Chapter IX 
THE FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PHOENICIAN PROBLEM, 188 5- 1 945 
I. Tsountas and Manan (1897, p. 326). 
2. Frothingham (1891, p. 528). 
3· Van Ness Myers (1895, p. 16). 
4· R. Brown (1898, p. ix). 
5· Reinach (1892 b, p. 93); cited in Reinach (1893, p. 724). 
6. Necrologue, Revue Archeologique 36 (1932) and the anon. article on Reinach in 
Encyclopaedia Judaica. 
7· Reinach (18')3, p. 543). 
8. Reinach (1893, p. 541). 
9· Reinach (1892b; 1893, pp. 541-2). For the elevation ofUthuanian, Saussure's 
historical linguistics and the Neo-Grammarians, see Pedersen (1959, pp. 64-7, 
277-300). 
10. Reinach (1893, pp. 561-77). 
I I. Reinach (1893, p. 572). 
12. Reinach (1893, p. 704). 
13· Reinach (1893, p. 726). 
14· Beloch (1894). 
15· Momigliano (I 966a, p. 247). 
16. MOmigliano (1966a, pp. 259- 60). 
17· Beloch (1893, vol. I, p. 34, n. I). 
18. Lloyd-Jones (1982c, p. xx). 
19· Momigliano (1966a, p. 258). 
20. See above, ch. VI, Note 94. 
21. See the striking conjunction of the two in Beloch (1894, p. 114). 
22. Beloch (1894, p. 126). 
, NOTES TO CHAPTER IX 501 
23. Beloch (1894, p. 125)' 
24. Beloch (1894, p. 128). 
25. Beloch (1894, p. 112). 
26. For Canaanite terms see, for instance, byblinos (cordage), related to the city name 
Byblos; )eldh, elate (oar) from 'eldh/)elat (mighty tree, post); gaulos (vessel) from 
gulldh (vessel). To my mind, Chantraine (1928, p. 18) dismisses the Indo­
European "'ku(m)bara (shaft) as an etymon for kubern- (steering oar) too readily. 
However, there would also seem to be influence from the Semitic root Ykbr 
(great). Chantraine admitted the possibility of the Egyptian etymology for baris, 
but - writing in the 1920S - he denied the Semitic loans, attributing the vast 
majority of maritime words that cannot be explained in terms of Indo- European 
to the 'Pre-Hellenes' or 'Mediterranean stock'. For the Egyptian etymologies, 
see vol. 2. 
For pictures of Egyptian boats, see the murals uncovered at Thera reproduced 
in Thera and the Aegean World: Papers Presented at the Second International Scientific 
Congress, Santorini, Greece,August 1978 (ed. C. Doumas, London, 1979). 
27· See Bass (1967); Helm (1980, pp. 95, 223- 6). 
28. Beloch (1894, pp. 124-5). 
29. See above, ch. I, Notes 58-68; Beloch (1894, p. 112). 
30. Bunnens (1979, pp. 6-7). 
31. See Armand Berard (1971, pp. vii-xviii). 
32. V. Berard (1894, pp. 3-5). 
33· V. Berard (1894, pp. 7-10). 
34· Kropotkin (1899, pp. 385-400). 
35· V. Berard (1902-03; 1927-9). 
36. Herodotos, LI05. 
37. Berard (1902-03, vol. 2, pp. 207-10); Astour (1967a, p. 143). Neither of these 
believed in significant Egyptian influence, so they failed to note that Skandeia -
which has no Indo-European etymology - probably derives from the Egyptian 
shmty (the double crown of Egypt), which, with the article PJ-, was transcribed 
htto Greek as psent. I believe that many, if not most, of Berard's doublets are in 
fact between Egyptian and Semitic rather than between Greek and Semitic. 
38. Petrie (1894-19°5, vol. 2, pp. 181-3). 
39· Weigall (1923, p. 69)· 
40. Gardiner (1961, pp. 213-14). 
41. King and Hall (19°7, pp. 385-6). 
42. Weigall (1923, p. 127). 
43· Freud (1939)· 
44· Vercoutter (1953, pp. 98- 122); HeIck (1979, pp. 26-30). 
45. See Evans (19°9, p. 109). He gave reasons for accepting Septimius' report; see 
also Gordon (1966b, p. 16). 
46. Ch. VII, Note 68.


--- PAGE 267 ---
II 502 BLACK ATHENA 
47. See above, ch. 8, Note 48. For Evans' invention of the term 'Minoan', see 1909 
(p·94)· 
48. Stobart (191 I, p. 32), quoted in Steinberg (1981, p. 34). 
49. King and Hall (19°7, p. 363). 
50. See Dorpfeldt (1966, pp. 366-94);E. Meyer (1928-36, vol. 2,pt 2,pp. 113-22). 
See also Giles (1924, p. 27). 
51. Bury (19°0, p. 77). This passage remains in the 3rd edn, revised by R. Meiggs in 
1951 (p. 77)· 
52. See, for example, Baron (1976, pp. 168-71). 
53· Oren (1985, pp. 38-63). 
54. Cornel/Alumni NeJ1)s 84, 9July 1981, p. 7. I am indebted to Dr Paul Hoch for this 
reference. 
55· Childe (1926, p. 4)· 
56. Myres (1924, p. 3)· 
57. Myres (1924, pp. 21-3)· 
58. Myres (1924, pp. 26-7)· 
59. S. A. Cook (1924, p. 195). 
60. S. A. Cook (1924, p. 196). 
61. Frankfort (1946, pp. 3-27); for a splendid discussion of this issue in European 
thought of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, see Horton (1973, pp. 
249-3 05). 
62. S. A. Cook (1924, p. 203). 
63. This point is made in Barnard (1981, p. 29). 
64· Nilsson (1950, p. 391). 
65. Blegen and Haley (1927, pp. 141-154). 
66. Blegen and Haley (1927,P. 151). 
67· Laroche (1977?, p. 213). 
68. Kretschmer (1924, pp. 84-106). See also Georgiev (1973, p. 244). 
69. For a detailed discussion of these 'elements', see vol. 2. 
70. See ch. V, Note 125; ch. VII, Note 68. For the confusion between Phoenicians 
and Minoans, see Burns (1949, p. 687). 
71. For a bibliography of German attempts to prove this, see Jensen (1969, p. 574): 
See also Waddell (1927); Graves (1948, pp. 1-124); Georgiev (1952, pp. 
487-95). 
72. Josephus, ContraApionem, 1.11. 
73. See Note I I above. 
74. Beloch (1894, pp. 113- 14). 
75. Iliad, VI.I68-9· 
76. Carpenter (1933, pp. 8-28). 
77. For my conviction that the Greek alphabet was initially formed from a Semitic 
one which used vowels, at least for the transcription of foreign sounds, see Ber­
nal (1987a; forthcoming, 1989). 
NOTES TO CHAPTERS IX-X 50 3 
78. Carpenter (1933, p. 20). 
79. Woolley (1938, p. 29)· 
80. See Jeffery (1961, p. 10, n. 3)· 
81. Jeffery (1961, p. 7)· 
82. See above, Note' 33· 
83. Bury (19°0, p. 77). See above, Note 51. 
84. See ch. VIII, Notes 83-5· 
85. For my arguments that there was heavy Phoenician influence on the Aegean, at 
least from the 10th century, and that the Greekpolis and Slave Society as a whole 
derived from Phoenicia, see Bernal (1987b). 
86. Carpenter (1938, p. 69)· 
87. Jensen (1969, p. 456). 
88. Ullman (1934, p. 366). 
89. Carpenter (1938, pp. 58- 69). 
90. See Parry (1971). 
91. See Z. S. Harris (1939, p. 61). For Albright's shifts on the dating of the critical 
inscription on the sarcophagus of Ahiram to bring it down to one that could fit 
with the predominant dating, see Garbini (1977, pp. 81-3)· See also Bernal 
(1987a; forthcoming, 1988); Tur-Sinai (1950, pp. 83-4)· 
Chapter X 
THE POST-WAR SITUATION 
I. Oren (1985, pp. 173- 286). 
2. See, for instance, Holm (1894, vol. I, p. 13)· 
3. See Grumach (1968/9); Hood (1967). 
4. For a description of the decipherment, see Chadwick (1973a, pp. 17- 27). 
5. See Friedrich (1957, pp. 124-3 1). 
6. See Chadwick (1973a, pp. 24-7)' 
7. See Georgiev (1966; 1973, pp. 243-54); Renfrew (1973, pp. 265-79)· For a 
survey of my own views on this, see the Introduction, pp. 13- 1 7· 
8. This is not to say that aU supporters of the isolationist paradigm have been 
anti-colonialist, nor all the diffusionists hostile to colonialism. 
9. Crossland and Birchall (1973, pp. 276- 8). 
10. See Carpenter (1958; 1966). See also Snodgrass (1971, pp. 18- 23). 
II. Vian (1963). 
12. Bury (195 I, p. 66). 
13. Kantor (1947, p. 103)· 
14. Baramki (1961, p. 10). 
15. Albright (1950; 1975)· 
16. Culican (1966). 
17. Thomson (1949, pp. 124,376-7); Willetts (1962, pp. 156- 8).


--- PAGE 268 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
18. Baramki (1961, pp. II, 59);jidejian (1969, pp. 34-7, 62). 
19· Huxley (1961, esp. pp. 36-7); see also below, Notes 64-5. 
20. Stubbings (1973, vol. 2, pt I, pp. 627-58). This fascicule was first published in 
1962. 
21. Stubbings (1973, pp. 631-5). 
22. Venneule (1960, p. 74); cited in Astour (1967a, p. 358). 
23· See Chadwick (1976); Dickinson (1977); Hammond (1967); Hooker (1976); 
Renfrew (1972) and Taylour (1964). The best expression of this view comes in 
Muhly (1970b, pp. 19-64). However, his shifting positions will be discussed 
below. Venneule (1964) also held these views, but she too has broadened her 
position greatly since then. 
24· Stubbings (1973, p. 637). The changes that took place in Egypt include the 
development of what is generally agreed to be a new language: Late Egyptian; the 
first widespread use of bronze and the introduction of such things as the horse, 
the chariot, the sword, the composite bow and the shadouf. 
25. Bass (1967); for his preliminary report, see 1961 (pp. 267-86). 
26. See Symeonoglou (1985, pp. 226-7). 
27. For a survey of these, see R. Edwards (1979, pp. 132-3). 
28. For a bibliography on this, see R. Edwards (1979, p. 118, notes 122-3). 
29· See the reviews of the work of Stevenson Smith by Mellink (1967, pp. 92-4) and 
Muhly (1970a, p. 305). 
30. See, for instance, Akurgal (1968, p. 162); Stubbings (1975, pp. 181-2). 
3 I. See Astour (1967a, pp. 350-5). 
32. See, for instance, the work of Professor G. S. Kirk. 
33. See Walcot (1966); West (1971). 
34. See Fontenrose (1959). 
35· Webster (1958, p. 37)· 
36. See Szemerenyi (1964; 1966; 1974); Mayer (1964; 1967). For further discussion 
of their work, see vol. 2. 
37· See Levin (1968; 197Ia; 1971b; 1973; 1977; 1978; 1979; 1984). For his work on 
the two language families, see 1971a. As mentioned in the Introduction (p. 54), 
there has been a substantial revival in the last few years of the idea of a genetic 
relationship between Afroasiatic and Indo-European. 
38. See Brown (1965; 1968a; 1968b; 1969; 1971). 
39· See Masson (1967); for the praise see, for example, Rosenthal (1970, 
P·33 8). 
40. There were, of course, important exceptions; notably the works of Umberto 
Cassuto (1971) and Spiegel (1967). 
41. See the autobiographical section in Gordon, 1971 (pp. 144-59). 
42. See Cross (1968, pp. 437-460); Friedrich (1968, pp. 421-4), Bunnens (1979, 
pp. 43-4); Davies (1979, pp. 157-8). For my own views on this, see ch. V, Note 
168. 
, NOTES TO CHAPTER X 505 
43. Gordon (1971, p. 157)· 
44. Gordon (1971, p. 158). For the concession, see Chadwick (1973a, PP·3 87-8). 
45. See Gordon (1962a; 1963a; 1968a; 1968b; 1969; 1970a; 1970b; 1975; 1980; 
1981). See also Astour (1967b, pp. 290-5). For Eteocretan, see above, ch. I, 
Note 16. 
46. See Dahood (lgSIa; 198Ib); Garbini (1981); Gelb (1977; 1981); Kienast (in 
Cagni, 1981). 
47. See Gordon (1971, p. 161). 
48. This has not prevented Afrikaner leaders from rediscovering their very real 
affinities with the ancient Israelites now that they have found it politic to establish 
an alliance with modem Israel. 
49. See Chanaiwa (1973)· 
50. See Chadwick (1973b, vol. 2, pt I, pp. 609-26; 1973a, pp. 595- 605). 
51. See, for instance, Duhoux (1982, pp. 223-33)· 
52. See Stieglitz (1981, pp. 606-16). 
53. See Neiman (1965, pp. 113- 15); Sasson (1966, pp. 126-3 8). 
54. Astour (1967a, pp. xii-xvii). 
55. See above, Note 33. A little later, Kirk (1970) took up very much the same 
themes. 
56. For Edwards' objections, see 1979 (pp. 139-61). She makes some valid points 
without destroying his overall case. 
57. Astour (I 967a, pp. 357- 8). 
58. Muhly (1968, p. 585). 
59. Muhly (1968, p. 586). 
60. For the modem admiration, see ch. IX, Note 18. 
61. Muhly (1970b, pp. 19-64). 
62. Billigmeier, (1976, esp. pp. 46-73). 
63. The publisher was j. C. Gieben of Amsterdam, and the book was to have had the 
title Kadmos and Danaos: A Study of Near Eastern Influence on the Late Bronze Age 
Aegean. 
64. Levin (197Ia, p. ix). 
65. R. Edwards (1979, p. x). 
66. R. Edwards (1979, pp. 139- 61). 
67. R. Edwards (1979, pp. 17-113). For her specific arguments, see ch. I, Notes 
52 -7. 
68. R. Edwards (1979, pp. 201-3)· 
69. R. Edwat:ds (1979, pp. 172-3). 
70. R. Edwards (1979, p. 171, n. 182). 
71. Van Berchem (1967, pp. 73- 109, 307-3 8). 
72. Bunnens (1979, esp. pp. 5-26). 
73. Helm (1980, pp. 97, 126). 
74. Muhly (1984, pp. 39-5 6).


--- PAGE 269 ---
506 BLACK ATHENA 
75· Muhly (1985, pp. 177-91). 
76. Tur-Sinai (1950, pp. 83- 110, 159-180,277-302); Naveh (1973, pp. 1-8). For 
the original but uninfluential work of Bundgard in the I 960s, see Bernal 
(forthcoming, 1988). 
77· Naveh (1973, pp. 1-8). 
78. For the dating of the inscription to the 13th century BC, see Garbini (1977); Ber-
nal (198Sb; 1987 and 1988b). 
79· Jeffery (1982, p. 823, n. 8). 
80. Jeffery (1982, p. 832). 
81. McCarter (1975, p. 126). 
82. See, for instance, Millard (1976, p. LH). 
83· Cross (1979, pp. 108- II). While I support nearly everything in this splendid 
statement, I do not agree with his beliefin the special antiquity of the alphabets of 
Crete, etc., see Bernal (1987b; forthcoming (1988». 
84· Cross (1980, p. 17). 
85· See Millard and Bordreuil (1982, p. 140); Kaufman (1982), for whose glee see 
pp. 142, 144, n. 18. 
86. See, for instance, Burzachechi (1976, pp. 82- 102). 
87· Stieglitz (1981, pp. 606-16). 
88. Bernal (1983a; 1983b). 
89· Rollig and Mansfeld (1970, pp. 265-7 0). 
90. Evans (1909, pp. 91 - 100); Dussaud (1907, pp. 57-62). 
91. See Bernal (1983a; 1983b; 1985b; 1987 and 1988b). 
92 . See Murray (1980, pp. 300- I, 80-99). For the Greek borrowing of these in­
stitutions, see Bernal (1988a). The forthcoming Vol. III, 2 of The CambridgeAn­
cient History will contain articles on the Phoenicians. This volume, however, is 
supposed to cover the 8th to the 6th centuries. The significance of the omission 
from Vol. III, I is that it denies the importance of Phoenician influence on 
Greece before 750 BC. 
93· Morenz (1969, p. 44; for language, see pp. 20, 175). 
94· Morenz (1969, pp. 38, 39). 
95· Morenz (1969, p. 49). 
96. Morenz (1969, pp. 56-7). 
97· Morenz (1969, pp. 44-8). 
98. Snowden (1970). 
99· James (1954). 
100. James (1954, p. 158). 
101. I was led to it by Dr James Turner only after many years of research in this area. 
102. Diop (1974; 1978; 1985a; 1985b). See esp. 1974, pp. xii-xvii, p. I. For my own 
views on this subject, see ch. V, Notes 65-90. 
103. Carruthers (1984, p. 34). 
NOTES TO CHAPTER X-APPENDIX 50 7 
104. Carruthers (1984, p. 35). See Dubois (1975, pp. 40- 2; 1976, pp. 120-47);J.J. 
Franklin (1947); Noguera (1976). 
105. Carruthers (1984, p. 35)· See Diop (1974; 1978; 1985a; 1985b); BenJochannan 
(1971); and C. Williams (1971). 
106. Apart from Morenz, there are one or two exceptions to this. Billigmeier's 
acceptance of the myths concerning the Egyptian Danaos has been mentioned 
above (see Note 62). Even more significant are the indications that Professor 
Emily Vermeule is considering the possibility of major Egyptian influence on 
Greece. See her reference (1979, pp. 69-80) to the fundamental similarities 
between the Egyptian and the Greek beliefs about death. 
ApPENDIX 
I. See ch. I, Notes 17 and 18. See also Macalister (1914, p. 2); Mazar (1971, p. 166), 
both cited inJoffe (1980, p. 2). 
2. Sandars (1978, p. 145). I shall not here go into the question of the head-dresses 
portrayed so vividly on Egyptian reliefs, because they do not give clear indications 
of whether their wearers come from the Aegean or Anatolia. 
3· Barnett (1975, p. 373)· 
4· Albright (1975, p. 513). 
5. Barnett (1975, pp. 363-6). For a mort sceptical approach, see Astour (I 967a, pp. 
53- 67; 1972, pp. 454-5)· 
6. Quoted in Strabo, XIV+3. (trans. Jones, p. 325). Astour (1972, pp. 454-5) 
rightly points out the extraordinary confusion surrounding reports of the migra­
tions of various Greek and Lydian Mopsoi. 
7. Quoted in Astour (1967a, p. II); Sandars (1978, p. 119). 
8. See Gardiner (1947, vol. I, pp. 124-5). For the Danaans, see ch. I, Notes 
106-1 I. 
9· Astour (1972, p. 457)· 
10. See Rendsberg (1982). 
I I. Astour (1972, p. 458). 
12. Strange (1973). 
13. Lipinsky (1978,PP. 91-7); Pope (1980,PP. 170-5). See alsoBlackAthena, vol. 3· 
14. See Astour (1967a, pp. I -4). For a discussion of the phonetic relationship be­
tween Muksas and Mps, see vol. 2 and Bernal (1988b). 
15. Amos 9:7; Jer. 47:4; Gen. 10:14; with textual emendation, Ezek. 25:15-17; 
Zeph.2:4-7· 
16. See 2 Sam. 15:18-22; I Sam. 27. On David's relations to the Philistines,pacej. 
Strange (1973). 
17. See M. Dothan (1973); Muhly (1973); Popham (1965). T. Dothan (1982, 
pp. 291-6); Snodgrass (1971, pp. 107-9), and HeIck (1979, pp. 135-4 6).


--- PAGE 270 ---
508 BLACK ATHENA 
18. T. Dothan (1982,pp. 20-2, 291-6). She has in her favour the fact that 'feathered 
crowns' or stiffened hair of the type worn by the Prst has not been attested in 
Greece. Neither, however, have they been attested in the Balkans or Western 
Anatolia. Furthermore the T(!)kr and the Dnn, who must surely have come from 
Greece, shared the same style. See Sandars (1978, p. 134). 
19· For a recent survey of this, see Helm (1980, p. 209). 
20. Nehemiah 13:23-4. 
21. For Yhd,J. Naveh (personal communication, Jerusalem, Jun. 1983); for Yhw, see 
Seltman (1933, p. 154). 
22. Gardiner (1947, vol. I, p. 202). 
23· Tcherikover (1976, pp. 87- 114). 
24· Gardiner (1947, vol. I, p. 202). I believe that Marna derives from the Egyptian 
Mlnw, the mysterious 'Mountain of Sunset in the West', a name which could be 
applied to Crete. The New Kingdom place name Mnnws, which has been 
plausibly, though not conclusively, identified with Minos and Crete, could well 
derive from this. See Vercoutter (1956, pp. 159-82); for more on this see vol. 2. 
GLOSSARY 
affixing or agglutination 
Mroasiatic 
Akkadian 
Allogenes 
Anatolia 
Anatolian 
Addition of prefixes, suffixes or infixes to words 
without affecting their roots. It is a term used to 
describe languages not included among the 
inflected or isolating ones. The best-known 
affixing languages are the Altaie ones, of which the 
central examples are Turkish and Mongol, but this 
family may include other languages as far apart as 
Japanese and Hungarian. 
Otherwise known as Hamito-SeInitic, a linguistic 
'superfamily' consisting of a number oflanguage 
families including Berber, Chadie, Egyptian, 
Semitic and East, South and Central Cushitic. 
The Semitic language of ancient Mesopotamia, 
heavily influenced by and influencing Sumerian. It 
was replaced by Aramaie around the middle of the 
I st millennium BC. 
Foreigners in Greek cities with rights greater than 
those of slaves but less than those of citizens. 
Ancient region, more or less contiguous with 
modern Turkey. 
The Indo-Hittite but non-Indo-European 
languages of Anatolia. They include Hittite, Palaie,


--- PAGE 271 ---
510 BLACK ATHENA GLOSSARY 511 
Luvian, Lycian, Lydian and probably Carlan and Babylon Ancient city in South Central Mesopotamia. Seat of 
II 
Etruscan. several important kingdoms and finally of the 
Aramaic A West Semitic language, originally spoken in parts Neo-Babylonian Empire between 600 and 538 BC. 
I 
of what is now Syria, that became the lingua franca Berber The languages spoken by the original inhabitants of 
of the Assyrian, Neo-Babylonian and much of North-West Africa. They are still spoken in 
the Persian empires. It replaced the Canaanite mountainous or remote areas from the Western 
dialects of Phoenician and Hebrew in the East Desert in Egypt to Morocco. 
Mediterranean during the middle of the 1st Bohairic Coptic dialect originally spoken in the Western 
millennium BC. It was in its tum replaced by Greek Delta, later standard throughout Christian Egypt. 
and Arabic, though it still survives in some remote Boiotia Region of central Greece known for its wealth and 
villages. power in the Bronze Age. Its major geographical 
Archaic Greece Greece from the 8th to the 6th century BC; the feature was the shallow lake Kopais, much of which 
period in which the Greek cities or poleis, and what was drained at some time around the end of the 
Marxists call Slave Society, were established. Early Bronze Age. Boiotia's chief city was Thebes. 
Armenian Indo-European language of an ancient people of Byblos Ancient port city in what is now Southern Lebanon. 
Eastern Anatolia. It is sometimes supposed to be In close touch with Egypt since the 4th millennium, 
especially close to Greek. However, as the earliest it was the most important Levantine city until it was 
surviving texts go back to only the 4th century AD, eclipsed by the rise of Sidon at the end of the 2nd 
the similarities may be the result of Greek influence millennium. 
or common contacts with Semitic. byname A subsidiary name. 
Aryan Term used to describe the speakers of the calque The literal borrowing of an expression or idiom 
Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European from another language. 
language family. They appear to have invaded Iran Canaanite A Semitic language, heavily influenced by Egyptian, 
and India in the I st half of the 2nd millennium BC. spoken in Southern Syro-Palestine between 1500 
In the late 19th century AD the term came to be and 500 BC, when it was displaced by Aramaic. 
used for the Indo-European 'race' as a whole. Phoenician and Hebrew are the best-known later 
Assyria An ancient kingdom in Northern Mesopotamia Canaanite dialects. 'Canaanite' is also used to 
dating back to the middle of the 3rd millennium. Its describe the material culture of Southern 
greatest periods were at the end of the 2nd Syro-Palestine in the Late Bronze Age, 
millennium and between 900 and 600 BC. c.1500-1 100 BC. 
Its language was originally a dialect of Carla Region in South-West Anatolia. Its language was 
Akkadian. probably Anatolian but may have been 
Atlantis Land sunk beneath the Atlantic Ocean described by non-Indo-Hittite. Alphabetic inscriptions in 
Plato; plausibly identified with Thera by modem Carlan date from the 6th century BC. 
writers. Catharism The name comes from the Greek Kathar-'pure.' A 
atomism The belief that matter is made up of minute group ofManichaean heresies in medieval Europe, 
indivisible particles, held by Demokritos - who had first reported in Bulgaria in the 9th century. The 
studied with Pythagoreans and in Egypt - in the 5th most famous centre was the one in Languedoc in 
century BC. It later became current among the the 12th century, also known as Albigensianism. 
Epicureans. In the 19th century it was revived by ceramic period A period of time reconstructed by archaeologists on 
John Dalton. the basis of pottery styles. 
autochthonous Native or aboriginal. Classical Greece Greece in the 5th and 4th centuries BC, the period


--- PAGE 272 ---
512 BLACK ATHENA 
which is generally held to have seen the greatest and 
'purest' products of Greek genius. 
Common Era Term used by non-Christians in general and Jews 
in particular, to avoid the sectarianism of the term 
AD, Anno Domini. 
Coptic The language and culture of Christian Egypt. 
Spoken until the 15th or 16th century AD, it remains 
the liturgical language of Egyptian Christians. 
Written in the Greek alphabet, with some additional 
letters derived from Demotic, it is the latest form of 
the Egyptian language. 
cuneiform A script system developed in Mesopotamia in 
which nail-shaped wedges were pressed into wet clay. 
Dark Ages (Greek) Name given to the period of Greek history after the 
fall of the Mycenaean palaces in the 12th century BC 
and before the rise of Archaic Greece in the 8th. 
Dark Ages (Christian) Name conventionally given to the period after the 
fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th 
century AD and before the Middle Ages, which are 
usually seen as beginning in the 9th or lOth. 
Dead Sea Scrolls These scrolls were found in caves above the Dead 
Sea in the 1940s. Most of them are concerned with 
the religious and institutional lives of Jewish sects 
living nearby from the 3rd century BC to the 2nd 
century AD. They cast a very interesting light on the 
Essenes and the origins of Christianity. 
deists A group of I 7th- and 18th-century thinkers who 
rejected formal religion but argued that the 
existence of God can be demonstrated from nature. 
Their doubts on the divinity of Christ also led them 
to Arianism or Unitarianism. 
Demotic Stricdy speaking, Demotic is the script derived from 
Hieroglyphic and Hieratic, used in Egypt after the 
7th century BC. The word is also used to describe 
the language of this period. 
dendrochronology The method of determining the age of wood and 
archaeological contexts by counting tree rings. 
dentals Consonants formed with the tongue against the 
teeth, as for example d and t. 
determinative Element in the hieroglyphic representation of a 
word signifying its meaning as opposed to its sound. 
GLOSSARY 51 3 
Diodoros Sikeliotes Greek historian from Sicily, &.80-&.20 BC, known 
for his Library of History. 
Dorians A Greek tribe originating from North-Western 
Greece who overran much of Southern Greece in 
the 12th century BC. The most famous Dorian state 
was Sparta. 
Early Helladic Ceramic period applied to Mainland Greece in 
the Early Bronze Age, &.2900 BC-2ooo BC. 
Early Minoan Ceramic period in Crete in the early Bronze Age, 
&.3000-2000 BC. 
Ebla An ancient Syrian city first excavated in the 1970s. 
It had a massive trading network and empire 
throughout Syro-Palestine in around 2500 BC. 
Eblaite The language ofEbla, an independent SeInitic 
language that can usefully be seen as a predecessor 
of Canaanite. 
Egyptian This is used here to refer not to the Arabic dialect 
spoken in Egypt today but to the language of 
Ancient Egypt, which was an independent 
Mroasiatic language. It is subdivided into Old 
Egyptian, spoken during the Old Kingdom from 
&.3250 to 2200 BC; and Middle Egyptian, spoken 
during the Middle Kingdom from 2200 to 1750 BC, 
which remained the official language for the next 
1,500 years. When 'Egyptian' is used without 
epithet it usually refers to this. Late Egyptian was 
spoken by the 16th century, but it was not 
commonly used in writing until the end of the 
millennium. It was, I argue, Late Egyptian that had 
the greatest influence on Greek. For the later 
stages, Demotic and Coptic, see above. 
Egypto- Paganism My own term for the pagan religion of the 
Hellenistic and Roman periods, with its insistence 
on the centrality and originality of Egypt in 
polytheist religion. 
epiclesis Surname or additional name. 
Epicurean School of thought founded by Epicurus, according 
to which the purpose of philosophy was to make life 
happy through intellectual pleasure or serenity. It 
was later known for the oversimplified formula 'eat, 
drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die', and was


--- PAGE 273 ---
SI4 BLACK ATHENA GLOSSARY SIS 
considered by monotheists as the epitome of atheist believers lay another, higher one, accessible only to 
materialism. those who 'know', the GreekgnO-. Epicurus Greek founder of Epicureanism, 341- 270 DC. Gymnosophist Naked philosophers, name given by Greeks to Eratosthenes &.275 - 195· Greek scholar and librarian of the Indian or Ethiopian holy men. 
great library at Alexandria. The first Greek to Harappa The names of this site or another, Mohenjo Daro, 
measure the circumference and tilt of the are used for the ancient civilization that flourished world. in North-West India from &.2500 BC to 1700, when Essenes An ascetic Jewish sect who lived in communities in it was destroyed, probably by the invading Aryans 
the Judaean and other deserts around the time of from the north. The writing of this civilization has 
Christ. The Dead Sea Scrolls have been plausibly not been deciphered, but it is likely that its language 
attributed to the Essenes, and tend to confirm the belonged to the Dravidian language family, 
theOlY that the Essene religious organization and dominant today in South India and still spoken in 
beliefs played an important role in the emergence of pockets in Western Pakistan. Christianity. Hasidim Name from the Hebrew I}dsid (pious) used to Etruscan Civilization of ancient Italy. The predominant view denote two Jewish religious movements: the first 
in Antiquity was that the Etruscans came from between 300 and 175 BC in resistance to the 
Lydia in North-West Anatolia. The language _ Seleucid attempts to Hellenize the Jews, and the 
which is not well understood - could well be second in the 18th century of the Common Era as a 
Anatolian. A very closely related language has been Messianic reaction against the rationalism of 
found on inscriptions from the nearby island of Talmudic Judaism. 
Lemnos. Etruscan seems to have been heavily Hebrew Canaanite dialect spoken in the kingdoms oflsrael, 
influenced by Phoenician civilization from the 9th to Judah and Moab between 1500 and 500 BC. For 
the 6th century BC. It was itself a central influence religious reasons it is often treated as the distinct 
in the formation of Latin culture. language which, with the disappearance of the other Eudoxos Great Greek astronomer and mathematician from Canaanite dialects, it has since become. 
Knidos on the Anatolian coast. Studied in Egypt. Helladic Name given to three ceramic periods on Mainland 
Born &.400, died &.350 BC. Greece, roughly approximating to the Minoan Euhemeros Philosopher - probably of Phoenician origin - who ceramic periods in Crete. 
flourished around 300 BC. Hellenic Greek or Greek-speaking, but particularly euhemerism Doctrine ofEuhemeros according to which what associated with Thessaly in northern Greece. Since 
were commonly worshipped as gods were actually the late 18th century, the word has gained many 
deified heroes. By extension the word is used to connotations of nobility and of northern and Aryan 
mean the explanation or reduction of religious 'blood', 
beliefs in rational terms. Hellenistic The name given to Greek culture throughout the genetic A 'genetic' relationship between languages is one in East Mediterranean from the conquests of 
which they are supposed to come from a single Alexander the Great in the late 4th century BC to 
parent or ancestral language. For example, French the incorporation of the region into the Roman 
and Romanian have a 'genetic' relationship because, Empire in the I st century BC. 
for all their differences, both derive from Vulgar Hellespont Strait linking the Mediterranean and Black Seas 
Latin. and dividing Asia from Europe. 
Gnostic Name of Christian and Jewish sects which Hermetic Texts A collection of mystical, magical and philosophical 
maintained that behind the religion of the ordinary documents, probably first written in Demotic in the


--- PAGE 274 ---
Hermeticism 
Herodotos 
Hieratic 
Hier~glyphic 
Hittite 
Hurrian 
Indo- European 
Indo-Hittite 
inflected languages 
interdentals 
lonians 
BLACK ATHENA 
second half of the 1st millennium BC and/or in 
Coptic between 200 and 400 AD, attributed to the 
god ThothlHermes. They later became central to 
Henneticism. 
Beliefin the magical, mystical and philosophical 
power of the Hennetic Texts. The Hermeticist 
movement existed in Late Antiquity and again in the 
Renaissance. 
Earliest Greek historian from Halikarnassos in Asia 
Minor, born &.485 BC, died c.425 BC. 
Egyptian script gradually developed from 
Hieroglyphic about 2500 BC. It changed the formal 
pictorial Hieroglyphic into a cursive script that was 
still based on the same principles. 
Egyptian script first attested in the late 4th 
millennium. It is made up of phonetic signs for 
letters, double letters, triple letters and 
'determinatives' which indicate the category of the 
word's meaning. 
Empire in central Anatolia during the 2nd 
millennium BC. Its language was an Anatolian one 
and was written in a form of cuneiform. 
Name of a people who lived in Eastern Anatolia 
and Syria in the 2nd millennium BC. Their 
extinct language was neither Indo- Hittite nor 
Mroasiatic. 
Language family including all European languages 
- except for Basque, Finnish and Hungarian - the 
Iranian and North Indian languages, and 
Tokharian. Although Phrygian and Armenian 
were situated in Anatolia they are Indo-European 
languages, not Anatolian. 
A language superfamily including both the 
Anatolian and Indo-European families. 
Languages like Greek, Latin and German that rely 
to a great extent on inflection or changing word 
shapes or morphology to convey meaning; opposed 
to isolating and affixing languages. 
Consonants formed by putting the tongue between 
the teeth, as in tho 
Central and Southern Greek people who survived 
the Dorian conquest, some of whom migrated to 
Isokrates 
isolating languages 
Kekrops 
labials 
labiovelars 
laryngeals 
Late Helladic or Mycenaean 
Late Minoan 
Lemnos 
Linear A 
LinearB 
liquids 
Lycia 
Lydia 
GLOSSARY 
the western coast of Anatolia. Their most famous 
state was Athens. 
Greek orator, teacher and pupil of Sokrates, 
436-33 8BC . 
Languages like Chinese and English that have 
relatively little inflection but rely heavily on syntax 
or the positioning of words in a sentence to convey 
meaning; opposed to inflected and affixing 
languages. 
Legendaryfounder and king of Athens. He was 
generally portrayed as autochthonous, although a 
minority tradition saw him as coming from Egypt. 
Some evidence supporting the latter is given in the 
Introduction. 
Consonants formed with the lips: b, p, m and so on. 
Velars completed with a rounding of the lips, as for 
instance in our qu, kW, and gW. 
Sounds made in the larynx or the throat as a whole; 
more precisely they can be divided into velar 
fricatives - h and g - pharyngeals - ~ and ( - and 
the larynge~s - ) and h. All these, except for g, exist 
throughout Semitic and Egyptian, but all except h 
have disappeared from Indo-European. 
Ceramic period in Mainland Greece from 
c.1650-1 100 BC. 
Ceramic period in Crete from &.1650-1450 BC, 
when the island became dominated by Greeks. 
Island in the North-Wesr Aegean where a 
non-Indo-European language related to Etruscan 
was spoken in Classical times. 
Syllabary used in Crete and elsewhere before the 
establishment of Greek on the island. 
Syllabary derived from Linear A, attested in 
Mycenaean Greece and Crete from about 1400 BC 
but probably written well before that date. 
Consonants like 1 and r which 'flow'. 
Region in Southern Anatolia. The Lycian language 
was Anatolian and was an indirect descendant of 
Hittite. Alphabetic inscriptions in it date from the 
5th century BC. 
Region of North-West Anatolia. The Lydian 
language belonged to the Anatolian family.


--- PAGE 275 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Tradition maintained that the Etruscans came 
from Lydia. Alphabetic inscriptions in it date from 
the 5th centwy BC. 
Manichaeism Religion founded by the Persian religious reformer 
Mani in the 3rd centwy AD. It took the Zoroastrian 
dualism still further and denied all matter or flesh as 
evil. Believers were divided into an elite, who 
practised strict celibacy and austerity, and the 
ordinary members, who were allowed to marry and 
live - austerely - in the world. Manichaeism was 
crushed by Christianity in the 6th centwy. 
However, Manichaean 'heresies' were relatively 
common in the Middle Ages. The best known of 
these was Catharism or Albigensianism. 
materialism Belief that the world is made of matter, first 
promoted in Greece by Demokritos in the 5th and 
4th centuries BC. 
metathesis Alternation or switching of consonantal or vocalic 
position in language. 
Middle Helladic Ceramic period for Mainland Greece for the 
period C.2ooo-1650 BC. 
Middle Minoan Ceramic period applied to Cretan Culture _ 
roughly contemporary with the Egyptian Middle 
Kingdom - C.2000-1650 BC. 
Minoan Name - derived by Arthur Evans from Minos, the 
legendary king of Crete - applied to the cultures of 
Crete before the arrival there of Greek speakers, 
and to three ceramic. periods, also established by 
Evans. 
monism In this book monism is used to indicate the idea that 
all things must have single causes. 
monogenesis The belief in single origins, largely restricted in this 
book to humanity and language. The opposite of 
poiygenesis. 
Mycenae City near Argos in the North-Eastern Peloponnese, 
famous as the leading city in the Bronze Age. 
Mycenaean Name of the Bronze Age material culture first 
discovered at Mycenae and, by extension, Greek 
culture in the Late Bronze Age. 
nasals Consonants like m and n formed with the nasal 
passage. Nasalization is the common feature of the 
GLOSSARY 
introduction of nasals before stops: m before b or p; 
n before d or t; and ng before g or k. 
Neo-Platonism Philosophy established in Egypt in the 2nd century 
AD which promoted Platonic idealist and mystical 
philosophy and Egypto-Greek religion. It was 
crushed by Christian authority early in the 6th 
century but survived in Christian form in the 
Middle Ages. It was revived - under more or less 
Christian guise - in the Renaissance. 
nominalism The view that ideal forms or universals are merely 
names. The. opposite of realism or essentialism. 
Olympian Festival and Games Religious festival and games held at Olympia in the 
North-West Peloponnese every four years from 776 
BC until they were discontinued by the Christian 
emperor Theodosius at the end of the 4th century 
AD. Revived according to the Aryan Model at the 
end of the 19th century. 
Orphics Followers of the divine Orpheus. Very much like 
the Pythagoreans, the Orphics promoted Egyptian 
religious beliefs and were especially concerned with 
personal immortality. 
pantheism Belief that God is in all things and all things are 
God. This world-view, which closely resembled 
that of Egyptian and Greek religion, became 
significant in the 17th century, especially after the 
publication of the works ofSpinoza. 
Pausanias Writer of an extensive Guide to Greece, who lived in 
the 2nd century AD. 
Pelasgians According to Classical tradition, the earliest 
inhabitants of Greece. 
Persian Empire Founded by Cyrus the Great in the mid-6th century 
BC, it dominated the Middle East, Asia Minor and 
the Aegean until pushed back by the Greeks. It was 
finally destroyed by Alexander the Great in the 2nd 
half of the 4th century BC. 
Philistines Invaders of Egypt and the Levant from Anatolia and 
the Aegean in the late 13th and 12th centuries BC. 
Phoenicia Cities along a strip of coast stretching from the 
present-day Lebanon to Northern Israel, the most 
famous of which were Byblos, Tyre and Sidon. 
The name Phoenicia refers to this region 
throughout Antiquity. However, it generally


--- PAGE 276 ---
520 
phoneme 
phonetic correspondences 
Phrygia 
Physiocrats 
pictogram 
polygenesis 
prothetic or prosthetic 
Proto-Greek 
Ptolemaic 
Ptolemy 
BLACK ATHENA 
indicates the greatest period in the cities' history, 
between 1100 and 750 BC. The Phoenician 
'language' was like Hebrew, a dialect of 
Canaanite. The alphabet is often referred to as a 
Phoenician invention. It may well have originated in 
the region, but it was developed long before the 
Phoenician period. 
The minimal significant unit of sound within a 
language. 
Sounds that are actually or etymologically similar. 
Region in Northern Anatolia. It was a powerful state 
in the first half of the I st millennium BC. Its 
language, which was written alphabetically, was not 
Anatolian but Indo-European, and closely related to 
Greek. 
A group of French philosophers and officials, 
overlapping with the Encyclopaedists, who played 
an important role in the rationalization of 
administration and strengthening of the state in the 
middle of the 18th century. Their most prominent 
figure, Frant;ois Quesnay, established a complete 
system of economics according to which - following 
Chinese economic theory - all wealth came from 
land. 
Writing in which the object signified is pictured or 
directly represented. 
The belief in multiple origins, in particular of 
humanity and language. The opposite of 
monogenesis. 
Vowels placed at the beginning of words to avoid 
initial consonants. The placing of prothetic 
vowels is particularly common before double 
consonants. 
The unattested language or people reconstructed as 
having been the origin of Greek or the Greeks. 
Name given to Egyptian culture under the rule of 
the Ptolemies. 
Name of a succession of descendants ofPtolemr-I, a 
general of Alexander the Great who seized power in 
Egypt after Alexander's death. The last ruler of this 
dynasty was Kleopatra VII, loved by both Caesar 
and Antony, who died dramatically in 30 BC. 
puttini 
Pythagoreans 
Pythagoras 
root 
Seleucid 
semantic 
sibilants 
Sidon 
stele 
stem 
stop 
Stoicism 
Strabo 
theogony 
GLOSSARY 521 
Small boys in artistic representation. 
Followers of Pythagoras organized into a 
'brotherhood' along what were generally seen to be 
Egyptian lines. The Pythagoreans played an 
important political, religious and scientific role in 
the Greek society of Sicily and Southern Italy in the 
5th and 4th centuries BC. 
Greek philosopher and mathematician, c·582-5OO 
BC. He studied in Egypt and brought back Egyptian 
mathematical and religious principles, and founded 
the Pythagorean brotherhood. 
Essential part of a word which remains after all 
other elements have been removed. 
The name of a dynasty established in Syria and 
Mesopotamia by Alexander's general, Seleukos. 
Relating to signification or meaning. 
Consonants with a hissing sound like s, s, ~ and z. 
Ancient Phoenician city dedicated to the sea god 
Sid. Its apogee was in the very early Iron Age, 
therefore 'Sidonian' is used for Phoenician in 
general in the early historical books of the Bible and 
in Homer. Its dominance was replaced by that ofits 
rival Tyre in about the 9th century BC. 
Upright slab with sculptured designs or 
inscriptions. 
Verbal form derived from a root by special 
vocalization or the addition of various prefixes or 
suffixes. 
A complete consonantal explosion of breath, as in 
the sounds represented by our letters b, p, d, t, g 
andk. 
Philosophy founded by Zeno of Kition which 
flourished in Hellenistic and Roman times. Stoics 
maintained that the world is material and that a 
universal working force - God - pervades 
everything. They stressed putting aside passion in 
order to follow duty and gain true freedom. 
Greek geographer of the 1st century BC and 1st 
century AD. 
Ancestry and birth of the gods; it was the name and 
subject of a number of poems, the most famous 
being that of Hesiod.


--- PAGE 277 ---
522 
Thera 
Thucydides 
Tokharian 
toponym 
trireme 
Tyre 
velars 
vocalization 
Zeno ofIGtion 
Zoroastrianism 
BLACK ATHENA 
Volcanic island 70 miles north of Crete. It suffered 
a major eruption during the 2nd millennium Be, the 
conventional dates for which are c. I 500-145°. I 
argue, however, that it took place 150 years earlier, 
in 1626BC. 
Greek historian of the Peloponnesian War, born 
C.460 Be, died 400 BC. 
Indo-European language spoken in the 1st 
millennium AD in the now Turkic-speaking, 
Western Chinese 'autonomous region' ofSinkiang. 
Tokharian shares several features with Western 
Indo-European languages which are not present in 
the Indo-Aryan languages. It therefore provides 
critical information on the nature of early 
Indo-European. 
Place name. 
Greek galley with three banks of oars. 
Ancient Phoenician city. Its period of greatest glory 
was from the lOth to the 9th century Be, but it 
remained an important political and cultural centre 
until its destruction by Alexander the Great in 
333 BC. 
Stops formed with the tongue at the back of the 
mouth, as for example k and g. 
Infusing a consonantal structure with vowels. 
A Phoenician who moved to Athens. The founder 
of Stoicism, C.336-264 Be. 
The state religion of the Persian Empire, founded 
by the religious reformer generally thought to have 
lived in the 7th century BC but probably much 
earlier, in the 2nd millennium. It maintained that 
the universe was the scene of a perpetual and finely 
balanced struggle between good and evil. 
Zoroastrianism was weakened by Alexander's 
conquest, and virtually destroyed by Islam. It may 
still survive in tiny pockets in Khomeini's Iran, and 
it is still flourishing throughout the world as the 
religion of the Parsees. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abdel-Malek, A. (1969) Idiowgie et renaissance nationaJe: l'Egypte moderne. Paris: Editions 
Anthropos, 2nd edn. 
Abel, L. S. (1966) Fifth Century BC Concepts of the Pelasgians. Stanford University, MA 
thesis. 
, Abou-Assaf, A., Bordreuil, P. and Milliard, A. R. D. (I 982) La Statue de TellFekheriyi: et 
son inscription bilingue IlSsyro-aramienne. Etudes Assyriologiques Editions recherche 
sur les civilisations no. 7, Paris. 
Ahl, F. (1985) Metaformations: Soundplay and Wordplay in Ovid and Other Classical Poets. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Akurgai, E. (1968) The Art of Gree«: Its Origins in the Mediterranean and the Near EllSt. 
New York: Crown Publishers. 
Albright, W. F. (1950) 'Some Oriental glosses on the Homeric problem', American 
Journal ofArchaeowgy 54:162-76. 
- (1968) Yahweh and the Gods ofCa1lQQn: A HistoricalAnalysis ofTwo Contrasting Faiths, 
London: Athlone. 
- (1970) 'The biblical period', in L. Finkelstein, TheJews Their History. New York: 
Schocken,pp.I-7 I. 
-(1975) 'Syria, the Philistines and Phoenicia', Cambridge Ancient History, 3rd edn, 
vol. II, pt 2, History of the Middle EllSt and the Aegean Region 1380-1000 BC, 
PP·5 0 7-3 6. 
Allen, P. (1978) The Cambridge Apostles: The Early Yean. Cambridge University Press. 
Allen, T. G. (1974) (trans.) The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day. Chicago: Ori­
ental Institute.


--- PAGE 278 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Annan, N. (1955) 'The intellectual aristocracy', in). H. Plumb, ed., Studies in Social 
History: A Tribute to G. M. Trevelyan. London: Longman, pp. 243- 87. 
Apollodoros (1921) The Library,). G. Frazer, trans., 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb. 
Appleton, W. W. (1951)A Cycle in Cathay, The Chinese Vogue in England in the 17th and 
18th Centuries. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Arbeitman, Y. and Bornhard A. R., eds (1981) Bono Homini Donum: Essays in Historical 
Linguistics, in Memory of]. Alexander Kerns, 2 vols. Amsterdam: John Benjamin. 
Arbeitman, Y. and Rendsburg, G. (1981) 'Adana revisited: 30 years later', Archiv 
Orientdlni 49: 145-57· 
Aristotle, De Caelo. 
-Metaphysica. 
-Meteriologica. 
- (1962) Politics, T. A. Sinclair, trans. London: Penguin. 
Arnold, M. (1869) CultureandAnarchy. London: Smith Elder. 
- (1883) Literature and Dogma. London: Smith Elder. 
- (1906) The Scholar Gypsy and Thyrsis. London: Macmillan. See F. W. E. Russell. 
Arnold, T. (1845) Introduaory Leaures on Modern History. New York. 
- (1864)A French Eton. London. 
Arrian {I 929) Anahasis of Alexander, E. Iliff, trans. Robson. New York: Putnam. 
Astour, M. C. (I 967a) Hellenosemitica: An Ethnic and Cultural Study in West Semitic Impaa 
on Mycenaean Greece. Leiden: Brill. 
- (1967b) 'The problem of Semitic in Ancient Crete',Journal oftheAmerican Oriental 
Society 87: 290-5. 
- (1972) 'Some recent works on Ancient Syria and the Sea People', Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 92.3: 447-59. 
Auguis, P. R. (1822) Introduction, in vol. 7 (pp. 1-26) of Dupuis, Originedetous les cultes, 
ou fa religion universelle, 12 vols. Paris. 
Badolle, M. (1926) L'AhheJean-Jacques Barthilemy(I716-179S) et l'HellinismeenFrance 
dans fa seconde moitie du XVIII' siec/e. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. . 
Baines,). (1982) 'Interpreting Sinuhe',Journaf of Egyptian Archaeology 68: 31-44. 
Baker,]. R. (1974) Race. London: Oxford University Press. 
Baldwin Smith, E. (1918) Early Christian Iconography and the School of Pr(J1)ence. 
Princeton: University Press. 
Banier, A. (1739) TheMythology oftheAncients Explained, anon. trans. London: A. Millar. 
Baramki, D. (1961) Phoenicia and the Phoenicians. Beirut: Khayats. 
Barnard, K. (1981) The Paradigm of Race and Early Greek History, paper for an 
undergraduate course, Government 352. Cornell. 
Barnett, R. D. (1956) 'Ancient Oriental influence on Archaic Greece', TheAegean and 
the Near-East, Studies Presented to Hetty Goldman, ed. S. Weinberg. Locust Valley, NY: 
Augustin, pp. 212-38. 
-. (1960) 'Some contacts between Greek and Oriental religions', Elements oriemaux 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
dans Ia religion grecque ancienne, ed. O. Eissfeldt. Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, pp. 143-53. 
- (1975) 'The Sea Peoples', Cambridge Ancient History, 3rd edn, vol. II, pt 2, pp. 
359-7 8. 
Baron, S. W. (1952) A Social and Religious History o/the Jews. New York: Columbia 
University Press, vols 1-2. 
- (1976) The RussianJew under Tsars andS(J1)iets. New York: 2nd enl. edn. 
Barthelemy,J-]' (1750) 'Reflexions sur quelques monuments et sur les alphabets qui en 
resultent', Recueils des Mhnoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions 30: 302-456. 
- (1763) 'Reflexions generales sur les rapports des langues egyptienne phenicienne et 
grecque', Recueils des Mimoires de l'Academiedes Inscriptions 32: 212-33. 
- (1789) (I 788) Voyage du jeune Anacharsis en Grece vers Ie milieu du IV~ sieck avant l'ere 
vulgaire. Paris. 
Bass, G. (1961) 'Cape Gelidonya Wreck: preliminary report', American Journal 0/ 
Archaeology 65: 267-86. 
- (1967) 'Cape Gelidonya: a Bronze Age shipwreck', Transaaions of the American 
Philosophical Society 57: pt 8. 
Baumgarten A. J. (1981) The Phoenician History o/Philo o/Byhlos: A Commentary. Leiden: 
Brill. 
Beck, R. (1984) 'Mithraism since Franz Cumont', in H. Temporini and W. Haase, eds 
(1972- ) Aufitieg und Niedergang der romischen Welt: Ge5chichte und Kultur Roms im 
Spiegel der neueren Forschung, 21 vols. BerlinlNew York. vol. 17+ Religion: (Heiden­
tum: romische Giitterkulte, orientalische Kulte in der romischen Welt [Forts./) ed. W. Haase, 
PP·2003- 112. 
Beckarath,J. von (1980) Kalender, in Heick and Otto, cols 297-9. 
Beddaride, M. (1845) De /'OrdreMaronique deMisraim. Paris. 
Beer, A. and Beer, P. (1975) Kepler Four Hundred Years: Proceedings o/Conferences Held in 
Honour o/Johannes Kepler. Oxford: Pergamon. 
Beloch,). (1893) Griechische Geschichte, Strasbourg. 
- (1894) 'Die Phoeniker am aegiischen Meer', Rheinisches Museum 49: I I 1-32. 
Benedetto, L. F. (1920) Le Origini Iii 'SalammhO '. Florence: Istituto di Studi Superiori 
Pratici in Firenzi Sezione di filologia e filosofia. 
Ben Jochannan, Y. (1971) Black Man 0/ the Nile, Africa, Africa the Mother o/Civilization. 
New York: Alkebu Lan Books. 
Bentley, R. (1693)A Confutation o/Atheismfrom theStruaureand Origin o/Humane Bodies. 
London. 
Benz, F. L. (I 972) Personal Names in the Phoenician and Punic Inscriptions. Rome: Biblical 
Institute. 
Berard, A. (1971) Preface, in V. Berard, Les Navigations d'Ulysse, 3 vols. Paris: Librairie 
Armand Colin. 
Berard,]. (1951) 'Philistines etprehellenes', RevueArcheologUJue, serie 6: 129-42.


--- PAGE 279 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
- (1?5 2) 'Les hyksos et la legende d' io: Recherches sur la periode pre-mycenienne, 
Syna 29: 1-,f.3. 
Berard, V. (1894) De /'origine des cultes arcadims: Essai de methode en mythologie grecque. 
Paris: Bibliotheque des Ecoles Fran~aises d' Athenes et de Rome. 
- (1902-3) Les Phenicims tt I'Odysie, 2 vols. Paris: Librairie Armand Colin. 
- (1927-9) Les Navigations d'Ulysst. Paris: Librairie Armand Colin. 
Berlin, I. (1976) Vico and Herder: Two Studies in the History of Ideas. London: Hogarth. 
Bernal, M. (198o) 'Speculations on the disintegration of Mroasiatic', paper presented at 
the 8th conference of the North American Conference of Afroasiatic Linguistics, 
San Francisco, April and to the 1st International Conference of Somali Studies 
Mogadishu, July. ' 
- (1983a) 'On the westward transmission of the Canaanite alphabet before 1500 Be', 
paper presented to the American Oriental Society, Baltimore (April). 
-(19 83b) 'On the westward transmission of the Semitic alphabet before 1500 BeE, 
paper read at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem Oune). 
-(19 8Sa) 'Black Athena: the African and Levantine roots of Greece', African Pres­
ence in Early Europe, Journal of African Civilizations 7.5:66-82. 
-(19 85b) Review of Sign, Symbol, Script: An Exhibition on the Origins of the Alphabet, 
in Journal of the American Oriental Society 105-4=736-7. 
-(19 86) 'Black Athena denied: the tyranny of Germany over Greece', Comparative 
Criticism 8:3-69. 
-(19 87) 'On the transmission of the alphabet to the Aegean before 1400 Be', Bulletin 
of the American Schools of Oriental Research 267: 1- 19. 
-(19 89) 'First land then sea: thoughts about the social formation of the Mediterra­
nean and Greece', in E. Genovese and L. Hochberg, eds. Geography in Historical 
Perspective. Oxford: Blackwell. 
-(199 0 ) Cadmean Letters: The Westward Diffusitm o/The Semitic Alphabet Before 1400 Be. 
'Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns. 
Bernier, F. (1684) Nouvelle Division de Ia terre par les diffirenles especes ou races' qui 
I'habitent. Paris. 
Beth, K. (1916) 'El und Neter', Zeitschrift for die altteslamentliche Wissmschaft 36: 
129-86. 
Beuchot, A. 'Jean Terrasson, 1852-77', Biographie Universelle: Ancienne tt Moderne. 
Paris, vol. 41, pp. 169-71. 
Bezzenberger, A. (1883) 'Aus einem briefe des herm dr. Adolf Erman', Beilrage zur 
Kunde der indogennanischen Sprachen 7: 96. 
Bietak, M. (1979) Avaris and Piramesst: Archaeological Exploration in the Eastern Nile Delta. 
Proceedings of the BritishAcadtmy 65. London. 
Bill, E. G. W. (1973) University Reform in Nineteenth Century Orford: A Study of Henry 
Halford Vaughan. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Billigmeier, J. C. (1976) Kadmos and the Possibility of a Semitic Presence in Helladic Greece. 
University of California, Santa Barbara, thesis. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Black, H. D. (1974) 'Welcome to the centenary commemoration', in Elkin and 
Macintosh, eds Grafton Elliot Smith. Sydney University Press, pp. 3-7· 
Blackall, E. (1958) The Emergence of German as a Literary Language, 17°°-1775. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Blackwell, T. (1735) Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer. London. 
Blanco, A. G. (1984) 'Hermeticism: bibliographical approach', in H. Temporini and 
W. Haase, eds (1972- ) Aufstieg und Niedergang der riimischen Welt: Geschichte und 
Kultur Roms im Spiegel der neueren Forschung, 21 vols. BerlinlNew York. Vol. 17.4. 
Religion: (Heidtntum: riimische GOtterkulte, orientalische Kulte in tier riimischen Welt 
[Forts.]) ed. W. Haase, pp. 2240-81. 
Blavatsky, H. P. (1930) The Secrtt Doctrine . .. Los Angeles: The Theosophy Co. 
- (1931) Isis Unveiled . .. Los Angeles: The Theosophy Co. 
Blegen, C. W. and Haley, J. (1927) 'The coming of the Greeks: the geographical 
distribution of prehistoric remains in Greece', American Journal 0/ Archaeology 32: 
141-5 2 . 
Bloch, M. (1924) Les Rois Thaumaturges: Etude sur Ie caractere sumaturel attribui a Ia 
puissance royale particuliertment en France tt en Angkterre. Strasbourg and Paris: 
Publications de la Faculte des Lettres de I'Universite de Strasbourg. 
Bloomfield, M. W. (1952) The Seven Deadly Sins. East Lansing: Michigan State 
University Press. 
Blue, G. (1984) Western Perceptions of China in Historical Perspeaive. Talk at the China 
Summer School, Selwyn College, Cambridge. 
Blumenbach,J. F. (1795) De Gtntris Humani Varietate Nativa. Gottingen, 3rd. edn. 
- (1865) Anthropological Treatises o/Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, ed. and trans. T. 
Bendyshe. London. 
Blunt, A. (I 940) Artistic Theory in Italy: 1450-1600. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Boardman, J. (1964) The Greeks Overseas: The Archaeology of Their Early Colonies and 
Trade. London:Pengmn. 
Boas, G. (1950) trans. The Hieroglyphics ofHorapollo. New York: Pantheon. 
Bochart, S. (1646) Geographia Sacrte Pars Prior: Phaleg Stu de Dupersione Gentium et 
Terrarom Divisione Facta in £dijicatione Turns Babel ttc. Pars Altera: Chanaan, stu de 
Coloniis et Sermone Phrmicum. Munich. 
Bodin,). (1945) Mtthodfor the Easy Comprehension o/History, B. Reynolds, trans. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
Boissel, J. (1983) 'Notices, notes et variantes', in Gobineau, Oeuvres, vol. I, pp. 
1177-471. 
Bolgar, R. R. (1979) 'Classical influences in the social, political and educational thought 
of Thomas and Matthew Arnold', in Bolgar, ed., Classical Influences on Western 
ThoughtAD 1650-187°: Proceedings of an International Conference held al King's College, 
Cambridge, March 1977. Cambridge University Press, pp. 327-38. 
- (1981) 'The Greek legacy', in Finley, pp. 429-72. 
Bollack, M. and Wismann, H. (1983) Philologie und Hermentutik ;m 19. Jahrhundert


--- PAGE 280 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
II: Philologie et hmneneutique au If)bne sieck. Gottingen: Vandenhoek und 
Ruprecht. 
Bomhard, A. (1976) 'The placing of the Anatolian languages', Orbis 25.2: 199- 239. 
- (1984) Toward Proto-Nostratic: A New Approach to the Comparison of Indo-European 
andAfroasiatic. Amsterdam:John Benjamin. 
Boon,J. (1978) 'An endogamy of poets and vice versa; exotic ideas in Romanticism and 
Structuralism', Studies in Romanticism 18: 333 -61. 
Bopp, F. (1833) Vergleichende Grammatik des Sanskrit, Zend, Griechischen, Lateinischen, 
Litthauschen, Gothischen undDeutschen. Berlin, trans. E. B. Eastwick, asA Comparative 
Grammar of the Sanskrit, Zend, Greek, Latin, Lithuanian, Gothic, German and Slavonic 
Languages,3 vols. London, 1845-50. 
Bordreuil, P. (1982) see Abou-Assaf. 
Borrow, G. (1843) The Bible in Spain. London: John Murray. 
- (1851) Lavengro. London: John Murray. 
- (1857) Romany Rye. London: John Murray. 
Borsi, F. et al. (1985) Portuna degli etruschi. Milan: Electa. 
Boylan, P. (1922) Thoth the Hermes ofEgypt:A Study of Some As peas of Theological Thought 
in Ancient Egypt. London: Oxford University Press. 
Bracken, H. (1973) 'Essence, accident and race', Hermathena 116: 91-6. 
- (1978) 'Philosophy and racism', Philosophia 8: 241-60. 
Brady, T. H. (1935) 'The reception of Egyptian cults by the Greeks <330-300 BC)', The 
University of Missouri Studies 10: I. 
Braun, L. (1973) Histoire de [,histoire de la philosophie. Paris: Ophrys. 
Braun, T. F. R. G. (1982) 'The Greeks in the Near East', CamhridgeAncientHistory, 2nd 
edn, vol. 3, pt 3, The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Sixth Centuries BC, pp. 
1-31. 
Breasted, J. H. (190 I) 'The philosophy of a Memphite priest', Zeitschrift for iigyptische 
Sprache undAltertumskunde 39: 39-54· 
- (1912) The Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt. Chicago:, Scribner. 
Bridenthal, R. (1970) Barthold George Niebuhr, historian of Rome: a Study in Methodology. 
Columbia University, thesis. 
Brodie, F. M. (1945) No Man Knows My History: The Life of Joseph Smith the Mormon 
Prophet. New York: Knopf. 
Brookfield, F. (1907) The CambridgeApostles. New York: Scribner. 
Brosses, C. de (176o) Du Culte des dieux fitiches 014 paral/ele de I 'ancienne religion de I 'Egypte 
avec la religion actuelle de Nigritie. Paris. 
Brown, J. P. (1965) 'Kothar, Kinyras and Kytheria', Journal of Semitic Studies 10: 
197- 219. 
- (1968a) 'Literary contexts of the common Hebrew Greek vocabulary', Journal of 
Semitic Studies 13: 163-91. 
- (1968b) 'Cosmological myth and the Tuna of Gibraltar', Transactions oftheAmerican 
PhilologicalAssociation 99: 37- 62. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
- (1969) 'The Mediterranean vocabulary of the vine', Vetus Testamentum 19: 146-7°. 
- (1971) 'Peace symbolism in ancient military vocabulary', Vetus Testamentum 21: 
1-2 3. 
- (1979-80) 'The sacrificial cult and its critique in Greek and Hebrew', pt I,Journal 
of Semitic Studies 24: 159-74; pt 2,JOUmal of Semitic Studies 25: 1-21. 
Brown, R. (1898) Semitic Influences in Hellenic Mythology. London: Williams and 
Norgate. 
Brown, R. L. (1967) Wilhelm von Humboldt's Conception of Linguistic Relativity. The 
Hague and Paris: Mouton. 
Bruce,). (1795) Travels to Discuver the Sources of the Nile, In the Yea~ 1768, 1769, 1770, 
1771, 1772 and 1773,5 vols. London: G. G. and). Robinson. 
Brugsch, H. (1879-80) Dictionnaire giographique de l'ancienne Egypte. Leipzig. 
-(1891) Religion und Mythologie der alten.A"gypter. Leipzig. 
Brunner, H. (1957) 'New aspects of Ancient Egypt', Universitas 1.3: 267-79. 
Brunner- Traut, E. (1971) 'The origin of the concept of the immortality of the soul in 
Ancient Egypt', Universitas 14.1: 47-56. 
Bryant,). (1774)A New System or an Ana?ysis of Ancient Mythology, 3 vols. London. 
Buck, R.). (1979)A History ofBoiotia. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press. 
Budge, W. (1904) The Gods of the Egyptians: or Studies in Ancient Egyptian Mythology, 2 
vols. London: Methuen. 
Bullough, G. (1931) Philosophical Poems of Henry More, Comprising Psychozoia and Minor 
Poems. Manchester University Press. 
Bunnens, G. (1979) L 'expansion phinicienne en mediterranie: essai d'interpretationfonde sur 
une analyse des traditions litter aires. Brussels and Rome: Institut historique beige de 
Rome. 
Bunsen, C. (1848-60) Egypt's Place in Universal History, C. H. Cotrell, trans. 5 vols. 
London: Longman. 
- (1852) The Life and Letters of Barthold George Niebuhr, with Essays on his Character and 
Influence, 2 vols. London. 
- (1859) The Life and Letters of Barthold George Niebuhr. New York. 
- (1868) Statement of a Plan ofIntellectual Labour Laid Before Niebuhr, at Berlin, 
January 1816. Trans. F. Bunsen, vol. I, pp. 85-90. 
- (1868-7°) God in History, or the Progress of Man 's Paith in theMoral Order of the World, 
S. Winckworth, trans., 3 vols. London: Longman. 
Bunsen, F. (1868) A Memoir of Baron Bunsen . .. Drawn chiefly from fomi?y papers by his 
widow Prances Baroness Bunsen, 2 vols. London: Longman. 
Bumouf, E. (1872) 'La science des religions', Paris; trans.J. Liebe (1888) as The Science 
of Religion, London. 
Bum, A. R. (1949) 'Phoenicians', Oxford Classical Dictionary, pp. 686-88. 
Burton, A. (1972) Diodorus Siculus, Book I: a Commentary. Leiden: Brill. 
Bury, J. B. (1900) A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great. London: 
Macmillan.


--- PAGE 281 ---
530 BLACK ATHENA 
- (195 I)A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great. London: Macmillan, 3rd 
edn., rev. R. Meiggs. 
Burzachechi, C. (1976) 'L'adozione dell'alfabeto nel mondo greco', Parola del Passato 
31: 82-102. 
Butler, E. M. (1935) The Tyra,my of Greece uverGmnany. A Study on the Influence Exercised 
by GreekArt and Poetry uver the Great Gmnan Writers of the Eighteenth, Nineteenth and 
Twentidh Centuries. Cambridge University Press. 
Butler, M. (198 I) Romantics Rebels andReactiono.ries: English Literature and its Background, 
1760-183°. Oxford University Press. 
Butterfield, H. (1955) Man and His Past: the Study ofHistoriaU Scholarship. Cambridge 
University Press. 
- (1981) The Origins of History. ed. A. Watson. New York: Basic Books. 
Cagnetta, A. (I 979) Antichisti e impero fascista. Bari: Dedalo. 
Cagni, L., ed. (1981) La Lingua di Ebla: Ani del ~egno interntltiontde (Napoli, 
21-23 aprile 198o). Naples: Istituto Universitario Orientale, Seminario di Studi 
Asiatici, 14. 
Canfora, L. (1980) Ideologie del Classicismo. Turin: Einaudi. 
Capart, J. (1942) 'Egyptian art', in Glanville, Legacy of Egypt. Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 
80-119. 
Carpenter, R. (1933) 'The antiquity of the Greek alphabet', American Journal of 
Archaeology 37: 8-29. 
- (1938) 'The Greek alphabet again', AmericanJournal of Archaeology 42: 58- 69. 
- ( 1958) 'Phoenicians in the west' ,American Journal of Archa.eology 62: 35-53. 
- (1966) Discontinuity in Greek Civilization. Cambridge. 
Carruthers,]. (1984) Essays in Ancient Egyptian Studies. Los Angeles. 
Cartledge, P. (1979) Sparta and LaItonia: A Regional History 1300-362 Be. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Cassirer, E. (1970) ThePlatonicRenaissanceinEng/o,nd,J. P. Pettegrove, trans. New York: 
Gordian Press. 
Cassuto, U. (I 97 I) The Goddess Anath: Canaanite Epics of the PatrillrchalAge, I. Abraham, 
trans. Jerusalem: Magness. 
Cattaui, R. and G. (1950) Mohamed-Aly en Europe. Paris: Geuthner. 
Cerny,]. (1952) EgyptillnReligion. London: Hutchinson. 
Chadwick, J. (1973a) Documents in Mycenaean Greek. 2nd edn. Cambridge University 
Press. 
- (1973b) 'The Linear B tablets as historical documents', Cambridge Ancient History, 
3rd edn, vol. 2, pt I, The Middle East and the Aegean Region, c.1800-1380 Be, 
pp.609- 26. 
- (1976) TheMycenaean World. London: Cambridge University Press. 
Chailley, J. (197 1) The Magic Flute, Masonic Opera, H. Weinstock, trans. New York: 
Knopf. 
Champollion,]. F. (1814) L 'Egypte sous Its Pharaons: ou recherches sur la giographie, /0, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 531 
religion, Ia IIJngue, Its kritures et I'histoire de I'£gypte tlVant l'irrvasion de Cambyse. 
Grenoble. 
- (1909) see Hartleben, H. 
Chanaiwa, D. (1973) The Zim!HlJm,e Controversy: A Case of Colonial Historiography. 
Syracuse, NY: Program of Eastern African Studies. 
Chandler, R. (1769) Ionian Antiquities, Published with Permission with the Society of 
Dilletanti. London. 
Chang, K. C. (1980) Shang Cwilization. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Chantraine, P. (1928) 'Sur Ie vocabulaire maritime des grecs', in Etrennes de linguistique: 
offertes parque!ques amis a Emile Berrveniste. Paris: Geuthner, pp. 1-25. 
- (1968-75) Dictionnaire itymologique de Ia langue grtC4ue, 4 vols. Paris: Klincksieck. 
, Charles-Roux, F. (1929) 'Le projet fran~ de conquete de I'Egypte sous Ie regne de 
Louis XVI' , Memoires de l'Institut d'Egypte 14: 1-85. 
- (1937) Bono.parte Guvemor of Egypt, E. W. Dickes, trans. London: Methuen. 
Chaudhuri, N. C. (1974) SCholar Extraordinary: The Lift of Professor the Right Honourable 
Max MUller PC. London: Chatto & Windus. 
Child, F.]. (1882-98) The English and Sco"ish Popular Ballads,S vols. Boston. 
Childe, G. F. (1926) TheAryans. London: Kegan Paul. 
Cicero, The Nature of the Gods. 
- Tusculanae Disputationes. 
Clark, W. M. (1954) Christoph-Martin Wie/o,nd and the Legacy of Greece: Aspeas of his 
Relationship to Greek Culture. Columbia University, PhD thesis. 
Clement of Alexandria, Stromata. 
- Protrepticus. 
Coleridge, S. T., see Griggs, E. L. 
Colie, R. L. (1957) Light and Enlightenment: A Study of the Cambridge Platonists and the 
DutchA""inians. Cambridge University Press. 
Combes-Dounous (1809) Essai Historique sur Platon, et coup d'rEil rapide sur I'histoire du 
Platonisme depuis Platon jusqu 'a nous. Paris. 
Comte, A. (1830-42) Cours dephilosophiepositwe, 6 vols. Paris: Bachelier. 
Conan-Doyle, A. (1968) The Adventure of the Devil's Foot, in The Annotated Sherlock 
Holmes, 2 vols. London: Murray, pp. 508-26. 
Conway, R. S. (1937) 'William Ridgeway', Didiono.ry of National Biography: Twentieth 
Century 1922-1930. Oxford University Press, pp. 720-2. 
Cook, A. B. (1914-40) Zeus: A Study in Ancient Religion, 3 vols, 5 pts. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Cook, R. M. (1937) 'Amasis and the Greeks in Egypt', Joumal of Hellenic Studies 57: 
227-37· 
Cook, S. A. (1924) 'The SeInites', Cambridge Ancient History, 1st edn, vol. I, pp. 
181- 237. 
Cordier, H. (1898) 'Les etudes chinoises: 1895-1898', Suppl. to T'oung-Pao 9: 44-51. 
_ ( 1899) 'De~ voyageurs dans I'Extreme Orient au XVe et au XVIe siecles: essai


--- PAGE 282 ---
532 BLACK ATHENA 
bibliograpbique, Nicolo, de Conti-Lodovico de Varthema', T'oung-Pao, 10: 380-
4°4. 
- ,( I 9°4-24) Bibliotheca Sinica: diaionnaire bibliographiIJue des otnJrages relatifi a l'Empire 
Chinois, 2nd edn, 5 vols. Paris: Librairie Orientale et Americaine. 
Corpus Hermeticum (1945-54) text established by A. D. Nock, trans. (into French) by 
A.-J. Festugiere, 4 vols. Paris. 
Cory, I. P. (1832) Sanchunation, Ancient Fragments of the Phoenician, Chaldaean, Egyptian, 
Tynan, Carthaginian, Indian, Persian and Other writers, With an Introduaory Dissertation 
and an Inquiry into the Philosophy and Trinity of the Ancients. London. 
Cousin, V. (1841) Cours de l'histoire de la philosophie: Introduaion a l'histoire de fa 
philosophic. Paris. 
Cowan, M. (1963) An Anthology of the Writings of Wilhelm von Humboldt: Humanist 
Without Portfolio. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. 
Cramer, M. (1955) Das altagyptische Lebenszeichen V4nkh) im christfichen (koptischen) 
Agypten. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz. 
Creutzer, F. (1810-12) Symbolik und Mythologie tier alten VOlker besonders tier Griechen, 4 
vols. LeipzigIDarmstadt. 
Croce, B. (1947) Bibliographica Vichiana, 2 vols. Naples: Atti dell'Accademia Ponta­
niana. 
Crombie, A. C. (1963) ed. Scientific Change: Historical Studies in the Intelleaual, Social and 
Technical Conditions for Scientific DisCflVtry and Technical Invention,.fromAntilJuity to the 
Present: Symposium on the History of Science Held at the University of Oxford, 9-15 July 
1961. London: Heinemann. 
Cromey, R. D. (1978) 'Attic nmaVLa and naLovLbm', Glotta 56: 62-9. 
Cross, F. M. (1968) 'The Phoenician inscription from Brazil. A nineteenth century 
forgery', Orient alia 37: 437-60. 
- (1974) 'Leaves from an epigraphist's notebook', The Catholic Biblical Quarterly 36: 
490 -3. 
- (1979) 'The early alphabetic scripts', in Cross, ed. Symposia, Celebrating the 
Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the American Schools of Oriental Research (1900-1975). 
Cambridge, Mass., pp. 97-123. 
- (1980) 'Newly found inscriptions in Old Canaanite and Early Phoenician scripts', 
Bulletin oftheAmerican Schools of Oriental Research 238: 1-21. 
Crossland, R. A. and Birchall, C. (1973) BronzeAge Migrations in the Aegean: Archaeol­
ogica/ and Linguistic Problems of Greek Prehistory. London: Duckworth. 
Crum, W. (1939)A CopticDiaionary. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Cudworth, R. (1743) (1676) The True Intelleaual System of the Universe, 2nd edn. 
, London. 
Culican, W. (1966) The First Merchant Venturers: The Ancient Levant in History and 
Commerce. London: Thames & Hudson. 
Comont, F. (1929) Les religions orientales dans le paganisme romain, 3rd edn. Paris: 
Annales du Musee Guimet, Bibliotheque de Vulgarisation. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 533 
- (1937) L 'Egypte des Astrologues. Brussels: Fondation Egyptologique de La Reine 
Elizabeth. 
Curl, J. S. (1982) The Egyptian Revival, An Introduaory Study of a Recurring Theme in the 
History of Taste. London: Allen & Unwin. 
Curtin, P. (1964) The Image of Africa: British Ideals andAaion, 1780-1850. Madison: 
Wisconsin University Press. 
- (197 1) Imperialism: the Documentary History of Western Civilization. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Curtius, E. (1857-67) Griechische Geschichte, 4 vols. Berlin, trans. A. W. Ward (1886) as 
History of Greece, 5 vols. New York. 
Cuvier, G. (1817) Le regne animal distribui d'apres son organisation. Paris, trans. M. Mac 
Murtrie (1831) as TheAnimalKingdom, 4 vols. New York. 
Dacier, A. Le F. (1714) Des Causes de la Corruption du gout. Paris. 
Dahood, M. (19813) 'The linguistic classification ofEblaite', in Cagni, pp. 177-89. 
- (198Ib) 'Afterward: Ebla, Ugarit and the Bible', in Pettinato, The Archives ofEbla, 
PP·27 1-3 21. 
Danielou,J. (1964) Primitive Christian Symbols, D. Attwater, trans. Baltimore: Helicon. 
Dart, R. A. (1974) 'Sir Grafton Elliot Smith and the evolution of man', Grafton Elliot 
Smith: The Man and his Work. Sydney University Press, pp. 25-38. 
Davies, N. (1979) Voyagers to the New World. London: Macmillan. 
Davis, W. M. (1979) 'Plato on Egyptian art',Journal of Egyptian Arehaeology 66: 121-7· 
Dawson, R. (1967) The Chinese Chameleon:AnAnalysis of European Conceptions of Chinese 
Civilization. London: Oxford University Press. 
Delatte, A. (1922) La vie de Pythagore de Diogene Laerce. Brussels: AcadeInie Royale de 
Belgique, Classe de Lettres etc. 
Delia, R. (1980) A Study in the Reign of Senwosret III, Columbia University, PhD 
thesis. 
Derchain, M.-T. & P. (1975) 'Noch einmal "Hermes Trismegistos"', Gottinger 
Miszellen 15:7-10. 
Derchain, P. (1962) 'L'authenticite de l'inspiration egyptienne dans Ie "Corpus 
Hermeticum"', Revue de l'Histoire des Religions: 175 -98. 
- (1980) 'Kosmogonie'. Heick and Otto, cols 747-56. 
Des Places, E. (1964) 'Les Mysteres d'Egypte et les Oracles Chaldaitjues', Oikumene: 
455- 60. 
- (1975) 'La religion de J amblique', Entretiens sur l'Antiquite classique 21: 69-94' 
- (1984) 'Les oracles Chaldaiques', in H. Temporini and W. Haase, eds (1972-
Aufitieg und Niedergang tier romischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur Roms ;m Spiegel tier 
neueren Forschung, 2 I vols. BerlinlNew York, vol. 17.4. Religion: (Heidentum: riimische 
Gotterkulte, orientalisehe Kulte in tier romisehen Welt (Forts.]), ed. W. Haase, pp. 
2300-35. 
Devisse, J. (1979) L 'image du no;r: dans I'art oecidental2. Des premiers sieeles chretiens aux 
'grands deeouverts' pt I: De fa menace dimoniaque a l'incarnation de fa sainteti; pt 2: Les


--- PAGE 283 ---
534 BLACK ATHENA 
Africains dans l'orJonnance chritienne du monde (Xlve_xvr siee/e) Lausanne: F ondation 
delamenil. 
Dickinson, O. T. P. K. (1977) The Origins of Mycenaean Civilization. Gotenborg: Studies 
in Mediterranean Archaeology No. 49. 
Dieckmann, L. (1970) Hieroglyphics: The History of a Literary Symbol. St Louis: Washing­
ton University Press. 
Dimakis, J. (1968) La guerre de /'indipendance grecque vue par la presse franfaise (piriode 
1821- 1824): contribution Ii l'itude de I 'opinion publique et du mouvement philhellinique en 
France. Thessalonika. 
Diodoros Sikeliotes (1933-67) The Library of History, 12 vols, C. H. Oldfather, trans. 
Cambridge, Mass. (vols I I and 12 trans. F. R. Walton and R. M. Geer). 
Diogenes Laertius (1925) Lives of Eminent Philosophers, R. D. Hicks, trans. 2 vols. 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Diop, C. A. (1974) TheAfrican Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality?, M. Cook, trans. 
Westport, Conn.: L. Hill. 
- (1978) The Cultural Unity of Black Africa. Chicago. 
- (1985a) 'Mrica: cradle of humanity', Nile Valley Civilizations: pp. 23-8. 
- (1985b) 'Africa's contribution to world civilization: the exact sciences', Nile Valley 
Civilizations: pp. 69- 83. 
Disraeli, B. I. (1847) Tancred; or the New Crusade. Liepzig: Tauschnitz. 
Dods, M. and Smith, T. (trans.) (1867) Tatian, Theop~ilus and the Clementine Recognition, 
vol. 3, TheAnte-Nicene Christian Library. Edinburgh, pp. [-39, esp. 35-6. 
Dolgopolskii, A. B. (1973) Sravitelno-istorichesltaya /onetika kushchitskikh yazykuv. 
Moscow: Nauka. 
Donaldson, J. W. (1858) Introduction in Muller, A History of the Literature of Ancient 
Greece,3 vols. London, vol. I, pp. i-xxxix. 
Doresse,J. (1960) The Secret Booles of the Egyptian Gnostics. London: Hollis & Caner. 
DOrpfeldt, W. (1966) (1935) Alt-Olympia: Untersuchungen und Ausgrabungen zur Ges­
chichte des iiltesten Heiligtums von Olympia und tier iilteren griechischen Kunst (reprint). 
Osnabriick: Zeller. . 
Dothan, M. (1973) 'Philistine material culture and its Mycenaean affinities', in 
Karageorghis, ed. TheMycenaeans in the East Mediterranean. Nicosia. 
Dothan, T. (1982) The Philistines and their Material Culture. Jerusalem and New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 
Doumas, C. (1979) Thera and the Aegean World: Papers Presented at the Second Inter­
national Scientific Congress, Santorini, Greece,August 1978. London. 
Dow, S. (1937) 'The Egyptian cults in Athens', Haroard Theological Review 30, 4: 
[83- 2 32 . 
Drioton, E. (1948) 'Le monotheisme de l'ancienne Egypte', Cahiers d'histoireigyptienne 
I: 149-68. 
- (1948a) Preface, in Lauer,Le Problemedes Pyramides d'Egypte. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 535 
Drioton, E. and Vandier, J. (1946) L 'Egypte. Clio. Paris: Introduction aux etudes 
historiques. 
Dubois, W. E. B. (1975) The Negro. New York: Kraus-Thompson Organization. 
- (1976) The World andAftica. New York: Kraus-Thompson Organization. 
Duff, W. (I 767)An Essay on Original Genius: and its various Modes of Exertion in Philosophy 
and the Fine Arts, Particulllrly in Poetry. London. 
Duhoux, Y. (1982) L 'Etiocritois: Les textes, III langue. Amsterdam:J. C. Gieben. 
Duke, T. T. (1965) review, The CiassicalJoumal61 .3: 13 [-6 (p. 133)· 
Dumas, F. (1976) Le Tombeau de Childiric. Paris: Le Cabinet. 
Dunand, F. (1973) Le culte d'isis dans Ie bassin de III Miditerranie, 3 vols. Vol. II: Le culte 
d'isis en Grece. Leiden: Brill. 
Dunker, M. (1880) Griechische Geschichte, S. F. Alleyne, trans. (1883),3 vols. London. 
Dupuis, C. F. (1822) ([795) Origine de tous Its cultes, ou III religion universelle, I2 vols in 7. 
Paris. 
- (An XII) Discours prononce ala rentree du College de France Le lef Frimaire. 
Dussaud, R. (1907) Les Arabes en Syrie avant l'Islllm. Paris: Leroux. 
- (193 I) 'Victor Berard (necrologue)', Syria 12: 392-3. 
Earp, F. R. (1953) 'The date of the Supplices of Aeschylus', Greece and Rome: 
118- 2 3. 
Edwards, G. P. (1971) The Language of Htsiod in its Traditional Context. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Edwards, I. E. S. (1947) The Pyramids of Egypt. London: Penguin. 
Edwards, R. (1979) Kadmos the Phoenician: A Study in Greek Legends and the Mycenaean 
Age. Amsterdam: Hakken. 
Eissfeldt, O. (1935) 'Molk als Opferbegriff im Punischen und Hebriiischen und das 
Ende des Gottes Moloch', Beitriige zur Religiongeschichte des Altmums, vol. 3. 
- (1960) 'Phonikische und griechische Kosmogonie', in Eliments orientaux dans la 
religion grecque ancienne. Paris, pp. 1-15. 
Eliot, G. (1906) (1864) Romolll, 2 vols. Chicago: Mc Clarg. 
- (1871-2) Middlemarch, 2 vols. London and Edinburgh. 
- (1876) Daniel Deronda, 2 vols. Edinburgh and London. 
Eliot, T. S. (1971) The Complete Poems and Plays: 1909-1950. New York: Harcourt 
Brace. 
Elkin, A. P. (1974) 'Sir Grafton Elliot Smith: the man and his work; a personal 
testimony', in Grafton Elliot Smith: the Man and His Work. Sydney University Press, 
pp.8- 15· 
- (197 4a) 'Elliot Smith and the diffusion of culture', in Grafton Elliot Smith: the Man 
andHis Work. Sydney University Press, pp. 139-59. 
Elliot Smith, G. (1911) The Ancient Egyptians and their Influence Upon the Civilization of 
Europe. London: Harper. 
- (1923) TheAncient Egyptians and the Origin of Civilization. London: Harper.


--- PAGE 284 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Erman, A. (1883) 'Aegyptische Lehnworte im Griechischen', Beitrage zur Kunde tier 
indogermanisehen Sprochen 7: 336-8. 
Erman, A. and Grapow, H. (1982) WOrterbuch tier agyptischen Sproche, 7 vols. Berlin: 
Akademie Verlag. 
Eusebius (1866) Chronicorum, trans. from the Annenian by H. Petermann, ed. A. 
Schoene. Berlin: Weidmann. 
Evans, A. {I 909) ScriptaMinoa. Oxford: Clarendon. 
- (1921-35) The Palace of Minos, 4 vols in 6. London: Macmillan. 
Fallmerayer,]. P. (1835) Welchern Einfluss hatte die Besetzung Grieehenlands dureh die 
Slawen auf das Sehieksal tier Stiidte Athen und tier Landsehaft Attika. Stuttgart and 
Tlibingen. 
Fan Xiangyong (1962) Guben Zhushu Jinian Jixiao Dipu. Shanghai. 
Farag, S. (198o) 'Une inscription memphite de la XIIe dynastie' ,Revue d'Egyptologie32: 
75- 81. 
Farnell, L. R. (1895-19°9) The Cults of the Greek States, 5 vols. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Farnham, F. (1976) Madame Dader: Scholar and Humanist. Monterey: Angel Press. 
Farrell,].]. (198o) InventingtheAmerican Way of Death . Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press. 
Faverty, F. (195 I) MatthewArnold: The Ethnologist. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univer­
sity Press. 
Fay, B. (1961) La frattemafOnnerie et La revolution intelleauelle du XVIIr s;ec/e. Paris: 
Libraire Fran~ais. 
Feldman, B. and Richardson R. D. (1972) The Rise of Modern Mythology 1680-1860. 
Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press. 
Fenelon, F. de S. de la M. (1833) (1699) Telhnaque,fils d'Ulysse. Philadelphia .. 
Festugiere, R. P. {I 944-9) La revelation d'Hermes Trismegiste, 3 vols. Paris: Lecoffre, vol. 
I, L 'astrologie et les sciences occultes. 
- (1945) trans. Corpus Hermeticum, 4 vols. Paris: Societe d'edition 'Les Belles Lettres'. 
- (1961-5) LesMoines d'Orient, 4 vols in 3. Paris: Editions du Cerf. 
- (1966-8) Prolius, Commentaire sur Ie Timee, 5 vols. Paris. 
Finkelstein, L. (1970) Akiba: Scholar, Saint andMartyr. New York: Atheneum. 
Finley, M.1. (1978) The World of Odysseus. New.York, rev. reset edn. 
- {I 98o) Ancient Slovery andModern Ideology. New York. 
- (1981) TheLegacy ofGreece:A NewAppraisal. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Flaubert, G. (I 857) Madame Booary. Paris. 
- (1862) SaJammM. Paris. 
- (1973) Oeuvres, 3 vols., ed. and ann.]. Bruneau. Paris: Pleiades. 
Fleckenstein (1975) 'Kepler and Neoplatonism', in Beer, pp. 519-33. 
Fontenrose, ]. (1959) Python: a Study in Delphic Myth and its Origins, Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Force, ]. E. (1985) William Whiston: Honest Newtonian. Cambridge University 
Press. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 537 
Forrest, W. G. G. (1982) 'Central Greece and Thessaly', CambridgeAncient History, 2nd 
edn, vol. 3, pt 3, The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Sixth Centuries Be. eds. ]. 
Boardman and N. G. L. Hammond, pp. 286-99· 
Forster, G. (1786) 'Noch etwas liber die Menschenratkn', Der Teutsche Merkur. Aug. 
_ (1958- ) Georg Forsters Werke. Berlin: Akademie der Wissenschaften der 
D.D.R. Zentralinstitut fiir Literaturgeschichte. 
Foucart, G. (1914) Les Mysteres d'Eleusis. Paris: A. Picard. 
Frankfort, H. and H. A. (1946) 'Myth and reality', in The IntellectualAdventure of Ancient 
Man. University of Chicago Press. 
Franklin,]. H. (1947) FromSlovery to Freedom: A History of American Negroes. New York: 
Knopf. 
Franklin, H. B. (1963) The Wake of the Gods: Melville's Mythology. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Frazer,]. (189°-19 I 5) The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion, 9 vols. London: 
Macmillan. 
- (1898) Pausanias 's Description of Greece, 6 vols. London. 
- (191 I) The Dying God, The Golden Bough, vol. 3. London: Macmillan. 
- (192 I) Apollodoros; The Library, 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass. See Apollodoros. 
Freeman-Greville, G. S. P. (1962) The EastAJrican Coast: SeleaDocumentsfrom the First 
to the Earlier Nineteenth Centuries. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Freret, N. (1784) 'Observations generales sur l'origine et sur l'ancienne histoire des 
premiers habitants de la Grece' , Academie des Inscriptions, 1784-1793 47 (published 
18°9). Memoire de Littirature: 1-149. 
Freud, S. (1939) Moses andMonotheism, Katherine]ones, trans. London: Hogarth. 
Friedrich,]. (1951) Phonizisch-punisehe Grammatik. Rome: Analecta Orientalia. 
- (1957) Extina Languages, F. Gaynor, trans. New York: Philosophical Library. 
- (1968) 'Die Unechtheit der phonizischen Inschrift aus Parahyba', Orient alia 37: 
421-4. 
Froidefond, C. (1971) Le mirage egyptien dans la littirature grecque d'Homere tiAristote. 
Paris: Ophrys. 
Frothingham, A. (1891) 'Archaeolog!cal news', American Journal of Archaeology 6: 
476-566. 
Frye, N. (1962) Fearful Symmetry. Boston: Beacon. 
Fueter, E. (1936) Geschichte tier neueren Historiographie. Berlin and Munich: R. 
Oldenberg. 
Fuhrmann, M. (1979) 'Querelle des Anciens et des Modernes, der Nationalismus und 
die deutsche Klassik', in Bolgar, Classical Influences, pp. 107-28. 
Fung Yu-lan (1952) A History of Chinese Philosophy, D. Bodde, trans., 2 vols. Princeton 
University Press. 
Gamer-Wallert, I. (1977) 'Fische, religios', in Heick and Otto, cols 228-34· 
Garbini, G. (1977) 'Sulla datazione dell'iscrizione di Ahiram', Annali dell1stituto 
Orientale di Napoli 627: 81-9·


--- PAGE 285 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
- (1978) 'La Lingua di Ebla', LaParola delPasslllo 181: 241-5I. 
- (1981) 'Considerations on the language ofEbla', in Cagni, pp. 75-82. 
Gardiner, A. H. (1927) Egyptian Gramma.r. Oxford: Clarendon. 
- (1942) 'Writing and literature', in S. R. A. Glanville, ed., The LeglUY of Egypt. Oxford: 
Clarendon, pp. 53-79. 
- (1947) Ancient Egyptilln Onomastica, 3 vols. Oxford University Press. 
- (1957) Egyptian Gramma.r, 3rd edn. Oxford: Clarendon. 
- (196 I) Egypt of the PhartlOhs. Oxford: Clarendon. 
- (1986) (I 945-55) My Early Yean, ed.j. Gardiner. Isle of Man: Andreas. 
Gardner, P. (1880) 'Stephani on the tombs at Mycenae', JournoJ of Hellenic Studies I: 
94- 106. 
Garvie, A. F. (1969) Aeschylus' Supplices: Play and Trilogy. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Gaster, T. H. (1964) The Dead Sea Scriptures: In English Translation. Garden City New 
York: Anchor Books. 
Gaulmier, j. (1978) Ernest Renan: Judo,isme et Christianisme: tates presentes par Jean 
Gaulmier. Paris. 
- (1983) Introduction to Gobineau, Oeuvres, vol. I, pp. i-lxxxvii. 
Gauthier, H. (1925-31) Dictionnaire des noms giographiques contenus dans les tates 
hieroglyphiques, 5 vols. Cairo: L'Institut Fran~ais d'archeologie orientale. 
Gelb, I. j. (1977) 'Thoughts about Ibla: A Preliminary Evaluation, March 1977', 
Syro-Mesopotamilln Studies I. I: 1-26. 
- (1981) 'Ebla and the Kish civilization', in Cagni, pp. 9-73. 
Georgiev, V.I. (1952) 'L'origine minoenne de l'alphabet phenicienne' ,Archiv Orientalni 
20: 487-95' 
- (1966) Introduzione alla storill delle lingue indoeuropee. Rome: Edizione de l' Ateneo. 
- (1973) 'The arrival of the Greeks in Greece: the linguistic evidence', in Crossland 
and Birchall, pp. 243-54. 
Gerbi, A. (1973) Dispute of the New World: TheHistoryofaPoiemic, 1750-1900, rev. and 
enl. edn. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
Gesenius, F. H. W. (1815) Geschichte der hebraischen Sprache und Schrift. Leipzig. 
Gibbon, E. (1776-88) The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 vols. London. 
- (1794) 'Memoirs of my life and writings', Miscellaneous Works of Edward Gibbon 
Esquire with Memoin of His Life and Writings, Composed by Himself: Illustrated from His 
Letten with OCCtlSiotud Notes and Narrillive by John Lord Sheffield, 2 vols. London, vol. I, 
PP·I- 185· 
Giles, P. (1924) 'The peoples of Europe', CambridgeAncient History, vol. 2, The Egyptian 
and Hittite Empires to c. 1000 Be. Cambridge University Press, pp. 20-4 0. 
Gillings, R.]. (1973) Mathemillics in the times of the PhartlOhs. Cambridge, Mass. 
Gilman, S. (1982) On BlacJmess withoutBlacks: Essays on theIma.geoftheBlacldn Germtlny. 
Boston. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 539 
Gimbutas, M. (1970) 'Proto-Indo-European culture: the Kurgan culture during the 
fifth, fourth and third millennia', Indo-European and Indo-Europeans: Papers Presented 
at the Third Indo-European Conference at the Univeniiy of Pennsyroania, eds. G. 
Cardona, H. M. Hoenigswald and A. Senn. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, pp. 155-97. 
Gladstone, W. (1869) Juventus Mundi: The gods and men of the heroic age. London: 
Macmillan. 
Glanville, S. (1942) The Legacy of Egypt. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Gobineau,j. A. de (1983) Oeuvres, 2 vols. Paris: Pleiades. 
Godwin,]. (I 979)Athanasius Kircher: A RenaissanceMan and the Quest for Lost Knowledge. 
London: Thames & Hudson. 
Goldin,]. (1967) Introduction, in Spiegel, The Last TriIIl, pp. i-xxvi. 
Goldsmith, O. (1774) History of the Earth, 8 vols. London. 
Gomme, A. W. (1913) 'The legend of Cadmus and the Logographi',Journal of Hellenic 
Studies, pp. 53-72,223-45. 
Gooch, C. P. (19 I 3) History and Historillns in the Nineteenth Century. London: Longman. 
Goodenough, W. H. (1970) 'The evolution and pastoralism and Indo-European 
origins', in Indo-European and Indo-Europeans: Papen Presented at the Third Indo­
European Conference at the Univenity of Pennsyroania, eds. G. Cardona, H. M. 
Hoenigswald and A. Senn, pp. 253-65. 
Gordon, C. (1962a) 'Eteocretan',Journal of Near Eastern Studies 21: 211-14. 
- (1962b) Before the Bible: The Common BtlCkground of Greek and Hebrew Civilizlltions. 
New York: Harper & Row. 
- (1963a) 'The Dreros bilingual',JournoJ of Semitic Studies 8: 76-9. 
- (1963b) 'The Mediterranean factor in the Old Testament', Supplements to Vetus 
Testamentum 9: 19-3I. 
- (1965) Ugaritic Tatbook, Analeaa Orientalill 18. Rome: Pontificum Institutum 
Biblicum. 
- (1966) Evidencefor the Minoan Language. Ventnor. 
- (I 968a) 'The present status of Minoan studies', Atti: 383-8. 
- (I 968b) 'Northwest SeInitic texts in Latin and Greek letters' ,Journal oftheAmmcan 
Oriental Society 88: 285-9. 
- (1968c) 'The Canaanite text from Brazil', Orienta/ia37: 425-36. 
- (1968d) 'Reply to Professor Cross', Orienllllill37: 461-3. 
- (1969) 'Minoan',Athenaeum 47: 125-35. 
- (1970a) 'Greek and Eteocretan unilinguals from Praisos and Dreros', B(1)'tus 19: 
95- 8. 
- (1970b) 'In the wake of Minoan and Eteocretan', llQuxtLXa 'lOU A' ~LtOVOU(J 
'AvOQoo:7tLotLxo{) l:u!UCoo(ou Ev dE).<I><>t~ I: 163-7I. 
- (1971) Forgotten Scripts: The Story of their Decipherment. London: Penguin.


--- PAGE 286 ---
540 BLACK ATHENA 
- (1975) 'The decipherment of Minoan and Eteocretan', Joumal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society: 148-58. 
- (1980) 'A new light on the Minoan language', nE3tQuyfJivu: 205-9. 
- (1981) 'The Semitic language of Minoan Crete', in Arbeitman and Bornhard, 
PP·7 61- 82. 
- (1983) 'The Greek unilinguals from Praisos and Dreros and their bearing on 
Eteocretan and Minoan', nE3tQuyfJivu 'to\) r' .:1Lt8vou<; KQTJ'toI..oYL'Xo\) 
l:uvebQ(ou: 97-103. 
Gossman, L. (1983) 'Orpheus Philologus: Bachofen versus Mommsen on the study of 
Antiquity', Transactions oftheAmerican Philosophical Society 73: pt 5. 
Gould, R. F. (19°4) A Concise History of Freemasonry. London: Gale and Polden. 
Gould, S.). (1981) TheMismeasureofMan. New York: Norton. 
Gran, P. (1979) Islamic Roots of Capitalism: Egypt 1760-1840. Austin: University of 
Texas Press. 
Graves, R. (1948) The White Goddess. London: Faber & Faber. 
- (1955) GreekMyths, 2 vols. London: Penguin. 
Green, A. (1982) Flaubert and the Historical Nuvel. Cambridge University Press. 
Green, A. R. W. (1975) The Role of Human Sacrifice in the Ancient Near East. Mis­
soula, Montana: Scholars Press for the American Schools of Oriental Resarch. 
Griffiths, J. G. (1970) Plutarch's De Iside et Osiride. Cambridge University Press. 
-(1975) Apuleius of Madauros, The Isis Book (Metamorphosis, Book XI). Leiden: 
Brill. 
- (1980) 'Interpretatio Graeca', in Heick and Otto, vol. III, cols 167-72. 
- (1982) 'Plutarch', in Heick and Otto, vol. N, cols 1065-7. 
Griggs, E. L. (1956-71) Collected Letters of Samuel TtfYlor Co/nidge, 5 vols. Princeton 
University Press and Oxford: Clarendon. 
Grimm, G. (1969) Die Zeugnisse agyptischer Religion und Kunstelemente in romischen 
Deutschland. Leiden: Brill. 
Grote, G. (1826) 'Mitford'sHistoryofGreece', in the Westminster Review 5: 280-331. 
- (1846-56)A History of Greece, I2 vols. London. 
Grumach, E. ([968/9) 'The coming of the Greeks', Bulletin oftheJohn Rylands Library 
5[: 73- 103, 400-30. 
Guignes, C. L. J. de ([758) Mbnoire dans lequel on prowe que /es chinois sont une colonie 
igyptienne. Paris. 
Haase, R. (1975) 'Kepler's harmonies between Pansophia and Mathesis Universalis, in 
Beer and Beer, pp. 427-38. 
Hammond,N. G. L. (1967)A History of Greece to 322 BC, 2nd edn. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Hani,). ([976) La Religion igyptienne dans la pensie de Plutarque, collection d'etudes 
mythologiques. Centre de Recherche Mythologique de l'Universite de Paris. Paris: 
'Les Belles Lettres'. 
Hannay, D. (19[ I) 'Spain, history',EruyclopaediaBritannica, [[th edn. 
Hansberry, L. W. (1977) Aftica and the Africans as seen by Classical Writers: The Leo 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 541 
William Hansberry African History Notebook, 2 vols, ed. J. E. Harris. Washington: 
Howard University Press. 
Harden, D. (1971) The Phoenicians. London: Penguin. 
Hardy, T. ([89[) Tess ofthed'Urbervilles. 
Hare,). (1647) St Edward's Ghost: or, Anti-Normanisme. Being a Putheticall Complaint and 
Motion in the behalfe of our English Nation against her grand (yet neglected) grievance, 
Normanisme. London. 
Harris, J. (1751) Hermes: Or, a Political Inquiry, Concerning Language and Universal 
Grammar. London. 
Harris, Z. S. (1939) The Development of the Cantlanite Dialects: An Itrvestigation in 
Linguistic History. New Haven: American Oriental Society. 
Harris-Schenz, B. (1984) Black Images in Eighteenth Century German Literature. Stutt-
gart: Heinz. 
Harrison,J. (1903) Prolegomena. Cambridge University Press. 
- ([925) Reminiscences of a Student's Life. London: Hogarth. 
Hartleben, H. (1906) Champollion sein Leben und san Werle, 2 vols. Berlin: Weidmann. 
- ([ 909) Lettres de Champollion Ie Jeune recuellies et annotees, 2 vols. Paris: Bibliotheque 
Egyptologique. 
Havelock, A. E. ([982) The Literate Revolution in Greece and its Cultural Consequences. 
Princeton University Press. 
Haydon, B. R. ([ 926) Autobiography andMemoirs, new edn, ed. Aldous Huxley. London: 
P. Davies. 
Heeren, A. H. L. (1824) Ideen uber die Politik, den Vehrkehr und den Handel der 
vornehmsten VOlkerderalten Welt, 2 vots, Gottingen, trans. B. W. Talboys (1832-4) as 
Reflections on the Politics, Intercourse, and Trade of the Principal Nations of Antiquity, 2 
vols. Oxford. 
Hegel, G. W. F. ([892) Lectures on the History of Philosophy, E. S. Haldane and F. H. 
Simson, trans., 3 vols. London. 
_ ([9 67) Philosophy of Right, trans. with notes by T. M. Knox. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
- ([975) Lectures on the Philosophy of World History: Introduction: Reason in History, 
H. B. Nisbet, trans. Cambridge University Press. 
Heine, H. (1830-[) Reisebilder, 2 vols. Hamburg. 
Heick, W. ([962) 'Osiris', inPauQI Wissowa, suppl. 9: 469-5[3. 
- ([ 97 [) Die Beziehungen A"gyptens zu Vorderasien im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend v. Chr. 2nd 
improved edn, Wiesbaden. 
_ ([ 979) Die Beziehungen A"gyptens und Vorderasiens zur Agais his ins 7. Jahrhundert v. 
Chr. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 
Heick, W. and Otto, E. ([ 975) Lexikon der A"gyptologie, vol. [. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz. 
- ([977) - vol. II. 
- (1980) - vol. III.


--- PAGE 287 ---
542 BLACK ATHENA 
- (1982) -vol. IV. 
Heliodoros (1935) Aithiopika,J. Maillon, trans., 2 vols. Paris: 'Belles Lettres'. 
Helm, P. R. (1980) 'Greeles'in the Neo-Syrian Levant and 'Assyria' in Early Greek Writm. 
Philadelphia, PhD thesis. 
Hemmerdinger, B. (1964) 'Noms communs d'origine egyptienne', G/otta, 44: 238-47. 
Herder,]. G. (1784-91) Ideen zur Phi/osophie der Geschichte tier Mmschheit, 4 vols. Riga 
and Leipzig. 
Henn, G. (1975) The Phoenicians: The Purple Empire of the Ancient World, C. Hillier, 
trans. New York. 
Herodotos (1954) Herodotus: The Histories, A. de Selincourt, trans. London. 
Hersey, G. (1976) "'Atyanism" in Victorian England', Yale Review 66: 104-13. 
Hester, D. A. (1965) 'Pelasgian a new Indo-European language?' Lingua 13: 335-84. 
Heumann (1715) Acta Phi/osophorum. Halle. 
Highet, G. (1949) The Classictd Tradition: Greek and Roman Influences on Western 
Literature. New York and London: Oxford University Press. 
Hill, C. (1968) The World Tumed UpsideDown. London: Temple Smith. 
- (1976) Science andMagic in Seventeenth Century England, text of a lecture given at the 
]. D. Bernal Peace Ubrary, 19 Oct. 1976. 
Hodge, C. ([976) 'Lisramic (Mroasiatic): an overview', in M. L. Bender, ed., The 
Non-Semitic Languages of Ethiopia. East Lansing, Mich., pp. 43-65. 
Hoefer (1852-77) Nouvelle Biographie ginirtJle, 46 vols. Paris. 
Hohendahl, P. U. ([981) 'Reform als Utopie: Die preuBiche Bildungspolitik 1809-
1817', in W. VoBkamp, ed., Utopieforschung: Interdiszipliniire Studien zur neuzeitlichen 
Utopie, vol. 3, pp. 250-72. 
Holm, A. (1886-94) Griechische Geschichte von ihr~ Unpunge his zum Untergange tier 
Selbstiindigheit des griechischen Volkes, 4 vols, Berlin, trans. 1894 as History of Greece. 
London: Macmillan. 
Honolka, K. (1984) Papageno: Emanuel Schikaneder: Der Grofle Theartermann der Mozart­
Zeit. Salzburg: Residenz Verlag. 
Honour, H. (1961) Chinoiserie: The Vision of Cat hoy. London: John Murray. 
Hood, S. (1967) Home of the Heroes: TheAegean Before the Greeles. London: Thames & 
Hudson. 
Hooker, J. T. (1976) Mycerumm Greece. London: Roudedge & Kegan Paul. 
Hopfner, T. (192213) Fontes Historiae Religonis Aegyptia&ae, 2 vols. Bonn: Marci et 
Weberi. 
- (1940-1) Plutarch Uber Isis und Osiris, 2 vols. Prague: Orientalisches Institut. 
Hornung, E. (1971) Der Eine und die Vielen: Ag,ptische Gottesvorstellungen. Darmstadt, 
trans.J. Baines (1983) as Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many. 
London: Roudedge & Kegan Paul. 
Horton, R. (1967) 'African traditional thought and Western science',Afiica 37: 5°-7 1, 
155- 87. 
- (1973) 'Levy-Briihl, Durkheim and the scientific revolution', in R. Horton and R. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 543 
Finnegan, eds Modes of 17wught: Essays on Thinking in Western ana Non-Western 
Societies. London: Faber & Faber. 
Humboldt, W. von. (1793) 'Uber das Studium des Altertums und des Griechischen 
insbesondre', GesammelteSchriften, vol. I, pp. 255-81. 
- (1821) 'Ueber die Aufgabe des Geschichtsschreibers', GesammelteSchriften, vol. 4, 
PP·35-5 6. 
- (1826) 'Lettre a Monsieur Abel-Remusatsur la nature des formes grammaticales en 
generaie, et sur la genie de la langue chinoise en particulier' ,JoumalAsiatique 9: II 5; 
reprinted, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 5, pp. 254-308. 
- (1841-52) Wilhelm von Humboldts gesammelte Werke, ed. C. Brandes, 7 vols in 4. 
Berlin. 
- (1903-36) Wilhelm von Humboldts gesammelteSchriften, 17 vols. Berlin: Leitzmann 
and Gebhardt. 
Hunger, K. (1933) Die Bedeutung der Univmitiit Gottingen for die Geschichtsfonchung am 
Ausgangdes achtzehntenJahrhunderts. Berlin: E. Ebering. 
Huxley, G. (1961) Crete and the Luvians. Oxford: the author. 
Iggers, G. I. (1967) [trans. ofW. von Humboldt's] 'The task of the historian', History ami 
Theory 6: 57-71. 
- (1968) The German Conception of His tory: The National Tradition of Historical Thought 
from Herder to the Present. Middlet~, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press. 
Irving, W. (1829) The ConquestofGrtml.llia. New York. 
- (1852) TheAlhambra. New York. 
Irwin, J. T. (1980) AmeriClln Hieroglyphics: the Symbol of Egyptian Hieroglyphics in the 
AmeriCllnRenaissance. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Isokrates (1928-44), 3 vols, I & 2 trans. G. Norlin; 3, trans. L. Van Hook. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Loeb. 
Iversen, E. (1957) 'The Egyptian origin of the Archaic Greek canon',Mitteilungen des 
DeutschenArchiieologischen InstitutsAbt. Kairo 15: 134-47. 
- (1961) TheMyth of Egypt ana its Hierog~phs in European Tradition. Copenhagen: Gad. 
Jacob, M. C. (1976) The Newtonians ana the English Revolution 1689-1720. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press. 
- (1981) The RadiCIII Enlightenment: Pantheists, Freemasons and RepubliCllns. London: 
Allen & Unwin. 
Jacoby, F. (1904) DIIS Mannor Parium, ed. and ann. Weidmann. Berlin. 
- (1923-9) Fragmmte tier griechischen Historiker, ed. and ann. Weidmann. Berlin. 
James, G. G. M. (1954) Stolen LegllCJ, The Greeles were not theauthon of Greek Philosophy, 
but the people of North AfriCII, common~ CIIlled the Egyptians. New York: Philosophical 
Library. 
Jeanmaire, H. (1951) Dionysos. Paris: Payol. 
Jeffery, L. H. (1961) The Local Scripts of Archaic Greece: A Study in the Origin of the Greek 
Alphabet and its Development from the Eighth to the Fifth Centuries BC. Oxford: 
Clarendon.


--- PAGE 288 ---
544 BLACK ATHENA 
- (1976) Archaic Greece: '11Ie City-States c. 700-500 BC. LondonlNew York: St 
Martin's. 
- (1982) 'Greek alphabetic writing', Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 3, pt I, pp. 
819-33. 
Jenkyns, R. (1980) '11Ie Vutorians andAncient Greece. Oxford: BlackweU. 
Jensen, H. (1969) Sign, Symbol and Script: An Account of Efforts to Write, 3rd rev. edn, 
trans. G. Unwin. New York: Putnam. 
Jespersen, O. (1922) Language: its Nature, Development and Origin. London: Allen & 
Unwin. 
Jidejian, N. (1969) Tyre '11Irough theAges. Beirut: Dar el-machreq. 
Joffe, A. H. (1980) Sea Peoples in the Levant. CorneU, Department of Near Eastern 
Studies, undergraduate thesis. 
Johansen, H. F. and Whittle, E. W. (1980) Aeschylus: the Suppliants, 3 vols. Aarhus: 
Gyldenda. 
Johnson, S. (1768) '11Ie History ofRassekls Prince of Abissinia: AnAsiatic Tale. Philadelphia. 
Jomard, E. F. (I 829a) Description ginerale deMemphis et ses pyramides. Paris. 
- (1829b) Remarque sur les pyramides. Paris. 
Jones, T. (1969) '11IeSumerianProblem. London, New York, Toronto and Sydney: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Jones, W. (1784) 'On the gods of Greece, Italy and India', in '11Ie Works of Sir William 
Jones, with the Lift of the Author by Lord Teignmouth, 13 vols, London, 18°7, vol. I, 
PP·3 19-97· 
- (1786) 'Third anniversary discourse before the Asiatick Society (of Bengal)" in '11Ie 
Works of Sir William Jones, with the Lift of the Author by Lord Teignmouth, 13 vols, 
London, 1807, vol. I, pp. 25-39. 
- (1794) '11Ie La1l1s of Manu. Calcutta. 
Jordan, W. D. (1969) White Over Black:American Attitudes T01l1ardtheNegro: 1550-1812. 
Baltimore: Penguin. 
Josephus, ContraApionem. 
-Antiquitates Judaicae. 
Juster,). (1914) LesJuifs dans l'Empire romaine, 2 vols. Paris: Geuthner. 
Kantor, H. ).. (1947) 'The Aegean and the Orient in the second millennium BC', 
AmericanJournai of Archaeology 51: 1-103. 
Kaufman, S. A. (1982) 'Reflections on the Assyrian-Aramaic bilingual from Tell 
Fakhariyeh',MAARAV 3/2: 137-75. 
Keightly, D. N. (1978) Sources of Shang History: The Oracle Bone Inscriptions of 
Bronze Age China. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
-(1983) ed., The Origins of Chinese Civilization. Berkeley: University of Calif or­
nia Press. 
Kern, O. (1926) Die Religion der Griechen. Berlin: Weidmann. 
Khattab, A. (1982) Das ;igypthenbild in den deutschsprachigen Reisebeschreibungen der 
Zeit von 1285-1500. Frankfort a.M.: Europiiische Hochschulschriften Reihe 
1 Deutsche Sprache und Literatur. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 545 
Kienast, B. (198 I) 'Die Sprache von Ebla und das Altsemitische', in Cagni, 
pp.83-9 8. 
King, L. W. and Hall, H. R. (1907) Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of Recent 
Discuvmes. London: Grolier Society. 
Kinkel, I. G. (1877) Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta. Leipzig. 
Kircher, A. (1652) OedipusAegyptiacus. Rome. 
Kirk, G. S. (1970) Myth: its Meanings and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures. 
Berkeley and Cambridge: University of California Press. 
Kisder, M. O. (1960) 'Dionysian elements in Wieland', GermanicRevie1lJ 25.1: 83-92. 
Klausner,). (1976) 'The First Hasmonean rulers: Jonathan and Simeon', in A. Schalit, 
ed. World History of the Jewish People: VI, '11Ie HellenisticAge. London: W. H. Allen, 
pp.183-210. 
Knight, S. (1984) '11Ie Brotherhood: '11Ie Secret World of the Freemasons. London, New 
York: Granada. 
Knoop, D. and Jones, G. P. (1948) '11Ie Genesis of Freemasonry: An Account of the Rise and 
Development of Freemasonry in its Operative, Accepted and Early Speculative Phases. 
University of Manchester Publications. 
Knowles,). (183 I) '11Ie Lift and Writings of Henry Fuseli, Esq. MA., RA. London. 
Knox, R. (1862) '11Ie Races of Men: A Philosophical Inquiry into the Influence of Race uver the 
Destinies of Nations. London, 2nd edn. 
Kretschmer, P. (1924) 'Das nt-suffix', Glotta 13: 84- 106. 
Kroll,J. (1923) 'Kulturhistorisches aus astrologischen Texten', Klio 18: 213-25. 
Kropotkin, P. (1899) Memoirs of a Revolutionist. New York and Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 
Kuhn, T. (1970) '11Ie Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd edn. Chicago University 
Press. 
Kunzl, A. (1976) Der Gegensatz Rom-Kartago im Spiegel historisch-politischer Awserungen 
der Zeit um den Ersten Weltkrieg. Erlangen, thesis. 
Lafont, R., Labal, P., Duvernoy, J., Roquebert Martel, P. and Pech, R. (1982) Les 
Cathares en Occitanie. Paris: Fayard. 
La Marche, V. C. and Hirschbeck, K. K. (1984) 'Frost rings in trees as records of major 
volcanic eruptions', Nature 307, uJan. pp. 121-6. 
Lambert, R. (1984) Beloved and God: the Story of Hadn'an and Antinous. New York: 
Viking. 
Lane-Fox, R. (1980) The Search for Alexander. Boston and Toronto: Little Brown. 
Langham, I. (1981) The Building of Brit ish SocialAnthropology: W HR. Rivers and 
his Cambridge Disciples in the Development of Kinship Studies, 1898- 193 1. Dor­
drecht, Boston and London: J. D. Reidel. 
Laroche, E. (1977?) 'Toponymes et frontieres linguistiques en Asie Mineure', in La 
ToponymieAntique:Aaesdu ColloquedeStrasbourg, 12-14ju;n 1975. Leiden: Brill, pp. 
205-13.


--- PAGE 289 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Lattimore, R. (1939) 'Herodotus and the names of the Egyptian gods', ClassicalPhiloiogy 
34: 357- 65. 
Lauer,]. F. (1948) Le Probiemedes Pyramides d'Egypte. Paris: Payot. 
- (1960) Observations sur /es pyramides. Cairo: Institut Fran'Yais d'Archeologie Orien­
tale. 
Leach, E. (1966) 'The legitimacy of Solomon, some structural aspects of Old Testament 
history', European Journal of Sociology 7: 58- I 0 I. 
- (1986) Aryan Invasions over Four Millennia, Wenner-Gren Symposium no. 100, 
'Symbolism Through Time'. Fez: 12-2IJan. 
Leclant, J. (1972) Inventaire Bibliographique des Isiaca: Repertoire analytique des truvaux 
relatifs a la diffusion des cultes isiaques,A-D. Leiden: Brill. 
-(1974)E-K 
- (1982) 'Champollion et Ie College de France', Bulletin de la Societe Franfaise 
d'Egyptoiogie 95: 32-46. 
Lee, H. D. P. (1955) Plato: The Republic. London: Penguin. 
Le Fevre, T. (1664) Les Poetes grecs. Saumur. 
Lehmann, W. P. (1973) Historical Linguistics: an Introduaion. New York: Holt, Reinhart 
& Winston. 
Levi, P. (1971) Pausanias' Guide to Greece, 2 vols. London: Penguin. 
Levin, H. (193 I) The Broken Column; a Study in Romantic Hellenism. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
Levin, S. (1968) 'Indo-European penetration of the civilized Aegean world as seen in the 
"Horse" tablet of Knossos (Ca895)', Attie memorie del 1° congresso internazionale di 
micinilogia. Roma, 27 Settem!?re-3 Ottobre 1967, pp. 1179-8S. 
- (197Ia) The Indo-European and Semitic Languages. Albany: State University of New 
York Press. 
- (197Ib) 'The etymology ofvEx'taQ exotic scents in early Greece', StudiMicenei ed 
Egeo-Anatolici 13: 31-So. 
- (1973) 'The accentual system of Hebrew, in comparison with the ancient Indo­
European languages', Fifth World Congress of Jewish Studies, 4: 71-7. 
- (1977) 'Something stolen: a Semitic participle and an Indo-European neuter 
substantive', in P. Hopper, ed., Studies in Descriptive and Historical Linguistics: 
Festschriftfor WinfredP. Lehmann. Amsterdam: John Benjamin, pp. 317-39. 
- (1978) 'The perfumed goddess', Bucknell Review 24: 49-59. 
- (1979) 'Jocasta and Moses' mother Jochabed, Teiresias- Teipeoiao, suppl. 2: 
49- 61. 
- (1984) 'Indo-European descriptive adjectives with 'Oxytone' accent and Semitic 
stative verbs', General Linguistics 24.2: 83-110. 
Lewy, H. (189S) Die semitischen Fremdwiirter im Griechischen. Berlin. 
Lieblein,J. (1884) Egyptian Religion. Christiania and Leipzig. 
Linforth, I. M. (1911-16) 'Epaphos and the Egyptian Apis', University of California 
Publications in Classical Philology 2: 8 1-92. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 547 
_ (1926) 'Greek gods and foreign gods in Herodotus', University of California 
Publications in Classical Philology 9.1: 1-2S· 
_ (1940) 'Greek and Egyptian gods (Herodotus II, 50, 52), Classical Philology 35: 
300-I. 
Lipinsky, E. (1978) 'Ditanu', Studies in Bible and the Ancient Near East, Separatum: 
91- 110. 
Lloyd, A. B. (1976) Herodotos Book II, vol. II: Commentary 1-98. Leiden: Brill. 
Lloyd-Jones, H. (1981) Foreword, in Trevelyan, Goethe and the Greeks, pp. i-xlvii. 
- (1982a) Blood for the Ghosts: Classical Influences in the Nineteenth and Twentieth 
Centuries. London: Duckworth. 
- (1982b) Classical Survivals: The Classics in the Modern World. London: Duckworth. 
- (1982C) 'Introduction to Wilamowitz-Moellendorf', History of Classical Scholarship: 
i-xxxii. 
Lochner-Hiittenbach, F. (1960) Die Pelasger. Vienna. 
Locke, J. (1688) Essay Concerning Human Understanding. London. 
- (1689) The True End of Civil Government. London. 
Lockyer,]. N. (1893) TheEarly Temple and Pyramid Builders. Washington. 
- (1894) TheDawn of Astronomy. London. 
Lohnes, W. F. W. and Strothmann, F. W. (1980) German: a Struaural Approach, 3rd 
edn. New York: Norton. 
Lorimer, H. L. (1950) Homer and the Monuments. London: Macmillan. 
Lucretius, De Rerum Natura. 
Lumpkin, B. (1984) 'Mathematics and engineering in the Nile Valley' ,Journal of African 
Civilizations 6.2: 102-19. 
Macaulay, T. B. (1842) Lays of Ancient Rome. London. 
- (1866-71) The Works of Lord Macaulay Edited by His Sister, Lady Trevelyan, 8 vols. 
London. 
McCarter, K. (1975) TheAntiquity of the GreekAlphabet and the Early Phoenician Scripts. 
Missoula, Montana: Scholars Press for Harvard Semitic Museum. 
MacDougall, H. A. (1982) Racial Myth in English History. Montreal, Hanover Vt. and 
London: Harvest House, University Press of New England. 
Macqueen,]. G. (1975) The Hittites and Their Contemporan'es in Asia Minor. London: 
Thames & Hudson. 
McGready, A. G. (1969) 'Egyptian words in the Greek vocabulary', Glotta 44: 247-54·· 
McGuire, J. E. (1977) 'Neoplatonism and Active Principles: Newton and the Corpus 
Hermeticum', in Westman and McGuire, pp. 9S-142. 
McGuire,]. E. and Rattansi, P. M. (1966) 'Newton and the pipes of Pan', Notes and 
Records of the Royal Society 2 I: 108-43. 
Madelin, L. (1937) Histoire du consulat et de ['empire, 8 vols. Paris: Hachette, vol. 2, 
L 'ascension de Bonaparte. 
Malingrey, A. M. (1961) Philosophy: Etude d'un groupe de mots dans la litteraturegrecquedes 
Presocratiques au IVe s. ap. J. -G. Paris: Klincksieck.


--- PAGE 290 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Mallet, D. (1888) Le Culte de Neiih aSaiS. Paris. 
Manuel, F. E. (1956) The New World of Henri Saint Simon. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 
- (1959) The Eighteenth Century Confronts the Gods. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 
- (1963) Isaac Newton, Historian. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
- (1974) The Religion of Isaac Newton. Oxford: Clarendon. 
- (1983) The Changing of the Gods. Hanover Vt. and London. 
Marichal, R. (1982) 'ChampoUion et l'AcadeInie', Bulletin de Ia Societe Franfaise 
d'Egypto[ogie95: 12-31. 
Marin, L. (1981) Le Portrait du Roi. Paris: Minuit. 
Marino, L. (1975) I maestri della Germania, Gottingen 1770-1820. Turin: Einaudi. 
Marsh, (1885) 'Review of A History of Art in Phoenicia and its Dependencies, by G. Perrot 
and C. Chipiez',AmericanJournalofArchaeology I: 190-5. 
Marx, K. (1939) Grundrisse der Kritik dei politischen Okonomie, Verlagfor jremdsprachige 
Literatur. Moscow and Berlin. trans. Martin Nicolaus (1973) as KarlMarx, Grundris­
se. New York: Vintage Books. 
- (1983) Das Kapital: Kritik der politischen Okonomie, erster Band, Hamburg 1867 Text. 
Ser. 2, vol. 5, in Karl Marx - Friedrich Engels, Gesamtausgabe (MEGA) 1975-1983. 
Berlin: Dietz Verlag. 
Masica, C. P. (1978) Defining a LinguisticArea: South Asia. Chicago University Press. 
Maspero, G. (1893) Etudes de mythologie et d'archeologie egyptiennes. Paris. 
Masson, E. (1967) Recherches sur les plus anciens emprunts semitiljues en grec. Paris: 
Klincksieck. 
Matz, F. (1973) 'The zenith of Minoan civilization', The Cambridge Ancient History, 3rd 
edn, vol. 2, pt I, TheMiddle East and theAegean c.1800-1380 BC, pp. 557-81. 
Maverick, L. (1946) China a Modelfor Europe. San Antonio: Paul Anderson. 
Maximus ofTyre (1910) ed. H. Hobein. Leipzig: Teubner. 
Mayer, M. L. (1964) 'Note etimologiche III',Acme 17: 223-9. 
- (1967) 'Note etimologiche IV', Acme 20: 287-91. 
Mayes, S. (1959) The Great Belzoni. London: Putnam .. 
Mazar, B. (1971) World History oftheJewish People, vol. 3. London: W. H. Allen. 
Meiners, C. (1781-2) Geschichte des Ursprungs, Fortgangs und Verfalls der Wissenschaft in 
Griechenland und Rom. Lemgo. 
- (1811- 15) Untersuchungen uber die Verscheidenheiten der Menschenrassen, 3 vols. 
TUbingen. 
Mellink, M. J. (1967) Review of Interconneaions in the Bronze Age by W. S. SInith. 
A merican Journal of Archaeology 71: 92-4. 
Merkelbach, R. and West, M. L. (1967) FragmentaHesiodea. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Meyer, E. (1892) Forschungen zuralten Geschichte, 2 vols. Halle. 
- (1921) UrsprungundAnfangedes Christentums, II Die EntwickiungdesJudentums und 
Jesus von Nazaret. Stuttgart and Berlin: Cotta. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 549 
- (1928-36) GeschichtedesAltertums, 4 vols. Stuttgart and Berlin: Cotta. 
Meyer, G. (1892) 'Von wem stammt die Bezeichnung Indogermanen?', Indogermanische 
Forschungen 2: 125-30. 
Michael, H. N. and Weinstein, G. A. (1977) 'New radio carbon dates from Akrotiri', 
Thera. Temple University Aegean Symposium 2: 27-30. 
Michelet,J. (183 I) Histoire Romaine, 2 vols. Paris. 
-{1962) (1831) Introduction Ii l'histoire universelle. Paris: A. Colin. 
Millard, A. R. (1976) 'The Canaanite linear alphabet and its passage to the Greeks', 
Kadmos 15: 130-44. 
Millard, A. R. and Bordreuil, P. (1982) 'A statue from Syria with Assyrian and Aramaic 
inscriptions', BiblicalArchaeologist 45.3: 135-41. See also under Abou-Assaf. 
Mitford, W. (1784-1804) The History of Greece, 8 vols. London. 
MoInigliano, A. (1946) 'Friedrich Creuzer and Greek historiography', Journal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Institute 9: 152-63. 
-(1957) 'Perizonus, Niebuhr and the character of the early Roman tradition', Jour­
nal of Roman Studies 47: 104- 14, repro in his Essays on Ancient and Modern Histo­
riography (1977). Oxford, pp. 231-51. 
-(195 8) 'The Place of Hero dot os in the History of Historiography', History 4: 1 - 13. 
-(19 66a) 'Giulio Beloch', in Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani, vol. 8, pp. 32 -45, 
repro in Terzo Contributo alla storia degli studi classici e del mondo antico, 1966. Rome, 
PP·239- 6S· 
-(19 66b) 'George Grote and the study of Greek history', Studies in Historiography 
(1966) London, pp. 56-74. 
-(19 66c) 'Vico's scienza nuova: Roman "Bestioni" and Roman "Eroi''', History and 
Theory 5:3-23, repro in Essays on Ancient and Modern Historiography (1977), 
PP·2S3-7 6. 
- 1966d) 'Ancient history and the antiquarian', Studies in Historiography, pp. 6-9. 
-(1968) Prime linee di storia della tradizione Maccabaica. Amsterdam: Hakkert. 
-(1975) Alien Wisdom: The Limits of Hellenization. Cambridge University Press. 
-(1980) 'Aile origini dell'interesse su Roma arcaica, Niebuhr e l'India, Rivista 
Storica Italiana 92:561-71. 
-(19 82) 'New paths of Classicism in the nineteenth century', History and Theory 
Beiheft 21. 
Monro, D. B. (191 I) 'Wolf, Friedrich August', Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th edn, 
vol. 28, pp. 770-1. 
Montesquieu, C. de (1721) Lettres Persanes. Paris. 
- (1748) L 'esprit des lois. Paris. 
Moorehead, A. (1962) The Blue Nile. New York: Harper & Row. 
More, H. (1931) Philosophical Poems of Henry More. G. Bullough, ed. Manchester 
University Press. 
Morenz, S. (1969) Die Begegnung Europas mitA'gypten. ZUrich and Stuttgart: Artemis. 
- (1973) Egyptian Religion, A. E. Keep, trans. London: Methuen. 
Moscati, S. (1968) Fenici e cartaginesi in Sardegna. Milan: A. Mondadori.


--- PAGE 291 ---
550 BLACK ATHENA 
Moscati, S., Spitaier, A., Ullendorf, E., and von Soden, W. (1969)An Introduaion to the 
Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages: Phonology andMorphology. Wiesbaden: 
Harrasowitz. 
Mosse, G. (1964) The Crisis of German Ideology: Intelleaual Origins of the ThirdReich. New 
York: Grosse & Dunlap. 
Mosshammer, A. A. (1979) The Chronicle of Eusebius and the Greek Chronographic 
Tradition. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press. 
Movers, F. C. (1841-5°) Die PhOnizier, 2 vols, 4 books. Bonn and Berlin. 
Muhly, J. D. (1968) Review of Hellenosemitica, by M. C. Astour. Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 88:585-8. 
- (1970a) Review of Interconnections in theAncient Near East, by W. S. Smith. Journal of 
the American Oriental Society 90: 305-9. 
- (1970b) 'Homer and the Phoenicians: The relations between Greece and the Near 
East in the Late Bronze Age and E~rly Iron Ages', Berytus 19: 19-64. 
- (1973) 'The Philistines and their pottery', paper presented to the Third International 
Colloquium on Aegean Prehistory. Sheffield. 
- (1979) 'On the Shaft Graves at Mycenae', Studies in Honor of Tom B. Jones, M. A. 
Powell and R. M. Sack, eds. Neukirchen-vlugn: Butzon & Bercker kevelaer, pp. 
311- 2 3. 
- (1984) 'The role of the Sea Peoples in Cyprus during the L.c. III period,' in 
Cyprus at the Close of the Late Bronze Age, V. Karageorgis, ed. Nicosia: G. Leventis 
Foundation,pp·39-5 6. 
- (1985) 'Phoenicia and the Phoenicians', BiblitalArchaeology Today: Proceedings of the 
International Congress on BiblicalArchaeology, Jerusalem, April 1984, A. Biran et al., eds 
Jerusalem: Is~ael Exploration Society, Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities 
American Schools of Oriental Research, pp. 177-91. 
Miiller, C. (1841-7°) Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum. Paris. 
Muller, K. O. (1820-4) Geschichten hellenischer Stiimme und Stiidte, 3 vols. Breslau, Vol. I, 
Orchomenos und die Minyer, vols II and III, Die Dorier, vols 2 and 3 trans. H. Tufnell 
and G. C. Lewis as The History andAntiquities of the Doric Race (1830) 2 vols. London. 
- (1825) Prolegomena zu einer wissenschafilichen Mythologie. Gottingen. trans. J. Leitch 
as Introduaion to a Scientific System of Mythology (18H) London. 
- (1834) 'Orion', Rheinisches Museum 2: 1-30. 
- (1858) A History of the Literature of Ancient Greece, Continued by J. W Donaldson, 
3 vols. London. 
Murray, G. (195 I) Five Stages of Greek Religion. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Murray, M. (1931) Egyptian Temples. Marston, London: Sampson Low. 
- (1949) The Splendour that was Egypt. London: Sidgwick & Jackson. 
Murray, O. (1980) Early Greece. Brighton: Harvester/Adantic Highlands, NJ: 
Humanities. 
Musgrave, S. (1782) Two Dissertations: I) On the Grecian Mythology: 2)An Examination of 
Sir Isaac Newton's Objeaions to the Chronology of the Olympiads. London. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 55 1 
Myres,}. L. (1924) 'Primitive man in geological time', CambridgeAncieniHistory, 1st edn, 
vol. I, pp. 1-97· 
Naveh, J. (1973) 'Some Semitic epigraphical considerations on the antiquity of the 
Greek alphabet' ,American Journal of Archaeology: 1-8. 
_ (1982) Early History of the Alphabet: An Introduction to West Semitic Epigraphy and 
Paleography. Jerusalem: MagnesiLeiden: Brill. 
Needham, J. and Lu, G. D. (1985) Transpacific Echoes and Resonances: Listening Once 
Again. Singapore: World Scientific. 
Needham,]. T. (1761) De Inscriptione quadam.!Egyptiaca Taurini imJenta et Characteribus 
.!Egyptiis olim et Sinis communibus exarata idolo cuidam antiquo in regia universitate seroato 
ad utrasque Academias Londonensem et Parisiensem Rerum antiquarum, imJesligationi et 
studio pr(£/Jositas data Epistola. Rome. 
Neiman, D. (1965) 'Phoenician place names', Journal of Near Eastern Studies 24: 
113- 15. 
Neschke-Hetschke, A. B. (1984) 'Discussion', in Bollack and Wismann, pp. 483-4. 
Nettl, P. (1957) Mozart andMasonry. New York: Philosophical Library. 
Neugebauer, O. (1945) Mathematical Cuneiform Texts. New Haven: American Oriental 
Society and the American Schools of Oriental Research. 
- (1950) 'The alleged Babylonian discovery of the precession of the equinoxes', 
JournaloftheAmerican Oriental Society 70: 1-8. 
- (1957) The Exact Sciences inAntiquity. Providence. 
Neugebauer, O. and Parker, R. A. (1960-9) Egyptian Astronomical Texts, 4 vols. 
Providence and London: Brown University Press. See also Swerdlow. 
Neusner,J, (1965-70)A History oftheJews in Babylonia,s vols. Leiden: Brill. 
Newton, I.A Dissertation upon the Sacred Cubit oftheJews and the Cubits of several Nations: 
in which from the dimensions of the Greatest Pyramid as taken by Mr. John Greaves, the 
ancient Cubit of Memphis is determined. 
- Principia Mathematica. 
- The Origins of Gentile Theology. 
Niebuhr, B. (1828-3 I, enl. edn) Romische Geschichte, 2 vols. Berlin. 
- (1847) Vortriige Uber alte Geschichte an tier Universitiit zu Bonn gehalten, 3 vols. Berlin. 
trans. L. Schmitz as Leaures on Ancient History from the Earliest Times to the Taking of 
Alexandria by Octavianus (1852) 3 vols. Philadelphia. 
- (1847-51) The History of Rome,}. C. Hare and C. Thirwall, trans. 4th edn, 3 vols. 
London. 
Nilsson, M. P. (1932) The Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
- (1950) The Minoan Mycenaean Religion. 2nd rev. edn. Lund. C. W. K. Gleerup. 
Nissen, W. (1962) Gotlinger Gedenktafeln: Ein biographischer Wegweiser. G6ttingen: 
Vandenhoek & Ruprecht. 
- (1975) 'Erganzungen', Gottinger Gedenktaftln: Ein biographischer Wegweiser. 
Gottingen.


--- PAGE 292 ---
552 BLACK ATHENA 
Noguera, A. (1976) How African was Egypt: A Comparative Study of Egyptian and Black 
African Cultures. New York: Vantage Press. 
Nonnos, (1940) Dionysiaca, 3 vols, trans. W. H. D. Rouse, notes by H. j. Rose and 
L. R. Lind (Loeb). Cambridge, Mass. 
Oren, D. A. (1985) Joining the Club: A History of Jews at Yale. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Otto, E. (197S) 'Agypten im SelbstbewuBtsein des Agypters', in Heick and Otto, cols 
76- 8. 
Paaw, C. de (1773) Recherches phiJosophiques sur les Egyptiens et les Chinois. Berlin. 
Pagels, E. (1979) The Gnostic Gospels. New York: Random House. 
Pallottino, M. (1978) The Etruscans, rev. and enl. edn, trans. ]. Cremona, ed. 
D. Ridgeway. London: Penguin. 
- (1984) Sloria della Prima Italia. Milan: Rusconi. 
Pang, K. D. and Chou, H. H. 'Three very large volcanic eruptions in Antiquity and their 
effects on the climate of the Ancient World', paper abstract in Eos 66.46. 12 Nov. 
1985: 816. 
Pappademos,j. (1984) 'The Newtonian synthesis in physical science and its roots in the 
Nile Valley', Journal of African Civilizations 6.2: 84- 101. 
Pappe, H. O. (1979) 'The English Utilitarians and Athenian democracy', in Bolgar, 
Classical Influences . .. , pp. 297-3 02. 
Parke, H. W. (1967) The Oracles of Zeus: DiidOna, Olympia and Ammon. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Parker, R. A. and Neugebauer, O. (1960-4) EgyptianAstronomical Texts, 4 vols. London: 
Lund Humphries for Brown University Press. 
Parmentier, L. (1913) Recherches sur Ie traite d'Isis et d'Osiris de Plutarque. Brussels: 
Academle Royale de Belgique. 
Parry, M. (1971) The Making of Homeric Verse: The Colleaed Papers of Milman Parry. 
Oxford: Clarendon. 
Patrides, C. A. (1969) The Cambridge Platonists. Cambridge University Press. 
Paulys Real-Encyclopadie tier classischen Altertumswissenschaft, ed. G. Wissama et al. 
(1894- ). Stuttgart, Munchen. 
Pausanias, Guide to Greece, see Frazer and Levi. 
Pedersen, H. (19S9) The DiscfTVery of Language: Linguistic Science in the Nineteenth 
Century,j. W. Spargo, trans. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Pendlebury,j. D. S. (1930a) Aegyptiaca. Cambridge University Press. 
- (1930b) 'Egypt and the Aegean in the Late Bronze Age', Journal of Egyptian 
Archaeology 16: 75-92. 
Petit-Radel, F. (1815) 'Sur l'origine grecque du fondateur d'Argos', Mimoires de 
I'lnstitut Royal de France, Classed'Histoire et de LitteratureAncienne 2: 1-43. 
Petrie, W. M. F. (1883) The Pyramids and Temples ofGizeh. London. 
- ( 1893) The Great Pyramid. London. 
- ( 1894- 190 S}A History of Egypt, 3 vols. London. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 553 
- (1908) 'Historical references in Hermetic writings', in Transaaions of the Third 
International Congress of the History of Religions, Oxford I: 196-225. 
- (1909) Personal Religion in Egypt before Christianity. New York: Harpers Library of 
Living Thought. 
- (193 I) 70 YeaFl of Archaeology. London: S~pson Low. 
Pettinato, G. (1978) 'L'Atiante Geografico nel Vicino Oriente antico Attestate ad Ebla 
ed ad Abu Salabikh', Orienta/ia 46: 50-73. 
- (1979) Ebla: un impero inciso nel1'1rgilla. Milan: Mondadori, trans. (1981) as The 
Archives of Ebla: An Empire Inscribed in Clay, with an Afterword by Mitchell Dahood S. J. 
Garden City: Doubleday. 
Pfeiffer, R. (1976) History of Classical ScholaFlh ip: From 13°O-185°. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Pharr, C. (1959) Homenc Greek: A Handbookfor Beginners, 2nd edn. Norman, Okla.: 
University of Oklahoma Press. 
Picard, C. (1937) 'Homere et les religions de l'Egypte', Revue archiologique 6me Serie, 10: 
110- 13. 
- (1948) Les Religions Prehelleniques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
Pierce, R. H. (1971) 'Egyptian loan words in Ancient Greek?', Symbolae Osloenses 46: 
96- 107. 
Pinot, V. (1932) La Chine et l'esprit ph iJosophique en Europe 1640-1740. Paris: Geuthner. 
Plato, (1914-192?) 12 vols, H. N. Fowler, trans. Kratylos. 
-Kritias. 
-Menexenos. 
-Republic. 
- Timaios, see Lee, 1955. 
Platon, N. and Stassinopouloutouloupa, E. (1964) 'Oriental seals from the Palace of 
Cadmus: unique discoveries in Boeotian Thebes', Illustrated London News, 28 
November: 859-61. 
Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, trans. F. C. Babbit (1934-5) in Plutarch s Moralia, 16 vols 
(Loeb). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press/London: Heinemann, vol. 5, 
Pp·7- 1 91. 
- De HerodotiMalignitate, trans. L. Pearson and F. H. Sandbach in Plutarch's Moralia, 
vol. I I, pp. 9-133. 
Pocock, j. G. A. (1985) 'Gibbon as an Anglican manque: clerical culture and the 
Decline and Fall', Miriam Leranbaum Memorial Lecture, SUNY, Binghamton, 17 
April. 
Poliakov, L. (1974) TheA ryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalist Ideas in Europe, E. 
Howard, trans. London: Chatto & Windus and Heinemann for Sussex University 
Press. 
Polome, E. C. (1981) 'Can grapheInic change cause phonemic change?', in Arbeitman 
and Bornhard, pp. 88 I -8. 
Pope, M. (1973) Job: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary, 3rd edn. 
Garden City, NY: Anchor.


--- PAGE 293 ---
554 BLACK ATHENA 
-(1980) 'The cult of the dead at Ugarit', in G. Young, ed. UgaritinRetrospect:so Yea7J 
ofUgarit and Ugaritic. Winona Lake: Eisenbraun, pp. 170-5. 
Popham, M. (1965) 'Some Late Minoan pottery from Crete', Annual of the British School 
atAthens 60: 316-42. 
Popkin, R. H. (1974) 'The philosophical basis of modern racism', in C. Walton and]. P. 
Anton, eds Philosophy and the CivilizingArts, pp. 126- 65. 
- (1985) Introduction to Force, pp. xi-xix. 
Popper, K. R. (1950) The Open Society and its Enemies, 2 vols. Princeton University Press. 
Porada, E. (1965) 'Cylinder seals from Thebes: a preliminary report',AmericanJournal 
of Archaeology 69: 173. 
- (1966) 'Further notes on the cylinders from Thebes' ,American Journal of Archaeology 
70: 194. 
- (1981) 'The cylinder seals found at Thebes in Boiotia, with contributions on the 
inscriptions from Hans G. Giiterbock and]ohn A. Brinkman', Archiv fur Orientfor­
schung28: 1-7 8. 
Porphery, Vita Plotini. 
Potter,]. (1697)Archteologia Grteca, or theAntiquities of Greece, 4 vols. London. 
Praetorius, G. F. (1902) 'Zur Geschichte des griechischen Alphabets', Zeitschriji der 
DeutschenMorgenliindischen Gesellschaft 56: 676-80. 
Pulleybank, E. G. (1955) The Background of the Rebellion of An Lu-shan. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Pyle, K. B. (1969) The New Generation in Meiji Japan.' Problems of Cultural Identity 
I88S-I89S· Stanford University Press. 
Rahman, A. (1982) Science and Technology in Medieval India. New Delhi: Vikas. 
- (1983) Intellectual Colonization: Science and Technology in West-East Relations. New 
Delhi: Vikas. 
"Rashed, R. (198o) 'Science as a Western phenomenon', Fundamenta Scientiae I: 7-21. 
Rattansi, P. M. (1963) 'Paracelsus and the Puritan revolution', Ambit-II: 24-3 2 . 
- (1973) 'Some evaluations of reason in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century natural 
philosophy', in Teich and Young, pp. 148-66. 
Rawlinson, G. (1869)AManual of Ancient History. Oxford. 
- ( 1889) History of Phoenicia. London. 
Rawson, E. (1969) TheSpartan Tradition in European Thought. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Ray,]. D. (1976) TheArchiveofHor. London: Egypt Exploration Society. 
Reghellini de Schio (1833) La MQ,fonnerie considiree comme Ie resultat des religions 
egyptienne, juive et chretienne. Paris. 
Reinach, S. (I 892a) L 'Origine desAryens: Histoire d'une Controvme. Paris. 
- ( 1892b) 'Resume ofTsountas', in RevueArcheologique I: p. 93. 
- ( 1893) 'Le mirage oriental',Anthropologie 4: 539-7 8,699-732. 
Renan, E. (1,855) Histoire generale et systeme composee des langues shnitiques. Paris. 
- ( 1858) Etudes d'histoire religieuse, 3rd edn. Paris. 
- (1868) 'Memoire sur l'origine et caractere veritable de l'histoire phenicienne qui 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 555 
porte Ie nom de Sanchunation', Memoires de l'Acadimie des inscriptions et Belles-Lettres 
23: 24 1 - 334. 
Rendsburg, G. (1982) 'A new look at Pentateuchal HW', Biblica 63=351 -69.. . 
Renfrew, C. (1972) The EmeTgenct of Civilization: The CyclaJes and theAegean tn the Thard 
Millennium Be London: Methuen. 
- (1973) 'Problems in the general correlation of archaeological and linguistic strata in 
prehistoric Greece: the model of autochthonous origin', in Crossland and Birchall, 
PP· 265-79· 
Renouf, P.1. P. (1880) Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion. London. 
Ridgeway, W. (1901) The EarlyAge of Greece, 2 vols. Cambridge University Pres~. . 
Robertson Smith, W. (1894) The Religion of the Semites: The Fundamental InstItutIons. 
Cambridge. 
Rollig, V. W. and Mansfeld, G. (1970) 'Zwei Ostraka vom Tell Kiimid el Loz und ein 
neuer Aspekt fUr die Entstehung des kanaanaischen Alphabets', Die Welt des Orients 
5.2: 265-'7 0. 
Rosen, E. (1970) 'Was Copernicus a Hermeticist?', Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of 
'Science 5: 164-9. 
- (1983) 'Was Copernicus a Neoplatonist?' ,Journal of the History of Ideas 44.3: 667-9. 
Rosen, G. (1929)Juden undPhOnizier. Tiibingen: Mohr. 
Rosenthal, F. (1970) Review of Recherches sur les plus anciens emprunts semitiques en grec, by 
E. Masson, in Journal of the American Oriental Society 90: 338-9. 
Rothblatt, S. The Revolution of the Dons: Cambridge and Society in Victorian England. 
Cambridge University Press. , 
Rouge, E. de (1869) 'Conference sur la religion des anciens Egyptiens', Annales de 
philosophie chritienne, 5th ser. 328-3°. 
Russell, B. (1961) History of Western Philosophy: and its Connections with Political and 
Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, new edn. London: Allen 
& Unwin. 
Russell, F. W. E. (1895) The Lettm of Matthew A rnold, 2 vols. New York. 
Rytkonen, S. (1968) B. G. Niebuhr als Poiitiker und Historiker. Helsinki: Annales 
Academiae Scientiarum Fennicae, ser. B. vol. 156. 
Sabry, M. (1930) L 'Empire Egyptien sous Mohamed-Ali et La Question d'Orient (1811-
I849). Paris: Geuthner. 
Saggs, H. W. F. (1962) The Greatness that was Babylon. New York: Hawthorn Books. 
Said, E. (1978) Orienta/ism. New York and London: Vintage. 
St Clair, W. (1972) That Greece Might Still be Free: The Philhellenes in the Greek War of 
Independence. London: Oxford University Press. 
- (1983) Lord Elgin and the Marbles. 2nd rev. edn. Oxford University Press. 
Saldit- Trappmann, R. (1970) Tempel tier iigyptischen Gotter in Griechenland und an der 
WestkUste Kleinasiens. Leiden: Brill. 
Sandars, N. K. (1978) The Sea People~: Warrio7J of the Ancient Mediterranean 1250-1150 
Be. London: Thames & Hudson.


--- PAGE 294 ---
556 BLACK ATHENA 
Sandmel, S. (1979) Philo of Alexandria: An Introduction. New York/Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Sandys, J. E. (1908) A History of Classical Scholarship, 3 vols. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Santangelo, G. S. (1984) Madame Dader, unafilologa nella 'Cris;' (1672-1720). Rome: 
Bulzoni. 
Santillana, G. de (1963) 'On forgotten sources in the history of science', in A. C. 
Crombie, ed. Scientific Change: Historical Studies in the Intelleaual, Social and Technical 
Conditions for Scientific Discovery and Technical ITlVention, from Antiquity to the Present. 
London, pp. 813-28. 
Santillana, G. de and von Dechend, H. (1969) Hamlet's Mill: an Essay in Myth and the 
Frame of Time. Boston: Gambit. 
Sasson,]. M. (1966) 'Canaanite maritime involvement in the second millennium BC', 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 86: 126-3 8. 
Sauneron, S. et al. (1970- ) Colleaion des voyageurs occidentaux en Egypte. Cairo: Institut 
Franc;ais d'archeologie orientale. 
Schiller, F. von (1967) (jber die iisthetische Erziehung des Menschen: in einer Reihe von 
Briefen (On the Aesthetic Education of Man: In a Series of Letters), E. M. Wilkinson and 
L. A. Willoughby, trans. Oxford. 
Schlegel, F. von (1808) (jberdieSpracheund WeisheittierIndier. Heidelberg. trans. as 'On 
the language and philosophy of the Indians' by E.]. Millington (1949) in Aesthetic and 
Miscellaneous Works of Friedrich von Schlegel. London. 
- (1939) COUTS d'histoire universelle(18oS-1806).].]. Anstett, ed. Paris: Patissier. 
Schleicher, A. (1865) (jber die Bedeutung tier Sprache for die Naturgeschichte des Menschen. 
Weimar: H. Bohlen. 
Schlesier, G. (1838-40) Schriften von Friedrich von Gentz, 5 vols. Mannheim. 
Scholem, G. G. (1960) Jewish Gnosticism, Merkehbah Mysticism and the Talmudic 
Tradition. New York: Jewish Theological Seminary of America. 
- (1965) On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism, R. Mannheim, trans. New York: 
Schocken. 
- (1970 ) Kabbalah. New York: Quadrangle. 
- (1974) Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. New York: Schocken. 
Schwab, R. (1950) La Renaissance Orientale. Paris: Bibliotheque Historique. 
- (1984) G. Patterson-Black and V. Reinking, trans. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Schwaller de Lubicz, R. A. (1958) Le Temple de l'homme: Apet du sud a Louqsor. Paris: 
Caracteres. 
- (1961) Le Roi de la theocratie pharaonique. Paris: 'Homo Sapiens'. 
- (1968) Le Miracle egyptien. Paris: Flammarion. 
Scollon, R. and S. B. K. (1980) Linguistic COTlVergence: An Ethnography of Speaking: At Port 
Chipewyan, Alberta. New York, San Francisco and London: New York Academic 
Press. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 557 
Scott, W. (1924-36) Hmnetica, 4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Seidel, S. (1962) Der B,.;,jiPechsel zJPischen Friedrich Schiller und Wilhelm von Humboldt, 2 
vols. Berlin: Aufban Verlag. 
Selem, P. (1980) Les Religions orientales dans la Pannonie Romaine: Partie en Yougoslavie. 
Leiden: Brill. 
Selunan, C. (1933) Greek Coins: A History of Metallic Currency and Coinage Down to the 
Fall of the Hellenistic Kingdoms. London: Methuen. 
Seznec, J. (1953) The Survival of the Pagan Gods: The Mythological Tradition and its 
Place in Renaissance Humanism and Art, B. E. Sessions, trans. New York: 
Pantheon. 
Shaffer, E. S. (1975) Kublai Khan and the Pall of Jerusalem: The Mythological School 
of Biblical Criticism and Secular Literature 1770-1880. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Shelley, P. B. (1821) Hellas. London. 
Sheppard, J. T. (191 I) 'The first scene of the Suppliants of Aeschylus', Classical 
Quarterly 5: 220-9· 
Siegert, H. (1941-2) 'ZurGeschichte der Begriffe "Arische" und "arich"', Wiirterund 
Sac hen 4: 73-99· 
Simonsuuri, K. (1979) Homer's Original Genius: Eighteenth Century Notions of the Early 
Greek Epic (1688-1798). Cambridge University Press. 
Smelik, K. A. D. and Hemelrijk, E. A. (1984) "'Who knows not what monsters 
demented Egypt worships?" Opinions on Egyptian animal worship in Antiquity as 
part of the ancient conception of Egypt', in H. Temporini and W. Haase, edsAufitieg 
und Niedergang tier romischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur Roms im Spiegel tier neueren 
FOTSchung. 17.4, Religion: (Heidentum: romische Gotterkulte, orientalische Kulte in tier 
romischen Welt [Forts.]), ed. W. Haase, pp. 1852-2000. 
SInith, W. (1848) A Classical Diaionary of Greek and Roman Biography, Mythology and 
Geography. London. 
- (1854) A History of Greece: From the Earliest Times to the Roman Conquest. New 
York. 
Smyth, C. P. (1864) Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid. London. 
- (1867) Life and Work at the Great Pyramid. Edinburgh. 
- (1874) The Great Pyramid (5 the Royal Society. London. 
Snodgrass, A. (197 I) The DarkAge of Greece: AnArchaeological Survey of the Eleventh to the 
Eighth centuries BC. Edinburgh University Press. 
Snowden, F. M. S. (1970) Blacks inAntiquity: Ethiopians in the Greco-Roman Experience. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Sourvinou-Inwood, C. (1973) 'The problem of the Dorians in tradition and archaeol­
ogy', paper presented to the Third International Colloquium on Aegean Prehistory, 
Sheffield. 
Speer, A. (1970) Inside the ThirdReich, R. and C. Winston, trans. London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson.


--- PAGE 295 ---
558 BLACK ATHENA 
Spiegel, S. (1967) The Last Trial: On the Legmds and Lore o/the Command toAbraha 
Offer Isaac as a Sacrifice: The Akedah, J. Goldin, trans. New York: Pantheon. m to 
SP:roP?u1os, T. ~1972) 'AlYU3t'tLaxo~ 'E3toLxLaJA.6~ tv BOlW'ttat.', 'A()XatoAoyt"a 
~VcUE"Ta E; ~lh7vO)v 5: 16- 2 7. 
-, (1~73) 'Ela~ywyT) d~ 'ti)v MEA.EtlJV 'toO KW3taLxo{) XooQou', A()XatOAoyt"a 
~VcUE"Ta E; ~8'1v6>v6: 201- 14. 
Starkie, E. (1971) Flaubert the Master: A Critical and Biographical Study (1856- 1880). 
New York: Atheneum. 
Stecchini, (1957) 'The Delphian column of the dancers', AmericanJournal o/Archaeology 
61: 187, note. 
- (1961) 'A history of measures', American Behavioral Scientist 4.7: 18-21. 
- (1978) 'Notes on the relation of ancient measures to the Great Pyramid' . 
Tompkins, TheSecretso/theGreatPyramid,pp. 287-3 82. ' m 
Steel-~aret (1~93) 'La Franc-Ma~onnerie: ses origines, ses mysteres et son but', in 
Archroes Secretes de la Franc-MOfonnerie. Lyon. 
Steinberg, R. (1981) Modern Shadows on Ancient Greece: Aegean-Levantine Conneaions in 
the Late BronzeAge. Cornell University, MA thesis. 
Stella, L. A. (195 1-2) 'Chi ~urono i Populi del Mare', Rivista di antropologia 39: 3-17. 
Stern, B. H. (~940) The RISe 0/ Romantic Hellenism in English Literature, 1732 - 1786. 
Menasha, WIsconsin: G. Banta. 
St~rn, F. R. (1961) The Politics o/Cultural Despair; a Study in the rise of the Germanic 
Ideology. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Stern, M. (1974) Greek and Latin Authors on Jews and Judaism, vol. 1, From Herodotus to 
Plutarch. Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Humanities and Sciences. 
Stewart,]. G. (I 959) Jane Ellen Harrison:A Portrait/rom Letters. London: Merlin 
Stieglitz, R. R. (1981) 'The letters ofKadmos: mythology, archaeology and eteoc'relan', 
avvt'lmo a3to 'tov a' (2) 'tOf.lO 'tWV 3tE3tQaYf.lEVWV t'OV b' bLE6vova XQ'Y)'tOAOYLXOV 
(TUVE8QLBu ('HQUXAELO, A:9, Auyoumou-3l:E3t'tEf.l{3QLOU 1976). Athens, vol. 1, 
pp.606-16. 
Stoban,). C. (191 I) The Glory that was Greece. Philadelphia: Lippincott. 
Strabo (1929) The Geography, H. L.]ones, trans. 8 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb. 
Strange,). (1973) 'Biblical material on the origin of the Philistines', paper presented to 
the Third International Colloquium on Aegean Prehistory, Sheffield. 
Strauss, B. S. (forthcoming) Politics and Society in Athens After the Peloponnesian War, 
403-3 86 BG. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Stricker, B. H. (1949) 'The Corpus Hermeticum',Mnemo~ne, Series 4, vol. 2: 79- 80. 
Stuart-Jones, H. (1968) Preface, Greek-English Lexicon: Liddell and Scott. Oxford, 
pp. i-xii. 
Stub~ings, F. H. (1973) 'The rise of Mycenaean civilization', The Cambridge Ancient 
HistOry, 3rd edn, vol. 2, pt I, The Middle East and the Aegean 1800- 1380 BC, 
PP· 627-58. 
- (1975) 'The expansion of Mycenaean civilization', The Cambridge Ancient History, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 559 
3rd edn, vol. 2, pt I I, The Middle East and the Aegean Region c.i380-1000 BC, 
PP· 165-87· 
Sturtevant, E. H. (1942) Indo-Hittite Laryngeals. Baltimore: Linguistic Society of 
America. 
Sweet, P. R. (1978-80) Wilhelm von Humboldt: A Biography, 2 vols. Columbus: Ohio 
State University Press. 
Swerdlow, N. M. and Neugebauer, O. (I 984) MathematicalAstronomy in Copernicus's De 
Revolutionibus, 2 pts. New York/Berlin: Springer. 
Sydow, A. von (1906-16) Wilhelm und Caroline in ihren Brieje, 7 vols. Berlin: Mittler und 
Sohn. 
Symeonoglou, S. (1985) The Topography of Thebes: From the Bronze Age to Modern Times. 
Princeton University Press. 
Szemerenyi, O. (1964) 'Structuralism and substratum: Indo-Europeans and Aryans in 
the Ancient Near East', Lingua 13: 1-29. 
-(1966) 'Iranica II', Die Sprache 12: 190-226. 
- (1974) 'The origins of the Greek lexicon: Ex Oriente Lux', Journal 0/ Hellenic Stud-
ies 94: 144-57· 
Sznycer, M. (1979) 'L'inscription phenicienne de Tekke pres de Cnossos', Kadmos 18: 
89-93· 
Tatian, see Dods and Smith. 
Taylor, A. E. (1929) Plato: TheMan and His Work, 3rd edn. London: Methuen. 
Taylor, T. (1821) Iamblichus on the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldaeans and Assyrians. 
Walworth. 
Taylour, W. (1964) The Mycaeneans. London: Thames & Hudson. 
Tcherikover, V. (1959) Hellenistic Civilization and the Jews, S. Applebaum, trans. 
Philadelphia. 
- (1976) Hellenistic Palestine in the Hellenistic Age: Political History o/Jewish Palestine 
from 332 BCE to 67 BCE, ed. A. Schalit, vol. 6 in The WorldHistoryo/theJewish People. 
London: W. H. Allen. 
Teich, M. and Young, R. (1973) Changing Perspectives in the History of Science: Essays in 
Honour of Joseph Needham. London: Heinemann. 
Terrasson,J. (1715) Dissertation critique sur I 'Iliad d'Homere, 014 a I 'occasion de ce poeme, on 
cherche les regles d'une poitique fondie sur fa raison et sur les exemples des anciens et des 
modernes, 2 vols. Paris. 
- (173 I) Sethos, histoire ou vie tide des monuments de l'ancienne Egypte. Paris. 
Teters, B. (1962) 'The Genro In and the National Essence Movement', Pacific Historical 
Review 31: 359-71. 
Thapar, R. (1975) The Past and Prejudice. New Delhi: National Book Trust. 
- (1977) 'Ideology and the interpretation of early Indian history', in Society and 
Change: Essays in HonourofSachin Chaudhuri. New Delhi, pp. 1-19. 
Thirlwall, C. (1835-H)A History o/Greece, 8 vols. London.


--- PAGE 296 ---
560 BLACK ATHENA 
Thirlwall,J. c.Jr (1936) Connop Thirlwal4 Historian and Theologian. London: Society for 
the Promotion of Christian Knowledge. 
Thissen, H.-). (1980) 'Manetho', in HeIck and Otto, Lexikon, vol. III, cols 1179-81. 
Thomson, G. (1941) Aeschylus and Athens - A Study in the Social Origin of Drama. 
London: Lawrence & Wishart. 
- (1949) Studies inAncient GreekSociety I: The PrehistoricAegean. London: Lawrence & 
Wishart. 
Thomson, K. (1977) The Masonic Thread in Mozart. London: Lawrence & Wishart. 
Thucydides, (195:4) ThePeloponnesian War, R. Warner, trans. London: Penguin. 
- (1980) Histories, C. F. Smith, trans. (Loeb). London: Heinemann/Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Tieck, L. (1930) Ludwig Tieck und die BrUder Schlege4 Briefe mit Einleitung und 
Anmerkungen, H. Liidete, ed., Frankfurt a. M.: Baer. 
Tiedemann, P. (1780) Griechenlands mte Philosophen oder Leben und System des Orpheus, 
Pherekydes, Thales undPythagoras. Leipzig. 
- (1793) Geist der spekulativen Philosophie. Marburg. 
Timpanaro, S. (1977) Introduction to Schlegel, Uber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier. 
Amsterdam. 
Tocqueville, A. de (1837) De laDemocratie en Ammque, 3 vols. Brussels. 
- (1877) L 'ancien regime et la revolution, 8th edn. Paris; trans. S. Gilbert (1955) as The 
Old Regime and the French Revolution. New York. 
Tompkins, P. (1978) The Secrets of the Great Pyramid. London: Penguin. 
Trevelyan, H. (1981) Goethe and the Greeks, 2nd edn: Cambridge University Press. 
Trevor-Roper, H. (1969) The RomanticMuvement and the Study of History Oohn Coffin 
Memorial Lecture). London: Athlone. 
- (1983) 'The Highland tradition of Scotland', in Hobsbawm and Ranger, The 
brvention of Tradition. Cambridge University Press, pp. 15-41. 
Tsountas, C. and Manatt,). (1897) TheMycenaeanAge. Boston. 
Turgot, A. (1808-15) Oeuvres de M. Turgot Ministre d'Etat, Prtddies et accompagntes de 
Memoires et de Notes sur sa Vie, son Administration et ses Ouvrages, 9 vols. 
Paris. 
Turner, F. M. (1981) The Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Turner, R. S. (1983a) 'Historicism, Kritik, and the Prussian professoriate', in Bollack 
and Wismann, pp. 450-78. 
- (1983b) 'Discussion', in Bollack and Wismann, p. 486. 
- (1985) 'Classical philology in Germany: toward a history of the discipline', Paper 
presented to The Fabrication of Ancient Greece 1780-1880, Conference held at Cornell 
22-23 April 1985. 
Tur-Sinai, S. (1950) 'The origin of the alphabet', The Jewish Quarterly Review 61: 
83-110,159-80,277-302. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 561 
Ullman, B. L. (1934) 'How old is the Greek alphabet?' ,American Journal of Archeology 38: 
359-81. 
Usener, H. (1907) 'Philologie und Geschichtswissenschaft', in Vortriige undAujSiitze, 2 
vols. Leipzig, vol. 2, p. II. 
Van Berchem, D. (1967) 'Sanctuaires d'Hercule-Melqart: contribution a l'etude de 
I'expansion Phenicienne en Mediterranee', Syria: 73-109, 307-3 8. 
Van Ness Myers, P. (1895)A History of Greece for Colleges and High Schools. Boston. 
Van Sertima, I. (1976) They Came Before Columbus. New York: Random House. 
_ (1984) 'Nile Valley presence in America BC',Journal of African Civilizations 6.2: 
221-4 6. 
Vaux de Foletier, F. de (1970)Milleans d'histoiredes Tsiganes. Paris: Fayard. 
Vercoutter,J. (1956) L 'Egypte et Ie monde egeen ptihellenique. Paris: Maisonneuve. 
_ (1975) 'Apis', in Heick and Otto, vol. I, cols 338-5°' 
Vermeule, E. (1960) 'The fall of the Mycenaean Empire', Archaeology 13.1: 66-75· 
_ (1964) Greece in the BronzeAge. Chicago University Press. 
_ (1975) TheArtoftheShaft Graves of Mycenae . Cincinnati: University of Cincinnati. 
_ (1979) Aspeas of Death in Early Greek Art and Poetry. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 
Vesey-Fitz-Gerald, B. (1973) Gypsies of Britain: an Introduction to their History, 2nd edn. 
Newton Abbot: David and Charles. 
Vian, F. (1963) Les origines de Thebes: Cadmos et les Spartes. Paris: Etudes et Commen-
taires No. 48. 
Vieo, G. B. (172I)De ConstantiaJurisprudenta. Naples. 
- (172 5) La ScienzaNuuva. Naples. 
_ (1730) La Scienza NuuvaSeconda. Naples. 
Virgil (1935) Works, H. R. Fairclough, trans., 2 vols (Loeb). London: Heinemann! 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Volney, C. F. C. (1787) Vtryages en SyrieetenEgypte. Paris. 
Voltaire, F. M. (1886) (1768) Siecle de Louis XIV, Paris. 
Von der Miihll, P. (1952) Kritisches Hypomnemazur Ilias. Basel: Rheinhardt. 
Voss, vonM. H. (1980) 'Horuskinder', in HeIck and Otto, vol. III, cols 52-3. 
Wace, A.J. B. (192 4) 'Greece and Mycenae', CambridgeAncient History, 1st edn, vol. 2, 
The Egyptian and Hittite Empires to C.1 000 BC, pp. 43 1-7 2 . 
Waddell, L. A. (1927) TheAryan Origin of the Alphabet. London: Luzac. 
Walcot, P. (1966) Hesiod and the Near East. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. 
Wallace, W. P. (1966) 'The early coinages of Athens and Euboia', Numismatic Chronicle, 
7th series. 6: 23-44· 
Walton, C. and Anton,J. P. (1974) Philosophy and the CivilizingArts. 
Warburton, W. (173 8-4 I) The Divine Legation of Moses, demonstrated, on the principles of a 
religious deist from the omission of the doctrine of a future state of reward and punishment in 
the Jewish dispensation. London.


--- PAGE 297 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Wardle, K. A. (~973) 'North West Greece in the Late Bronze Age: the archaeological 
background', paper presented to the Third International Colloquium on Aegean Pre­
history, Sheffield. 
Warmington, B. H. (1960) Carthage. London: Robert Hale. 
Warren, P. M. (1965) 'The first Minoan stone vases and early Minoan chronology', 
Kretika Chronika 19: 7-43. 
- (1967) 'Minoan stone vases as evidence for Minoan foreign connections in the 
Aegean Late Bronze Age', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33: 37-48. 
Webster, T. B. L. (1958) From Mycenae to Homer. London: Methuen. 
Weigall, A. (1923) The Life and Times ofAkhnaton. New York: Putnam. 
Weir Smyth, H. (1922) Aeschylus, 2 vols (Loeb). London: Heinemann/Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Weise, O. (1883) 'Miscellen', Beitriige zur Kunde tier Indogermanischen Sprachen 7: 
167-71. 
Wells, W. C. (1818) An Account of the Female of the White Race of Mankind, Part of 
Whose Skin Resembles that of a Negro; with some Observations on the Causes of the 
Differences in Colour and Form Between the White and the Negro Races of Men 
Appended to Two Essays: One upon Single Vision with Two Eyes and the other . .. 
London. 
Wessetzky, V. (1961) Die agyptische Kulte zur Riimerzeit in Ungarn. Leiden: Brill. 
West, M. L. (1971) Early Greek Philosophy and the Orient. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Westfall, R. S. (1980) Never a Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Westman, R. S. and McGuire,]. E. (1977) Hermeticism and the Scientific Revolution: 
Papers read at a Clark Library Seminar Los Angeles: William Andrews Clark Memorial 
Library. Los Angeles: Unversity of California Press. 
Whiston, W. (1957) (1720?) Concerning God's Command to Abraham to Offer up Isaac, his 
Son, for a Sacnjice. Dissertation II added to The Lift and Works of Flavius Josephus. 
Philadelphia, pp. 914-2 I. 
White, H. G. E. (1914) Hesiod: The Homeric Hymns and Homerica. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Loeb edn. 
Wiener, M.]. (1981) English Culture and the Decline of the Industrial Spirit, 1850-1980. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Wigtil, D. N. (1984) 'Incorrect apocalyptic: The Hermetic "Asclepius" as an improve­
ment on the Greek original', in H. Temporini and W. Haase, eds Aufstieg und 
Nietiergang der romischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur Roms ;m Spiegel der neueren 
Forschung. 17.4. Religion: (Heidentum: romische Giiuerkulte, orientalische Kulte in tier 
romischen Welt [Forts.}), ed. W. Haase, pp. 2282-97. 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, U. von (1919) Ploton. Berlin: Weidmann. 
- (1931)DerGlaubederHe/lenen, 2 vols. Berlin: Weidmann. 
- (1959) Geschichte der Philologie, 3rd. edn (1927) repro Leipzig: Teubner. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
_ (1982) History of Classical Scholarship, A. Harris, trans. London and Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Wilcken, U. (1928) 'Alexander Zug in die Oase Siwa', Sitzungberichte der preu{3ischen 
Akademie der WlSsenschaften VIII: 576- 603. 
_ (1930) 'Alexander Zug von Ammon: Epiteg', Sitzungberichte der Preu{3ischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften X: 159-7 6. 
_ (1931) 'Eine Gedachtnisrede auf Barthold Georg Niebuhr', Bonner akademische 
Reder 10. Bonn. 
Willetts, R. (1962) Cretan Cults and Festivals. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Williams, C. (197 I) The Destruction of Black Civilization: great issues of a race from 4500 BC 
to 2000 BC. Dubugne, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt. 
Williams, R. J. (198 I) 'The sages of Ancient Egypt in the light of recent scholarship', 
Journal oftheAmerican Oriental Society 1011I: 1-19· 
Wilson, E. (1960) To the Finland Station. New York: p.b. edn. 
Winckelmann, ]. (1964) (1764) Geschichte der Kunst des Altertums, ed. W. Senff. 
Weimar. 
Winckler, H. (1907) The History of Babylonia andAssyria,]. A. Craig, trans. New York: 
Scribner. 
Wind, E. (1968) Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance, rev. edn. (1980) p.b. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Wismann, H. (1983) 'Modus operandi, analyse compare des etudes platoniciennes 
en France et en AIlemagne au 1geme siecle', in Bollack and Wismann, pp. 
490 -5 13. 
Witte, B. C. (1979) Der preu{3ische Tacitus: Aufitieg, Ruhm und Ende des Historikers 
Barthold Georg Niebuhr 1776-183 I. Dusseldorf: Droste. 
Wolf, F. A. (1804) Prolegomena ad Homerum. 2nd edn. Halle. 
Wood, R. (1767)A Comparative View oftheAntient and Present State of the Troade. To which 
is Prefixed an Essay on the Original Genius and Writings of Homer. London. 
_ (177 5)An Essay on the Original Genius ofH orner, with a Comparative View of theA ntient 
and Present State of the Troade, ed.]. Bryant. London. 
Woolley, L. (1938) 'Excavations at AI Mina, Sueidia, I & 2',Journa/ of Hellenic Studies 
58: 1-3 0 , 133-7 0 . 
Wortham,]. D. (197 I) British Egyptology 1549-1906. Newton Abbot: David & Charles. 
Yadin, Y. (1965) "'And Dan, why did he remain in the ships?"', Australian Journal of 
BiblicaiArchaeology, I.I: 19- 2 3. 
_ (1973) 'And Dan, why did he remain in the ships?', in]. Best, ed. The A rrival of the 
Greeks. Amsterdam: Hakkert, pp. 55-74· 
Yates, F. (1964) Giordano Bruno and theHermetic Tradition. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul. 
_ (1967) 'The Hermetic tradition in Renaissance science', in C. S. Singleton, ed.,Art, 
Science and History in the Renaissance. Baltimore, pp. 255-74· 
_ (1972) The Rosicrucian Enlightenment. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.


--- PAGE 298 ---
BLACK ATHENA 
Yavetz, Z. (197 6) 'Why Rome? Zeitgeist and Ancient historians in early 19th century 
Germany', American Joumol of Philology 97: 276-96. 
Yoyotte, J. (1982) 'Le Pantheon egyptien de j.-F. Champollion', Bulletin de Ia Societe 
Fra1lflJise d'Egyptologie: seance solennel/e consacree a Ia commemoration du cent­
ci1ll/uantena;rede Ia mort deJ.-F. Champollion 95: 76-108. 
Zafiropulo,j. and Monad, C. (1976) Sensorium Dei dans l'hermitisme et Ia science. Paris: 
'Les BeUes Lettres'. 
Zervos, C. (1920) Un Phi/osophe nioplatonicien duXI' s.: Miche/ Pse/los, sa vie, son fEUVre, us 
luttes philosophiIJues, son influence. Paris: Leroux. 
Zucker, F. (1950) 'Athen und Aegypten bis auf den Beginn der heUenstischer Zeit', 
Antike und Orient: 140-65. Leipzig. 
INDEX 
1l4lic type indicates a main entry. 
Abraham 164,25 2,3 06,353 
Achaia, Achaians 21, 76 f., 83, 331 
Achilles 76, 116, 185 
Adams,J. 25 I 
Adonis 86, 454 
Afroasiatic 10,54 ff., 509, 513 
Agamemnon 331, 362 
A~~otpe, Queen 40 
A~iram, King of Byblos 397, 428, 503 
Ahl, F. xvi, 91, 95 
Aigyptos 20, 86, 94, 307 
Aiolians 82 
Aischylos 22 f., 78 f., 8 I 
Akhenaton (Amenophis IV) 383-4 
Akkadian 84, 364, 415,417 f., 509 f. 
Alberti, L. B. 152 
Albright, W. F. 142 f., 409, 428, 503 
Alexander the Great 109-10, 114 ff., 
185,260,394,449,515,519-22 
Alexandria 121 f., 5 I 4 
Algeria 234, 357 
Al Mina395 
alphabet 16, 34-5, 77, 86-7,393-9, 
408,427-33,502,519 
Amenophis 69; see also Akhenaton 
Ammenemes 19,329 
Am(m)on 19,64 f., 82,114 f., 383 
Amon-Ra 115 
Amphion 18 f., 84 
'Anat 21 
Anatolia, Anatolian 13, 17,78,80,392, 
446,50 9 
Ancient Model xv, I f., 7 f., 22-3, 31, 
39,43,46 f., 58, 62, 75-[20, 
281-3 16; 'Revised' 2, 7, 9 f., 43, 57, 
81 f., 84, 331, 437-8 
Anglican Church 322 
Annan, N. 322 
anti-Semitism xiv, xix, 33,338-40, 
387-8,397 
Antony, Mark 116, 1l3, 520 
Anubis 53, 116,4 66 
Aones 83, 1 12 
Aphrodite 21,65-6,382 
Apis 64 
Apollo 68-9,178 
Aquinas, Thomas 155 
Arabia, Arabs 10,390,404 
Arabic xxi, 23 1,233-4,344,353,43 I, 
510 
Aramaic 55, 255, 344,353,394,43 1, 
50 9ff. 
archaeology 7, 9-10,14-16,18,41-6, 
362 ff., 385 ff., 394,412,424-5 
Areios, King of Sparta 109-10 
Argives 77, 79, 33 1 
Argos 20, 22, 76, 79; see also Danaos 
Arianism 175, 195,5 12 
Aristode 28,108-9,162,178,202, 
212,261,295,3 23,47 6 
Arkadia 78, 81 f . .377 f. 
Armenian 13, 17,510,516 
Arnold, Matthew 320,347-50,351-2 
Arnold, Thomas 303,317,320,322 f., 
347-5 0 
Artemis 21, 67-9 
Aryan, Aryans 29,]30-6, 510 
Aryan Model 1-2,7,9 f., 31 f., 39, 46, 
79 ff., 84 f., 58,62, 104, 138-9, 
3 [7-3 6,3 67 ff.; 'Broad' 35, 38,


--- PAGE 299 ---
566 BLACK ATHENA 
330 ,400-5°; 'Extreme' 1,34 ff., 
59 f., 432-3 
Ashmole, E. 174 
Assyria, Assyrians 12, 187, 236,360, 
364 f., 396, 448, 510 
Astour, Michael C. xiii-xvi, 36-7, 
91 f., 360, 412, 415 f., 419-22, 
423 ff., 495 
Aten, Aton 67, 383 
atheism 174-5, 191,318,473 
Athena, Athene 20-21, 51-3, 66, 453 
Athens, Athenians 19, 22-3, 5 I f., 
II 1,114.3 11 ,453 
Atlantis 1°7,510 
atomism 175,19 1,5 10 
Augustine, St2 4,145, 158, 181 
Autochthonous Origin, Model of 7, 58, 
40 7-8 
Avaris 45, 5 1,7 6 
Babel, Tower of 168,23 0,344 
Babylon 355, 364-6, 51 I 
Bacon, Francis 200 
Baillie, M. G. L. 452 
Bakunin, Mikhail 381 
ballads 207, 323 
Banier, A. 171, 181 
Baramki, D. 409 
Barthelemy,].-]. 61,168, 171, 185 ff., 
200,227, 285,3°7,344,4 80 
Basque 232 
Bass, G. 411-12 
B3stt68 
Baumgarten, A.]. 142, 144 
Beloch,]. 34, 49, 360, 367.373-6, 
377,393-4,4 12,421 f., 498 
Benedetto, L. F. 356 f. 
BenJochannan, Y.43 6 
Bentley, R. 27, 194-5,251,283,473 f. 
Berard, Jean 77, 92 
Berard, Victor 367,377-83,396; 403, 
417,4 20 f., 426, 495,5 01 
Berber 353,498,509,5 I I 
Berkeley, G. 251 
Bernier, F. 242-3 
Beth, K. 258 
Bezzenberger, A. 262 
Bhagavad Gila 230 
Bible 24, 338, 353, 414, 420, 521 
Billigmeier,]. C. 422-3, 426, 507 
Birch, S. 254,406 
Black races 18,24 1,245,3 84,404, 
435-6 
Blackwell, T. 208, 210, 226 
Blake, William 172,339 
Blanco, A. G. 134, 156 
Blegen, C. W. 48-9, 391 
Bloomfield, M. W. 134 
Blue, Gregory xvi, 470 
Blumenbach,J. F. 28, 219-21, 222, 
244,254 
Bochart,S. 169, 171,344 
Bodin,]. 169,204 
Boie, M. C. 298, 300 
Boiotia 326, 328-9, 51 I 
Bornhard, A. R. xvi, 54 
Bopp, F. 227,479 
Born, Ignaz von 472 
Borrow, George 497 
Bousiris 104,242,476 
Boylan, P. 139, 140 
Boyle, Sir Robert 195 
Bracken,H.202 
Brahims 228 f. 
Breasted,]. H. 140-1,264 
Bridenthal, R. 301 
Brosses, C. de 244 
Brown,]. P. 414 
Brown, R. 370 
Bruce,]. 243-4 
Brucker,J. 172, 197, 199, 216 f. 
Brugsch, H. 258, 261 
Brunner, H. 266, 278 
Bruno, G. 24-7,153,158 f., 162, 
164 f., 174 ff., 190, 192, 195 
Bryant,]. 171,J28 
Budge, W. 261-2 
Buffon, G.-L. Leclerc 219 
Bunnens, G. 376 f., 426 
Bunsen, C. 237 f., 254 f., 256-7, 291, 
299,3 05 f., 316, 320 ff., 335, 348, 
373,39 2 
Bunsen, E., 349 
Bunsen, F. 299 ff. 
Burattini 166 f. 
Burke, Edmund 299,3 01 
Bumouf, Emile Louis 342-3 
Bumouf, Eugene 342 
Bury,]. B. 293,3 87,3 89,4 08 
Butler, E. M. 2 I 4, 299 
Byblos 57, 397, 501, 5 I 1,519 
Byron, Lord 247, 291 
Caesar,Julius 116, 123,260,5 20 
Campanella, T. 155, 176 
Canaanite(s) xiii, xxi, 55 f., 58, 335, 
353,393,398,418,428,431,446, 
510 f., 513, 515, 520 
Caplan, H. 388 
Caria(n) 13,335,380,391, 5 I of. 
Carlyle, Thomas 323 
Carpenter, Rhys 360,393,395 ff., 
408, 422, 428 f. 
Carruthers,]. 436 f. 
Carthage 338, 354 ff., 358 
Casaubon, I. 25 ff., 135-6, 139, 162 f., 
166, 169,194,253 
Caucasian 27-8, 340 
Chadwick,J. 406, 410, 418- 19 
ChampoUion,J.-F. 225,244,25 1-3, 
257-8,260, 272 f., 280,306,308, 
316,483 f. 
Charax of Pergamon 52 
Chiflet,J·-J·4 66-7 
Childe, F. Gordon 388-9 
ChildericI51,466-7 
China, Chinese xii, 25, 29,4 2, 172-3, 
190,199,2°4,209,237-8,24°, 
289,357,371,4°3-4,452,483 
Chomsky, Noam 202 
Christianity xix, 23-7, 124-30, 
145-51,189,192-6 
Cicero 117 
Clement of Alexandria 139, 193, 
216 
Clovis 151 
Cole,]. H. 275 
Coleridge, Samuel T. 25 1,321,323, 
482 
Colie, R. L. 192 
Comte, Auguste 212, 327 
Condorcet 198-9 
Cook, James 222 
Cook, S. A. 389-90 
Copernicus 24,155-6,158,276 
Coptic xx, 164, 17 I 
Corsalis, A. 239 
Cousin, Victor 319 f., 349 
Crete 13, 15, 18 f., 76 f., 336, 385, 
395,397,4 09,4 16 f., 430, 446, 508 
Creuzer, J. 3 10 
Cromer, Lord 262 
Cross, F. 429-3 0, 433 
Cudworth, R. 162, 166, 191, 192 
Culican, W. 409 
INDEX 
cults, religious 17, 19,63-73,82,92, 
113 ff., 378, 383 
Cumont, F. 136-7 
cuneiform 15 f., 47,233,364,415, 
512,5 16 
Curtius, Ernst 80, 33 1,332-6,363, 
385,39 2,443,49 8 
Curtius, Georg 332 
Cuvier, G. 240-1, 243 
Cypriot 15 f., 405 
Cyprus 380, 394,395, 406 
Dacier, Andre 253 
Dacier, Anne 179, 194,207-8,283 
Daidalos 64 
Damaskios 143 
Danaos, Danaans 20, 22,37,76 f., 
78 f., 81 t.,83 f., 109, III, I13, 169, 
180,186,250,307,312 f., 325 f., 
331,3 60 f., 365, 393, 420, 423 ff., 
432,434,44 6,49 2,5 07 
Daneau, L. 159-60 
Darwin, Charles 34 I 
Darwinism 442 
Dautry,J. 485 
David, King 447,507 
Ddwn65 
Dead Sea Scrolls 512,514 
deism, deists 174, 193, 195 ff., 512 
Delacroix, Eugene 483 
Delphi 68, 69 
Demeter, 21, 57, 69 f., 113 
Demokritos 175, 5 10, 518 
Demosthenes 185 
dendrochronology 43,512 
Derchain, P. 139 
Descartes, Rene 200, 203 
Devisse,]. 242 
Dickinson, O. T. P. K. 410 
Dieckmann, L. 479 
Diels, H. 183 
diffusion(ism), cultural 7 , 13- I 5,31, 
108,27 0 - 2,486 
Diodoros Sikeliotes 77, 79, 110-1 I, 
115,173,179 f., 212,JI 1,513 
Dionysios of Halikarnossos 307 
Dionysios Slytobrachion 1 15 
Dionysos 21, 64-5, 69 ff., 113, 
115- 16,406 
Diop, Cheikh Anta 435 f. 
Disraeli, Benjamin 339 f. 
Dodona 65, 78, 82, 99, 452


--- PAGE 300 ---
568 BLACK ATHENA 
Dolgopolskii, A. B. 54 
Dorians 78,80,82 f., 113,334,361, 
513; invasion by 21, 76-7, 80, 82, 
33 1 
Dorpfeldt, W. 386 
Dothan, T. 448 
Dreyfus Affair 367, 371 
Drioton, Abbe Etienne 266, 279 
Dubois, W. G. B. 436 f. 
Duff, W. 211 
Dumas, F. 466 
Dunker, M. 363 
Dupuis, C. F. 26,181 ff., 222,244, 
250,251-2,275 f.,Jlo 
Dussaud, R. 432 
Ebla, Eblaite 16,418,513 
Edwards, I. G. S. 277 
Edwards, Ruth xx, 421, 423-5, 495 
Egypt 29, 151-60, 183-8, 196-7, 
246-5°,252,260,267,272 
Egyptian, Ancient xiv, xix-xx, 508, 
513; religion xiv, xv, 23-7, 63-73, 
114- 20,122-4, 130-45, 177-81, 
189-222,257-66,513 
Eissfeldt, O. 142 f. 
EIAmarna383 
Eleusis, Eleusinian mystery cults 2 I, 
69-7 0,94, 264 
Elgin Marbles 290, 488 
Eliot, George 156-7,253,34°,483 
Eliot, T. S. 35 I 
Elliot Smith, G. 31, 225-6, 270-2 
Enfantin, Prosper 268-9 
Enlightenment 25 f., 190,204-5,206, 
208,288,3°1,3°3,311; Radical 
26-7, 168, 174, 175-6, 192, 195 f. 
Ephoros 110,453 
Epicureanism 216,474,513-14 
Erasmus 159, 163, 193 
Eratosthenes 166, 5 14 
Erechtheus 79, 453 
Erman, A. 262-3, 280 
Essenes 146,512,514 
Eteoboutades 453 
Eteocretan(s) 76-7, 418 f., 431, 448, 
453,5 05 
Ethiopia, Ethiopic 10, 56,344,353, 
43 1 
Etruscan(s) 13,78,3°3,3°9,491,510, 
514,5 1 7 
Euclid 279 
Eudoxos ofKnidos 103, 108, 16,,", 176, 
514 
Euhemerism 142-3, 145, 181,466, 
51 4 
Euripides 79, 81,115,164 
Europa 69, 85 
Europocentrism 2 I 5 f., 440 
Eusebius 93, 465 
Evans, Sir Arthur 34 f., 336, 367, 
385-6,391,398,4°5,4°9,416, 
432,49 8,5°1,5 18 
Fenelon, F. de S. de la M. 169, 179 f., 
186 
Festugiere, R. P. 134 f., 139 f. 
Fichte,]. G. 206 
Fieino, Marsilio 24, 154 ff. 
Fick, A. 48 f. 
Flaubert, Gustave 338, 342, 355-6, 
358, 488, 498 f. 
Fludd, R. 163 
folksong 207 
Fontenelle, B. de 181 
Fontenrose,]. 413, 420 
Forrest, G. 86 
Forster, G. 222, 297, 478 f. 
Foucart, G. 264 
Foucart,P·7o,264-5,314,380,383, 
495 
Frankfort, Henri 390 
Franklin, Benjamin 203 
Franklin,John Hope 436 
Frazer,]. G. 4, 115,313,380,413,493 
Frederick the Great 205, 214 
Freemasonry 25-6,27,168,173-7, 
180 f., 485 
Freret, N. 93 f., 181, 186,192,197, 
30 7 
Freud, Sigmund 384 
Froidefond, C. 105 
Fuseli, H. 290 
Galen 178 
Galileo 164, 200, 2 I 7 
Gardiner, A. 251, 263, 265 f., 484 
Gardiner, M. xvii 
Garvie, A. 89, 92 
Geb 71 f. 
Georgiev, V. I. 13-14,407 
Germany 2°7,212-15,285-8 
Gesenius, W. 353, 498 
Gibbon, Edward 170, 185, 187,3° 2, 
473 
Gladstone, William E. 350 ff., 362, 
380 f., 385 
Gnosticism 23, 130-4, 145,5 14- 15 
Gobineau,]. A. de 220,236,240 f., 
245,338,342-5,352-5,360-2, 
364,3 82,396,4°4 
God 176, 178,512 
INDEX 
Goethe,]. W. von 207, 214, 215, 229, 
472 
Goldsmith, Oliver 198 
Goliath 445, 447 
Gomme, A. W. 85 f. 
Gooch, G. P. 3°2,3°8 f. 
Goodenough,W.H.I4 
Gordon, Cyrus xiii, xiv, xvi, 37, 415, 
416-19,420,423,426,495 
Gottingen University 27-8,215-23, 
286,478 f., 487 
Gould, S. 221 
Graves, Robert 220, 393 
Greaves, J. 166 f. 
Greece 13-14,38-62,192-6,324, 
326 f., 368-83, 429, 433,510 ff.; 
colonization of xiii-xv, 1,8, 17 f., 
22-3,34,38,76,79,81 f., 84-98, 
109-12, 121,33 1,4°1; see also 
Ancient Model; Aryan Model; 
Autochthonous Origin 
Greek xiii, xiv, 47-5 1,54,56 f., 
58-62,78,81,168 f., 329 f., 335 
Greek tragedy 88-98 
Greek War ofIndependence 247 f., 
282,3 23,44 1 
Grimm brothers 3 16, 49 I 
Grote, Georg 81, 317 f., 323-4, 
326-30 ,33 6,494 
Grotefend, G. F. 233 
Grumach, E. 80 
Gypsies 20 I, 497 
Hades 70 
Haley,]. 48-9, 391 f. 
Hallam, A. H. 321 
Ham 343, 353 
Hamann,]. G. 226 
Hamites, Hamitic 353, 355 
Hammond, N. G. L. 410 
Harappa 15,515 
Harden, D. B. 409 
Hardy, Thomas 349-50 
Hare,]. 321 ff.,327 
Hannachis; see Horus 
Harris,}. 210-11,328 
Harrison,Jane 4, 313, 380,413 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel 268 
Hebrew xiii, 58, 231,344,353,510 f., 
51 5 
Heeren, A. H. L. 222,297,316 
Hegel, G. W. F. 206, 256, 289,294-6, 
481 
Heine, Heinrich 213,293,297 
Hekataios of Abdera 109,142 
Heick, W. 434 
heliocentrieity 155 -6, 167 
Heliodoros 465 
Heliopolis 176 
Helladic period 17, 513, 515,517 f. 
Hellen 80, 101 f., 333 
Hellenomania 281-336 
Helm, P. R. 426-7 
Hemelrijk, E. A. I 17 
Herakles 21, 63, 113,178,477 
Heraklids 21,23,53,405; see also 
Dorians, invasion by 
Herder,J. G. 206 f., 215, 219-20, 
226,3°5,359,47 8 
Hermes 53, 466 
Hermes Trismegistos 23-4,131,136, 
139, 141, 144 f., 154 f., 164, 176, 
242 
Hermetic Texts, Hermeticism 24-6, 
130-51,155-6,162-4,515-16 
Hermopolis, Ogdoad of 143 
Herodotos 19,26,52-3,64 f., 72 , 75, 
78,80,82 f., 170, 173, 179, 242, 
277,302,311,375,379,392,432, 
435,492,516; Histories 98-101; 
Plutarch and 108-9,491 
Hesiod 76 ff., 85 f., 113,310,455,521 
Hesychios 77, 382 
Heumann, K. A. 216 
Heyne, C. G. 220-3, 254, 283 f., 286, 
293, 297 f., 3 16, 478 f. 
hieroglyphs 14-15,26,66, 164, 168, 
233,5 12,5 16 
Hill, C. 165 
Hiram Abif 168, 173-4,471 
Hitler, Adolf 349, 403 
Hittite 13,391,392,446 f., 509 
Hobbes, Thomas 174-5, 191 
Hodge, Carleton xvi, 54 
Hoffmann,]. G. E. 144


--- PAGE 301 ---
570 BLACK ATHENA 
HOiderlin, F. 213 
Holm, A. 363-4, 375, 411 
Homer 19,35 f., 50, 76-7, 78, 113, 
164,178,194,207-9,226,310, 
325,393 f., 398,422,476,487 f., 
521 ; Iliad 185, 190,210,283,376; 
Odyssey 87, 283 
homosexuality 7 I, 2 I 3 
Hood,S. 80 
Hooker,J. T .• po 
Horapollo 152, 164 
Hornung,E. 129,259,266 
Horus 68, 70 
Hprr67 ff. 
Humboldt, A. von 254,306 
Humboldt, C. von 339 
Humboldt, W. von 214, 230, 232-3, 
238,254,256,281,284-5,292, 
297,302,305 f., 308, 316 f., 319 ff., 
323,339,344,373,397 
Hume, David 27,151-2,202 ff., 215 
Hurrian xiv, 26, 383 
Huxley, G. 409 
Hyantes 83, I 12 
Hyksos 19 ff., 22,43 ff., 66 f., 69, 76, 
82,109,112,306,313,410 f., 
424 f., 452 
Hypatia 111-2 
Imhotep 278 
immortality 70-1, 72, 493, 519 
Inachos, King 84,186,307 
India 29,225-80 
Indo-China 357 
Indo-European xiii, xiv, I I ff., 3 I, 
54 ff., 224,227,330 f., 479, 509 f., 
516 
Indo-German 227, 255, 479 
Indo-Hittite 13 f.,s 16 
10 95 
Ion 83 f. 
Ionia, Ionians 56, 78, 81 ff., 197,334, 
474,5 16 
Isidore of Seville 173 
Isis 69 f., 139 
Islam 145-50,292,294,404 
Isokrates 103-8,318,477,516 
Israel, Israelites 20, 44, 191, 193, 199, 
415,4 27,43 0,505 
jabulon 176 
jacob, M. 168, 174 
Jabn, ('Father') F. L. 290,488 
James, George G. M. 38, 401, 435 
Japan xii, 198, 240, 246 f., 403-4, 
474,4 82 
Japhet 220, 339, 343 
jason 420 
Jefferson, Thomas 251 
Jeffery, L. H. 395-6, 428 
Jensen, H. 397 
jesus Christ 164, 175 f., 195,349,512 
Jews, Judaism xvii, 36,123,145-50, 
322,339,3 87,39 0 
Jidejian, N. 409 
Johnson, Samuel 243 
Jomard, E.-F. 184-5,251-2,252, 
272 f., 275 f., 280 
Jones, Sir William 229 f., 479 
Josephus 193,393,432 
Jowett, Benjamin 319 
Joyce, James 382 
Jupiter Serapis 15 I 
Juvenal1l7 
Kadmos xiii, 19 f., 37, 69, 79,84-5, 
109, III, 113, 169 f., 180, 186,307, 
3 12 f., 326,330,359,361,365,393, 
408 f., 412, 419 f., 422 ff., 425, 432, 470 
Kallinos44 6 
Kant, Immanuel 206, 284,308,491 
Keightley, T. 315 
Kekrops 19, 50,79,84, I I 1,186,307, 
311,3 12 f.,J26, 492, 517 
Kekrops of Miletos 77 
Kepler,Johannes 200, 468 
Kircher, A. 163-4, 171, 191 
Kirk, G. S. 504 
Klaproth, H.J. 227 
Kleopatra VII 116, 123, 52d 
Knossos 34 f., 328, 385 f. 
Knox, R. 240- I 
Koestler, Arthur 443 
Korea 198 
Kranaoi 79 
Krantor 106-7 
Kretschmer, P. 48, 391 f. 
Kroll,]. 136 
Kronos 143 
Kropotkin, Prince Peter 381 
Kuhn, T. I 
Kurgan culture 12, 14 
Kydonians 76 
Kythera 382 
Labyrinth 64 
La~e,P.349,497 
Lakonia 79 
Laris(s)a 76, 452 
Laroche, E. 392 
Lassen, C. 340 
Lauer,]. F. 277- 8, 279 
Le Fevre, T. 207 
Leibniz, G. W. von 200, 205 
Lemnos 78, 514, 517 
Lepsius, R. 254 
Lessing, G. E. 215 
Letronne,]. A. 253 
Levin, Saul xvi, 60, 414, 423, 495 
Libya 52-3, 65, 1 IS 
Liddell, H. G. 494 
Lieber, F. 299 
Lieblein,J. 259, 262 
Linear A and B 7,16,39,55,83,3 13, 
406 f., 414, 417-20, 448, 450,517 
linguistics 29, 224- 80 
Linnaeus, Carolus 205, 219 
Linosl64 
Lithuanian 372, 500 
Livy 302 
Lobos, Father 243 
Locke, John 27,131,202 f., 210, 215, 
475 
Lockyer, Sir Norman 273 ff. 
Louis XIV ('Sun King') 177-8, 179 
Louis XV 172, 178 
Louis XVI 199,285 
Louis XVIII 252 
Lubicz, Schwaller de 275 f. 
Lucian 117, 2 II 
Lucretius 174, 195,474 
Luther, Martin 193 
Lutheran Church 322 
LuvianI3,392,447,5IO 
Lycia, Lycian 13,55 f., 380, 391, 510, 
517 
Lydia, Lydian 13,78,391,445,510, 
514,5 17 
Lykourgos 53, 105 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington 323 f., 
490 
McCarter, K. 429 
Macpherson, James 207 f. 
Mahafty,]. P. 293-4 
Mahomet 176 
Manetho 109,180 
INDEX 
Mansfeld,J.43 1 
Manuel, F. 166, 181 ff., 196,222 
Mariette, A. 269 
Marin, L. 178 
Marna 449, 508 
Marx, Karl 106-7, 289, 295- 6, 390, 
474 
Maspero, G. 259-61, 263, 273, 280 
Masson, E. 414 
Maximus of Tyre 131 
Max-Muller,F.237 
Mazrui, Ali 436 f. 
Medici, Cosimo de' 24, 153-4 
Meiggs, R. 408 
Meiners, C. 2 I 7 f. 
Melampous 1 13 
Melissos 164 
Melos 430 
Melville, Herman 268 
Memnon 19, 64, 329 
Memphis 76,180 
Mendelsohn, Moses 231 
Mendes 19,65 
Menelaion 53 
Menelaos 33 I 
Menes (Pharaoh Min) 64 
Menexenos 3 I I 
Ment~otpe 18, 63 
Mersenne, M. 163 
Mesopotamia 12, IS, 17,364 
Messenia 79, 333, 492 
metempsychosis 72,133 
Metternich 248 
Meyer, E. 80,375, 386 
Micali, G. 490 
Michaelis,]. D. 220, 222 
Michelet,]. 33, 303, 341- 2, 348, 350, 
352,355,47 6,489,49 8 
Mill,John Stuart 327 
millenarianism I6S-6, 174 
Minoan(s} IS, 43 f., 66, 336, 385-7, 
417, SI3, 517 f. 
Minos 18,63-4,385,449,508,518 
Mirandola, Pico della IS 4 
Missolonghi 247 
Mitanni 383 f. 
Mitford, Jessica 485 
Mitford, William 23,187 f., 2II,JI7, 
323-4,3 26,490 
Mnewe (Mnevis) 64 
Mn!Wi see Mont 
Mochos 468 
571


--- PAGE 302 ---
572 BLACK ATHENA 
Mohamed Ali 246-7, 248 ff., 269, 326 
Moloch 33, 338, 358-9, 372 
Momigliano, A. 299 ff., 302 f., 315, 
326- 8,374 
Monunsen,1rheodor339,373,495 
monotheism 196, 257-66,383,384 
Mont (Mn!w) 18 f., 63 
Montesquieu, C. L. de 28,170,172, 
198 f., 204, 216, 299, 301, 474 
Montfaucon, Bernard de 467 
Moors 292 
Mopsos 445 fT. 
More, H. 166 
Morea 247 f. 
Morenz, S.37,433-4,437, 506 
Moschos 160, 469 
Moser,]. 299, 309 
Moses 24, 109, 159-60, 176,340,384 
Moslems 248, 404 
Mousaios 164 
Movers, F. C. 3 13, 360 f., 364, 396, 
421 
Mozart, Wolfgang A. 180, 185, 243 f., 
269,47 2 
Muhly,]. D. 421-2, 426 f., 432 
Miiller, K. 0.4,31 ff., 230, 282,307, 
308- 16,3 17 f., 324 f., 329 ff., 333, 
359,37 1,373,375f.,407,4 13,443, 
495 
Murray, M. 266 
Murray, Oswyn 433 
Musgrave, S. 188,21 1,330 
Mycenae, Mycenaean 44,80,82,328, 
362-4,377,386,410,518 
Myres,]. 389 
mythology 10, 63-73,181-3,413 
Napoleon 1185,207.229,286 
Naukratis 434 
Naveh,J.xri,4 28,429,43 1 
Nazis, Nazism 230, 3°4, 339, 349, 
354,374,3 87,4 17 f., 437 
Nehemiah 449 
Neit 21, 51 
Neo-Hellenism 212-15 
Neo-Platonism 23 f., 132-7, 145-50, 
518- 19 
Nephthys 70 
Nero, Emperor 252, 385 
Neugebauer, O. 276-7 
Newman, Cardinal 322 
Newton, Sir Isaac 24, 26-7, 166, 
167-8, 169, 184, 191- 2, 195 fT., 
200,25 1,474,47 6 
Niebuhr, B. 80, 253-4, 281 ff., 
297-3 07,3 15 f., 320 f., 326 f., 336, 
341,373 f., 443, 490 f. 
Niebuhr, C. 298 ff. 
Nietzsche, F. W. 213, 293, 339 
Nilsson, M. 391 
Nineveh 355 
Noah 219, 220, 339, 343, 353 
Noguera, A. 436 
Nysa 115 
Odysseus 169, 382, 499 
Oedipus 69 
Oldfather, C. H. I I I 
Olympiad 329,519 
'On (Heliopolis) 176 
Oren, D. A. 387 
Orientalism 233-7 
Orpheus 71 f., 154, 164,519 
Orphism 71-2, 519 
Osiris 64-5,69,70 ff., 115-16, 176 f., 
180 
Ossian 185,207 f., 301 
Ottoman Empire 247 
Pagels, E. 133,464 
Palaic 13 
Palestine, Palestinians 16,404,446 
Palmyrene 17 I 
Panhellenism 103 
pantheism 27. 174 f., 192, 196,473, 
519 
Paracelsus 24, 157 
Parmenides 164 
Patritius 156 
Paul, St349 
Pausanias xxii, 50, 79, II 1-12, 114, 
116,3 09,3 11,377,5 19 
Pelasgians 75-83, 325, 329, 330, 333, 
378,386,45 2 f., 519 
Pelops, Pelopids 21, 84, 365, 491 
Percy, T. 207,323 
Perrault, C. 177 
Persephone 70 
Perseus 113 
Persian Empire 510, 5 19 
Petit-Radel, F. 307-8 
Petrie, Sir W. M. Flinders 25, 137-8, 
162,274 
Petulengro,jasper 497 
INDEX 
Pfeiffer, R. 214, 221,3 08,3 15 
Pheidias 13 I 
Philhellenism 31,282,288, 289-92, 
318 fT. 
Philistia, Philistines 77 f., 94,445-5 0 , 
453,5 07,5 19 
philon of Alexandria 147 
philon of By bios 142, 144 
Phoenicia, Phoenician(s) xiii, xv, I, 
21-2,33 fT., 37, 58, 81 f., 85 ff., 95, 
313,326,329.337-66,393 fT., 
396 fT., 409, 412, 418,426 ff., 433, 
447,sIO f., 519 
Phoroneusl86,3 07 
Phrygia, Phrygian 13, 17,333 f., 516, 
520 
Phthia 78, 80 
Physiocrats 172-3, 199,238, 520 
Picard,J. 167 
Pindar 68, II 4 
Plato 22 f., 25, 71, 103-8,154,162, 
164,172,197 f., 208-9, 261, 311, 
348,434,475,493 
Plotinus 132 
Plutarch 66, 75, 112.- 14, 185,212,49 1 
Pocock,J. G. A. 192, 196, 197 
Poliakov, L. 34 1, 343 
Polybios 355 
polytheism 257- 66, 513 
Pompeii 116- I 7 
Pope, M. 143-4 
Popper, K. R. 107 
Porphery 150 
Poseidon 20- 1,67, 84, 112, 454 
Potter,j. 195 f. 
Praetorius, G. F. 432 
'Pre-Hellenes' 7, 32-3, 48, 77, 33 1,3 68, 
386,390 - 2 , 40 5 
'Pre-Hellenic' culture 2, 34; language 48, 
77,39 2,407 
Prescott, W. H. 488 
Prester john 243 
priesthood, Egyptian 25, 70, 72 
'progress' 7, 27-8, 30, 32, 177-9, 181, 185, 
189-90,196,198-201,204,208,232, 
237,245,265,296,316 
'progressive(s)' 205,218,284,318,339 
Prometheus 220 
Proto-Greek 8 I, 520 
Proudhon, P.-J. 381 
Psellos, M. 150, 152 
Ptah49 2 
Ptolemy (astronomer) 133-4 
Ptolemy I 116,520 
Punic 353 
Punic Wars 341 f., 355 
Pyramid(s) 19,273,276 f.; Great 164, 
174,27 2- 80 
Pythagoras, Pythagoreanism 71 - 2 , 
105,197,295,519 fT. 
Quesnay, F. 520 
Quinet, E. 228, 233, 236 
Ra, Re 67 f., 115, 176 
racism 27-9, 30, 201-4, 239-4 0 
Ragep, J. xrii, 468 
Ramesses 180, 249, 260, 446 
Rashed, R. 235 
Rask, C. 227,479 
Rawlinson, G. 362 
Rawson, E. 292-3 
Ray,J. xrii, 141 
Reinach, J. 37 I 
Reinach, S. 34. 230,367,37 1-3,37 6, 
393,4 16,500 
Renaissance 23-5, 121-60 
Renan, E. 143, 186,305,341,344 f., 
347 f., 350,352,371,390.496-7 
Renfrew, C. 13-14, 16,4 07,4 10 
Renouf, Sir Peter Ie Page 258 
Rhadamanthys 63. 84 
Rhea 63 
Rhodes II 1,395 
Ridgeway,W.80,33 6,489 
Ritter, C. 378 
Rivers, W. H. R. 271 
Robertson Smith, W. 380, 493 
Rochette, R. 253 
Rollig, V. W. 43 I 
Romanticism xv, 27 fT., 204- 11 
Rome 25,117,190,209,289,307 
Rosen, E. 156 
Rosetta Stone 25 I 
Rosicrucianism 25 f., 165-9 
Rouge, E. de 258 
Rousseau,J.-J. 28, 204 f., 327 
R(t63 
Russia 246, 247, 387, 390 
Rytkonen, S. 299 fT. 
Sacy, 1. Sylvestre de 234, 253 
Said, E. xrii, 184,234,235 
573


--- PAGE 303 ---
574 BLACK ATHENA 
Saint-Simon, C. H. de 268 
Sais 23>5 1,52, I lId I I 
Salamis 335 
Sandars, N. K. 445 
Sanskrit 29, 224,227-30,330, 372 
Santillana, G. de 182 f., 217, 275- 6 
Saussure F. de 6, 372, 500 
Scaliger,]. 169 
Schelling, C. 222 
Schelling, F. W. 478 
Sch~neder,E. 180, 185,244 
Schiller, F. von 284 f., 323 
Schlegel, August Wilhelm von 206, 
230 ,47 8 
Schlegel, Friedrich von 206, 227- 8, 
2301f,,245, 255,289, 292-3,310, 
344,361,479 f. 
Schleicher, A. 238 
Schleiermacher, F. E. D. 321, 348 f., 
494,497 
Schliemann, H. 5, 24,43,316,338, 
362,368,377,380(,386,405,410 
Schlozer, A. L. 220, 227,47 8 
Scholem, G. 147-8 
Schwab, R. 227 f., 233, 234-5, 236, 
267,34 2 
Scodand 206-7, 209 f., 215,301 
Scott, Prof. Walter 138 
Scott, Sir Walter 291, 475, 488 
Sea Peoples 446 f., 449-5 0 
Semites, Semitic xiii, xiv, xx, xxi, 12, 29, 
340,344- 6,353 
Senwosret; see Sesostris 
Septimius, Lucius 385, 501 
Serapis, temple of 121 
Sesostris 19,64, 168, 170, 178 f., 185, 
32 9 
Seth (Sutekh, St) 20- I, 66-7, 68, 70, 
84,112,454 
Sethos (Sety) 179 f. 
Severus, Lucius Septimius 117,3 85 
Seznec,]. 145, 157-8 
Shaffer, E. xvii, 318-19 
Shaftesbury, Earl of 210 
Shaft Graves 43 ff., 410 
Shakuntala 229 
Shelley, Percy B. 27, 290 ff., 295, 323 
Shem 339, 343 
Sid 67, 454, 521 
Sidon 67,187,354 f., 378, 5II, 519, 
521 
Siwa oasis 65, II5 
Skandeia 382,501 
slavery 27, 30, 322, 354 
Smelik, K. A. D. 117 
Smith, G. 406 
Smith, Sir William 195,315,329 f., 
362 
Smyth, C. Piazzi 274, 277, 279 
Snowden,F. 434, 436 
Sokrates 7 I, 106, 197, 348 
Solomon's Temple, Jerusalem 168, 
173-4 
Spain 291-2 
Sparta 53,109-10, II4, 292, 333, 513 
Spencer, Herbert 341 
Sphinx 19,63-6,68 f., 246 
Spinoza, B. de 27, 175, 192,471,473, 
519 
Spyropoulos, T. 18,38 
St; see Seth 
Stecchini, L. C. 275 f. 
Stephanos of Byzantium 449 
Stieglitz, R. 43 I 
Stoicism 110, 521 
'storm and stress' school 207 
Strabo 76,79 f., 378, 521 
Strange,]. 447 
Stricker, B. H. 139 
StuartJones, H. 332 
Stubbings, F. 44 f., 364, 410-1 I, 
424 ff. 
Sudan 12, 247 
Sumerian 12,364,509 
sun, sun-worship 19,24,67,69,17 6, 
178,349 
Sutekh; see Seth 
Swedenborg, Emanuel 485 
Swinburne, Algernon C. 27 
Switzerland 209, 327 
Taautos 142, 143-4 
Tacitus 302 
Tatian 193,472 ( 
Taylour, W. 410 
Tcherikover, V. 449 
Telemachus 169 
Tennyson, Alfred, Lord 321 
Terrasson,J. 179-80,208 
Teukros 446 
Thales 279 
Thebes (Boiotia) 18-20,22,3 87,4 25; 
see also Kadmos 
Thebes (Egypt) 51, 82,383,478 
theogony 87-8,197,521 
Thera, island of9, 41- 2, 107,375, 
430,510,521 
Third World 403-4, 437 
Thirlwall, Connop 317, 321 , 322-3, 
324-6,329 f., 336,349,364,41 I, 
42 5 
Thomson, G. 409 
Thoth 24, 106, 139-44,466 
Thothmes III 41, 69,260 
Thucydides 23, 78, 80, 101-3,302, 
331,375-6,386,522 
Tiedemann, D. 216-17 
Tm67 ff. 
Tocqueville, A. de 238, 344, 352, 354, 
482 
Tokharian 516,522 
Toland,]. 175-6,192,195,251,471 
Tompkins, P. 38, 276 
Treitschke, H. von 301 
Trojan War 76, 330,393, 422, 43 I f. 
Troy 210, 328,376 
Tsountas, C. 368-9, 37 1, 373 
Turgot, A. R. 199-200,212 
Turkey 13, 248 f., 371 
Turner, C. F. M. 3 I 5 
Turner,]. xvii, 506 
Turner, S. xvii, 22 I 
Tur-Sinai, S. 398, 428 
Tyre 40, 354 f., 393, 519, 521,522 
Ugaritic 40, 55 f., 414, 416, 418 fT., 
424,43 1,44 6 
Ullman, B.]. 397 f., 428 
Ulysses; see Odysseus 
Unitarianism 5 I 2 
Uruk tablets 451 
Usener, H. 313 
Utilitarianism 327 
Van Berchem, D. 426 
Vaughan, H. H. 494 
Vedas 185,229 
Ventris, M. 5 ff., 36, 405 f., 417 f. 
Vermeule, E. xvii, 410, 507 
Vian, F. 408 
Vico, G. B. 170,208,217,219,283, 
470,477 
Vietnam xxii, 198 
Virolleaud, C. 419 
Volney, C. F. de 244 
Voltaire 178,208,302 
Voss, M. H. von 298 
INDEX 
W3dyt65-6 
Walcot, P. 365, 413,420 
Warburton, W. 196-7, 199 
Warren, P. 16 
Wells, W. C. 245-6 
West, M. L. 413 
Westfall, R. S. 191-2 
West Semitic 7, 36, 56, 83 f., 417 f., 
432 ,5 10 
Whewell, W. 321 f. 
Whiston, W. 175, 192, 197,25 I 
Wieland, C.-M. 214-15, 293 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, U. von 81, 
104,211,3 15,333,339,374,4 87 
Wilcken, U. 304, 374 
Willetts, R. F. 409 
Williams, C. 436 
Williams, G. W. 436 
Winckelmann,].J. 212-I4, 215,244, 
265, 283 f., 290, 348 f., 476, 484 
Wind,E.153 
Witte, B. C. 301 
Wolf, F. A. 283-4, 286, 306 fT., 327, 
376 
Wood, R. 210, 283 
Woolley, Sir Leonard 395, 409 
Wordsworth, William 32 I, 323 
writing 12, 14, 16,25,47, 106,327 
Xanthos 445 
XenophonI16, 185,473 
Xouthos 83 f., 454 
Yahwe 21, 66,176,447 
Yam21, 66 
Yates, F. 25,153-6,158 f., 162 f., 
165, 174, 191 
Yavetz, Z. 299 
Young, E. 170 
Young, T. 227 
Zeno 110-11 
Zeno ofKition 110,521 f. 
Zervos, C. 150 
Zethos 18 f., 84, 454 
Zeus 19, 64 f., 76, 89, 91, 449 
Zimbabwe 4 I 8 
Zionism 36, 4 I 6 
Zodiac 19, 252, 272 
Zola, Emile 358,499 
Zoroastrianism 5 18, 522 
575

