=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: MARTIN-LUTHER-KING-JR-S-DEATH-AND-HOW-IT-CHANGED-AMERICA.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 305
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:19:24.302345
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
APRIL 4, 
1968
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page i


--- PAGE 3 ---
ALSO BY MICHAEL ERIC DYSON
Know What I Mean? Reflections on Hip Hop (2007)
Debating Race (2007)
Pride: The Seven Deadly Sins (2006)
Come Hell or High W ater: 
Hurricane Katrina and the Color of Disaster (2006)
Is Bill Cosby Right? 
Or Has the Black Middle Class Lost Its Mind? (2005)
Mercy, Mercy Me: 
The Art, Loves, and Demons of Marvin Gaye (2004)
The Michael Eric Dyson Reader (2004)
Why I Love Black Women (2003)
Open Mike: 
Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture, and Religion (2003)
Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur(2001)
I May Not Get There with You: 
The True Martin Luther King, Jr. (2000)
Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line (1996)
Between God and Gangsta Rap: 
Bearing Witness to Black Culture (1996)
Making Malcolm: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X (1995)
Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (1993)
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page ii


--- PAGE 4 ---
APRIL 4,
1968
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.’S 
DEATH AND 
HOW IT CHANGED
AMERICA
MICHAEL ERIC 
DYSON
A MEMBER OF THE PERSEUS BOOKS GROUP
NEW YORK
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page iii


--- PAGE 5 ---
Copyright © 2008 by Michael Eric Dyson
Hardcover first published in 2008 by Basic Civitas Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
Paperback first published in 2008 by Basic Civitas Books
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. 
No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever 
without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Civitas Books, 
387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Civitas Books are available 
at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United States by 
corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, 
please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group,
2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, 
or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail
special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Design by Jane Raese
Text set in 12-point Garamond 3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available for this book.
Hardcover: ISBN 978-0-465-00212-2
Paperback: ISBN 978-0-465-01286-2
2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
0465012862-all.qxd:Dyson  10/27/08  12:48 PM  Page iv


--- PAGE 6 ---
TO
MS. OPRAH WINFREY
THE FULFILLMENT OF THE DREAM
WHO LOOKS OUT ON THE PROMISED LAND HE MADE POSSIBLE
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page v


--- PAGE 7 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page vi
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
CONTENTS
Preface ix
PART ONE
Moses: A Prophet’s Death in Three Acts
1 (Act 1) Fighting Death 3
2 (Act 2) Talking Death 25
3 (Act 3) Facing Death 45
PART TWO
Promised Land, or Wilderness?
4 Report Card on Black America 79
5 The Black Family and Black Inequality 101
6 What Would Martin Do? 
Poverty, Prosperity, and the Performance 
of Blackness 119
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
PART THREE
Joshua: Charismatic Black Leadership 
in a Prophet’s Shadow
7 A Messiah Measures Leadership 145
8 Heir Apparent 171
9 Last of a Dying Breed? 201
10 Black Kennedy 223
Afterword: Interview with Dr. King 
on His 80th Birthday 245
Acknowledgments 271
Bibliographical Notes 275
Index 283
CONTENTS
viii
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page viii


--- PAGE 10 ---
PREFACE
When Martin Luther King, Jr., was murdered, I was a
nine-year-old schoolboy. I had no idea who he was, had
never heard his name or seen him in action. Just as tech-
nology had allowed him to speak at his own funeral, it
offered me my first glimpse of King’s oratorical magic.
Like so many folk born after he died, I first met King on
television. I was sitting on the living room floor of my
inner city Detroit home. “Martin Luther King, Jr., has
just been shot in Memphis, Tennessee,” the newsman
announced, interrupting whatever program we were
watching. My father sat behind me in his favorite chair.
He was barely able to utter “humph.” It was one of those
compressed sighs that held back far more pain than it let
loose. It came from deep inside his body, an involuntary
reflex like somebody had punched him in the gut.
The newsman reported that King had been seriously
wounded on a hotel balcony. Then we were ushered by
film into Mason Temple for the climax of King’s soul
shaking last speech. When he finished, I was stunned—
that words could thrill me that way, that they could cause
such delicious pandemonium in an audience. King’s
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
electrifying rhetoric stood the hair on my arms at atten-
tion. Soon the newsman broke faith once more with the
scheduled programming to announce the final tragedy. 
“Martin Luther King, Jr., has been assassinated in
Memphis, Tennessee, at thirty-nine years old.” 
After King’s death, I hungered to know him. I haunted
libraries in search of biographies, sent off for recordings of
his speeches, talked to teachers about his life. I learned
that he was a man of peace and love. I also got scared: if
King could be murdered for seeking to heal the nation’s
racial fractures, then all black men might be vulnerable. I
thought to myself: “If they killed him, and he didn’t want
to harm anybody, then they could kill me too.” For more
than a year, I couldn’t stand in front of the upstairs bath-
room sink because a door with a window opened onto a
small balcony. I feared that I, too, might be taken out.
The bullet that shattered King’s jaw lodged fragments of
fear deep inside my psyche. 
April 4, 1968 is my effort to grapple with King’s
death—in my own mind, and in the life of the nation. My
earlier book on the leader wrestled with his radical legacy
and the way it had been hijacked by conservatives out to
remake King into an opponent of both affirmative action
and a culture that usefully takes race into account. The
present study aims to understand just how dominant
death was in King’s life—how he fought death and faced
it down all the same, even as he used death to rally his
people in the fight for justice. By probing how King
PREFACE
x
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page x


--- PAGE 12 ---
embraced death’s inevitability to shape his social agenda,
we may better understand how he secured his legacy on
the bloody battlefields of racial transformation. 
If King was his people’s Moses, their charismatic and
bold leader, then his vision of the Promised Land has
influenced how later generations of black folk have meas-
ured their distance from the achievements he foresaw. It
has been 40 years since King gave his last will and testa-
ment in Memphis and encouraged his followers to believe
that he had seen the future promise of fulfillment. Are we
any closer to King’s beloved community, or are we wan-
dering in a vast racial wilderness from which there is no
easy escape? If the signs of arrival into the land of milk
and honey are strongest for the wealthiest among us, they
are depressing and weak for the poorest. Our faltering
quest for justice for the lowliest members of our commu-
nity suggests the responsibility of the most gifted to forge
a path on their behalf. This, after all, is how King spent
his last days, fighting for the rights and increased wages of
striking sanitation workers. And what of the Joshuas left
standing to lead their people into the Promised Land? Has
charismatic leadership run its course, or do Messianic
leaders still have a role to play in our national destiny?
Jesse Jackson, Al Sharpton and Barack Obama all in vary-
ing ways can claim aspects of King’s black Christian lead-
ership mantle. But have they measured up to King’s own
vision of how those who would come after him must
respond to the crises at hand?
PREFACE
xi
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
On the 40th anniversary of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s
death, it is sobering to realize that he will have been dead
longer than he lived. And yet his deeply moving moral
vision has lasted beyond the grave. King’s painful but pro-
ductive martyrdom rescued both his failing reputation as a
great leader and the efforts of black folk to move further
along the path to racial redemption and national thriving.
But now that King is enshrined in a national holiday, his
challenge to the status quo—and thus his ability as a sym-
bol to inspire radical social change—is smothered beneath
banalities and platitudes. 
Only by turning to his death and martyrdom can we
size up the work that remains to be done and address the
suffering and hardship that too many of the folk he loved
continue to face. If January 15, 1929, is a holiday celebra-
tion trumpeting the arrival of the prophet, then April 4,
1968, is a day that directly confronts the sorrows and
death we must forever negotiate. King’s memory contin-
ues to call us forward out of our creature comforts into the
sacrifices of body and spirit that he routinely made. If we
hear again his voice, and listen once more to his enduring
faith, even as he confronts death, we just might success-
fully conquer the death and grief in our own souls and in
our nation. And we might just resurrect the hope we need
to inch even closer to the Promised Land he saw.
PREFACE
xii
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page xii


--- PAGE 14 ---
Well I don’t know what will happen now. We’ve got some diffi-
cult days ahead. But it really doesn’t matter with me now.
Because I’ve been to the mountaintop. And I don’t mind. Like
anybody, I would like to live a long life. Longevity has its
place. But I’m not concerned about that now. I just want to do
God’s will. And He’s allowed me to go up to the mountain.
And I’ve looked over. And I’ve seen the Promised Land. I may
not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight, that
we as a people will get to the Promised Land. And so I’m
happy tonight. I’m not worried about anything. I’m not fearing
any man. “Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the
Lord.”
—MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., APRIL 3, 1968
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page xiv
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 16 ---
PART 
ONE
MOSES
A PROPHET’S DEATH 
IN THREE ACTS
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 1


--- PAGE 17 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 2
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 18 ---
ACT
ONE
FIGHTING DEATH
YOU CANNOT HEAR THE NAME MARTIN
Luther King, Jr., and not think of death. You might hear
the words “I have a dream,” but they will doubtlessly only
serve to underscore an image of a simple motel balcony, a
large man made small, a pool of blood. For as famous as he
may have been in life it is, and was, death that ultimately
defined him. Born into a people whose main solace was
Christianity’s Promised Land awaiting them after the suf-
fering of this world, King took on the power of his race’s
presumed destiny and found in himself the defiance neces-
sary to spark change. He ate, drank, and slept death. He
danced with it, he preached it, he feared it, and he stared
it down. He looked for ways to lay it aside, this burden 
of his own mortality, but ultimately knew that his 
unwavering insistence on a nonviolent end to the mis-
treatment of his people could only end violently.
3
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 3


--- PAGE 19 ---
Before anyone ever threatened him, King nearly died
by his own hands. As a youth, he tried to kill himself
twice because of his love for his grandmother. King’s first
fling with fate came after an accident. His brother A.D.
slid down a banister and knocked their beloved matriarch
motionless to the ground. Fearing that his grandmother
was dead, King ran upstairs to his room at the back of the
house and leaped from the opened window. He got up
from his escapade unscathed after he learned that she had
survived. The next time trouble struck, neither of them
would be so lucky. King snuck away from home to watch
a parade in Atlanta’s Negro business district. His headi-
ness of getting away with something forbidden and glee 
at the thrill of seeing a parade were interrupted when a
friend told him that he had better hurry home. While he
was having his illicit fun, his grandmother had died of a
heart attack. King’s youthful frolic buried him in guilt,
causing him to naively wonder whether God was punish-
ing the family because he had committed the sin of dis-
obedience. Remorse and religion pushed him out of the
window a second time. He survived his sophomore spill,
but without the consoling presence of one of his biggest
boyhood boosters. 
The year King was born was the first in over sixty years
that the South wasn’t soaked in the blood of over a thou-
sand annual lynchings. From the moment the Civil War
ended until the day he was born, a theater of intimidation
through public death was reenacted across the country,
APRIL 4, 1968
4
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 4


--- PAGE 20 ---
and had nearly codified in King’s backyard. His grandpar-
ents and parents, his uncles and aunts, every single mem-
ber of his family before him had learned how to live in
fear, how to abide the Jim Crow ways, and how to provide
for the next generation a haven carved within a black com-
munity of like-minded survivors. It was also a time of
deep economic depression, and in the following decade
progress would come for the African American commu-
nity with the New Deal and the WPA. But the forward
momentum would also be hounded by the dark forces that
had been beaten back by anti-lynching associations, only
to find horrific new ways to enact their particular brand of
vengeance.
King later confessed that his grandmother’s death
forced him to clarify his beliefs about the afterlife while
causing a crisis of faith. Raised in the home of a respected
evangelical minister, King swallowed the beliefs around
him without the need to question his father’s authority.
But with his grandmother went his blind faith, and
though his adherence to personal morality never really
wavered, a profound skepticism ate away at his fundamen-
talist core. It prompted him to challenge the bodily resur-
rection of Jesus in his father’s church. King’s skepticism
persisted; by the second year of college he regretted going
to church. He eventually cast off the narrowness of his
father’s church and found his own solace in a far more
liberal interpretation of Christianity, pursuing truth in
theology and philosophy, always seeking answers from
FIGHTING DEATH
5
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 5


--- PAGE 21 ---
whatever source lay at hand. His questioning nature later
served him well as a leader who was open to new ideas.
This piercing style of intellectual debate proved a boon to
his staff, as they relished the lively and contentious inter-
actions that King encouraged. 
If King escaped his boyhood fundamentalism, he
couldn’t shake the foreboding finger of death that traced
across his life. From the time he began to speak out, King
was haunted by death—mugged by the promise of
destruction for seeking an end to black indignity and the
beginning of equality with whites. After a few years spent
up North acquiring his education, King chose to return to
where he would be needed most in the coming years—the
white-hot center of the burgeoning civil rights movement
and Montgomery, Alabama. At twenty-six he took on the
responsibilities of a Baptist pulpit, joining forces with the
local NAACP , and dug in for the yearlong bus boycott
created to end the Jim Crow law of racial segregation in
public transportation. During this conflict his house was
bombed—his wife, Coretta, and their ten-week-old
daughter, Yolanda, were home but escaped injury. It was
the first time King would be tested with violence aimed
at his life, but far from the last. Later in the boycott a
shotgun blast was fired into King’s home. King did not
capitulate, but instead he emerged from the ashes of these
attempts as the true phoenix of the newly minted move-
ment. Once again, his mortality challenged, he accepted
his calling without hesitation. 
APRIL 4, 1968
6
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 6


--- PAGE 22 ---
A couple of years after the boycott ended, King was in
Harlem at Blumstein’s Department Store signing Stride
Toward Freedom, his account of the movement’s success.
From out of nowhere, a clearly disturbed black woman,
Izola Ware Curry, sunk a letter opener into his chest after
asking if he was Martin Luther King. Though considered
an act of instability, this attack was still colored by Curry’s
irrational hatred of what King and the NAACP were try-
ing to do, and by her own fear of being killed because of
his constant stirring of the pot. Even so, it was one of the
rare instances of black public hate directed at King, the
kind that would later be famously associated with his col-
league and competitor Malcolm X. 
As he took flight to snip the bullying wings of Jim
Crow, King ruffled the feathers of white racists, who grew
more determined to bring him down. There was striking
physical intimidation of King. In a show of naked aggres-
sion, two white cops attempted to block his entry into a
Montgomery courtroom for the trial of a man who had
attacked King’s comrade Ralph Abernathy. Despite a
warning from the cops, King poked his head inside the
courtroom looking for his lawyer to help him get inside.
His actions ignited their rage. The policemen twisted his
arm behind his back and manhandled him into jail. King
said the cops “tried to break my arm; they grabbed my
collar and tried to choke me, and when they got me to 
the cell, they kicked me in.” A photographer captured 
the scene. The shot of King—dressed in a natty tan suit,
FIGHTING DEATH
7
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 7


--- PAGE 23 ---
stylish gold wristwatch and a trendy snap-brim fedora—
wincing as he was banished to confinement is an iconic
civil rights image. 
As King addressed the 1962 convention of his organi-
zation, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
(SCLC), a two-hundred-pound young white man rushed
the stage and landed a brutal blow on his left cheek. The
crowd reacted in hushed disbelief. The diminutive King
never flinched or retreated, even as the young brute deliv-
ered several more blows, first to the side of his face as he
stood behind King, and then two blows to his back. King
gently spoke to his attacker as he continued to pummel
his body. As he was being knocked backward King
dropped his hands—legendary activist Septima Clark, in
attendance that day, said King let down his hands “like a
newborn baby”—and faced his assailant head on. 
Finally, SCLC staff leader Wyatt Tee Walker and others
intervened as King pleaded, “Don’t touch him! Don’t
touch him. We have to pray for him.” King quietly
assured the young man he wouldn’t be harmed. The leader
and his aides retreated to a private office to talk with his
assailant, who was, King told the audience when he
returned, a member of the American Nazi Party. As King
held an ice-filled handkerchief to his jaw, he informed the
crowd he wouldn’t press charges. Most in attendance were
amazed at King’s calm as violence flashed. Obviously non-
violence was more than a method and a creed; it answered
assault with acts of steadfast courage. 
APRIL 4, 1968
8
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 8


--- PAGE 24 ---
If King was unfazed by battering, he managed, through
a Herculean work ethic and a laserlike attention to his pur-
pose, to ride the crushing stream of daily death threats that
flowed from Montgomery to Memphis. Everywhere he
went, disenfranchised throngs clamored to see him—
while hordes of bigots wanted to see him dead. Many of
the planes he rode on were delayed because of bomb
threats. Many of the buildings he spoke in were secured
because of threats of destruction. Many of the speeches he
gave at hotels and colleges were delivered knowing that
some potential crackpot—or crack shot—was roaming
and ready to do him in. Many of the marches he led drew
goons who violently complained of the decay of their
“pure” white America. And many of the demonstrations
he conducted were met by grieving white nationalists full
of murderous resentment. King slashed the gnarled, Cro-
Magnon verities of white supremacy with his silver
tongue. The love-drunk orator also troubled racists by
calling on white liberal divines in his pleas for freedom.
King deflected the blows of mortality through rhetoric
and philosophy that owed as much to theater as to theol-
ogy. He grasped the benefit of dramatizing his fight with
death—and hence, his people’s fight with social death as
victims of oppression. When King’s house was bombed
during the boycott in Montgomery, he rushed home from
a mass meeting to greet an angry crowd of blacks. By a
single dramatic gesture—holding up his hand to silence
the crowd, just as Malcolm X would later wave his hand
FIGHTING DEATH
9
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 9


--- PAGE 25 ---
over an angry crowd of Muslims in Harlem to retreat,
causing a white policeman to say, “That’s too much power
for one man to have”—King reassured them that his wife
and baby were safe. He asked them not to panic or resort
to violence. “If you have weapons, take them home. He
who lives by the sword will perish by the sword. Remem-
ber that is what Jesus said. We are not advocating vio-
lence. We want to love our enemies.” 
King urged his listeners to believe in the moral beauty
of their fight for justice. Death could not derail such a
movement. “I want it to be known the length and breadth
of this land that if I am stopped, this movement will not
stop. If I am stopped, our work will not stop. For what 
we are doing is right, what we are doing is just,” King
declared. “If anything happens to me, there will be others
to take my place.” It was a shrewd appeal to his listeners’
religious beliefs. He also reinforced the virtues of non-
violence and underscored his humility as a leader. And he
situated, and thereby downplayed the effect of, his possi-
ble death in a broader movement that was impossible to
stop. It was the perfect fusion of truth and art.
To be sure, King was courageous in the face of death.
But he confessed to his audiences that he was often afraid
as well. He inspired his listeners to swap their fears for
faith, just as he had done. “I went to bed many nights
scared to death,” King admitted, referring to the early
days of the boycott. Death threats were frequent. After
one of them, King got a new dose of faith in a famous
APRIL 4, 1968
10
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 10


--- PAGE 26 ---
kitchen encounter with God. That experience led him to
an adult belief in a personal deity. King says he heard a
voice saying to him to “‘preach the gospel, stand up for
truth, stand up for righteousness.’ Since that morning I
can stand up without fear.” That didn’t mean there
weren’t relapses and new struggles to overcome, or reaffir-
mations of faith to be made. 
In a mass meeting after city buses were integrated,
King voiced the sorrow and fear of black Montgomery
over violent white backlash. King was toiling under the
increased pressures of a man who had become a symbol for
his people. He also faced the jealousy of fellow activists
because of the ink and spotlight that followed him. So
King took to the pulpit to pray for God’s guidance. He
sowed a few phrases that reaped a harvest of turmoil in his
audience: “Lord, I hope no one will have to die as a result
of our struggle for freedom in Montgomery. Certainly I
don’t want to die. But if anyone has to die, let it be me!”
King’s words were met by a chorus of “No”s that ripped
through the congregation. Overcome with emotion, King
couldn’t continue. He broke down and was led to his seat
by two preachers. It was one of the few times that the
trauma King routinely endured slipped into public view.
King struggled constantly between bravery and the
specter of breakdown. His public proclamations of fear-
lessness were both truthful and strategic. They were aimed
at reinforcing troops in the racial trenches. But in private,
blue moods sometimes sucked his spirit dry. There were
FIGHTING DEATH
11
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 11


--- PAGE 27 ---
times when King was undaunted by the prospect of death,
addressing it with fairly objective calculation. At other
times he was ambushed by the fear and world-weariness
known only to those who’ve been fiendishly chased by
government officials, fellow citizens, and hate groups.
This didn’t make King a hypocrite or a coward. His brutal
honesty about death made him bravely human. King
warred against death’s sovereignty, and in some desperate
moments, conceded its ugly ubiquity. In the midst of the
battle, he remained strangely hopeful about using death to
jumpstart social progress.
There’s little doubt that King knew the price he might
have to pay if he gave in to the pressures and fortunes of
history. Black life was dangerous during the reign of white
terror in the fifties. As King was first putting on his robes
to preach in Alabama, the Supreme Court was lighting a
match with their decision against segregation in Brown v.
Board of Education. Over the summer of 1955, as the first
school year that would see mixed classes approached, the
Mississippi Delta began to smolder. On May 7, a black
minister—Willie George Washington Lee, the first black
person to vote in Humphreys County—was shot in the
face, ultimately dying from his wounds. No one was
charged, as the local sheriff claimed the buckshots found
in his jawbone were probably fillings. On August 13, a
sixty-three-year-old farmer and WWII veteran named
Lamar Smith was shot on the courthouse lawn in
Brookhaven, in front of the sheriff. Three men were
APRIL 4, 1968
12
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 12


--- PAGE 28 ---
arrested, but a grand jury of their white supremacist peers
brought no indictments. Later that month a young black
teenager would allegedly wolf-whistle at a white woman,
and the sparks that had been flying around the state of
Mississippi would ignite into one of the most horrendous
and infamous lynchings of the twentieth century. Black
leadership was even more a risk of one’s life for the pre-
cious goal of freedom. There were those who coveted lead-
ership in order to profit from the goodies that fell along
the lime-lit path of fame. Few were truly willing to sacri-
fice life and limb to secure rights and privileges for the
masses. King zealously embraced the task, and by doing
so, inspired other leaders to do the same. “If a man hasn’t
found something he’s willing to die for,” King was fond of
repeating, “he isn’t fit to live.” When a reporter asked him
if he was afraid after a spasm of violence in Montgomery,
King demurred. “Once you become dedicated to a cause,
personal security is not the goal. It is greater than that.
What will happen to you personally does not matter. My
cause, my race, is worth dying for.”
King refined his argument in an essay, writing: “If
physical death is the price that a man must pay to free his
children and his white brethren from a permanent death
of the spirit, then nothing could be more redemptive.” In
an interview with Alex Haley in Playboy magazine he fur-
ther stated: “If I were constantly worried about death, I
couldn’t function. After a while, if your life is more or less
constantly in peril, you come to a point where you accept
FIGHTING DEATH
13
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 13


--- PAGE 29 ---
the possibility philosophically.” Saying that all leaders
must face the fact that “America today is an extremely
sick nation” and that “something could happen to me at
any time,” King concluded that “my cause is so right, so
moral, that if I should lose my life, in some way it would
aid the cause.”
Regardless of these brave assertions, it would be a mis-
take to conclude that King was cavalier about death. Even
as he acknowledged the strong possibility he might die,
King fought death to the end. Less than two weeks before
he was shot down, King joked with an audience in Albany,
Georgia, that he had to “pray [his chartered plane] all the
way in” because for a long while the plane’s engine
wouldn’t start, making the leader late for his speech.
“Now, as I’ve often said, I don’t want to give the impres-
sion that I don’t have faith in God in the air; it’s simply
that I’ve had more experience with him on the ground.”
At a press conference in Los Angeles after Malcolm X’s
death in 1965, King disclosed a discussion he had with
Attorney General Katzenbach about his own safety. King
admitted that death threats “are not too pleasant to dis-
cuss so I didn’t want to go into great detail.” 
When a reporter quizzed him about the potential vio-
lence that would result from his death, King began his
answer by declaring, “Well, I certainly hope that nothing
happens to me.” In a speech delivered at Los Angeles’
Victory Baptist Church under death threats, King said: 
“I don’t ever request police protection, but when it’s given
APRIL 4, 1968
14
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 14


--- PAGE 30 ---
I don’t ever turn it down . . . I wish I could take them
back with me to Selma.” King was scheduled to leave Cal-
ifornia for Selma to lead the campaign for voting rights,
where he faced several more credible death threats. Before
he left, King placed calls to several go-betweens to recruit
prominent citizens to telegram President Johnson and
seek federal protection for the leader. The brutality and
murder that marchers later faced in Selma warranted
King’s request. On occasion, King balked at going places
where the threat of death loomed, only to face down his
fears and troop on.
King courageously resisted the forces that caucused
against him. But the unrelenting threat of bombs explod-
ing and snipers shooting took its toll. King suffered des-
perate stretches of depression that sometimes alarmed his
closest aides and friends. He fought valiantly to maintain
sanity and focus as his body rebelled against the baleful
disharmonies of white supremacy. One of his top aides
wanted him to consult a psychiatrist because of his steep
descent into the doldrums. The sleeping pills he got from
a physician friend stopped working. King’s reliance on
elbow-bending to combat insomnia and exhaustion dra-
matically increased. His vacations rarely allowed him to
escape his troubles and pressures. And the somber tones of
his voice evoked the nightmares that stalked him when he
wakened from unsatisfying sleep. Martin Luther King was
a marked man. There was little possibility of retreat from
the maelstrom that called his name and sought his blood.
FIGHTING DEATH
15
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 15


--- PAGE 31 ---
Is it little wonder that King’s philosophical armor
sometimes wore thin in the ghastly confrontation with his
own mortality? The inhuman pace of his schedule alone
was enough to wear out five men. But the energy it took
to grapple with death-dealing, death-denying, death-
delaying, death-avoiding, and death-embracing could only
last so long. King shuttled theologically between Jesus’s
confident stoicism in the face of death—“Now is my soul
troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour”—and his
wrenching desire in Gethsemane to slip the burden of
saving the world through his own bloodshed: “O my
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.” If
Jesus could be torn between cosmic obligation and exis-
tential terror, it makes sense that the same could be true
for his ebony disciple.
Still, it is nearly miraculous that King managed to
keep death in a philosophical headlock as often as he did.
Sure, he sometimes cried uncle in private and was bull-
dozed by impenetrable despondency. But King rallied to
declare in public what he knew to be true, both despite and
because of his suffering. King’s plight made this clear: If
sleep is the cousin of death, then depression is its little
brother. His depressions often felt like death only slightly
delayed. King’s public dreams and private nightmares
formed the raw and the cooked of his civil rights world.
His dreams were the natural reflex of hope and redeemed
curiosity. His depressions were largely the result of the
APRIL 4, 1968
16
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 16


--- PAGE 32 ---
social evils he encountered. Despite the despair that
tempted him, King promoted hope and curiosity to his
dying day. 
King’s hope flashed even as he said that the nation’s
political drift led to spiritual death. If he had given up on
the American dream he would have stopped being dis-
appointed in white America. King’s bitter indictment of
the country’s unconscious racism grew from his lover’s
quarrel with America. He said that unfair white privi-
leges had to die for black equality to be born. King made
an even more striking argument: that black moral disci-
pline could redeem a decaying white America. King was
fond of quoting historian Arnold Toynbee’s claim that 
“it may be the Negro who will give the spiritual dynamic
to Western civilization that it so desperately needs to 
survive.” 
But helping to save Western civilization came at a
cost: even a superior black morality wasn’t enough to res-
cue the nation. Black blood would have to flow to com-
plete the task. King never tired of telling black folk that
unearned suffering, even death, is redemptive. King spoke
of how he and, by extension, his followers, could trans-
form “suffering into a creative force . . . Recognizing the
necessity for suffering I have tried to make it a virtue . . . 
I have attempted to see my personal ordeals as an opportu-
nity to transform myself and heal the people involved in
the tragic situation which now obtains. I have lived these
last few years with the conviction that unearned suffering
FIGHTING DEATH
17
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 17


--- PAGE 33 ---
is redemptive.” The logic is clear: since suffering, includ-
ing death, can’t be avoided, turn it to advantage and wrest
from evil a sweet and ironic victory. Nobody did that bet-
ter than King.
King made a virtue of necessity by brilliantly using
death—the threat of it, the use of it to terrorize black
folk, the fact of its existence to spoil the black quest for
justice—as a means to inspire black folk to keep going,
and to signal to white racists that their way wouldn’t win.
King presided over the spectacle of black death with stir-
ring imagination. He cast light on the harsh interior of
black mortality and found a costly but triumphant
immortality as its reward. The threat and reality of death
played many roles simultaneously: It was a bitter arena to
be played. It was also the producer, director, and often the
co-star of many civil rights performances—marches,
demonstrations, funerals, rallies, protests, freedom rides,
sit-ins, speeches, and eulogies. No one presided over the
theater of death with more skill than King. No one
brought as much drama and passion to the play of death
and life as King. 
And no one directed the response of black folk in the
face of death with as much brilliance and cunning, or as
much courage and brio, as King. In thousands of speeches,
eulogies, pep talks, sermons, essays, articles, and books,
King rehearsed the use and consequence of death. He 
re-hearsed it too, placing death into convenient moral
coffins after he publicly slayed the fear of death in axiom
APRIL 4, 1968
18
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 18


--- PAGE 34 ---
and anecdote. King got pugilistic about the fear of death.
He boxed his way across the canvass of American moral
and social life, tagging the fiercest enemy of black
progress with rhetorical uppercuts and verbal jabs.
King also waged war against death and the anxieties 
it birthed by finding bright purpose behind its ominous
clouds. At the funeral for three of the four little girls
blown to glory in a Birmingham church bombing—
Addie Mae Collins, Carol Denise McNair, and Cynthia
Diane Wesley—King argued that their deaths “say to us
that we must be concerned not merely about who mur-
dered them, but about the system, the way of life, the phi-
losophy which produced the murderers. Their death says
to us that we must work passionately and unrelentingly
for the realization of the American dream.” King also
insisted that the little girls’ deaths could force a greater
good if we would heed the lessons of their murder. King
argued that only the redeeming action of the girls’ sur-
vivors—all citizens of good will—could defy the logic,
and deny the victory, of the hateful murderers who nipped
the sweet flower of their lives in the bud. And he linked
their deaths to the transformation of the broader society.
“And so my friends, they did not die in vain. God still has
a way of wringing good out of evil. And history has
proven over and over again that unmerited suffering is
redemptive. The innocent blood of these little girls may
well serve as a redemptive force that will bring new light
to this dark city.”
FIGHTING DEATH
19
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 19


--- PAGE 35 ---
King creatively contested death’s dreary, thudding,
throbbing persistence. At times, he sought to trump its
existential agony through philosophical detachment, and a
near clinical exposure of its pathologies and pitfalls. At
other times, he narrated its approach, first in his own skin,
then glimpsing it rattling the roost of neighbors in the
vicinity of fear. King knew intimately of death’s sneaky
approach, how it could trade vulgar visibility for tacit
implosions, such as a nagging insecurity that robbed the
Negro of confidence. King tirelessly detested the “clouds
of inferiority in the mental skies” of black folk. 
He also discerned the disparagement of blackness that
took root in the language of social analysis and cultural
criticism before it flowered in black self-hate. Inspired by
Ossie Davis, King frequently cited the 60 negative syn-
onyms for blackness of the 120 contained in Roget’s The-
saurus. By comparison, whiteness was given a clean bill
among its 134 synonyms. It was black death by other
means, a calculated and systematic deprivation of Negro
self-worth that drew from the poisoned wells of bigotry.
And neither was the battle merely academic to King. He
protested, half jokingly, as the black movement turned
north and began to focus on rehabilitating the black self-
image, that he was black and beautiful, and that he had
good hair too, a nod to the growing defeat in the black
psyche of white styles of beauty—including black folks’
desperate elevation of fairer skin and straighter hair, nei-
ther of which King possessed. 
APRIL 4, 1968
20
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 20


--- PAGE 36 ---
If King took these psychological contests to heart, he
couldn’t help but make the battle against death a personal
one as well. At times, King sought outlets for his depres-
sion and fear in gallows humor. After preaching at the
funeral of Alabama activist Jimmie Lee Jackson (a black
Vietnam veteran who was shot by state troopers at a
voter’s rights rally for intervening in the beating of his
mother and grandfather) and leading a procession to Jack-
son’s gravesite, King flagged SCLC board member Joseph
Lowery. “Come, walk with me, Joe,” King said. “This may
be my last walk.” King and his comrades often preached
mock funerals for one another to cut the tension. How-
ever, it was Jackson’s brutal and wrongful death that
helped spark the Selma to Montgomery march. King’s
depression only deepened, from fatigue and exhaustion, 
as well as the ever-present nag of death. Peace was being
met with violence regardless of how hard he prayed or
preached. He turned to food and alcohol for comfort; he
gained weight but no relief from his raw nerves. A former
staff member for Summer Community Organization and
Political Education (SCOPE) said that King “was
depressed,” that he “was dark, gaunt and tired,” that he
“felt that his time was up . . . He said that he knew they
were going to get him.” 
Every eulogy King delivered undoubtedly made him
think of the words that would be said over him. Every
death he observed made him think of his own death.
When John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas,
FIGHTING DEATH
21
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 21


--- PAGE 37 ---
he had said to his wife, Coretta, “This is what is going 
to happen to me also. I keep telling you, this is a sick
society.” It is easy to gauge the loneliness King must have
felt in Coretta’s response. “I was not able to say anything.
I had no word to comfort my husband. I could not say, ‘It
won’t happen to you.’ I felt he was right. It was a
painfully agonizing silence. I moved closer to him and
gripped his hand in mine.” Even when consolations were
offered, King deflected them. After a plane King boarded
received a bomb threat in 1964, he told his wife and aide
Dorothy Cotton that “I’ve told you all that I don’t expect
to survive this revolution; this society’s too sick.” After
Cotton tried to reassure him, King replied, “Well, I’m
just being realistic.” And whatever differences the two
leaders may have had, Malcolm X’s brutal gunning-down
in 1965 must have shattered many a restless sleep for
King thereafter.
King’s friend Deenie Drew said that in his “last year or
so, I had a feeling that Martin had a death wish . . . I had a
feeling that he didn’t know which way to turn.” King was
so preoccupied with his own death, so obsessed with its
likely occurrence, that in the last years he could only relax
in a room with no windows because he was tortured with
worry about who might pull the trigger. His eyes fell on
strangers, wondering if they were the messenger of death.
King asked former aide Bayard Rustin, “You think I’m
paranoid, don’t you?” referring to the brooding monopoly
of death in his mind. Rustin confessed he did. Increas-
APRIL 4, 1968
22
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 22


--- PAGE 38 ---
ingly marginalized in his own pain, as there were very few
people to whom he could confide the depths of his obses-
sion, King suffered huge grief of soul and heart, largely
alone.
FIGHTING DEATH
23
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 23


--- PAGE 39 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 24
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 40 ---
ACT
TWO
TALKING DEATH
THE DEEPER MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., 
sank into a private hell of unquenchable bleakness, the
higher he rose in pulpits and rostrums across the nation to
preach the fear from his own breast, and those of his fellow
strivers. Just as he gave most of his pocketbook and
preaching to the movement, King offered up his despon-
dency as well. King channeled his deflation and demoral-
ization into the searing oratory that would form his
automortology, a genre of speech that looked past his death
to tell the story of how he should be viewed once his life
was over. Automortology looks back on a self whose past
lies in the future. Automortology, at least on King’s
tongue, rolled off in a tense that might be called the future
moral anterior, what will and should have been true about
his life and death. King took revenge on his death before
it occurred—a linguistic vengeance that was the only
25
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 25


--- PAGE 41 ---
possible one he could take as an advocate of nonviolence.
This was a case of “If you can’t beat them, then you can
beat them to it,” as King made first claim to interpreting
his life after his own lights. Judging by the sermons and
speeches he gave, it was a bitterly pleasurable exorcism of
vexing spirits.
“Every now and then I guess we all think realistically
about that day when we will be victimized with what is
life’s final common denominator—that something that we
call death,” King declared in his home pulpit of Ebenezer
Baptist Church in Atlanta exactly two months before his
assassination. “We all think about it.” 
These words appear at the close of “The Drum Major
Instinct,” a homily made famous after excerpts of it were
played at King’s nationally televised funeral. The point of
King’s sermon was to unmask the yearning “to be impor-
tant, to surpass others . . . to lead the parade,” calling it
the “drum major instinct” after psychoanalyst Alfred
Adler, who argued that “this quest for recognition, this
desire for attention, this desire for distinction is the basic
impulse.” King argued that the hunger for recognition
and praise is understandable; it may even be a healthy
boost to the ego. Still, the “drum major instinct” often
tempted individuals to snobbish behavior and drove
nations to war to prove their dominance. It may seem odd
for King to discuss his death in such a sermon. But the
meaning comes clear when he ties reflections on his mor-
APRIL 4, 1968
26
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 26


--- PAGE 42 ---
tality to the kind of instincts he’d like to be remembered
for championing. 
King briefly discusses death in a general, philosophical
way, staking his claim in the subject as an analyst inter-
ested in its psychological fallout. But his abbreviated dis-
course on death quickly gets personal. After all, sermons
are not exercises in objective inquiry as much as intellec-
tually and emotionally charged speech meant to persuade
hearers of the gospel’s truth. Eyewitness—better yet, “I”
witness—gives testimony a prized place in black sacred
talk. It’s great to know what Isaiah or Jeremiah said, and
nice to hear what Aristotle or Du Bois thought, but “what
say ye” is the biblical archaism that resounds in black
sanctuaries. 
King swiftly moves from the universal, “We all think
about it,” to the particular, and from psychology to auto-
mortology, as he confesses, “And every now and then I
think about my own death and I think about my own
funeral.” To be sure, death flows constantly through the
black Christian universe, with its cycle of grief and conso-
lation released in funerals, eulogies, burials, gravesite 
visits, and memorial services. But like most religious
communities, death is ritually segregated: beyond special
sermons, constant but sprinkled pulpit references, prayer-
meeting soliloquies, or as an adjunct to the preacher’s
perpetual inducement to sinners to get right with God
before it’s too late, the subject is usually taken up with
TALKING DEATH
27
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 27


--- PAGE 43 ---
sustained seriousness at funerals. And speaking extensively
of one’s own death in first person singular leapfrogged way
past the call for personal testimony in most black churches.
What most of King’s parishioners had no way of knowing
is that his mood was increasingly funereal, though he
quickly protested the thought that he was in any way
morose about the subject. Listening to King’s voice,
bathed in weary sadness and dripping in pathos, it’s hard
to miss the heartbreak just beneath the sermonic surface. 
“And I don’t think of it in a morbid sense. And every
now and then I ask myself, ‘What is it that I would want
said?’ And I leave the word to you this morning.” King
was explicit and sincere, if completely unrealistic, in his
wishes: a short funeral, a brief eulogy, no mention of his
Nobel Peace Prize or his hundreds of other awards, and 
no mention of where he attended school. Instead, King
wanted his eulogist to say that he served and loved others,
that he tried to be “right on the war question,” that he
tried to “feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and visit the
imprisoned,” and then, as if to recap the point, that he
“tried to love and serve humanity.” 
King concludes by saying that should his eulogist call
him a drum major, it should honor his dominant quest for
justice, peace, and righteousness. King said, “I won’t have
any money to leave behind. I won’t have the fine and luxu-
rious things of life to leave behind. But I just want to leave
a committed life behind.” He confessed the desire to be at
Jesus’ side—the same way that James and John, the protag-
APRIL 4, 1968
28
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 28


--- PAGE 44 ---
onists of the biblical story he hung his sermon on, wanted
to be there, except in their case it was for personal glory
and political advantage. King wanted to be near his Lord
to play the role of servant that he claimed in his sermon
was the true mark of greatness. “I just want to be there in
love and in justice and in truth and in commitment to
others, so that we can make of this old world a new world.”
King’s automortology permits him to strike a solemn
blow against death by delivering his eulogy in advance of
the event. He wins, temporarily at least, the battle to pub-
licly declare his death, even if it was a fictional projection
of the end. In retrospect, that might seem a Pyrrhic vic-
tory: King may have furnished his death room in his
mind, but it didn’t keep his enemies from plotting to lay
him in the casket in the flesh. The advantage King got
was one of perspective and interpretation. He would dance
his way through the land mines of literal, and apparently
imminent, termination. And by supplying the narrative
that would accompany his corpse, he would be resurrected
from the grave his enemies dug for him and enjoy the sort
of immortality that he felt was fit for a king. Immortality
had nothing to do with man-made toys and earthly
bonuses. Instead, immortality was gained in service to 
the lowly and lost, the heartbroken and despairing, the
prisoner and soldier, the hungry and naked, the mass of
humanity. 
Thus, when the actual date would arrive, and the cer-
tificate of death would be signed, his enemies’ act of
TALKING DEATH
29
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 29


--- PAGE 45 ---
murder would only confirm King’s standing as the very
thing they tried to deny—a man who was first among
men because he was willing to lose his life in service.
What his enemies didn’t realize, and what King fought
desperately to believe, is that he was in a failsafe position:
the more spite they spit, the more opposition they
mounted, the more King was pushed to greatness in serv-
ing his people. In a strange way, King’s life was tied to his
enemies in inverse proportion to their attacking, and ulti-
mately, killing him: The more they got their way, the
more King got his. King’s despondency and death wish
could only be defeated by the committed life that he saw
himself leaving behind. 
Neither should one miss the irony that the miracle of
technology permitted King’s words to be played at his
well-watched funeral, providing a hugely influential
venue to air his automortological thoughts and help bring
them to pass. He shaped the interpretation of his life in a
eulogy of his own words in the aftermath of his death. The
same technology also permitted King to say at his funeral
what he didn’t want said at his funeral. Achieving more
than intriguing tautology—after all, there were several
eulogies offered—the airing of King’s words in effect
made him dishonor his own wish of remaining silent
about his earthly accomplishments. But his own words
may have been the most memorable spoken about him
that day.
APRIL 4, 1968
30
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 30


--- PAGE 46 ---
I HAVE BEEN TO THE MOUNTAINTOP
The pressures and worries that King endured in his last
years stormed him as he delivered what turned out to be
his last will and testament. King’s “Promised Land”
speech in Memphis the night before he was murdered has
become perhaps the clearest example of his automortologi-
cal art, and a heartbreaking work of dialectical genius.
King’s speech eloquently protested death’s arbitrary force.
One of automortology’s benefits is a sense of control over
the story of one’s death, even though it may prove a
largely illusory control when stacked up against other
forces vying to interpret one’s death, and hence, one’s
life—and further still, one’s life after death; that is, one’s
posthumous reputation. But the consolation prize to such
competition is that automortology tries to shape the
future of one’s not-yet past before it is brought to pass. 
In King’s case, the tension between the not-yet and the
will-have-been kept intruding on his mind, and in Mem-
phis, he let it flow in his by-then-trademark mellifluous
melancholia.
The conditions of King’s return visit to Memphis make
it remarkable that the speech got delivered at all. His rep-
utation as a nonviolent leader was on the line: a march he
led in the city the week before in support of striking sani-
tation workers had for the first time turned violent from
within his crowd. The march was sabotaged by a volatile
mix of government-paid rabble-rousers and the short fuses
TALKING DEATH
31
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 31


--- PAGE 47 ---
of fatigued forces on the fringe of the black freedom move-
ment. The minor riot that unfurled under King’s watch
wounded his ego and caught him in the throes of an even
deeper depression. He was determined to redo the march
and restore the movement’s reputation of peaceful means
of protest. But to do this he would have to go to court to
clear the way. His detractors lay in wait for him, and his
closest supporters urged him to move on—they needed his
diminished energy focused on the poor people’s march on
Washington being planned for the end of April. Most of
his staff was bitterly opposed to that march too. King was
foremost battling crushing exhaustion and the sort of ill-
ness he always suffered when his spirits were way down. 
When he arrived in Memphis in pouring rain and tor-
nado threats, King took shelter in the Lorraine Motel and
sent Ralph Abernathy to speak in his stead at a rally at
Mason Temple. King felt the severe weather would scatter
his flock, and thus offer opportunity to the press and his
enemies to trumpet his declining popularity and influ-
ence. Plus, one of the few vanities he clung to as the
nation’s most celebrated black leader was the right to
duck small crowds. Abernathy was Tonto to King’s Lone
Ranger, the two of them a diminutive tandem galloping
into troubled towns, even going to jail together. Aber-
nathy was also Ed McMahon to King’s Johnny Carson,
warming up the audiences King spoke to with folksy
humor and preacherly wit, and sometimes relinquishing
his role as second banana to be the big tomato. He could
APRIL 4, 1968
32
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 32


--- PAGE 48 ---
tell when King’s absence could be tolerated, and when it
would dishearten the audience and the speaker who tried
to fill his shoes. When Abernathy stepped into the audito-
rium, saw the size of the crowd gathered, and felt the let-
down of King’s missing profile, he rang his sometime
roommate and insisted King rise and meet the throng
who’d come to see him. King dressed and rushed to an
audience whose restless energy ultimately lifted his spirits
above the thunder and lightning.
In his familiar role of hype man, Abernathy reveled
that night in introducing King, speaking uncharacteristi-
cally long, more than half an hour, loving his best friend
out loud for him and the world to hear. Looking back,
Abernathy’s gesture gleamed with the same premonition
that glowed in King’s words—it wasn’t hard to discern
premonition in a man who faced death threats nearly
everywhere he went. As his comrade Andrew Young said,
“He always knew some speech would be his last.” And
even though King asked Abernathy to give the major
speech that night while he simply made a few remarks,
Abernathy’s lavish sentiments roused in King a fiercely
articulated and powerfully delivered speech. 
Without a note in front of him, King opened by
thanking Abernathy, “the best friend that I have in the
world.” His voice ragged and nearly slurred-sounding at
first, there was no indication of the rousing twenty min-
utes to come. After then thanking his audience for coming
despite a storm warning, signs of which battered the
TALKING DEATH
33
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 33


--- PAGE 49 ---
building and sliced through his speech as natural sound
effects to punctuate his points, King took an imaginative
tour of history. Automortology egged King on to turn
time against itself and embrace a death whose future had
slipped into history. Before he took that leap for the last
time, King skirted temporality altogether and stood with
God at the beginning of time. In King’s imagined survey
of history, the Almighty spoke to him by name. King, 
in turn, spoke of his relationship with God in the same
matter-of-fact way that he announced his friendship with
Abernathy, or the weather conditions that night. This
took what the old folk in black churches often say about
being “on speaking terms with God” to a loftier level.
Whether he meant to or not, King implied that his cre-
dential as a prophet came straight from headquarters.
Without such prophetic confidence, any seer is lost from
the start. 
King thrilled the audience on his sweep through his-
tory with a poet’s tongue and a philosopher’s erudition.
After God asked him what period he wanted to live in,
King took a “mental flight” over Egypt’s Red Sea, and
then on to Greece’s Mount Olympus, where he would 
“see Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, Euripides and Aristophanes
assembled around the Parthenon as they discussed the
great and eternal issues of reality.” He’d pass over the
Roman Empire, and take a gander at the Renaissance to
“get a quick picture” of its contribution to “the cultural
and esthetic life of man.” King would visit “the man for
APRIL 4, 1968
34
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 34


--- PAGE 50 ---
whom I’m named,” Martin Luther, to see him start the
Reformation, and then make his way to 1863 “and watch
a vacillating president by the name of Abraham Lincoln
finally come to the conclusion that he had to sign the
Emancipation Proclamation.” He’d visit another president
who in the early thirties grappled with “the bankruptcy 
of his nation” and uttered “an eloquent cry that ‘we have
nothing to fear but fear itself.’” King said he wouldn’t
stop at any of these places, but instead, would “turn to the
Almighty, and say, ‘If you allow me to live just a few years
in the second half of the twentieth century, I will be
happy.’”
King’s fictional flight, in search of the best period to
live in, lands right in his backyard. That’s no surprise to
those familiar with a speaker rigging the rhetoric to make
necessity a virtue: since you have no choice but to live in
the era in which you’re born, why not say that, if given
the choice, you’d choose that era to live in. It also cuts
down on epoch-envy, the lust to live in another time, in
greener temporal pastures. It gives your audience a sense
that they, too, aren’t living in such a bad time, and offers
hope to those who think their period is of little use to his-
tory or God. King manages the feat nicely, but without
insulting his audience’s intelligence. He admits that it
might seem strange to choose their era to live in, “because
the world is all messed up.” But he sees “God working in
this period of the twentieth century in a way that men, 
in some strange way, are responding.” The masses are
TALKING DEATH
35
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 35


--- PAGE 51 ---
rising up, and people around the world are saying, “We
want to be free.” The human rights revolution is a princi-
pal reason King is glad to be alive in his day.
Assured that his audience is happy to be born to their
epoch, King challenges them to make the most of their
historical advantage by siding with the poor and disen-
franchised, determined to throw off their shackles. The
black sanitation workers who are on strike are, of course, 
a centerpiece of King’s social homily, but their plight is a
test of the nation’s commitment to justice. King calls on
his audience to identify with the slaves of the Exodus story
(the sanitation workers and their allies) who were brutal-
ized in Egypt, pleading that they not be hoodwinked by
the divide-and-conquer strategies of “Pharaoh” (Mem-
phis’s mayor) and instead unite under the banner of resis-
tance to injustice. It is one of the biblical threads and
existing narratives stitched throughout the speech. 
Another narrative and theme drawn from the holy
book weaves in the Good Samaritan story. King presses
the crowd to adopt the “dangerous unselfishness” of the
story’s protagonist who risked his life to help his fellow
man. King wanted the audience to do the same with the
sanitation workers. King here employs a modified form of
chiasmus, where two clauses are related to each other by
reversing their structure to make a bigger point, when he
contrasts the Levite who left the stranger by the roadside
and the Good Samaritan who aided him: “And so the first
question that the Levite asked was, ‘If I stop to help this
APRIL 4, 1968
36
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 36


--- PAGE 52 ---
man, what will happen to me?’” But then the Good
Samaritan came by. And King reverses the question: “‘If I
do not stop to help this man, what will happen to him?’”
King makes a finer point by also identifying with the two
who passed the fallen man on the road, citing the poten-
tial for violence on such a meandering and unwelcome
road. The Samaritan stopped. King stopped.
King’s performance, like that of a jazz musician,
improvises on themes of justice, riffs on themes of love,
and wails on harsh forces of oppression. King brilliantly
moves between the social world of his hearers and the bib-
lical stories they are familiar with to reinforce the moral
meaning of their struggle. He also skillfully probes the
contours of death. Like all great rhetoricians and jazz
musicians, King states and restates his themes, here more
quietly, there with more verve and gusto, enlarging his
point by repeating it with different examples. 
King turns again to his gratitude to God for allowing
him to live in the latter part of the twentieth century, and
for allowing him to join the sanitation workers in their
struggle for dignity, manhood, and fair wages. He under-
scores his gratitude by imagining how things might have
been had he not been around, had he died. King uses
automortology to open a historical window onto his role
as actor and observer in the civil rights drama. King tells
the affecting story of a letter he received after he was
stabbed and nearly killed by Izola Ware Curry. With an
impeccable sense of timing, King recounts all the letters
TALKING DEATH
37
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 37


--- PAGE 53 ---
and telegrams he received in the hospital from dignitaries,
including the president, vice president, and governor of
New York, whose content he forgot. 
But one letter stood out. It was from a writer who’d
read that the blade that punctured King’s chest rested at
the tip of his aorta, and with a single sneeze, he could
drown in his own blood. King recalled its content verba-
tim. “I’ll never forget it. It said simply, ‘Dear Dr. King: 
I am a ninth-grade student at the Whites Plains High
School.’ She said, ‘While it should not matter, I would like
to mention that I am a white girl. I read in the paper of
your misfortune, and of your suffering. And I read that if
you had sneezed, you would have died. And I’m simply
writing you to say that I’m so happy that you didn’t
sneeze.’”
Before he can even season the story, let it stew in its
juices, cook it and tear off a piece for himself, and then
savor it in his mouth before serving the rest to others, the
audience, including a great many preachers, belches in
emotional response. They know that a gifted wordsmith
like King will tease the anecdote to a delicious conclusion.
Their anticipation fuels King’s hunger to meet their
expectations. 
“And I want to say tonight, I want to say that I am
happy that I didn’t sneeze. Because if I had sneezed, I
wouldn’t have been around here in 1960, when students
all over the South started sitting-in at lunch counters.”
APRIL 4, 1968
38
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 38


--- PAGE 54 ---
As the applause and verbal affirmation build, King
repeats the phrase. Having visited Greek civilization on
his imaginary tour, King again pays homage to their
rhetorical invention in the structure of his speech.
Anaphora is the Greek term for emphasizing words or
phrases by repeating them at the beginning of neighbor-
ing clauses. King plays the satisfying, pleasurable repeti-
tion to maximum effect, repeating “If I had sneezed” to
suggest all the ways he and his colleagues were present
and accounted for in racial and democratic revolution. If
King had sneezed, he wouldn’t have seen the sit-ins, the
Albany movement, or the colossal struggle in Birming-
ham; he wouldn’t have dreamed before the Lincoln Memo-
rial, or marched in the Selma campaign. And of course, he
“wouldn’t have been in Memphis to see a community rally
around those brothers and sisters who are suffering. I’m so
happy that I didn’t sneeze.”
In one brilliant gesture, King fuses a variation of auto-
mortology and history: he links his death that might have
occurred to events that he would have missed. And though
he doesn’t say it, or even imply it, we’re left to wonder if
most of those events would have occurred in quite the
same way without his presence. Besides identifying with
the movement in Memphis, and identifying the move-
ment of history with the strikers, King identifies with the
little white girl whose phrase he samples, and then owns,
casting his fate, his life and death, in her terms.
TALKING DEATH
39
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 39


--- PAGE 55 ---
If King’s imaginary tour posits his presence before
time, his sneezing anecdote invents his absence to draw
attention to some of history’s grand moments. In either
case, it’s clear that time is on his mind. And so is death—
the death of time, the death of the movement, the death of
hope. And to be sure, his own death. King comes to the
close of his magnificent speech, improvised at the last
moment in impossible conditions, with a nod to the threat
of death, and his fears, as a way to eviscerate them. King
tells how the plane he took to Memphis had to be guarded
all night before taking off because he would be on board.
He speaks as well of the dangers in Tennessee. “And then I
got into Memphis. And some began to say the threats, or
talk about the threats that were out, or what would hap-
pen to me from some of our sick white brothers.”
King gives answer, but not before he zooms out from
his gaze at time’s start, by God’s side, to the contingencies
and accidents of history. The parallels between King and
Jesus are apparent: Surrendering the perch of omniscience,
he settles for the finite view of all mortals: “Well I don’t
know what will happen now.” King’s confession mixes res-
ignation and defiance; the recognition of limits doesn’t
leave him helpless. 
In the film footage of King’s speech, his flashing eyes
bore into his audience as he admits, “We’ve got some dif-
ficult days ahead.” Because he couldn’t control the future,
except in his mind, he wouldn’t worry over its outcome.
APRIL 4, 1968
40
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 40


--- PAGE 56 ---
“But it really doesn’t matter with me now.” It’s the third
time he’s said it in his speech, suggesting that maybe he
really does mean it, but he has to remind himself that he
does. The true reason for King’s confidence is the only one
he could ever bank on: that God had whisked him to a
spot high above the misty plains of fear and doubt. 
No sooner had King renounced the privilege of pos-
sessing a perspective before time, than he regained his
bragging rights to beating time and all its buddies—fate,
fear, and finality—by looking to the future. His automor-
tological announcement is calm but insistent: “Because
I’ve been to the mountaintop.” King summons the
metaphor of Moses to clinch the case of his prophetic
pedigree. He also brings the Exodus story to a rousing
conclusion. The camera captures King at side angle, his
eyelids fluttering through his intense blinking, his head
turning from left to right, his mouth wide open as his
words tumble down his tongue with gravitas and grace. 
“And I don’t mind,” King says before the applause
subsides. “Like anybody, I’d like to live a long life,” he
yearns. “But long-ge-ve-ty has its place.”
King stretches out the word like a shoehorn in a pair 
of loafers. It’s almost as if he wants to make the word that
means long life last as long as it can, a linguistic counter-
point to his rapidly shrinking life. Perhaps he flashed back
on his monumental speech in Chicago, where he declared,
“I have no martyr complex. I want to live as long as
TALKING DEATH
41
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 41


--- PAGE 57 ---
anybody in this building tonight, and sometimes I begin
to doubt whether I’m gonna make it through. I must con-
fess I’m tired.” His voice is rising to its upper register of
melodious resonance. King’s speech was a clinic in the use
of the vocal instrument to vibrate in swooping glissandos
and poignant crescendos. King showed that there didn’t
have to be strife between lexis (style, such as metaphor)
and pisteis (argumentation and proof) as there is in Aristo-
tle’s view of rhetoric. In the best black oratory, style is not
juxtaposed to argument; in fact, style becomes a vehicle of
substance. Paying attention to how you say what you say
doesn’t mean you have nothing to say. 
“But I’m not concerned about that now,” King trum-
pets. “I just want to do God’s will. And He’s allowed me
to go up to the mountain.” The preachers and audience
smell King’s climax and splice their elation into his
speech. “Yes, sir!” “Oh yes!” “Go ’head!” “Yes, Doctor!”
King’s automortology merges with his theology, baptizing
time in the sweet possibilities of divine destiny. Still, it is
a hard assignment. King knows that Moses ascended the
mountain and spied the blessed terrain his people would
claim, but, punished by God, he failed to put clothes on
his vision. It’s a risky identification, one that pushes King
toward his death, both imagined and real, as if by now the
two could be separated.
“And I’ve looked over,” King nearly sings as the
preachers behind him shout out more affirming vernacular
APRIL 4, 1968
42
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 42


--- PAGE 58 ---
phrases like “Talk to me!” “And I’ve s-e-e-e-e-n the
Promised Land.” King’s implosive intensity forces his jaws
to extend to their full range. His eyes are teary. His brow
is furrowed. His energy is concentrated. 
“I may not get there with you. But I want you to
know tonight that we as people will get to the Promised
Land.” The congregation collapses in ecstatic verbal
release at King’s every word. His phrases are weighed and
measured, yet manage to flow in admirable economy. 
“And I’m happy tonight,” King reassures his audience.
Perhaps he senses they have caught wind of his premoni-
tion, or have misjudged the effect on him of the threats
that circulated in the city. He boosts them as he boosts
himself.
“I’m not worried about anything!I’m not fearing any
man!” he promises his flock. “Mine eyes have seen the
glory of the coming of the Lord.” King begins the hymn
he had quoted so often over the years. Just as he finishes a
single line, King turns suddenly on his heels, as much out
of emotional fullness as out of a sense of a dramatic end-
ing. He nearly collapses into the waiting arms of Ralph
Abernathy, as Jesse Jackson stands near to offer compli-
ments and comfort. 
Less than twenty-four hours later, Abernathy and
Jackson shared King’s final perch when he met his day 
on a desolate balcony at Lorraine Motel. A single bullet
slammed him backward to the concrete floor, shattered his
TALKING DEATH
43
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 43


--- PAGE 59 ---
jaw, severed his spinal cord, rolled his eyes to the back of
his head, and ushered him into the infinitely vast region
of interpretation that he had already conjured in his
mournful meditations on death.
APRIL 4, 1968
44
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 44


--- PAGE 60 ---
ACT
THREE
FACING DEATH
HAD MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., NOT BEEN
preparing relentlessly for the likelihood of that bullet, his
final speech would not have been fraught with such mean-
ing. His unknowing final request, to musician Ben Branch
standing in the courtyard with Jesse Jackson that chilly
spring evening, was for him to play the hymn “Precious
Lord, Take My Hand” at the rally that night, and to “play
it real pretty.” King was leaning over the railing at the
time, and in another moment of blind prophecy, bending
his back toward his assailant, proving his assertion of the
night before that “a man can’t ride your back unless it is
bent.” He was smiling as he stood there, about to turn to
his room and fetch a coat for the ride. 
With this seemingly small request to once again have
God take his hand, King’s flight through time the
45
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 45


--- PAGE 61 ---
previous night suddenly seems less off the cuff or pulled
out of the rainy night sky and more contemplative, as
though King had given many hours of thought to those
stops. His choices in light of his death seem far less prais-
ing of previous eras and more circumspect. You can hear
in King’s voice a disappointment with these great
moments, almost a crestfallen tone that more hadn’t been
done sooner for the suffering of mankind. He starts with
the Red Sea and the march of slaves out of Egypt and into
a Promised Land, yes, but then he eavesdrops on the great
Greek philosophers, a gaggle of old white men who put
the right to own slaves into philosophical law. Without
Aristotle’s assertion that “from the hour of their birth,
some are marked out for subjection, others for rule,” cen-
turies of justification would likely not exist. And the great
Platonic rule regarding slaves, “let us have the best and
most attached whom we can get,” is hardly a moral edict
forbidding the ownership of other humans. Surely a stu-
dent of philosophy such as King would not overlook these
not-so-small flaws of intellect.
He briefly pauses to visit the Roman Empire, infamous
for its love of slave labor, without which much of the old
world’s infrastructure would not exist, saying, “I would
see some developments around there.” What kind of
developments, if not ones to abolish slavery? Next stop,
the Renaissance, with all that it “did for the cultural and
aesthetic life of man.” Is it possible that King is pushing
irony here, as his voice is more dolorous than pleasant? Is
APRIL 4, 1968
46
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 46


--- PAGE 62 ---
it possible that he could be referring to the emergence
into the “light” of the core belief that one man’s interests
can and should supercede another’s? Is it possible that
King is actually referring to the onset of the African slave
trades, which grew in lockstep with the greed of the
Dutch and the French and the British as they opened their
minds and opened new lands? 
Surely, you would think, King chooses his namesake as
a moment in time where virtue won out over the evil in
man, but there is no mention of slavery in Luther’s theses,
nor in his wide writings, except to speak of man’s slavery
to sin, even though he lived in a time when slavery was
commonplace throughout Europe and its colonies, and
even as he was asserting man’s need to be both free and a
slave in order to be Christian. Another great man, Lincoln,
is accused of “vacillating” before he could “finally come to
the conclusion that he had to sign the Emancipation
Proclamation.” Hardly a ringing endorsement of the great
emancipator’s moral compass. And why did King next
choose Roosevelt, who declared that “we have nothing to
fear but fear itself” about the “problems of the bankruptcy
of the nation”? Perhaps because even when Roosevelt had
the opportunity to put an end to the grisliest decades of
lynching with the stroke of his presidential pen he chose
to walk away rather than risk losing the support of South-
ern Democrats in his upcoming reelection. Only those
who knew true fear itself, like King, could know just how
deeply it was to be feared.
FACING DEATH
47
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 47


--- PAGE 63 ---
No, King chose the moment in time where he stood
that night of April 3, 1968, because he knew in his very
core that, as Sam Cooke hoped only three years earlier,
change was finally about to come. (Cooke’s 1965 single 
“A Change Is Gonna Come” was released posthumously.
But before his murder—like King, he was shot in a 
small motel—he let close friend and soul crooner Bobby
Womack hear the song, which includes the lyric “It’s been
too hard living, but I’m afraid to die.” Womack said: “It
sounds like death . . . it’s just so eerie. It gives me the
chills, Sam.”) That change had been growing up right
alongside of him. He knew that with the inevitability of
his death would come the time worth living in—the time
when all men and women would truly be seen and treated
as equal in his beloved country. Now was the time when
his true kingdom had come. 
Regretfully, the end of King’s life was not met with
the kind of peace he had so cherished. Indeed, 110 Ameri-
can cities convulsed in rioting. Congress of Racial Equal-
ity (CORE) leader Floyd McKissick said that King “was
the last prince of nonviolence. He was a symbol of nonvio-
lence, the epitome of nonviolence. Nonviolence is a dead
philosophy and it was not the black people that killed it.”
Stokely Carmichael agreed: “White America killed Dr.
King. They had absolutely no reason to do so. He was the
one man in our race who was trying to teach our people to
have love, compassion and mercy for what white people
had done . . . We have to retaliate for the death of our
APRIL 4, 1968
48
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 48


--- PAGE 64 ---
leaders. The execution of those deaths will not be in the
courtrooms, they are going to be in the streets of the
United States of America.”
Beyond the anger and riots, black America was blan-
keted in grief and sorrow for its most beloved freedom
fighter. A 1966 Newsweek-Harris survey of Negroes con-
cluded: “Martin Luther King remains the preeminent
leader.” Neither Carmichael’s nor McKissick’s skepticism
about nonviolence as an effective tool of black equality
could blunt King’s standing among his people. The huge
admiration King garnered became even more hallowed in
death. Black America mourned King’s murder so deeply
because it felt like our murder. King’s death felt like the
death of black progress, the death of black justice, the
death of black hope, because its most passionate voice had
been sniped into silence. King was in the eyes of many
blacks the key to a righteous black future, one that threat-
ened to slip away on the horns of a racial dilemma:
whether to support more militant calls for racial justice,
including black power and armed self-defense, or to side
with King’s insistence on a more aggressive version of
nonviolence. That choice was still being put to the test
when King died.
King’s death also quenched for a while the black expec-
tation that political struggle could bring a brighter
future. The Newsweek-Harris survey argued that King 
“had become a symbol of progressive change in policies
concerning race relations and poverty.” His death dealt a
FACING DEATH
49
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 49


--- PAGE 65 ---
severe blow to the belief of many blacks that such change
could take place in organized politics. As one political sci-
entist noted in 1969, King’s assassination caused “an emo-
tional disengagement from the realm of normal political
behavior.” Since King had been “a symbolic intermediary
between individuals and the political system,” his murder
“had a much greater impact on Negroes than on whites, at
least as far as changes in affective ties to the political sys-
tem are concerned.” However, there was no way to “ascer-
tain the duration . . . of the grief and disaffection
provoked by the murder.” 
Fortunately, the black mood changed; black mayors
soon sprang up in Newark, New Jersey, and Gary, Indiana.
As King’s trusted lieutenant Andrew Young argued, by
“1970, the sixties movement was disintegrating, and it was
necessary that those of us who had worked in the move-
ment now move into the political arena ourselves, applying
our skills, contacts, and experiences to this previously for-
bidden area of activity.” Young saw “political office as a
way of sustaining what we had done and needed to do
again rather than as a deviation from our history of collec-
tive struggle.” In 1972, four years after King’s murder cre-
ated a seismic shift in racial sensibilities, Andrew Young
won a seat, if not quite at the table of brotherhood, then at
least in the halls of political power as the first black to go
to Congress from Georgia since Reconstruction. 
If black folk were grieved and disaffected—if they dis-
believed in institutions in the society—King’s murder
APRIL 4, 1968
50
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 50


--- PAGE 66 ---
“had little impact on whites.” The most “common pattern
of change for whites, increasing polarization of feelings”
resulted from “a sensitization effect” that reinforced “pre-
existing dispositions toward politics.” Many whites felt
the same about King after his murder as they did before
he died. As a white woman in Memphis remarked, “Had
he stayed home in Atlanta, he’d be alive today.” Journalist
David Halberstam, who’d written a thoughtful essay on
King for Harper’smagazine in August 1967, registered an
obituary of sorts for the magazine a couple months after
King’s death while noting that he had attended, near the
time of his first article, a suburban dinner party among
nice affluent white folk. “One of the wives—station
wagon, three children, forty-five-thousand-dollar house—
leaned over and said, ‘I wish you had spit in his face for
me,’” Halberstam recalls. “It was a stunning moment; I
wondered for a long time afterwards what King could pos-
sibly have done to her, in what conceivable way he could
have threatened her, why this passionate hate.” Tony set-
ting or not, she was hardly alone.
There were some exceptions. In February and March 
of 1968, questionnaires were sent to nearly ten thousand
members of college and university governing boards as
part of a survey of college trustees. These nearly all-white
college trustees formed “a very elite group of people,
generally representing prestige occupational positions and
substantially higher levels of formal education and
income.” 
FACING DEATH
51
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 51


--- PAGE 67 ---
A month after they were mailed—and three quarters 
of the way through the response period—King was mur-
dered. One of the questions asked the respondents about
their perceived similarity to Martin Luther King, “and
since the responses were still being received regularly, a
unique opportunity to compare pre-and post-death atti-
tudes was recognized.” On the Thursday of King’s death,
nearly 3,500 questionnaires had been returned, and along
with the questionnaires returned over the next three days,
were marked as pre-assassination returns. The 1,100
questionnaires received after April 9 were marked post-
assassination samples. Of the pre-assassination sample,
36% perceived their views as similar to King’s, while the
number spiked to 50% among post-assassination respon-
dents, a 14% change. When asked if King’s views were
“very unlike mine,” 30.48% of the pre-assassination sam-
ple agreed, while only 19.36% of the post-assassination
respondents admitted a big difference in views.
The survey’s authors suggest several reasons for the
shift among the respondents: sensitivity to current events;
the tendency to idealize the dead, with a corresponding
reluctance to criticize them (especially since “it might be
speculated that many of those who were most critical of
King while he was alive might be expected to harbor
guilt feelings, as though by their animosity they had
pulled the trigger”); vast amounts of information about
King in the media after his death “could have resulted in
more awareness of the purposes of the man’s life and a
APRIL 4, 1968
52
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 52


--- PAGE 68 ---
consequent realization of a greater similarity”; and violent
black reaction to King’s murder “brought home to white
America in a constant barrage from the media the irasci-
bility of the Negro population, the potential for anarchy,
and the threat of a militant alternative” and made King
appear “moderate, even to many conservatives.” As one
white woman in Atlanta said after King’s death, “All we
hope is some nice, religious Negro will quickly take his
place.”
Despite his popularity among black folk, King’s repu-
tation during his life enjoyed something of a rollercoaster
ride in most quarters of white America. King was seen at
first by many whites as a Yankee-educated preacher and
troublemaker who used highfalutin’ words to upset the
segregated Southern social order. The FBI’s second-in-
command called him “the most dangerous and effective
Negro leader in America.” When liberal and international
forces embraced him—he was named Man of the Year by
Time in 1963, and granted the Nobel Peace Prize in the
same year—King, like many black jazz musicians, finally
received wide recognition at home just as he had abroad.
When black militancy and black nationalism got back in
vogue in the mid-sixties, King’s luster seemed even more
polished in white America. Faced with the prospect of
leaders like Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael, large seg-
ments of white America proclaimed King a godsend. 
King increasingly butted heads with the soft, safe
image manufactured for him. The more he protested
FACING DEATH
53
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 53


--- PAGE 69 ---
poverty, denounced the Vietnam War, and lamented the
unconscious racism of most whites, the more he lost favor
and footing in white America. For the first time in a
decade, King’s name was left off the January 1967 Gallup
poll list of the ten most admired Americans. Financial
support for his organization nearly dried up. Mainstream
newsmagazines turned on him for diving into foreign pol-
icy matters supposedly far beyond his depth. Universities
withdrew lecture invitations. And no American publisher
was eager to publish a book by the leader. King was at his
nadir in white America. In truth, in many ways, King was
socially and politically dead before he was killed. Martyr-
dom saved him from becoming a pariah to the white
mainstream. And given the cycles and changing fortunes
of black leadership, his death kept him from ultimately,
almost inevitably, being dismissed as irrelevant to his own
race. 
But martyrdom also forced onto King’s dead body the
face of a toothless tiger. His threat has been domesticated,
his danger sweetened. His depressions and wounds have
been turned into waves and smiles. There is little suffer-
ing, only light and glory. King’s more challenging rheto-
ric has gone unemployed, left homeless in front of the
Lincoln Memorial, blanketed on freezing nights in dream
metaphors, feasting on leftovers of hope-lite, drinking
discarded cans of diet optimism. Whites have long since
forgotten just how much heat and hate the thought of
King could whip up. They have absolved themselves of
APRIL 4, 1968
54
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 54


--- PAGE 70 ---
blame for producing, or failing to fight, the murderous
passions that finally tracked King down in Memphis.
What his assassin couldn’t see through his viewfinder is
that his bullet would shoot King into legend; the force of
his report only thrust King into an even larger and richer
life than the one he lived. If one man held the gun, mil-
lions more propped him up and made it seem a good, even
valiant idea. And millions of others failed to speak out
bravely against the brutality and evil that finally hunted
King down and killed him. In exchange for collective
guilt, whites have given King lesser victories: a national
birthday, iconic ubiquity, and endless encomiums. He 
has been idealized into uselessness for the poor he loved,
immortalized into a niceness that dilutes the radical poli-
tics he endorsed. His justice agenda has been smothered
by adulation. 
But blacks have not been innocent in the posthumous
manipulations of King’s legacy. If whites have undercut
King by praising him to death, blacks have hollowed his
humanity through worship. The black reflex to protect
King’s reputation from unprincipled white attack is
understandable. But the wish to worship him into perfec-
tion is misled; the desire to deify him is tragically mis-
placed. Many black folk believe that any criticism of King
is treason to the race, a blemish to King’s memory. But
this is the retail version of King’s true greatness. It dis-
honors the way King earned his stripes as black America’s
general: on the battlefield of social struggle in the bloody
FACING DEATH
55
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 55


--- PAGE 71 ---
trenches of history. The scars of his humanity are what
make his glorious achievements all the more remarkable.
He did not descend as a god to become human; he labored
as man to become a servant like his God. The urge to erase
King’s deficits is flawed; the nicks and bruises on King’s
image only enhance his appeal and humanity. By idolizing
King, many blacks are unduly harsh on present leaders
and the young who are said not to measure up to King’s
standards. But a reminder of King’s missteps and mistakes
might hearten those who struggle to remember that one
need not be perfect to be useful.
Andrew Young reminds us that there is a liability to
enshrining King in divinity:
Martin has become a larger-than-life symbol, almost 
a deity, rather than the flesh-and-blood man I knew.
There is a danger in this. We should not lose our sense
of how the civil rights movement happened, because if
we do, younger generations, along with ourselves, will
lose a sense of how new opportunities were fought for,
and won. In blurring, or ignoring, the context of 
the struggle, the veneration of Martin Luther King
becomes devoid of depth and context, and the ability
to use his model to renew the struggle for a just and
equitable society is lost. 
Whites want him clawless; blacks want him flawless. 
Both options are bad for using King’s death as a means to
APRIL 4, 1968
56
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 56


--- PAGE 72 ---
inspire the kind of social change for which he died. What
then are we to make of King’s death?
It should be plain that King wasn’t killed by a lone
gunman. His downfall was eagerly sought, even man-
dated, in a culture of death that choked segments of white
society that feared black equality. Tragic elements of that
culture remain in today’s hate groups. Recalcitrant, even
anachronistic, racists refuse to die, or recede into the mists
of history. True, many whites have learned to look beyond
color to character. They waive the suspicion and skepti-
cism of blacks learned at home or picked up in the cul-
ture. They recognize the humanity of each soul. 
But whites must not reduce the problems of race to
face and skin; they must also see them in structure and
system. But it is harder to see things this way. It is far
easier to believe that we’ve made all the progress we need
to make on race. That only makes sense if we believe that
personal behavior is the key to change—that whites
should alter their actions to lessen, or destroy, racism, and
that blacks in good faith should act as if such changes
have occurred and take advantage of the opportunities at
hand. To be sure, attitudes and beliefs among influential
whites play a big role in distributing goods that matter to
blacks: a job, a car, or a mortgage. But overcoming per-
sonal bigotry doesn’t solve stubborn structural issues like
chronic unemployment, racial profiling, educational
inequity, radical poverty, gross over-imprisonment, and
the enduring reluctance to hire black men. It takes more
FACING DEATH
57
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 57


--- PAGE 73 ---
than enlightenment to solve these problems; goodwill
alone can’t heal these bleeding sores on the body politic. It
takes the kind of sharp thinking about deep structures and
faulty systems that King spoke of—and that may have, in
part, caused his death. As Andrew Young argues, King
survived challenging the “racial status quo,” but was mur-
dered when he “began to address poverty and war,” and to
“challenge in an even more fundamental way the basic
structure of the American economy.” He was murdered 
on the first-year anniversary of his bold public statement
against the war in Vietnam. Given the government’s rabid
pursuit of the beleaguered minister, it’s not hard to see
how one might think this was more than mere coinci-
dence or a lucky, opportunistic strike. 
White Americans must also demand the truth about
how elements of our government, especially the FBI under
J. Edgar Hoover, tried to destroy King’s career, marriage,
and ultimately, his life. Hoover was obsessed with King,
using illegal and immoral methods to tarnish his leader-
ship by claiming he was a communist, by alleging finan-
cial malfeasance, snooping on King’s sex life, and
withholding information about death threats. King’s
financial integrity was above reproach; Hoover’s attempts
to paint him as a greedy minister were unsuccessful.
Hoover’s maniacal pursuit of King also failed to prove he
was a communist, though his advisers Stanley Levison and
Jack O’Dell had varying degrees of connection to the com-
munist party and leftist organizations. 
APRIL 4, 1968
58
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 58


--- PAGE 74 ---
There was a valid history between communist organi-
zations and the civil rights movement—as early as the
1930s white communist groups were the only people to
come forward and pay for legal aid for Southern blacks
accused of wrongdoing, most famously in the case of the
Scottsboro boys. In the red scare that swept the nation, it
was child’s play for Hoover to link King’s tolerance of pro-
gressive ideas to a communist-style treason, though it was
Hoover himself who acted most like Soviet Russia with
the unconstitutional tactics he employed trying to trap
King. Hoover obsessed, jealously, over King’s womanizing
and sought to portray him to all who would listen as a
pervert and moral menace. Despite ample evidence of
King’s surrender to fleshly enticements, Hoover sent doc-
tored tapes of King allegedly having sex with another
woman to King’s wife in the hope of humiliating him and
driving a wedge between him and Coretta. She refused to
take the bait. 
But it was the way that the FBI failed to warn King of
legitimate death threats that is especially damning. Time
and again, Hoover instructed his agents to leave King
unwarned about, and unprotected from, death threats. In
St. Petersburg, Florida, a letter detailing multiple assassi-
nation threats was sent to FBI headquarters. All the peo-
ple named in the letter as targets of murder—including
NAACP head Roy Wilkins, Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen,
Bobby Kennedy, and President Johnson—were warned,
except the principal target, Martin Luther King. Hoover
FACING DEATH
59
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 59


--- PAGE 75 ---
said that King didn’t deserve fair warning. Although
King had sought federal protection in Selma, Hoover tam-
pered with internal communications about the threats on
King’s life should he lead the march. Two credible threats
loomed: one involving two gunmen from Detroit, the
other a KKK killing squad from Louisiana. Hoover vetoed
plans to warn King, scribbling “No” on one communiqué,
and “not to tell King anything” on the other. It is beyond
unconscionable for an official government agency to deny
a private citizen information about potential threats,
much less act to prevent the threats from being realized.
These facts give a great deal of heat to the notion that
there was a conspiracy within the government to take
King down. It may also help explain the skepticism and
suspicion that many blacks still harbor for the govern-
ment, which many whites dismiss as mere paranoia. The
fact of black paranoia should not undermine the legiti-
macy of black fear.
STRANGE FRUIT
King’s death must also be seen in light of a tradition of
black death, from the first drowning on the first passage,
the starvation, depredation, and complete annihilation 
of those who had any fight in them in the years of state-
sanctioned slave-trading and owning, to the lynchings,
shootings, stabbings, burnings, castrations, bombings,
and assassinations that followed in the red wake of the
APRIL 4, 1968
60
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 60


--- PAGE 76 ---
Civil war—a train of mortal meanings carrying a message
of intimidation and fear to black folk. Lynching under Jim
Crow was meant to prove the power of white supremacy.
It was a highly visible way to keep Negroes in place by
swinging black bodies into submission, hanging black
bodies to hell, and burning black bodies into the black
imagination and mainstream memory. The dead bodies of
black folk were handed up as ample evidence that white
folk were in control of every aspect of black life, and
irrefutable proof that the issues of black life and death
hung in the balance of white desire, permission, and
power. As Billie Holliday memorably sang, black bodies
were the “strange fruit” on Southern trees. 
Whites who participated in lynching gained a great
deal of joy and satisfaction from witnessing the final
moments and subsequent death of black folk. Thus,
lynching was a crime primarily suited to the optic nerve: 
a public spectacle to be viewed by the murdering whites,
with cameras in hand, snapping shots of the offending
black, often in alleged retaliation for reckless eyeballing,
or the sexual desire of looking. Sex and death could be 
tied into one neat package and then strung up for the
world to see. Sometimes, no other reason was necessary
than the color of a man’s skin. One lynching participant
was asked why a black man had been murdered, and he
replied, “Oh, because he was a nigger. And he was the 
best nigger in town. Why, he would even take off his hat
to me.”
FACING DEATH
61
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 61


--- PAGE 77 ---
“Negro barbecues” drew business leaders, elected offi-
cials, church members, women, children, and run-of-the-
mill whites. Many of them sent postcards of the atrocities,
a travelogue into the far country of Negro tragedy and the
often literal black death of charred bodies. “This is the
barbeque [sic] we had last night. My picture is to the left
with a cross over it. Your son, Joe.” Or, “This was made in
the court yard in Center Texas he is a 16 year old black
boy. He killed Earl’s Grandma. She was Florence’s mother.
Give this to Bud. From Aunt Myrtle.” Thus, intimacy and
intimidation easily mixed; the most hallowed acts of fam-
ily mingled with murder. Crowds of white folk posed for
pictures near the mutilated black bodies. As Christine
Harold and Kevin Michael DeLuca argue: “Lynching was
an event, an occasion to see, to be seen, and to memorial-
ize for others . . . Lynched black bodies were spectacles 
of white supremacy that helped forge white community.
They were also messages of warning and terror for black
communities.” It was racial terror of black folk one body
at a time. 
In the early 1930s the death rate from vigilantism
stemmed to a trickle, due in large part to the pioneering
heroism of anti-lynching crusader Ida B. Wells-Barnett,
and the interracial Association of Southern Women for the
Prevention of Lynching. It was their specific outrage that
men were still claiming that their hate crimes were perpe-
trated on behalf of women that fueled their cause. When
APRIL 4, 1968
62
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 62


--- PAGE 78 ---
in 1935 a homeless man named Rubin Stacy was jailed for
begging door to door for food and consequently dragged
from the jail and hanged, the movement finally had a case
to bring to Washington. Anti-lynching legislation was
drafted but withered without President Roosevelt’s sup-
port. His feeling that he couldn’t risk losing the White
House and thereby end up doing less for civil rights in the
long term is eerily echoed in King’s last thoughts on the
priest and Levite who pass by the naked, bleeding man on
the road to Jericho: “And every now and then we begin to
wonder whether maybe they were not going down to
Jerusalem—or down to Jericho, rather to organize a ‘Jeri-
cho Road Improvement Association.’ That’s a possibility.
Maybe they felt that it was better to deal with the prob-
lem from the causal root, rather than to get bogged down
with an individual effect.” 
After he secured his reelection, Roosevelt did what he
could to attack the causal root by creating a civil rights
branch of the Justice Department in 1939. Even so, no
cases would prove out until 1946, and an untold number
of lynchings occurred overseas during the war, including
the hanging in Italy of Louis Till for the murder of one
woman and the rape of two others in 1945. On the face of
it, for those who favor the death penalty, this seems like a
crime worthy of the punishment of hanging. But when
you compound this information with the fact that sev-
enty-five other black servicemen were hanged for similar
FACING DEATH
63
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 63


--- PAGE 79 ---
crimes at or around the same time, it’s much harder to
find the truth of what may have happened so far away at 
a time of great crimes against God’s dark people. 
In a sad twist of fate, ten years later it would be Till’s
only son’s shot, stabbed, strangled, and mutilated dead
body that would wash up on the shores of the Tallahatchie
River in Mississippi and ultimately enrage a black nation
enough to come together and risk their own lives to get
justice for their brothers and sisters. Emmitt Till was a
fourteen-year-old Chicago boy who had been sent south by
his mother to visit relatives during the summer. A dis-
puted encounter with Carolyn Bryant, the twenty-one-
year-old white wife of a shopkeeper from whom he bought
a pack of bubble gum—some say he wolf-whistled at her,
others claim he said “Bye baby” and “Gee you like a movie
star,” while others claim he propositioned her in a lewd
manner, all on a dare to flirt with her from his new friends
in Mississippi—led to a brutal, vicious, unspeakable
crime, since the sin of a black male daring to flirt with a
white woman was reason for murder. Till was kidnapped
from his uncle’s home in the middle of the night and sav-
agely beaten to death before he was tossed into the river
with a seventy-five-pound cotton gin spiked with barbed
wire fixed to his neck.
Till’s murder was so shocking because by the time his
body was pulled from the killing waters, lynching, say
Harold and DeLuca, “was no longer an acceptable public
spectacle, though it was still an acceptable community
APRIL 4, 1968
64
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 64


--- PAGE 80 ---
practice.” Racial violence “had gone more ‘underground’”
since “even the inexplicable disappearance of a black body
made a perverse kind of sense. History had taught both
blacks and whites how to fill in the blanks . . . Rumor and
speculation now performed the rhetorical violence for-
merly exacted by the public lynching.” Till’s murder was
meant to silence black folk; instead of being a symbol of
white power and intimidation, as it was intended, it
helped to ignite the civil rights movement by offering a
visual reminder of the inhuman depths to which whites
could sink (and sink blacks) in their desire to control
black life. Till’s mother fought the state of Mississippi to
get her son’s casket opened so she could see her son one
last time. Once she had it opened, she had pictures of her
son’s disfigured visage printed in Jetmagazine. It wasn’t
his sweet boyish smile beaming out from under a straw
hat that galvanized the country; it was the hideous Munch
Scream-like mask of complete annihilation that made the
collective gorge rise and overflow. Freud said men speak to
each other through women’s bodies; it may be that whites
speak to each other through black bodies. Till became
more than a floating signifier of white power and death as
they wanted. Instead, his bloated body and slack eyeless
face became visual testimony in death to the power of
black life to affirm protest and the need for spiritual
response and black voice.
If lynching was forced underground in the politics of
absence, in the nasty work of arranging the disappearance
FACING DEATH
65
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 65


--- PAGE 81 ---
of black bodies, then the assassination of black leaders
was an attempt to reclaim visibility in the ugly battle to
use black death to intimidate black folk. Lynching was
replaced by the symbolic gesture of collective death in
the sniper’s gun. When King was killed, it may have
been a single man’s bullet, but it was a tribe’s desire driv-
ing the lethal projectile into King’s neck. Lynching was
aimed at everyday black folk for the most part; there was
ghoulish democracy in lynching. Assassination is one
better—it targets a “big nigger” and makes his death a
cautionary tale. Medgar Evers’s murder in 1963 is such an
example. The message of Evers’s assassination was clear:
do what Evers did—integrate public facilities, schools,
and restaurants, and organize voter registration drives—
and you die. But the threat of death didn’t deter Evers.
“We both knew he was going to die,” his widow Myrlie
Evers said about her husband. “Medgar didn’t want to be
a martyr. But if he had to die to get us that far, he was
willing to do it.” 
King’s assassination was meant to say “We got the
biggest Negro of all, the King of men, and if he can be
got, then you’re all vulnerable.” There was a lesson to
other blacks: don’t try to do and be what he was, and be
warned, those who speak up are in danger, are vulnerable.
They will be terminated. If the best and brightest go
down, then the rest of you must fall into place. Assassina-
tion possessed the evil potency of lynching—a former
public spectacle pushed underground—with the advan-
APRIL 4, 1968
66
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 66


--- PAGE 82 ---
tage of leaving those who hadn’t participated, but wanted
to, both scot-free and able to enjoy a gleefully vicarious
racist victory. The final irony in King’s case was that what
killed him actually made him and his cause stronger.
LIFE GOES ON
If black death has been a staple of white terror, it has also
become a physical, cultural, psychological, and sociologi-
cal characteristic of black life. One of the challenges black
folk face in the aftermath of King’s death is to confront
the cultures of death we have accepted and used. Black
mortality has become, ironically enough, a style of exis-
tence. Death has become synonymous with black life in 
so many quarters of our culture, at times from natural
causes—including preventable diseases that plague black
bodies, like heart disease and diabetes. At other times it
springs from acts of disconsolation committed against
ourselves, like suicide, or from fits of rage, plans of con-
quest, episodes of envy, spikes of mortal passion, swirls of
hate, all issuing from a violent vortex that draws down
into murder. Black mortality has also become a norm of
social exchange among those who haunt subcultures of
crime. It is the way punishment (killing someone for
offending honor or invading one’s territory) and rewards
(promoting a gang member for arbitrary or targeted
death) operate in a culture of competition for criminal and
illicit supremacy. 
FACING DEATH
67
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 67


--- PAGE 83 ---
Black-on-black homicide is tragically real, though per-
haps a misnomer: it’s black under black, black over black,
black against black. It’s the politics of attrition measured
in prepositions. King took up this issue when he
responded to the death of Malcolm X, seeking to mollify
black conflict in warring factions within the Nation of
Islam while speaking against “dissent through murder.”
King said, “We must face the fact that there are some very
ghastly and nightmarish aspects of violence taking place
at this time and it does seem to be a feud between some of
the Black Nationalist groups.” King condemned the vio-
lence, and pleaded for its end. “I think it has to stop some-
where. It isn’t good for the image of our nation. It isn’t
good for the Negro cause. It isn’t good for anything that
we hold dear in our country and democracy . . . I think we
have to learn to disagree without being violently disagree-
able and this whole philosophy of expressing dissent
through murder must be vigorously condemned.”
Of course, black mortality has also been made into a
commodity in popular culture, in urban films—from 
New Jack City and Boyz n the Hood to Paid in Full and
W aist Deep—and most notably in hip hop. Critics of hip
hop claim that it is corporate-sponsored black death; they
say that, at its worst, it is sonic genocide. The way hip-
hop artists explore death both reflects and reinforces the
vulnerability of black men—both at the hands of violent
black males and in a culture that in the past has forced
APRIL 4, 1968
68
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 68


--- PAGE 84 ---
them to suffer in silence. Black elders fire on hip hop for
profiting from an artistic culture of death. 
Murder is even at the heart of hip hop’s symbolic
quest for capital: “dead presidents” is the term for cash,
and there is, according to cultural critic James Peterson,
an “abstract delight in the death of American political
leaders. The complicated suggestion being: if living pres-
idents won’t represent me, dead ones will.” Some critics
of hip hop say it lends credence to the bloodshed on the
streets of urban America. There is a lot not to like in 
the violent appetites that devour the creative imagina-
tions of many entertainers. In such cases, the flattest and
most tedious artistic expressions of violence and death
hold sway.
But there are others who brilliantly, if disturbingly,
wrestle with the problem of evil, especially the suffering
they and their loved ones endure. Max Weber, the pio-
neering sociologist, spoke of theodicy as the effort of
gifted people to make meaning of the suffering of the
masses. The plight of the ghetto poor resounds clearly in
the lyrics of those who survive to tell the tale of the lost
and forgotten. Economic inequality, police brutality, and
racism concern the best of these ghetto griots. To be sure,
as with many talented artists, there’s a great deal of moral
ambiguity in their creations. They strike fear in many
observers and make us uncomfortable, because they
remind us how we humans are neither all good nor bad.
FACING DEATH
69
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 69


--- PAGE 85 ---
These artists maintain little distance from the evils they
decry; at times, they embody in their characters the evil
they’d like to defeat. It’s an artistic ploy that is often over-
looked or ignored. 
Part of this has to do with the “keep it real” mantra
that has been taken so seriously that its rhetorical pleas-
ures are erased, and its signifying resonances removed, in
the stark literalism of critics. Rappers are rarely viewed in
the same vein of other artists who blur the lines between
good and bad. Perhaps that has to do with the depressing
social conditions these rappers come from. Hence they are
straitjacketed into only delivering positive remedies for
suffering, as opposed to adroitly, and dramatically, exam-
ining the give and take, the push and pull of good and
evil in the human heart. Francis Ford Coppola can get
away with it in the Godfather; Jay-Z is pounced on in
American Gangster.
If King embraced automortology, the hip-hop artist
who comes closest to his musings on finitude and the
future is 2Pac, the genre’s dean of death. As with many
artists—notably Scarface, who was a forerunner of sorts—
2Pac was obsessed with death: the death of fallen com-
rades, the death he witnessed, the death he wished on
others, and above all, his own death. 2Pac’s theodicy was
full of sorrow and lamentation, his voice wailing and cry-
ing, at once defiant and mournful. 2Pac could go from
“Life Goes On,” a haunting, mellow paean to departed
homeboys, to “Hit ’Em Up,” a vicious battle song full of
APRIL 4, 1968
70
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 70


--- PAGE 86 ---
death aimed at archrival Notorious B.I.G. Like King,
2Pac died violently—though, as Chris Rock says, one was
assassinated; the other was killed. Like King, 2Pac grew
bigger than what his already crammed life could contain,
or imagine. The uses made of 2Pac’s body and memory
make him unlike King in this sense: 2Pac has become, in
death, a signifying, trickster figure in the black urban
imagination. He has allegedly been spotted alive on
islands by true believers. 
2Pac has integrated the gallery of secular saints in
white America—Elvis, James Dean, and Marilyn Monroe
among them—who have survived their deaths to become
mythological presences, a posthumous persona. He is the
first black person to attain the comparable stature of these
white figures. These figures have permanent futures
because they have useful pasts that point to important
moments in the culture, or suggest unique insight into a
movement or people. They are kept alive because their
survival fills a void, serves a need. In 2Pac’s case, his sur-
vival expressed the moral ambitions of despised black
youth. Many adults read his elevation as a morally bank-
rupt attempt at equivalency with King. Instead, it should
be read as a critique of just how that generation has been
left for dead by its elders. 
Black folk must also come to grips with how we prac-
tice soul murder, a term coined by Scandinavian play-
wrights Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg. Ibsen says
that soul murder is the destruction of the love of life, the
FACING DEATH
71
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 71


--- PAGE 87 ---
capacity for joy, in another human being. Daniel Paul
Schreber, a nineteenth-century German jurist who went
mad at forty-two (and was made famous by Freud in 1911
in one of his long case histories) defined his illness as soul
murder, which rested on the notion “widespread in the
folklore and poetry of all peoples that it is somehow possi-
ble to take possession of another person’s soul.” The term
has since been applied to abused children and traumatized
slaves. Black culture—by its deficits and defeats and by its
defensive actions to protect its interests and assure its sur-
vival—has generated pockets of pathology where potential
is suspected and snuffed. We murder ambition, slaughter
pride. A tortured racial history feeds this learned behavior,
sustained now as a self-perpetuating cultural practice. 
We are skeptical of black folk who don’t meet our narrow
views of blackness. We are taught to despise and be envi-
ous of others who rise and prosper. 
All of this is different from the routine and healthy
criticism in which all groups should engage. I am refer-
ring to the pernicious self-doubt, and other-doubt—really,
it’s race-doubt—that is the ontological residue of collec-
tive self-hate. It is a centuries-old reflex borne of pulveriz-
ing suspicion of the beauty, integrity, and dignity of
blackness. We snuff our children’s ambition through
despising their intellectual independence and emotional
freedom. We target our children with vicious corporal
punishment to make them obedient to what we think the
Bible says to do to our kids. We beat the hell out of our
APRIL 4, 1968
72
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 72


--- PAGE 88 ---
kids, and when we do, we often beat out their initiative
and ambition too. In the name of King’s movement
against all forms of oppression, we must be released, and
release each other, from such degrading, deadening,
deathly practices. And in the public realm, we hardly do
better. We don’t buy black, shop black, or even love black,
because we think and have been taught, and often still
believe, that our blackness is just not good or beautiful
enough. King spoke against the lethal tribal practice of
self-imposed genocide in his last years. 
Finally, one of the ugliest forms of black death is how
the poor are subject to a symbolic social death. True, the
application of this term to the poor does not square with
the natal alienation of the slave to whom it was initially
applied—and who was alienated “from all ‘rights’ or
claims of birth” and “ceased to belong in his own right to
any legitimate social order.” They were cut off from the
heritage of their ancestors, made genealogical isolates. The
poor are, however, in effect socially dead persons. They
suffer social alienation: They lack standing, status, and
protection. They are mercilessly flogged in the press,
demonized by fellow citizens, made a football by politi-
cians, viciously criticized by public policy makers, and
assaulted by scholars and intellectuals. The stigma the
poor carry bans them from the presumption of political
innocence, of being good citizens; they carry the weight of
social pariah. They walk in the door with a capital “P” on
their foreheads. The irony is that King spent his last few
FACING DEATH
73
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 73


--- PAGE 89 ---
years rescuing the poor, helping them help themselves
through political agency, and forging connections among
the poor of different races and ethnicities. If we are to res-
urrect King’s spirit and work for what he worked for, we
must love and concentrate on the poor for whom Martin
Luther King died. He also prophesied that black people
would make it to the Promised Land. It has been forty
years since his death, the same amount of time the chil-
dren of Israel searched for their home. In the time since he
died, are black people any closer to the Promised Land, or
are we doomed to a racial wilderness?
No matter who killed him—a bigoted gunman, con-
spiring gangsters, or renegade government forces—Martin
Luther King, Jr.’s life was an anxious and dramatic march
to the grave. Of course, all humans are born to die. But
King knew that in all likelihood he would go earlier and
more violently than most. He exhausted himself uplifting
his country and race, but hateful forces hounded him to
his last breath. King’s ultimate sacrifice made America a
better country. His dream has been richly explored—and
exploited. His birthday is celebrated as a national holiday.
But his challenge to America has frozen beneath an ava-
lanche of amnesia. King’s date of death shivers in frosty
abandonment. It is clearly easier to salute a hero than face
a martyr. That is especially true when his death reminds
us of our demons and our unachieved potential. Facing
King may not be all bad. We may meet the man who
already knew, and forgave, our wrongdoing. We may also
APRIL 4, 1968
74
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 74


--- PAGE 90 ---
see the leader who asks us to use his death to better our
country. King used the unavoidable fact of death to argue
for social change and measure our commitment to truth.
There is a lot to be learned in how King feared and faced
death, and fought it too. What we make of his death may
determine what we make of his legacy and our future. 
FACING DEATH
75
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 75


--- PAGE 91 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 76
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 92 ---
PART 
TWO
PROMISED
LAND,
OR WILDERNESS?
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 77


--- PAGE 93 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 78
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 94 ---
CHAPTER
FOUR
REPORT CARD 
ON BLACK AMERICA
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON, JR., 
stood behind the pulpit made famous by Martin Luther
King, Jr., and asked his black Pentecostal audience a sim-
ple question: “If Martin Luther King . . . were to reappear
by my side today, and give us a report card on the last
twenty-five years, what would he say?” By 1993 much had
changed—opportunity had blossomed but so had despon-
dency. The black upper class soared, the middle class rose,
then dipped, and the black lower class sunk so low that its
children were killing each other over scraps of imagined
nothingness. Never before had America seen such a chasm
between rich and poor, a disparity that was amplified in
the blight of inner-city blacks as they were forced to
watch the explosive wealth of their upper-crust brethren
79
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 79


--- PAGE 95 ---
fail to drop the crumbs of prosperity down from its ban-
quet tables.
Some of the policies of the Clinton administration
drove great change into the black economy, moving for-
ward agendas like affirmative action and opening doors to
black folk as high-placed officials in government. As Clin-
ton stood before his audience, he believed the time had
come to evoke King’s message as a means to castigate
black America for leaving behind the poorest among
them, for not practicing what King had so urgently
preached. Clinton dared in his homily to perform King’s
own act of prosopopeia—speaking as if you are someone else
who is not present—by addressing the “great crisis of the
spirit” that gripped black America by serving as both 
the slain prophet’s historical secretary and philosophical
ventriloquist.
Clinton confessed that he never dreamed he “would
ever have a chance to come to this hallowed place where
Martin Luther King gave his last sermon.” The chance to
be where King last spoke was thrilling; the temptation 
to be King speaking was irresistible. And though it would
be five years before Toni Morrison famously dubbed Clin-
ton “America’s first black president,” Clinton did not shy
away from the already much-implied honorific nor the
opportunities extended to him in this cherished role. But
as proved in the bitter fallout over Clinton’s controversial
campaigning for his wife Hillary’s 2008 bid for the Oval
Office he once occupied—where he was accused of enflam-
APRIL 4, 1968
80
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 80


--- PAGE 96 ---
ing rather than dousing racial passions—it may be an
honor the Southern politician took too far, and certainly
too literally.
In his brief speech, Clinton worked from the same bag
of rhetorical invention as King. While King imagined
himself standing next to God, Clinton imagined himself
standing next to King. Both men cloaked themselves in
authority—one divine, the other as close to divine as an
American black man has come—to take a trip through
time to tell on the present. King stood outside of time
before coming to rest in his own era. Clinton resurrected
King to speak to the black world in the generation that
has lapsed since his death. King largely reported his part
of the conversation with God while speaking briefly in the
Almighty’s voice. Clinton, on the other hand, borrowed
King’s baritone extensively.
“‘You did a good job,’ he would say,” Clinton mused.
“‘Voting and electing people who formerly were not elec-
table because of the color of their skin.’” Clinton-as-King
praises black political power and the freedom of blacks to
live where they choose. He also praises black folk doing
well in the military and the broadening of the black mid-
dle class. Then Clinton’s King gets to the core of his
assessment. “But he would say, ‘I did not live and die to
see the American family destroyed.’” And he didn’t die so
kids could gun each other down with automatic weapons
and build fortunes on drug dealing and destroying lives.
Clinton’s version of King says he fought for freedom, but
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
81
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 81


--- PAGE 97 ---
not the freedom to abandon children and families. Clin-
ton’s King says he “fought to stop white people from
being so filled with hate that they would wreak violence
on black people,” but not “for the right of black people to
murder other black people.” Clinton then reasoned in his
own voice that as government has to make changes “from
the outside in” (including passing a crime bill, overhaul-
ing the health care system, and creating more jobs), black
folk have to make changes “from the inside out . . . some-
times all the answers have to come from the values and the
stirrings and the voices that speak to us from within.”
In a clever use of empathy, Clinton used King’s voice to
castigate King’s followers—and included himself by claim-
ing the dead leader would be disappointed that “we would
have abused our freedom this way,” and went on to connect
himself to the people in the room through his spiritual
heart. From this unimpeachable position of solidarity,
Clinton also argued that black crime, violence, family and
community breakdown, drug and employment problems,
and children impregnating each other without thought to
the consequences had finally prompted the nation to
address what Clinton later called “public pathology.”
Switching back to King, he said the civil rights leader
would praise our victory in the cold war, remark on the
perks of technology, and acknowledge that hard work and
playing by the rules can get you into a good college. But
then Clinton passionately, poignantly asked, “How would
APRIL 4, 1968
82
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 82


--- PAGE 98 ---
we explain to him all these kids getting killed and killing
each other? How would we justify the things that we per-
mit that no other country in the world would permit?
How could we explain that we gave people the freedom 
to succeed, and we created conditions in which millions
abuse that freedom to destroy the things that make life
worth living—and life itself?” Answering himself Clinton
concluded somberly. “We cannot.”
In a strange twist of fate, it was the policies put in
place by another president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
which first lifted many blacks out of poverty by creating
programs that would today be labeled “workfare.” And
though these programs were not specifically designed
with blacks in mind, it would be the poorest Americans
who benefited most—and most of the poorest were black.
The New Deal brought relief to the rural poor and fun-
neled money into communities to create jobs, not hand-
outs. Ironically, it would also be some of these same
programs that would disenfranchise the already working
poor, in particular sharecroppers, tenants, and farm labor-
ers, none of whom were provided for in the Agricultural
Adjustment Act of 1933. This particular piece of legisla-
tion would ultimately lay the groundwork for the kinds of
farm subsidies that would eventually undermine the small
family farm and drive even more poor rural blacks into
urban environments in search of unskilled factory jobs.
And it would be in the urban environment, where black
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
83
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 83


--- PAGE 99 ---
parents were working numerous low-paying shifts to keep
their small households afloat, that largely unchecked black
youths would eventually turn to and on each other.
It was also Roosevelt’s use of a coalition of “liberals”
that would first unwittingly pair African Americans and
communist organizations—long before communism
became a cudgeling fear—in a way that would be used
against both constituencies for the next fifty years.
Though the policies of the New Deal helped at least half
of black America, the other half would be forced into a
deeper struggle—foremost due to the intensifying hatred
of the supremacists around them as black men and
women had increased opportunity to become “presenta-
ble” and “articulate,” and more akin to white mainstream
culture and possibility than they had ever dared to imag-
ine. The New Deal showed them they could have a place
at the table, even as that table was being burned along
with their churches. By funneling some poor blacks into
work and others into relief situations, Roosevelt’s bril-
liant solution to the Depression created a definable
schism within black culture whose repercussions are felt
to this day.
Forty years after King’s death, and fifteen years after
Clinton’s speech, the question of King’s report card on
black America deserves an answer. Whether black folk
have set foot in the Promised Land, or got lost in the
wilderness, depends on whom you ask and what you see.
Quarters of black America have boomed into the upper
APRIL 4, 1968
84
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 84


--- PAGE 100 ---
reaches of prosperity. The wealthiest black folk, and the
merely rich, have fared very well, more annoyed than
trumped by racial beliefs and barriers. Due in large part to
affirmative action, the upper-middle classes continue to
rise, but their arc of triumph sometimes dead-ends in ceil-
ings lowered on their professional ambitions, in particular
for black women. The lower-middle and middle-middle
classes are struggling but, to varying degrees, maintaining.
The lower classes, meanwhile, are suffering greatly. The
working poor are barely surviving, while the black impov-
erished—variously called the permanently poor, the ghetto
poor, the underclass, or the “outer class” because they are
banished to the outskirts of prosperity and respect—are
struggling against the odds to eek out a living.
How are we to reconcile King’s vision of a Promised
Land for blacks with the stubborn reality of a wilderness
for too many? On top of this, or perhaps roiling beneath
it, a bitter civil war waged from the inside bloodies black
America. Among the greatest casualties are typically the
defenseless poor. They are further disgraced by the
neglect, or indifference, of their more fortunate kin. Well-
positioned critics in the ruling black class snipe at the
poor at the same time as they offer amnesty to their main-
stream enemies. When staunchly conservative social crit-
ics witness the black fortunate lambasting their poorer
brothers and sisters, it offers insurance against the charge
of racial insensitivity. After all, if well-heeled blacks are
harshly judging them, how can whites who make similar
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
85
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 85


--- PAGE 101 ---
comments be accused of indifference to the black poor?
The bitter criticisms of the black elite also embolden radi-
cal conservatives to take similarly hard-line stances that
oppose social and political help for the most vulnerable.
And the poor are wounded by friendly fire; even the poor
learn to loathe themselves and attack other poor people.
Now more than ever we need King’s wisdom and fire, and
his love, for the most vulnerable and violated members of
our community. These qualities must be kept in mind as
we grapple toward the Promised Land and judge our
progress through his eyes.
King would have agreed with portions of Clinton’s
speech, especially the need for more jobs and health care,
but he would have surely quarreled with many of Clin-
ton’s contentions and positions. Praising the end of the
cold war? Sure, but not so much because of what they were
doing to us as what we were doing to ourselves. McCarthy-
ism and the red scare allowed Congress and the FBI the
pretense of making a historical connection between com-
munist groups and African Americans a valid excuse to
violate King’s, and untold other Americans’, civil liber-
ties. Elevating people to the top of the military? King
might have applauded Colin Powell’s achievement, but he
eventually spoke vehemently as a pacifist against wars hot
and cold, and might not have been so happy with Powell’s
role in the Bush administration’s march to war. King
would have certainly opposed Clinton’s subsequent welfare
reform legislation, about which Clinton himself later
APRIL 4, 1968
86
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 86


--- PAGE 102 ---
admitted that most “advocates for the poor and for legal
immigration, and several people in my cabinet . . .
opposed . . . because it ended the federal guarantee of a
fixed monthly benefit to welfare recipients, had a five-year
limit on welfare benefits, cut overall spending on the food
stamp program, and denied food stamps and medical care
to low-income illegal immigrants.” King advocated a
guaranteed annual income for the poor and worked with
welfare rights advocates to secure stronger, not weaker,
benefits from the government.
Perhaps most troubling is how Clinton recruits King
into the battle over ghetto violence and domestic disinte-
gration among the poor. King had a profoundly different
take on the issue than his self-appointed amanuensis—
Clinton clearly didn’t take good notes. While King
opposed inner-city mayhem—in his time a lot of it had to
do with riots—he traced the link between the ghetto and
our government in denouncing violence. “As I have
walked among the desperate, rejected and angry young
men, I have told them that Molotov cocktails and rifles
would not solve their problems,” King said. “Their ques-
tions [about America using violence to solve its problems]
hit home, and I knew that I could never again raise my
voice against the violence of the oppressed in the ghettos
without having first spoken clearly to the greatest pur-
veyor of violence in the world today—my own govern-
ment.” And King would have never signed on to a Clinton
crime bill that turned on segregated consumption: plainly
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
87
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 87


--- PAGE 103 ---
stated, black offenders who smoked crack cocaine received
much harsher sentences than white offenders who sniffed
powder cocaine.
Though King had only a short lens to look through, he
wasn’t nearly as convinced as Clinton that the civil rights
movement had done much for the black poor. King went
so far as to say in 1966 that the Civil Rights Act of 1964
and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 had done little to bet-
ter the plight of either Southern or Northern poor blacks.
King charged that these “legislative and judicial victories
did very little to improve” Northern ghettos or “penetrate
the lower depths of Negro deprivation.” King said “the
changes that came about” because of civil rights struggle
were “at best surface changes, they were not really sub-
stantive changes.” The changes that came were “limited
mainly to the Negro middle class.” Because the condition
of the black poor had worsened, King argued in February
1968 for “a redistribution of economic power.”
That remedy is often written off by detractors as just
another liberal ruse to mask what is considered the true
source of the problem: the cultural pathologies and
plagues of the poor. Clinton isn’t alone in pinning the
weight of cultural resurrection on blacks themselves. It
has become fashionable among many critics to claim that
the biggest harm to black America is self-imposed.
Racism, it is claimed, has largely run its course, and now
only the ambition and fortitude of black folk can save
them; only their foolish reliance on old racial scripts can
APRIL 4, 1968
88
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 88


--- PAGE 104 ---
lead them astray. Blacks must bootstrap their way to pros-
perity like any other immigrant group that overcame
obstacles to find its footing in the culture. What is lack-
ing in this argument is that most blacks were not immi-
grants, they were slaves, and even after the core of the
culture achieved freedom, they were set the kinds of obsta-
cles—death, dismemberment, and denial of self—that no
other immigrant group ever faced on these shores. Bearing
that in mind, King still always encouraged personal
responsibility, but he frowned on those who demanded
poor black folk to do for themselves what the government
automatically had done for businesses and white farmers
after slavery.
“At the very same time that America refused to give
the Negro any land,” King said, “through an act of Con-
gress our government was giving away millions of acres of
land in the West and the Midwest, which meant it was
willing to undergird its white peasants from Europe with
an economic floor.” King wailed indignantly at the
nation’s unjust demand for self-reliance from black folk
while forgetting how white immigrants were offered edu-
cation, agriculture, and subsidies. “But not only did they
give them land, they built land grant colleges with gov-
ernment money to teach them how to farm. Not only that,
they provided county agents to further their expertise in
farming. Not only that, they provided low interest rates in
order that they could mechanize their farms.” It was not
lost on King how white privilege and government support
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
89
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 89


--- PAGE 105 ---
contrasted sharply to—and ultimately reinforced—black
suffering.
King recognized that the call for black self-help made
hypocrites of those who ignored the aid given the very
groups to whom blacks are unfavorably compared. “Not
only that, today many of these people are receiving
millions of dollars in federal subsidies not to farm, and
they are the very people telling the black man that he
ought to lift himself by his own bootstraps.” The call for
blacks to turn inward and pull themselves up by their own
striving, rather than wrestling with the massive structural
problems of economic inequality that caused their blight,
struck King as plain dishonest. “So often in America, we
have socialism for the rich, and rugged, free enterprise
capitalism for the poor,” King said on another occasion.
“Nobody has lifted himself by their own bootstraps.”
King also knew that there had been a time, and recently
too, when the act of wearing boots, and thereby showing
some small outward sign of equality to whites, was
enough to get a black man hung.
When we examine the report card that King might
have issued America, it may contain the rare A, but there
will be more than likely plenty of failing grades as well.
BY THE NUMBERS
Perhaps if we were to take a more realistic snapshot of
black life—one that clarifies what progress has been made,
APRIL 4, 1968
90
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 90


--- PAGE 106 ---
and tells what lies ahead—it will help offset uninformed
and exaggerated cries for black self-sufficiency. The big
forces that have always pounced on black life—concen-
trated poverty, high rates of unemployment and imprison-
ment, persistent racial and economic inequality, family
stress and strain, and violent crimes, especially homi-
cide—remain largely undiminished. For instance, in
2004, the last year for which statistics are available, a
black family of four earned a median income of $31,969—
61% of the $52,423 median incomes for white house-
holds, and the lowest among minority groups. A quarter
of black folk lived beneath the poverty line, which was
roughly $21,000 for a family of four. Only 11% of whites
were that poor. In 1968, 34.7% of blacks were poor while
10% of whites lived below the poverty line. And though
25% is clearly an improvement on 34.7%, it’s still more
than double that of white America.
Downward mobility is a fact of black life. In 1968,
45% of stable black middle-class children—those whose
families pulled down $55,600 when adjusted for infla-
tion—ended up among the lowest fifth of income earners
once they had families of their own, a steep decline in
salary that amounts to $23,100 in today’s dollars. Con-
versely only 16% of whites suffered a similar fate. Even
more shocking, almost half of black children whose fami-
lies earned less than the median in 1968 sank all the way
to the lowest income group when they came to maturity.
Poverty begat greater poverty.
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
91
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 91


--- PAGE 107 ---
Forty years later, in every income group, black folk are
statistically less likely than their white peers to match or
surpass their parents’ earnings, and more likely to slide
further down the economic scale. Indeed, only 31% of
black children born to middle-income parents now make
more than their parents did, while 68% of white children
have surpassed their parents’ income. A common eco-
nomic gauge of success in America is rate of home owner-
ship, where we see blacks lagging far behind whites. In
1970, black home ownership was at 41.6%, while white
home ownership was at 65.4%. Today, black home owner-
ship has failed to reach 50% while white home ownership
has jumped to a staggering 75.8%.
There is no doubt that education is fundamental to
betterment, and when we look at the numbers there, the
horizon is equally cloudy. In 1968, 54.9% of whites com-
pleted high school while only 30.1% of blacks matricu-
lated. Things have improved dramatically for both races,
with 80% of the nation’s nearly 40 million blacks today
earning a high school diploma. A very healthy number
until you compare it to the 90.5% of whites—do the
math and you find that at this rate not until 2176 will
there be education parity in this country. And there are
gender differences at work: black women routinely out-
strip black men in education. Black males experience a
precipitous decline in academic achievement beginning
around the fourth grade, when they score 87% of what
APRIL 4, 1968
92
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 92


--- PAGE 108 ---
whites score on tests, and by the time they’re in twelfth
grade, those who have made it that far manage to score
75% of the white tally.
Once they get to college, 16% of black women and
13% of black men earn at least a bachelor’s degree. Black
women collect more than 63% of the college degrees
earned by blacks; for every 100 women who earn a degree,
there are 60 black men who achieve the same feat. In
1968, only 5.3% of black people between the ages of
twenty-five and thirty had completed four or more years
of college, while 15.6% of whites had done the same. The
number for blacks now stands at 18.6%, still a 10% lag
behind the 28.3% of whites with four or more years of
higher education.
These forces hardly suggest stunted ambition as the
culprit in black vulnerability and alienation. The gulf in
black and white incomes is the monetary residue of
inequality; it shows just how stubborn and systematic has
been the denial of literal and symbolic capital to black
kin. Greater education significantly boosts the odds of
black folk getting bigger paychecks and more job security.
For the working poor, that security all but vanishes into a
haze of piecemeal jobs, part-time work, no benefits, spo-
radic rewards, and depressed wages—and hence, depress-
ing prospects. The desire to work is large, the absence of
sustaining work even larger. Black folk, like all Ameri-
cans, must be challenged to get more education and at
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
93
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 93


--- PAGE 109 ---
higher levels, but the courts must continue to demand
better and equal early education so that every child learns
how to love learning.
There is a pernicious trend toward subtle resegregation
of schools across the nation as more and more public
primary schools in urban areas are drained of upwardly
mobile whites and affluent blacks who seek private educa-
tion options. In rural communities in the South, it is well
documented that at the start of desegregation whites who
opposed mixing the races quickly organized and opened
“private” schools that to this day tend to be almost 100%
white-attended, just as the public schools are predomi-
nantly African American and poor. In Tunica, Mississippi,
county seat to one of the poorest areas in the nation—
a locale made up of a minority of white landowners and a
majority of poor black descendents of sharecroppers—
there stand two schools: Rosa Fort High School, which is
98% black and 97% “free lunch eligible,” and the Tunica
Institute of Learning, which is 99% white. When casino
money flooded into the county from riverboat gambling
on the county’s shores, the area’s coffers grew tenfold, but
the public school money-per-child ratio remains over
$1,000 behind the national average.
In May of 2007 the public school shut down for a few
days when a man wearing black pants and a white and
black T-shirt was seen wielding a rifle on campus. The
man was not described by race, even though he was wear-
ing a “T-shirt,” which must have exposed some skin. Had
APRIL 4, 1968
94
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 94


--- PAGE 110 ---
this “man” been black, is it at all possible his race would
not have been a factor? A “person of interest” was ques-
tioned and released, and the investigation was dropped
after a few days. Imagine the same event happening across
Tunica at the all-white school with a gunman who was
presumed black. Would the investigation stop or, more
likely, would it continue until someone was made to pay
for the crime? In any case, the result of the incident was
plain: black children were once again intimidated during
a school day.
In like fashion, the courts must continue to protect an
equal shot at universities and colleges through creative
affirmative action policies. But neither education, nor
retooling at the higher levels of work, is a guarantee that
upper-management positions will open, or that ceilings
carved from color or chromosomes can be crashed. The
persistence of subtle discriminatory practices at work and
school makes getting ahead a tedious task.
The dramatic downward mobility of black families,
though depressing, is unavoidably metaphoric: sliding
down a bleak spiral is far easier than rising on a positive
trajectory. This state of affairs points to routine reversals 
of fortune met by the upward swing of white success in a
culture where that success is both expected and supported.
The ease of falling back and down for many black families
screams the opposite: nonexistent wealth and social net-
works don’t pass hands from one generation to the next. 
In 1983, the average white household had a net worth of
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
95
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 95


--- PAGE 111 ---
$287,900; for blacks it was a measly $54,200. By 2004,
whites had a household net worth of $534,000 compared
to $101,400 for blacks. To make matters worse, 29.4% of
black households have zero or negative net worth, com-
pared to 13% for whites.
Neither do the few resources that exist make it to the
following generation. The subprime mortgage crisis will
cost black folk between $71 billion and $122 billion, the
greatest loss of black wealth in history. Only 17.2% of
whites have high-cost loans; for blacks, the number is an
astonishing 54.7%. The parental lift up the ladder of sta-
tus is missing several rungs—gaps that accumulate as the
arithmetic of negative calculation of all the goods and
perks that go missing for black families, but which more
well-positioned families take for granted. It is the ten-
dency to see as natural what has been gained at someone
else’s expense—one’s parents or grandparents, or other
sources of both rightful and unjust inheritance—that
often turns the beneficiaries of unearned privilege so
harshly against the unfortunate.
Black folk may be far behind in education and eco-
nomic security, but they can boast of a distinctly
unwanted honor: Black mortality outstrips white mortal-
ity. The dramatic decline in mortality, and a big gain in
life expectancy, a good measure of a population’s overall
well-being, has marked the twentieth century. In the
United States, life expectancy jumped from 47.3 years in
1900 to more than 76 years in the late 1990s; 81 percent
APRIL 4, 1968
96
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 96


--- PAGE 112 ---
of Americans expect to live to be 65 years old. At the
same time, there has been a significant spike in sex mor-
tality differences: the female advantage in life expectancy
hovers between five and eight years, up from two to three
years in 1900. This means that American female life
expectancy exceeded male life expectancy by 2.5 years in
1900 and 5.8 years by the late 1990s. Sex mortality differ-
ences are even more pronounced among blacks.
The same disparity holds true for race and socioeco-
nomic status: black folk from lower economic groups are
less likely to reach old age than members of other racial
and ethnic groups, and from higher income brackets. Iron-
ically, in 1968 the age expectancy for a black male was
sixty years. After King’s autopsy, the medical examiner
reported that he was surprised to see the thirty-nine-year-
old’s heart had the wear and tear of a man who had seen
sixty years—at that time an advanced age for a black man.
The stress of carrying the hopes, dreams, and fears of a
generation around for so long had ultimately worn King
out even as he was murdered.
Black mortality increased a great deal between 1984
and 1989 while white mortality declined. Black males
experienced a rise in death rates from HIV infection,
homicide, and accidents; black females suffered from HIV
infection, cancer at elevated ages, and diabetes. Despite a
shrinking gap between the races, black mortality remains
significantly higher than white mortality. Black male life
expectancy still lags behind white male life expectancy by
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
97
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 97


--- PAGE 113 ---
six years, while black female life expectancy trails white
female life expectancy by more than five years. In descend-
ing order, black men die from heart disease, cancer, acci-
dents, stroke, homicide, diabetes, HIV , chronic respiratory
problems, kidney disease, and influenza and pneumonia.
For black women, it is heart disease, cancer, stroke, dia-
betes, kidney disease, accidents, chronic lower respiratory
diseases, septicemia, Alzheimer’s disease, and influenza
and pneumonia.
It is little wonder that black folk simply can’t catch 
up in the race to live longer. Beyond all the shocks and
wounds of living and dying that everyone faces, there is 
a grueling subculture of animosities, anxieties, and
anguishes that end our lives earlier than might otherwise
be the case. While the goods and privileges that black folk
don’t have cannot be passed along, the bruises and
heartaches that are more than plentiful get transmitted
like a virus. The weight of psychological hurt and existen-
tial brutality press down on the heart, kidneys, and lungs.
Unspoken, and therefore, unresolved racial conflicts
invite bad eating habits and obesity, which are in turn
enabled by a shrewdly specific marketing agenda. What
could possibly be right about a Styrofoam bowl filled with
bits of fried chicken, mashed potatoes, corn, and cheese,
smothered in gravy and held out in black hands to black
customers? At 740 delicious calories (half of those from
the fat content of the meal) and 2350 milligrams of
sodium—98 percent of the recommended daily allow-
APRIL 4, 1968
98
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 98


--- PAGE 114 ---
ance—is it any wonder that poor people, who can more
easily afford this conveniently packaged and priced food
than fresh meats and vegetables, are steadily becoming the
most obese among us? We are perhaps the only country in
the world where the rich get thinner and poor get fatter.
Self-doubt and self-hate bring self-destruction in bot-
tles and cartons. Smoldering resentments and petty agita-
tions lead to murderous fits of temper. Homicide is often
the payoff for impoverished conditions; it is the unsubtle
and undisciplined hatred of the other-who-is-like-me that
blooms in the psyches of those who hate themselves and
their plight even more. Brooding discontent with the
racial ploys that deny mortgages and hike interest rates on
loans leads to strokes and aneurysms. Recent subprime
scandals have an unmistakable subtext: black life just
shouldn’t be housed in the same league and fashion as
white life. Racial shorthand and racist Morse code can lead
to debilitating fear and paranoia: did they mean to suggest
I was that dumb, or were they just peddling the obnox-
ious pap to me that they’d give to a member of their own
race? And the burden of trying to feed mouths, and a rav-
enous appetite for somebodyness, can eat one’s soul into
depression and suicide.
What all of these numbers offer is a portrait of black
life that is hardly a reflection of the failure to strive for a
better existence. Instead, the structural and institutional
forces that beat down upon black life continue to hamper
the flourishing of too many black folk and keep them
REPORT CARD ON BLACK AMERICA
99
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 99


--- PAGE 115 ---
from beginning to enter the Promised Land of social and
racial equality that Martin Luther King imagined. This
gulf between hope and the heartbreak that is the lot of
millions of black poor is nowhere better glimpsed than in
the social and economic circumstances that batter the
black family.
APRIL 4, 1968
100
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 100


--- PAGE 116 ---
CHAPTER
FIVE
THE BLACK FAMILY AND 
BLACK INEQUALITY
THE STATE OF BLACK FAMILY LIFE IN AMERICA
evokes grave concern, and graver criticism. There is no
more certain and painful measure of the lag between
Martin Luther King, Jr.’s dream of equality and the stark
wilderness navigated by millions of blacks than in the
numbers and plight of most poor black women, children,
and men. From the suffering of children in families that
struggle to gain sufficient economic support, to the diffi-
cult plight of single black women, to the unemployment
and overincarceration of black males, the black family is
buffeted by a host of brutal social facts that compromise
its quality of survival and make a mockery of King’s vision
of a black Promised Land.
101
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 101


--- PAGE 117 ---
Nearly 70% of black children are born to single moth-
ers, compared to 27% of white children, and 43% of Lati-
nos. Black folk have lower marriage rates, and marital
stability, than any ethnic group. Black families also have
higher rates of single-headed families than all other
groups. Thirty-three percent of black children live in two-
parent families, compared to nearly 80% in 1960. Black
homes have 45.4% single-female-headed families; white
single-headed families register at 13.7%. More than 40%
of black single-female-headed households live in poverty.
In 1968, the number was not that much higher at 58.9%.
Overall, nearly 40% of single-female-headed households
live in poverty, while only 6% of two-parent families exist
beneath the poverty level.
The majority of childbearing black women are unmar-
ried, and the rate of out-of-wedlock childbirths is forever
rising and falling. Unmarried women presently account
for 69% of black births, compared to 22% for unmarried
white women. There are 70 single black men for every
100 single black women, a figure that doesn’t take into
account the prison population or black males living in
group homes—where folk who are unrelated live together,
arrangements dictated by, for example, children with
behavioral problems, troubled teens, or the victims of
domestic violence. Contrary to popular perception, more
black men than women have never been married. The per-
centage of black men who have never said “I do” is 43.3%,
while 41.9% of black women have never had nuptials. By
APRIL 4, 1968
102
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 102


--- PAGE 118 ---
contrast, 27.4% of white males have never been married,
compared to 20.7% of white females. Still, black women
are the least likely members of society to marry: between
1970 and 2001, the United States marriage rate fell by
17%, but in black culture it plummeted by 34%.
Black children catch hell from birth. In 90% of metro-
politan areas, black women experienced over a 9% share of
low-birth-weight babies, much higher than the 5% target
suggested by professional health goals. In 85% of metro-
politan areas, white families with white children had a
home ownership rate of 70%, compared to the 50% of
black families who live in 96% of metropolitan areas. The
typical black child in a metropolitan area lives in a neigh-
borhood with a poverty rate of 21%; white children have 
a poverty rate of 8%. But there is segregation even in
poverty: many more black children than white children
live in concentrated poverty, where the majority of people
who live around them are just as destitute. For instance,
while only 25% of poor white children in Chicago lived 
in high-poverty neighborhoods, more than 90% of poor
black children found themselves in the slums.
The same segregation plagues their schooling. As
touched on above, there has been a profound resegregation
of American schools. Here again, the numbers don’t lie.
More than 70% of black students in the nation attend
schools that are composed largely of minority students.
The segregation of black students is more than 25 points
below 1969 levels, but there are still plenty of financially
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
103
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 103


--- PAGE 119 ---
strapped schools that make a mockery of the judicial man-
date for integrated education. White students typically
attend schools where less than 20% of the student body
comes from races other than their own. By comparison,
black and brown students go to schools composed of
53–55% of their own race. In some cases, the numbers are
substantially higher; more than a third of black and Latino
students attend schools with a 90–100% minority popula-
tion. In tandem with residential segregation, school reseg-
regation amounts to little more than educational apartheid.
King hammered away at the belief—one that still
resonates in the claims that black students are more anti-
intellectual, and less interested in learning, than whites—
that poor black children weren’t as intelligent as their
better off white peers. Although “one explanation of the
poor educational results of Negro and other center-city
children alleges that there is something basically wrong
with the educational capacities of these children,” King
argued that our society hasn’t given poor black youth “an
equal opportunity at a decent education.” He also drew
attention to the wide disparities between urban and sub-
urban schools and the unequal resources each received. 
“In 1962, suburbs spent $145 more per pupil than did the
central cities,” King said. “Even more disturbing is the
sad fact that in 1957 the differences in educational expen-
ditures between big city and suburb were very small; since
then, the disparities have grown.” King understood that
APRIL 4, 1968
104
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 104


--- PAGE 120 ---
economic inequality gave the children of the nation’s elite
a better chance to be educated.
The black family has been scrutinized, and attacked,
since the domestic unit took shape under the pulverizing
deformities of slavery. The black family was viewed by
Daniel Moynihan, in a famously controversial 1965
report, as “a tangle of pathology” whose destruction by
slavery flashed in female-headed households, absent
fathers, and high illegitimacy. Martin Luther King was
one of the few Negro leaders who refused to condemn
Moynihan’s report when it leaked out. (Of course King
surely didn’t agree with one of Moynihan’s suggestions to
overcome the ego-deflation of black matriarchy: sign up
for the military to be sent to Vietnam under a program
that lowered the military entrance requirements and fun-
neled poor black men to combat. Moynihan said the mili-
tary was the ideal patriarchy and “a world away from
women, a world run by strong men and unquestioned
authority.”)
“The shattering blows on the Negro family have made
it fragile, deprived and often psychopathic,” King said in
conjuring a depressing image to convey his beliefs about
the domestic suffering of black folk. “Nothing is so much
needed as a secure family life for a people to pull them-
selves out of poverty and backwardness.” King quickly
saw that the Moynihan report offered “dangers and
opportunities.” The opportunity the report provided was
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
105
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 105


--- PAGE 121 ---
the chance to gain support and resources for the black
family. The danger in the offing was that “problems will
be attributed to innate Negro weakness and used to jus-
tify, neglect and rationalize oppression.” It is clear in the
public discussion of black families over the last forty years
that the dangers won, drowning the report’s opportunities
in a sea of sociological and pop psychological assault that
has enjoyed both political and scholarly support.
King didn’t live to see Moynihan’s thesis of black fam-
ily pathology and an overbearing matriarchy challenged
by scholars like Herbert Gutman, who argued a decade
after the Moynihan report that the black family managed
to remain close, strong, and intact from slavery to at least
the Great Depression. Gutman’s work drew from slave
registers, Reconstruction marriage records, and subse-
quent census data to show that typical black families for
most of our American experience have had two parents
who remained married a long time. Before that, marital
fidelity was prized and upheld in slave quarters; premari-
tal sex was not encouraged, but tolerated, and illegitimacy
brought no stigma. Of course, premarital sex and illegiti-
macy were staples of the white slave-owning sexual econ-
omy: slave masters pillaged and plundered young girls
and women at will, and produced a constant stream of
babies that would make the stereotypical pimped-out,
family-fleeing, children-abandoning, absentee-fathering
black male blush in embarrassment at his relatively low
productivity.
APRIL 4, 1968
106
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 106


--- PAGE 122 ---
Despite thwarted erotic exclusivity, black marriage
bonds in slavery remained strong and long except when
shattered by the sale of one spouse. Black fidelity was so
vital that it outlasted periods of forced separation when
one spouse escaped to freedom and left a mate behind.
Family ties endured as some slaves stuck close even after
escape, and risked recapture to see and touch their family’s
flesh again. Black families in slavery mostly rejected the
white habit of wedding cousins. Instead, they embraced
West African kinship ties, naming children after parents
and grandparents.
Once they were freed, they even kept the names of for-
mer slave-owners to bolster family solidarity. That habit
didn’t just begin with single black mothers giving their
babies the last names of the children’s father. Even when
blood relatives receded or were coerced into oblivion dur-
ing slavery, black folk relied on strong patterns of fictive
kin—a network of aunts, uncles, and cousins not bound
by blood but brought into existence by the need to relate
and love. That’s why the obsessive demonizing of black
families has obscured one of its strengths: multiple ways
to gather kin that defy narrow views of what’s healthy or
respectful. As Gutman argued, Moynihan’s report “was
the last hurrah for the idea that there is one right way to
organize family life.”
There’s little doubt that the black family is in big
trouble. After the period taken up by Gutman’s research,
migration and urbanization repaid black families with
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
107
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 107


--- PAGE 123 ---
enormous grief and suffering. The black family adjusted
with great difficulty to the geography of deprivation,
reduction, and compression in the ghetto. Nor is there any
question that black families must shoulder some of the
weight and responsibility for improving our lot: increas-
ing parental attention to our children’s education; examin-
ing and discouraging some destructive birth trends among
vulnerable and desperate single young females; encourag-
ing greater responsibility for black fathers; and shifting
the dramatic emphasis on corporal punishment that leads
to psychological suffering and behavioral difficulties. 
We must be honest about the black family’s undeniable
wounds and scars, its flaws and failures, its illegitimacies
and abandonments, its dissipations and deconstructions,
its myriad self-destructions, all of which must be identi-
fied, fought, warred against, resisted, contested—and by
no means tolerated or excused—by black folk ourselves.
But if any entity bears primary responsibility for
destroying the black family, it isn’t the black family.
Those of us seeking the salvation of black domesticity
must not dare overlook or deny the institutional forces
that dissolve kinship bonds—or separate sense from joy in
black families. We must be even more vigilant in pointing
to those who benefited from harming the black family by
raping, sundering, shattering, and brutalizing its mem-
bers for crass financial gain. Those who say “That wasn’t
me, but my foreparents” benefit by inheritance—by con-
suming monies and resources those black families should
APRIL 4, 1968
108
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 108


--- PAGE 124 ---
have received but didn’t, or by getting the cultural and
psychological advantage of not being assumed to be
pathological. It is even more grating to see unconscious
beneficiaries of the black family’s destruction flashing a
self-flattering smirk of moral superiority, especially since
their presumed ethical advantage rests on the immoral
denial to those families of opportunity, legitimacy, and
humane support.
The Clinton administration’s welfare reform, with its
institutional self-delusions—it didn’t reform the system
to the advantage of the most vulnerable, but to the con-
venience of its architects and perpetrators—doesn’t begin
to address the needs of the neediest. Black families can
only prosper when we fix the problems that most hurt
them—huge unemployment; racist and opportunistic
lending and mortgage practices; diminished family and
child care support for poor mothers; stunted retraining
programs for black males who’ve been made obsolete by
technological advance (while penalizing employers who
practice discrimination in hiring black males); and the
political erosion of early childhood learning programs that
are critical to success later in life.
The plight of black males in particular has had grim
consequences on black life. The 8.9% black unemploy-
ment rate is twice that of whites. For black men, the
unemployment rate is even higher at 9.5%, compared to
4% for white men. In 2004, the percentage of black men
16 and over who were employed stood at 59.3%; for white
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
109
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 109


--- PAGE 125 ---
men, it was 70.4%. This clearly has a huge impact on
black income. The incomes of black men were higher in
1974 than they were in 2004. The median weekly income
of black men 16 and over who worked full-time was 78%
of white men’s income. For black males between the ages
of 15 and 34, homicide was the leading cause of death.
Black men under the age of 25 are fifteen times more
likely to die of homicide than their white peers. In 2005,
black males accounted for 52%—or 6,800—of the nearly
13,000 homicide victims. In 2005, black males were even
more vulnerable to violent crimes than black women.
If violent crime plagues black life, so does the lethal
prison industry. Blacks are incarcerated at 4.8 times the
rate of whites. In mid-2006, nearly 1 in every 123 blacks
was incarcerated, compared to 1 in every 353 Latinos and
1 in every 588 whites. During the same time, an esti-
mated 4.8% of black men were in prison or jail; the num-
ber for Latino men was 1.9%, and that of whites 0.7%.
More than 11% of black men between the ages of 25 and
34 were incarcerated. Also, more black men—836,000—
were in state or federal prisons or local jails than white
men, 718,000 of whom were locked down, or Latino men,
426,000 of whom were behind bars. Black men made up
more than 41% of the more than 2 million men held in
custody; black men between the ages of 20 and 29 com-
prised 15.5% of all men sent away. Overall, black men
were incarcerated at 6.5 times the rate of their white
peers.
APRIL 4, 1968
110
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 110


--- PAGE 126 ---
One of the legal loopholes for sending black offenders
away continues to unjustly keep black prisoners behind
bars: the abuse of crack cocaine. Under law, possessing five
grams of crack cocaine (about five pea-sized “rocks”)
brings a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in
prison. In sharp contrast, a first-time offender may simply
possess any quantity of any other controlled substance and
be punished by a maximum of one year in prison. The net
result is that those who offend federal crack cocaine laws
routinely receive substantially longer sentences than those
who offend powder cocaine laws. The difference in the
length of the sentences between the two has only increased
since 1992. Typically, white offenders are the bulk of pow-
der cocaine offenders while black offenders make up the
majority of crack cocaine offenders, even as their percent-
ages have declined since 1992, when it was 91.4%, to
84.7% in 2000, to today’s 81.8%.
The big business of warehousing black and brown bod-
ies in prison is more than despicable; it strains the bonds
of morality and decency and threatens the civic compact of
just treatment for all citizens. Relatively minor juvenile
and narcotic offenses of law—ones that often escape notice
when the subjects of prosecution are white youth—are
magnified, and judicially marshaled, as the sick predicate
for profitable confinement. Racial disproportion is
wielded as a cudgel: the huge numbers of black men beat
into prison can hardly be justified by the numbers or
kinds of crime they commit. A lot of black men are
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
111
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 111


--- PAGE 127 ---
simply thrown away for nonviolent drug offenses, as sadly
nowhere are better criminals made than in prison.
There is a long and tragic history of black males being
viewed as the scourge of Northern urban society. As
whites fought to divide themselves from black inner-city
life—a life made more nakedly brutal by white flight to
safe suburban neighborhoods—they mischaracterized
black males as the source of social decay. Black males were
blamed for everything that made black life in the inner
city harsh: crime, poverty, and drug addiction. There can
be no denying in hindsight that the ballyhooed war on
drugs of the 1980s was a war on black and brown men.
President Reagan and members of his administration tar-
geted young men of color as the source of urban suffering
and sought to drag them to jail in the greatest wave of
mass imprisonment in U.S. history. Ironically, the eighties
were typified by the enormous use of powder cocaine in
the halls of business and entertainment. Add to this the
sudden appearance of crack in the inner cities at the same
time that an illegal war was being waged in Nicaragua—
a war that funneled the cheap narcotic straight into the
hands of drug dealers as guns were ultimately exchanged
for thousands of black men’s souls. Finally poor blacks
could afford a white man’s escapist luxury on a mass scale.
“Equality” had found its unconscionable level.
The life of poor black folk is caught between crime and
punishment. Most critics argue that those of us who beg
for rationality and clarity, and for consistency and fairness,
APRIL 4, 1968
112
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 112


--- PAGE 128 ---
in the criminal justice system are seeking amnesty for all
black criminals or an escape of responsibility for misbe-
havior. Neither is true. Criminals should be held account-
able for their crimes. The practice of murder to resolve
conflicts has ravaged too many poor communities and
must be opposed with every bit of our strength. We must
preach against it, legislate against it, and march against it;
but we must also demand an end to the economic and
social ills that make murder a convenient tool to express
aggression and secure goods in a perverted moral out-
look—largely at the expense of other poor people.
Too often, however, segregation and racism penetrate
even the depths of criminality: white offenders routinely
get treated to a brand of justice that differs greatly from
that meted out to black and other minorities. We need
standards of criminal justice, and punishment for offense,
that are, like Fox News is supposed to be, fair and bal-
anced. A criminal justice system is criminal when it is
ruined by racial preference and white privilege. The Jena
Six case is but one instance of this infuriating and unjust
divergence.
The Jena Six is a group of six black teenagers from
Jena, Louisiana, who were charged in the December 2006
beating of Justin Barker, a white teenager at Jena High
School. The beating came on the heels of several racially
charged incidents in the town—including three white
students who hung nooses from a tree at Jena High
School—after a black student sought permission from a
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
113
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 113


--- PAGE 129 ---
school administrator to sit under the school’s “white tree,”
reserved exclusively by local custom for white students.
The Jena Six case sparked protests that the arrests and
subsequent charges were excessive and racially unjust.
White Jena youth involved in other incidents were given
far lighter penalties.
On September 20, 2007, thousands of protesters
marched on Jena in one of the largest civil rights demon-
strations in years. Mychal Bell, the only Jena Six member
who has been tried—he was originally charged with
attempted murder, though the charges were reduced with
wide outcry—had his conviction of aggravated battery
and conspiracy set aside because it was determined he
should have been tried as a juvenile. Bell eventually pled
guilty to a reduced charge of battery and agreed to testify
against the other defendants should they face trial. Bell
was sentenced to eighteen months, with credit for time
he’d already served.
Unfortunately, the plight of the Jean Six is not unique.
The overprosecution and overincarceration of black youth
occurs with frightening regularity. It has been apparent
for the longest time that black youth simply don’t get a
fair shake in the criminal justice system. The same
offenses that get white youth a slap on the hand land
black youth in juvenile detention, increasing the likeli-
hood that they later end up in jail or prison. Nearly a
decade before the Jena Six, black youth between the ages
of 10 and 17 made up only 15% of their age group in the
APRIL 4, 1968
114
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 114


--- PAGE 130 ---
United States population, yet accounted for more than
26% of juvenile arrests, 32% of delinquency referrals to
juvenile court, 41% of juveniles detained in delinquency
cases, 46% of juveniles in corrections institutions, and
52% of juveniles transferred to adult criminal court after
judicial hearings. These statistics show that black youth
are vulnerable to zealous prosecutors out to throw the
book at them while proving to the broader society that
they are tough on crime. Black youth are often the tro-
phies of success for unprincipled tugs of war between the
custodians of the criminal justice system over who should
serve how much time for which crimes. It’s no secret that
our youth get the short end of that racially braided rope.
Even though Jena Six occurred in the Deep South,
black youth in urban centers across the North and beyond
face brutal miscarriages of justice. This happens in part
because of the persistent stereotyping of black youth as
crime-prone social misfits. It doesn’t help that many hip-
hop music videos carry the image of black youth commit-
ting crime or glorifying the gangsta lifestyle. But we can’t
scapegoat black popular culture as the source of the prob-
lem. We must acknowledge that the lyrics and lifestyles
promoted in rap music track, even mimic—but didn’t cre-
ate—the image of black male youth as pathological and
deviant. Only continued vigilance by black folk will
assure that our children don’t spend more time behind
bars in unjust overprosecution. We must be more deter-
mined to vote, protest, resist, organize, and mobilize
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
115
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 115


--- PAGE 131 ---
against the cruel miscarriage of justice that too often lies
in wait for our youth. As the outpouring of black aware-
ness and outrage around Jena Six proved, if we don’t speak
up and act up for our youth, few others will.
If our youth are targets of an unjust war, so are the
poorest black Americans. The black poor have been made
a political piñata: public policy makers, politicians, and
cultural critics of varying stripes blindfold themselves to
the dignity and humanity of the poor to strike at them
with vicious stereotypes, and often hardened hearts, savor-
ing from their broken images the sweet but soulless satis-
faction of defeating the already defeated. In our day, this
may even be truer of the black elite—whom I have else-
where called the Afristocracy—than the white main-
stream. Wealthy blacks, rich blacks, upper-middle-class
blacks and solidly middle-class blacks have declared war
on the poor. They have heaped burning coals of disdain
and outright hatred on their heads.
It is not that the animosity isn’t old; what is relatively
new is the way it has gone public. Black elites have rou-
tinely and mercilessly hammered the poor behind the
walls of black civil society and social organizations. After
slavery, noblesse oblige prompted Afristocrats to uplift 
the race; but their aid and advice to the unwashed Negro
masses often dripped in condescension and contempt. The
moral refinement of the crude Negro has been a favorite
theme of the Afristocracy ever since. The attempt to make
poor blacks better has recently made rich blacks bitter.
APRIL 4, 1968
116
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 116


--- PAGE 132 ---
Hurricane Katrina brought a remarkable downpour of
charity to poor blacks from well-off blacks, but it was
occasionally spiked with condemnations of the lifestyles
and so-called lethargy of the least well-off. What role
should fortunate blacks play in addressing the suffering of
poor blacks? It is a question which, in a post-King era of
black striving, too often goes unasked and unanswered.
THE BLACK FAMILY AND BLACK INEQUALITY
117
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 117


--- PAGE 133 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 118
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 134 ---
CHAPTER
SIX
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
Poverty, Prosperity, and 
the Performance of Blackness
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. WAS A BLACK ELITE
who renounced the privileges of fortunate birth to share
the suffering of the poor. He was highly suspicious of
charity as a long-term strategy for social change. King
argued exactly a year before he died that “we are called to
play the Good Samaritan on life’s roadside,” but that was
“only an initial act.” We must “come to see that the whole
Jericho road must be transformed so that men and women
will not be constantly beaten and robbed as they make
their journeys on life’s highway.” King concluded that
“true compassion is more than flinging a coin to a beggar;
119
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 119


--- PAGE 135 ---
it is not haphazard and superficial. It comes to see that an
edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring.”
King believed that charity was a poor substitute for
justice. Charity is a hit-or-miss proposition; folk who tire
of giving stop doing so when they think they’ve done
enough. Justice seeks to take the distracting and fleeting
emotions out of giving. Justice does not depend on feeling
to do the right thing. It depends on right action and
sound thinking about the most helpful route to the best
and most virtuous outcome. King understood, and
embodied, this noble distinction. People who give money
to the poor deserve praise; people who give their lives to
the poor deserve honor. King is among the few who
should be honored.
While others make war on the poor, King made war on
what made them poor. He moved in 1966 into a Chicago
slum for several months to dramatize the plight of the
poor, and to put flesh to the spirit of nonviolent resistance
to “the violence of poverty.” At the urging of activist Mar-
ian Wright Edelman, King began the Poor People’s Cam-
paign to bring national attention to the poor of all races.
He joined with a coalition of activists across the racial and
ethnic spectrum to fight poverty in a planned march on
Washington, DC, in April of 1968. It was the first stage
of a massive, aggressively nonviolent movement that
called on poor people and their allies to take up residence
in the nation’s capital for months and, if necessary, shut
down traffic. At the invitation of nonviolent apostle and
APRIL 4, 1968
120
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 120


--- PAGE 136 ---
activist James Lawson, King journeyed to Memphis to
march and protest the mistreatment of poor sanitation
workers on strike for better wages and just treatment.
Before he was murdered, King planned to disobey a court
injunction against marching to dramatize these poor black
workers’ plight.
King loved the poor and hated poverty. He never grew
to despise them the way some black elites have. This was
clear on April 4 when Ralph Abernathy and King ate
lunch in the Lorraine Motel where he would be assassi-
nated on the balcony in a few hours. The catfish special for
the day thrilled King and Abernathy, but the waitress
failed several times to get the order right.
“We’ll have two orders, and two glasses of iced tea,”
King asked. Shortly, she returned. “You want one order of
catfish or two?” she asked King. “Two orders,” he said,
holding up two fingers.
The two men passed their time talking about the court
injunction against the planned march. They were quite
hungry, and glanced occasionally at the kitchen door for
the waitress to come with their order. When she finally
arrived with a tray of food, they were excited. Despite
King’s clarification, she brought a single platter of fish
and two glasses of iced tea. Abernathy was about to cor-
rect her when King stopped him.
“Oh, Ralph. Don’t bother her anymore. She probably
doesn’t get paid minimum wage, and you know what the
tips must be like here. We’ll just eat from the same plate.”
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
121
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 121


--- PAGE 137 ---
King was motivated by more than compassion for the
poor; he brought ideas and analysis along in the fight
against poverty. He believed that poverty was in part the
weakened blood flow of resources into the arteries of
deprived and vulnerable communities. Those arteries are
clogged with failed political will and a severely dimin-
ished belief that poverty could be destroyed. King
believed the problem could be solved—by guaranteeing
the poor an annual income (progressive economist John
Kenneth Galbraith said it could be done for $20 billion a
year and even conservative economist Milton Friedman
supported the idea through a form of negative income
tax); by diverting resources from the war back into domes-
tic social programs; by raising the minimum wage; by full
employment (so that the Negro could be “freed from the
smothering prison of poverty that stifles him generation
after generation”); and by restructuring social and eco-
nomic relations through “a revolution of values.”
King argued that materialism, militarism, and racism
were killer kin; these “triplets of tragedy,” the offspring of
greed and oppression’s sordid marriage, were thicker than
the political and cultural thieves who depended upon
them to wreak havoc in the world. King said that when
“machines and computers, profit motives and property
rights are considered more important than people, the
giant triplets of racism, materialism, and militarism are
incapable of being conquered.” He insisted that a nation
APRIL 4, 1968
122
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 122


--- PAGE 138 ---
that “will keep people in slavery for 244 years will
‘thingify’ them . . . exploit them, and poor people gener-
ally, economically.” Economic exploitation meant that
America “will have to have foreign investments and every-
thing else, and will have to use its military might to pro-
tect them. All of these problems are tied together.” He
also argued that someone “has been profiting from the low
wages of Negroes. Depressed living standards for Negroes
are a structural part of the economy. Certain industries are
based upon the supply of low-wage, underskilled and
immobile non-white labor.”
King viewed viable work as a key to combating the
economic and psychic toll of poverty. Until black female
activists challenged him late in his career, King framed his
arguments in terms of the needs and vision of poor black
men. “When you deprive a man of a job, you deprive him
of his manhood, deprive him of the authority of father-
hood.” King said this placed the black man “in a situation
which controls his political life and denies his children an
adequate education and health services while forcing his
wife to live on welfare in a dilapidated dwelling and you
have a systematic pattern of humiliation which is as
immoral as slavery and a lot more crippling than southern
segregation.” King increasingly spoke of the “violence of
poverty, which destroys the soul and bodies of people.”
Young black males became the “legion of the damned in
our economic army. Damned to hold the dirtiest jobs, the
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
123
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 123


--- PAGE 139 ---
lowest paying jobs—and damned to be not only the last
hired but also the first fired when reversals come to our
economy.”
King brilliantly diagnosed the suffering the black poor
endured in the struggle for freedom and self-worth, speak-
ing of what he elegantly termed the black “discouraged.”
He also pointed to the hypocrisy of giving more analytical
credibility to whites when they shared the same setback 
as blacks. King said black people “are living in a literal
depression. Now the problem is when there is massive
unemployment in the black community, the nation calls it
a social problem. When there is massive unemployment in
the white community, the nation calls it a depression.”
(Later in his speech, King said when money is “given out
to provide certain rights for black people, they call it wel-
fare. When it’s given to white people, it’s called subsidy.”)
King said that labor statistics show “that there is about
8.4 percent unemployment in the black community. But
do you know, it doesn’t include what we call the discour-
aged—the thousands and thousands of Negroes in this
country who’ve given up, who’ve lost hope. They’ve had
so many doors closed in their faces that they feel defeated,
and they don’t even go down to look for a job.”
King was especially disappointed with the black mid-
dle class’s refusal to toss in with the plight of the poor. He
constantly reminded well-to-do blacks of their obligation
to their less fortunate brothers and sisters. His words con-
APRIL 4, 1968
124
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 124


--- PAGE 140 ---
trast sharply with the bitter assaults on the black poor out
of the mouths of many of our present black elites.
Now, some Negroes are more secure than others. None
of us are secure enough, but some are more secure than
others. And I’m trying to get it over to the Negro
“partial-haves” to join hands with the Negro “have-
nots.” You know, we have too many Negroes who have
somehow, through some education and a degree of eco-
nomic security floated or kind of swam out of the back
waters, the muddy waters, and they’ve kind of man-
aged to get out into the fresh waters of the mainstream
a little bit. And they’ve forgotten the stench of the
back waters. Now I hope this will change. I hope that
every Negro in this country will be in this movement
for the poor, [and] know that all of God’s children
must have the basic necessities of life.
The black elite blame the black poor for their poverty,
and hold them responsible for fixing the problem them-
selves. King said that if “society changes its concepts by
placing the responsibility on its system, not on the indi-
vidual, and guarantees secure employment or guaranteed
income, dignity will come within the reach of all.” King
fought against reducing poverty to a matter of the per-
sonal responsibility of the poor. “We do much too little to
assure decent, secure employment,” King said. “And then
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
125
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 125


--- PAGE 141 ---
we castigate the unemployed and underemployed for
being misfits and ne’er-do-wells. We still assume that
unemployment usually results from personal defects; our
solutions therefore largely tend to be personal and individ-
ual.” King argued that we “need to take quite a different
view of the causes and cures of the economic misfortunes
of the Negro and the poor and to aim at establishing
income security.”
King wasn’t opposed to personal initiative and respon-
sibility; he simply redefined it in political terms. It’s most
clear when he called black folk to account for the failure to
exercise the franchise once they got the chance to vote.
“And the tragedy is that even after we register in many
instances, we don’t even go out and vote. Now we must
get up; we must rise up from our stools of do-nothingness
and complacency and do something for ourselves. And in
doing something for ourselves, we’ll do something for the
nation.” But he consistently refused to offer a self-help
prescription while ignoring the structural forces that pun-
ished poor people.
King took the black church to task for being possessed
of a religion that talked more than it acted. He criticized
religion for adding to, rather than challenging, social suf-
fering. “I wish today, that Christians would stop talking
so much about religion, and start doing something about
it, and we would have a much better world,” King said
from his pulpit a week before his last birthday. “But the
problem is that the church has sanctioned every evil in the
APRIL 4, 1968
126
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 126


--- PAGE 142 ---
world. Whether it’s racism, or whether it’s the evils of
monopoly-capitalism, or whether it’s the evils of mili-
tarism. And this is why these things continue to exist in
the world today.” King tirelessly preached the biblical
parable of Dives and Lazarus, recounting how Dives was
rich on earth, while Lazarus was poor. King said that their
roles were reversed in the afterlife: Dives was sent to hell,
and Lazarus enjoyed a rich life in heaven. King said that
Jesus never condemned wealth wholesale, so that it wasn’t
being rich that sent Dives to hell. Rather, it was because
“he forgot about the poor.”
Dives didn’t go to hell because he was rich. Dives went
to hell because he allowed Lazarus to become invisible.
And Dives went to hell because he passed Lazarus by
every day, but he never really saw him. Dives went to
hell because he maximized the minimum and mini-
mized the maximum. Dives went to hell because he
allowed the means by which he lived to outdistance the
ends for which he lived. Dives went to hell because he
didn’t use his wealth to bridge the gulf that separated
him from Lazarus. That’s why he went to hell. And if
America doesn’t use its wealth to bridge the gulf
between the rich nations and the poor nations, between
the poor and the rich in this nation, it too is going to
hell. Now, I mean this. And I don’t want the secure
Negroes to end up going to a kind of spiritual, degen-
erate hell in their own lives.
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
127
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 127


--- PAGE 143 ---
King assailed black ministers for their material narcis-
sism even as they neglected the needs of their parishioners.
King told a group of black clergy in February of 1968
that they had to admit that some of them had “been lax.”
King said the black church had often been a “taillight
rather than a headlight.” He asked them to admit that “all
too often some of us have stood in the midst of social
injustice and yet we remained silent behind the safe secu-
rity of stained glass windows.” They also had to “honestly
admit that in the midst of poverty of our own members,
so often we’ve just looked around and ended up uttering
pious irrelevancies and sanctimonious trivialities.” King
struck even harder as he encouraged his brethren to
“admit that all too often we’ve been more concerned about
the size of the wheel base on our automobiles, and the
amount of money we get in our anniversaries, than we’ve
been concerned about the problems of the people who
made it possible for us to get these things.”
One can only imagine how King would be appalled by
the prosperity gospel movement in the black church, with
its obsessive emphasis on getting rich and reading the
bible through an exclusively entrepreneurial lens. The
prophetic refrain of the black pulpit, as marginal as it has
always been, is even more silenced in entrepreneurial
evangelism. Prosperity gospel’s most zealous proponents
say that God wants all believers to drive big cars and live
in big houses and make big money. Instead of criticizing
excess, they rabidly embrace it; they slight altogether the
APRIL 4, 1968
128
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 128


--- PAGE 144 ---
structural forces that sustain poverty. Entrepreneurial
evangelists personalize poverty; the poor either rise to
riches or fall to being broke by their own sweat and
prayers. It’s self-help dispensed from a Mercedes-Benz or 
a private jet.
Prosperity preachers market their wares on television
and mass appearances: an endless stream preaching in
churches, auditoriums, and stadiums flow into audiotapes,
DVDs, CDs, and books promoting wealth and well-being,
all bought by their global congregation of consumers.
Entrepreneurial evangelists are Booker T. Washington
with prayer cloths and anointing oil: they spout a gospel
of capitalism that endorses the status quo. King’s dramatic
attention to the poor is obscured, erased, or ignored.
Entrepreneurial evangelists have perversely absorbed the
prophetic demand for the gospel to renounce its other-
worldly addictions and face the world at hand and turned
it into a rationale for undisciplined materialism.
Although the socially conscious and politically active
wing of the black church supplied King theological impe-
tus for social change, it was always in the minority. That is
even more the case now that the prosperity gospel has
seized the black imagination at a time when the numbers
of the black poor have increased, their plight made more
difficult by a pronounced lack of either social empathy or
critical resources. Now more than ever, the most fortunate
members of the black community must helpfully address
the plight of their beleaguered black brothers and sisters
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
129
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 129


--- PAGE 145 ---
and find creative ways to bring the masses of black folk
closer to the social and racial equality for which Martin
Luther King hoped.
On the bright side, and beyond the prosperity gospel’s
grip of greed, there are those black Americans who have
grabbed hold of their rung on the ladder of upward mobil-
ity in the years since King’s death. Black households in
the upper income bracket, those making $75,000 to
$99,000, increased fourfold between 1967 and 2003,
making up 7 percent of the population. And the numbers
of the black middle class have significantly swollen. In
1960, there were only 385,586 black professionals, semi-
professionals, business owners, managers, or officials, a
number that ballooned to 1,317,080. By 1995, there were
nearly seven million black folk employed in middle-class
occupations, helped by blacks who became social workers,
receptionists, insurance salespeople, and government
bureaucrats.
WE MIGHT JUST GET THERE WITHOUT HIM
Black progress toward the Promised Land King foresaw
can’t simply be measured in material terms. We must also
understand how black intelligence and creativity have
flourished, and have been acknowledged since King
died—a measure of how blackness has been celebrated 
and supported, or at other times engaged or resisted, but
APRIL 4, 1968
130
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 130


--- PAGE 146 ---
rarely ignored. Black writers, athletes, singers, actors, and
other creative figures have garnered prominence and
exerted influence in America, a testament to King’s vision
being closer, in spirit at least, if not quite in the lives of
the most vulnerable.
In his 1970 essay, writer Ralph Ellison eloquently
addressed the question, “What America Would Be Like
Without Blacks.” Ellison said that American language
would be the poorer without black inflections and
nuances, since “whether it is admitted or not, much of the
sound of that language is derived from the timbre of the
African voice and the listening habits of the African ear.”
Ellison also wrote that without the presence of black
“style, our jokes, tall tales, even our sports would be lack-
ing in the sudden turns, shocks and swift changes of pace
(all jazz-shaped) that serve to remind us that the world is
ever unexplored.” Ellison argued that it was our “tragic-
comic attitude toward life” that explained our quality of
black style known as “soul,” which “announces the pres-
ence of a creative struggle against the realities of exis-
tence.” Ellison contended that without black folk “our
political history would have been otherwise”—no slave
economy, Civil War, Reconstruction, KKK, or Jim
Crow—and we would not know that the “most obvious
test and clue” to the self-perfection of the democratic
process “is the inclusion, not assimilation, of the black
man.” This led Ellison to conclude that “whatever else the
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
131
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 131


--- PAGE 147 ---
true American is, he is also somehow black.” A mere two
years after King’s death, the political urgency of Ellison’s
remarks, whether intended or not, could hardly be denied.
Over the last forty years, many black artists, intellectu-
als, and activists have transformed our society through
their love affair with the sort of excellence King often
encouraged. Without their contributions, America would
not look the same, sound the same, or even struggle in the
same way to bring us closer to King’s imagined Promised
Land. Writers like Maya Angelou, Toni Morrison, Sonia
Sanchez, Edward P . Jones, Nikki Giovanni, Alice Walker,
John Edgar Wideman, and Walter Moseley—like James
Baldwin, Ralph Ellison, Richard Wright, and Gwendolyn
Brooks before them—have reshaped American literature
with their protean gifts. Richard Pryor’s unruly comic
genius spliced rage into social commentary and brought
America face-to-face with its darker brother, opening the
door for Eddie Murphy, the Wayans Brothers, and Whoopi
Goldberg. Alvin Ailey’s dance troupe—especially in the
sweep of Judith Jamison’s limbs—won appreciation for
the grace of black movement, even as the rhythms of black
tap created a heartbeat through the soles of Sammy Davis
Jr., Gregory Hines, and Savion Glover. Jessye Norman and
Kathleen Battle—as Marian Anderson and Leontyne Price
had done—spiced opera with the pathos and charm of the
black voice. Muhammad Ali’s fists and mouth—both in
the boxing ring and in the public arena—hammered home
black courage. Like Jackie Robinson before him, who
APRIL 4, 1968
132
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 132


--- PAGE 148 ---
broke the color barrier in baseball and integrated Ameri-
can sports, and Michael Jordan after him, whose will to fly
raised the bar on athletic style and standards, Ali’s physi-
cal skill symbolized black humanity.
Black artists have profoundly changed what and how
America sees—in the images that flare on the canvass as
well as those that flicker on the large and small screens.
During King’s era, Gordon Parks peeked through photo-
graphic and, later, cinematic lenses to record the travail
and triumph of black life. Black artists used Abstract
Expressionism and social protest—and brushes, pens,
invented materials, and found objects—to fashion the tex-
tures and colors of a new black humanity that challenged
racial stereotypes. Our humanity shines in Elizabeth
Catlett’s Sharecropper, a portrait of a black woman that con-
jures strength and elicits sympathy created the year King
died. It is glimpsed as well in Bettye Saar’s The Liberation of
Aunt Jemima, a feisty revision of the black mammy myth,
and in Kara Walker’s black-cut paper silhouettes, includ-
ing Insurrection! (Our Tools Were Rudimentary, Yet We Pressed
On), which play with racial stereotypes to undercut them.
And Jean-Michel Basquiat’s powerful and disturbing art
undercut the notion of a single, or simple, black esthetic.
Black artists also took to stage and screen to portray
the contradictory forces that define black existence, and
America’s too. George C. Wolfe challenged narrow views
of black life with stereotype-shattering and politically
incorrect views of blackness, while August Wilson
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
133
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 133


--- PAGE 149 ---
brilliantly explored the terrain of twentieth-century black
life in a series of plays whose sheer elegance is a testimony
to the black will to survive the worst that life offers. Harry
Belafonte, a brilliant calypso singer who brought island
rhythms to American soil, was one of King’s closest
friends, advisers, and fundraisers. Sidney Poitier was also
King’s friend. His elegant body of work—his turn as Virgil
Tibbs in The Heat of the Nightstill resonates with a splen-
did mix of fury and dignity—combated the negative black
image in Hollywood. Since King’s death, the work of Spike
Lee a generation later—especially his provocative morality
tale Do The Right Thing and his magnum opus, Malcolm X,
the greatest black biopic ever made—opened up black
film. It cleared the way for John Singleton’s poignant
urban drama Boyz N the Hood, which enflamed the Ameri-
can psyche with the suffering of young black males, and
Kasi Lemons’s sublime ebony Greek drama Eve’s Bayou,
which added shades of complexity to black identity.
Without Poitier, and the talented and troubled
Dorothy Dandridge, there would be no Denzel Washing-
ton or Halle Berry. Their sensuality and grace—and their
irreverence as well—singe the silver screen. On the small
screen, Bill Cosby almost single-handedly changed how
blacks are seen. His cerebral Alexander Scott character on
I Spy shattered television’s race barrier in the sixties and
was neither a lackey nor a buffoon. Cosby’s Chet Kincaid
character—a coach and school teacher who brought humor
to his effort to enlighten his students—and his gentle
APRIL 4, 1968
134
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 134


--- PAGE 150 ---
patriarch on The Cosby Show, twenty years after I Spy,
revived the sit-com and made him America’s Dad, a title
that would have been unthinkable a generation earlier.
And Oprah’s first-name familiarity suggests how she used
the medium to build an unprecedented media empire that
has given her a bigger and longer presence in white homes
than any black figure ever.
The sound of America is sweeter, more soulful, and
more sorrowful because of black artists. The blues drew
from West African rhythms, work songs, chants, and spir-
ituals. In the mid-forties, the country blues migrated
north when Muddy Waters boarded a train from Clarks-
dale, Mississippi, to Chicago, making it the center of
urban blues. The music’s irony and tragicomedy, and its
humor, too, flood the plaintive cries of Howlin’ Wolf, the
weeping guitar of B. B. King, the salty wails of Koko Tay-
lor, and the artful hawks of the otherwise smooth Bobby
Blue Bland—who lifted his signature warble from Rev.
C. L. Franklin, one of the great innovators of sacred sound.
Their craft testifies to how blues artists ministered to
Negroes seeking consolation for the griefs of ghetto exis-
tence. More recently, Robert Cray, Keb Mo, and Deborah
Coleman have enriched the art form.
Jazz, too, shifted radically in its sound during King’s
era, and afterward. While big band swing music had
dominated the idiom, bebop emerged in the mid-forties as
Charlie Parker—and after him Dizzy Gillespie, Thelo-
nious Monk, Charlie Christian, Bud Powell, Don Byas,
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
135
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 135


--- PAGE 151 ---
and Ben Webster—–experimented with chord progres-
sions, faster tempos, higher notes, and more dissonant
tones. With bebop, jazz went from dance music to an art
form to be listened to. Armstrong and Ellington remained
the music’s greatest performer and composer, respectively;
and Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughn brilliantly explored
the American songbook after Billie Holliday’s death.
Miles and Coltrane rode together from bebop and hardbop
to modal jazz. Later, Davis jumpstarted fusion, while
Coltrane pioneered free jazz. Each influenced American
musical experimentation while revolutionizing the sound
and shape of jazz. The present neotraditional movement
incorporating swing, bop, and ragtime blows through the
virtuosic trumpet of Wynton Marsalis, the first jazz musi-
cian to snag a Pulitzer Prize and head of the influential
Jazz at Lincoln Center. And Terrance Blanchard’s A Tale of
God’s Will (A Requiem for Katrina)is a searing and at times
mournful musical evocation of the indomitable black
spirit that has kept black folk afloat from slave ships to
Hurricane Katrina. Without jazz, American democracy
can’t swing, can’t imagine its improvised destiny.
Rock and roll was born as the modern civil rights
movement took off. Although they hardly get their due,
black rock and roll artists helped establish the idea of
black humanity in a large white fan base. Without Chuck
Berry’s 1955 “Maybeline” and Little Richard’s “Tutti
Frutti” the same year, all that came after them, including
Elvis, makes no sense. Motown was born in 1959 and,
APRIL 4, 1968
136
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 136


--- PAGE 152 ---
more than ever, black sound captivated the white ear.
Motown was home to two of pop music’s towering
prophets—Marvin Gaye and Stevie Wonder—whose poli-
tics and pleas for change were rooted in love.
The two greatest voices, arguably, in all of popular
music—Sam Cooke and Aretha Franklin—both emerged
during the civil rights movement from their base in the
church. Gospel music—from close King friend Mahalia
Jackson’s trembling, triumphant shout to, more recently,
Yolanda Adams’s soulful, secular saintliness and Kirk
Franklin’s gospel funk—has lifted the spirit of black peo-
ple. Gospel also willed its edifying groans and melodic
sweep to golden-voiced R&B giants Curtis Mayfield and
Donny Hathaway. Cooke twirled the country’s need for
love on the rollicking riffs of his haunting tenor, while
Aretha’s soul-shattering sanctified moans captured our
yearning for faith. And a string of delightful divas has
blessed the musical landscape; their fame and contribu-
tions are so integral to black life and American culture
that their first names need only be cited: Diana, Dionne,
Whitney, Janet, Mary J., and Beyonce. James Brown
fathered funk; Sly Stone raised it. Ray Charles’s mastery of
it all made America see beyond its blinding bigotry. Hip-
hop, of course, is the greatest development in pop culture
in the last quarter century. If not for the furious poetry
and elastic rhythms of rap’s greatest artists—including
2Pac, Notorious B.I.G., Nas, Chuck D, KRS-One, Com-
mon, MC Lyte, and Jay-Z—and the soulful yearnings of
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
137
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 137


--- PAGE 153 ---
the best girl groups—En Vouge, TLC, Destiny’s Child,
like the Supremes before them—black youth might be
unheard and invisible.
Less than a decade after King’s death, a monumental
event occurred that changed the face of American culture
and how black folk are viewed: the publication of Alex
Haley’s Rootsand the groundbreaking television series
made from the book—the highest rated in the history of
the small screen at the time. From the very beginning,
Roots counted as much more than a mere book. It tapped
deeply into the black American hunger for an African
ancestral home that had been savaged by centuries of
slavery and racial dislocation. More than the sum of its
historical and literary parts—some of which have been
rigorously criticized and debunked—Haley’s quest for his
roots changed the way black folk thought about them-
selves and how white America viewed them. No longer
were we genealogical nomads with little hope of learning
the names and identities of the people from whose loins
and culture we sprang.
Haley wrote black folk into the book of American her-
itage and gave us the confidence to believe that we could
find our forebears even as he shared his own. Kunta and
Kizzy—and Chicken George too—became members of
our black American family. That’s why no flaw or short-
coming in Haley’s tome could dim the brilliant light he
shed on the black soul. Haley’s monumental achievement
helped convince the nation that the black story is the
APRIL 4, 1968
138
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 138


--- PAGE 154 ---
American story. He also made it clear that black humanity
is a shining beacon that miraculously endured slavery’s
brutal horrors.
I was a seventeen-year-old boarding school student
when Haley’s comet of a book hit the nation’s racial land-
scape. It immediately changed the course of our conversa-
tions around school and provided a powerful lens onto a
period of history that few of us really understood. Until
Haley’s book, there was little public grappling with the
drama of American slavery. Of course, the epochal televi-
sion series that grew from Haley’s text seized us in its
thrilling exploration of chattel slavery’s vast and vicious
evolution. The book and television series also sparked the
phenomenon of black self-discovery.
For too long, slavery had been an American terror that
left the lives of black folk scarred by memories of pain and
humiliation. Haley’s book brought black folk out of the
shadows of shame and ignorance. It also spurred many of
us for the first time to speak openly and honestly about
the lingering effects of centuries-old oppression. If the
black freedom struggle of the sixties had liberated our
bodies from the haunting imperatives of white supremacy,
Haley’s book helped free our minds and spirits from that
same force.
Roots also prodded white America to reject the racial
amnesia that fed its moral immaturity and its racial
irresponsibility. As long as there was no book or image
that captured slavery’s disfiguring reach, the nation could
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
139
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 139


--- PAGE 155 ---
conduct its business as if all racial problems had been
solved when it finally bestowed civil rights on its black
citizens. But Haley helped us to resist that seductive lie
with a tonic splash of colorful truth: that the nation had
yet to successfully negotiate its perilous ties to an institu-
tion that built white prosperity while crushing black
opportunity. Roots was a soulful reminder that unless we
grappled with the past, we would be forever saddled by its
deadening liabilities. Since it was published during the
nation’s blithely romantic celebration of its bicentennial,
Haley’s book provided a touchstone for alternative history.
Haley’s book helped conscientious citizens to challenge
the self-image of America as an unqualified champion of
democracy and freedom.
The true impact of Haley’s book is that it started a
conversation about black roots that continues to this day.
DNA tests to determine black ancestry are more popular
than ever. Scientific advance is part of the explanation, but
the cultural impetus for such an agenda of racial discovery
lies with Haley’s inspiring book. It is also fitting that
Roots appeared the same year that Black History Week 
was officially extended to Black History Month. Haley’s
crowning achievement came along at just the right time
to prompt the investigation of black folks’ noble and
complex contributions to national culture. Haley’s Roots
sparked curiosity among ordinary citizens by making the
intricate relations among race, politics, and culture emi-
nently accessible. Long before demands for history from
APRIL 4, 1968
140
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 140


--- PAGE 156 ---
the bottom up became a rallying cry of progressive histo-
rians, Haley’s book practiced what it preached. And if he
made missteps along the way, he nevertheless put millions
of us on the right path to racial and historical knowledge
that shaped our reckoning with the color line. Coming as
it did on the heels of King’s death and the rise of black
pride and black power, Haley’s book marked a significant
transition in the public definition of black culture, and
thus arguably forged a critical link in the chain of black
struggle toward the Promised Land.
Black art and cultural preoccupations—jazz and box-
ing, baseball and blues, detective novels and black bil-
dungsroman, opera and country, acting on television and
the silver screen—have provided examples of black intelli-
gence and humanity that, over the last forty years, have
brought black folk into the homes, minds, and imagina-
tions of white America. The civil rights revolution bene-
fited from such black genius, and made a way for more 
of it to reach the American mainstream and even more of
black masses. Black art’s development is a sure index of
the intellectual and artistic progress black America has
made since King’s death. But, of course, a great deal
remains to be done to make black people truly free.
King’s prophetic shadow extends across the nation, and
black America, in the forty years since his death. We mea-
sure our progress in terms of his dream, but especially his
heroic deeds on behalf of the dispossessed and poor. His
example calls to us from his grave to resurrect the spirit of
WHAT WOULD MARTIN DO?
141
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 141


--- PAGE 157 ---
resistance to oppression and to fight for the lives of the
most vulnerable. It also causes us to reflect on the leaders
who have emerged since he left us too soon in the promis-
ing flowering of a new, more radical, even dangerous, path
to social revolution.
APRIL 4, 1968
142
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 142


--- PAGE 158 ---
PART 
THREE
JOSHUA
CHARISMATIC
BLACK LEADERSHIP IN A
PROPHET’S SHADOW
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 143


--- PAGE 159 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 144
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 160 ---
CHAPTER
SEVEN
A MESSIAH MEASURES
LEADERSHIP
BEFORE HIS BODY WAS EVEN LAID TO REST,
Martin Luther King, Jr., had slipped into the long night
of myth. He quickly became the most overworked martyr
since Abraham Lincoln. The folk who loved him got up
the courage to say so; those who despised him couldn’t
afford to say so as loudly—their hatred of King was no
longer in vogue. He’d gone from nuisance to saint in a
matter of days. It took fifteen years to get him a national
holiday, but as honors like that go, it was a heartbeat.
George Washington received the same honor a long eighty
years after his death. It now seems inevitable that King’s
memory would be forced to carry the burden of our
deepest desires as a country. After all, given the racial
145
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 145


--- PAGE 161 ---
chasm his death revealed, King—or rather the eminently
useful godlike image of the leader postmortem—was com-
missioned to achieve in death what he had been denied in
life: the forging of racial harmony amidst the conflict of
color. The price paid for becoming an outsized American
hero was the manufactured appearance that the nation had
agreed with him all along. The last thing the country
needed was the image of King being killed because he was
more faithful to core American ideals than the white
mainstream that bitterly opposed him. 
A large part of King’s posthumous makeover focused
on his role as the consummate and, judging by the articles
and books that poured out after his death, the only leader
worth mentioning in the civil rights movement. Crown-
ing King as his people’s Moses began immediately with
his organization’s attempt to situate him in a field of rivals
as the leader best suited to get racial equality for black
folk. King was an intriguing mixture of inspirations and
impulses: he was at once the most humble big black
leader around and yet extremely conscious of his messianic
function in the drama of black freedom. Paraphrasing
theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, King claimed that “the
battering rams of historical necessity” had thrust him into
destiny. His calling came from on high. 
As early as 1957, King declared himself a Moses to his
people. “If I had to die tomorrow morning I would die
happy because I’ve been to the mountaintop and I’ve seen
the Promised Land and it’s going to be here in Mont-
APRIL 4, 1968
146
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 146


--- PAGE 162 ---
gomery” was a refrain he would voice many times. He was
constantly lauded as a messiah by jubilant well-wishers
whose praise countered the vicious criticism King regu-
larly received. In 1956, a Baptist minister wrote to King
that “I have longed for a Baptist Messiah like you since
1932!!” And as King made his way to a mass meeting the
evening he was convicted of conspiracy for leading the bus
boycott, a preacher exclaimed: “He who was nailed to the
cross for us this afternoon approaches.” 
As King’s fame grew, so did the jealousy and criticism
of his peers. Many older civil rights leaders resented how
handily he rose to the top once he found his stride a few
years after the bus boycott in Montgomery. Younger
activists in the movement, especially those in the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), criticized
King’s hierarchical, top-down leadership. Behind his back,
they ridiculed him for his alleged messianic posturing by
calling King “De Lawd.” SNCC’s leaders, inspired by
activist Ella Baker, promoted a leaderless grassroots move-
ment of the masses. Later, however, SNCC leader John
Lewis confessed that his group’s version had its own faults
that led to its downfall. “Anarchy and chaos,” Lewis
writes, “freedom and openness. It’s amazing how . . .
principles that are treasured at one moment as positive
and healthy can, with time and a shift in circumstances,
become forces of destruction.” Lewis says that by the fall
of 1964, SNCC had succumbed to such forces, and that
“the precepts that had been so fundamental to us when we
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
147
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 147


--- PAGE 163 ---
began—decentralization, minimal structure, a distrust of
leadership—were now beginning to tear us apart.” 
There has been a big debate among scholars of the civil
rights movement about whether it is Great Men—and the
inherent patriarchy of the term has been increasingly criti-
cized as the years have added up to feminist conscious-
ness—who shape history, or whether such figures are
molded by the movement. Baker was herself an unjustly
slighted prime mover in the movement who once worked
for King, declaring of him after his death: “The movement
made Martin rather than Martin making the movement.”
Scholar Richard Lischer disagrees with that assessment.
He argues that the “Civil Rights Movement did not
‘make’ King any more than the Civil War ‘made’ Lin-
coln.” Lischer acknowledges that like Lincoln “King was
summoned by events he did not initiate and exposed to
conditions he did not create, but his response was so pow-
erful an interpretation of events that it reshaped the condi-
tions in which they originated.” King wasn’t the first
Negro to “champion the cause of civil rights,” but he “was
merely the first to name the struggle and to declare its
meaning.”
If King brilliantly named the struggle and declared its
meaning, others have come along in the same messianic
mold since his death to interpret the events and struggles
of race—its progresses and retreats, its high moments and
its utter embarrassments. While a lot has been written
about King’s leadership, not much has focused on King’s
APRIL 4, 1968
148
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 148


--- PAGE 164 ---
views of black leadership and how they might help us
view his major heir, Jesse Jackson, and to a lesser degree,
Al Sharpton. Charismatic leadership of the sort that King
embodied has many virtues. One of them is the ability to
inspire the masses and to dramatize the push for equality.
It has vices too; charismatic leaders often don’t find useful
ways to transfer power or transmit authority. Lethal forms
of competition are the norm more than cooperation. And
there is a need to consider a version of political leadership
that combines charisma and formal institutional authority
that challenges old-style racial leadership, best seen
recently in the career of Barack Obama. Does his leader-
ship fulfill King’s vision or fall short?
King reflected intelligently on black leadership; those
thoughts are useful in examining the achievements and
character of representative leaders who’ve emerged in the
post-King era. A discussion of King’s flaws and weak-
nesses may also help move us past an idealization of his
leadership and to appreciate the leadership of those who
have found their voices in very different times than when
King captivated the nation. And by doing so, perhaps we
can appreciate that some of the same criticism lodged at
present-day black leaders in the charismatic mode may
have been aimed through them at King as well. These
black Joshuas—a designation fraught with many compli-
cations and contradictions—have borne the burden of
King’s mantle, and have sought to claim or modify his
legacy. Their gifts and limitations say a great deal about
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
149
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 149


--- PAGE 165 ---
what can be expected and achieved in the arena of race,
and say a lot about the role that black leaders play today.
When he was fresh to the field, King exulted in the
new age of race he saw on the national horizon. He felt
that such a revitalized era would be hastened by “intelli-
gent, courageous and dedicated leadership.” King wel-
comed the new period of change but called for “leaders
who are calm and yet positive, leaders who avoid the
extremes of ‘hot-headedness’ and ‘Uncle Tomism.’” This
was more than a rhetorical flourish for King. It was the
application to race of one of King’s favorite philosophical
methods: Hegel’s dialectic, which involved stating a the-
sis, an antithesis, and then a synthesis that resolved the
tensions, and combined the best features, of opposites. But
the substance was just as important as the form. One must
neither be a hard-charging rebel without direction, thus
wasting precious racial resources, flying off each racial
handle in sight; nor a subversive figure whose racial calcu-
lations and gestures would sell out the race. Even so,
King’s conscientious Hegelian maneuvering away from
the fatal compromises of the Uncle Tom couldn’t prevent
him from wearing that title, acerbically given to him by
Malcolm X, just a few years later.
King also argued that “the urgency of the hour” calls
for leaders of “wise judgment and sound integrity—leaders
not in love with money, but in love with justice,” leaders
“not in love with publicity, but in love with humanity,”
and leaders “who can subject their particular egos to the
APRIL 4, 1968
150
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 150


--- PAGE 166 ---
greatness of the cause.” Wisdom and integrity were key
because the Negro cause was beginning to take off in
exciting directions that demanded restraint and balance,
and unimpeachable moral credentials. Negroes were often
subject to a double standard, one that whites hardly
noticed when applying rules to black life that they will-
fully ignored for themselves. Black folk had to pay atten-
tion to how they were being perceived in the white world
as they pressed forward in the name of progress. The
seductions of publicity were ubiquitous, but a particular
trap for black leaders, because they could easily derail the
interests of the race into blatant self-promotion. The black
leader’s ego, fed by too much praise and popularity, could
be his downfall and that of his followers, and ultimately,
the entire race. The virtues of justice and humility would
ground the black leader; he would place the cause of the
group above venal self-interest, avoiding the lure of cash
that so easily silences the prophetic voice, a way of literally
selling out. And he would constantly remember that his
greatest role was to serve and uplift his brother and sister.
Several years later, King was even more insistent on
principled black leadership. In explaining the white back-
lash to black progress in 1964, King placed the heaviest
burden on white resistance, but he also took black leader-
ship to task. King indicted black leaders as being “spo-
radic,” sunk by leadership that “neither planned ahead nor
maintained itself at the helm at all times.” King may not
have passed his own litmus test until he was a third of the
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
151
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 151


--- PAGE 167 ---
way through the sixties. It wasn’t until his Birmingham
campaign that “King’s idea of leadership” encompassed
“the deliberate creation of new struggles or the conscious,
advance selection of strategies and tactics.” Before then,
King’s leadership style was molded by the spread of wis-
dom and the transmission of learning for black liberation.
His leadership agenda was largely an improvisational
affair, the creative management of a medley of themes and
actions that were addressed as they arose. King would
later seek to combine the best improvisational and inten-
tional methods in his leadership efforts.
King’s top-down bias shows through in the last part of
his statement about leaders at the helm: in King’s view,
the black masses needed a constant and visible presence in
charge to work and organize effectively. Even King’s self-
criticism—“All leaders, including myself, continued to
work vigorously, but we failed to assert the leadership the
movement needed”—plays into a leadership premised on
hierarchy, even if in the name and interests of the black
masses. Such a view slighted the efforts of the grassroots,
and imposed a scheme and rationale that didn’t always pay
attention to the organic character of social change in local
environments. For instance, King bumped heads with
SNCC organizers in Albany, Georgia, because after their
painstaking, local grassroots efforts, he rode into town to
capture the spotlight and the credit for their hard work.
Obviously even activists who spurned hierarchy wanted
some recognition for their leadership—and for the hard
APRIL 4, 1968
152
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 152


--- PAGE 168 ---
work of the masses themselves in functioning as agents of
their own freedom.
King argued that the vacuum created by the failure of
legitimate leaders to step up and lead was filled by “less-
experienced and frequently irresponsible elements.” The
response of the legitimate leaders was “either a negative
reaction or disdain.” Thus, irresponsible black leaders
embarked on a “new, distorted form of action” that substi-
tuted “small, unrepresentative forces for the huge, mass,
total-community movements” genuine black leaders had
organized. For King, the purposes of mass demonstrations
were to “isolate and expose the evildoer by the mass pres-
ence of his victims” and prove the Negro’s unity to whites
while making a case for concrete programs that could
withstand scrutiny. But sporadic actions on the part of
irresponsible groups disrupted the lives of blacks and their
white allies. King cites the examples of a “mere handful of
well-intentioned but tragically misguided young people”
who when they blocked the “doorways to New York City’s
Board of Education, or threatened to stop traffic to the
World’s Fair, or charged into the streets to spread garbage,
and to halt traffic on bridges . . . were reducing the
imposing grandeur of the movement to cheap chaos.” As a
result, the “mass movement of millions was overnight
exposed to ridicule and debasement.”
King is clearly drawing distinctions between the mass
demonstrations he led, which identified their targets and
objectives—in Birmingham, Bull Connor’s police force
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
153
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 153


--- PAGE 169 ---
and the fight against segregation; in Selma, Sheriff Jim
Clark and the right to vote—and the spurts of social
rebellion by well-meaning but unfocused factions of
youth. Such social gestures sullied the dignity of black
protest. There may be more than a bit of paternalism in
King’s comments, or even a disdain for the organized
chaos of social actions based on the philosophy of anarchy.
King’s words would come back to haunt him since his
planned march on Washington in April of 1968 was
feared to have the same anarchic effect. 
In fact, King embraced disruption in his notion of
aggressive nonviolence, though his version of mass civil
disobedience was focused, massive, and sustained. King
said that nonviolence had to be “adapted to urban condi-
tions and urban moods,” and that it must mature and
“correspond to heightened black impatience and stiffened
white resistance.” King concluded that:
There must be more than a statement to the larger
society, there must be a force that interrupts its func-
tioning at some key point . . . To dislocate the func-
tioning of a city without destroying it can be more
effective than a riot because it can be longer lasting,
costly to the larger society, but not wantonly destruc-
tive. It is a device of social action more difficult for a
government to quell by superior force . . . it is militant
and defiant, not destructive.
APRIL 4, 1968
154
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 154


--- PAGE 170 ---
King was careful to state twice that massive civil disobe-
dience and aggressive nonviolence were not destructive.
He earlier chided the “irritating deeds of certain irrespon-
sible civil rights forces” because they were too often mis-
taken by the public as the “senseless violence” of Negro
perpetrators, thus compromising the moral force of the
civil rights movement. Civil rights leaders controlled the
demonstrations they led and distinguished them from
urban chaos and criminal acts by the discipline they
exhibited. Still, the W ashington Postconcluded that King’s
planned act of massive social disruption of Washington,
DC, with his Poor People’s Campaign was “an appeal to
anarchy.” The New York Timeseditorialized that King
invited disaster “in the present overheated atmosphere,”
and that his cause was damaged merely by announcing his
plans “whether or not Dr. King goes ahead with his per-
ilous project.”
Despite his progressive views, King’s “regal leadership
image” made him vulnerable to criticism from grassroots
and younger activists. At an SNCC private fund-raiser in
New York in 1962, for which King had agreed to speak,
host Harry Belafonte vigorously defended his friend to
the SNCC cohort before he arrived. The students com-
plained that King was too removed from the scene of
struggle, that he was far too cautious, and that he was
preoccupied with his fame. The example of SNCC leaders
like Bob Moses—as modest a force for good as the
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
155
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 155


--- PAGE 171 ---
movement produced, and an organizer who identified
intimately with the folk—contrasted with King’s com-
paratively glamorous and camera-hogging campaigns for
justice. The younger activists argued that Belafonte’s
defense of King against their misguided criticisms drew
from the entertainment credo that there should be a star
for every show. When Belafonte insisted that King wasn’t
nearly as bourgeois as they made him out to be, the
SNCC activists tore gleefully into King and his family:
Coretta sported pearls and pillbox hats; his father, Daddy
King, was imperiously self-centered; and King himself
favored silk pajamas and nice vacations. The students
admitted that Belafonte was right in insisting that no
other leader would take their stern criticisms and still act
with love. His admonishment was proved that evening
when King spoke highly of the SNCC students and the
lessons he learned from their sacrifices, while urging the
audience to generously support them without mentioning
his own SCLC.
What the younger activists probably didn’t know is
that King placed nearly all of his more than $200,000
yearly salary from speaking engagements into the civil
rights till; that he refused to buy a home (because he
strongly disagreed with private ownership of property)
until his wife insisted in 1965; that he gave all of his book
royalties to his alma mater, Morehouse College; and that
he rotated a meager three suits near the end of his life in a
APRIL 4, 1968
156
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 156


--- PAGE 172 ---
spartan, guilt-driven leadership style that was witheringly
self-critical and sacrificial. King’s trusted aide and advisor
Stanley Levison says that King was consumed with guilt
over the kudos he got because he believed that he was
simply “an actor in history at a particular moment that
called for a personality, and he had simply been selected 
as that personality . . . but he had not done enough to
deserve it.” Levison says that King felt “keenly that people
who had done as much as he had or more got no such trib-
ute.” King was “troubled deeply” about the praise he got
that others should have received, but that there was little
to be done since there’s no way to share it with others.
One had to accept it. He knew quite well from the Bible
that many great men of calling felt intense discomfort in
their role, but they had soldiered on in spite of their con-
flicted feelings. Levison argues that a conscientious man
like King was haunted by his plight.
But when you don’t feel you’re worthy of it and you’re
an honest, principled man, it tortures you. And it
could be said that he was tortured by the great appreci-
ation that the public showed for him. If he had been
less humble, he could have lived with this kind of
acclaim, but because he was genuinely a man of humil-
ity, he really couldn’t live with it. He always thought
of ways in which he could somehow live up to it, and
he often talked about taking a vow of poverty: getting
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
157
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 157


--- PAGE 173 ---
rid of everything he owned—including his home—so
that he could at least feel that nothing material came
to him from his efforts.
Levison says that King’s views were rooted in an aware-
ness of his fortunate birth, and how he “was always aware
that he was privileged . . . and this tortured him.” Levison
suggests one of “the reasons that he was so determined to
be of service was to justify the privileged position he’d
been born into.” King felt that “he had never deserved 
and earned what he had,” and that he didn’t deserve the
acclaim he received as a civil rights hero. “It was a contin-
ual series of blows to his conscience, and this kept him a
very restive man all his life.” King’s brutal self-examina-
tion and relentlessly imposed self-sacrifice were nearly like
Blaise Pascal’s, the famous seventeenth-century philoso-
pher, scientist, and mathematician whose ascetic Chris-
tianity contrasted to his privileged upbringing, and who,
like King, died at thirty-nine years of age. 
King’s internal monologue may have run constantly in
his brain, but it didn’t shield him from accusations that
his leadership was ineffective, particularly when he suf-
fered a major defeat in the 1961–62 Albany campaign
against segregation. King was outfoxed in Albany, Geor-
gia, by Sheriff Laurie Pritchett, who was determined with
Albany officials to manage demonstrations and the jailing
of Negroes by meeting “nonviolence with nonviolence”
and killing the demonstrators “with kindness.” This
APRIL 4, 1968
158
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 158


--- PAGE 174 ---
strategy worked brilliantly; under King, the civil rights
movement provoked often violent confrontations with
governmental authorities to dramatize the brutality of the
white oppressor in contrast to the nonviolent protesters.
But Pritchett got the best of his civil rights opponents by
refusing to take the bait of civil rights protest and instead
matched their nonviolent efforts with a devilishly effective
piece of preemptive policing. Since there was no violence
or crisis—a deal was struck by local white and black lead-
ers to postpone demonstrations and to free all demonstra-
tors on bail, including King—the protest fizzled and
King and the civil rights movement suffered one of its
most visible and humiliating defeats. King was criticized
for being “an absentee media star” and for “his failure to
rely more heavily on the courts, his insensitivity to local
whites,” and “his reluctance to go to jail more frequently.” 
After Albany, King shunned the spotlight for eight
months and licked his wounds as his name shrank to small
newspaper print. He was viewed as a has-been freedom
star from the fifties whose luster had dimmed and who
had strained to become the kind of national leader that 
his talent simply couldn’t sustain. King stung from the
Albany criticism, but he learned too. Later, his 1963 cam-
paign in Birmingham benefited from the flaws and faults
in Albany. King scored one of the resounding victories of
his leadership, and the civil rights movement, when the
barbarism of Bull Connor was theatrically orchestrated to
expose the vicious heart of Southern apartheid. As the
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
159
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 159


--- PAGE 175 ---
black activists, including women and children, assembled
to protest segregation, Connor directed his goons to spray
powerful water hoses on the marchers—when he wasn’t
having police dogs sicced on them. Connor believed that
he was getting the upper hand against the protesters with
a dramatic show of brute force. But it backfired; instead of
being impressed by his reckless display, many politicians,
including the president, were appalled. The sight of water
hoses and police dogs unleashed on Negro demonstrators
was tailor-made for the evening news, prompting the pres-
ident to act and Congress to pass the Civil Rights Bill.
King duplicated the feat in Selma, where violence reigned
and bloodshed poured—three activists died—helping to
win passage of the Voting Rights Bill in 1965.
King not only faced down intellectual criticism, and
the bluster and bile of Southern bigots, but he confronted
conflict with Northern black leaders as well. Adam Clay-
ton Powell engaged in a turf war with King whenever the
Southern preacher lighted on New York City. Powell was
the powerful congressman from Harlem and, like King,
black church royalty as pastor of Abyssinian Baptist
Church. Butting heads was to be expected. Powell called
King a moderate who catered to “Whitey.” Powell also
eventually threatened to expose King advisor Bayard
Rustin as a homosexual when Powell and King battled
over a boycott Rustin planned of the 1960 Democratic
National Convention in Los Angeles to pressure the party
to act on behalf of civil rights. The conflict forced Rustin
APRIL 4, 1968
160
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 160


--- PAGE 176 ---
from the ranks of the SCLC. Rustin says that Powell
warned King that “if he did not withdraw his support
from the Rustin-led demonstration in Los Angeles, 
[Powell] would go to the press and say that there was a
sexual affair going on between me and King. Martin was
so terrified . . . he decided he would get rid of me.” 
In like fashion Rev. Joseph H. Jackson of Illinois, the
imperial head of the National Baptist Convention, had
King removed from his office as vice president of the Con-
vention’s Sunday School Board in 1961. The move was in
retribution for King siding with Rev. Gardner Taylor in
the dramatic effort to unseat the conservative, anti–civil
rights Jackson as convention president. Jackson had origi-
nally won his position by demanding term limits, but
when his final term came to a close, he reversed the
amendment and won another four years. This violation of
the convention’s constitution was met with outrage by
many of the members, including King, who with his
father had originally helped put Jackson where he was.
The schism between warring factions in the convention
led to the secession of several pro–civil rights ministers,
including King and Taylor, to form the Progressive
National Baptist Convention.
But of all the Northern forces against him, King was
most famously engaged in a war of words with Nation of
Islam minister Malcolm X, whose stronghold was nestled
in Harlem. King was critical of the separatist philosophy
of the Black Nationalist group, while Malcolm mercilessly
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
161
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 161


--- PAGE 177 ---
pelted King with epithets like “twentieth century Uncle
Tom” and lashed him with the rejoinder that he was the
“best weapon that the white man” ever had. King chafed
under Malcolm’s assault. He was bruised by Malcolm’s
claims about “my being soft and my talking about love and
the white man all the time and . . . my being a sort of pol-
ished Uncle Tom.” After he was deluged with eggs by Mal-
colm’s followers on a trip to New York, King felt the need
to “get my mind off of myself and feeling sorry for myself
and feeling rejected.” When Malcolm claimed that nonvio-
lence made black folk weak and submissive, King replied
that “I’m talking about a very strong force where you stand
up with all our might against any evil system, and you’re
not a coward, you are resisting, but you come to see that
tactically as well as morally it is better to be nonviolent.”
When King spoke out against the Vietnam War, he reaped
a firestorm of opposition among prominent Negro leaders,
figures, and intellectuals, from Carl Rowan to Jackie
Robinson, and from Ralph Bunche to Roy Wilkins. 
King’s principled leadership also got him into trouble
with the presidents who to varying degrees supported the
civil rights movement. John F. Kennedy was tentative on
civil rights, and ultimately didn’t commit the necessary
resources to push civil rights legislation through Con-
gress. While Kennedy publicly praised King’s “personal
conduct and your dynamic leadership,” which had earned
“the respect and admiration of the great majority of the
people of the United States,” privately he fumed that
APRIL 4, 1968
162
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 162


--- PAGE 178 ---
should he give in to King’s request for federal troops in
Birmingham “it will look like he got me to do it.” Ken-
nedy offhandedly in private said that inviting King to the
Oval Office during the tumult in Alabama was risky:
“King is so hot these days that it’s like having [Karl]
Marx coming to the White House.” And while Lyndon
Baines Johnson worked diligently with King to push leg-
islation through Congress and then sign the Civil Rights
Bill and Voting Rights Act—key legal underpinnings to
the quest for black equality—Johnson was enraged with
King when he vocally opposed the Vietnam War in 1967,
and privately cursed him. “What is that goddamned nig-
ger preacher doing to me?” Johnson exploded in bitter
bigotry. “We gave him the Civil Rights Act of 1964, we
gave him the Voting Rights Act of 1965, we gave him the
War on Poverty. What more does he want?” King never
got inside the White House again.
Perhaps King engaged Kennedy and Johnson with
such principled, though costly, interactions because of his
strong views on the relationship between white patronage
and subordinate black leadership. King argued that black
political leaders must not imitate white leadership, espe-
cially in its condescending view of his own people. 
Negro leaders suffer from . . . being either exalted
excessively or grossly abused. Some of these leaders suf-
fer from an aloofness and absence of faith in their peo-
ple. The white establishment is skilled in flattering
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
163
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 163


--- PAGE 179 ---
and cultivating emerging leaders. It presses its own
image on them and finally, from imitation of manners,
dress and style of living, a deeper strain of corruption
develops. This kind of Negro leader acquires the white
man’s contempt for the ordinary Negro. He is often
more at home with the middle-class white than he is
among his own people. His language changes, his loca-
tion changes, his income changes, and ultimately he
changes from the representative of the Negro to the
white man into the white man’s representative to the
Negro. The tragedy is that too often he does not recog-
nize what has happened to him.
King was highly critical of the white cultural mecha-
nisms that promoted Negro political leadership within
black culture, saying that the powers that be exploited the
manner in which black leadership emerged. King argued a
year before his death that the “majority of Negro political
leaders do not ascend to prominence on the shoulders of
mass support.” He conceded that genuine leaders were
emerging, but that “most are still selected by white lead-
ership, elevated to position, supplied with resources and
inevitably subjected to white control.” King said that
most Negroes had a healthy skepticism about the “manu-
factured leader” because he expends little effort in con-
vincing them of his integrity, commitment, and ability.
Plus, he offers paltry programs and service. Such a leader
is not “a fighter for a new life but a figurehead of the old
APRIL 4, 1968
164
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 164


--- PAGE 180 ---
one.” King concluded that few Negro politicians were
impressive and had little support in black circles.
King argued that the status of these Negro leaders pre-
vented them from effectively bargaining with the white
power structure with strength and independence. White
political leaders treated a black political leader with little
real regard because of his “impotence” and his distance
from his constituents, viewing him as a “powerless subor-
dinate.” Since the Negro politician had no real base or
firm footing in either black or white society, he was stuck
in a vacuum with no influence or leverage. Thus, the
Negro had to create moral black leaders who could gain
black confidence. But such support was not automatic; 
the politics of pigment and color were insufficient to win
black approval. Blacks “will have to demand high stan-
dards and give consistent, loyal support to those who
merit it” and who “prove themselves to be committed
political warriors on our behalf.” Only when black folk
developed “partisan political personalities whose indepen-
dence is genuine” would they “be treated in white politi-
cal councils with the respect those who embody such
power deserve.”
King’s leadership was a powerful combination of the
Hegelian opposites he embraced. Many times, he was more
progressive than was customary in American politics (he
argued for a reconstruction of American society and a radi-
cal redistribution of wealth to the poor) and yet he could
be cautious and moderate—and sometimes conservative
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
165
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 165


--- PAGE 181 ---
(August Meier called him the “militant conservative”).
King could be decisive and focused, while at other times
he could be indecisive, unfocused, paralyzed, and unsure
of where to head. King was perhaps the most self-effacing
prominent black leader ever, and yet there were flashes of
conscious mythmaking around his own image in the spot-
light of the media. But the cumulative impact of King’s
leadership is perhaps discerned in a story King told in a
1967 New York Times Magazinearticle to illustrate the
ideal black leader. 
Two men flew to Atlanta to meet with a black leader at
the airport. But before they spoke, a porter sweeping the
floor engaged the black leader about a troubling personal
issue. After fifteen minutes of conversation between the
leader and the porter, one of the visitors complained bit-
terly to his fellow visitor that he was too busy for such
nonsense, that he hadn’t come a thousand miles to sit and
wait while the leader spoke to a porter. But the other visi-
tor replied, “When the day comes that he stops having
time to talk to a porter, on that day I will not have the
time to come one mile to see him.” King was as good as
his illustration: when he was on the way in to a crucial
staff meeting in the last year of his life, he paused to speak
to a janitor about his wife’s illness, spending more than
forty-five minutes in compassionate conversation as his
staff waited.
Despite King’s charismatic leadership, within his orga-
nization he encouraged his staff, likened to a team of wild
APRIL 4, 1968
166
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 166


--- PAGE 182 ---
horses, to run free, engage in vigorous debate, offer tough,
direct criticism of King’s ideas—all while King listened.
King depended upon Andrew Young to chart the conser-
vative path to Jesse Jackson’s, Hosea Williams’s, and
James Bevel’s more radical suggestions so that King could
“come down the middle.” King displayed his extraordi-
nary security, and his appreciation of others’ gifts, in his
leadership style. But on very rare occasions he could also
be quite harsh. In a meeting with some of his aides,
including SCLC executive director William Rutherford,
and with Stokely Carmichael, Courtland Cox, and SNCC
chairman H. Rap Brown, King met to get the black
nationalists to agree to not interfere with—or taint with
violence—SCLC’s Poor People’s Campaign efforts in DC.
Cox pledged that, while they couldn’t support the march,
they would neither oppose it nor keep black folk from
helping each other. Rutherford deemed Cox’s reply reason-
able, but King disagreed, insisting that a genuine com-
mitment to nonviolence meant that no destructive forms
of action could be tolerated, regardless of their purpose.
As the meeting broke up, King did an extremely rare
thing: he lambasted Rutherford in public. “Dr. King
never ever humiliated anyone in public in front of anyone
else,” Rutherford remembered. “But he was shaking.”
Rutherford concluded that King wasn’t so much speaking
to him, but to himself and history. He read King’s fit of
rage as a sign of just how exhausted he was, and just how
poorly the Poor People’s Campaign was going.
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
167
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 167


--- PAGE 183 ---
In the last week of his life, King gave members of his
staff a brutal rebuff. King was in a meeting in Atlanta
listening to his staff trash the idea of his Poor People’s
March, and even the usually reliable Andrew Young
teamed up with Jesse Jackson and James Bevel to oppose
the late-April march to DC. Young argued that the poor
planning for the march might push it back a year, while
questioning the wisdom of assembling masses of the poor
in DC. Bevel insisted that instead of “hanging around
Washington,” they needed “to stop this war.” And Jackson
called the Memphis mobilization too small and Washing-
ton too unformed, and since there was no timetable for
how long they’d be in DC, it made no sense to pull away
from the successful negotiations with big corporations and
youth gangs being conducted by Operation Breadbasket.
King replied to all three that whenever they needed his
aid with their individual projects, he was there for them,
and now all he was asking for was their help. And then,
King “did something I’ve never heard him do before,” said
Stanley Levison. “He criticized three members of the staff
with his eloquence. And believe me, that’s murder. And
was very negative.” King let loose with calm accusations
against all three, claiming that they all had given in to
different forces: Young to doubt, Bevel to brains, and
Jackson to ambition. All three, King claimed, had forgot-
ten the need to bear witness, and now that the movement
had made them, they were each using the movement for
self-promotion. King scolded Bevel, who’d been Young’s
APRIL 4, 1968
168
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 168


--- PAGE 184 ---
and Jackson’s mentor: “You don’t like to work on anything
that isn’t your own idea. Bevel, I think you owe meone.”
When Abernathy, Jackson, and Young ran after King,
who had demanded that Abernathy hand him his car keys,
it was Jackson who sought to soothe King’s ruffled feath-
ers in the stairwell as King departed. “Doc, doc, don’t
worry!” Jackson called to his boss and mentor. “Every-
thing’s going to be all right.” 
But King would have none of it this time, and unchar-
acteristically wheeled around on a landing and raised his
hands and pointed at Jackson while shouting. “Jesse,
everything’s notgoing to be all right! If things keep going
the way they’re going now, it’s not SCLC but the whole
country that’s in trouble. I’m not asking, ‘Support me.’ I
don’t need this. But if you’re so interested in doing your
own thing that you can’t do what this organization’s struc-
tured to do, if you want to carve out your niche in society,
go ahead. But for God’s sake, don’t bother me!” King’s
rage resounded in the Atlanta staff building’s conference
room. 
Of course, to a degree, King was justified in his frus-
tration with the trio. They chipped away at him, perhaps
exploiting King’s tolerance of what might in other quar-
ters be perceived as disrespect and insubordination. King’s
last interaction with Jackson after the staff meeting has
marked the younger man’s career, a touchstone of mythol-
ogy that suggests his lethal ambition, a millstone that was
hung around his neck even before he began his meteoric
A MESSIAH MEASURES LEADERSHIP
169
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 169


--- PAGE 185 ---
flash to fame. King’s judgment of Jackson has been
inscribed on him like a walking epitaph; instead of bury-
ing him, however, King’s remarks the week before he died
simply catapulted Jackson to stratospheric heights. In the
forty years since King’s death, it is Jackson who has best
captured his mentor’s spirit, extended his work, and inter-
preted his vision as the most prominent and powerful
black leader in the post-King era.
APRIL 4, 1968
170
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 170


--- PAGE 186 ---
CHAPTER
EIGHT
HEIR APPARENT
THE IMAGE THAT LAUNCHED JESSE JACKSON
in the public mind was drenched in mythology and his
mentor’s blood. After King’s assassination, Ralph Aber-
nathy, Andrew Young, and other aides accompanied his
body to the hospital while other staff members lingered at
the motel’s courtyard trying to make sense of their leader’s
demise. Jesse Jackson stayed behind and spoke to the
press, which began arriving around 6:25 p.m., less than a
half hour after King was shot. In speaking to the press,
Jackson seemed to break the very rule he had just barked
out to an associate. “Jesse called to me from across the lot
and said, ‘Don’t talk to them!’” said Ben Branch, the
musician King had requested to play “Precious Lord, Take
My Hand,” who was also the music director of Operation
Breadbasket’s band. “I agreed because I thought he meant
171
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 171


--- PAGE 187 ---
none of us were supposed to talk until Abernathy got back
from the hospital. So I walked away.” 
As Jackson spoke to a television reporter, Hosea
Williams listened in and didn’t like what he heard. “I
heard Jesse say, ‘Yes, I was the last man in the world King
spoke to.’ I knew Jesse was lying because Solomon Jones
was the one, and I had a feeling about what Jesse was
trying to pull. I climbed over the railing and was going
to stomp him into the ground but a cop grabbed me. I
called Jesse a dirty, stinking, lying so-and-so . . . I had no
hang-ups about Jesse talking to the press. That was okay,
but why lie? Why capitalize on another man’s name and
image—a dead man, who can’t speak for himself?”
(Writer Gary Wills was in Memphis shortly after King’s
death and reported that “SCLC members who have
denounced Jackson for his publicity seeking—Hosea
Williams, especially, and James Bevel—were very aggres-
sive in their courting of the cameras in the next few
days.” Perhaps Williams was mad that Jackson beat him
to the punch.) Many news outlets repeated the story that
Jackson was the last man to whom King spoke and that
he had cradled the dying leader in his arms, getting his
blood all over him. That account has fueled the mytho-
logical passing of the leadership mantle from King to
Jackson, a neatly staged succession story designed to
legitimate Jackson’s standing as what Playboy magazine a
little more than a year later called the “fiery heir apparent
to Martin Luther King.”
APRIL 4, 1968
172
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 172


--- PAGE 188 ---
The moment of Jackson’s emergence is shadowed with
conflicting reports. It seems that the staff agreed in an
emergency meeting the night of King’s murder not to
speak with the press, more than likely to show unity and
to exhibit the movement imperative to control the mes-
sage. Jackson was absent, excused by Abernathy to return
to Chicago to organize planeloads of people to attend
King’s funeral, although Hosea Williams remembers Jack-
son telling him he was ill and needed to see his physician
for medicine. In any event, Jackson turned up the next day
to speak at a special meeting of the Chicago City Council
and, before that, in the morning on NBC’s Today Show,
wearing on both occasions the same bloody shirt he had on
when he last saw the prophet on that desolate balcony of
destiny, which now became a ledge of opportunity for the
ambitious protégé.
Jackson’s actions provoked the consternation of his fel-
low acolytes. They questioned his claim that he was on 
the balcony at all since he was in the courtyard when the
report rang out and slammed King to the ground. But a
famous picture of King’s associates pointing in the direc-
tion of the sniper’s bullet, with what appears to be Jack-
son’s figure partially masked by a woman, bears out his
contention that he was there. He had obviously climbed
the stairs in the commotion to be by King’s body. As for
the claim that he cradled King in his arms, most of those
around the scene initially denied it, but how to explain
the blood on Jackson’s shirt? 
HEIR APPARENT
173
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 173


--- PAGE 189 ---
“I can see Jesse going over and leaning down and plac-
ing both his palms down flat in that pool of blood, and
then standing up and . . . wiping down the front of his
shirt,” Andrew Young now admits. Neither was Jackson
the only one to crave King’s blood; after returning from
the hospital, Abernathy produced a jar and began scraping
King’s blood up with the cardboard from a laundered
shirt, crying, “This is Martin’s precious blood. This blood
was shed for us.” Young says that there’s “nothing that
unusual about [Jackson’s gesture], it’s what you’d have
done. We Baptists, you know, we believe there’s power in
the blood—power that’s transferable.” Jackson endured
the trauma of losing his leader by becoming him, or at
least, getting as close as his admiring imitation could
bring him until he, in his own clothes and voice, became
the leader he always longed to be. In the meantime, Jack-
son’s naked bid for succession as King’s heir apparent was
fueled by internal demons and a stunning self-confidence,
even self-importance, that had driven him long before his
public career began.
Jackson was born in 1941 in Greenville, South Caro-
lina, as an illegitimate son to a teen mother—sired by a
former professional boxer and married man who lived next
door to her parents. Jackson grew up under a cloud of con-
troversial paternity back when such births carried a stigma
now hard to imagine, especially when films like Juno and
Knocked Up challenge societal norms as much as reflect
them. Jackson was mercilessly teased by his mates as he
APRIL 4, 1968
174
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 174


--- PAGE 190 ---
matured. He took his revenge in besting his better off
peers by becoming the president of everything and by
working harder than everyone else to enhance his native
intellectual gifts. He also consoled himself in the cool
winds of achievement that hugged him. It was the sense of
being delegitimated and decertified that pushed Jackson
higher and harder. 
Though his mother married when he was two, it would
be twelve years before his stepfather officially adopted
him, and his illegitimacy gave him a grudge against
mediocrity and invisibility. It swore him to a Protestant
work ethic to outdo his socially established competitors in
the iron-cage world of segregated black America where
the black elite were forced to breathe the same air as their
less fortunate kin. If segregated black America was hardly
the mixture of social altruism and cohesion now popular
in nostalgic accounts of black life under Jim Crow, the
classes nevertheless forged paths in the same schools and
churches, barbershops and haberdasheries. The well-to-do
got a sense of the pluck and pride of their lesser kin while
the poor got a sense of the material possibilities that lay
ahead for those who strived to exceed their parents’
limitations. 
Jackson was denied standing in the world into which
King was born. Jackson pressed his nose against the glass
barriers that kept King safe and nurtured, whether in fine
stores or the homes of the black elite. What King could
gather at his parents’ table—a sense of self bigger than the
HEIR APPARENT
175
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 175


--- PAGE 191 ---
prejudice that obscured black achievement—Jackson had
to gather in schools from teachers used to spotting tal-
ented students. The stability that comes from having a
father at home, even an overbearing one like King’s father,
eluded Jackson, grating at his ego, chafing his pride, and
scraping his sense of somebodyness. It forced him to flex
back in reaction against degrading, denying forces, driv-
ing him to overcompensate for his loss. Except his loss was
even more painful because he got a view of what could
have been his as he witnessed the legitimacy and comfort
of his half-brother, Noah. Years later, when he poured
forth in dramatic cadence “I am somebody . . . I may be
poor, but I am somebody,” he had to look no further than
the mirror to catch a glimpse of his natural constituency. 
Even King recognized the effects of father-deprivation
on Jackson—although Jackson’s stepfather, Charles Jack-
son, gave him affection and offered his family care and
protection. But it could never adequately compensate for
the hidden injuries and psychic bruises that unleashed in
Jackson a rage for acceptance and one-upmanship. Excel-
lence was both the compensation for hard work and the
way to defeat the defeaters. King had a complicated rela-
tionship with Jackson: he initially frowned on Abernathy’s
choice to bring the twenty-three-year-old into the SCLC
fold. But his helpfulness at the Selma campaign, where
Jackson went to volunteer and to seek a job with King,
endeared him to Abernathy, who would act as a sort of
mentor to Jackson. It would be especially bitter for Aber-
APRIL 4, 1968
176
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 176


--- PAGE 192 ---
nathy’s friends when, after King’s death, Jackson set out to
eclipse him as the heir apparent to King and the leader of
black folk. 
Once his initial reservations were placated, King read-
ily spotted Jackson’s enormous talents and moved quickly
to name Jackson head of the Chicago Division of SCLC’s
Operation Breadbasket in 1965. Operation Breadbasket
was developed to hold businesses accountable that had
exploited black folk by accepting their patronage while
denying them jobs. Breadbasket countered this discrimi-
nation with selective buying and economic boycotts
against those businesses, as well as those that refused to
purchase goods and services from black contractors. Jack-
son would become the national face of Operation Bread-
basket in 1966, running it from his base in Chicago.
King also astutely gauged Jackson’s outsize ambitions:
his hunger to help, his desire to lead. Andrew Young says
that Jackson’s “willingness to assume responsibility” in
Selma in the march from Selma to Montgomery distin-
guished him from other Northern students. Young didn’t
realize at the time that Jackson had been a veteran of
Greensboro’s student movement. His impressions of Jack-
son were favorable:
Tall and handsome, Jesse had an air of confidence and
was willing to take the initiative. He had proved him-
self to be responsible and levelheaded in Selma and,
unlike the SNCC students, Jesse did not have a
HEIR APPARENT
177
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 177


--- PAGE 193 ---
romance with the proletariat: while SNCC was striving
for a nonleadership model and saw themselves as anti-
authoritarian facilitators, Jesse’s model for leadership
was the traditional Baptist preacher. He was eager for
the leadership mantle. We didn’t know exactly what
was driving Jesse, but Martin appreciated Jesse’s des-
perate desire to lead and encouraged it.
Young says that he “always suspected that Jesse’s child-
hood as the son of a single mother created in him a con-
stant psychological need for a father figure.” He says that
Jackson’s “leadership drive was a product of that need for
attention and approval,” and that as a student, he “seemed
drawn to the glory of leadership and looked to Martin as a
paternal authority.” Young says that while neither he nor
King “had any trouble being a brother to Jesse, we were
struggling ourselves with our own identity development
and in no position to play a fatherly role.”
King was often the recipient of Jackson’s ability to spit
a stream of rhetoric that sometimes overwhelmed the
slower, gentler, less animated King. On some occasions
Jackson was so eager to engage and impress King that he
pelted him with questions only to answer himself before
his mentor had time to respond. Jackson idolized King,
loved the way he stood bravely for black people, loved his
oratorical magic, and admired how he loved black people
enough to die for them. Jackson may well have longed to
be where King was and to do what he did—not out of
APRIL 4, 1968
178
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 178


--- PAGE 194 ---
jealousy, but out of a burning desire to share his gifts with
the movement. King knew of Jackson’s undisciplined
grasp for leadership; the young man’s hunger for vindica-
tion melded with his yen to change the world at a pace
that matched the whirling demons inside him. It reflected
the desire of all young Turks to seize the times by the
throat and to coax change in newer, more slashing idioms.
King’s language resounded less shrilly in the terms of
moral revolution. 
When King was killed, Jackson acted immediately to
seize the reins of leadership, to square his internal ambition
with his external status. He found the right opportunity to
ascend as his leader and elder brother lay on the ground,
not yet cold. Before King was buried, Jackson was plan-
ning to pitch himself as King’s successor. His ability to cut
through the thicket of events surrounding King’s assassina-
tion and to focus on microphones and television cameras to
interpret King’s death, and attach himself to King’s legacy,
was conniving, self-serving—and race-saving, redeeming,
and the expression of a nearly inevitable trajectory of ascent
that King himself had predicted. King had half-jokingly
warned his staff that they had better be careful lest young
Jackson ended up leading them one day. 
Jackson’s bloody shirt and media mastery suggest a
religious use of death and blood to sanctify a movement,
to secure a legacy—King’s and Jackson’s—and to point to
a successor who was appointed by the leader. If Jackson
dipped his hands into the blood of the prophet, it proved
HEIR APPARENT
179
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 179


--- PAGE 195 ---
he was both calculating and a good Christian. Jackson
understood the disciples symbolically drank the blood of
Jesus to memorialize his death; he merely tailored that
theology to himself and to black America in the loss of
their messiah. After all, King had accepted the messianic
role thrust on him as humbly as he could, taking the
good—the elevation by his people to a status near Jesus—
and the bad—risking his life and paying with his body
and blood to secure the redemption of his people and
nation. Jackson could hardly be blamed for doing his part
to usefully exploit King’s messianic stature, even if it split
the difference between self-promotion and group edifica-
tion, a compromise Jackson would constantly be accused
of making. The racial transubstantiation, the holy Eucha-
rist of the blood of King, and his body, too, could be bro-
ken and shared, drank and consumed, as energizing rituals
of solidarity and sanctification, of sacred remembrance. If
Jackson was the wisest and most handy liturgist, it made
sense that it was precisely at the point of death that he
should spring to life—to more fully grasp the meaning of
King’s mission, and the uses of his death. If King didn’t
consciously pass along his mantle to Jackson—in fact, if
he withheld it deliberately, punitively, or suspiciously, as
if it were his to give in the first place, as if by wishing he
could boost Abernathy beyond his talents, or by warning
he could keep Jackson from his portion—Jackson never-
theless believed it was his to have. Such a belief reveals
both undisturbed hubris and unshakable confidence,
APRIL 4, 1968
180
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 180


--- PAGE 196 ---
appearing to be the result of vulgar scheming and at the
same time, feeling utterly natural and, finally, almost nec-
essary and inexorable.
Thus, objections to the manner in which Jackson
gained power are almost beside the point. Jackson’s lead-
ership abilities were greater, his inspirational skills more
staggering, his speaking gifts bigger, his ego more mas-
sive, and his hunger to be the vessel of change deeper than
all the rest of King’s men. If he hadn’t arranged to get
there, he would have almost certainly been pushed to the
top by the cycles of fate, fortune, luck, ambition, and the
size of his sight and fight. When it came to his capacity to
dream himself beyond his circumstances, Jackson’s eyes
were never bigger than his gut, and with pugilist genes 
at his command, he was more than ready for the fight.
Besides, it couldn’t have been his desire alone that got
him there. Many others wanted it just as much in their
own way, but he was the most talented among those who
wanted it badly; although, it must be noted, wanting it
badly is a necessary but insufficient basis for assuming
charismatic leadership. When it came down to it, Jackson
simply had what it took to present himself as the heir to
Martin Luther King Jr. Still, Jackson couldn’t trust that
his talent alone would land him in the driver’s seat. He
had seen the bourgeois set get over because they were
lighter, or better educated, or had better pedigree. The
same qualities he would later display as leader had to be
applied to the process to become leader: he had to outthink,
HEIR APPARENT
181
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 181


--- PAGE 197 ---
outfox, outcalculate, outstrategize, and outwork all others
in the field.
As for Jackson’s succession scenario, it is almost always
assumed that King’s measure of Jackson’s ambition and
plans was benign, and remarkably, for the most part, that’s
true—but not absolutely. King praised Jackson for his
hard work, and even quoted him in the last speech he gave
in Memphis. King lauded Jackson’s good qualities, but he
also smelled Jackson’s impatient, imperious drive, his
approaching footsteps, all of which added up to successor
and competitor. “Just be patient, Jesse,” King said to him.
“Your time will come.” Others sensed Jackson’s hunger for
the premier spot. “I think Jesse wanted to be the number
one black American leader himself someday. Now I don’t
think Jesse was foolish enough to believe that he could
displace King. But he was clearly competing with him
anyway.” If the person in question has no real talent, is no
real threat, then such desires can be abided. King was
more patient than most because even when the threat was
real, he still tolerated the hoofbeats of largely friendly
competition from Jackson. King perhaps spotted before
anyone else the real capacity for leadership that Jackson
possessed. Perhaps King was agitated that someone could
so nakedly want to wear a crown that King didn’t think
he himself deserved to wear. Perhaps it was his sense that
anyone who hadn’t yet earned the right to rise should sim-
ply not covet an elevated perch. Perhaps King sensed that
Jackson’s unbridled ambitions would harm the movement.
APRIL 4, 1968
182
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 182


--- PAGE 198 ---
Perhaps he wanted to spare Jackson the drama and burden
of leadership that he had no idea he was asking himself
into. Perhaps it was his sense that Jackson was not yet
ready, that even his gargantuan talents couldn’t bring him
to resist the nasty tide the movement was taking.
Or maybe King felt, or feared, that Jackson’s brand of
leadership might be the way to go, or that, should the
people be exposed to him they would feel that way, rightly
or wrongly—and that despite his big ego and need for
recognition, his ideas and style were more suited to a
younger generation surging to the fore. Jackson physically
towered over King; he was a strikingly handsome figure,
tall and full of sex appeal in a way that King wasn’t. Of
course, the young Jackson was already full of himself.
When he and King arrived once at a mass meeting, Jack-
son says he refrained from speaking when “he noticed how
the young people in the crowd got all excited when they
saw [Jackson]. So he decided he would take a backseat,
because he didn’t want to take anything away from Dr.
King.” 
One observer says that “Jesse’s grabbing at the leader-
ship became a big problem for them. King never showed
consternation, but Andy Young was visibly perturbed.”
Young admits that all the men surrounding King went
through a similar phase of thinking they could best King
at leadership because he was so mild-mannered and hum-
ble. “Typically, brash young men mistake humility for
weakness, and everybody was always doing that to
HEIR APPARENT
183
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 183


--- PAGE 199 ---
Martin—thought they could one-up him, manipulate him,
co-opt him for their own purposes,” Young says. “And he’d
never fight back.” Still, Young believed that Jackson over-
stepped even that boundary. For instance, at the opening
mass rally for SCLC’s Chicago campaign at Soldier Field,
Jackson’s naked ambition “really shook us,” Young says.
“This was supposed to be Dr. King’s moment. The only
thing was, Jesse was speaking earlier in the program, and
he tried to do an imitation of the March on Washington
speech. I mean, it was obvious he was trying to do a Dr.
King speech himself, not a speech as just a director of the
Chicago project. He was trying to give his ownvision for
the movement in the future. It just wasn’t appropriate.”
Jackson was driven as well by having finally gained
access—after being excluded for most of his life—to the
black middle-class circles that King frequented as a youth,
circles of power and protection, and of social privilege.
King had by then committed class suicide in his radical
identification with the poor, but it was a noble choice that
still rested on privilege: he had the psychic wherewithal
and the emotional security from having been a member 
of the black elite to cast his fate with the downtrodden.
Though it may be hard to surrender privilege—and the
numbers of the fortunate who don’t voluntarily do it tes-
tify to this fact—it is still easier to give up what one had
than actively spurn the privilege one has never tasted. 
While it’s true that King refused to brazenly exploit
his status as the greatest civil rights leader, he could also
APRIL 4, 1968
184
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 184


--- PAGE 200 ---
afford to be humble because the world proclaimed him 
a god. There were also corners to King’s psyche, and
moments when he understandably, humanly, rejected his
humble demeanor, which escaped public notice. Writer
David Halberstam caught one of them in his 1967 essay
on King for Harper’smagazine.
King is a frustrating man. Ten years ago, Timefound
him humble, but few would find him that way today,
though the average reporter coming into contact with
him is not exactly sure why; he suspects King’s vanity.
One senses that he is a shy and sensitive man thrown
into a prominence which he did not seek but which he
has come to accept, rather likes, and intends to perpet-
uate. Colleagues find him occasionally pretentious . . .
He has finally come to believe his myth, just as the
people in the Pentagon believe theirs and the man in
the White House believes his; he sticks to the morality
of his life and of his decisions, until there becomes
something of a mystic quality to him.
King’s good friend and legendary pulpiteer Samuel
Proctor said that “I’m not sure that King was not aware of
this sense of destiny. Every now and then, I’d hear some-
thing drop from his lips. I’ll never forget hearing him say,
‘I have wondered how long I should have kept my silence
on the Vietnam question.’ Kind of like, you know, the
whole world has only been waiting for you to break your
HEIR APPARENT
185
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 185


--- PAGE 201 ---
silence.” Proctor says that “phrases like that he’d let fall”
with increasing frequency. Another friend recalls how
King responded to a 1963 Newsweek poll that confirmed
King as the most popular black leader among black peo-
ple. “Martin got up and rushed to the nearest newsstand.
He had that copy of Newsweek already opened to the poll.
He kept looking at it, and after a while, he must have
sensed that I thought it was all disgusting, so he closed up
the magazine. He pretended to be contrite. He said, ‘I
know I shouldn’t care what they think about me. I just
ought to pay it no mind and do what I must. I shouldn’t
be so vain.’ But he was feeling good because he was first.”
This may be why King could preach so effectively and
brilliantly about the “drum major instinct”; he felt its lure
inside his own breast. 
King warred mightily against his vanity in a way that
never occurred to Jesse Jackson. Perhaps he was so hard on
Jackson because he knew more than most how seductively
the sirens of fame could beckon. King probably knew, as
one aide put it, that “Jesse could never pass a reflective
surface without pausing—whether it was a store window
or just a shiny car, he’d have to stop a second and check
himself out again.” But King loved Jackson and under-
stood him much better than Jackson’s fellow staffers who
were irritated by his desperate need for affirmation from
King and others. “You’re very lucky you had both a
mother and daddy who loved you,” King told his staff,
“and so you don’t compulsively need attention. Jesse com-
APRIL 4, 1968
186
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 186


--- PAGE 202 ---
pulsively needs attention.” King also confessed to aides
that “Jesse’s just so independent, so ambitious.” Once,
when King looked at a Jet magazine photo of Jackson that
had been supplied by his Operation Breadbasket office—
where Jackson was standing in a pulpit with a portrait of
King beneath him and a cross hanging high behind
him—he said, “Well, at least he had the good grace to
place himself below the Savior.” 
What King may have not fully acknowledged is that
when others lift you up high, it is far easier to practice
humility. There is a paradoxical element of high self-
regard in self-debasement, as if one is specially singled out
by destiny or divinity to sacrifice and suffer. King grap-
pled with that paradox as he received the praise of the
masses. Jackson, however, was a one-man team, at least at
the beginning of his career; he had no one else to rely on
but himself. Even if God was on his side, he’d still have to
do most of the heavy lifting, since King had most of the
“God has ordained you to this task” talk on lock. Jackson
had to work overtime to be both cheerleader for King and
self-booster—though surely being in place to champion
King had its advantages. One could be seen and heard
shaking the pompoms for King, and thus, indirectly, one
was cheerleading and boosting oneself. 
With Jackson’s star on the ascendant even as King’s
was beginning to dim in the backlash to his positions on
war and poverty, it is not unreasonable to believe that King
felt some unpleasant pressure, perhaps even resentment, 
HEIR APPARENT
187
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 187


--- PAGE 203 ---
in Jackson’s relentless striving. He certainly couldn’t have
been deaf to the rumblings of Jackson’s increasingly supe-
rior effect on people. Dorothy Collins, a former Chicago
Today woman’s editor, said to her coworkers after hearing
Jackson, “King gave a hell of a speech, but you should
have heard that kid, Jesse.” And attorney Anna Langford,
who would become Chicago’s first black female alder-
woman, said that “after I heard that kid speak, I felt that
all the rest of the Breadbasket speakers could go home—
including King.” No matter how humble, how self-
denying, there is something in the ego that, like nature,
abhors a vacuum created by one’s increasing absence, espe-
cially when that absence is, even if gently or subtly, being
actively sought. The times were reversing King’s formula
for change, and in body and spirit, Jackson was King in
reverse: King could afford to be calm, patient, humble,
self-effacing. Jackson was driven to compensate for the
lack of recognition; hence, exposure was the key to his
psyche and soul’s development—and his manner of being
and leading. Even the acronym for the group he would
later form upon heated departure from the SCLC would
sum up his drive and testify to his style and ambition:
PUSH. 
These undercurrents also suggest that there was a bit 
of unconscious revenge that took place when Jackson
snatched from King’s grave and his not-yet-cold-body the
mantle of leadership. King’s last words to Jackson, which
stung him deeply, had been a particularly harsh rebuke for
APRIL 4, 1968
188
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 188


--- PAGE 204 ---
his fatal ambition. In adopting a critical posture toward
Jackson, King may have conjured the image of the black
elite finding fault with him. King stood in for the very
black bourgeoisie he had in many ways rejected as he
expressed scorn for Jackson’s ambition and style. In grasp-
ing King’s legacy, even in the face of King’s desire to see it
transmitted to Abernathy, Jackson was getting a kind of
revenge on the black bourgeoisie who judged him. Jack-
son was getting a leg up on the privileged and educated
who kept him out, who were suspicious of him, although
King and Young nobly forsook their comfortable upbring-
ings to give their lives to the movement. Jackson’s
revenge, or his sweetly poetic justice, was complete after
he rose to become the most significant black leader after
King’s death.
Although he has prestige and responsibility as King’s
most noted apostle, Jackson’s leadership has in many ways
proved him as the anti-King, or at least, the un-King.
Gone in Jackson is the ravaging guilt that shredded
King’s psyche in three: remorse for cheating on his wife;
guilt over being featured as the H.N.I.C. (head Negro in
charge); and sorrow over not serving God and man suffi-
ciently. By contrast, there was, especially as a young black
leader, a defiant swagger in Jackson, an athlete’s bold 
self-possession: the confidence of the utterly black-and-
beautiful. And with the rise of a black power esthetic that
Jackson embraced, his youthful Afro was the bane of the
bourgeoisie, and a sign of self-acceptance to the brothers
HEIR APPARENT
189
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 189


--- PAGE 205 ---
and sisters in the streets who struggled for self-recognition.
Jackson’s Black Nationalist, and at other times, ghetto
country getup—dashikis and denim in smooth sartorial
rotation, and neck medallions and cowboy boots too, 
and turtlenecks and suede sports jackets—were the garb
and accessories of his outcast spiritual shamanism. His
wardrobe signified both street mesmerism and ministerial
charisma, a symptom of the black working class’s excom-
munication from privileged black circles. Jackson became
an accessible icon for its grievances with black and white
elites. 
If Martin Luther King had to decamp on the hood as a
sign of ultimate class suicide—renouncing the privilege 
of his bourgeois upbringing to solidify his standing as a
ghetto saint—Jackson was a ghetto superstar, a native of
the projects who poured his bravura and his grievance
through his syrupy thick speech. Jackson’s words winced
and winked in the battle against white supremacy, even 
as he returned fire with every weapon in his impressive
rhetorical arsenal: gutbucket metaphors, urban parables,
extended analogies, street slang, country grammar,
theological sophistication, Southern diction, preacherly
pacing, biting wit and humor, and an imperishable will 
to clarity. Jackson made love in language; he relished
promiscuous verbal trysts with audiences around the
world, flexing and undulating and twisting his meanings
in an erotically agitated cadence that conjured the spirit
and the flesh in the same breath. His rhyming speech was
APRIL 4, 1968
190
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 190


--- PAGE 206 ---
an unavoidable homage to Muhammad Ali and a fore-
runner to hip hop, as Jackson played rebel badass and
strutting reverend with equal vigor. Jackson’s verbal vitae
also tentatively resolved in style what couldn’t be bridged
in philosophy or in person: Malcolm X’s slashing and
combative rhetorical fusillade and the high elegance of
King’s most finely wrought phrasing. Jackson also com-
bined King’s analytical sharpness with Abernathy’s color-
ful down-home vernacular to offer engaging snapshots of
the black condition.
“How many of you watch those cowboy movies on
TV?” Jackson asked his regular Saturday morning gather-
ing at Operation Breadbasket in 1969. “They’re a lesson
y’all got to learn. At first there ain’t nothin’ on the scene
but pistols and money. Bang! Bang! A man holds up the
stagecoach. Who has the most power? The man with the
most money. He can be so ugly he looks like he’s been
made in a Headstart program and it doesn’t matter.
“Now the rich man starts building up his economic
base. Opens a saloon or a general store. Then he brings in
the law. For justice? To make him give the money back?
Course not. The law’s there to make sure no one robs the
rich man. He’s the legislature, not only protects but
decides who gets protected.
“Next the schoolmarm gets off the stagecoach. She
interprets history and teaches culture. Since the rich man
already has his money, he wants everybody else to be
polite.
HEIR APPARENT
191
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 191


--- PAGE 207 ---
“Finally the preacher comes to town and forgives the
rich man his original sin. Old folks who stole money start
getting scared. 
“That’s how you go about forming a civilization. First
the economic base, then the legislature to protect it—
that’s politics—then the culture to interpret it, finally
religion to justify it. Y’all understand what I’m telling
you? Say amen.”
Since his early days in the spotlight, Jackson has
become one of the most gifted public moralists, and pub-
lic intellectuals, in the nation. Martin Luther King’s bril-
liance was certified in having received a PhD in theology
from Boston University. By contrast, Jackson didn’t
receive his master of divinity degree from Chicago Theo-
logical Seminary—which he left in 1965 after King prom-
ised him that six months working with him would be
worth six years in school—until 2000. King has come
under fire for plagiarism in large portions of his academic
work, and some of his written and spoken work, since
leaving Boston University. Some critics have argued that
King’s doctorate be rescinded; others claim he was an
intellectual fraud. But no one who ever encountered
King’s lively mind on stage or in public conversation
where he called upon his huge reserve of knowledge could
doubt his intellectual pedigree. 
But King’s posthumous troubles only accent how
remarkable are Jackson’s considerable intellectual gifts.
From the beginning of his time with King and SCLC,
APRIL 4, 1968
192
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 192


--- PAGE 208 ---
Jackson showed a deep intellectual hunger and unquench-
able curiosity that sometimes proved daunting even to the
formidably brilliant King. On a trip to Atlanta for his
first SCLC staff meeting, Jackson and fellow white semi-
narian David Wallace stayed with King at his home
because they lacked money for food and lodging. Jackson
smothered King in relentless intellectual dialogue “in
which he’d ask King a question and then answer it him-
self,” Wallace says. “Because Jesse thinks while he talks,
you know. We were flying once from Atlanta to Savannah
for a retreat, and the whole flight down, Jesse is sitting 
by King, with these books he’d been reading in his lap,
Tillich and Niebuhr, and asking King questions about
them like some hyper student, and then answering the
questions himself as he thought through them in asking
them. Until King finally said, ‘Well Jesse, you don’t even
give me time to answer the question.’” This bothered
King’s staff, but King was usually tolerant, though on one
occasion he became so exasperated that he bluntly
instructed his protégé to leave him alone. “Don’t send me
away, Doc,” Jackson pleaded, “don’t send me away.” 
It may be that Jackson’s intense personality—even
then, other aides to King say, he was always “on,” a trait
he hasn’t lost in the last forty years—and his equally rav-
enous intellectual appetite make him the most original
thinker to emerge from civil rights circles. King bril-
liantly borrowed and synthesized ideas in responding to
critical social and moral issues. Jackson, lacking King’s
HEIR APPARENT
193
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 193


--- PAGE 209 ---
formal education, was forced to think for himself, impro-
vising and inventing answers from the depth of his intel-
lectual energy and the vast reach of his curiosity about the
world around him. His native intelligence and skills, and
his willingness to do the difficult work of thinking deeply
and independently, in alliance with his Herculean work
ethic, make him a formidable public intellectual. His
speeches and interviews shine with brilliant interpreta-
tions and teem with ideas and information.
In 1969, Jackson told Playboy magazine that poor
whites held fast to their racist views at peril to their iden-
tification with poor black people that recalls W . E. B. Du
Bois’s analysis of how poor whites clung to the “psychic
wages of whiteness” against their self-interest. “The white
poor have always been distracted from demanding their
rights; they’ve been too embarrassed to admit their depri-
vation. They’ve nourished themselves on the meager psy-
chic diet of racism . . . United in a class struggle, we can
force the redistribution of wealth in America.” Earlier in
the interview Jackson weighed in on how black progress
wasn’t nearly as significant as the progress of white soci-
ety. “The economy quadruples while blacks creep along
with unemployment as high as 35 and 40 percent in some
black communities. When the white unemployment rate
was 20 percent in 1933, it was a Depression that required
massive aid. But the black unemployment rate is ignored 
. . . A black man in Chicago with a master’s degree earns
less than a white man with a high school diploma.”
APRIL 4, 1968
194
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 194


--- PAGE 210 ---
In a 1986 Harper magazine debate with conservative
Charles Murray, Jackson warned against a knee-jerk nega-
tive reaction to the state and its policies to assist the poor. 
“We cannot be blindly anti-government,” Jackson said.
“The government has made significant interventions in
many, many areas for the common good. Without public
schools, most Americans would not be educated. Without
land-grant colleges, the United States would not have the
number one agricultural system in the world. Without the
federal transit programs, we would not have an interstate
highway system. Without subsidized hospitals, most
Americans could not afford decent medical care . . . But
when we shift from the notion of subsidy as something
that serves our national interest, to that of welfare, then
attitudes suddenly shift from negative to positive.” 
As the most gifted and vigilant black leader in the
post-King era, Jackson has helped to guide black America
through cycles of white backlash, the assertion of black
power, the institutionalization and attack on affirmative
action, Reaganism, post–civil rights racial politics, the
social and racial consequences of crack, the age of hip hop,
and bitter black class warfare. Long before recent heated
debates about black self-help and personal responsibility,
Jackson argued that black parents should take an active
role in their children’s education, and that inner city chil-
dren should attend to their school lessons, through his
PUSH/Excel program. Jackson was criticized for “blaming
the victim,” but after conceding that blacks “are the
HEIR APPARENT
195
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 195


--- PAGE 211 ---
victims and the oppressor is the victimizer,” he argued that
there “are just some things that people can’t do for you,
that you have to do for yourself. Of all of your powers—
your political power, your economic power, and your social
power—no power is more fundamental than willpower.”
Jackson said that he wanted youth to understand that they
“need their willpower developed. It’s bad to be in the
slums, but it’s even worse when the slums get in you.”
Jackson said, “Self-determination is our goal, and self-
discipline, self-initiative, and self-awareness are necessary
to get self-government.” Jackson proclaimed that what “we
must do today is raise the expectation levels of our people.”
Jackson’s two presidential races, in 1984 and 1988,
altered the black political landscape. Jackson garnered 3.5
million voters in his first run for the White House, and
more than doubled that number in 1988. His efforts reg-
istered massive numbers of black citizens and mobilized
progressives across the country. Jackson founded the
National Rainbow Coalition in 1984 to forge connections
among various racial and ethnic groups with an eye to
transforming the American political scene. Jackson also
expanded his freedom efforts globally, winning the release
of hostages and political prisoners from Kuwait to Cuba.
Jackson has been a relentless force in the media, brilliantly
leveraging his celebrity to explore on television and radio
complex social ideas, while advocating for social change.
Jackson has largely lived up to King’s beliefs that lead-
ers be wise and in love with justice; that they be strategic
APRIL 4, 1968
196
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 196


--- PAGE 212 ---
in their plans to effect transformation; and that they place
the interests of the folk over self-interest. To be sure, Jack-
son has been accused of unprincipled self-promotion, of
“shaking down” corporations in the name of racial justice,
of hogging the spotlight for economic benefit, and a great
deal more. But King faced nearly every one of these
charges from forces that sought to smear his name in bad
publicity and negate the good work he did. Jackson has
had to face even more criticism over the years because he
lacked the benefits of martyrdom: the erasure of conflicts
and contradictions and the reshaping of history to the
advantage of the fallen leader. Neither did King have to
deal with the sort of public embarrassment that Jackson
faced when it was revealed in 2001 that he had fathered a
child out of wedlock after having an extramarital affair
with an aide. 
Jackson’s plight raises difficult questions about leader-
ship and morality. His situation illustrates the need to
acknowledge that our leaders will occasionally disappoint
themselves and us. If we demand that they be perfect, we
risk disillusionment when their shortcomings surface. The
underlying flaw of our unwritten compact with leaders is
the desperate need to believe that they must be pure to be
effective. The best leaders concede their flawed humanity
even as they aspire to lofty goals. 
This does not mean that we should not hold leaders
accountable for their actions. To his credit, Jackson
acknowledged his failure, sought the forgiveness of his
HEIR APPARENT
197
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 197


--- PAGE 213 ---
family and followers, and provided for his infant daughter.
He is willing to practice the same moral accountability he
preaches. Because Jackson has so prominently urged young
people to take the high road of personal responsibility,
some conclude that his actions reveal hypocrisy. But it is
not hypocritical to fail to achieve the moral standards that
one believes are correct. Hypocrisy comes when leaders
conjure moral standards that they refuse to apply to them-
selves and when they do not accept the same consequences
they imagine for others who offend moral standards. 
We are plagued by either-or ethics. Some believe that
morality is judged by examining the private behavior of
leaders—that what one does in the bedroom is just as
important as what one does in public. Others claim that
private behavior has little consequence in measuring polit-
ical character. The truth may lie somewhere between these
extremes. Conservatives too often reduce the complexity of
character to a test of sexual propriety. In assessing moral
failure, they pay little attention to how political judg-
ments may reveal ethical poverty. As long as a decision,
say, to cut millions of the needy from welfare rolls is made
by a politician without a sexual problem, the outrage it
may cause is chalked up to ideology, not morality. 
On the other hand, liberals are infamous for underplay-
ing the relation between personal and public life. When
liberals justly defended Bill Clinton during the impeach-
ment debacle, few remembered that the same president
had demanded Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders’s resigna-
APRIL 4, 1968
198
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 198


--- PAGE 214 ---
tion after she suggested that masturbation should be
openly discussed with young people. The obsession with
sexual sin has distorted our understanding of the morality
of leadership. Our leaders cannot possibly satisfy the
demand for purity that some make. And neither should
they try. Leaders who are blemish-free often possess a self-
satisfaction that stifles genuine leadership. 
Those leaders who are in touch with their own limita-
tions often display a political prudence that matches their
personal humility. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s flaws magnify
his greatness because they provide a glimpse into a soul
struggling with the knowledge that he was neither perfect
nor pure. King’s guilt about being widely celebrated, and
about his own moral failures, gave him a humility that is
virtually absent in contemporary leaders. If we delude our-
selves into believing that our leaders, even our heroes,
have not at times fallen, we deny ourselves the powerful
lessons of their struggle for moral maturity.
One of the most significant consequences of Jackson’s
troubles had nothing to do with his family life, but with
how he became vulnerable to a challenge of his leadership
of black America.
HEIR APPARENT
199
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 199


--- PAGE 215 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 200
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 216 ---
CHAPTER
NINE
LAST OF A DYING BREED? 
JESSE JACKSON’S DIFFICULTIES OPENED THE
way for the emergence of another charismatic black leader,
Al Sharpton, who looked to King and Jackson as his role
models, even as he failed at times in his early career to
uphold their vision for principled and careful leadership.
Al Sharpton’s evolution from “impulsive militant to a
more responsible activist and politician” suggests that he
matured when he stuck to King’s and Jackson’s style of
leadership. Furthermore, his occasionally contentious
relationship with Jackson underscores the vices of charis-
matic authority in black life. 
The competing public images of Sharpton—glorified
racial ambulance chaser, racial poseur bent on stirring con-
troversy, camera-hogging activist more interested in the
limelight than civil rights—often ignore his Pentecostal
roots and the influence on his style and approach by a
201
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 201


--- PAGE 217 ---
diverse cadre of mentors. Sharpton, born in 1954, was 
a bona fide prodigy of the black pulpit: at the age of four,
he began to extol the Lord’s word in his Brooklyn Pente-
costal church, and by the age of ten, the pint-sized
preacher who had been dubbed the “Wonderboy” was offi-
cially ordained. Sharpton went on preaching tours with
his Washington Temple pastor Bishop Frederick Douglas
Washington and gospel great Mahalia Jackson, for whom
Sharpton preached in 1964 in between her shows at the
New York World’s Fair. Taken under wing by another
minister at his church, Sharpton read widely, learning
about Marcus Garvey and Adam Clayton Powell. During a
tour of the Caribbean, the ten-year-old minister spent a
day sipping tea with Garvey’s widow, having called her on
the phone. Inspired by Powell’s story, he sought out the
flamboyant congressman and pastor of Harlem’s historic
Abyssinian Baptist Church. When he met him in his
study after service, Sharpton was surprised and delighted
to learn that the famed leader had already heard of him.
The two forged a relationship that influenced Sharpton’s
understanding of leadership.
Sharpton turned increasingly to politics, and on a cou-
ple of occasions met Martin Luther King at Brooklyn’s
branch of Operation Breadbasket, headed by Rev. William
Augustus Jones, an eloquent preacher who pastored
Bethany Baptist Church. Sharpton focused his youthful
attention elsewhere, but later, deeply affected by King’s
death, he returned to Breadbasket and asked to start a
APRIL 4, 1968
202
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 202


--- PAGE 218 ---
youth division. Named youth director in 1969, he met
Operation Breadbasket’s national director, Jesse Jackson, 
a couple of months later, and they formed a close relation-
ship that has been sometimes sorely tested in the nearly
forty years of their association. Sharpton continued
throughout his youth to preach and engage in civil rights
protests and boycotting businesses that failed to honor
black patronage—most notably mammoth grocery chain
A&P . After graduating from high school, he became the
first person in his family to attend college, but he dropped
out of Brooklyn College after completing only two years.
Sharpton was eager to expand his leadership and, with the
aid of former King lieutenant Bayard Rustin, formed the
National Youth Movement as a vehicle for his activism.
As he raised funds for his group, Sharpton met soul
singing legend James Brown, who volunteered to help.
Brown took Sharpton on tour with him, and the two
bonded as father and son, a relationship that lasted until
Brown’s death in 2006. 
Sharpton’s rise as a black leader in New York came at a
time when there was a displacement of manufacturing
jobs by the dominance of the financial, insurance, real
estate, and advertising sectors. As a result, the economy
shifted away from blue-collar workers and favored the
well-trained middle- and upper-managerial classes. The
New York of the seventies and eighties for black commu-
nities was marked by rising unemployment, dramatic
spikes in homelessness, and vastly increased crime driven
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
203
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 203


--- PAGE 219 ---
in large part by the crack cocaine underground economy.
Mayor Ed Koch’s administration, which lasted from 1978
to 1990, was distinguished by policies and practices that
have been characterized as a war on the poor. Koch’s direc-
tor of human services Blanche Bernstein said that the
number of folk receiving welfare, whom Koch dubbed
“poverty pimps,” would be “what she wanted it to be.”
She was as good as her word: in 1978 the rejection rate for
welfare applicants nearly doubled from its 1976 level. At
the same time a zealous police state was imposed on poor
black communities, with a pronounced increase in publi-
cized police brutality cases. This is the political and social
arena into which Sharpton stepped to exercise his brand of
leadership: an aggressive public response to the erosion of
black civil rights by conjuring the parallels, and drawing
distinctions, between New York and the South; linking
his actions to, and patterning his public practice after,
that of well-known black leaders like King and Jackson,
and thus seeking to establish his pedigree and legitimacy;
and protecting the black working and working poor
classes from the invidious consequences of white hate
mobs and a vicious police state. 
Sharpton’s vocation as a social activist took off due to,
and was sustained by, a series of racial conflagrations in
various regions of New York, each one bringing him more
visibility and controversy in turn. In December 1984
Bernhard Geotz, the white “subway vigilante,” shot four
APRIL 4, 1968
204
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 204


--- PAGE 220 ---
young black men on a Manhattan subway. They had asked
him for five dollars and he shot them (unloading his gun
at the rate of five shots a second), he claimed, because he
feared for his life. Goetz was eventually convicted of ille-
gally possessing a weapon and spent eight months in jail,
thanks in part to a series of protests that Sharpton orga-
nized. Then two years later in Howard Beach, Queens, a
white Italian neighborhood, a car occupied by three black
men, Cedric Sandiford, Timothy Grimes, and Michael
Griffith, broke down. They looked for a phone to call for
help, but facing the taunts of a group of racist whites,
took refuge in a local pizzeria. When they left, the three
men were harassed by the white mob, fighting with them
before they fled as the crowd pursued. Sandiford and
Grimes hid by an expressway, but Griffith wasn’t as fortu-
nate: he ran onto the expressway to escape and was hit 
by a car and killed. Sandiford said that when the police
finally showed up, they treated him as the criminal, not
the victim, refusing to treat his wounds and demanding to
know why he’d come to Howard Beach at all. Sharpton
sprang into action; his aggressive protests, including
blocking the traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge and jumping
onto subway tracks, and strategic advice to the victims’
families, suggesting they withhold cooperation with the
Queens district attorney until a special prosecutor was
appointed, eventually resulted in getting the charges of
“reckless endangerment” against four of the mob members
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
205
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 205


--- PAGE 221 ---
upgraded to charges of murder and manslaughter. Later,
three of the four men were convicted of manslaughter and
with assaulting Sandiford. 
Sharpton’s reputation grew as he addressed every
major, and minor, racial scandal in New York, especially
those involving the hateful actions of white mobs or the
brutality of the police. There was the 1989 case of sixteen-
year-old Yusuf Hawkins, a black youth who was murdered
while shopping with three other black youth for a used car
in Bensonhurst, an Italian neighborhood in Brooklyn. The
black men were beaten by nearly thirty white youth who
had been laying in wait to exact vengeance on a black man
who was dating a girl in the neighborhood. Joseph Fama
was eventually sentenced to thirty-two and two-thirds
years to life for shooting Hawkins twice through the
heart, in part because Sharpton organized more than a
score of marches to protest the injustice, bringing out the
worst in Bensonhurst’s white citizens, some of whom
shouted “Send ’em back to Africa” and “Niggers go
home.” On the weekend before the King holiday in 1991,
Sharpton was about to lead his twenty-ninth march in the
area, when Michael Riccardi, a hateful white man,
accosted him and, the portly minister thought, punched
him hard in the chest. Sharpton looked down only to
discover a knife handle protruding from his chest. He
quickly pulled the five-inch blade out before he collapsed
to his knees amidst his blood and the pandemonium of the
crowd. Sharpton recovered from his attack and asked for
APRIL 4, 1968
206
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 206


--- PAGE 222 ---
leniency in court for his attacker, who served eight years
in prison after being sentenced in 1992 to five to fifteen
years on a first-degree assault conviction. After he was
stabbed, Sharpton reflected on his path and formed the
National Action Network to channel his social activism
around voter education, poverty, and community busi-
nesses in a structured organizational environment.
But no other case got Sharpton such wide and negative
notice as the Tawana Brawley case. On November 28,
1987, in the town of Wappingers Falls, New York, Braw-
ley, a fifteen-year-old black girl, was found in a garbage
bag smeared with excrement, her clothing torn and
burned, with racist graffiti written on her body in char-
coal. Brawley said that she had been assaulted and raped
by six white men, some of them police officers. Attorneys
Alton H. Maddox and C. Vernon Mason, who frequently
worked with Sharpton, joined the minister in representing
Brawley. A grand jury concluded after seven months of
scouring police and medical records that Brawley had fab-
ricated her story. Sharpton, Maddox, and Mason blasted
back that the Dutchess County prosecutor, Steven
Pagones, was a racist and accused him of being one of the
perpetrators of the alleged abduction and rape. Pagones
sued the controversial trio for slander and won his case.
Sharpton’s share in the judgment for making defamatory
comments about Pagones was $65,000. Already branded a
racial controversialist who provoked public spectacles to
enflame, rather than dampen, the fires of racial animus,
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
207
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 207


--- PAGE 223 ---
Sharpton’s reputation took a huge hit with his defense of
Brawley. But it didn’t keep Sharpton from being involved
in other high-profile racial catastrophes, from the 1991
Crown Heights incident (a twenty-nine-year-old Jewish
visiting seminary student was randomly killed in retalia-
tion for the death earlier that day of a seven-year-old black
boy who was hit as a vehicle driven by a Jewish man ran 
a red light); to protesting the 1999 police killing of
unarmed African immigrant Amadou Diallo; spending
ninety days in jail in 2001 for protesting the use of
Vieques Island in Puerto Rico for bombing practice; and
leading a major march in 2007 on behalf of the Jena Six 
in Louisiana. 
Sharpton’s political engagement—running for mayor
of New York City, twice for the U.S. Senate, and then in
2004 for the presidency—cemented his appeal as a main-
stream political force and shored up his bid to be taken
seriously as a, some would argue the, national black leader.
Sharpton’s early career fell short in satisfying King’s views
of leadership on some accounts, especially King’s insis-
tence on planning and preparation, and in the erratic,
chaotic, and anarchic elements that occasionally sur-
rounded Sharpton’s social interventions, particularly the
Brawley case. Ironically, Sharpton’s evolution from per-
ceived racial hustler to respectable black leader has
brought him into sharp conflict with his self-proclaimed
“second hero” Jesse Jackson, a conflict that may illumine
both their specific relationship and the flawed character of
APRIL 4, 1968
208
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 208


--- PAGE 224 ---
charismatic authority and its transmission within black
leadership circles that claim King as an inspiration. 
Sharpton’s career has been shaped, perhaps more than
most, by his models and mentors. Bishop Washington
opened a window onto the Pentecostal preaching land-
scape for Sharpton, offering a fiery baptism into the frater-
nity and social rituals of livelihood made possible by
plying the sacred spoken word. William August Jones
gave Sharpton an appreciation for the elegant possibilities
and intellectual integrity of the black sermon, and whet-
ted Sharpton’s appetite for picking up the books of the
social gospel tradition in which Jones was widely read.
“One of the first times I heard him speak,” Sharpton
recalls of Jones, “he said America was suffering from a
‘faulty theology emanating from a sick sociology based in
a false anthropology.’” Sharpton says that the “only other
person I had ever heard with that command of the English
language was Dr. King.” Sharpton began to read academic
theology because of Jones—everything from liberation
theology, Karl Barth, Paulo Freire, Walter Rauschen-
busch, as he recalls that “I’m fourteen and I’m reading this
stuff because I’m around these big Baptist preachers.”
When Jones told him that King was deeply influenced by
Rauschenbusch and the Social Gospel, Sharpton gained
“even more incentive to get involved in the movement.”
Later, Sharpton would switch denominations from Pente-
costal to Baptist, for spiritual and, arguably, political
reasons. 
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
209
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 209


--- PAGE 225 ---
Adam Clayton Powell gave Sharpton a sense of coura-
geous theatricality, a flashy, stylish indifference to what
others thought as long as he wielded genuine power.
Powell’s considerable self-confidence was seductive to
Sharpton, if threatening to the white world that harshly
judged him. Sharpton later came to see how Powell’s out-
rageous antics worked against an appreciation for his
legitimate contributions, especially the boycotts, marches,
and sit-ins that Powell led long before his Southern peers.
“I think that the media and scholars have underplayed his
substance and real contribution,” Sharpton writes. “Some
of it was Adam’s fault—he was a preacher, and preachers
have a natural tendency for showmanship—but beyond
that, I think he had a very deep resentment of whites
because of how his family was treated . . .” Sharpton says
that Powell’s “outrageousness was a deeply personal way of
mocking the system that had caused him such pain. And
perhaps, at times, he carried it too far, masking his own
achievement.” Many critics have drawn the same conclu-
sion about Sharpton. 
James Brown was a surrogate father for Sharpton and
gave him his sense of identity as a black man. By taking
Sharpton under his wing—taking him on tour, entrusting
him with aspects of his business, showing him the per-
sonal and professional payoffs to extremely disciplined
exploitation of his talent—Brown offered Sharpton a view
of black masculinity that was responsible, hardworking,
and persevering through personal difficulty, especially
APRIL 4, 1968
210
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 210


--- PAGE 226 ---
Brown’s jail time and allegations of domestic violence.
Sharpton says:
James Brown taught me more than anyone in the Civil
Rights Movement about how to stand up, not compro-
mise, be a man and push things as far as they can go
. . . James took me all over the world with him . . .
Pound for pound, he is the strongest, most courageous
man I have ever known. Even when he was in jail, he
didn’t break, he didn’t back down. There were many
stories about him over the years of domestic violence
and drug use, but all I can say is that I didn’t see it. I
can’t say it didn’t happen, but if it did, he shielded me
from it . . . All I know is that I’ve learned more about
manhood, and being a man, from him than from any-
one else. And he’s a musical genius. He can do every
single job on one of his records, and those records are
among the most influential in the history of popular
music. What a man.
It was also Brown who inspired Sharpton’s trademark
conked mane. Brown had been invited to the White
House in 1981 by Ronald Reagan to meet with Vice Pres-
ident George Bush on Martin Luther King’s birthday. The
legendary entertainer insisted on bringing along his pro-
tégé Sharpton, but he first wanted him coiffed to James
Brownian perfection. “I want you to do the Reverend’s
hair like mine,” Brown instructed his female Georgia
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
211
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 211


--- PAGE 227 ---
hairdresser, “because when we go to the White House
there’s going to be a lot of press, and when people see him
I want them to see me, like he’s my son.” As the hair-
dresser relaxed and rolled Sharpton’s Afro, Brown
extracted a pledge from him of lifelong follicle fidelity.
“Reverend, I want you to make me one promise. I want
you to wear your hair like that until I die.” Sharpton
agreed, even as he later acknowledged the alleged racial
self-injury that was pressed into his curls. “People often
say that wearing a process indicates self-hatred and imi-
tates white people, but my hair has nothing to do with
that; it is symbolic of my bond, very deep and intensely
personal, with James Brown.”
Sharpton’s hair has often been, if not quite a floating
signifier, then at least a bouncing metaphor, driving the
black bourgeoisie mad with embarrassment that a major
black leader propped up by the press is literally propped
up by a press and curl. But what his black elite critics
often railed against in dissing Sharpton was the working-
class symbolism of the jogging suits he often sported in
addition to the conk which, in an earlier generation of
working-class black men known as zoot suiters, “was a
refusal to look like either the dominant stereotyped image
of the Southern migrant or the black bourgeoisie, whose
‘conks’ were closer to mimicking white styles than those
of the zoot suiters.” When Sharpton later ran for the
White House, one couldn’t help but observe the ironies of
style that joined him by his hair to the presidential pedi-
APRIL 4, 1968
212
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 212


--- PAGE 228 ---
gree: anyone viewing a silhouette of George Washington
juxtaposed to Al Sharpton might be hard pressed to tell
the difference between the two.
But Sharpton’s bread and butter—brilliantly turning
the sacred spoken word to political use, using a sharp wit
to underscore social suffering, dramatizing social injustice
through bold public gestures, and projecting black leader-
ship through an ethic of swagger—owes perhaps the
greatest debt to his apprenticeship, and his aggravations,
with Jesse Jackson. Like Jackson, Sharpton had a painful
and complicated relationship with his father, who left the
family home when it was discovered he had been carrying
on an illicit affair with his wife’s daughter from a first
marriage. Eventually they had a son, who was both Sharp-
ton’s brother and nephew. Those events not only trauma-
tized the nine-year-old preacher, but thrust Sharpton and
his mother and other sister from a comfortable existence
into poverty and the projects. Like Jackson, Sharpton was
influenced by King, though he obviously didn’t enjoy the
close bond between Jackson and King. Sharpton was
deeply affected by King’s death. “I was sad,” he writes. 
“I worked in his Breadbasket program and was a youth
minister. I met Dr. King a couple of times. He knew me as
‘the boy preacher.’ When he would see me, he would say,
‘There goes that boy preacher!’ and a big grin would break
over his face. I felt good being a part of something he was
involved in, and the loss was definitely felt.” But it wasn’t
until a year later when he viewed the theatrical release of
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
213
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 213


--- PAGE 229 ---
the poignant documentary King: From Montgomery to Mem-
phis that he fully felt the impact of King’s death, moving
him to shape his life around the themes of King’s career.
“That’s when it hit me,” Sharpton says. “All those things
he did, all those freedoms he fought for, all those laws that
got overturned to make life better for all people—what
would happen now?” Sharpton made up his mind to work
in Operation Breadbasket “to carry on Dr. King’s legacy.”
Jackson was the most direct link to King’s legacy, and
a crucial influence on Sharpton’s view and style of leader-
ship. Sharpton says that “Jesse Jackson is probably the
smartest person I know. There’s no one I know who has a
more brilliant, fertile mind. He is hardworking. I learned
about the value of getting up early every morning from
Jesse. And he is very, very committed.” Sharpton says he
had read about Jackson “in magazines and seen him on
television, and I liked his style. He was young, brash, had
a huge Afro, and wore a medallion. I started wearing a
medallion to emulate him.” When Jackson came to town 
a couple months after Sharpton had been named youth
director of Operation Breadbasket, the fourteen-year-old
preacher got pithy, direct advice from his hero, who,
according to Sharpton, didn’t look at him but rather past
him. “All you got to do is choose your targets and kick
ass.” Later, when Jackson’s friend, and Sharpton’s some-
time touring mate, Mahalia Jackson arrived and showed
the young preacher love, it broke the ice between him 
APRIL 4, 1968
214
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 214


--- PAGE 230 ---
and his soon to be idol. From that night on, Jackson and
Sharpton “became tight.” 
When he saw Jackson reading Paul Tillich’s Love, Power
and Justice, he went out and purchased and read Tillich’s
corpus. Sharpton was “imitating my mentor, but also
expanding myself as a person,” saying that it’s very
“important whom you choose as your mentor” because
“their heroes become your heroes, their ideological bent
becomes of serious interest to you.” When Sharpton
dropped out of college—a decision he later regretted, but
which at the time made sense to him because he knew “all
these heavy hitters” so “what do I need a degree for?”—
Jackson mercilessly teased and shamed him in the acerbic
way that those in Jackson’s orbit sometimes feel. “Here
come the boy wonder, ain’t gonna be nothing but a
Harlem fanatic,” Jackson sarcastically offered. Sharpton
resented it, but he came to see that Jackson understood
that he needed serious preparation for the long haul. “I
thought he was trying to stifle me, that all the people
applauding were the ones who cared. But it was the oppo-
site, wasn’t it? He never gave me undue credit; with him 
I had to earn everything twice, which is what any young
person needs.” 
After Sharpton became a figure in his own right, Jack-
son offered him advice on how to handle stinging criti-
cism as they listened to a radio talk show guest run
Sharpton down. “Before you even say anything about this,
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
215
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 215


--- PAGE 231 ---
let me tell you something,” Jackson instructed Sharpton.
“This used to happen to me in Chicago all the time. But
have you ever been in a football game? If you’ve played
football, you noticed that the players, the offense and the
defense, they’re all thinking about one thing. The guy
with the ball. If everybody’s after you, it must be that you
have the ball. Nobody’s chasing anybody that doesn’t have
the ball.” Sharpton derived consolation from Jackson’s
story and concluded that if “I’m the one they all want to
tackle, it’s because they’re afraid that I may score.” Jack-
son also helped Sharpton understand the difference
between good and great leaders. “Good leaders are famous,
energizing types of people, inspirational to all kinds of
people,” Jackson told Sharpton. “But great leaders are
those who can learn to suffer and take pain, and still give
out positive auras and inspirational hope while never
betraying the pain they experienced. That’s what made Dr.
King great, what made Nelson Mandela great.” Sharpton
drew from Jackson’s words the lesson that “pain is part of
the price you pay if you’re going to lead, and if you’re not
willing to pay that price, you ought not to lead.”
Sharpton claims he and Jackson had their first trouble
when Jackson insisted that Sharpton’s relationship with
James Brown would distract him from his civil rights
work. Sharpton believed that Jackson was jealous of his
close relationship to the entertainer, and besides, Jackson
maintained friendships with Hollywood celebrities, so his
association with Brown should be no bother. But in the
APRIL 4, 1968
216
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 216


--- PAGE 232 ---
late 1980s, Sharpton says the two grew apart because of
Sharpton’s ties to black nationalists, who proved strong
critics of Jackson’s integrationist politics. They continued
to drift apart until Sharpton was stabbed in 1991, when
he and Jackson reconciled and talked every day, sometimes
two and three times a day, for the next seven years. But in
the late 1990s, he and Jackson suffered strained relations
as Sharpton questioned the direction of Jackson’s commit-
ment to civil rights as he became close to Bill Clinton. “I
felt his relationship with Clinton and the White House
was getting in the way of his work as an activist,” Sharp-
ton says. “I felt that if he was going to represent the civil
rights cause, the human rights cause, Jesse had to choose
between whether he was going to be part of the structure
or challenge the structure.” Then, turning King’s example
on Jackson, Sharpton argues that “Dr. King, as close as he
was to Lyndon Johnson, came out vocally against the war
in Vietnam. He never took a presidential appointment. He
challenged the system.” 
Sharpton says that he had “tactical discomfort” with
Jackson’s confusing inside-outside strategy—“You need
both, but you can’t be both”—in his relations to Wall
Street and the White House. “While Jesse was inside the
White House with Clinton, I was outside calling for
economic accountability on Wall Street. I was outside,
calling Clinton’s hand on welfare reform and the onerous
crime bill. Jesse was virtually silent on those issues. He
was an insider. And after seven years of us being close
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
217
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 217


--- PAGE 233 ---
again, we started to split.” Their split was exacerbated
when, Sharpton says, Jackson publicly disagreed with
Sharpton’s boycott of Burger King. Sharpton couldn’t
“believe that he, who taught me in my youth about fight-
ing these corporations and making them accountable,
would publicly come out against my doing the very thing
he taught me to do.” Sharpton took comfort in history,
noting that Jackson didn’t receive the support of Andrew
Young and Coretta Scott King when he ran for president,
wondering if he was going through with Jackson what he
went through with them. “But I would have thought that
he might not want to do that to the next generation.”
Sharpton’s claim that “[c]ontrary to popular belief, we
didn’t split over his scandal with Karin Stanford and the
baby he had out of wedlock,” but over philosophy, has
been challenged by a damning December 2004 story in
the Village Voicethat persuasively argues that Sharpton
“helped engineer the demise of his mentor, Jesse Jackson,
who had an affair with the executive director of his non-
profit organization and showered her with benefits, even
while Sharpton was sending every signal to those around
him that he was doing the same.” According to the Voice,
four top Sharpton associates “participated in a news bar-
rage against Jesse Jackson early in 2001 that elevated
Sharpton to a new national status,” or as a related Voice
article said, that “catapulted Sharpton to the top ranks of
African American leadership.” One of those associates,
Harold Doley Jr.—the first black to win a seat on the
APRIL 4, 1968
218
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 218


--- PAGE 234 ---
New York Stock Exchange and a key figure in Jackson’s
Wall Street Project, and as a black Republican millionaire,
a Sharpton financial supporter—suggesting that Sharpton
may have done precisely what he claimed Jackson did by
confusing the inside-outside on Wall Street, told the Voice:
“I said to Sharpton, ‘I’m going to bring Jesse down and
make you the man.’ Al said, ‘I’m ready.’” And if the
charges are true that Sharpton was carrying on an affair
with his then chief of staff, even as Jackson was being pil-
loried in the press at his bidding, then his claims to the
Nation in April 2001 (when he was allegedly in the thick
of the tryst) that he “got that impulse [to cheat] out my
system when I was on the road with James Brown all
those years” rings especially false and hypocritical.
Sharpton may have a legitimate beef with Jackson over
differing philosophies and conflicting approaches to
protests and the ethics of black leadership. But if true, his
alleged takedown of his mentor so that he might ascend 
to his throne burns with Shakespearean tragedy. It also
underscores some of the vulnerabilities and weaknesses 
of charismatic authority: it hinges on displacement and
deceit, on vanity and viciousness, on the part of those who
would carve their niche on the totem pole of black leader-
ship. It also highlights the rule of ruthless ambition in
charismatic leadership circles where the desire to point the
way and be on top is a classic example of King’s warning
against the “drum major instinct.” Instead of seeking to
serve, the desire for premier status, to serve as “president
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
219
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 219


--- PAGE 235 ---
of black America” among charismatic black leaders, fosters
an intensely competitive, and often lethal, environment
fueled by succession syndrome.
In Jackson’s case, whatever one may conclude about the
fatal ambition that drove him to become King’s replace-
ment before the leader was even laid to rest, at least King
was dead, and equally important, Jackson hadn’t killed
him off, either literally or symbolically. But in Sharpton’s
seizure of uncontrollable ambition, lacking the conven-
ience of a brilliantly dead mentor whom he might praise
and replace, he contrived to knock Jackson off by slicing a
symbolic jugular, the vitally important vein of his public
reputation. By doing his mentor in and offering himself
up as Jackson’s defender and successor, Sharpton unwit-
tingly revealed the poisonous sentiments on which charis-
matic leadership and succession syndrome depend. 
It may be a bitter irony as well that Sharpton’s recent
campaign against the lethal intensities of hip hop—its
murderous misogyny and epithet-laden rage—have noth-
ing on the internecine injuries that black leaders impose
on one another when they want to be the H.N.I.C. Charis-
matic black figures say “nigga” must be shed from the
linguistic arsenal of the young, but it has hardly been dis-
placed, at least in one of its negative incarnations, as the
spiritual basis of intramural contests among black male
leaders. Sharpton is a man of enormous gifts, a former
wunderkind of black homiletics who fulfilled his early
promise with a biting, brilliant tongue in defense of the
APRIL 4, 1968
220
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 220


--- PAGE 236 ---
vulnerable, and with a skilled and inventive leadership
that, at its best, extends the legacy of King and Jackson.
He is the last member of a genre and style of leadership
that is quickly passing off the scene, forced away as much
by new conditions of culture as by the increased options
available to a risen black middle class. But the persistent
poverty of struggling blacks, and newfangled forms of
racism, mean that another charismatic black leader in 
the mode of King, Jackson, and Sharpton may always be
needed. Sharpton has also consciously, and in masterly
fashion, rehabilitated his image from that of an itinerant
race hustler to a respected national black leader. If Jackson
has begrudged or blocked his ascent, it is a severe mark
against his noble and legendary leadership. But if the alle-
gations of Sharpton’s betrayal of Jackson are true, the
unconscionable means elected to achieve his position are a
blight on his record and that of charismatic black leader-
ship. Perhaps another example of leadership, one rooted in
political and institutional authority, offers a fresh vision of
how charismatic authority can be channeled into social
good for black America, and help to fulfill King’s vision 
of redemptive black political leadership. 
LAST OF A DYING BREED?
221
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 221


--- PAGE 237 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 222
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 238 ---
CHAPTER
TEN
BLACK KENNEDY
THE RISE OF BARACK OBAMA AS THE MOST
popular and potentially powerful black American politi-
cian ever is at once a nod to King’s legacy and a pioneer-
ing venture into new territory. Obama’s historic quest for
the presidency—winning more than twenty-five primaries
and caucuses both in predominantly black states and in
states with overwhelming white populations—has also
revealed the complicated politics of race for the Joshuas
who seek to blaze a path toward the Promised Land. 
Obama is, no doubt, the product of a paradox: he rests
atop an inverted racial pyramid that he has been credited
with overturning, and yet without the fierce rumblings of
race that his ascent seems to overcome, his career, and now
his campaign for the presidency, wouldn’t necessarily be
seen as the miracle of transcendence for which they’ve
been touted. Obama’s promise as a black man who bears
223
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 223


--- PAGE 239 ---
none of the scorn or rancor of his civil rights predecessors
is a double-edged razor: one of the reasons he’s able to be
the man he is—to have the noble bearing of a statesman
who wants to get past the arguments of the past—is
because those arguments were made, and bitter battles
were fought, and in some cases are still being fought. But
the division of labor throws many people off: it appears
that the either-or thinking that Obama wants to sail
beyond has trapped those who applaud his success. If
Barack Obama now, or some black person in the future,
should become president, neither Jesse Jackson nor Al
Sharpton would be out of a job. A black president can’t
end black misery; a black president can’t be a civil rights
leader or primarily a crusader for racial justice. A black
president won’t stop racism or erase bigotry. A black pres-
ident won’t be the president of blacks alone, but the
president of the United States. That tricky but not trivial
difference suggests that prophets of the people won’t go
unemployed when politicians of the race do well. In fact,
quite the opposite is true. 
Obama himself recognized this difference when he
answered a question put to him and his peers by journalist
Wolf Blitzer during a debate for Democratic presidential
candidates in South Carolina on the 2008 King Holiday.
“If Dr. Martin Luther King were alive today, why should
he endorse you?” “Well, I don’t think Dr. King would
endorse any of us,” Obama responded. “I think what he
would call upon the American people to do is to hold us
APRIL 4, 1968
224
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 224


--- PAGE 240 ---
accountable . . . I believe change does not happen from 
the top down; it happens from the bottom up. Dr. King
understood that. It was those women who were willing to
walk instead of ride the bus. [It was] union workers who
were willing to take on violence and intimidation to get
the right to organize. It was women who decided, ‘You
know, I’m as smart as my husband; I’d better get the right
to vote.’ Them arguing, mobilizing, agitating and ulti-
mately forcing elected officials to be accountable. I think
that’s the key.” Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton and a legion
of activists are the arguers, mobilizers, and agitators who
force the Barack Obamas and other elected officials to be
accountable. 
This doesn’t mean that Obama lacks the urgent sense
of destiny that only a few politicians have ever truly pos-
sessed in American life. This is not to be confused with
the gutless swagger of the younger Bush’s revamped
Manifest Destiny, or the perilous and bloated delusions of
Richard Nixon. Ever since he roared into our ears in elo-
quent cadence at the podium of the 2004 Democratic
National Convention, Barack Obama has struck new
chords in American politics. He has made millions believe
that their elected leaders might dare to dream out loud
and not mind saying so. He makes one feel that he can
cast aside rigid categories and rise above the plodding
aspirations that weigh down too many politicians. His
written word sings; his spoken word soars on the wings of
renewed faith in the democratic process, and how we need
BLACK KENNEDY
225
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 225


--- PAGE 241 ---
such renewal in an ugly age of despotic indifference to the
freedom to think creatively. Obama’s eyes are fixed on
what we can make together of our national future.
To see what makes Obama tick, look at his training in
the trenches of community organizing. As Ronald Reagan
practiced what Vice President George Bush would call
“voodoo economics”—supply-side theories wrapped in tax
cuts for the wealthy—Obama exited the Ivy League corri-
dors of Columbia University in 1983. After a brief and
unsatisfying stint on Wall Street, he headed straight for
the ’hood. On the South Side of Chicago, he worked with
a church-based group that battled poverty’s offspring:
crime and high unemployment. Obama rolled up his
sleeves—something he got used to doing to satisfy his
basketball jones on countless asphalt courts—and applied
elbow grease and hard thinking to the persistent ills of the
poor. Practical efforts to help the beleaguered are good
training for leaders of the free world. The poignant mem-
ory of the most afflicted stands a better chance to replay in
their minds. 
Young Obama soon learned the limits of local reme-
dies. Soon he imagined how law and politics might help
him change lives at the national level. This was at a time
when Reagan feasted on skepticism about government to
help ordinary people. Obama’s hopeful—but far from
naive—belief in the political process sent him to Harvard
Law School in the late eighties. He kept in hand a round-
trip ticket back to Chicago, where he served as an Illinois
APRIL 4, 1968
226
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 226


--- PAGE 242 ---
state senator for eight years before entering the U.S. Sen-
ate in 2004. Obama’s community organizing and work in
the Illinois Senate offer a glimpse of his political pedi-
gree—especially his bipartisan efforts to earn families
across the state more than $100 million in tax cuts, his
advocacy of legislation in support of early childhood edu-
cation, and his opposition to racial profiling. But so does
his brief stay in the U.S. Senate. Obama has fought for
disability pay for veterans. He has worked to boost the
nonproliferation of deadly weapons. He has advocated the
use of alternative fuels to cure our national addiction to
oil. He has scolded the Bush administration for its vicious
indifference to the poor, and for its political incompetence
in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. He has rallied as well
against genocide in Darfur. Long before it was popular, he
stood against the war in Iraq. He saw early that it was a
futile gesture of American empire that would do little to
beat back the threat of terror. Sadly, his prophesy has been
confirmed in the numbers of dead and the relentless pace
of destruction. 
It is one thing to say that Obama’s credentials for pub-
lic service have been gained in the give-and-take of com-
munity organizing and power politics. But his belief in
the American people is a reflection, in part, of the pro-
found belief they have invested in him. His belief also
greatly borrows from his trafficking in the cross-sections
of various cultures, colors, and communities. Obama’s
roots in more than one race, and his experiences in many
BLACK KENNEDY
227
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 227


--- PAGE 243 ---
cultures, are not, as falsely advertised, a liability. But there
has been a great deal of Obamanxiety; in fact, there’s been
a war in Barack, that is, in his metaphoric body, which
captures the insular and insidious nature of so much talk
about blackness and race. The debate about whether or not
Obama is black enough rests on a bad misreading of the
politics of race in black America. That debate has jumped
off more in media than in the mouths of everyday black
folk longing to know more about Obama’s politics, not his
pigment. 
Before he rose to fame, there was little doubt that
Obama was black. He moved to the South Side of
Chicago, home to black communities that have spawned
sociological classics by Cayton and Drake and William
Julius Wilson. He took a low-paying job to work largely
among the black poor. He joined the blackest church in
town, for which he’s taken considerable heat from the
right-wing media. He twice ran and lost a bid for Con-
gress against an icon of sixties black struggle. He married
a brilliant and beautiful and unmistakably black
woman—for all, and for what, that’s worth—with whom
he is rearing two bright and lovely black daughters. But
there’s an understandable phenomenon that happens in
black life—though, to tell the truth, it is sometimes com-
pletely befuddling when it gets evoked. It issues in an
informal axiom: when white folk like a black person too
much, there’s usually something really wrong with them.
Or, in its worse incarnation, they must be really bad for
APRIL 4, 1968
228
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 228


--- PAGE 244 ---
black folk: either they hate us because they hate them-
selves, or they despise our pride in them and covet the
alienated status that they wear as a badge in white Amer-
ica. The latter usually happens among blacks seeking the
approval of the far right, and the former among a small
percentage of blacks who, because they were reared in
largely white areas around white folk, simply can’t imag-
ine why they must wear the skin of the people most for-
eign to them. 
But that litmus test doesn’t always work; Martin
Luther King fought the perception that he was an Uncle
Tom or a sellout among some black factions because he
moved effortlessly between white and black America.
Neither can it entirely predict how black folk will behave
toward a black refugee who is forced out of seclusion in
largely white enclaves. O. J. Simpson was never seen
before he was accused of murder as a black man by most
black folk; but when he fell so far so fast—and when Time
magazine blackened his face like a meal of catfish on its
cover—O.J. was received back into black arms and hearts.
It is supremely ironic, perhaps even tragic, that a man like
Simpson, accused of murder with an extraordinary amount
of evidence amassed against him, could receive the black
benefit of doubt, and yet in some quarters, Obama
couldn’t pass the smell test. 
Blackness, incidentally, has never really been about
genetics anyway. That’s because most black folk could
point to somebody in their family tree who couldn’t pass
BLACK KENNEDY
229
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 229


--- PAGE 245 ---
muster as pure Nubian ancestry. The varied skin shades
testified to broad patterns of racial mixing that black folk
took for granted. And trying to reduce race—–any race,
but especially blackness—–to a genetic calculation is
nearly beside the point. What disturbs or assures us about
race has very little to do with blood or biology. Sure, your
color can get you pulled over for driving your Ferrari in a
white neighborhood, and it can get you followed in a store
where they think you don’t have enough plastic to ring
the cash register. But race plays out in the streets and in
our culture in a far more complicated way. Its about how
you use language, understand your heritage, interpret
your history, identify with your kin, and figure out your
meaning and worth to a society that places values on you
beyond your control. 
And it’s also about what people see you as—or take
you to be. You might protest, for example, to a passing
cabbie that you are a mixture of many races, and he might
keep going because you look like you’re black. But the cue
he gets from your color isn’t about your pigment alone;
it’s about what that color means to him, how it’s been
jammed into his mind with a slew of stereotypes about
what a person who looks like you is likely to do, namely
rob, cheat, or kill him. He didn’t get that from a DNA
swab; he got that from talking heads on television seeking
to warn him about the carnage you might inflict—or,
perhaps, from the latest 50 Cent video. All of this makes
it awfully futile to string Obama up on a genetic tree and
APRIL 4, 1968
230
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 230


--- PAGE 246 ---
hang him for not being black enough, because, in the
mother of all ironies, his mother is white and his father is
African. The black folk claiming that he’s not black the
way they want him to be black—that he wasn’t born of an
American black father and mother—are pretty humorless
and miss the irony of claiming that a black man born of
immediate African ancestry doesn’t measure up to their
test of blackness. 
Black folk have every right to ask if Obama will betray
them, to see if he is more Clarence Thomas than Martin
Luther King. And they have a right to be nervous about
all the talk about post-racial identity, knowing full well
that such a possibility is not only relatively slim, but that
it’s not a norm that should even be embraced. One need
not stop being black in order to be a full citizen of the
nation. Bland racial identities are not required to help 
the nation to a fair and just polity. We should not be 
post-racial: seeking to get beyond the uplifting meanings
and edifying registers of blackness. Rather, we should be
post-racist: moving beyond cultural fascism and vicious
narratives of racial privilege and superiority that tear at
the fabric of “e pluribus unum.”
The challenge to black folk is to see that at least three
different strategies of black identity are constantly in play
to manage our lives on a cosmic level. These strategies
offer the world a picture of how we understand our black-
ness. The first strategy is accidental blackness: we, by the
accident of birth, simply happen to be black. In this
BLACK KENNEDY
231
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 231


--- PAGE 247 ---
strategy, our blackness is only the most obvious, not the
most important, element of our identity. The second strat-
egy of blackness is incidental blackness: we are proud to be
black, but it is but one strand of our identity. Our black-
ness is surely important and valued, but it is not the only
feature of our identity that occupies our minds. Finally,
there is intentional blackness: we are proud of our blackness
and see it as a vital, though not the exclusive, aspect of our
identity. Our blackness is understood in its political forms
and its social manifestations. These strategies permit black
folk to operate in the world with a bit of sanity and grace.
Black folk pass in and out of these strategies over a life-
time. And one can be intentionally black in one setting—
say in a protest march against police brutality—and
incidentally black at the company picnic. Circumstances
and politics make all the difference in how and when these
strategies of blackness play out.
These strategies must be kept in mind when assessing
a figure like Obama. Like all black folk, he may deploy 
a variety of blackness depending on where he is and to
whom he is speaking. When Obama was speaking before a
black crowd in South Carolina during his campaign there,
he used words and ideas sure to connect with them on a
visceral, cultural, and racial level: he talked about being
“hoodwinked” and “bamboozled” by misleading character-
izations of his ideas, clearly signifying on Malcolm X’s use
of those terms. Obama was clearly being intentionally
black. When Obama speaks before a diverse crowd of folk,
APRIL 4, 1968
232
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 232


--- PAGE 248 ---
he may include concerns about racial profiling with the
need to clean up the environment; he’s being incidentally
black in such a setting. And where Obama means to unite
the nation by referring to the grand ideals of the Constitu-
tion, suggesting that all Americans must forge unity
around common hopes for future prosperity, he is being
accidentally black. The circumstances and political objec-
tives determine what strategies of blackness are most
salient and purposeful. It is quite legitimate to question
whether the use of particular strategies of blackness will
work against a just polity for black folk. Still, we must be
conscious that varying, sometimes even competing, strate-
gies are at work.
This is especially true in light of the contentious racial
politics of the 2008 presidential campaign. Former presi-
dent Bill Clinton, a vigorous surrogate for his wife,
presidential candidate Senator Hillary Clinton, caused 
a stir when he stated on the Charlie Rose show that voters
who chose to support someone of Obama’s experience were
willing to “roll the dice” with the presidency. Some critics
thought that Clinton’s comment, whether intentional or
not, was a subtle racial reference to urban black manhood
dressed in full dice-throwing stereotypical garb. Obama,
however, stayed above the fray and simply gave Clinton a
taste of his own medicine, quoting the former president
when he was similarly berated for a lack of experience
during his 1992 run for the Oval Office: “The same old
experience is irrelevant. You can have the right kind of
BLACK KENNEDY
233
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 233


--- PAGE 249 ---
experience or the wrong kind of experience. And mine is
rooted in the real lives of real people, and it will bring real
results if we have the courage to change.”
Clinton also accused the press of being blinkered by
Obama’s charisma and not challenging his contention that
he was the only Democratic presidential candidate to con-
sistently oppose the war in Iraq. Clinton argued that while
Obama stood against the war before joining the Senate, 
he made a statement in 2004 that he couldn’t say how he
would have voted on the war had he been in the Senate.
Thus, Clinton concluded, his consistent antiwar claim was
a fabrication. “This thing is the biggest fairy tale I’ve ever
seen.” Again, critics charged Clinton with subtle racial
hints that Obama as a black man wasn’t a substantial and
serious candidate, though Clinton insisted on Al Sharp-
ton’s radio show that he was only referring to Obama’s
record, not his candidacy. Obama accused Clinton of
distorting his statement, noting that the former president
failed to cite his closing caveat: that from where he stood,
the case hadn’t been made.
Again Obama refused to bite the race apple. But fac-
ing the prospect of race-baiting in his South Carolina
homestead where a major primary was approaching, and
in a state where half the Democratic voters were black,
James Clyburn, the highest-ranking black in Congress,
expressed disappointment and called on Clinton to tone
things down and “chill.” Clyburn insisted that Clinton
couldn’t campaign for his wife in a way that would
APRIL 4, 1968
234
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 234


--- PAGE 250 ---
“engender the kind of feelings that seem to be bubbling
up as a result of this . . . He is revered in many sections 
of the African-American community, and I think he can
afford to tone it down.”
Neither was Clyburn pleased with Hillary Clinton’s
comments to the Fox News Chanel suggesting that Presi-
dent Lyndon Johnson was more critical than Martin
Luther King in getting the Civil Rights Act made into
law. Clinton said that “I would point to the fact that Dr.
King’s dream began to be realized when President John-
son passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, when he was able
to get through Congress something that President
Kennedy was hopeful to do, the president before had not
even tried, but it took a president to get it done. That
dream became a reality, the power of that dream became
real in people’s lives because we had a president who said
we’re going to do it, and actually got it accomplished.”
Clinton’s comments were meant to counter Obama’s fre-
quent references to King and to assert the importance of
presidential leadership. House majority whip Clyburn said
in the New York Times:“We have to be very, very careful
about how we speak about that era in American politics.
It is one thing to run a campaign and be respectful of
everyone’s motives and actions, and it is something else 
to denigrate those. That bothered me a great deal.” 
Obama had refrained from speaking about race in the
campaign, but he couldn’t resist commenting on Clinton’s
remarks. “Senator Clinton made an unfortunate remark,
BLACK KENNEDY
235
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 235


--- PAGE 251 ---
an ill-advised remark, about King and I didn’t make the
statement. I haven’t remarked on it. And she, I think,
offended some folks who felt that somehow diminished
King’s role in bringing about the Civil Rights Act. She is
free to explain that. But the notion that somehow this is
our doing is ludicrous.”
Bill Clinton threw even more fuel on the racial flame
when he downplayed Obama’s huge victory in the South
Carolina primary and suggested it was a result of the
state’s black population and Obama’s large black follow-
ing. “Jesse Jackson won South Carolina in ’84 and ’88.
Jackson ran a good campaign. And Obama ran a good
campaign here.” Many black folk took the equation of
Jackson and Obama as a not-so-subtle attempt to ghetto-
ize Obama as a “black” candidate and undercut his trans-
racial appeal.
New York Timescolumnist Frank Rich argues that such
racial politics are a central feature of the Clinton camp’s
efforts to defeat Obama.
The campaign’s other most potent form of currency
remains its thick deck of race cards . . . In October
[2007], seven months after the two candidates’ dueling
church perorations in Selma, USA Today found Hillary
Clinton leading Mr. Obama among African-American
Democrats by a margin of 62 percent to 34 percent.
But once black voters met Mr. Obama and started to
gravitate toward him, Bill Clinton and the campaign’s
APRIL 4, 1968
236
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 236


--- PAGE 252 ---
other surrogates stopped caring about what African-
Americans thought. In an effort to scare off white
voters, Mr. Obama was ghettoized as a cocaine user 
(by the chief Clinton strategist, Mark Penn, among
others), “the black candidate” (as Clinton strategists
told the Associated Press) and Jesse Jackson redux (by
Mr. Clinton himself) . . . Meanwhile, the Clinton cam-
paign’s attempt to drive white voters away from Mr.
Obama by playing the race card has backfired. His
white vote tally rises every week. Though Mrs. Clinton
won California by almost 10 percentage points, among
whites she beat Mr. Obama by only 3 points.
With the exception of the dustup over Clinton’s com-
ments on Martin Luther King and Lyndon Baines Johnson,
Obama has steadfastly resolved to steer his campaign away
from the orbit of race. As a candidate for the presidency
who happens to be black—and here Obama’s accidental
blackness is a vital means to assure his appeal to all Amer-
icans—taking the racial high road is both intrinsically
rewarding and strategically necessary. If Obama is success-
fully painted into a racial corner as “the black candidate,”
he not only loses his effectiveness as a viable contender in
the mainstream, but he compromises the ability to uplift
black constituents. If Obama can’t get elected to help all
Americans—and while black Americans are key to his
election, blacks alone can’t elect him—he can’t get elected
to help any Americans, including black Americans. 
BLACK KENNEDY
237
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 237


--- PAGE 253 ---
Obama must sort through three models of leadership
in dealing with the issue of race. The first model of leader-
ship is one that transcends race. In one version of race tran-
scending leadership, key features of the racial situation are
suppressed. The nation’s racial past is largely ignored. Any
race conscious social remedies or political prescriptions are
strictly forbidden and negatively viewed. Although this
option is seductive, it is ultimately one that will not serve
Obama or the nation well. Such an approach is based on a
willful amnesia about race that is too steep a price to pay
in order to reach what is essentially a false racial peace, an
empty racial accord.
The second model is one that translates race. In this
model of leadership, all the significant features of the
social order are spoken in the language of race, are trans-
lated into the idiom of color. In this model, all social
forms and facts only make sense when they refer to race.
For instance, the problems of gender and class are denied
the right to sit on their own analytical bottoms, or to
occupy their own theoretical space. This model is too nar-
row because it reduces the complex social strata to its
racial dimensions, while other compelling features of the
social order are slighted, ignored, or erased. This model
compensates the failure to consider race with the equally
flawed approach of only considering race.
Finally, there is leadership that transforms race. In this
model, a compelling account of racial facts and history is
joined to an articulation of what race can and should be.
APRIL 4, 1968
238
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 238


--- PAGE 254 ---
This model offers Obama the greatest intellectual and
political freedom to explore the history of race while
transforming its meaning in the future. Race transforming
leadership does three good things: acknowledges racial
facts and history, challenges racial orthodoxies, and links
anti-racist struggle to other forms of political struggle.
Acknowledging the history of racial suffering and strife in
America is a vital necessity for all American politicians,
including Obama. It assures sufficient recognition of the
bitter struggles to overcome bigotry and to undo centuries
of structural oppression. 
But there is a need as well to challenge racial orthodox-
ies. For instance, the reluctance of the liberals and the left
to speak forthrightly about issues of value and virtue must
be criticized. Just because the right gets it wrong doesn’t
mean that the left should overlook the role of moral and
spiritual values in the social reconstruction of black
America. We have ceded this territory for far too long to
conservative interests that exploit narrow views of black
morality, especially in the attack on sexual minorities and
the young. On the other hand, race-transforming leaders
must cry out against vicious political attacks on poor
black communities and the resources needed to strengthen
their social standing. 
Finally, race-transforming leaders must accent the cen-
trality of race while denying the exclusivity of race. The
long and bitter history of race means that its effect on
American life should never be underplayed or ignored.
BLACK KENNEDY
239
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 239


--- PAGE 255 ---
But it must also be acknowledged that even issues of race
are shaped by factors like gender, class, sexuality, region,
and religion. Forging coalitions is critical to the political
behavior of race-transforming leaders, playing to Obama’s
strengths. In fact, Obama’s racial experiences may offer him
an edge in the national effort to overcome the poisonous
divisions that plague the American soul. His fascinating
mix of race and culture shows up in lively fashion—
including his love for the upper reaches of Abraham
Lincoln’s emancipating political vision, as well as his com-
passion for the black boys and girls stuck on the lowest
rung of the ladder of upward mobility. That he is aware 
of race without being its prisoner—that he is rooted in,
but not restricted by, his blackness—challenges orthodox-
ies and playbooks on all sides of the racial divide. But it
may also make him curiously effective in the pledge to
overcome our racial malaise and to restore our national
kinship.
Barack Obama has come closer than any figure in
recent history to obeying a direct call of the people to the
brutal and bloody fields of political mission. His visionary
response to that call gives great hope that he can galvanize
our nation with the payoff of his political rhetoric: a true
democracy fed by justice, one that balances liberty with
responsibility. He may be our best hope to tie together the
fraying strands of our political will into a powerful and
productive vision of national destiny, one for which Mar-
APRIL 4, 1968
240
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 240


--- PAGE 256 ---
tin Luther King, Jr., hoped and died. If King was Moses
who couldn’t get to the Promised Land with us, then
Jackson, Sharpton, and Obama—and Susan Taylor, Max-
ine Waters, Carolyn Cheek Kilpatrick, Marian Wright
Edelman, and many, many more—may be the Joshuas to
take us further still. Obama recognized the legacy of the
Joshua generation, and exhorted it to fulfill its obligation
to lead in a speech at Howard University’s convocation,
words that are fit for us all.
Most of you know that Moses was called by God to
lead his people to the Promised Land. And in the face
of a Pharaoh and his armies, across an unforgiving
desert and along the walls of an angry sea, he succeeded
in leading his people out of bondage in Egypt. He led
them through great dangers, and they got far enough
so that Moses could point the way towards freedom on
the far banks of the river Jordan. 
And yet, it was not in God’s plan to have Moses
cross the river. Instead He would call on Joshua to fin-
ish the work that Moses began. He would ask Joshua
to take his people that final distance. 
Everyone in this room stands on the shoulders of
many Moses. They are the courageous men and women
who marched and fought and bled for the rights and
freedoms we enjoy today. They have taken us many
miles over an impossible journey. 
BLACK KENNEDY
241
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 241


--- PAGE 257 ---
But you are members of the Joshua Generation.
And it is now up to you to finish the work that they
began. It is up to you to cross the river. 
When Joshua discovered the challenge he faced, 
he had his doubts and his worries. But the Lord told
Joshua not to fear. He said, “Be strong and have
courage, for I am with you wherever you go.” 
Those are the words I will leave you with today. Be
strong and have courage. Be strong and have courage
in the face of injustice. Be strong and have courage in
the face of prejudice and hatred. Be strong and have
courage in the face of joblessness and helplessness and
hopelessness. Be strong and have courage, in the face 
of our doubts and fears, in the face of skepticism, in 
the face of cynicism, in the face of a mighty river. Be
strong and have courage and let us cross over to that
Promised Land together. 
Perhaps even more than Joshua, Obama is like his bib-
lical namesake Barak, who is described in the New Testa-
ment (along with other judges) as one “who through faith
conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained
what was promised.” Obama has a real chance to embody
the stable, principled black political leadership that King
envisioned. And by administering justice and gaining
what has been promised, Obama has an authentic oppor-
tunity to fulfill the legacy of King, and of Jesse Jackson
too. Because King and Jackson fought bitter battles with
APRIL 4, 1968
242
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 242


--- PAGE 258 ---
ugly forces, Obama can gracefully walk through doors
kicked in by King and Jackson. As he walks through
those doors, Obama carries the legacy of his people even as
he seeks to serve the entire nation. There could hardly be a
more fitting tribute to King, and to the people and justice
he loved.
BLACK KENNEDY
243
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 243


--- PAGE 259 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 244
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 260 ---
AFTERWORD
Interview with Dr. King 
on His 80th Birthday
If Dr. King had lived, what might he say about what he
sees today? This is but a small piece of what I think he
might have thought about a few personal and social issues,
offered in the same spirit that he penned his letter to the
American church as the Apostle Paul. The occasion for 
the interview is a celebration of Dr. King’s 80th birthday,
which, of course, had he lived, would be nowhere near a
national holiday. 
QUESTION: Dr. King, how does it feel to turn 80 years old?
It’s such a milestone.
DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING: I must confess to you that I never
thought I’d make it to this age. During the most intense
moments of our struggle, there was a great deal of hatred
and danger directed at us. I personally faced constant
death threats. Many of our greatest leaders and most stal-
wart activists were brutally murdered. Medgar Evers was
245
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 245


--- PAGE 261 ---
shot down like an animal in Mississippi, and in the same
state, those three brave young civil rights workers were
viciously murdered. And one can’t forget the incredible
sacrifice that those four young girls made when they were
blown to premature martyrdom in the 16th Street Baptist
Church bombing in Birmingham, Alabama. Spike Lee’s
very fine documentary, Four Little Girls, captures the sense
of terror we all faced during those times, but also the dig-
nity and courage of the people too. 
As far back as 1956 I had to face the real possibility
that I would die. After all, my house was bombed during
the Montgomery bus boycott. When I look back on many
of the sermons and speeches that I gave during the sixties,
I can clearly see that I was trying to address our people’s
grief and suffering, and trying to inspire them to keep
going in the midst of the death and hatred we faced on a
daily basis. But to be honest, I was also trying to come 
to grips with my own mortality in a movement where it
seemed guaranteed that I would be made a sacrificial
lamb. But contrary to what some might have believed, I
had no martyr complex. I repeatedly stated that I wanted
to live as long as anybody, and so . . .
QUESTION: Well, that’s certainly borne out by a statement
you made in Montgomery, Alabama, in May of 1965,
where you expressed a great deal of frustration and anger
over the killing of Negroes while the government sat idly
by. You said that “when they kill Negroes and civil rights
APRIL 4, 1968
246
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 246


--- PAGE 262 ---
workers in Alabama, nothing is done about it. Under the
administration of Governor George Wallace alone 10 peo-
ple have been killed during civil rights demonstrations.”
Do you remember that statement?
KING: Absolutely, like it was yesterday. I also said, “What
we are saying now is that we are tired of this. Our lives are
too precious. We are saying to the State of Alabama, now
you’re not going to frighten us into submission. If you kill
one Negro, or one white ally, then you’re going to have to
kill ten, and if you kill ten, you’re going to have to kill
20, and if you kill 20, you’re going to have to kill 100,
and if you kill 100, then you’re going to have to kill a
thousand!”
QUESTION: But did you ever have a stronger sense you were
going to die than at other times? There’s famous newsreel
footage of you explaining in rather stark and dramatic
terms how you thought you were going to die one night
in Philadelphia, Mississippi. Could that be considered
such a moment? 
KING: Yes, it really can. There were policemen who were
preceding us as we marched, and they spotted several peo-
ple in trees ahead of us, ready to shoot us if they could get
us in their sights. I really just gave up. As I said then, I
wouldn’t say I was so afraid, as that I had yielded to the
real possibility of the inevitability of death. I really had
concluded that day in Philadelphia, Mississippi, that it
AFTERWORD
247
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 247


--- PAGE 263 ---
was all over. When I look back, I can find a kind of humor
in the situation that was awfully difficult to see then. But
we had stopped to speak and pray, and I gave a few words,
saying that the murderers of the three civil rights workers
who had gone to Mississippi to work, Chaney, Schwerner
and Goodman, were probably around us somewhere. And
all of a sudden, my speech was interrupted by a man
standing behind me who said, “You damn right, I’m right
behind you.” I just knew my life was over, because I could
tell that he wasn’t bluffing at all. And when it was time 
to pray, Ralph Abernathy said he kept his eyes open as he
spoke to God. We had a good chuckle about that later.
QUESTION: Some people who’ve heard it think that the
speech you gave on April 3rd, 1968, before an audience of
striking sanitation workers and their allies at Mason Tem-
ple in Memphis, Tennessee, contained a strong sense of
premonition of death. It’s not one of your better known
speeches, and the only reason I bring it up is because
scholars who’ve studied the civil rights movement and
your life suggest that it might have become one of your
best known speeches had you been killed that night, or
shortly afterward. In retrospect, it does tend to read as a
last will and testament. Did you think you would be mur-
dered soon after you delivered that speech?
KING: Well, as I’ve said, death was our constant companion
in the movement, and I was having an especially tough
time of it. The first demonstration on behalf of the strik-
APRIL 4, 1968
248
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 248


--- PAGE 264 ---
ing workers in Memphis in late March had turned violent,
and there was rioting; a young black man was shot and
killed. I was extremely depressed. Then the Poor People’s
Campaign was not going very well either. I was wearing
myself out, ruining my health, really, ripping and running
from one side of the country to the other trying to drum
up support for our mass mobilization in Washington,
D.C. My own SCLC board was against me, especially our
wonderful benefactor Marian Logan, the fiery and brilliant
wife of the renowned physician Arthur Logan, with whom
I had many heated disagreements about the direction of
our group in 1968. 
On top of all that, when I was flying into Memphis to
lead the march, the pilot announced, before we took off,
yet another bomb threat because I was flying on the plane.
Of course this kind of thing had by then become routine,
but I must say to you, the thought of being killed never
gets old or routine. There’s an insistent, and troubling,
freshness to each new threat, as if the possibility of being
snuffed out renews in one’s spirit a deep sense of one’s
fragility and finitude. I beat the feeling back, or at least 
I tried to, but when we landed in Memphis, there was a
horrible downpour, and tornadoes in the area had already
killed several people. The bleak weather seemed to match
my dampened spirit, and I retreated to the Lorraine motel
to get some rest, since I didn’t feel very well. I sent Ralph
over to the Mason Temple to speak in my place at the rally
that night. Ralph rang the room and insisted I get right
AFTERWORD
249
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 249


--- PAGE 265 ---
over because it was, how did he frame it, a Martin
moment. I got dressed as fast as I could and rushed over 
to Mason Temple. 
What you and the folk who were there that night
probably heard was my fatigue, my despair, my depres-
sion, my feeling out of sorts. All of that came gurgling to
the surface, I suppose, when I spoke. I can’t honestly say 
I had any more a sense of my impending end that night
than on many other nights when I felt that I could die 
at any moment because of the actions of our sick white
brothers. In fact, I was much more convinced of my death
in Philadelphia, Mississippi, in 1964 than on that night
in Memphis. By the way, it turns out that the man who
shouted his warning was Neshoba County Sherrif Rainey,
who was allegedly implicated in the murders of those
young men along with his deputy, Cecil Price. Sick broth-
ers indeed.
QUESTION: Since you’ve already mentioned it, can you speak
to us a bit about your depression? You were one of the
most famous black people ever to publicly acknowledge
that you’ve struggled with depression, a subject that’s not
often spoken about since mental health remains a big
taboo in black circles.
KING: Certainly. Although I know some who read this may
think I’m grossly exaggerating, I consider the announce-
ment of my struggles with depression nearly two decades
ago every bit as important in the psychological realm as
APRIL 4, 1968
250
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 250


--- PAGE 266 ---
breaking my silence about my opposition to the Vietnam
War in 1967 was in the political realm. I decided to break
my silence about my depression so that I could encourage
more of our people to own up to the enormous psychic
burden and emotional stress that we too often carry
around. And it can have a horrible impact on our overall
health. Black people have been shouldering the weight of
the world, and it tells on our physical and mental health. 
I figured that if I told the truth, perhaps a few others
might be heartened in their own struggles, and encour-
aged to confront what we now know is an illness that is
just as much biological and physical as anything else.
There should be no shame in addressing the profoundly
dispiriting emotions that sometimes seize us.
I began experiencing severe bouts of depression in
Montgomery during the bus boycott, when the pressures
and anxiety were building at such a fast pace, and I had 
to call on every spiritual resource I had. I remember once 
I was on the podium about to speak at a mass meeting,
when a wave of deep emotional suffering washed over me
so strongly that I couldn’t continue. My own ego and my
sense of male pride kicked in, and later, when folk started
saying I nearly passed out and had a small emotional
breakdown, I denied it, but I eventually confessed that it
was true. Of course that’s not something that’s easy to
admit for any of us, especially for men, but I felt I had to
tell the whole truth of my own battles with depression,
because I’d sought the same way out—through excessive
AFTERWORD
251
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 251


--- PAGE 267 ---
drinking and other habits of which I’m not proud—that
many others have taken. But it ultimately doesn’t work.
Oh, it may narcotize you for a while, but it doesn’t address
the underlying causes of depression, which range from the
chemistry of the brain, to deep psychological suffering
that comes from enduring different traumas, to the stress
and strain of our professions and personal lives.
Remember, I started in the movement as a very young
man of 26 years of age, and by the time I was in my early
30s, I’d already confronted a huge degree of pain and suf-
fering as a result of our push to destroy Jim Crow and
institutional racism in the south. When I look back, I see
it even invaded my language. I spoke in Chicago one
night of how tired I was. And I . . .
QUESTION: I don’t mean to interrupt you Dr. King, but it’s
very interesting that you mention that speech, because I
had pulled it out so I could quote some of its poignant
phrases to you, and ask you about them. Here are a few. 
“I don’t mind saying to Chicago or anybody, I’m tired of
marching for something that should have been mine at
birth. I don’t mind saying this to you this night . . . I’m
tired of the tensions surrounding the days. I don’t mind
saying to you tonight that I’m tired of living every day
under the threat of death . . . Yes, I’m tired of going to
jail; I’m tired of all of the surging murmur of life’s restless
sea.” I mean, those are remarkably direct and powerful
expressions of the troubling emotions you were con-
APRIL 4, 1968
252
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 252


--- PAGE 268 ---
fronting. The imagery of your suffering is simply
haunting.
KING: Yes, I suppose I felt, as sociologist Max Weber called
it, “world weary.” I think that as much as I was trying to
inspire the troops to keep pushing in the war to win
America’s bitter battle with itself over whether it would
do the right thing by Negroes—I mean black people; I
still revert back to the language of that era from time 
to time, it just sneaks up on me, the old ways, the old
phrases, just slip right in. But as I was saying, while try-
ing to lead our people in the fight for equality, I also
found myself fighting the gloominess of spirit that some-
times sunk me quite low. I had a number of physical and
psychological battles. 
First, I often had horrible hiccups when I got anxious
or depressed, and they simply wouldn’t go away—until,
miraculously enough, it was time for me to speak. Then I
could get up and deliver a speech that had no trace of a hic-
cup, but then, as soon as I was finished, they’d come right
back on me. I have no way of explaining it except to tell
you that, as I used to hear the old saints say, “God’s grace
is truly sufficient.” Then I’d overeat. Even though one of
my great sins, as I’ve always said, is eating good food,
especially soul food, when I was depressed I was nearly
eating myself into an early grave. It was quite unhealthy. 
I even remember Andy Young telling me once, “Martin, 
it looks like we might live through this revolution, and if
AFTERWORD
253
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 253


--- PAGE 269 ---
we’re going to be around, we might as well be healthy.”
But I kept piling my plate higher and higher, and as a
result, I became extremely overweight, and had to go on a
serious diet to get my weight under control, although I
still battle with it to this day.
From a psychological standpoint, I had such gloomy
days that sometimes I just couldn’t rouse myself out of
bed. A couple of my aides in the sixties—long before it
became even remotely acceptable to visit a therapist
among the masses of Americans, much less black folk—
strongly hinted that I needed to see a psychologist or a
psychiatrist. My mood swings were getting progressively
worse, except there wasn’t much of a bi-polar manic
depression going on, since I was stuck for very long peri-
ods in the depression side of that equation. I finally
sought out a very smart and compassionate therapist who
helped to guide me through the haze of mental injury to 
a healthy psychological state where I could come to grips
with my wounds and bruises and recover enough to be an
even more effective leader.
QUESTION: Wow, that’s truly amazing. But that’s not the
only thing you’ve bravely broken your silence about. You
also announced your support for the lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender community. You even spoke at a huge
rally they held in Washington, D.C., last year to oppose
amending the Constitution to ban gay marriage. What 
APRIL 4, 1968
254
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 254


--- PAGE 270 ---
led you to such an unpopular position, especially as an
ordained Baptist minister?
KING: Well I said a long time ago that injustice anywhere
is a threat to justice everywhere. I could not in good con-
science refuse to weigh in on such a gross injustice to a
precious group of God’s children, our lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual and transgender brothers and sisters. I find it abhor-
rent that President Bush would try to bully the country
into adopting a vicious and narrow view of the Constitu-
tion by trying to use it to define marriage in such a tradi-
tional and conservative fashion. This certainly reminded
me of those vicious white supremacists in the 50s and 60s
who used the law and religion—and racial customs and
cultural traditions—to justify their evil assaults on black
folk. Now the same reactionary forces are trying to deny
to sexual minorities the right to say “I do” as they see fit.
It strikes me as extremely hypocritical that conservatives,
who claim they want a limited government, want to
expand the power of the state to tell citizens what they
can do in their bedrooms. 
And then the religious side of this business is quite
disturbing to me as well. The same white evangelical
Christians who are crusading against the rights of gays
and lesbians are often descended, theologically speaking,
from the very Christians who opposed us during the hey-
day of the civil rights movement. They pointed in their
AFTERWORD
255
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 255


--- PAGE 271 ---
bibles to those passages that admonished the slave to obey
his master; they justified segregation and racial discrimi-
nation based on twisted readings of the bible and religious
history.
I’m afraid black Christians haven’t done much better.
The homophobia in black religious circles is so thick you
could cut it with a knife. I try to challenge black clergy
and laypeople alike with the message of Jesus’ love for all
people. There is no asterisk in the bible when Jesus bril-
liantly boils down the majestic sweep of the law and
prophets to two central commandments: to love God with
all of your heart, soul and mind, and the second one, to
love your neighbor as yourself. And many black Christians
seem to have no sense of either irony or history when they
trot out biblical justifications for why they are opposed to
homosexuality in the same manner conservative white
Christians used the bible against them. 
I’m ashamed to say that in the sixties I felt I had no
choice but to get rid of my trusted advisor Bayard Rustin
because of the vicious politics played by Adam Clayton
Powell. The powerful congressman had threatened to lie
and say that Rustin and I were lovers if I didn’t discourage
Bayard from leading a protest at the Democratic conven-
tion over the party’s failure to aggressively support civil
rights. It wasn’t one of my shining moments of standing
up for truth and righteousness. I let Adam bully me into
firing a man whose strategic brilliance was unquestion-
able, all because of the poisonous politics of homophobia.
APRIL 4, 1968
256
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 256


--- PAGE 272 ---
I have since seen the errors of my way, and I hope that we
as a people, and as a nation, can welcome our gay and les-
bian brothers and sisters in all aspects of our culture and
nation. 
QUESTION: Since we’re on the topic of the black church, do
you care to comment on the so-called “prosperity gospel”
movement?
KING: Quite frankly, the prosperity gospel movement is a
tragic development within the Christian church in gen-
eral, but especially for the black church. I’ve never roman-
ticized the black church; even during the height of our
movement in the sixties, we never had more than a small
percentage of its leadership involved. Most of the minis-
ters in the black church and their members, I’m sorry to
say, were bystanders, spectators and observers of our move-
ment—and sometimes, they were even critical or hostile
to our movement. There are a variety of reasons for such
actions; black people were deathly afraid of white suprem-
acists, and that’s quite understandable. Others were bitten
by the bug of otherworldly religiosity, and as I used to say
about the white church, they mouthed pious irrelevancies
and sanctimonious trivialities. I’m afraid the prosperity
gospel has taken this trend a step further into dangerous
ground. Whenever you reduce the gospel promise of
freedom and liberation from oppression, and make it
essentially about finding and exploiting wealth, you have
perverted the meaning and intent of Jesus. I realize those
AFTERWORD
257
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 257


--- PAGE 273 ---
are strong words, but that’s simply how strongly I feel
about the direction large quarters of the black church have
taken by adopting the prosperity gospel perspective.
The question we must relentlessly pursue in judging
the effectiveness of our religion is who are we helping and
how does this serve God to bring about the transformation
of the lives of the vulnerable and the forsaken. The carrot
of a payoff for service in the Kingdom may drive a great
many of our people to tithe or participate in the cloistered
rituals of sanctuary bound politics, but it won’t nudge
them to actively resist economic oppression or contribute
to the lives of the least fortunate. I’m terribly disturbed by
how much ground we’ve lost in the black church to this
brand of the gospel—and here I don’t think we can take
the metaphor lightly, because the gospel has been virtually
turned into a commodity, into a designer religion which
places being fashionable and trendy above the enduring
concerns of sacrificing for and fighting for the poorest
members of our community. The prosperity gospel move-
ment sells the gospel at a cost, and turns a fetish with cap-
italism into a full-blown religious experience. The high
priests of dollarism have muted the prophetic and revolu-
tionary accents of the black Christian message of libera-
tion and freedom and turned the sanctuary over to the
money changers that Jesus drove from the temple.
QUESTION: Wow, those are strong words from you Dr.
King. In light of your statement then, what do you make
APRIL 4, 1968
258
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 258


--- PAGE 274 ---
of the recent criticisms of prominent black figures of the
black poor?
KING: Just as I am disappointed by the prosperity gospel
movement, I’m equally disturbed by well-known black
people and other celebrities beating up on vulnerable poor
black folk. I have spent the bulk of my public career now
addressing the systematic exploitation of the poor all over
the world, and of course, concentrating on the American
poor, especially the black and brown poor. There are horri-
ble economic and social burdens that poor black people
carry. As I’ve said time and time again, the civil rights
movement did a great job of opening the doors for the
black elite and the black middle class. The civil rights act
and the voting rights act were marvelous pieces of legisla-
tion that enacted freedoms for black people who could
afford to take advantage of them. Now of course all black
people can, and ought to, vote. And all black people can
enjoy the freedom from Jim Crow restrictions, but if we’re
honest with ourselves, the civil rights movement in the
sixties primarily helped out those black people who could
take advantage of the new opportunities we helped to
make available. 
But the nagging persistence of poverty for one-fourth
of the black community is a staggering blight on the
record of our movement, most especially on the failure 
of our government and society to address their plight. It
does precious little good for prominent black people to
AFTERWORD
259
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 259


--- PAGE 275 ---
take aim at the black poor, especially when the problems
that make black people poor can’t be solved by the moral-
istic recommendations that some of these figures offer. For
example, as a Baptist preacher, I’m all for black folk of
every economic strata behaving properly. I have always
preached the discipline of nonviolence, which holds dear
the notion that folk must ethically purge themselves in
order to concentrate on redemptive social action. Good
personal behavior has always been an ally in the fight
against racism because of the punishing double standard
that the Negro, I’m sorry, that black folk, have faced when
trying to make public arguments about black advance-
ment. It was exceedingly hypocritical for many of our
white brothers and sisters to hold black people to a stan-
dard that they weren’t willing themselves to uphold. 
I’m afraid that the hypocrisy that many of our white
brothers and sisters have given up has been transferred on
to the upper black middle class, and the black elite. Too
many well-to-do-black folk hide behind the safe security
of class status and bourgeois values and look down their
noses at the unwashed black poor, and yet they—and
really I should say we—have moral shortcomings of our
own. So it simply does no good to divide the world by
class when examining the question of moral excellence; as
I said in an essay I wrote when I was barely nineteen, some
of the smartest white people during the height of Jim
Crow were also the most racist. And some of the most
well-to-do black folk are also some of the most morally
APRIL 4, 1968
260
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 260


--- PAGE 276 ---
judgmental and, quite frankly, some of the most hypocrit-
ical members of our race. 
And listen, I’m not trying to be either hostile to the
black elite, or celebratory of factions of the black poor who
struggle with horrible habits. But the crushing circum-
stances of poverty that lead to all manner of social ills have
barely been scoffed at, let alone strongly resisted or criti-
cized, by the black elite. If I saw the same people who are
harshly critical of the black poor make equally harsh state-
ments about the social barriers that prevent the black poor
from advancing—or if I saw them just as vigorously take
to task the white brothers and sisters whose personal and
corporate interests are masked behind the maintenance of
black poverty and social and economic inequality—then
I’d be much more inclined to see their judgment of the
black poor as moral and intellectual consistency. As it
stands now, their words ring rather hollow when they have
not taken the time to critically analyze the complex fac-
tors that shape human behavior and that leave the poor
vulnerable the world over.
QUESTION: One of the major criticisms of the black poor
made by the black elite, and the black middle-class, and
even a lot of working class black people, is that the family
structure of the black poor, especially soaring rates of teen
pregnancy leading to single female headed households,
which the poor themselves can control, makes them more
vulnerable to the social ills they confront.
AFTERWORD
261
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 261


--- PAGE 277 ---
KING: There’s little doubt that we have to do a better job at
family planning among the poor. I made this argument in
an address that Mrs. King delivered for me on May 5,
1965, at the National Conference on Family Planning.
Margaret Sanger, as you know, was at one time quite con-
troversial because she went up against hostile cultural
forces that opposed family planning as the instrument of
evil, especially when it recommended birth control and
later, when women gained the right of choice around the
volatile issue of abortion. We must surely encourage the
poor to do a better job of taking care of the homestead,
and of making healthy decisions that don’t unduly tax
their families or overburden their resources.
But neither can I pretend that the major burden for the
plight of the black family falls on the poor themselves.
What we have done is basically moralize what is essen-
tially an economic and political question. By demonizing
the black poor as somehow ethically incompetent in the
choices they make, we relieve the state of its responsibili-
ties toward the poor. We make little black girls the worst
offenders of the morals of society—though that is hardly
the case when we examine the malfeasance that happens at
the top levels of this society and government every day—
and let off the hook all those who perpetuate crimes
against the poor in the name of fiscal conservatism, family
values and social virtue. The harsh and punitive social
policies of Republican administrations over the last two
APRIL 4, 1968
262
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 262


--- PAGE 278 ---
decades has done more to harm the black poor family than
anything any “Shaniqua” could do to harm herself. 
I’m not saying that poor black girls don’t need to be
taught a more productive and healthy way to conduct
themselves, but I’m also saying that policies of our govern-
ment bear an even greater burden in the responsibility
equation. And I shouldn’t just speak of Republican admin-
istrations. President Bill Clinton did an awful thing when
he signed the legislation for welfare reform. I personally
lobbied him to think very carefully while weighing the
competing interests of a conservative hegemony that was
exercising tremendous political influence and the needs of
the black poor who hardly had advocates in high places.
Again, this is why I am personally depressed that the black
elite work so vigilantly against the black poor in the name
of “cleaning up” and “policing” our community morally,
when they did little to nothing with their celebrity, fame
and influence to lobby government and political leaders to
do the right thing by the black poor. In that sense, the
black elite who remained silent while the black poor were
led to the political slaughter have blood on our hands too.
And in the end, let’s be even more honest: there are few
of us who can stand up in public and say we’ve never made
a mistake, or done the wrong thing in a time of passion or
desperation, so we should go just a bit easier on the poor
who have even less of a social cushion and cultural comfort
to absorb their mistakes.
AFTERWORD
263
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 263


--- PAGE 279 ---
QUESTION: Speaking of the conservative hegemony, what do
you make of this war in Iraq and the so-called war on ter-
ror that the president has been prosecuting? 
KING: It seems to me that we’re heading way in the wrong
direction. Let me say immediately and unequivocally that
I have been saddened by the way stigma has been heaped
on the heads of our Muslim brothers and sisters around
the world, but especially in our country. While I stand
opposed to any religious expression or justification of vio-
lence, I know that most brothers and sisters who follow
Islam want peace, and love truth and justice just as much
as the rest of us. I also know that the terrorists that we
were concerned about for much of our history as a people
bowed their knees to Jesus, not Allah. They burned the
religious symbol of the cross on our lawns, and into the
American collective unconscious. They dressed in cowards’
garb when they donned white sheets to purify their das-
tardly and evil deeds. They hid behind God’s name to
wreak havoc and terror on black people through lynching,
castration, rape and social and political intimidation. So
when I think of terror, I don’t think first of Al Qaeda; I
think of the Ku Klux Klan and other white hate groups
that have perverted and recruited a warped Christian
theology in the service of truth. 
As for the war in Iraq, I think it is on par with Viet-
nam as a tragic misuse of American might and a misled
campaign to end terror when we have merely helped light
APRIL 4, 1968
264
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 264


--- PAGE 280 ---
a torch for terror in the minds and hearts of millions who
perceive us as unjust in our exercise of power. When I
called America the greatest purveyor of violence in the
world in the sixties because of our involvement in Viet-
nam, I was accused of being unpatriotic. The rest of the
country eventually caught up to my stance on that issue,
it’s safe to say. But the seeds of violence and empire we
then sowed halfway cross the world have germinated in
the soil of people in the Middle East who have felt for a
long time the pressures of American empire. Let me be
clear: I do not at all condone the terrorist activity of any
group, for any reason, under any circumstances, even as 
I understand a people’s or country’s desperation to be
released from the yoke of visible and invisible oppressions.
If America is going to successfully fight terror, it must do
what black folk who were fighting terror in the sixties
did: we purged ourselves morally; we examined our own
habits to make sure we weren’t contributing unnecessarily
to violence; we sought divine leadership in our pursuit of
truth and justice; and we appealed to the consciences of
our oppressors, while refusing to demonize them in the
process of demanding fair treatment before the law. Amer-
ica is dealing with a dangerous threat to her borders, but
she must never capitulate to blind violence and wholesale
demonizing of people who have felt the crushing blows of
the despotic American will across time. Since most Amer-
icans are ignorant of the tragic consequences of our foreign
policy, the hatred we face as a nation comes as a surprise.
AFTERWORD
265
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 265


--- PAGE 281 ---
But in fighting terror, we must also fight the impulse to
be self-righteous and arrogant; we should practice a bit
more humility, which might go a far longer distance in
getting the sort of justice and balance and security we
need—and that we need to guarantee for others as well.
QUESTION: I know we’re running out of time, but your
quick take on three subjects: hip hop, Barack and Oprah!
KING: My goodness, what a magnificent trio of issues. Of
course, I am quite critical of the violence and misogyny at
the heart of so much rap music. I oppose violence in all
forms, and I can’t offer rap music a pass because it’s made
by black youth, mostly in our urban centers. But the terri-
ble pain I face in listening to the misogyny in rap is that
it is the child of our neglect as older, wiser black people. 
I remember once when a young lady was brought to the
SCLC, complaining of being fairly ravaged by a staffer,
and the men gathered there, including me, I’m ashamed
to say, were cruelly insensitive to her complaints. We men
have been nurtured in a male supremacist society where
the needs and claims of women are at best marginal. I was
a chauvinist to my wife for many, many years, and it caused
a great deal of strain in our relationship, until I had to
finally admit that my ways had to be reformed. It was a
difficult process, and I suppose you could say I’m a recov-
ering male supremacist. It’s hard to see yourself as an
oppressor on gender when you’ve been oppressed by race,
but it’s a truth we’ve got to face nonetheless. 
APRIL 4, 1968
266
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 266


--- PAGE 282 ---
That’s not to say I don’t like rap music; in fact, aside
from its vicious sexism and misogyny—and these are
words we had no idea about when we fought racism in the
sixties—I like the powerful stories and incredible lyrical
genius of some of the young folk in rap music. I think at
their best they have done what the black pulpit has too
many times relinquished doing: telling the ugly truth
about painful realities that demand brutal honesty in cor-
recting. And if we can forgive sexist, lecherous preachers
for their sexual sins—and you can include me in that
number, unfortunately—then we can certainly hold our
youth accountable while not doing it from a vague,
abstract sense of superior morality that won’t stand up
under even the slightest scrutiny.
As for Barack Obama, I think he’s a wonder of nature. 
I said in the sixties that we hadn’t yet produced in black
circles a political personality that had the magnetism and
respect of John F. Kennedy. I think we may have found
that person in Senator Obama. He is incredibly well-
prepared, very bright, very thoughtful, and not full of
bombast—though by nature, every politician has to brag
about what he or she has done, or will do, to lead the
country. The thought of having such a worthy person in
the highest office is simply wonderful. And the sheer
charisma and magnetism that he brings revives a sense of
expectation and hope in the electorate, and that’s a stun-
ning thing to witness coming from a black man whose
people in the South couldn’t even vote for the most part
AFTERWORD
267
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 267


--- PAGE 283 ---
until the mid-sixties. I do caution people, however, in
expecting too much from Senator Obama should he
become president. A black president won’t stop black
suffering, but he can use his bully pulpit to speak out on
social issues that matter to us, and he can help enact legis-
lation that will address our most pressing needs—like
universal healthcare, tax cuts for the poorest and neediest,
not the richest Americans, and jobs and boosted wages for
the working class and poor. But the need for prophets
outside the system won’t disappear with a black president.
We must hold him accountable just as we would any 
other president. Now that would be a sign of real racial
progress: to witness a black president engaged in his
duties while facing serious scrutiny by prophetic black
voices in the culture. 
Finally, I am the world’s biggest fan of Oprah Winfrey.
I think she is a stunning figure, a woman who best repre-
sents our people’s magnificent spiritual genius. Oprah’s
show, and her sparkling, luminous presence in the world,
has done more good than a million sermons and acts of
Congress. Her will to better the American people by offer-
ing an alternative to smut media is remarkable and coura-
geous. Her support for the black poor in this country
when it wasn’t even popular has been stirring. Her loving
embrace of our brothers and sisters in Africa has been
nothing short of miraculous. She is the symbol of our will
to survival through the word and spirit translated into
therapeutic doses of information and transformed moral
APRIL 4, 1968
268
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 268


--- PAGE 284 ---
habits that provide her the most powerful pulpit in the
world today. I applaud her sterling and impeccable sense
of conscience, and her refusal to do anything to tarnish the
black moral treasury and integrity with which she has
been endowed. She has proved that white America can
listen to a black voice that resonates with pure love and
extraordinary compassion for the ordinary human being. 
I must say, I love Oprah.
AFTERWORD
269
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 269


--- PAGE 285 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 270
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 286 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In a book about the impact of death, it is only natural to
think of those who have passed on, and foremost in my
mind is my beloved late editor Liz Maguire, whom I miss
dearly. I’d like to thank the good folk at Basic Civitas,
including David Steinberger and John Sherer for seeing
this book through to completion, and to Chris Greenberg
for his great work over the years, and at the beginning of
this book. I reserve special thanks for Amy Scheibe, a
supremely gifted editor, stylist, and intellectual whose
contributions made this book much better. I also have spe-
cial thanks for Christine Marra, for yet another great job
under impossible conditions—delivered with her trade-
mark grace and calm under pressure. Without Amy and
Christine this book wouldn’t be in your hands right now.
I also thank the wonderful folk at the Martin Luther
King, Jr., Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Inc.
King Library and Archives in Atlanta, including the
generous president and CEO Isaac Newton Farris, who
graciously accommodated my last minute request and
opened to me the treasure trove of the King Papers. I’m
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 271


--- PAGE 287 ---
thankful as well to Cynthia Patterson Lewis, the superb
archivist who along with Elaine Hall led me through the
papers to find what I needed with a beautiful smile and a
lovely spirit.
I am grateful to my colleagues at Georgetown, my new
academic home, especially President John DeGioia and
Provost James O’Donnell, two shining stars in the aca-
demic firmament whose leadership is uplifting. And I
thank Derreck Brown for his incredibly expert help and
his efficient handling of business. I also thank Kirby Blem
and Harrison Lyle Beacher for their wonderful help. I’d
also like to thank the fine students at Georgetown who
helped with library research of articles and books, includ-
ing Michael Moore (who graciously and efficiently coordi-
nated his fellow students) and Ashley Bowen, Graham
Eng-Wilmot, Pamela Nwaoko, Kate Morrissey, Lisa
McDowell (who provided crucial assistance), LiAnna
Davis, Gillian Brooks, and Monica Anderson. 
I thank as usual my cadre of friends who offer love,
wisdom and insight: Susan “Queen” Taylor and Khephra
“Smooth” Burns; Stan and Barbara Perkins; Andriette and
Khaska; Yolanda and Horace (thanks for picking up my
American Book Award and delivering my remarks, and for
all that great music); to Linda Johnson Rice and Mel Farr;
Michelle Miller and Marc Morial; Karen Lloyd; and of
course to Soyini. 
I’m grateful as always to my wonderful family—my
mother Addie Mae Dyson, and my brothers Anthony,
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
272
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 272


--- PAGE 288 ---
Everett, Gregory and Brian; my cousin Oscar Madison;
and my children, Michael II, Cory and Maisha (God bless
your child), and Mwata. And finally, to Rev. Marcia Louise
Dyson for her brilliant mind, and for her dedicated service
to humanity. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
273
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 273


--- PAGE 289 ---
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 274
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 290 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
The majority of quotes from Martin Luther King in this book
come from the papers of Dr. King housed in the Martin Luther
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Inc. King Library
and Archives in Atlanta; collections of his sermons derived
from the monumental Martin Luther King, Jr., Papers Project
at Stanford University and the King Center in Atlanta, edited
by Clayborne Carson; the major single volume collection of his
writings, edited by James Washington; and major biographical
and intellectual studies of King. These include Clayborne Car-
son, editor, A Knock at Midnight: Inspiration from the Great Ser-
mons of Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. (New York: Warner
Books, 1998) and A Call to Conscience: The Landmark Speeches of
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.(New York: Warner Books, 2001);
James M. Washington, editor, A Testament of Hope: The Essential
Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr.(New York:
HarperCollins, 1986) and I Have a Dream: Writings and Speeches
That Changed the World (New York: HarperCollins, 1992);
David Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (New York: William
Morrow, 1986); Taylor Branch’s trilogy, Parting the W aters:
America in the King Years, 1954–63 (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1988); Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years,
275
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 275


--- PAGE 291 ---
1963–65 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998), and At
Canaan’s Edge: America in the King Years, 1965–68(New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2006); and Michael Eric Dyson, I May Not
Get There with You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr.(New York:
Free Press, 2000).
Following are the bibliographical sources of quotes and sta-
tistics and references for each chapter.
CHAPTER 1
“King Urges Black Muslims Stand Together in Peace,” Chicago
Defender, March 1, 1965, pp. 1, 10.
Coretta Scott King, My Life with Martin Luther King, Jr. (New
York: Holt, Rinehart, 1969).
CHAPTER 2
I coined the term automortology from a combination of
autothanatography, used by theorists like Jacques Derrida,
Louis Marin, and Maurice Blanchot; autothanatology, used by
Ivan Callus; and automortography, used by Thomas H. Kane.
Interestingly, Kane, neither in his article on Martin Luther
King, Jr., nor in the dissertation from which it is drawn, cites
none of the literature on autothanatology/autothanatography,
even though it clearly establishes an intellectual precedent for
his conception of automortography. I prefer automortology
rather than automortography when discussing King since it
underscores the spoken word and not the written text, a differ-
ence of ology (as in logos, or word, or speech) and graphy (writ-
ing). See Jacques Derrida, The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
276
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 276


--- PAGE 292 ---
and Beyond, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: University of Chicago,
1986); Ivan Callus, “(Auto)Thanatography or (Auto)Thanatol-
ogy? Mark C. Taylor, Simon Critchley and the Writing of the
Dead,” Forum for Modern Language Studies 41, no. 4 (2005):
427–438; and Thomas H. Kane, “Mourning the Promised
Land: Martin Luther King Jr.’s Automortography and the
National Civil Rights Museum,” American Literature 76, no. 3
(September 2004), and his dissertation, Last Acts: Automortogra-
phy and the Cultural Performance of Death in the United States,
1968–2001, University of Virginia, 2003.
John Murphy, “Inventing Authority: Bill Clinton, Martin
Luther King, Jr., and the Orchestration of Rhetorical
Traditions,” Quarterly Journal of Speech83, no. 1 (February
1997): 71–89.
Thomas Rosteck, “Narrative in Martin Luther King’s I’ve Been
to the Mountaintop,” The Southern Communication Journal 58
(Fall 1992): 1.
CHAPTER 3
William Brink and Louis Harris, Black and White: A Study of
U.S. Racial Attitudes Today (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1966).
Michael Eric Dyson, Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac
Shakur (New York: Basic Civitas, 2001).
Christine Harold and Kevin Michael DeLuca, “Behold the
Corpse: Violent Images and the Case of Emmett Till,”
Rhetoric & Public Affairs 8, no. 2 (2005): 263–286.
Rodney T. Hartnett and Carol U. Libby, “Agreement with
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
277
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 277


--- PAGE 293 ---
Views of Martin Luther King, Jr. before and after His
Assassination,” Phylon 33, no. 1 (1st Qtr. 1972): 79–87.
C. Richard Hofstetter, “Political Disengagement and the Death
of Martin Luther King,” The Public Opinion Quarterly 33, no.
2 (Summer 1969): 174–179.
James Peterson, “‘Dead Prezence’: Money and Mortal Themes
in Hip Hop Culture,” Callaloo 29, no. 3 (2006): 895–909.
Leonard Shengold, Soul Murder: The Effects of Childhood Abuse
and Deprivation (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989).
Andrew Young, An Easy Burden: The Civil Rights Movement and
the Transformation of America (New York: HarperCollins,
1996).
CHAPTER 4
Bureau of Justice Statistics, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/
pdf/bvvc.pdf.
William Jefferson Clinton, “Memphis Church of God in Christ
Church Address,” http://www.americanrhetoric.com/
speeches/wjclintonmemphis.htm.
Department of Justice Statistics, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/
bjs/pub/pdf/pjim06.pdf.
Economic Mobility of Black and White Families, http://www.
economicmobility.org/assets/pdfs/EMP_Black_White_
Families.pdf.
PEW-Economic Mobility Project, http//www.economic
mobility.org/reports_and_research/Economic%20Mobility
%20Project%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf.
Amaad Rivera, Brenda Cotto-Escalera, Anisha Desai, Jeannette
Huezo, and Dedrick Muhammad (Institute for Policy
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
278
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 278


--- PAGE 294 ---
Studies), Foreclosed: State of the Dream 2008, http://www.
faireconomy.org/files/pdf/StateOfDream_01_16_08_Web.
pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau Current Population Report, “Income,
Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United
States 2006,” http://www.census.gov/prod/2007pubs/
p60-233.pdf.
——, http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/race/
ppl-186.html.
——, http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/race/black/
ppl-186/tab13a.html.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06/tables_
1.asp#Ch1Sub5. 
——, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06/tables/dt06_
019.asp?referrer=list.
United States Sentencing Committee 2007, http://www.ussc.
gov/r_congress/cocaine2007.pdf.
CHAPTER 5
Bill Clinton, My Life (New York: Knopf, 2004).
Herbert Gutman, The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom,
1750–1925 (New York: Pantheon, 1976).
CHAPTER 6
Ralph David Abernathy, And the W alls Came Tumbling Down: An
Autobiography (New York: Harper & Row, 1989).
Michael K. Honey, Going Down Jericho Road: The Memphis Strike,
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
279
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 279


--- PAGE 295 ---
Martin Luther King’s Last Campaign(New York: Norton,
2007).
Thomas F. Jackson, From Civil Rights to Human Rights: Martin
Luther King, Jr., and the Struggle for Economic Justice
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007).
CHAPTER 7
John Lewis, W alking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998).
Richard Lischer, The Preacher King: Martin Luther King, Jr. and
the Word that Moved America (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995).
CHAPTER 8
Marshall Frady, Jesse: The Life and Pilgrimage of Jesse Jackson
(New York: Random House, 1996).
Jesse Jackson, Roger D. Hatch, and Frank E. Watkins, Straight
from the Heart (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1987).
Jesse Jackson and Charles Murray, “What Does the Government
Owe the Poor? Welfare, Race, and the Wealth of a Nation,”
Harper’s Magazine,April 1986.
Arthur Kretchmer, “Jesse Jackson: A Candid Conversation with
the Fiery Heir Apparent to Martin Luther King,” Playboy,
November 1969.
Richard Levine, “Jesse Jackson: Heir to Dr. King?” Harper’s
Magazine, March 1969.
Barbara Reynolds, Jesse Jackson: America’s David (Washington,
D.C.: JFJ Associates, 1985 [1975]).
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
280
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 280


--- PAGE 296 ---
John Alfred Williams, The King God Didn’t Save: Reflections on
the Life and Death of Martin Luther King, Jr. (New York:
Coward-McCann, Inc., 1970).
CHAPTER 9
Wayne Barrett, “What Al Did to Jesse: Sharpton and Jackson:
‘They were kind of the best of enemies,’” Village Voice,
December 7, 2004.
——, “On a New High, Sharpton Hits a New Low: TV’s
Democratic minister of ‘moral’ values take a hypocritical
plunge,” Village Voice,December 7, 2004.
Robin D. G. Kelley, Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black
Working Class (New York: Free Press, 1994).
Al Sharpton with Karen Hunter, Al on America (New York:
Kensington Books, 2002).
Al Sharpton and Anthony Walton, “Go and Tell Pharaoh”: The
Autobiography of the Reverend Al Sharpton (New York:
Doubleday, 1996).
Clarence Taylor, Black Religious Intellectuals: The Fight for
Equality from Jim Crow to the Twenty-First Century (New
York: Routledge, 2002).
CHAPTER 10
Barack Obama, Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and
Inheritance (New York: Crown, 1995).
——,  The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American
Dream (New York: Crown, 2006).
Remarks of Senator Barack Obama, Howard University
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
281
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 281


--- PAGE 297 ---
Convocation, Washington, D.C., September 28, 2007,
http://www.barackobama.com/2007/09/28/remarks_of_
senator_barack_obam_26.php.
Frank Rich, “Next Up for the Democrats: Civil War,” New York
Times, February 10, 2008.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
282
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 282


--- PAGE 298 ---
INDEX
283
Abernathy, Ralph
assassination day lunch, 121–122
attack on, 7
death threats, 7, 248
Jackson relationship, 176–177
King relationship, 189
King’s assassination, 43–44, 171,
174
King’s funeral, 173
Poor People’s March, 168
return to Memphis/speech,
32–34, 43, 249–250
role of, 32–34, 43
style of, 191
Adam, Yolanda, 137
Adler, Alfred, 26
Ailey, Alvin, 132
Ali, Muhammad, 132–133, 191
Allen, Ivan, 59
Anderson, Marian, 132
Angelou, Maya, 132
Aristophanes, 34–35
Aristotle, 34–35, 42, 46
Armstrong, Louis, 136
Baker, Ella, 147, 148
Baldwin, James, 132
Barak, 243
Barker, Justin, 113–114
Barth, Karl, 209–210
Basquiat, Jean-Michel, 133
Battle, Kathleen, 132
Belafonte, Harry, 134, 155
Bell, Mychal, 114
Berry, Chuck, 136
Berry, Halle, 134
Bevel, James
King’s assassination, 172
Poor People’s March, 167–168
style of, 166–167
Beyonce, 137
Blanchard, Terrance, 136
Bland, Bobby Blue, 135
Branch, Ben
King’s assassination, 171–172
King’s Memphis speech, 45, 171
Brawley, Tawana, 207–208, 209
Brooks, Gwendolyn, 132
Brown, H. Rap, 167
Brown, James
Sharpton relationship, 203,
210–212, 216–217
talents of, 137
Bryant, Carolyn, 64
Bunche, Ralph, 162
Bush, George H.W ., 211, 226
Bush, George W .
“Manifest Destiny” of, 225–226
marriage definition of, 255
Byas, Don, 135
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 283


--- PAGE 299 ---
Carmichael, Stokely
King’s assassination, 48–49
meeting with King, 167
white fears and, 53–54
Catlett, Elizabeth, 133
Cayton, 228
Chaney, James, 248
Charles, Ray, 137
Christian, Charlie, 135
Chuck D, 137
Clark, Jim, 154
Clark, Septima, 8
Clinton, Hillary
husband campaigning for, 80–81,
233–235, 237
on King/Johnson, 235–236,
237–238
Clinton, William J.
as “America’s first black
president,” 80
black economy, 80
Clinton-as-King speech, 79, 80,
81–83, 86
crime bill, 87–88
Elders and, 198–199
impeachment, 198
Jackson and, 217–218
welfare reform legislation, 86–87,
109, 263
wife’s presidential campaign,
80–81, 233–235, 237
Clyburn, James, 234–235, 236
Coleman, Deborah, 135
Collins, Addie Mae, 19
Collins, Dorothy, 188
Coltrane, John, 136
Common, 137
Connor, Bull, 153, 159–160
Cooke, Sam, 48, 137
Coppola, Francis Ford, 70
Cosby, Bill, 134–135
Cotton, Dorothy, 22
Cox, Courtland, 167
Cray, Robert, 135
Curry, Izola Ware, 7, 37
Dandridge, Dorothy, 134
Davis, Miles, 136
Davis, Ossie, 20
Davis Jr., Sammy, 132
Dean, James, 71
DeLuca, Kevin Michael, 62, 64–65
Diallo, Amadou, 208
Dives, 127
Doley Jr., Harold, 218
Drake, 228
Drew Deenie, 22
Du Bois, W .E.B., 194
Edelman, Marian Wright, 120, 241
Elders, Joycelyn, 198–199
Ellington, Duke, 136
Ellison, Ralph, 131–132
Euripides, 34–35
Evers, Medgar
assassination of, 66, 245–246
work of, 66
Evers, Myrlie, 66
Fama, Joseph, 206
Fitzgerald, Ella, 136
Franklin, Aretha, 137
Franklin, Kirk, 137
Franklin, Rev. C.L., 135
Freire, Paulo, 209–210
Freud, 65, 72
Friedman, Milton, 122
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 122
Garvey, Marcus/wife, 202
INDEX
284
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 284


--- PAGE 300 ---
Gaye, Marvin, 137
Geotz, Bernhard, 204
Gillespie, Dizzy, 135
Giovanni, Nikki, 132
Glover, Savion, 132
Goldberg, Whoopi, 132
Goodman, Andrew, 248
Griffith, Michael, 205–206
Gutman, Herbert, 106, 107–108
Halberstam, David, 51, 185
Haley, Alex, 13, 138–141
Harold, Christine, 62, 64–65
Hathaway, Donny, 137
Hawkins, Yusuf, 206
Hines, Gregory, 132
Holliday, Billie, 61, 136
Hoover, J. Edgar
King and, 58–60
not warning/protecting King, 60
Houston, Whitney, 137
Howlin’ Wolf, 135
Ibsen, Henrik, 71
Jackson, Charles, 176
Jackson, Jesse
accomplishments (summary),
196–197
becoming King’s heir, 149,
169–170, 172–174, 179–183,
188–189
birth/parents, 174–175
childhood/education, 174–176,
192
Clinton presidential run and, 236,
237
criticism of, 197, 198, 217
joining SCLC, 176–177
Joshua Generation, 241, 242–243
King relationship, 176–177,
178–179, 182–184, 186–187,
193
King’s assassination, 43–44,
171–174, 179–180, 188
King’s funeral, 173
King’s “Promised Land” speech,
43, 45
King’s rebuke of, 169–170,
188–189
National Rainbow Coalition, 
196
Operation Breadbasket, 177, 187,
191
Poor People’s March, 167–169
presidential runs, 196, 218, 236,
237
rise/talents of, 187–196
Sharpton relationship, 201–202,
209, 213, 214–221
style of, 166–167, 177–178,
189–192
Jackson, Jimmie Lee, 21
Jackson, Mahalia, 137, 202, 214
Jackson, Noah, 176
Jackson, Rev. Joseph H., 161
James (disciple), 28–29
Jamison, Judith, 132
Jay-Z, 70, 137
Jesus, 10, 16, 28–29, 40, 127, 258
John (disciple), 28–29
Johnson, Lyndon Baines
civil rights/poverty and, 163
Hillary Clinton on, 235, 
237–238
interactions with King, 15, 163,
217
King’s protection request, 15
as murder target, 59
Vietnam War, 163
INDEX
285
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 285


--- PAGE 301 ---
Jones, Edward P ., 132
Jones, Rev. William Augustus, 202,
209–210
Jones, Solomon, 172
Jordan, Michael, 133
Katzenbach, Attorney General, 14
Kennedy, Bobby, 59
Kennedy, John F.
assassination, 21–22
civil rights act and, 235
interactions with King, 162–163
Kilpatrick, Carolyn Cheek, 241
King, A.D., 4
King, B.B., 135
King, Coretta
criticism of, 156
Hoover and, 59
house bombings, 6
housing and, 156
husband’s death’s fears, 22
Jackson and, 218
speech of, 262
King, Yolanda, 6
King Jr., Martin Luther
“80th birthday interview,”
245–269
assassination day lunch, 121–122
background, 4–5, 119, 158, 175,
184, 190
Bill Clinton’s policies/views and,
86–88
black church responsibilities,
126–128, 129
on black families, 105–106
black middle class
responsibilities, 124–126,
127–128
on Black Nationalist groups, 68
charity vs. justice, 119–121
childhood, 4–5
criticism of aides/staff, 167–169
depression, 15–17, 21–22, 25,
30, 31, 32, 250–254
education of, 5–6, 192
on educational inequality,
104–105
father, 5, 156
flaws’ importance, 199
grandmother and, 4, 5
guilt and, 189
hiccups, 253
Hillary Clinton on, 235–236,
237–238
honors/recognition, 53–54
Hoover/FBI and, 58–60
humility and, 156–158,
184–186, 188
jealousy/criticism of, 147, 148,
152–153, 155–156, 158–159,
160–162, 229
leadership (black) vision of,
149–156, 163–165, 166,
208–209, 221
leadership description, 165–167
leadership vision and Obama,
149, 223, 241, 243
Memphis sanitation workers,
31–32, 36, 37, 39–40, 121,
248, 249
Moynihan’s report, 105–106
Negro self-worth, 20–21, 73
nonviolence and, 8–9, 31–32,
48–49, 68, 86, 87, 154–155,
162, 167
Poor People’s March, 32,
120–121, 154, 155, 167–168,
249
posthumous image/legacy, 54–58,
74–75, 145–146
INDEX
286
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 286


--- PAGE 302 ---
poverty issues and, 54, 58, 74, 80,
85, 86, 87–90, 119–128, 130,
141–142
strategy, 154–155
suicide attempts, 4
Vietnam War, 54, 58, 162, 163,
185–186, 217, 251, 265
King Jr., Martin Luther/assassination
black grief/reactions, 48–50, 51,
53
college governing boards survey
and, 52–53
description, 44, 45–46
Newsweek-Harris survey, 49–50
rioting following, 48–49
white message with, 66–67
white reactions, 50, 51, 52–54
King Jr., Martin Luther/death
thoughts
automortology, 25–31
automortology benefits, 26,
29–30, 31
automortology/“Promised Land”
speech, 31, 34–43, 45, 46–48
consolation and, 22
“Drum Major Instinct,” 26–27,
28, 186, 218
funeral wishes, 28–29, 30
prevalence of, 3, 6–7, 10–23
King Jr., Martin Luther/death
threats
1962 attack, 8–9
Birmingham church bombing
and, 19
bombing of home, 6–7, 9–10,
246
FBI not warning, 59–60
fear/fearlessness and, 10–17
“interview,” 245–250
intimidation and, 7–8
prevalence of, 9–12, 13–18
protection and, 15, 60
stabbing, 7, 38
See also King Jr., Martin
Luther/assassination
King Jr., Martin Luther/faith
becoming minister, 6
kitchen encounter with God, 11
“on speaking terms with God,” 
34
prophetic confidence of, 34, 41,
42–43, 146–147
skepticism, 5–6
King Jr., Martin Luther/“interview
on 80th birthday,” 245–269
black elite/black poor, 259–262,
263
black family planning, 262–264
death threats, 245–250
depression, 250–254
gay community, 254–257
Obama, 267–268
Oprah, 268–269
“prosperity gospel,” 257–258
rap/hip hop, 266–267
war on terror/Iraq, 264–266
King Jr., Martin Luther/speeches
“Promised Land,” 31, 33–43, 45,
46–48, 63, 250
return to Memphis, 31–43
slavery and, 46–48
style, 37, 38–40, 41–42, 43
Koch, Ed, 204
KRS-One, 137
Langford, Anna, 188
Lawson, James, 121
Lazarus, 127
Lee, Spike, 134, 246
Lee, Willie George Washington, 12
INDEX
287
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 287


--- PAGE 303 ---
Lemon, Kasi, 134
Levison, Stanley
communist party and, 58
King criticizing staff, 168
King’s humility, 157–158
Lewis, John, 147–148
Lincoln, Abraham, 35, 47, 240
Lischer, Richard, 148
Little Richard, 136–137
Logan, Arthur, 249
Logan, Marian, 249
Lowery, Joseph, 21
Luther, Martin, 35
Maddox, Alton H., 207–208
Malcolm X
assassination of, 14, 22, 68
black hate and, 7
on King, 150, 161–162
Obama and, 232–233
power of, 9–10
style of, 191
white fears and, 53–54
Mandela, Nelson, 216
Marsalis, Wynton, 136
Mason, C. Vernon, 207–208
Mayfield, Curtis, 137
MC Lyte, 137
McKissick, Floyd, 48–49
McNair, Carol Denise, 19
Meier, August, 166
Mo, Keb, 135
Monk, Thelonious, 135
Monroe, Marilyn, 71
Morrison, Toni
accomplishments, 132
on Clinton, 80
Moseley, Walter, 132
Moses, 41, 42, 241
Moses, Bob, 155–156
Moynihan, Daniel
black families report, 105–106,
107
military and, 105
Muddy Waters, 135
Murphy, Eddie, 132
Murray, Charles, 195
Nas, 137
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 146, 193
Nixon, Richard, 225
Norman, Jessye, 132
Notorious B.I.G., 71, 137
Obama, Barack
2004 Democratic National
Convention, 226
background/education, 226, 227,
228, 231
“blackness” of, 228–229, 231,
233, 238
community organizing of,
226–227, 228
Jackson and, 224, 225
Joshua Generation and, 224,
241–243
on King, 225, 236
“King” question in debate, 225
King’s leadership vision and, 149,
223, 241, 243, 267–268
leadership roles/race, 238–241
parents/roots, 228, 231
political accomplishments,
227–228
as president, 224–225
presidential campaign and,
223–224, 233–238
Sharpton and, 224, 225
as state senator, 227
as U.S. senator, 227
INDEX
288
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 288


--- PAGE 304 ---
wife/daughters, 229
writing/talking style, 226
O’Dell, Jack, 58
Oprah, 135, 268–269
Pagones, Steven, 207–208
Parker, Charlie, 135
Parks, Gordon, 133
Pascal, Blaise, 158
Penn, Mark, 237
Peterson, James, 69
Plato, 34–35, 46
Poitier, Sidney, 134
Powell, Adam Clayton
King and, 160–161, 256–257
Rustin and, 160–161, 256–257
Sharpton and, 202, 210
Powell, Bud, 135
Powell, Colin, 86
Presley, Elvis, 71, 136
Price, Cecil, 250
Price, Leontyne, 132
Pritchett, Laurie, 158–159
Proctor, Samuel, 185–186
Pryor, Richard, 132
Rainey, Sheriff, 250
Rauschenbusch, Walter, 209–210
Reagan, Ronald
James Brown and, 211–212
policies, 112, 226, 227
“voodoo economics,” 226
war on drugs/imprisonment, 112
Riccardi, Michael, 206
Rich, Frank, 236–237
Robinson, Jackie, 132–133, 162
Rock, Chris, 71
Roosevelt, Franklin D.
coalition of “liberals,” 84
lynching and, 47–48, 63–64
New Deal and blacks, 83–84
“Promised Land” speech and, 35,
47–48
workfare, 83–84
Ross, Diana, 137
Rowan, Carl, 162
Rustin, Bayard
King’s “paranoia,” 22–23
Powell and, 160–161, 256–257
Sharpton and, 203
Rutherford, William, 167
Saar, Bettye, 133
Sanchez, Sonia, 132
Sandiford, Cedric, 205–206
Sanger, Margaret, 262
Scarface, 70
Schreber, Daniel Paul, 72
Schwerner, Michael, 248
Sharpton, Al
as boy minister, 202, 203, 209,
213–214
Brawley case, 207–208, 209
childhood, 202–203, 213
criticism of, 201, 206–208, 212,
216
current presidential campaign
and, 234
education, 203, 215
influences on, 201, 203, 204,
209–215, 216
Jackson relationship, 201–202,
209, 213, 214–221
James Brown relationship, 203,
210–212, 216–217
Joshua Generation and, 241
King and, 201, 203, 204, 210,
213–214
King’s legacy and, 149, 221
National Action Network, 207
INDEX
289
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 289


--- PAGE 305 ---
Sharpton, Al (continued)
National Youth Movement, 203
Operation Breadbasket, 203,
213–214
political office and, 208, 213
rise as black leader, 201,
203–206, 219–221
stabbing of, 207, 217
style/hair, 212–213
Simpson, O.J., 229–230
Singleton, John, 134
Smith, Lamar, 12–13
Socrates, 34–35
Stacy, Rubin, 63
Stanford, Karin, 218
Stone, Sly, 137
Strindberg, August, 71
Taylor, Koko, 135
Taylor, Rev. Gardner, 161
Thomas, Clarence, 231
Till, Emmitt
background, 64
legacy, 65–66
mother, 65–66
murder, 64–65
Till, Louis, 63
Tillich, Paul, 193, 215
Toynbee, Arnold, 17
2Pac, 70–71, 137
Vaughn, Sarah, 136
Walker, Alice, 132
Walker, Kara, 133
Walker, Wyatt Tee, 8
Wallace, David, 193
Wallace, George, 247
Warwick, Dionne, 137
Washington, Bishop Frederick
Douglas, 202, 209
Washington, Booker T., 129
Washington, Denzel, 134
Washington, George, 145, 213
Waters, Maxine, 241
Wayans Brothers, 132
Weber, Max
on ghetto poor, 69–70
“world weary” concept, 253
Webster, Ben, 136
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 62
Wesley, Cynthia Diane, 19
Wideman, John Edgar, 132
Wilkins, Roy, 59, 162
Williams, Hosea
King’s assassination, 172, 173
style of, 166–167
Wills, Gary, 172
Wilson, August, 133–134
Wilson, William Julius, 228
Winfrey, Oprah, 135, 268–269
Wolfe, George C., 133–134
Womack, Bobby, 48
Wonder, Stevie, 137
Wright, Richard, 132
Young, Andrew
background, 189
Jackson and, 174, 177–178,
183–184, 218
King’s assassination, 171
King’s health, 253–254
King’s legacy, 56–57, 58
King’s premonition, 33
politics and, 50–51
Poor People’s March, 166–168
role of, 166–167
INDEX
290
0465002122.qxd  2/21/08  9:57 PM  Page 290

