=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Message-to-the-Black-Movement-A-Political-Statement-From-the-Black-Underground.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 26
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:20:05.399613
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
THE SOONER BEGUN, THE SOONER DONE!  The BLA 
The BLA Coordinating Committee, Message to the Black Movement- 
A Political Statement From the Black Underground is a part of the 
RBG FROLINAN COLLECTION-REVOLUTIONARY BLACK 
NATIONALISM STUDIES  
 
Companion: Open / Study / Download Intro to The BLA 
Political Statement -An Interactive Pictorial PowerPoint 
Presentation


--- PAGE 2 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 2 
   
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK 
MOVEMENT 
 
 
 A Political Statement from the Black Underground  
(Coordinating Committee Black Liberation Army)  
ORIGINALLY RELEASED 1976/1977 
 Dedicated to all the comrades killed, captured, and exiled in the struggle. To 
build the armed urban guerrilla front and to those who supported us.  When all 
others refused to face up to Reality! 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 3 
 AN OVERVIEW ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 4 
VIEW FROM THE ARMED FRONT  The Dialectic of Revolutionary Violence, law, and  
Reformism ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  5 
WHY BUILD THE ARMED FRONT ? ................................ ................................ ........................ 9 
RACISM AND CLASS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............10 
DESTRUCTIVE SUB-CULTURE, CRIME AND PRISON ................................ ..........................12 
LEADERSHIP OF THE STRUGGLE ................................ ................................ ........................16 
WHAT IS PROTRACTED WAR IN THE BLACK LIBERATION STRUGGLE? .........................20 
ALLIANCES WITH WHITES ................................ ................................ ................................ .....24 
 
 
 
 
View the Icebreaker Video


--- PAGE 3 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 3 
INTRODUCTION  
 
The following is political overview and statement of general political positions. We  
have written these political positions from the perspective of the Armed Front because  
we feel that such a perspective is needed in the total revolutionary process for Black  
liberation. We are general in our public statement because we are essentially a  
military and political front; therefore it would not do to speak in any other terms, fo r the  
actions of the armed front will address themselves to the specifics of our people's  
national oppression. We do not wish the ENEMY to gain tactical insight in carrying out  
his repressive campaigns, while on the other hand we do desire that the Blac k  
Liberation Movement understand the correct role armed struggle plays in a peoples  
struggle and how this role is in motion for us here in North American.  
The tool of analysis is for us a further development of the Historical Materialist method,  
the dialectical method. We will not even waste our time debating the values of Marxism  
with those who are emotionally hung up on white people hung up to the point of  
ideological blindness. We understand the process of revolution, and fundamental to  
this under standing is this fact: Marxism is developed to a higher level when it is  
scientifically adapted to a peoples' unique national condition, becoming a new  
ideology altogether. Thus was the case in China, Guinea Bissau, Vietnam, North  
Korea, the Peoples Rep ublic of the Congo and many other socialist nations. For Black  
people here in north America our struggle is not only unique, but it is the most  
sophisticated and advanced oppression of a racial national minority in the whole  
world. We are the true 20th century slaves, and the use of the dialectical method, class  
struggle and national liberation, will find its highest development as a result of us. This  
dialectic holds true not only for Marxism, but for revolutionary nationalism as well it  
holds true for concepts of revolutionary Pan -Africanism it is true of the theoretical basis  
in developing revolutionary Black culture. All of these ideological trends will find their  
highest expression as a result of our advanced oppression.  
Yet, we must be ever mi ndful that the same objective process is true for reactionary  
refinement as a result of our struggle. This is the unity of opposites in struggle with  
each other. To defeat our enemy and render his reactionary allies impotent, we must  
have a truly revolu tionary perspective informed by concepts of revolutionary class


--- PAGE 4 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 4 
struggle, a movement without such a perspective will fail to defeat our common  
oppressor. We are not afraid of white people controlling our movement, for our  
formations, guns, and ideas are  built with our own hands, efforts, and blood. With this  
in mind, we address ourselves to the Black Liberation struggle, its activist elements  
and organizations. Our call is for UNITY, FOR A NATIONAL BLACK LIBERATION   
FRONT. We must build to win!  
Nyurba / Black Liberation Army  
 
 
AN OVERVIEW  
We will start with the basic fact that Capitalism and Imperialism as an economical  
system is in a deep crisis at home and abroad. The basis of this crisis is, of course,  
the exploitive relationships that capital must maintain in order to function. It is these  
economic, social and political relationships that signal the eventual doom of  our  
oppressors and this system of oppression under which we all live.  
This crisis of capitalism is of a protracted nature. By this we mean it is a long process  
of deterioration that is spread over a considerable length of time. The seeming  
material we alth which we see all around us in no way contradict this fact of decay,  
deterioration, or the fact of crisis. In fact, over -production and uneven distribution have  
led time and time again to a bloated market, cutbacks in employment , and all the  
attendant ills of a economy based on private ownership of socially produced  
commodities. Inflation, soaring prices, and inadequate wages are all symptoms of an  
economy that is based primarily on class exploitation at home ad national domination  
of the Third World's resources abroad.  
The heightening of oppressed peoples struggles abroad have added to the crisis of  
the entire western world, and threaten to cut drastically its essential resources. We  
realize that the chief economical and military power in the western world and its ruling  
circles, will never allow the demise of its empire without a desperate fight. We, as  
Blacks in North America, must realize that to seek inclusion into the prevailing  
socio-economic system is suicide in the long run, for the prevailing system cannot  
withstand the irresistible world trend of history which is opposed to continued U.S.  
exploitation, racist domination and subjugation. To fool ourselves into believing that  
"equal opportunity", "justice"," and social equality is the same as the capitalist system  
is a grave mistake with genocidal implications for every person of color. Our first  
obligation is to ourselves, this means our first obligation is to secure our total liberation  
from those forces that maintain our oppre ssive condition. Related to this self obligation  
(not distinct from it), is our obligation to all oppressed peoples throughout the world, for  
in striving to liberate ourselves we must abolish a system that enslaves others  
throughout the world. This, in essence, is our historical duty, we can either carry it out  
or betray it - - but we most certainly will be judged accordingly by the world's peoples.  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 5 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 5 
 
The B.L.A., as a result of realizing the economical nature of the system under which we  
are forced to live, maintains the following principles:  
     1. That we are anti capitalist, anti imperialist, anti racist, and anti sexist.  
     2. That we must of necessity strive for the abolishment of these systems  
     and for the institution of Socialistic relationships in which Black people  
     have total and absolute control over their own destiny as a people.  
     3. That in order to abolish our systems of oppression, we must utilize the  
     science of class struggle, develop this science as it relates to our unique  
     national condition.  
 
 
 
VIEW FROM THE ARMED FRONT  
The Dialectic of Revolutionary Violence, law, and  
Reformism 
Our recognition of the economical contradictions of capital in no way obscures the  
social and political realities that now confront us and our struggle for Black Liberation.  
To the contrary, it enhances and deepens our perspective and clarifies the dialectical  
role or armed struggle in our liberation process.  
We have begun to recognize and analyze those forces in a modern t echnologically  
advanced society that set our particular struggle apart from other Third world people's  
struggles, as well as the common factors all oppressed peoples share as a result of  
U.S. and western imperialism. One such factor that sets our strugg le apart from other  
struggles is the profound influence of organized technology on our consciousness,  
social relationships, and behavior. People who live in the technologically advanced  
societies of the west have been programmed to perceive their needs as being one in  
the same as the technology that created these artificial needs. Because the masses of  
working people do not control this technology, it has been consistently used to  
manipulate their whole lives. We are told what to buy, what to eat, who m to hate, and  
what to love, by rulers and controllers of an exploitive system.  
Technology in the context of capitalism is the ultimate means by which the masses are  
programmed out of the need for real freedom. A whole social value system has  
evolved t o support the dependence on corporate state technological control. We no  
longer know what freedom is   what self determination is. We perceive the value of  
competition as being in the natural order of human relationships, instead of contrary to  
the fact that people are social animals, more attuned to cooperation than competition.


--- PAGE 6 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 6 
We must create in the course of destroying our system of oppression, whole new value  
concepts, concepts that exist in dialectical opposition to the values that buttress our  
oppression - - even more than this, we must create a new need within ourselves for  
freedom, so that we can harness technology in our behalf. As it stands how, Black  
people cannot even conceive of real freedom; we are afraid of real liberation because  
we h ave been programmed to be afraid by racist class oppression  even more than  
this, we must create a new need within ourselves for freedom, so that we can harness  
technology in our behalf. As it stands how, Black people cannot even conceive of real  
freedom; we are afraid of real liberation because we have been programmed to be  
afraid by racist class oppression. Technology has immensely added in reinforcing our  
fear of the dominant ruling circles. We must break this social psychosis.  
The B.L.A. has under taken armed struggle as a means by which the social psychosis  
of fear, awe, and love of everything white people define as being of value, is purged  
from our peoples' minds. Our historical experience in North America has shown us that  
we as a people have  always suffered while the racist ruling circles have never suffered.  
We have seen throughout our history pain, blood, rape, exploitation, poverty, our  
families torn asunder by a cruel and brutal culture, our youth murdered and socially  
crippled, our women degraded, our lives ever at the mercy of the cold American dream  
machine. We realize that the results of this historical experience has caused Black  
people to fear America's capacity for racist violence, and on the other hand , has  
reinforced the ra cist ruling circles in their attitudes of arrogance and confidence. The  
fact that the majority of whites who are equally oppressed and exploited do not really  
understand who their real enemy is, does not deter us from doing what must be done  
to break no t only our people'' mental chains, but theirs as well. We therefore, will  
illustrate in the only terms that the ruling classes understand   the terms of blood  
their blood. America must learn that Black people are not the eternal sufferers, the  
universal prisoners, the only ones who can feel pain. Revolutionary violence is,  
therefore, not a tactic of struggle, but a strategy. A strategy designed to drive the  
capitalist system further into crisis, while at the same time forcing all those responsible  
for oppression to realize that they too can bleed, they too can feel our pain. Only when  
this is realized, will any just and equal decisions be made, will we be conceded our  
right to self determination. As it stands now, the powerful do not believe they can hurt  
and therefore, find concession to our demands for liberation ridiculous. Our  
social/psychotic fear of the racists ruling circles must be purged also, and only by  
developing our capacity to fight our enemy will this unreasonable and reactionary fear   
be eradicated from our social psyche. Revolutionary violence is not so much a self  
cleansing process as it is a necessary ingredient in creating a psychological frame of  
mind amongst the ruling classes that our liberation must be granted.  
We must clar ify revolutionary violence in relationship to our actual condition, because  
many of our people believe in the "law," or at least the existing code of law of our  
oppressor. Most people do not see the real relationship between the development of  
western l aw and the development of western capitalism; therefore, these people  
cannot deal with the reality of injustice as being an integral part of the prevailing  
system. Not a few people misunderstand the objective class function for the courts, the


--- PAGE 7 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 7 
police, a nd various related institutions in maintaining the illusion of North American  
democracy.  
In a society such as exists here today, law is never impartial, never divorced from the  
economical relationships that brought it about. History clearly shows that in the course  
of the development of modern western society, the code of law is the code of the  
dominant and most powerful class, made into laws for everyone. It is implemented by  
establishing "special" armed organs, that are obliged to enforce the prevailing class  
laws. In this historical period of human social development such is the objective  
function of "law". Under such conditions of the most powerful economic and political  
classes. But, what about the law in a democracy, especially one that claims that all its  
citizens can elect their representatives who in turn can create new laws? First of all,  
such a democracy does not exist in North America, bourgeois democracy as suc h is  
merely a means of political control that evinces a design to subjugate its people, all of  
these reasons flow from the necessity to maintain exploitive capitalist relationships.  
Thus, the influence of corporate wealth on the politics of bourgeois de mocracy is  
merely an extension of private property's traditional influence and control of the  
so-called democratic process. The constant co -optation by ruling classes of the  
masses of working peoples, coupled with their complete control of technology an d of  
working peoples, coupled with their complete control of technology and of working  
people, coupled with their complete control of technology and information renders the  
so-called democratic process null and void. To a reflections of the class organi zation  
of that society and the reflection of a given technological economical arrangement and  
its supporting value system. The political organization of the most powerful classes or  
economic groups in a class society has to be, and is, the control by th ese classes or  
economic groups over the entire society and its political system. We ha found the  
democratic process under capitalism to be merely a means by which capital controls  
the masses. It is a means of mass diversion, designed to keep the powerle ss classes  
politically impotent while at the same time fostering the illusion that real power can be  
gained through the electoral process. Black people should know better. In a nation  
based on the false principle of majority rule, we are a marginal mino rity and therefore  
our right to self determination cannot be won in the arena of our oppressor.  
The rejection of reformism however, is much deeper than the above reasons. For if  
reformism is a rejection of any meaningful change, it is also a rejection o f revolutionary  
violence, and therefore reformism is a functional ignorance of the dynamics of Black  
liberation. This is because the character of reformism is based on unprincipled class  
collaboration with our enemy. The ideals of class collaboration do  not stand in  
opposition to our people's oppression, but instead consistently seeks to reform the  
oppressive system. Reform of the oppressive system can never benefit its victims, in  
the final analysis the system of oppression was created to insure the rule of particular  
racist classes and sanctify their capital. To seek reform therefore inevitably leads to, or  
begins with, the recognition of the laws of our oppressor as being valid.  
Those within the movement who condemn the revolutionary violence of anti capitalist,  
anti capitalist, anti imperialist and revolutionary Black nationalist groups are in


--- PAGE 8 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 8 
essence weakening themselves. These fools do not understand the inter -active need  
for revolutionary violence with other forms of struggle and because th ey do not  
understand the real dynamics involved they seriously inhibit the development of the  
liberation movement as a whole. These reformists in liberationist garb should  
understand that unless the movement cultivates its capacity to fight the enemy on  all  
fronts, no front will secure any real victories. It is abysmal ignorance that imagines our  
oppression in any other terms than undeclared war.  
How will the movement as a whole be able to fight the oppressor in the future when all  
other "legal" meth ods are completely exhausted? How will we implement political  
struggle without the machinery and capacity for revolutionary violence when it is  
abundantly clear that our oppressor maintains armed organs of violence for the  
enforcement of his rules? We a s a movement will be unable to fight in the future if we  
do not develop the capacity for revolutionary violence in the present. But revolutionary  
violence is not an alternative to mass movement and organization, it is complementary  
to mass struggle, it is another front in the total liberation process. Those who put the  
question of revolutionary violence in "alternative" terms are guilty of crippled politics at  
worst. Those involved in the total revolutionary process, yet claim not to "endorse"  
revolutionary violence when it occurs, are attempting to "legi timize" their existence at 
the expense of the entire struggle. The only "legitimacy" these people can possibly be  
seeking in such cases is bourgeois legitimacy. These type people further confuse the  
masses, for revolutionary violence is not clarified and extended in order to undermine  
the psychological dependence Black people still have on racist reactionary "legality."  
This is the vilest of sins, one for which everyone will pay during heightened repression.  
 
We therefore do not view the "law" of our class enemies as valid, no do we feel  
restricted in struggle to his laws. On the other hand, we unde rstand the "tactical" value 
of using the law and consequently we understand the tactical value of reform in the  
liberation process. For example, school takeovers by community parents, rent strikes  
by tenants, labor union takeover by dissident members, etc., utilizing their systems and   
built-in safeguards to obtain certain goals that place the enemy at a temporary  
disadvantage. But we maintain there is only tactical value to reform when there exists  
other forms of revolutionary struggle against the whole of the capitalist structure.  
Reform as such is inherently reactionary and perpetuated psychological dependence  
on the enemy, while confusing the true class contradictions between ourselves and the  
enemy. Considering these factors, we maintain that reform can never be anything  
more than a tactic, never a complete strategy, never offering in itself any revolutionary  
change. While it may offer the Black bourgeoisie rewards, it can never be the road to  
self determination for the entire Black populace.  
We also strongly condemn those who claim to be progressive, yet depreciate  
revolutionary violence of an oppressed people in their struggle for liberation. There can  
be no conditions on our fight for freedom except those set by the oppressed  
themselves. Those who claim that revolution ary violence gives the enemy the


--- PAGE 9 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 9 
opportunity to repress the movement in general are profoundly mistaken if they think  
the reactionary government needs such excuses for repression, or that the government  
does not recognize the real danger in allowing a m ovement to develop the full blown  
capacity to wage armed struggle. The B.L.A. has undertaken the task of building just  
such a capacity, along with other comrades on the clandestine level.  
 
 
 
 
WHY BUILD THE ARMED FRONT ?  
We have chosen to build the armed front, the urban guerilla front, not as an alternative  
to organizing masses of Black people, but because the liberation movement as a  
whole must prepare armed formations at each stage in its struggle. A f ailure to build  
these armed formations can be fatal to both the struggle and Black people.  
Our Ultimate or strategic goal at this point in creating the apparatus of revolutionary  
violence is to weaken the enemy capitalist state, creating at the same tim e  
objective subjective conditions that are ripe for the formation of a National Black  
Liberation Front composed of many progressive revolutionary, and nationalist  
groupings, and in this same process create the nucleus of the armed clandestine  
organs which such a front would need in order to carry out its political tasks. These are  
the broad reasons for our devotion to armed struggle. The fact that no such national  
united front exists now, in no way precludes the fact that the creation of one will  
become necessary in the future (as the contradictions of capitalist society increase  
repression, racism and social deterioration). We are of the opinion that subjective  
conditions are not ripe for such unity.  
Because of objective conditions, namely, enemy activity and the relative low degree of  
unity within the Black struggle, we have decided to build the apparatus separate and  
distinct (organizationally) from all other mass type groups. This is a tactical necessity,  
but this tactical necessity does note  contradict our strategic all for all groups in the  
Black liberation movement to form a national united front, with the principle of armed  
action as one of many "legitimate" forms of political policy.  
At present the contradictions that any B.L.A. activities may cause are not to be  
avoided. Every progressive should welcome the exposure and development of  
contradictions, for it is through the development of contradictions that we will all move  
forward. Every brother, every sister on the side of liberation should and must support  
the struggle on all fronts, and clarify to our people the acts of revolutionary violence  
committed against our common oppressors and class enemies of all colors. This  
means the revolutionary violence must be supported by those in the movement on all  
levels. While such support will be difficult at first, objective conditions and time will  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 10 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 10 
remove much of the difficulty which primarily ideological myopia to begin with. We  
know from experience that because of the class nature of our struggle and its racist  
aspect, many of our actions may very well be tactical action of a purely  
military psychological nature, and because of this clear political support may seem  
quite difficult . Nonetheless we intend to clarify all acts of revolutionary violence and  
accepts responsibility for these acts. The important factor, however, is that the  
progressive movement, the liberation movement, and comrades on all levels of  
struggle understand that failure to support the armed urban guerilla front (military,  
politically) is a failure to support the mass front, is a failure to support the "legal" thrusts  
of our struggle in "civil rights," and in the final analysis, an abdication of responsibili ty.  
Cowardice can be understood, but not opportunism and an abdication of commitment  
to our total liberation.  
 
RACISM AND CLASS  
   
Our recognition of the class nature of our struggle has led us to certain  objective  
conclusions which have been borne out by actual conditions. We have for some time  
now observed how the influence of certain class values determine how one acts or  
reacts in society. We have observed the class differences among the majority wh ite  
population in the United States, and the reflection of these difference among Black  
people. As we have said years before this, the class difference among Black people  
are difference in consciousness, attitudes, and behavior, but unlike these same cl ass  
difference among whites, economic status or economic position is not the major  
determinate. The overwhelming majority of Blacks (with the exception of very few) are  
essentially in the same economic class, and suffer essentially the same relationship  to  
the productive forces of capital.  
Despite this fact however, the difference in consciousness and in attitudes are real,  
and therefore must be dealt with as if these attitudes were economic class distinctions.  
The reality of our people tells us that  not only are there Black enemies of Black people,  
but that these Black enemies are first and foremost class enemies of our struggle for  
liberation. It is their class values, ideas, and class ideals that make them what they are,  
coupled with the fact th at these enemies in Black face can hide among us, spreading  
their various reactionary liberal philosophies of gradualism, Black capitalism,  
"integration," cultural nationalism, reformism, etc.  
The reason  why these Black class enemies find acceptance are many. The first and  
foremost reason is our unique social psychology, or our emotional response to racism.  
This reflex has primed us to think in terms of color first (just as it programmed whites to  
view color as a determinant factor), and when such thinking becomes culturally typical  
of us, we are vulnerable to class infiltration by Black enemies of our struggle. We tend  
to blame the color and not the class values of our oppressor when we are betrayed or  
exploited by one of our own people. Thus when a Black person betrays or hurts us we  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 11 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 11 
say, "n-words ain't shit!" (this also indicates self hatred and/or self pity); instead, what  
we should say is that "certain classes of n-words ain't shit!"  
Why should we have such a class perspective, and maintain class vigilance for ruling  
class lackeys? The first reason is that in a class society such as the one that we suffer  
under, every brand of thought, every form of behavior are stamped with the mark of a  
particular class. This has deep meaning for us, for the dominant classes in this country  
are white and their culture racist. We as Blacks reflect in our thinking the values, and  
ideas of these dominant classes, as well as the defensive response to their  
social cultural racist. We as Blacks reflect in our thinking the values, and ideas of these  
dominant classes, as well as the defensive response to their social cultural racism  
manifested in their system of rule. For these reasons we are vulnerable, we can  easily  
be misled, abused and misused. We become easy targets for the racist ploys of our  
collective enemy. The enemy can use skin color to confuse us into thinking that if we  
attack another Black we are necessarily attacking ourselves; when it may very  well be  
the other way around we are attacking him! It is to our advantage to have a clear  
principled class view. It is to the oppressors disadvantage if we are principled class  
conscious individuals, opposed to unprincipled class collaboration.  
If we look at most of the organizations on the scene today, and their philosophies,  
leadership, and methods of. Struggle, we will see the reflection of certain class ideals,  
ideas and values. Overwhelmingly these groups each reflect the goals of a particular  
class of Black folks. Without a revolutionary class perspective, we who are striving to  
acquire total emancipation from the forces which enslave the whole of our people, will  
be unable to distinguish true friends from true enemies, those who are confused  from  
those who are conscious tools of the oppressor, and we will not be able to win  
potential allies.  
 
This brings us to the dialectical role of culture, for if we understand that as members of  
a class society (or victims) we all are influenced by the  class perspectives of that  
society, and for Black people this means the values, standards, etc., of the dominant  
racist classes, then we must understand the tool by which we are programmed into  
these perspectives of class. Culture is the tool. We view culture as the means by which  
a dominant class programs the whole of society into that classes' ideals, values, and  
standards, thereby perpetuating its dominance.  
This objective class function of culture should not lead us to the incorrect conclusion  
that if we adopt a "cultural" orientation in our fight for liberation that such would be  
sufficient. This is the essential view of the cultural nationalists who orient all around  
culture, such a view is incorrect. For it does not deal with the economic, c lass, and  
psychological basis of the struggle between two opposing cultural entities. The  
dominant reactionary culture must be destroyed before any revolutionary culture can  
truly manifest itself. In other words, it is in the active struggle of the two that the seeds  
of a revolutionary culture are laid. Not in the passive creation of an alternative "culture".


--- PAGE 12 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 12 
Such could only be an alternative life style, allowed to exist at the will of the dominant  
capitalist culture. In this sense cultural nationalis m is bourgeois nationalism because it  
does not propose the abolishment of the capitalist system and culture.  
In dealing with the objective function of culture then, we understand its social role in  
maintaining certain class relationships. A racist cultu re does this and more. A racist  
culture programs not only the members of the dominant racial group into class ideals,  
standards, and values, but it also psychologically creates the necessary racist attitudes  
needed to maintain these class perspectives a s a whole) against the targets of that  
racism. Thus the feelings of superiority, fear of Blacks, and hostility toward the strivings  
of Black people (and all Third World peoples in general) is deeply ingrained into the  
white psyche along with the class p hobias and standards. Even more than this, the  
victims of the racist culture are programmed into feelings of self hatred, inferiority, and  
impotency. Very often this creates a mental social state that views the prevailing  
system as eternal and everlasti ng. Coupled with the class values of the dominant  
culture, Black folks are constantly torn between wanting what the oppressor defines as  
desirable, and the inability to get it. Or, to get it and then realize that it was only a hoax,  
he is still, as Blac k as ever. All of this is crippling for the oppressed Black person, for it  
ties their brains irrevocably' to their oppressors for salvation, often leading to the  
clownish pursuit of all that is defined as "good" by the standards of the oppressor.  
In ord er to break these psychological class chains of 20th century enslavement, we  
must build a revolutionary culture. A culture that not only programs our minds out of  
oppression, but at the same time impels us against the enemy classes and culture.  
The B.L. A. contribution in building such a culture will be to strive to create an armed  
tradition of resistance to our oppression, and to create a socio -psychological frame of  
mind on both oppressed and oppressor alike, that will lead to our eventual  
self determination as a people.  
We therefore make few distinctions based on the color of our enemies. The same  
treatment will be meted out to white ruling class enemies and their lackeys as will be  
meted out to Black bootlickers and Black class enemies of our str uggle. Our only  
consideration is that our armed formations and leadership are of our own people.  
 
 
DESTRUCTIVE SUB-CULTURE, CRIME AND PRISON  
   
The Black communities of the United States are the tragic results of class/ race  
subjugation, an oppressive situation created and exploited by the rich white capitalist  
class of this corrupt country, and systematically perpetuated and reinforced through  
their various institutions. The wretched conditions that are inherent within these ghettos  
continue to exist not because there are no means of erasing them, but rather because  
they have proven profitable to the class that created them.  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 13 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 13 
The ruling class  of the racist descendants of the chattel slave holders. They have  
amassed a vast portion of the world's wealth through their rapacious practice of  
profiting off the misery and discomfort of humanity in general, and Third World people  
in particular. The y use this enormous concentration of wealth to buy, bribe, steal,  
influence, murder, enslave, Blackmail, control, and repress any nation, organization,  
group or individual that would speak out against, or offer any serious opposition to  
their self imposed right to power.  
In order to maintain the present mis -arrangement, the social imbalances, the  
bourgeois class continues to use repressive tactics in various forms. The effects of this  
repression becomes clearly evident upon examination of the destruct ive sub -culture  
(the Black community) born out of American politics.  
This sub-culture materialized out of the need of Black folks for security and a sense of  
belonging that had been denied them since their arrival in this country; an attempt by  
the rej ected and dispossessed a totally de -culturalized people to integrate  
bourgeois society by imitating the life -style and adopting the value system of their  
oppressors.  
The destructive nature of this sub -culture manifests itself in the living reality of Bl ack  
folks' attitudinal and philosophical outlook on life. The self preserving quality of unity is  
almost totally absent in the Black community. In its place there is an unhealthy  
atmosphere of individuality which is detrimental and inconsistent with the  needs of our  
people, for it is precisely this thinking that has kept us divided and un -organized for so  
long.  
 
It would seem that brothers and sisters would recognize the fact that by accepting and  
perpetuating the values of the class that oppresses us, that they are only aiding in their  
own genocide. They have all the physical evidence necessary to prove that the values  
that they now cherish so dearly are not complimentary to their best interests.  
In our community we continuously come face to face with the reality of our situation.  
The dilapidated, fire hazard tenements; the Black mother with her un -fed child; the  
brother overdoses from the C.I.A.'s right to free enterprise; the sister that sell s herself  
to an abominable pleasure seeking fool the unemployed/unskilled/miseducated  
remains of a once beautiful people.  
It's sickening to listen to "Negro's" talk about how much profit they've made from selling  
dope and pimping sisters about the bran d name automobile they're driving, while their  
children are starving because they have ceased to be men or to hear some  
bad talking, chicken -hearted punk describe how he has ripped off some poor Black's  
life savings because he does not have the courage to take it from the criminals who  
oppress us.


--- PAGE 14 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 14 
We can't afford to continue as we have for the past one hundred years if we expect to  
ever be in the position to determine the quality of our own lives, and more important,  
the lives of our children. Already the influence of the negative images projected by  
some Black folks have filtered down to our offspring. In their attempts to emulate their  
elders, Black kids are beginning to take on the psychological posture of the str eet  
wise. They are being taught (through words and action) that the only way to get ahead  
in this world is to "get the money" and "go for self." Such values are mere reflections of  
a potentially destructive sub -culture organized within the social order of a modern  
technological society. What we must understand is the institutional process that is  
constantly at work in our daily lives. Only with such an understanding can we begin to  
make the struggle for liberation a part of our peoples' everyday life,  uniting the large  
objective struggle for liberation with our people's subjective struggle, and make them  
one continuous movement.  
Every institution in this racist class society serves the intended or unintended purpose  
of maintaining the attitudes, an d relationships of our destructive sub -culture. Welfare,  
housing agencies, systems programs, courts, prisons and countless other ruling class  
institutions reinforce negative relationships among Blacks. Our relationship and  
dependence on these enemy inst itutions is total, and only with their collapse can true  
alternative institutions prosper, but the process must begin now. We must not only build  
alternative social, economic, and political institutions, but we must intentionally  
sabotage, overload, and destroy existing ruling class institutions in the process.  
Part of our socialization process is the reality of prison and "crime." Crime in a  
capitalist society has a class basis, and is punished in accordance with this class  
basis. The whole of capita list society is predicated upon exploitive relations, and thus  
lower class crime is a reflection of ruling class criminal values and practices. In the  
Black community the average inmate is exposed to, and preyed upon by these very  
criminal values. We kn ock each other in the head, rob each other, burglarize each  
other's apartments, sell dope as a means of "getting over" because we each want  
what the system of capital has defined as being of value, but has forbidden us to  
acquire in "legitimate" fashion . In a society that views a persons material things as  
determining his or her worth, we are the most hungry to be of "worth," crime is  
essentially illegitimate capitalism in such an arrangement. We are socialized into this  
distorted existence and can ha rdly see the root causes that make our community  
havens for dope sellers, mack men, and hustlers.  
The reality of the Black experience in America has not only socialized us into living  
illegitimate lives (in terms of capitalist law) but it has programmed  us to expect and  
look to the very institutions that created this socialization in the first place, for solutions  
to our plight. We ask for more police in our community, when it is the police that serve  
a repressive role in maintaining our oppression. W e condone and glorify traitors and  
snitches, when in the future our very survival will depend on ideals contrary to such vile  
acts. We ask for stiffer jail sentences for those convicted as "criminals," when it is  
prisons that help maintain destructive social relations in our community. The fact that all  
of America is a prison escapes us. This reality has enabled Black folk to adapt so


--- PAGE 15 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 15 
readily to the transition from "street life" to life behind the walls. There is a dialectical  
and fundamental relation ship between the two that reinforces the destructive aspect of  
Black social relationships.  
The weakening of the Black family, the socialization of exploitive male female  
relationships, the basic fabric that supports cultural genocide can all be found in  the  
social role that prisons and crime play in a destructive subculture. Hardly a Black  
family, hardly a Black person is without at least one relative or friend behind prison  
wails, or know of someone in human cold storage. Our social acceptance of thi s cold  
fact is in reality our cultural response to the effect of powerlessness as a people. We  
must begin to determine our lives by creating community institutions of revolutionary  
justice outside the structure of capitalist law. This means we must crea te armed  
political organs in our community to enforce our community interest, and create new  
values based on our people's social interest. It will not do to forego this vital aspect of  
our struggle, we must build it now.  
Why is the construction and mai ntenance of community based armed cadres  
necessary? Because the enforcement of revolutionary justice in our communities is  
first a political question that cannot be answered by the existing oppressive system,  
but outside its control. Secondly, the very nature of corruption, crime in our  
communities, the negative class role of the courts, prisons, and other related  
institutions, must be combated with enforcement of our own laws, laws beneficial to our  
people and our struggle for liberation. Thirdly, if  we construct our own agencies of  
revolutionary justice, arm them and politicize their ranks, we are creating the necessary  
machinery for survival, while actively repressing those values and elements in our  
community that prey on our people. Finally, we  should realize that until our powerless,  
poor, and unconscious people can call someone else other than the oppressors' storm  
troopers for protection, we are ineffective as a revolutionary movement.  
Complementary to creating our own social force of "law " enforcement is the struggle to  
take over, dismantle, and weaken the oppressors police apparatus in our community.  
This apparatus must be neutralized at the same time that our own apparatus is being  
built. The two are dialectically opposed to each othe r, yet there is a complementary  
aspect. Community control of police, residence of the police in the community in which  
they work, are all reform issues that tactically are complementary to building our own  
system of community revolutionary justice. Thes e reform issues should be the  
continued target of the mass front, while the creation of community based armed  
cadres for the enforcement of revolutionary justice is the proper province of  
clandestine activity.  
We maintain that in the social revolution for Black liberation, it is a principled necessity  
that any creation of a national Black front must first and foremost deal with the social  
effects of a destructive sub -culture by creating and directing a system of revolutionary  
justice that will protec t and defend our people against reactionary behavior. This is the  
social aspect of Black liberation for the immediate future.


--- PAGE 16 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 16 
 
 
 
 
LEADERSHIP OF THE STRUGGLE  
It is important that the leadership of our struggle come from among our own people,  
just as it is crucial that we build the necessary machinery that will develop this  
leadership. The problem of leadership has always been a vexing one for Black people.  
We must break with the old style of leadership forced upon us by the prevailing class  
standards or we will fail in our struggle. Nonetheless, leadership is important,  
especially to Black people, and without it we will never triumph in our struggle.  
It is  past time that Black intellectuals, professionals, and so -called Black scholars  
assumed a more active role in the leadership of the liberation struggle, instead of  
laying back theorizing and writing essays in a vacuum, or in various Black bourgeois  
publications.  
We realize that many of our Black scholars have their minds in pawn to the ruling class,  
we are not primarily addressing ourselves to these particular individuals, but to those  
brothers and sisters who have a relatively high level of awarenes s (political) and to  
those Black intellectuals who are anti imperialist, anti capitalist) and pro Black  
liberation. It is these Black intellectuals who must assume new positions of leadership  
in our struggle by helping to build the necessary revolutiona ry apparatus that will forge  
total liberation.  
On the armed front it is these intellectuals who must become the political leadership  
and work in creating a far reaching and effective apparatus. Our struggle for Black  
liberation is a revolutionary strug gle, for it implies the transformation of the whole of  
American society if it is to succeed, and Black intellectuals have a clear obligation to  
this process. We have seen how the capitalist state uses its intellectuals and  
institutions of "higher educat ion" In order to continue, its exploitive policies) and we as  
a people must utilize our professionals and intellectuals in the total process of  
liberation and destruction of capitalistic society. Our principled call for a national Black  
revolutionary fr ont will never become a reality without such leadership of Black  
intellectuals with concrete and clear revolutionary politics. The B.L.A. will never  
subordinate itself to such a front unless leadership of this caliber is evident. Our  
intellectuals must make a firm commitment to improving the quality of our struggle on  
all fronts, military, mass front, electoral politics, legal front, etc. For us the creation of a  
revolutionary front and its military arm are worthy tasks for our intellectuals to pursue in  
the revolutionary process. There can be no struggle without sacrifice, and our Black  
intellectuals must begin to apply this principle to themselves as well as others.  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 17 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 17 
It is clear to us that the so -called lumpen class cannot carry our liberation strug gle  
forward on its own. This is because of their class nature: undisciplined, dogmatic, and  
easily prone to diversion. This class however will supply some of the most dedicated  
comrades to the struggle. 'But we must clarify our view of the lumpen class as a whole.  
The traditional concept of lumpen as a category of the lowest social strata in an  
industrialized society, unemployed, etc., is a description that fits not only brothers and  
sisters that hang out in the street all day long and survive in that  fashion, but it also fits  
a great segment of Black people who are marginally employed and who for various  
socio-economic reasons think essentially the same as the classical "lumpen."  
Therefore, we must make a clear distinction between the economic defi nition of  
lumpen (the relationship of that class to the means of production) and the attitudinal,  
behavioral definition which can readily apply to a larger proportion of our people. When  
we use the term lumpen, we are using the broad definition.  
The unemployment rate among Black people is a little over twice that of the white  
population, placing it roughly at 20%. This to us is still a conservative estimate. But if  
we consider the population ratio of Blacks to whites, such a high rate of unemplo yment  
represents a considerable number of the total amount of Black people. Therefore, in  
strictly social terms, the lumpen class represents a very large segment of the Black  
population, a segment who in our estimation will be the first to grasp the rea lities of  
capitalist repression. This as it may be, we still realize the limitations of this class in  
moving our struggle forward, their class tendencies make them ideal targets of the  
enemy, as agents, infiltrators, as well as some of these same tenden cies contribute to  
making the lumpen class staunch comrades in struggle. When we realize the real  
limitations of this class, we as a movement will begin to create a more dynamic  
revolutionary process.  
The Black bourgeoisie (from which most Black intell ectuals, professionals, come)  
cannot by themselves lead our struggle, not because they are incapable of leadership  
but because their class nature is more reactionary than revolutionary. The tendency to  
vacillate, compromise with the ruling class enemy, opportunism, and lack of  
commitment to any revolutionary principles, are typical traits of this class. It is from this  
class that the enemy has drawn the majority of so -called "endorsed" spokesmen, and  
it is this class from which the majority of poverty pimps spring forth.  
But this class can supply the movement with some dynamic leadership as well as  
devoted comrades. Those truly progressive elements of the Black bourgeoisie that  
can be won over to the side of the liberation struggle should be focused  on by the  
movement and principally dealt with. The failure of the liberation movement to put the  
Black bourgeoisie principally against the wall is inexcusable. For if the people are to  
understand the impotency of our bourgeoisie, its opportunism, and t he role they are  
made to play in maintaining our collective oppression, the movement as a whole must  
create conditions that will lead to such an understanding.  
We have witnessed the ruling class crisis of Watergate, and the division it has caused  
within the ruling circles. This division was essentially based on repairing the body


--- PAGE 18 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 18 
politic of capitalist rule. The "crisis of confidence in government" was a crisis for the  
ruling economical circles, for they had to not only restore "faith" in their system of rule  
(political system) but they also had to find a political front man upon which they all could  
agree, and in whom the masses would have some degree of confidence. Yet the  
revelations of Watergate (which were essentially of a political nature deali ng with the  
ruling class parties) had profound implications for our struggle. It hinted at the extent to  
which our movement has and is repressed by the reactionary government. An ideal  
opportunity existed for the movement as a whole to put our so -called "elected leaders"  
of the Black bourgeoisie against the wall. But the movement never seized the  
opportunity presented. No consistent widespread call was put to Black politicians to  
conduct a unilateral investigation into the government repression of the  Black liberation  
struggle, and into political espionage against the Black movement. Such a demand  
could have revealed glaring repression (and thereby weaken the mental residual belief  
in our oppressors' "fair" system) or as was more likely, the real im potency of our Black  
elected officials would have been clearly revealed (thereby weakening the confidence  
in bourgeois electoral politics to effect change). Of course no such widespread call  
was made, and therefore no such result. It is this lack of pra ctical class struggle that  
inhibits the growth of the mass front. The Black bourgeoisie must be put into objective  
conditions that can benefit our struggle, or enhance the people's awareness as to what  
they are "truly about. Only in this way can those p rogressive elements within their ranks  
come to the fore.  
The majority of Black people are workers and as such suffer all the exploitation of the  
working class in a capitalist society. In addition to this, however, Black workers suffer  
the vicious effec t of institutionalized racism. Black workers are the lowest paid, the  
most marginally employed, and the most economically insecure. The impact of  
technology will further erode -the employ-ability of the Black worker, for in the majority  
of cases the edu cational background of Black workers are lower than their white  
counterparts. Education for Blacks has always been another method of programming  
Black people into the lowest strata of capitalist society insuring generations of  
exploitable and marginal labor.  
We view the Black working class as the basis for the success of our struggle, not  
because of its political consciousness (which is still very low) and not because of its  
class nature (more disciplined, industrious), but because of its sheer number s and  
because of its economic role in the Black community. We do not think that Black  
workers' relationship to the productive forces of this society is essentially different from  
any other class of Blacks due to racism. Although there are some differenc es there  
seem to be no essential differences. Black folks in total suffer the same relationship to  
capitalist productive forces, some more so than others, but all essentially the same.  
Just as we have made a distinction between the purely economic defin ition of the  
lumpen and the attitudinal definition of the lumpen, we are forced to make a similar  
distinction between bourgeois attitudes and working class attitudes. All those who  
must work are workers, but all workers are not of the working class. Suc h as police


--- PAGE 19 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 19 
and prison guards who serve a reactionary class function, or those that work, yet  
maintain the upper middle class behavioral patterns and attitudes.  
We therefore define the working class (and bourgeoisie) not solely on their economic  
relationship to the productive forces, but also on how they view themselves and society  
and behave as a result. Thus the Black bourgeoisie is a sham bourgeoisie, for it has  
no real economic base (in comparison to white capital) but its attitudes are real and  
strongly affect their class character. The Black working class has the economical basis  
of a working class, but many of them have the mentality of the sham bourgeoisie, which  
effects their social response to certain class ideas. Thus you have a Black fam ily that  
can barely make ends meet with all the ideas of the Black bourgeoisie, "putting their  
daughter through school society," attending "cocktail sips," etc. Nonetheless, we  
perceive the Black working class as the socioeconomic basis of Black liberat ion.  
The Black working class, like any other unconscious working class has no  
revolutionary identity at best, no consciousness of itself as a revolutionary class. To  
move the enemy is to move the working class, for the enemy is the factor that  
determines our relationship to each other. This can only be done through active  
struggle on all fronts, it is the sum total of this process that brings about revolutionary  
conditions, not the parts in and by themselves.  
We can then say that the leadership 'of t he Black liberation struggle will come from the  
most advanced elements within each class of the Black population, and because of  
the objective conditions certain classes will gravitate toward particular fronts of  
struggle more so than others, and it is on these particular fronts of struggle that  
leadership will be developed, culminating in some form of collective leadership for the  
entire movement (as conditions dictate such unity for mutual survival). We already see  
this trend in the movement today. However, the basis of the movement will increasingly  
depend on the Black working class and its ability to perceive the nature of capitalism,  
racism, and the politics of these twin evils as they relate to our survival as a people.  
The primary factor in d eveloping such a consciousness is the enemy, is increasing  
crisis, and social reaction to his dilemma. Therefore we must increase his problems a  
thousand fold, while building our capacity to struggle. Yet we do not see the Black  
bourgeoisie as the prima ry class leading the masses of Black people into a higher  
degree of revolutionary consciousness. Experience has taught us that the Black  
bourgeoisie as a class has certain ideological tendencies. It is these tendencies if not  
curbed, that limit the revo lutionary potential of this class of Blacks. The era of civil  
rights, has shown us that any thrust of our liberation struggle primarily led by this class  
will never exceed the bourgeois goals of the class itself. Such being the case, the  
racist ruling c ircles have always found it more "acceptable" to concede to Black  
bourgeois demands and thereby diffuse any revolutionary movement among the  
masses of Blacks who are not yet conscious of their revolutionary potential. The racist  
oppressor has a natural ally in the Black bourgeoisie, because this class above all is  
the most opportunist.  
We still hold fast to the premise that the Black bourgeoisie in the U.S. is essentially a  
colonial type bourgeoisie, that at one moment supports the legitimate aspirati ons of


--- PAGE 20 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 20 
the "colony" (for its own bourgeois ends) and at other moments opposes these  
aspirations when their bourgeois leadership position is threatened. The history of the  
reformist civil rights phase of the Black liberation struggle proves "this beyond a doubt.  
Recognition of these tendencies in this class of Blacks should not deter the  
revolutionary segment of the movement from requiring of the Black bourgeoisie certain  
responsibilities, namely, that it is still their duty to build a movement that wi ll lead in the  
ultimate destruction of the capitalist state and self determination for Black people for  
only under these conditions will our survival as a people (a free people) manifest itself.  
Considering our just given overview of the classes, and cl ass nature of the Black  
liberation struggle, we contend that if the Black working class is the basis for our  
struggle succeeding, and that each of the primary categories of the Black population  
will assume some leadership responsibilities in leading the  struggle, the primary  
category of Blacks that will constitute the dynamic revolutionary leadership of the  
movement will be the Black students, and youth as well as those young Black adults  
who have acquired the basics of professional training but have refused to continue in  
the same narrow vein as their parents. The crucial element in developing this dynamic  
potential is the training of this segment of the Black population. Our youth, students and  
young fledgling professionals must be politicized mor e, involved in struggle, and  
trained in the art of protracted war. Over half of the Black population is under the age of  
30, and we as a movement must realize their true potential. For, if we don't, the enemy  
surely will, and intensify their programs aimed at dehabilitating our young.  
 
 
 
 
WHAT IS PROTRACTED WAR IN THE BLACK 
LIBERATION STRUGGLE?  
   
If the nature of the crisis of the system of oppression is protracted, that is, drawn out  
over a considerable period of time, then our struggle to defeat this exploitive system  
and acquire self determination is also of a protracted nature. But why a protracted  
war?  
The very reality of Black people's experience in North America proves that we  are and  
have been in a state of war. This is a difficult realization for many to make, especially  
those who still have their minds in pawn to the great American delusion, but often the  
truth is harsh in its naked form. The nature of this war assumes ma ny different guises,  
sometimes overtly violent, sometimes economically restrictive, and still other times  
socially repressive. If we bear in mind that the modern wars of U.S. imperialism waged  
against Third World people have not all been completely mili tary campaigns, but have  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 21 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 21 
also included social pacification programs, economic aid to reactionary regimes,  
political police extermination of legitimate opposition and the like, then it should not be  
too hard for us to realize that in its policies against  Blacks, poor people, and other  
national minorities, the U.S. government is waging an undeclared war. The primary  
aspects of this undeclared war are class repression, and casualties can be counted on  
both the welfare unemployment rolls, and the statisti cs of murdered Black youth and  
prison crime reports.  
This undeclared war has masked itself as "domestic reform," "law and order," and "a  
return to traditional American values" a la Nixonian doctrine. The ending of overt U.S.  
military involvement in Vie tnam has led to an increasingly reactionary stance on the  
part of the majority of white Americans. The vile and deceitful nature of America's  
institutions were revealed glaringly by the Vietnam imperialist venture, and has cast  
many into the pit of uncertainty.  
Of course the post Vietnam revelations of government deception told Black people  
nothing "new" about the ruling class institutions of American society. But it revealed  
these institutions for what they are, for the first time America could see w hat was  
perpetrated in their name. This was/is most uncomfortable, for white America  
cherishes its self deceptions of righteousness and democracy. With the eroding of  
these self delusions, our position as a national minority has become increasingly  
endangered. There is the foul odor of reactionary "Americanism" in the air, fanned and  
blown into the confused faces of white America by a ruling class beset with all manner  
of economic political and social ills - - which demand attention. (The landslide vi ctory of  
Nixon in '72 was an endorsement, conscious or unconscious, of white America's  
deep seated reactionary nature and confusion as manifested in the Nixonian doctrine).  
Imperialism is the final stage of over -developed capitalism. It is the international control  
of monopoly corporate capital over the economic, social, and political lives of over half  
the world's people. Imperialism is also the extension of the capitalist  ruling class's  
political control on the international level, which has called into existence the  
organization of neo -colonial relationships with the national bourgeoisie of former  
colonies. Neo -colonialism, then, is the highest stage of imperialism, fo r it substitutes  
the faces of the oppressor while maintaining the exploitive relationship of imperialism.  
Because imperialism is international in scope, the fight against it must also be  
international. For until all people affected by it are free, no on e will be free. Capitalism  
must be destroyed wherever it exists and we must mutually support each others  
struggles against it. To relate Pan -Africanism to the realities of the world today, we  
must never lose sight of the true nature of imperialism and i ts number one exponent,  
U.S. imperialism. Pan -Africanism that does not deal with neo -colonialist lackeys, but  
instead obscures the exploitive policies of these lackeys for the sake of Blackness, is  
nothing more than bourgeois nationalism taken to the in ternational level. A  
Pan-Africanism that does not support the struggles of other Third World peoples  
against reactionary imperialist control, is not true revolutionary internationalism, and  
hence narrow cultural nationalism on the international level. I n order for Pan -Africanism  
to be truly progressive, it must not only advocate the necessity for Black international


--- PAGE 22 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 22 
unity against racism, it must put racism in its true perspective. It must also advocate  
Black and Third World unity against imperialism a nd neo -colonialism everywhere.  
Which means internal solidarity among national minorities within the confines of the  
U.S. A Pan -Africanism that does not clarify to Black people the economic basis for all  
national oppression cannot possibly explain the ve ry fact that there are Black  
governments that exploit and assist in the oppression of Black people, and therefore  
will be unable to deal with the dialectics of racism correctly. It is the duty, therefore, of  
Pan-Africanism, to clarify and explain to Bla ck people exactly who the enemy is. The  
enemy is international capitalism, imperialism, and neo -colonialism, and all those in  
league with these reactionary forces on the world scene.  
The question of which road against racism and imperialism for the Blac k liberation  
movement here in the U.S., is a question that has been kicked around by everyone  
from doctrinaire narrow Black nationalists to the most reformist minded "Black  
intellectuals." Although it is not our intention to answer this question in its entirety, it is  
our intention to make the following points:  
               1. Whatever the ideological differences within the  
               liberation movement here in the U.S., our  
               movement must persuade those countries that are  
               Black and truly anti imperialist, to take a principled  
               stand on the issue of political fugitives from the  
               shores of the U.S.A.  
             2. That the nature of imperialism and racism  
               requires of all those that oppose these twin evils the  
               utmost in mutual support short of actual interference  
               within the national struggle of a particular people.  
 
In respect to point number one, it should be obvious to all elements of the Black  
liberation movement that things will get worse before they can possibly get better. The  
crisis of the capitalist system, increased domestic reaction, and other factors indicate  
that Black people will feel the ramifications of contradictions mo re so than any other  
class or group in this country. We can no longer sit by and rationalize the fact of the  
repressive apparatus of the ruling classes arrayed against our struggle. It would be  
incorrect for any responsible movement activist not to prep are for eventualities that the  
struggle for liberation may be confronted with.  
We all must consider that any intensification of our struggle will lead to an increase of  
repression. This should not be feared as the pseudo revolutionaries would have us do .  
Instead, we should see any intensification of repression as a necessary result of our  
increased efforts toward full freedom and prepare for it. Essential to such preparation  
is the establishment of principles of political sanctuary beyond the shores o f the  
imperialist U.S.


--- PAGE 23 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 23 
We cannot but note that a real friend does not turn you away from his door in times of  
danger, and just as those independent and progressive nations of Africa principally  
support and give sanctuary to the freedom fighters of Afri ca, it is equally as principled  
that the movement for Black liberation within the U.S. be supported in a like fashion.  
Every group, every organization in the struggle for self determination, should put "this  
request high on the agenda of tasks to be dea lt with. Our movement as a whole should  
make the principled stand that our right to struggle) and the mutual obligation to  
support all anti imperialist movements is more than mere rhetoric, and as such we as  
a movement should be supported on the international level.  
The second point deals with the basis for our contention that support is necessary, for  
without a unity in effort world wide imperialism will not be defeated, nor racism  
eradicated.  
It is the international web of U.S. imperialism, its pro found effect on the lives of the  
worlds people that puts our struggle in such a crucial strategic position. International  
support should be based on this strategic premise, for if self determination is a  
legitimate goal of our struggle it will ultimatel y become an international question. As a  
movement we will be unable to create the principled international support necessary if  
we do not speak as one voice. Thus the principle of a National Front has clear  
international implications and is conducive in  creating a unity in effort on the  
international level. To create the type of solidarity needed we should emphasize  
practical approached. Sanctuary for our movement's activists is a practical approach  
that can develop into the establishment of a permane nt strategic headquarters abroad,  
out of the immediate reach of the enemy, and able to give strategic guidance to the  
movement during heightened repression. There are other such practical approaches  
already in motion.  
It is incorrect for those involved  in the struggle to attend international conferences  
without putting -the question of practical and principled support of our movement on the  
agenda, this every organization should at least agree with in principle. In terms of  
international solidarity, the same principle holds true for other progressive nations that  
also holds true for us. We rely primarily upon our own resources but we do not refuse  
revolutionary aid offered in the spirit of solidarity. Our principle of self reliance is not  
compromised as a result of seeking concrete international support, it is enhanced by  
its revolutionary nature.  
We find it absurd that many brothers and sisters can support the armed struggles in  
Africa and not support the armed front at home. This is adopting th e posture of  
solidarity with the essential spirit and revolutionary substance. It comes as no surprise  
than that progressive struggles do not support our movement as they should, how can  
they when we ourselves do not support our own? In the final analys is true revolutionary  
internationalism begins at home. It begins with basic principles of revolutionary  
struggle.


--- PAGE 24 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 24 
In summation, the Black Liberation Movement must move forward into the international  
arena with clear revolutionary politics instead of "c ommunity oriented perspective"  
devoid of broad and far reaching understanding. Revolutionary nationalism is and  
must be revolutionary internationalism, Pan -Africanism if it is to be revolutionary must  
express not only international Black solidarity, but  revolutionary solidarity with ail  
oppressed peoples struggles against U.S. imperialism.  
 
 
 
ALLIANCES WITH WHITES  
   
We are opposed to unprincipled class collaboration in our struggle for liberation, for  
unprincipled class collaboration can only weaken and dilute our struggle. On the other  
hand, we uphold the principle of unity based on struggle around issues that relate to  
our peoples revolutionary development. The principle of unity on struggle does no t  
remove our right to principled criticism of reactionary ideas and struggle with incorrect  
views.  
The question of Black White alliances is both a tactical and strategic question of  
policy, that can only be answered by given objective conditions and no t by emotional  
reflex. Many brothers and sisters think that under no circumstances should we as Black  
people enter into alliances with whites. These comrades consistently confuse alliance  
with bourgeois integration, or they maintain that all whites are our enemy, and therefore  
to have any alliance with whites can only lead to co -optation of our forces. Still other  
arguments maintain that in Black White alliances we will be "fronted off" and for whites'  
own benefit. Some argue these views ideologically, in that they believe that a method…. 
ideological system, if invented by whites cannot be adapted to, modified and  
developed to serve Black folks. It is a good thing Mao, Ho Chi Minh, Amilcar Cabral,  
Kim II Sung and a host of other revolutionaries who l ed successful struggles did not  
think with such blinders.  
 
The root cause of such incorrect views of alliances with whites is "fear" and lack of  
confidence in the forces that we ourselves build, we as a people are not at all used to  
dealing with white folks from a position of power and we fear that we will be  
manipulated against our will. Another contributing factor in creating our narrow  
perspectives is the fact that because we lack a clear understanding of class struggle  
we are unable to see the re al differences that exist among whites themselves, and are  
unable to exploit these differences for our own struggle. Nothing is absolute, including  
white folks and their alleged unity. To persist in the incorrect view that whites are  
all embracing in th eir unity among other whites is a stupid and childish myth that we  
have as a people. It is a confusion an oppressed people make when confronted with a  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 25 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 25 
seemingly all powerful system of oppression, we have confused the appearance of the  
system with its su bstance. In capitalist society class struggle, inter group antagonism,  
ethnocentric divisions, are all at the basis of such a system. Competition is the order of  
the day, and class unity, group unity, are all transitory, subject to change at any given  
moment. The historical fact that out of such conflict racism has evolved as culturally  
typical of all white society should not obscure the real differences among whites based  
on economic, social, and political position, we combat racism with revolutionary   
nationalism and a Black revolutionary united front, not with reactionary nationalism and  
racism. We combat economic exploitation with revolutionary class struggle waged  
against the capitalist class and their flunkies. These are the methods the movement   
should employ, revolutionary nationalism secures in our own hands our movement for  
self determination, and thus combats the historical dynamic of white racism, while  
revolutionary class struggle allows us to defeat our class oppressor and enter into  
alliance beneficial to us.  
Revolutionary struggle is a process, and like all things, goes through stage of  
development, setbacks, and periods of dormancy, at one point uniting seemingly  
contradictory elements, and at another eliminating these elements. The principles of  
united fronts, principled alliances, are basic recognition of this dialectical process of  
social change. Alliances based on revolutionary class consciousness and around our  
national interests as a people can never be "integration." Integration is a class  
collaboration of an unprincipled and reactionary nature, for it is based on the  
revolutionary considerations of our struggle must be principled ones, its principle  
characteristic being our own working class interests as a people.  
Does this mean Black White worker solidarity at any coast? Black White worker  
solidarity cannot be attained at any cost, but at a particular cost. We do not agree with  
white leftist revisionists that Black and white workers share the same interests because  
they are both workers. While this may be true on a tactical level (specific struggles  
around certain issues), it is not true on a strategic level. Strategically speaking (long  
range) the Black workers ultimate goal is the same as the masses of Blacks, which is  
toward national self determination as a people, the creation of a socialist state, or  
Black nation places different requirements on Black worker s. Our move is for  
autonomy, our working class must not exist for any other state but our own. Whereas  
the white worker has an historical obligation to create his own socialist relationships , 
the cultural, and social dynamics of racism mandates this distinction if we are not to  
fall victim to poorlessness in the future when capitalist relations are abolished. National  
self determination is therefore a necessary stage for both Blacks and whites in  
creating new human beings able to relate to each other. Thus Black worker white  
worker solidarity can only be a tactical policy not a complete strategy having as its end  
one socialist entity as the revisionists would have us believe. Recognition of our right  
to national self determination is not compromised when we clearly understand our  
tasks as a movement. Both the establishment of a Black revolutionary Nation based on  
socialist relations, and overthrowing the present capitalist system and establishment of  
predominantly white workers state, are complementary struggles, and as such there


--- PAGE 26 ---
MESSAGE TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT/BLA 
Page 26 
will be tactical unity around issues that affect both Black and white workers. This is not  
integration.  
 
On the armed front, solidarity is based upon revolutionary action. We recognize the  
legitimacy of all revolutionary violence against the capitalist  corporate state, its ruling  
classes, and its institutions. Militarily speaking, clandestine alliances between different  
revolutionary armed formations is a matter of coordinating command first. Until such  
time as the armed front develops its logistical  machinery in depth, such coordination of  
command is unlikely. But for the Black liberation movement, its armed front, and its  
entire clandestine network, there is no hang -up concerning ideological or military  
control of our struggle by whites. Organized armed struggle has freed us of this fear so  
typical on the mass front. Our formations are Black led controlled and organized to win  
our fight for liberation.  
The Black liberation movement must be a principled  and revolutionary movement, or it  
will be unable to lead our struggle for freedom forward to final victory. The question of  
Black White alliance is not a question of should we form such alliances, but a question  
of when and with whom. To consider an ta ctical alliances that are in our own best  
interests, and that strengthen our struggles position as "integrationist," is therefore an  
incorrect view to ally oneself with something is not to necessarily bring that thing into  
your ranks and give it control  over your political policy. We refute all ideas that confuse  
principle revolutionary unity with unprincipled class collaboration.  
In closing, it is clear that there is still much to be learned, and our movement will surely  
encounter difficulties and se tbacks in the coming years. We must prepare ourselves,  
our people, and our ideas for the long and difficult road ahead. Our preparation must  
be thorough and complete, for our very existence will depend on how well we prepare  
on all fronts of the struggl e. We are in the turbulent years, the hard years. Black people  
and oppressed people throughout the world are entering the season of struggle.  
            
  THE SOONER BEGUN, THE SOONER DONE!  The BLA 
 
 
 
 
 
Multi-media Tutorials for study and download (Publi 
Back to Top

