=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Michael Eric Dyson Can You Hear Me Now The Inspiration, Wisdom, and Insight of Michael Eric Dyson.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 317
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:18:08.322770
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Praise for Michael Eric Dyson
“Michael Eric Dyson...  i s  a  w o r l d -class scholar and the
most brilliant interpreter of hip hop culture we have.”
Jay Z
“If any one person is continuing W. E. B. Du Bois’s idea of
the engaged public intellectual on African-American issues,
it’s Michael Eric Dyson.” 
Steven Nadler, Professor of Philosophy, 
University of Wisconsin
“The preeminent black intellectual.” 
The Boston Phoenix
“Few have carried on the legacy of Du Bois’s public intellec-
tualism as well, or with as much verve . . . as Professor
Michael Eric Dyson.”
Lawrence Bobo, the W. E. B. Du Bois Professor 
of the Social Sciences at Harvard University
“The ideal public intellectual for our time: translator, 
boundary-breaker, and healer of a war torn culture.”
Naomi Wolff
“Michael Eric Dyson is reshaping what it means to be a
public intellectual by becoming the most visible black
 academic of his time.”
The Philadelphia Weekly
“Such is the genius of Dyson. He flows freely from the
 profound to the profane, from popular culture to classical
literature.”
Washington Post
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page a


--- PAGE 3 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page b
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
Can You 
Hear Me 
Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page i


--- PAGE 5 ---
Also by Michael Eric Dyson
April 4, 1968: Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Death and 
How It Changed America (2008)
Know What I Mean? Reflections on Hip Hop (2007)
Debating Race with Michael Eric Dyson (2007)
Pride: The Seven Deadly Sins (2006)
Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and 
the Color of Disaster 
(2005)
Is Bill Cosby Right? Or Has the Black Middle Class 
Lost Its Mind? 
(2005)
Mercy, Mercy Me: The Art, Loves, and Demons of Marvin Gaye (2004)
The Michael Eric Dyson Reader (2004)
Open Mike: Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex, 
Culture, and Religion 
(2003)
Why I Love Black Women (2003)
Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur (2001)
I May Not Get There with You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr. (2000)
Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line (1997)
Between God and Gangsta Rap: Bearing Witness to 
Black Culture 
(1996)
Making Malcolm: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X (1995)
Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism (1993)
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page ii


--- PAGE 6 ---
The Inspiration, 
Wisdom, and 
Insight of
Michael Eric Dyson
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New York
Can You
Hear Me
Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page iii


--- PAGE 7 ---
Copyright © 2009 by Michael Eric Dyson
Published by Basic Civitas Books
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book
may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except
in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For in-
formation, address Basic Civitas Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY
10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Civitas Books are available at special discounts for
bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other or-
ganizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets Depart-
ment at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia,
PA 19103, or call (800) 255-1514, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Design by Jane Raese
Set in 10.5-point New Aster
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available for this book.
ISBN 978-0-465-01883-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page iv


--- PAGE 8 ---
To
Ingrid Saunders Jones
Richard Plepler
Johnny Furr
Mike Bantom
Kenneth Chenault
and
Marva Smalls
Gifted Executives, 
Good Friends
and Great Americans
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page v


--- PAGE 9 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page vi
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents
Telling the Truth Gently, Dave Eggers ix
1 Obama    1
2 Faith and Spirit    17
3 Love and Relationships    37
4 Music    53
5 Literature, Language, and Learning    71
6 Sports    89
7 Icons    105
8 Justice and Suffering    123
9 Arts    137
10 Gender    155
11 Preachers and Preaching    167
12 Race and Identity    183
vii
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page vii


--- PAGE 11 ---
13 Leadership    203
14 Hip Hop and Youth Culture    221
15 Homosexuality and Homophobia    239
16 Poverty and Class    255
17 Wisdom    281
Photography Credits    295
Acknowledgments    297
viii Contents
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page viii


--- PAGE 12 ---
Telling the Truth Gently
Dave Eggers
“Tell the truth gently.” This maxim ends this book, but I’m
making sure it opens it too. It characterizes, though doesn’t
summarize, Michael Eric Dyson’s work and the wall-to-wall
aphoristic wisdom this book collects. It’s very hard to both
tell the truth and do it with care, but Dyson has proved him-
self master of this high-wire act. He’s an electrifying man of
words — this is clear to anyone who has read him or heard
him or seen him speak. Although he is entirely unafraid to
walk into a rhetorical firefight, he is careful, he is considered,
and he always seeks peaceful resolution to any debate, no
matter how fraught. His ability to clarify complex and painful
issues with lyrical prose, all the while avoiding cheap shots
or opening new wounds, is remarkable. While Dyson makes
it look easy, it’s exceedingly difficult. It’s very hard to both tell
the truth and do it with care. As he puts it himself: “Paying
attention to how you say what you say doesn’t mean you have
nothing to say.”
Can You Hear Me Now?is being published at the beginning
of what many of us hope is a new era of magnanimity. Presi-
dent Obama has stunned and energized a conflict-weary na-
tion with his willingness to embrace his erstwhile opponents,
and the ever-widening embrace he models for us has allowed
millions to reconsider the divisions in our own lives — in our
ix
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page ix


--- PAGE 13 ---
communities, at our jobs, among family members. There ex-
ists the hope that through his example of generosity, notably
married with intellectual curiosity, we will usher in a new pe-
riod of honest and respectful dialogue, of candor, of listening
with humility, an era where debate is conducted with vigor,
honesty, and civility. 
Michael Eric Dyson has been doing this for years. With his
incredibly prolific pen, he’s been speaking for the voiceless,
explaining the inexplicable, putting to rest tired lies and un-
earthing new truths. No one has explained hip hop better. His
examination of Colin Powell’s life and what it signifies is
pretty much definitive. His writing about the oratory of Mar-
tin Luther King, Jr., is unparalled. And in the aftermath of
Hurricane Katrina, it was Dyson, perhaps more than anyone
else, who put the government’s criminal neglect into historical
context, channeled our collective rage, and cleared a path
 forward.
I had the pleasure of publishing some of Dyson’s early work
at Might, a small magazine I started with some friends just
after college. One day in the early ’90s, one of our editors, Paul
Tullis, was at a hip hop symposium in New York. He caught
Dr. Dyson speaking on a panel, and he was astounded. As he
does on most panels, Dyson blew everyone out of the room.
Here was a professor of religion who was no stuffed shirt —
he could quote Chuck D and the Wu Tang Clan one minute,
Nietzsche and Hegel the next, the words of scripture and Mil-
ton and MLK mixed in for good measure. And he could do it
all with great flow, disarming humor, and insanely quick wit.
Nothing could sound more leaden than a panel discussion on
hip hop, but Dyson, through sheer force of will and facility
with words, was able to bring it to life. This is the mark of a
born writer.
x Telling the Truth Gently
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page x


--- PAGE 14 ---
xiTelling the Truth Gently
Tullis approached him after the panel, asking him if he
wanted to write a column for our little magazine. Dyson al-
ready had a national reputation, but he was young enough
that Tullis felt it was at least worth a shot. We could pay very
little, Tullis said, but maybe Dyson wanted to reach the kind
of people who were reading our magazine — that is, young
idealists with a sense of humor? When Dyson said yes, we
were thrilled, but we also had that moment of confused inse-
curity that inspired Groucho Marx’s quote: “I wouldn’t want
to belong to a club that would have me.” Why would Michael
Eric Dyson agree to appear in our two-bit magazine? 
Watching his career since, the answer is clear. Dyson wants
to talk to those who want to listen. In the interest of bringing
light into the many dark corners of ignorance, he’s faced the
blowhard wrath of Bill O’Reilly and the grandfatherly chiding
of Bill Cosby. And though Dyson’s profile and reputation have
grown every year, he’s still the kind of guy who will take the
time to talk to a young person looking to him for clarity and
guidance. Type Dyson’s name into YouTube and you’ll find the
professor, wearing a Yankees cap, being interviewed outside
a Nas concert. It’s obvious the young journalist who waylaid
him is stunned that Dyson has stopped to talk to him, and in
response to the interviewer’s question — “Why are you seeing
Nas tonight?” — Dyson lays down, off the top of his head, a
wide-ranging and prose-perfect dissertation on the power and
significance of Nas’s music. The fact that Dyson would take
the time to think about the interviewer’s questions, and would
get excited about talking about the answers, shows that he’s
a guy who wakes up in the morning wanting to challenge and
be challenged. 
If you’re equally willing to be challenged and enlightened,
you’re holding a precious volume. For the newcomer to
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xi


--- PAGE 15 ---
Dyson’s work, it’s a great primer, grabbing some of the best
passages from his essays and books over the last eighteen
years or so. For the longtime reader, it’s a one-volume greatest
hits package. Dyson’s always been the kind of writer you read
with highlighter in hand, ready to illuminate some sentence
you could have sworn was written by Cicero or Douglass or
Lincoln or King. So this book does the work for you. Try this
one: “Justice is what love sounds like when it speaks in pub-
lic.” Or this: “Spirituality makes religion behave.” That’s
Dyson at his most concise and aphoristic, but there are also
the passages that give you new lenses through which to see
an issue. Here’s one of the best: “This is a painful paradox of
race: that blacks must often be rejected into the American
creed, that they are often included only after their alienation
from America reveals America’s alienation from its social
ideals.” It was Dyson who called Obama “a re-founding fa-
ther,” who called the O. J. Simpson trial a “racequake.” It was
Dyson who said, “Like a poisonous mushroom, the tangled
assumptions of race grow best in darkness.” And this: “One
of the problems with neoliberalism is that it writes the check
of its loyalty to the black and Latino poor against the funds
of conservative rhetoric and social policy.” I could go on quot-
ing the man, but that’s the point and task of the pages that
follow.
The last point I’ll make is that Dr. Dyson has a way of ex-
ploring complex issues full of contradiction and finding a way
to leave the reader with a sense of clarity of vision — and even
urgency of purpose. And the same could be said of the man.
Michael Eric Dyson is alive to the fierce urgency of now and
yet he’s full of felicitous contradictions: an intellectual who
won’t talk down to anyone; a man of God who eschews pious-
ness; a truth-teller who is not afraid of doubt or nuance; a
fighter whose arguments, though always to the point, are
xii Telling the Truth Gently
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xii


--- PAGE 16 ---
never ad hominem. We can and should be thankful we have a
writer like Michael Eric Dyson in our midst. And to have him
at a time like this? Very interesting. In 1996 he wrote, “We can
strive for a society where each receives his or her just due,
where the past in all its glory and grief is part of the equation
of racial justice and social equality. Then we won’t need to be
blind to color, which in any case is a most morbid state of ex-
istence. Then we can embrace our history and ideals with the
sort of humane balance that makes democracy more than a
distant dream.” Is this that time? With Dyson’s help, we shall
see.
xiiiTelling the Truth Gently
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xiii


--- PAGE 17 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xiv
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 18 ---
Can You 
Hear Me 
Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xv


--- PAGE 19 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page xvi
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
chapter 1
Obama
The distance from Martin Luther King’s
assassination to Barack Obama’s inauguration
is a quantum leap of racial progress whose
timeline neither cynics nor boosters could
predict.
1
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 1


--- PAGE 21 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 2


--- PAGE 22 ---
If Barack Obama’s emergence as the most powerful man in
the world has not relieved the pull between color and country,
it has proved that the black story is an American story.
Barack Obama is an American man; his triumph is an
American moment.
In the adjectival way we measure racial progress, Obama
is not a black president, but a black president.
Obama links his life to Abraham Lincoln’s. He sees in the
man he considers our greatest president the will to remake
himself, and his surroundings, through imagination and hard
work. You don’t have to be what you used to be. You don’t
have to be trapped by a past that could simply be reshaped in
the mirror of pitiless self-reflection. Such brilliant enthusiasm
made fate a four-letter word. Just take destiny into your own
hands — for Lincoln, by splitting rails, and for Obama, by toil-
ing in communities — and then transform your labor into
helpful policies through the law and politics.
Obama is the beneficiary of Frederick Douglass’s eloquence
and sense of struggle, Booker T. Washington’s self-reliant up-
lift, W. E. B. Du Bois’s brilliant unmasking of racial hierarchy,
Mary McLeod Bethune’s imperishable desire for education,
Ella Baker’s tactical and strategic energy, Malcolm X’s will to
literary reinvention, and Martin Luther King, Jr.’s soaring or-
atory and ultimate sacrifice. Obama is the latest link in the
chain of progress they all forged in the struggle to improve
the U.S. by improving the condition of black folk. Obama will
move in exactly the opposite direction: As president, he will
3Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 3


--- PAGE 23 ---
improve the condition of black folk because he improves the
nation. That is a sign of his calling as a national leader, not a
black leader.
If Obama had been successfully painted into a racial corner
as “the black candidate,” he would not only have lost his ef-
fectiveness as a viable contender in the mainstream, but he
would have compromised the ability to uplift black con-
stituents. If Obama couldn’t get elected to help all Americans
— and while black Americans were key to his election, blacks
alone couldn’t elect him — he couldn’t get elected to help any
Americans, including black Americans.
In 1968, the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., met a bullet in
resistance to his dream of equality; forty years later, Ameri-
cans cast their ballots to make Obama president. The distance
from King’s assassination to Obama’s inauguration is a quan-
tum leap of racial progress whose timeline neither cynics nor
boosters could predict.
Contrary to many critics, his election does not, nor should
it, herald a postracial future. But it may help usher in a post -
racist future. A postracial outlook seeks to delete crucial
strands of our identity; a postracist outlook seeks to delete op-
pression that rests on hate and fear, and that exploits cultural
and political vulnerability. Obama need not cease being a
black man to effectively govern, but America must overcome
its brutal racist past to permit his gifts, and those of other
blacks, to shine.
4 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 4


--- PAGE 24 ---
It was awfully futile to string Obama up on a genetic tree
and hang him for not being black enough, because, in the
mother of all ironies, his mother is white and his father is
African. The black folk claiming that he was not black the way
they want him to be black — that he wasn’t born of an Amer-
ican black father and mother — were pretty humorless and
missed the irony of claiming that a black man born of imme-
diate African ancestry didn’t measure up to their test of black-
ness.
Our belief in Obama must become contagious; it must
spread and become a belief in other blacks who have been
quarantined in racial stereotype. Regarding Obama as an ex-
ceptional black man — when he is in fact an exceptional
American — hampers our whole nation’s desire to clear the
path to success for more like him. Obama is not the first black
American capable of being president; he’s the first black
American who got the chance to prove it.
Ever since he roared into our ears in eloquent cadence at
the podium of the 2004 Democratic National Convention,
Barack Obama has struck new chords in American politics.
He has made millions believe that their elected leaders might
dare to dream out loud and not mind saying so. He makes one
feel that he can cast aside rigid categories and rise above the
plodding aspirations that weigh down too many politicians.
His written word sings; his spoken word soars on the wings
of renewed faith in the democratic process, and how we need
such renewal in an ugly age of despotic indifference to the
freedom to think creatively. Obama’s eyes are fixed on what
we can make together of our national future.
5Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 5


--- PAGE 25 ---
One of the greatest effects of Obama’s becoming the most
powerful man in the world is the incalculable psychic boost
it gives young black egos that take shape in the glare of TV
screens that project his face and words around the globe. But
the real miracle may be that Obama’s presidency persuades
Americans to take for granted that a talented black person, if
trusted, can do a great deal of good for the country. Even be-
fore he swore his oath of office, Obama served the nation in
heroic fashion.
Before he rose to fame, there was little doubt that Obama
was black. He moved to the South Side of Chicago, home to
black communities that have spawned sociological classics by
Horace Cayton and St. Clair Drake, and William Julius Wil-
son. He took a low-paying job to work largely among the
black poor. He joined the blackest church in town, for which
he’s taken considerable heat. He ran and lost a bid for Con-
gress against an icon of sixties black struggle. He married a
brilliant and beautiful and unmistakably black woman — for
all, and for what, that’s worth — with whom he is rearing two
bright and lovely black daughters.
We should not be seduced by the notion that Obama’s pres-
idency signals the end of racism, the civil rights movement,
the struggle for black equality or the careers of Jesse Jackson
and Al Sharpton. A President Obama would not have come to
be without the groundbreaking efforts of Shirley Chisholm,
and especially Jackson. Obama is able to be cool and calm be-
cause leaders like Sharpton, at least in the past, got angry.
6 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 6


--- PAGE 26 ---
Obama taught the nation how being black is not a distor-
tion of American ideals but rather a celebration of them. Still,
Obama’s foes tried to kick him to the curb of political life by
demonizing him as a threat to the American way of life. He
was bitterly denounced as a communist, socialist, Marxist,
terrorist, traitor, and an un-American subversive. So Obama
annoyed his critics by becoming even more American. He
spoke of hope; he chastised bitter partisanship; he said his
biracial roots gave him an understanding of all races; and he
claimed his meteoric rise was possible only in America. Even
as reports of foiled assassination plots surfaced, he continued
to walk steadily toward the Oval Office with a steely resolve.
In those moments, he owed as much to John Wayne as to
Martin Luther King.
Obama’s promise as a black man who bears none of the
scorn or rancor of his civil rights predecessors is a double-
edged razor: one of the reasons he’s able to be the man he is
— to have the noble bearing of a statesman who wants to get
past the arguments of the past — is because those arguments
were made, and bitter battles were fought, and in some cases,
are still being fought.
Obama’s belief in the American people is a reflection, in
part, of the profound belief they have invested in him. His be-
lief also greatly borrows from his trafficking in the cross-
 sections of various cultures, colors, and communities.
Obama’s roots in more than one race, and his experiences in
many cultures, are not, as falsely advertised, a liability. But
7Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 7


--- PAGE 27 ---
there has been a great deal of Obamanxiety; in fact, there’s
been a war in Barack, that is, in his metaphoric body, which
captures the insular and insidious nature of so much talk
about blackness and race.
Obama has the urgent sense of destiny that only a few
politicians have ever truly possessed in American life. This is
not to be confused with the gutless swagger of George W.
Bush’s revamped Manifest Destiny, or the perilous and
bloated delusions of Richard Nixon.
Obama’s restless self-reinventions — from organizer to
state senator, from law professor to president of the United
States — make him the very language of American social pos-
sibility. Obama the iconic figure has quickly come to express
the idea that America could produce a man like him to lead
the country forward in a time of nation-defining crisis. At first
blush, all that Obama is not — a rich white man; the son of
social royalty; a well-established Washington insider — makes
him a counterintuitive choice to take the helm of a political
vessel that threatens to capsize. Yet on closer inspection, it is
precisely his mix of gifts that makes him the kind of man who
can right the ship of American political destiny — a remark-
ably sober and cool demeanor, a keen intelligence and a po-
litical maturity far beyond his years, an eloquence drawn
from fighting injustice, and a sensitivity to all sides of a debate
born of his biracial heritage.
8 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 8


--- PAGE 28 ---
Obama is, no doubt, the product of a paradox: he rests atop
an inverted racial pyramid that he has been credited with
overturning, and yet without the fierce rumblings of race that
his ascent seems to overcome, his career, and now his presi-
dency, wouldn’t necessarily be seen as the miracle of transcen-
dence for which they’ve been touted.
The debate about whether or not Obama is black enough
rested on a bad misreading of the politics of race in black
America. That debate jumped off more in media than in the
mouths of everyday black folk who longed to know more
about Obama’s politics, not his pigment.
The Oval Office is the ultimate symbol of national access
to power. If the levers of influence are weighted with bias or
unjust privilege, they swing away from the promise of democ-
racy, which is America’s greatest legacy. Today, Americans of
all stripes can be proud that the ideals of the founders, though
trumped over the centuries by grievous instances of racism
and sexism, have finally found us.
A black president can’t end black misery; a black president
can’t be a civil rights leader or primarily a crusader for racial
justice. A black president won’t stop racism or erase bigotry.
A black president is not the president of blacks alone, but the
president of the United States. That tricky but not trivial dif-
ference suggests that prophets of the people, like Jesse Jack-
son and Al Sharpton, don’t go unemployed when politicians
of the race do well.
9Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 9


--- PAGE 29 ---
Barack Obama’s journey as a black man has not challenged
his claim to national identity. Instead, it has helped to certify
his standing as a quintessential American. In becoming pres-
ident, Obama has integrated the pantheon of figures who
have inherited the symbolic role of the nation’s father from
George Washington. Obama has become a re–Founding Fa-
ther of sorts, a symbolic patriarch who guards the American
way of life and redefines American moral ambition through
his speech and action. Obama is now the face of America to
the nation and world. It is striking enough that a black man
will skirt the irritating limits of race to become the nation’s
advocate before the world. It is even more striking that in so
doing Obama has not interrupted, but rather extended, the
democratic ideals of the Founding Fathers.
To see what makes Obama tick, look at his training in the
trenches of community organizing. As Ronald Reagan prac-
ticed what Vice President George Bush would call “voodoo
economics” — supply-side theories wrapped in tax cuts for
the wealthy — Obama exited the Ivy League corridors of Co-
lumbia University in 1983. After a brief and unsatisfying stint
on Wall Street, he headed straight for the ’hood. On the South
Side of Chicago, he worked with a church-based group that
battled poverty’s offspring: crime and high unemployment.
Obama rolled up his sleeves — something he got used to
doing to satisfy his basketball jones on countless asphalt
courts — and applied elbow grease and hard thinking to the
persistent ills of the poor. Practical efforts to help the belea-
guered are good training for leaders of the free world. The
poignant memory of the most afflicted stands a better chance
to replay in their minds.
10 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 10


--- PAGE 30 ---
It is supremely ironic, perhaps even tragic, that a man like
O. J. Simpson, accused of murder with an extraordinary
amount of evidence amassed against him, could receive the
black benefit of doubt, and yet in some quarters, Obama
couldn’t pass the smell test.
Black folk had every right to ask if Obama would betray
them, to see if he was more Clarence Thomas than Martin
Luther King. And they have a right to be nervous about all the
talk about postracial identity, knowing full well that such a
possibility is not only relatively slim, but that it’s not a norm
that should even be embraced. One need not stop being black
in order to be a full citizen of the nation. Bland racial identi-
ties are not required to help the nation to a fair and just polity.
We should not be postracial — seeking to get beyond the up-
lifting meanings and edifying registers of blackness. Rather,
we should be postracist: moving beyond cultural fascism and
vicious narratives of racial privilege and superiority that tear
at the fabric of “E Pluribus Unum.”
Obama’s racial experiences may offer him an edge in the
national effort to overcome the poisonous divisions that
plague the American soul. His fascinating mix of race and cul-
ture shows up in lively fashion — including his love for the
upper reaches of Abraham Lincoln’s emancipating political
vision, as well as his compassion for the black boys and girls
stuck on the lowest rung of the ladder of upward mobility.
That he is aware of race without being its prisoner — that he
is rooted in, but not restricted by, his blackness — challenges
orthodoxies and playbooks on all sides of the racial divide.
But it may also make him curiously effective in the pledge to
11Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 11


--- PAGE 31 ---
overcome our racial malaise and to restore our national
 kinship.
Barack Obama has come closer than any figure in recent
history to obeying a direct call of the people to the brutal and
bloody fields of political mission. His visionary response to
that call gives great hope that he can galvanize our nation
with the payoff of his political rhetoric: a true democracy fed
by justice, one that balances liberty with responsibility. He
may be our best hope to tie together the fraying strands of our
political will into a powerful and productive vision of national
destiny, one for which Martin Luther King, Jr., hoped and
died.
Obama, something of a re–Founding Father, now joins the
pantheon of white men who have cast a bright light or nega-
tive shadow over the nation’s political landscape. His inter-
pretation of America’s ideals and destiny will enliven the
creeds that have shaped the nation’s self-image.
Perhaps even more than being like the Old Testament
leader Joshua, Obama is like his biblical namesake Barak,
who is described in the New Testament (along with other
judges) as one “who through faith conquered kingdoms, ad-
ministered justice, and gained what was promised.” Obama
has a real chance to embody the stable, principled black po-
litical leadership that Martin Luther King envisioned. And by
administering justice and gaining what has been promised,
Obama has an authentic opportunity to fulfill the legacy of
King, and of Jesse Jackson too. Because King and Jackson
12 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 12


--- PAGE 32 ---
fought bitter battles with ugly forces, Obama can gracefully
walk through doors kicked in by King and Jackson. As he
walks through those doors, Obama carries the legacy of his
people even as he seeks to serve the entire nation. There could
hardly be a more fitting tribute to King, and to the people and
justice he loved.
The election of Barack Obama symbolizes the resurrection
of hope and the restoration of belief in a country that has
often failed to treat its black citizens as kin. For millions of
blacks abandoned to social neglect and cultural isolation,
Obama’s words and vision have built a bridge back into the
American family. Obama’s historic win is the triumphant clos-
ing of a circle of possibility begun when former slaves boldly
imagined that one of their offspring or kin would one day lead
the nation that enslaved their ancestors.
As a black man, I feel indescribable elation and pride to be
an American on this day of Obama’s election as president.
Black folk have told our children a useful lie in the past: they
could be anything their minds and talents permitted them to
be, even president. Now we can stop lying and start working
to make sure that Obama is only the first of many more —
presidents, astronauts, governors, senators, theoretical physi-
cists, baseball commissioners, NASCAR drivers, Olympic
swimmers, or whatever other pursuit we can dare to imagine.
As Obama made his way in local and national politics, he
bravely embodied Du Bois’s wish for black folk to develop
themselves in the white world without being dissed by their
13Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 13


--- PAGE 33 ---
own group. It’s not that Obama was seeking to escape his
black identity so much as he wanted to leap valiantly past
racial limits. Blacks quickly got over their suspicion of
Obama’s experiment in free black identity. They grew to ap-
preciate how he yearned to crush racial stereotypes and revel
in a cosmopolitan American identity that drank from its black
roots without being strangled by them.
The psychological advantage of waking up knowing and
seeing almost every day the leader of the free world as a mem-
ber of your own tribe brings pride even to the most cynical
critic. Maybe this psychic, internal emotional turmoil that
black people struggle against will somehow be lessened by
seeing the image of a black man in charge.
As the nation is mired in war and economic depression,
Obama believes in America. He proclaims our nation as a
land of hope awash in moral excellence and political reinven-
tion, a place where people may dream out loud about impos-
sible ventures and turn them to fact. He is fueled by his own
improbable transformation from insecure kid to indomitable
political force.
As he took the oath of office to uphold the Constitution and
to defend the nation from its enemies, Obama joined a pre-
cious short list of men who have shaped the nation’s future
and direction for good or ill. Obama’s efforts have not solved
the riddle of race in America. We are not a postracial land,
and we have not vanquished racism from our midst. But
Barack Obama’s election as president has brought us closer
14 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 14


--- PAGE 34 ---
to the day when a man can be considered an American even
when it is recognized that he is also black.
They called him a Communist, a Socialist, a traitor, and a
terrorist, but since January 20, 2009, they have called him
President of the United States of America. 
MED 
15Obama
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 15


--- PAGE 35 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 16
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 36 ---
chapter 2
Faith and Spirit
In this era of global relations, God may be
outsourcing the pursuit of justice, truth, and
goodness to those who aren’t religious but
who are willing to do the work.
17
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 17


--- PAGE 37 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 18


--- PAGE 38 ---
Spirituality makes religion behave. 
Believers at their best avoid attempts to impose Christian-
ity on the world, a strategy as old as religious establishment
and as new as national efforts to manipulate God for political
favor. Christians maintain their belief while making argu-
ments for the common good that are subject to criticism and
revision because they are neither final nor perfect. 
Because the Founding Fathers were not orthodox Chris-
tians, the views they held about the role of religion in the re-
public had more to do with its preservative function in
national life and its support of political institutions than its
strictly redemptive role as envisioned by partisan believers. 
The culture of sexual privilege encouraged within most re-
ligious quarters — where ministers, priests, and rabbis expect
carnal rewards for spiritual service — must be openly ad-
dressed. The doctrine of sin in most religious circles counsels
forgiveness in the face of failure because human vulnerability
is universal. But that’s different from the moral hypocrisy that
often haunts these religious circles. While clergy rail against
the sexual deviance of rappers, teen mothers, and gays and
lesbians, they often fail to confront the rituals of seduction
they practice from the pulpit. Bedding women is nearly a
sport in some churches. 
Jean Paul Sartre led me into atheism as a youth. He lured
me with his insistence that human beings should make their
19Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 19


--- PAGE 39 ---
own choices in a godless universe where the only design is the
one we furnish. Enough with God, I thought, even though I
didn’t leave the church and insisted on pricking the church’s
conscience by making arguments against God on God’s own
turf. To my pastor’s credit, he encouraged me to remain in
church and to run the course of my atheism. My strident dis-
belief was dramatically reversed a year later when I was
caught in the middle of an armed robbery, and I promised the
God I didn’t believe in that I would use my mind to serve him
if he would let me live. He did, and I have. 
Faith has a large part to play in the public arena, but only
if it will describe its goals in a language that is publicly effec-
tive, accompanied by the politics with the best chance to
make those goals concrete and relevant. 
I loved coming to prayer meetings because I got a more in-
timate sense of belonging to a congregation where, like the
bar on the television series Cheers, “everybody knows your
name.” Our church had nearly five thousand members, mak-
ing it easy to get lost in the shuffle, especially as a poor youth.
Prayer meetings provided a glimpse of the church in glorious
subtraction. The midweek prayer and praise service, as the
Wednesday meetings were officially known, winnowed the
faithful from the once-a-week-on-Sunday-morning crowd in
most churches, much the way Bible study does. Beyond that,
prayer meetings offered a theological ultrasound of a congre-
gation’s spiritual health by forming a picture of the hidden
organs of faith and prayer that sustain the church body. 
20 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 20


--- PAGE 40 ---
In this era of global relations, God may be theologically
outsourcing the pursuit of justice, truth, and goodness to
those who aren’t religious but who are willing to do the work. 
Water is central to African American culture; it symbolizes
freedom, separation and purity, and birth and death, all at the
same time. It is important in the religious stories we tell to
narrate our identity and destiny. The Red Sea opened up in
the Bible to clear a path for escaping Hebrew slaves, but
closed and drowned Pharaoh’s pursuing army. The angry sea
consumed and spit out black bodies during the Middle Pas-
sage, a watery grave that provided freedom from the brutal
chattel slavery ahead. But water is also the symbol of spiritual
redemption, of burying sins and cleansing the soul of moral
dirt. “Wade in the Water” is a favorite spiritual, or slave song,
one that promises the ebony children of God that “God’s
gonna trouble the waters.”
Our faith can give us the comfort that God walks with us,
and will not forsake us. That may seem like small solace in
the face of our finitude. But the knowledge that God refuses
to let us go ultimately calms the soul in distress. That is the
only guarantee we have that the universe that has betrayed us
at one turn through the perils of nature will stand behind us
through the divine Word.
The black church has been flooded by theological support
for material greed that threatens to drown our identification
with “the least of these.” In the meantime, we have surren-
dered Micah’s prophetic plea to love mercy, do justice, and
21Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 21


--- PAGE 41 ---
walk humbly with God. Black pastors and flocks must refocus
on their mission to the downtrodden, the heavy laden, the so-
cially outcast, the bereaved, and those imprisoned by hope-
lessness and despair. Too many black churches have failed to
translate the gospel into concrete demands for social justice.
Instead, we have tailored our theologies to fit the market. And
we have surrendered moral ground to a conservative culture
that resists our history and our best traditions.
The real wall of separation most grievous to American
Christianity is not between church and state; it remains the
wall between black and white. 
There is a relentless procession, circulation, and movement
of black bodies in the black church: the choir gliding in and
grooving to the rhythmic sweep of a grinding gospel number;
members marching aisle by aisle to plop a portion of their
earnings in the collection plate; women sashaying to the
podium to deliver the announcements; kids huddling around
the teacher for the children’s morning message; the faithful
standing at service’s start to tell how good the Lord’s been to
them this week; the convicted leaping to their feet to punctu-
ate a preacher’s point in spiritual relief or guilt; the deliberate
saunter to the altar of the “whosoever wills” to pray for the
sick and bereaved, and for themselves; the white-haired,
worldly-wise deacon bowing down at this seat to thank God
that he was spared from death, that “the walls of my room
were not the walls of my grave,” his bed “sheet was not my
winding sheet,” and his bed was not “my cooling board”; the
church mother shaking with controlled chaos as the Holy
Ghost rips straight through her vocal chords down to her
22 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 22


--- PAGE 42 ---
abdomen; the soloist’s hands gesturing grandly as she bends
each note into a rung on Jacob’s ladder to carry the congre-
gation “higher and higher”; the ushers’ martial precision as
they gracefully guide guests to a spot where they might get a
glimpse of glory; and the choir director calling for pianissimo
with a guileless “shhhh” with one hand as the other directs
the appointed soprano to bathe the congregation in her
honey-sweet “ha-lay-loo-yuh.” 
When the divine intersects human identity, a transforming
energy is unleashed that redeems time and gives human be-
ings unshakable purpose.
When Jesus came to earth, it spotlighted a God who, when
it came to battling impossible odds, had been there and done
that. Because black Christians passed through the “valley of
the shadow of death,” they took solace from a God who had
faced the same ills they faced. Divine abandonment. Cruel
cursing. Ethnic bigotry. Religious marginalization. Unjust
punishment. Spiteful epithets. And most important, vicious
death. Just knowing that God had walked these same roads,
eaten this same food, tasted this same disappointment, expe-
rienced this same rejection, fought this same self-doubt, en-
dured this same betrayal, felt this same isolation, encountered
this same opposition, and overcome this same pain often
made the difference between black folk living and dying. 
A great source of hope to black Christians is the belief that
God identifies with our condition as the underdog. That’s why
the stories of Christ’s birth in the gospels are carefully read
23Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 23


--- PAGE 43 ---
and heavily leaned on: they express the fact that God sides
with the homeless, the oppressed, those besieged by the state,
those who are the victims of political terror. When God was
born in a manger as Jesus, it showed just how far God was
willing to go to prove to humanity that God loves us.
Vital, living traditions leave space for people to change bad
habits because they have a better understanding of what the
tradition should mean. As one wise churchman put it: tradi-
tion is the living faith of dead people, while the traditional is
the dead faith of living people. Too often, the latter has ruled
our churches. While we may share our forbears’ faith, we can
certainly leave aspects of their theologies behind. 
There is a profound kinship between spirituality and sexu-
ality. Great mystics figured that out a long time ago. Black
Christians are reluctant to admit the connection because our
theologies of sexuality are captive to the mind-body split
thought up by philosopher Descartes. Except it is translated
as the split between body and soul. Black Christian sexuality
is subject to the sort of segregation we sought to escape in the
social realm. The body and soul in worship are kept one place
while the body and soul in heat are kept elsewhere. That’s
ironic because, as critic Michael Ventura has argued, black
culture, especially black music, has healed, indeed tran-
scended, the split between mind and body inherited from
Descartes and certain forms of Christian theology. Segments
of secular black culture have explored the intimate bond of
sexuality and spirituality. The black church has given a great
deal to black culture, including the style and passion of much
24 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 24


--- PAGE 44 ---
25Faith and Spirit
of black pop music. It is time the church accept a gift in re-
turn: the union of body and soul. 
Their faith has long provided black folk safe harbor in ugly
storms and disasters, both natural and man-made. When
Africans were torn from their mother soil and forced into
bondage in the New World, millions of lives were lost on the
angry seas. Still, even as their brothers and sisters perished,
their faith allowed many Africans to preserve life and limb
and to symbolically book passage on the “Ol’ Ship of Zion.”
When blacks were plunged beneath the harsh waves of chattel
slavery, they sought refuge in the community of faith they
carved out of their brutal existence. When the civil rights
movement was drenched with the foul spray of white su-
premacy and Jim Crow, it took cover in sanctuaries across the
land.
On every first Sunday of the month, or whenever they cel-
ebrated the Lord’s Supper, black Christians broke bread and
drank wine, knowing that Jesus’ crucified body was their cru-
cified body, and that Jesus’ resurrected body could be theirs
as well. Every time the words of Holy Communion were re-
peated, “this do in remembrance of me,” black Christians re-
membered those lost warriors who once fought mightily
against oppression but who now slept with the ancestors. 
Even as we battle bruising inequalities, we must be careful
to resist the Elijah complex, named for the prophet who be-
lieved that he was the only righteous person left to spread
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 25


--- PAGE 45 ---
God’s message and to keep God’s people from perishing. But
God spoke to Elijah in practical terms that had profound re-
sults: “Rest your mind and soul, and get something to eat,”
God said to Elijah, and I’m paraphrasing here, “and then look
and see that there are seven thousand others who have not
bowed their knees to the false god Baal.” The sense that we
are alone, that we have no moral compatriots, is the perennial
plague of the prophet. But we are often reminded that God
has other warriors, messengers, and prophets who speak the
truth. Such a recognition should relieve our stress and chal-
lenge our often arrogant assumptions that we are the exclu-
sive bearers of God’s word.
Today’s prosperity gospel reflects earlier trends in twenti-
eth-century theological materialism, termed the gospel of
health and wealth, which emerged in the 1920s, ’30s, and ’40s.
It influenced both white and black preachers. I think one ex-
planation for its revival is the attempt of new members of the
upper black middle class to offer theological grounds for their
success without feeling guilty, or responsible, for those left
behind. As a result, we get a materialistic, not a material, reli-
gion. The former archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple,
said that Christianity is the most material religion there is be-
cause we address the flesh, we deal with the body. A material
religion takes seriously the issues of disease, suffering, pain,
death, and so on. But materialistic religion surrenders to an
economic interpretation of the faith. It attempts to baptize fi-
nancial pursuits as the greatest goal of life, spurning our ob-
ligations to the poor while remaining silent about the forces
that cause economic inequality.
26 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 26


--- PAGE 46 ---
There’s this arbitrary sin system that we’ve established here
that says you can’t do this and you can’t do that. Yet we’re
doing all kinds of stuff that we know is out of bounds and un-
questionably “sinful.” And if we would be honest about it, we
could talk about how complex our real theologies are. Not our
written ones, but our lived ones.
Let’s be honest: for many Christians, the insistence on the
virgin birth is just as much a moral matter as a theological
one. The same religious folk who beat up on poor single
mothers have to give Mary a pass. The fact that God chose her
to mother God’s son makes her different, makes her special.
And thus she’s spared the brutal condemnation that single
poor mothers routinely receive in our culture. But who’s to
say that God doesn’t still choose poor single mothers to de-
liver another of God’s beloved sons or daughters to earth, even
if they get here in more conventional fashion?
At the root of so much of the fratricide and the genocide in
our world is the question of the use or abuse of money and
wealth. That’s why we should talk about prosperity in the con-
text of God’s plan. God is not interested in the unfettered ac-
cumulation of wealth for self-aggrandizing purposes, for
self-absorbed “me-ism.” It’s about helping this nation. It’s
about helping our people. It’s about helping all people in need.
As strange as it might sound, God has a hard time finding
room in our hearts and culture. Most of us who think of our-
selves as Christians feel that we’re full of God. We pray and
politic in God’s name; we bless and curse folk in God’s name.
27Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 27


--- PAGE 47 ---
We preach and posture in God’s name. And we think we’d
never turn God away. We see ourselves with open arms wel-
coming God into every nook and cranny of our existence. But
the story of Christmas reminds us that it’s the very folk who
think we’re in with God who keep God outside — of our iden-
tities, our institutions, and our history.
If God is going to be God, you’ve got to get rid of your other
gods. And sometimes God does a jack move on your gods, just
rips them off; just uses your enemies to take them away from
you. I know we don’t like that, but to paraphrase the great
preacher Paul Sherer, “Real worship is bringing the gods we’ve
made to bow down to the God who made us.” But what do we
do? We attempt to make God bow down before our gods.
The story of Jesus’ birth — the struggles of his parents, and
the tough and dramatic circumstances in which he was con-
ceived and delivered — may as well have been ripped from
the pages of faith and dropped right into today’s social science
textbooks. There’s been a great deal of hand wringing and
moralizing about the poor: They don’t try hard enough to get
education. They wear their victim status like a badge of honor.
They’re hopelessly dependent upon government paychecks.
They have too many babies out of wedlock. They don’t speak
with intelligence or eloquence. They spurn moral discipline
and are ruled by lust and envy. 
Thank God that the biblical account of Jesus’ family is free
of such harsh judgments of the poor. Joseph and Mary were
obviously without means; why else would they have to resort
to a manger because there was no room for them in an inn?
And yet the Bible doesn’t condemn them for their condition.
28 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 28


--- PAGE 48 ---
Instead, the story unfolds in simple eloquence to suggest their
purity of heart — that is, their singleness of purpose — even
as it captures their struggles for divine direction. They were
sure the finger of God had written in their lives; they were
simply trying to figure out what it all meant. They knew it re-
volved around the special child Mary would bring into the
world, but they wrestled with inner visions and heavenly
warnings to discern his lofty destiny.
Martin Luther King, Jr., didn’t want to create a Christian
nation. He used his Christian beliefs to create a just nation.
We should offer the same sort of guidance to poor single
mothers that Mary got — from God, the angels, religious sto-
ries, and human beings. Maybe then their children will be
able to prosper like Jesus did. We should hope this is the case
for minority mothers who, like Mary, witness decrees sent out
to harm their children. Of course these need not be as explicit
as Herod’s edict to find and kill Jesus because of the threat he
posed. There are some political figures who detect in black
children’s birth to poor mothers a threat to their conservative
beliefs. The threats are sometimes expressed as moral fears
concealed in political terms — such as the need to reform
poor families harmed by “social pathologies” and welfare
 dependency. 
On occasion, the potential threat of black children to con-
servative philosophies barrels over the top. That happened
when former education secretary Bill Bennett pondered aloud
the social benefits of the abortion of black babies. And there
is a great deal of harm for black children in political and cul-
tural edicts to build more prisons to warehouse young black
29Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 29


--- PAGE 49 ---
boys, or to shut schools in poor neighborhoods, thus making
black youth even more socially isolated and vulnerable. These
different disguises worn by political figures invested in black
social control makes them little more than Herod in drag. 
We have to be very careful about talking about how God
blesses us — even in our theology when it says, “I was spared.”
I was supposed to be at the World Trade Center doing a book
signing the day it went down. I was instead in Boston that
Monday night; I could’ve been on that plane Tuesday morn-
ing. Some of my friends and family said, “God blessed you.”
And I said, “Yeah, hold on, I am blessed by God, but not be-
cause I was spared.” What kind of theology is that? So the
people who went down to their deaths were not blessed?
Blessing is not determined by possession of material wealth
or even by your life. Blessing is determined by your relation-
ship with God. Blessing is determined by your consciousness
to know you need God. Blessing is determined by your inti-
mate contact with the Almighty.
It cannot be denied that religion pervades the terrorism —
and our response to it — that crumbled the World Trade Cen-
ter and our national security. When a Koran was found
among the effects left behind in a car rented by two suspects
in the World Trade Center debacle, religious stereotypes im-
mediately flashed. Many in the West believe that Islam en-
courages fanaticism and a hatred of our way of life. In truth,
the Muslim faith at best preaches peace and human solidarity.
As with any religion, the culture in which it takes root will in-
evitably influence its expression. In countries where Islamic
belief has thrived, including many Arab nations, desperate
30 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 30


--- PAGE 50 ---
poverty and the perception that American imperialism has
crippled Middle Eastern stability has certainly fueled nation-
alist sentiment. It has also fed anti-American attitudes and
destructive violence by religiously inspired groups.
The use of violence in the name of religion is not unique to
Islam. Christianity and Judaism are filled with members
claiming God inspired their terror. In fact, the most visible ex-
pression of any religion, especially to outsiders, is usually its
fundamentalist branch. The true believer of any faith willing
to kill for religious principles is a blight, whether in Oklahoma
or Afghanistan. The terror unleashed in the attacks on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon is not an indictment of
belief, but believers. The twisted interpretation of religion
cannot be allowed to smear spiritual traditions that sustain
us. 
Millions of citizens here and around the globe turn imme-
diately to their faith to shield them when terror erupts. When
the 9/11 terrorists struck, mosques, temples, synagogues, ash -
rams, churches, and cathedrals were packed. Bishops, imams,
rabbis, shamans, priests, and ministers read from Holy Scrip-
tures and helped believers address the unspeakable depravity
they had witnessed. Sometimes, the best defense against ter-
ror is a religiously inspired critique of zealous pride and na-
tionalist sentiment.
There’s no question that former president George W. Bush’s
evangelical Protestantism greatly influenced his understand-
ing of foreign and domestic policy. I think he felt a sense of
divine calling to make sure that all of the values that we have
as Americans would be protected. There appeared to be col-
31Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 31


--- PAGE 51 ---
lusion between ideology and theology: Bush’s faith had been
profoundly informed by a sense of missionary zeal to support
the American empire.
We often mistakenly blur the history of American religion
and American empire. If you take a close look at Thomas Jef-
ferson and Benjamin Franklin, these are not Christians in the
same sense as George W. Bush. He believed in divine revela-
tion; they believed in practical moral guidance. This is not a
Christian nation in the sense that people think. The Founding
Fathers were not promoting Christianity to evangelize the cul-
ture. Benjamin Franklin said, and I’m paraphrasing, “What-
ever religion exists is great if it is good for the nation because
it brings us together and creates a kind of political consensus
for us to be able to do our business.” He was not promoting a
particular version of Christianity. And by the time Thomas
Jefferson cut and pasted what he believed should be extracted,
and what should remain, from the scriptures — Jefferson
slashed the miracles and mystery of the Bible and reduced it
to reasonable propositions — most evangelical Christians
would have been appalled. They wouldn’t even recognize their
Bible afterwards. So we’ve been hoodwinked by some reli-
gious folk to believe that this is a Christian nation, when it
simply is not.
You can’t be an effective prophet if you’re on Pharaoh’s pay-
roll.
The Founding Founders for the most part believed in
mechanistic deism. That means they believed God wound the
32 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 32


--- PAGE 52 ---
world up like a machine and now it’s operating on its own en-
ergy. God kicked it off but God doesn’t get in on our side.
None of that, “We want to thank Jesus for helping Notre
Dame to win this football game; we want to thank God for
being on our side of the war versus those evil people.” Many
of the Founding Fathers did not even believe in the kind of
personal God involved in human history, at least not the way
believers claim today. So, just as a matter of historical empha-
sis, many conservative Christians have snookered the rest of
us. For those believers who do subscribe to the belief that God
operates in human history, there are many other thinkers who
provide alternative theological and political arguments. Peo-
ple like Martin Luther King, Jr., offered us a language of civil
disobedience and civil rights that was available to all people,
whether you were Jewish or Christian or Muslim.
There are many progressive evangelicals who challenge the
powers-that-be, and who warn against identifying the King-
dom of God with the social or political order, or the state, in-
cluding America. This notion that America is God’s chosen
nation is not only politically harmful, but it’s theologically
suspicious. Such a claim involves the sin of ideological ex-
haustion, as if one form of state completely captures the will
of God. Unfortunately, the more cautious and critical voices
just don’t get heard as much as the shrill right-wing voices in
our society.
There is a religious dimension to the black community’s
taboo on seeking therapy and strengthening our mental
health. “All you need is Jesus,” they’ll say, or “Just pray to
Allah.” I like to Dysonize the story of Jesus coming down from
33Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 33


--- PAGE 53 ---
the Mountain of Transfiguration, where he was met by some
of his disciples who were stumped by their failure to deliver
a poor soul from his spiritual affliction. “Lord, why couldn’t
we cast out this demon?” they asked Jesus. And Jesus said,
“Oh, this kind comes out only by prayer and fasting.” And I
like to add, “And Prozac.” I tell folk, “Naw, you need to send
that Negro to the psychiatrist. Jesus gave you enough sense
to understand that — and blessed the therapist with some
healing advice.” For too many of our folk — and let’s not lie,
in the broader culture as well — therapy means that you’re
weak, or that you’re not sufficiently spiritual. The hurtful
myth that religion alone will sustain you has kept many a
brother from tapping into alternate forms of help — like self-
examination in therapy — that might be able to keep him sane
in a culture and country not designed to do that.
What you often get with the gospel of health and wealth is
that ordinary believers, especially those who are poor because
of structural inequality and social injustice, think that there’s
something wrong with them. They think that the moral defect
lies in their failure to believe or behave correctly, and not in
flawed public policies or political systems. This gospel of
health and wealth is, in a sense, a playing out of one of Elis-
abeth Kübler-Ross’s stages of death and dying, where you bar-
gain with God before you accept death. Materialistic theology
is almost like that; it’s the attempt to deal with the dark night
of the soul that can result from material deprivation and fi-
nancial misery by trying to negotiate with the economic
forces of the universe controlled in their view by God. I think
the gospel of health and wealth, and theological materialism,
is a way of negotiating with God about the economic and ma-
terial limits of one’s life. What happens is that those who get
34 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 34


--- PAGE 54 ---
blessed feel that they’ve somehow been saved from the eco-
nomic hell to which others have been sent.
In black religious circles, a crucial distinction is made be-
tween knowing about God and knowing God. The former rep-
resents a strictly intellectual exercise devoid of faith
commitments; the latter is rooted in the faithful assertion of
an intellectual and personal relationship with the Supreme
Being. The consequence of such a relationship is the perfor-
mance of faith,the dramatization of devotion,and the behaving
of belief. In black religion, there is little substance or benefit
to knowing God without doing, or performing, one’s knowl-
edge of God. 
When we close the Bible, we have neither shut God’s mouth
nor closed God’s mind.
MED 
35Faith and Spirit
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 35


--- PAGE 55 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 36
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 56 ---
chapter 3
Love and Relationships
In some ways, it might be easier to surrender
one’s life for a loved one than to do the daily
and difficult work of making a relationship
work.
37
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 37


--- PAGE 57 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 38


--- PAGE 58 ---
We must put aside our beliefs about womenand honestly en-
counter the woman that stands before us.
Men are often afraid to admit that it’s much more than sex
keeping us in a relationship. There’s a deeper hunger, for
which sex is merely a symptom. There’s a hunger for joy, a
hunger for unconditional affirmation, a hunger, in the end,
for love. Men have to stop trading away what we need for the
hot rush of what we crave. We’ve got to pull out of the crotch-
notch sweepstakes, and stop measuring by the crude mathe-
matical equation: M = HMWB (manhood equals how many
women bedded).
Loving a woman doesn’t mean that we surrender our pride
as men.
A great deal of the dissension between the sexes draws on
a deep mutual distrust of the other’s ultimate agenda. The
only way to lessen such distrust is through friendship. That
means we must focus on the fundamentals: our lover’s out-
look on life, her approach to problem solving, her spiritual
values, her moral vision, her social conscience. That doesn’t
sound very sexy. But it can make for dynamite sex and blissful
erotic communion because sparks fly when both mates are
rooted in such security. 
Black men and women are in the same bed. Instead of cut-
ting each other’s throats, let’s rub each other’s feet, massage
each other’s backs, and heal each other’s wounds.
39Love and Relationships
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 39


--- PAGE 59 ---
Thank God there are some women who hope that their
man will be better than his failures, bigger than his weak-
nesses, and grander than her low expectations of him. 
Marcia, I shudder when I think of some of the things I have
shared with you, and the vulnerability such sharing entails.
But such thoughts are quickly disposed of when I think of the
gentleness you have displayed about my doubts, the sensitiv-
ity you have shown in the face of my fears, and the unspeak-
able love you have shown in the face of my weaknesses and
failures. And yet you remain my soul’s closest companion, and
for that I have eternal gratitude.
We have a better sense of who we are in a healthy relation-
ship with another person. We get a chance to see the outlines
of our faces, our characters, our souls. We come to be known
and loved for our real selves.
I married my twenty-six-year-old actress girlfriend, Terrie,
when I was eighteen because I got her pregnant. We were
both members of the same church, sang in the same choir,
and I thought, had the same kind of love for each other. It was
not until two months after our shotgun wedding, when Terrie
told me that she didn’t love me and should have never married
me, that I discovered that she was shooting blanks.
40 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 40


--- PAGE 60 ---
Women need to manage their expectations, especially in
the sometimes jarring contrast between the man they were
expecting to have versus the one they got.
We make love. God makes babies.
As a teen father I had a wonderful boy who is now a mar-
velous man. I spent quite a bit of time attending to him. I did
much of the night duty. I loved my son and wanted to bond
with him. I think many more black men than are given credit
love and nurture their children.
Too often we’ve got it wrong. We think that flying sparks
create long-lasting love. But sparks can only ignite what’s
been stored and accumulated; they cannot store and accumu-
late.
In the ’60s and ’70s, interracial marriage, whether intended
or not, represented a rejection of racist values and suggested
that love was a matter between individuals, not races. Few
could miss the heroic gesture of loving across racial lines.
Those who did often risked their reputations and social status
while enduring cultural stigma. It was apparent that inter -
racial romance couldn’t help but be interpreted in political
terms.
41Love and Relationships
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 41


--- PAGE 61 ---
For a man to get to intimacy, he has to feel safe. It’s imper-
ative to communicate that, no matter what he says about his
fears and feelings, the relationship can bear it.
No two people are alike, and no two women behave in the
same manner. We can’t begin our sentences with, “All women
. . .” It is better to say, “In my experience, women . . .” It is
even better to say, “Women are distinct individuals, and I
want to know who you are.”
Home should be a no-harm zone, the place where we
choose to be known and understood. Our emotional health
depends on it. 
Women, you need to hold a mirror up and show your man
the mask he’s hiding behind. Some men don’t remember they
put the mask on in the first place. You’ve got to gently insist
to your man that it’s there, and that it’s blocking him from his
highest good. You know when he’s putting on a front because
you feel it. It’s like opening the freezer and feeling the air
blowing over the ice. You have to help him understand that
he’s not all there. That he’s not only missing in action, he’s
missing out. Say something like, “I understand that you’re
going into a hostile environment, but here it’s okay for you to
let your guard down. The way you’re being now is coming be-
tween us, and I’d like us to be closer.” If you share this truth,
and he says, “Great, thank you,” or “Let me think about that,”
you may have some grounds for growth. But if his response
is something like: “You’re seeing things wrong. This isn’t
42 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 42


--- PAGE 62 ---
43Love and Relationships
about my mask, this is about your cataracts,” then you may
have to move on.
In a relationship, we must demand only what we deliver. If
we’re not willing to give it, we can’t expect to get it.
At bottom, black men terrorizing their women and children
is an act of un-kinning,of violently unmaking the black family
and dismantling its binding relations one beaten body at a
time.
Healthy people have a high regard for the body. We should
not be ashamed of our bodies, but proud that they bind us to
our God and our loved ones. Unfortunately, we have often pre-
tended as if the body wasn’t there, that it wasn’t important to
our identity, our celebration of life and our worship of God.
This is why we don’t teach our children about sex. That’s also
why we deny that a healthy sexual identity is critical to enjoy-
ing our earthly existence. We often repress our sexual identi-
ties in an unhealthy fashion. Even God depended on the body
to communicate divine love. We are embodied creatures, and
we men should do as the Bible says: love our women as we
love our bodies. If we appreciate our bodies, we’ll appreciate
our women’s bodies.
The continued preference for lighter sisters among blacks
bears witness to psychic wounds that are not completely
healed. The poisonous self-hatred that pours freely in the
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 43


--- PAGE 63 ---
rejection of dark blackness is painful evidence of our unre-
solved racial anxieties about our true beauty and self-worth.
Dark black women have often been cast aside and looked
down upon because they embody the most visible connection
to a fertile African heritage whose value remains suspect in
our culture and nation.
Women often say they want a sensitive man, but when her
partner shows his insecurities and fears, women worry that
he may “punk out.” 
It some ways, it might be easier to surrender one’s life for
a loved one than to do the daily and difficult work of making
a relationship work.
Black men are given theological license to affirm our black
women’s bodies. We have a holy obligation to acknowledge the
beauty of God’s creation in black women’s unique shapes,
sizes, and styles. That’s good news, because black women, like
black men, have been attacked and exploited since they arrived
on American soil. Their hair is said not to be silky enough,
their lips not thin enough, their noses not slim enough, their
hands not smooth enough, their feet not soft enough, their
waists not trim enough, their skin not light enough, their
breasts not firm enough, their hips not straight enough, their
frames not sleek enough, their eyes not blue enough, their
teeth not white enough, their necks not long enough, and their
behinds not small enough. But for God — and for us black
men and lots of other men too — they’re all just right.
44 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 44


--- PAGE 64 ---
We must tenderly encourage each other to develop
strengths, prune weaknesses, discipline reckless urges and
harness raw, untapped energy and talent.
We should love black women’s skin, in whatever shade it
comes, from vanilla vitality to chocolate charm, from mocha
mist to espresso elegance, from beige bliss to almond effect,
from tan tint to blue blaze, and from cream comfort to black
beatitude. We should love black women’s noses — broad or
pointed, snub or extended, fine-lined or bluntly drawn. We
should love their eyes — black, brown, hazel, green, or blue
— and their lips, whether pouting, pursing, protruding, huge,
small, voluptuous, streamlined, or luscious. We should love
their feet — long toes or short, painted nails or nude, and
whether they are broad, flat and thick, or thin, fleshy, and nar-
row. We should love their breasts — whether tiny or enor-
mous, whether sagging or taut, and whether they fit into A or
D cups. We should love their hands — manicured or un-
touched, long fingers or short pointers, and acrylic nails or
natural. We should love their faces — made-up and plain
ones, oval-shaped and banana-like, ellipses and concaves,
high foreheads and low brows, and fleshy ones and tight ones.
We should love their legs — long, lean legs and thick, short
legs, shapely legs and skinny legs, and legs that are clean-
shaven and legs with hair. We should love their hair — natu-
ral, dreaded, locked, kinky, nappy, permed, curly, straight,
silky, jagged, or wiry.
Many women can justifiably sue us men for nonsupport in
the court of emotions.
45Love and Relationships
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 45


--- PAGE 65 ---
Nobody gets a free ride. Each of us must pay the toll and
be responsible for our relationships.
We learn who we are through our interaction with other
human beings. But unless we have a secure enough sense of
ourselves it’s hard to absorb these lessons without hostility or
resentment. And that sense of personal identity comes when
we wrestle with our true selves. If we’ve hurt ourselves with
our lack of self-awareness, we’ve also hurt the women in our
lives by failing to take the risk of telling them the truth. With-
out truth-telling there will be little trust and a great deal of
manipulation. The more honest we are with our women, the
less inclined any of us will be to twist, cajole, spin, or strong-
arm each other. To have healthy relationships, we’ve got to be
honest about our fears of commitment, our avoidance of ac-
countability, and our tendency to hug the surface of our feel-
ings in fear of drowning in their depths.
A demanding love doesn’t mean that she cooks for me be-
cause I cook for her, or that I stitch her hems like she stitches
mine. She may not be able to cook. I may not be able to sew.
Demanding love is not a demand for similar gifts. It is a de-
mand for a similar willingness to share one’s gifts.
For a black man to reach beneath his class station to em-
brace a black woman reinforces the status quo: as breadwin-
ner, he can provide for his family, and thus remain “head of
the house.” For a black woman to behave similarly upsets the
status quo: if she makes more money and is better educated
than her partner, the resentment of her man can become bur-
46 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 46


--- PAGE 66 ---
densome, sometimes abusive. I know a lot of brothers who
felt they could take a woman making more money than them,
but once the reality of her higher status set in, it usually took
on social meanings beyond a paycheck. Issues of control in-
evitably arose, and the question of who was in charge fol-
lowed in its wake. Since black men struggle with a society that
sets up expectations for appropriate masculine behavior —
take care of one’s family, be gainfully employed, be a financial
success — and then undermines their attainment, black
women are often the psychological scapegoat of our anger.
The rise in black male domestic violence is poignant testi-
mony to such tensions in the black home.
There’s no hard-and-fast definition of what it means to be
a real man. We’re figuring it out as we go.
If you’re lying to yourself about your most intimate rela-
tionship, you’re lying in your relationship to God.
Control is an illusion. Some days the woman’s going to
have more influence; at other times, the man will. We must
be willing to concede that our mates have strengths we don’t
have and shape the relationship around what works best.
Keep it dynamic — not controlled — and then watch how it
grows and evolves.
I believe that our best selves are nurtured in an environ-
ment of expectation. Love, after all, has to do with acceptable
requirements and reasonable demands.
47Love and Relationships
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 47


--- PAGE 67 ---
We’re living in a culture of complaint. Too many of us men
choose to air disagreements and diatribes about our mates in
a ritual of same-sex bonding, creating and exacerbating the
very conditions we try to avoid. That kind of talk brings us
closer to the men we’re commiserating with, but not the
women we’re complaining about.If we’re just letting off steam
and then going home less stressed, it’s one thing; if we use our
dissatisfaction to short-circuit closeness, it’s another.
Intimacy demands discipline — an open, honest vulnera-
bility that is maintained while in close proximity to the
beloved. A lot of men are scared of the nearness. We pour the
fear into our raw sexuality. Hit it, then quit it. We have so
many “commitmentphobes” because we don’t want to have
that vulnerability uncovered.
A relationship is going to have much greater potential to
go the distance if the foundation is created by two people who
have the courage to lay themselves bare. Dropping our cover
encourages our women to drop theirs. Then our erotic joy and
sexual passion will increase immensely. And the pride of our
manhood, as Teddy Pendergrass once sang, will be in turning
“burdens into a song.”
The statistics reinforce the gloomy outlook for black
women. In essence, black women are less likely than other
women to marry in the first place, more likely to divorce, and
less likely to remarry. Only fifty percent of black women are
48 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 48


--- PAGE 68 ---
expected to be married by the age of twenty-eight, compared
to eighty percent of white women. Black women are less likely
to remarry after a divorce than white women. Only thirty-two
percent of black women remarry within five years of divorce,
while fifty-four percent of white women, and forty-four per-
cent of Latino women, get married again. As if to underscore
how tight and complicated relationships are for black folk,
even when marriages are broken, they don’t necessarily lead
to divorce. Many sisters experience a marital breakup without
having their relationships legally terminated. Just sixty-seven
percent of black women who were separated from their hus-
bands were divorced three years later. Although this statistic
might be interpreted as thirty-three percent of black women
try to work out their relationships during separation, it is just
as likely that the high percentage of sisters who don’t termi-
nate their relationships suggests an inclination — perhaps the
desperation — to hold on as long as possible.
If black men are in prison and not in college, they have two
strikes against them in their bid to become viable partners to
black women. Black male imprisonment has a double-
whammy effect on black women finding mates among their
male peers: it separates black men from society, and it se-
verely erodes their prospects for higher education.
Many college-educated black women marry black men with
significantly lower levels of education. In marriages where
black women have a college degree, only 45.9 percent of their
husbands also have a college degree. More than one quarter
of black women who have a college degree are married to men
who have never gone to college. And 4 percent of black
49Love and Relationships
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 49


--- PAGE 69 ---
50 Can You Hear Me Now?
women with a college degree are married to black men who
didn’t graduate from high school. By comparison, nearly 70
percent of white women with a college degree married men
who also had a college degree, and only 12 percent of white
women with a college degree married men who never went to
college. While black women may prefer mates who are edu-
cationally compatible, they have often chosen mates whose
lower achievement makes their marriages vulnerable to di-
vorce and spousal abuse.
The preference for light-skinned women finds painful
precedent in black culture. It dates back to slavery when the
lightest blacks — whose skin color was often the result of rape
by white slave masters — were favored over their darker kin
because they were closer in color and appearance to domi-
nant society. Unfortunately, despite the challenge to the
mythology of inherently superior white standards of beauty,
there persists in black life the belief that light is preferable to
dark. Music videos have historically presented light-skinned
black women, or mixed or nonblack women, as the most de-
sirable women. Even as browner women have recently be-
come more visible within our race — a few of them, like Carla
Campbell, Angela Basset, and Valerie Morris appear in videos,
film, and on television news, respectively — there is an un -
deniable subordination of darker-skinned black women to
lighter sisters in everyday life.
Hair has long been for black American women a sore spot — 
often quite literally when you consider the lengths black
women go to embrace or conquer their “nappy” hair, whether
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 50


--- PAGE 70 ---
51Love and Relationships
through relaxers, weaves, or extensions. Black women’s hair
is among the most vulnerable features of their bodies because
it embodies visible differences that are used to distinguish
their beauty, or its absence, from that of nonblack women.
Black women experience intense anxiety in deciding to either
straighten their hair, or to plait, braid, or lock it in dreads.
Black people have psychologically absorbed this toxic self-
 hatred by scorning black women who wear a natural hairstyle.
But when black women comb through their contradictions
there’s usually no mirror in white America to capture their
struggles.
Black culture — by its deficits and defeats and by its defen-
sive actions to protect its interests and assure its survival —
has generated pockets of pathology where potential is sus-
pected and snuffed. We murder ambition, slaughter pride. A
tortured racial history feeds this learned behavior, sustained
now as a self-perpetuating cultural practice. We are skeptical
of black folk who don’t meet our narrow views of blackness.
We are taught to despise and be envious of others who rise
and prosper. All of this is different from the routine and
healthy criticism in which all groups should engage. I am re-
ferring to the pernicious self-doubt, and other-doubt — really,
it’s race-doubt — that is the residue of collective self-hate. It
is a centuries-old reflex borne of pulverizing suspicion of the
beauty, integrity, and dignity of blackness. We snuff our chil-
dren’s ambition through despising their intellectual indepen-
dence and emotional freedom. We target our children with
vicious corporal punishment to make them obedient to what
we think the Bible says to do to our kids. We beat the hell out
of our kids, and when we do, we often beat out their initiative
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 51


--- PAGE 71 ---
and ambition too. We must be released, and release each
other, from such degrading, deadening, deathly practices.
When we love black women, we love ourselves, and the God
who made us.
MED 
52 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 52


--- PAGE 72 ---
chapter 4
Music
James Brown fathered funk; Sly Stone raised it.
53
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 53


--- PAGE 73 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 54


--- PAGE 74 ---
When black music is unavoidably appropriated, imitated, and
diluted in mainstream culture, black folk are on to something
else. With black creative cultures, it’s always about the great
next.
When slaves sang “Green trees are bending / My soul stands
a’trembling / Ain’t got long to stay here,” white plantation
owners were being entertained while black slaves were being
emancipated. They were signaling each other about when
Harriet Tubman was coming through to liberate slaves and
lead them along the Underground Railroad to freedom. The
double entendre joined emancipation and entertainment in
many African and African American musical forms. 
That’s why the drums were outlawed: they were the lan-
guage of black emancipation. The drums allowed blacks to
facilitate community, to communicate valuable political mes-
sages in a percussive tongue. 
The sound of America is sweeter, more soulful, and more
sorrowful because of black artists. The blues drew from West
African rhythms, work songs, chants, and spirituals. In the
mid-forties, the country blues migrated north when Muddy
Waters boarded a train from Clarksdale, Mississippi, to
Chicago, making it the center of urban blues. The music’s
irony and tragicomedy, and its humor, too, flood the plaintive
cries of Howlin’ Wolf, the weeping guitar of B. B. King, the
salty wails of Koko Taylor, and the artful hawks of the other-
wise smooth Bobby Blue Bland — who lifted his signature
warble from Rev. C. L. Franklin, one of the great innovators
55Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 55


--- PAGE 75 ---
of sacred sound. Their craft testifies to how blues artists min-
istered to Negroes seeking consolation for the griefs of ghetto
existence.
The blues functioned for another generation of blacks
much as rap functions for young blacks today: as a source of
racial identity, permitting forms of boasting for devalued
black men, allowing commentary on personal and social con-
ditions in uncensored language, and fostering the ability to
transform hurt and anguish into art and commerce. 
Even in its heyday, the blues existed as a secular musical
genre in contrast to religious traditions that saw the blues as
“devil’s music” and the conservative black cultural perspective
of the blues as barbaric. These feelings, along with the flow
of Southern agrarian musical energies into a more accessible
and populist soul music, ensured the shrinking economic and
cultural basis for expressing life experience through the blues.
Blues and jazz, rhythm and blues, and soul have all been
viewed as indecent, immoral, and corrupting of black youth.
To be nostalgic for a time when black music offered a purer
aesthetic or a higher moral vision is to hunger for a time in
history that simply doesn’t exist.
The blues shouts and the field hollers get reemphasized,
and rearticulated, in the longing, yearning, feral tones of the
trumpet and the cornet. When you hear Louis Armstrong
wailing on his trumpet and cornet, when you hear him cutting
56 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 56


--- PAGE 76 ---
through the aesthetics of polite society with its measured,
rigid, precise tonalities, lashing, as only Armstrong could, in
a viciously insistent tone that suggested he was indeed
“stomping the blues,” you hear the quality I’m talking about.
It’s anger and joy, anxiety and peace in shuffling cadences that
trade hope for despair as he’s trading fours in King Oliver’s
group and later his own.
The question of what to do with ragtime, and then blues,
jazz, and gospel, was never simply a matter of taste, or should
I say, that taste was never simply a matter of musical prefer-
ence divorced from the prevailing racial context. Syncopation
indexed race as surely as black skin. Plus, the caste system
was never far away, since these ragtime musicians were not
often educated musicians who had absorbed the finer points
of European music. Their musical trace had to be washed
away from the palette of American music, which was little
more than an imitation of the so-called classical forms flow-
ing in from Europe. The kick is that across the waters, Euro-
pean classical musicians and composers were digging this
indigenous American music being created by mostly black
musicians of a supposedly inferior pedigree. Figures like De-
bussy and Stravinsky, and even Charles Ives, are being influ-
enced by ragtime, even as the artistic guardians of Western
culture are dissing ragtime.
There was an Americanization of New Orleans after the
Louisiana Purchase in the early 1800s. New Orleans, racially
and ethnically speaking, was a mixture of French and Spanish
and indigenous American elements. The Creole, or the light-
skinned Negro, the French-inflected “mulatto,” was the
57Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 57


--- PAGE 77 ---
58 Can You Hear Me Now?
 product of a fusion of black and white. Creoles began to cre-
ate ragtime and jazz music only after they had interactions
with indigenous Negro or African-inflected musicians in New
Orleans, a fact that causes me to be skeptical about James
Lincoln Collier’s argument that jazz is not identifiable as a
black music. One can hear in such denials reverberations of
the stigma of blackness — of black skin and skill, of black
blood, metaphorically speaking, of black styles — that washed
over American culture at the turn of the twentieth century. It’s
a stigma that persists to this day, even if, ironically enough,
black popular culture is the idiom, is the grammar, through
which America is globally identified.
Without jazz, American democracy can’t swing, can’t imag-
ine its improvised destiny.
Piano-based ragtime accentuated percussive features of
black music that were later expanded in ensembles, which
highlighted the shift to multiple instruments in jazz music,
including, say, a saxophone, a trumpet, and a drum, which fa-
cilitated the process of improvisation that was strictly forbid-
den in classical music, which had to be read note for note off
a sheet. It was eye music versus ear music, music that had to
be read versus music that had to be heard and learned by ear,
the visual versus the aural, so to speak. Since there was ini-
tially little sheet music in jazz, at least not to the degree or in
the manner of classical music, musicians were free to impro-
vise, to remake the song as they played it each time. There
was in-built freshness to the music’s improvisational quality,
allowing the musicians to enlarge or diminish themes, to re-
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 58


--- PAGE 78 ---
59Music
arrange musical elements, to alter tempos and tones, as the
occasion or mood dictated.
If democracy is what jazz is about, glimpsed in the equal
participation of varying elements in the construction of a
whole, European classical music is about a kind of oligarchy
of aesthetic taste: that is, there is tight control over what can
be played, what can be said, what can be articulated, and who
gets a chance to play it.
Jazz culture was seductive to white kids, and they turned
from the quadrille, the mazurka, the waltz, and the polka of
their parents to the slow drag and the hoochie-coochie, while
reveling in the blues of the Delta filtering into New Orleans
from Mississippi. This explosion of African creativity consti-
tuted a veritable Negropolis, a black cosmopolitanism whose
influence sprawled beyond its original borders to capture
large segments of American society.
In European music you saw the segregation of the body,
where the hands were good but not the feet, where the lips
were fine but not the eyes, and so on. In jazz, the body was
artistically desegregated, freed from the artificial constraints
of taste, custom, and tradition. In jazz, the entire body was
truly integrated.
The values of jazz include a profound vocal tonality, since
the musical instruments were manipulated in varying degrees
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 59


--- PAGE 79 ---
to sound like the voice. That’s why we love Lester Young’s and,
later, John Coltrane’s sound, because the very textures they
evoke on the saxophone remind us of the human voice crying,
sighing, laughing, speaking and shrieking, complaining, and
expressing joy.
Mainstream swing music was the attempt to domesticate
the hot beats of ragtime in early jazz into lightly syncopated
orchestral riffing. But again, it wasn’t Jimmy Lunceford or
Count Basie or Duke Ellington who got the biggest advantage
from the swing they helped invent. Rather, it was Paul White-
man, Guy Lombardo, Woody Herman, the Dorsey Brothers,
and Gene Krupa. Harry James, who was Benny Goodman’s
trumpet player, was routinely favored over Louis Armstrong
in jazz polls. What’s up with that?
Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong swung in the main-
stream and then swung the mainstream to a black rhythm,
and through their music, helped America grasp the need to
place culture and craft above color.
Bebop emerged in the mid-forties as Charlie Parker — and
after him Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonious Monk, Charlie Chris-
tian, Bud Powell, Don Byas, and Ben Webster — experi-
mented with chord progressions, faster tempos, higher notes,
and more dissonant times. With bebop, jazz went from dance
music to an art form to be listened to. Louis Armstrong and
Duke Ellington remained jazz’s greatest performer and com-
poser, respectively; and Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughn
brilliantly explored the American songbook after Billie Holli-
60 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 60


--- PAGE 80 ---
day’s death. Miles and Coltrane rode together from bebop and
hardbop to modal jazz. Later, Davis jump-started fusion,
while Coltrane pioneered free jazz. Each influenced American
musical experimentation while revolutionizing the sound and
shape of jazz.
What we now mean when we say American is what we
mean when we say jazz.
I think the lyrical depth is what’s so compelling about the
best of country music, similar to the blues. And just as there
is in the blues, there’s irony, tragedy, and a sense of humor in
the midst of the pathos. All of that is quite appealing to black
folk, and we’ve been involved in country music from the very
beginning. If you look at the history and roots of country
music, it’s deeply influenced by earlier African sources, espe-
cially the banjos and the steel guitars. Even today, many
Africans on the Continent are deeply involved in country
music. They might be listening to Kenny Rogers’s Greatest
Hits. They might be listening to Hank Williams. They might
be listening to Merle Haggard. In fact, Merle Haggard might
have a bigger demographic in Kenya than he has in Kentucky.
Race shaped the division of music into segregated cate-
gories. So, “hillbilly music” was seen as the “redneck” creation
of poor whites in the back hills of Kentucky, Georgia, Ala-
bama, and Tennessee. “Race records” were cut from black
music. But the division of “hillbilly” versus “race music” re-
flected the logic of racial separatism — “this belongs to the
black folk, this belongs to the white folk.” But poor whites
61Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 61


--- PAGE 81 ---
and poor blacks — besides the racial hostilities that raged —
were sometimes eating together and loving together since
they inherited a common vocabulary and menu. While the
blues became identified with black communities, and hillbilly
music became identified with white communities, there was
quite a bit of cultural and racial promiscuity going on be-
tween the two.
Gospel’s influence is felt deeply in the history of rock, pop,
and soul — in the compressed frenzy of Marion Williams’s ec-
statically ejaculated whoo,which became Little Richards’s un-
mistakable vocal signature; in Alex Bradford’s pathos and
understated irony woven into the country blues of Ray
Charles; and in the fiery vocal pirouettes of Clara Ward that
embellished the near-otherworldly artistry of Aretha Franklin
at her soulful crest.
Gospel music initially faced its own barriers within the
church. It was an offspring of blues, jazz, and ragtime music
born in the black Pentecostal churches at the end of the nine-
teenth century; early religious music consisted of barbershop
quarter harmonies sung a capella by mostly male groups. A
Chicago blues pianist named Thomas A. Dorsey forever
changed black religious music in the 1920s by featuring
women (and later men) singing in a choir tradition backed by
piano accompaniments dipped in a blues base and sweetened
by jazz riffs. Before the belated embrace of gospel music by
mainline black churches in the 1940s, gospel thrived in mostly
lower-class storefront Pentecostal churches, stigmatized as a
sacrilegious mix of secular rhythms and spiritual lyrics.
62 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 62


--- PAGE 82 ---
Traditional gospel greats, including the later Clara Ward,
Marion Williams, Roberta Martin, and Inez Andrews, took the
exploration of jazz and blues further than previous artists.
These artists harnessed the seductive beats of jazz to gospel’s
vibrant harmonies and percolating rhythms, and transformed
the anguished wails of the blues into holy shouts brimming
with deferred joy. Performers as varied as Ray Charles, Aretha
Franklin, and James Brown started out singing gospel, and
the music can be said to have spawned rhythm and blues,
soul, and funk. Gospel music gained wide popular acceptance
with Clara Ward’s appearance at the Newport Jazz Festival in
1957 and with the incomparable Mahalia Jackson’s numerous
concerts at Carnegie Hall in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Clara Ward, in fact, was criticized in the 1960s for singing
gospel music in Las Vegas. Gospel music’s real transformation
into a popular and contemporary musical art form was qui-
etly effected by Edwin Hawkins’s 1969 rhythm-and-blues-
influenced arrangement of the traditional Baptist hymn “Oh,
Happy Day.” The groundbreaking song was captured on a
two-track recorder in the basement of a California Pentecostal
church and was performed by the North California State
Youth Choir, eventually selling more than two million copies.
BeBe and CeCe Winans help make visible the implicit sen-
suality of gospel music, a sometimes embarrassing gift that
draws forth the repressed relationship between body and soul.
The suggestive ambiguity of their art is expressed in their
songs, many of which can be read as signs of romantic love
and sensuous delight or as expressions of deep spiritual
yearning and fulfillment.
63Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 63


--- PAGE 83 ---
Although they hardly get their due, black rock-and-roll
artists helped establish the idea of black humanity in a large
white fan base. Without Chuck Berry’s 1955 “Maybeline” and
Little Richard’s “Tutti Frutti” the same year, all that came after
them, including Elvis, makes no sense.
Little Willie John was one of the greatest — some argue,
the greatest — R&B singers, but few people know his name
or work, except as it’s drained of its pathos by more famous
but less gifted white artists.
Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle — as Marian Anderson
and Leontyne Price had done — spice opera with the pathos
and charm of the black voice.
Motown shaped the musical tastes of millions of Americans
with its bright melodies, upbeat lyrics, and crossover ambi-
tions. It wanted to sell the beauty and brilliance of the black
voice to white America. Motown broke down many racial bar-
riers with its massive artistic achievements, even as it embod-
ied both the triumphs and troubles of the American dream
and capitalism.
Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson’s elegant, sophisti-
cated arrangements and their literate, inspiring lyrics —
which fused the Christian love ethic with an uplifting philos-
ophy of relationships powered by the erotic charge of mutual
respect — were the perfect vehicle to spread Marvin Gaye and
Tammi Terrell’s urban sensuality. These songs also provided
64 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 64


--- PAGE 84 ---
an edifying glimpse into the black sexual imagination at a
time when the civil rights movement was still waging war for
black social and political equality. In their subtle fashion,
these songs protested malevolent stereotypes of black rela-
tionships while embracing a universal vision of romance.
While they made the point that black folk are like all others,
they made the equally powerful point that all others can learn
and benefit from black love. That’s why the songs were both
R&B and pop hits; they crossed over to the white mainstream
by slipping through the streams of bigotry that poisoned in-
terracial understanding.
Curtis Mayfield defined the gospel-drenched Chicago
sound with music of haunting eloquence and lyrics that
touched the soul of black struggle.
Along with Sly Stone, Norman Whitfield seized on the wah-
wah pedal — which distorts the guitar’s sound — as the em-
blematic tool in the expanding technological repertoire of
electrified black music. Stone and Whitfield helped to extend
funk modernism — multiple rhythmic patterns that blend fre-
netic bass lines and turbulent drumbeats in jolts of regulated
frenzy. Besides the aesthetic dimensions of funk modernism,
which draws on a collage of jazz and blues sounds, its meta-
physical heart beats in lyrics that explore black existence. A
key form of funk modernism, lyrically speaking, is urban real -
ism; artists probe the complex social and moral properties of
black urban identity and the political issues that shape black
life.
65Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 65


--- PAGE 85 ---
The black male falsetto came into its own in the gospel
music of the early twentieth century, a great deal of which
wasn’t heard for a long time in mainstream culture. Its pure
tones and soaring reach conjured the celestial climes to which
it spiritually aspired. When the falsetto migrated beyond the
sanctuary, its baptism in the currents of black secular culture
meant that a wider range of hearers had access to both its
artistic merits and its moral intensity. The falsetto’s political
meaning was partially derived from its willingness to reach
for notes — like reaching for freedoms and privileges — far
beyond the pale. Thus, the aesthetic quality of the falsetto
mirrored the moral intent of black community: to shirk im-
posed limits and gain a higher register of achievement.
It is a new world of black erotic hope that Marvin Gaye
strains to create through his eerily arching falsetto. In his gut-
tural cries, his hectic moans, his elliptical ejaculations, and
his plaintive whispers, Marvin explores the healing and re-
demptive dimensions of black romantic love. He serves as a
voice piece for the millions who identify with his ethical in-
tent: to claim space in the heavens, whether it is social or
erotic.
James Brown fathered funk; Sly Stone raised it.
The Isley Brothers damn near reinvented the soul ballad —
taking apart its prepackaged sentimentality, rebuilding it from
the ground up, and handing it back to us full of honest, edi-
fying emotion in songs like “For the Love of You.”
66 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 66


--- PAGE 86 ---
Because he was ten years younger than Jimi Hendrix, Ernie
Isley never got the chance to study directly with the guitar
wizard, but he soaked up the pyrotechnic vibes Hendrix sent
rippling through the homeplace. Still, the shadow of Hen-
drix’s Stratocaster falls mightily on Ernie’s majestic craft: the
psychedelic, bluesy intensity of Ernie’s long, lacerating licks
on Isley ballads like 1973’s “Summer Breeze”; his atmos-
pheric, weeping phrases that jut just above the melody of mid-
tempo grooves; and the dropkick-to-the-chest ferocity of his
staccato picks on such up-tempo Isley jams as 1973’s “That
Lady.”
Disco was born in gay bars and homosexual haunts where
interracial audiences embraced black dance music. In post-
Stonewall gay culture — Stonewall Inn was the New York City
gay bar where a 1969 police raid aimed at enforcing laws
against same-sex intimate touching lead to rioting and shouts
of “Gay Power!” — political activism inspired increased public
displays of homoeroticism. Hence the gay bar and dance club
became important places to express gay sexuality as both a
political and personal gesture. The music found in such places
helped to promote the homoerotic ambitions of a gay popu-
lace in search of social support and cathartic release. Since
whites, blacks, and Latinos mixed much more frequently in
gay bars than in most places in American society, the music
that moved them was equally eclectic. A new sound matched
the erotic intensity and rhythmic ferocity of suppressed long-
ing set free. These settings brought together two styles of early
seventies black dance music from which disco drew: poly -
rhythmic funk pioneered by James Brown and George Clin-
ton, and up-tempo soul music found especially in artists
associated with Philadelphia International Records.
67Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 67


--- PAGE 87 ---
The rhythms of funk, soul, and disco stretch the body
across erotic dance grooves. Black music moves the erotic ac-
tion away from the crotch and redistributes it throughout the
entire body. Disco promoted the undervalued eroticism of the
gay body and the female voice. It was the gay body perform-
ing to black rhythms embraced by female voices — of Donna
Summers, Gloria Gaynor, Grace Jones, and Diana Ross —
that made disco a haven for society’s outcast and overlooked
members. It also gave disco a social charge that resonated far
beyond the boundaries of music. To be sure, the voices of
Aretha Franklin, Betty Wright, and Millie Jackson expressed
a female sexuality and independence in the early seventies
that was virtually absent in other branches of popular music.
But the fusion of black rhythms, gay bodies, and female eroti-
cism in disco provided a political lesson in its very existence.
Barry White’s heterosexual boudoir bravado and elaborate
orchestrations are of a piece with the bohemian rhapsodies
spawned in homoerotic fields of play.
Mary J. Blige’s art reshapes the blues at the bottom of
Aretha Franklin’s soul feminism into a brooding female voice
of resistance in an age of misogyny. Aretha’s generation cer-
tainly faced the same forces. But ’60s and ’70s sexism was
cloaked beneath a chivalry and condescension that even black
male versions of patriarchy could express. Aretha Franklin’s
and Mary J. Blige’s aesthetic values reflect, in part, the cul-
tural and musical environments that shape their art. What
they respond to — norms, practices, behaviors, expectations,
68 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 68


--- PAGE 88 ---
ideas — has as great an effect on their art as their particular
musical gifts. While soul and hip hop cultures embody virtues
to which each musical style responds, the cultures contain
vices to which each style reacts.
At its best, pop music presses an anxious ear to American
society, amplifying our deepest desires and fears. At times,
too, pop music almost unconsciously invites us to listen to
ourselves in ways forbidden by cultural debates where com-
plexity is sacrificed for certainty.
The anxiety about what and who is really black in pop
music is proportional to just how increasingly difficult it is to
know the answer. As multiracial unions of sex and sound pro-
liferate, the “one drop” rule may lose its power. And, as cul-
tural theorists are now proud to announce, race is not merely
a matter of biology but an artifice of cultural convention.
Such a construction is often used to establish and reinforce
the power of one group over another. This view does not mean
that black music is solely the product of perception. Nor does
it mean that black music’s power must be diluted to a generic
form. What it does suggest, however, is that the meaning of
race, like the art it molds, is always changing.
While black music at its best has often offered a supple-
mentary argument for political change, it is not a substitute
for actual politics. And if you don’t have a vital political move-
ment, the music can only go so far. It can helpalter the mind-
set of the masses; it can helpcreate awareness of the need for
social change; it can help dramatize injustice; and it can help
69Music
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 69


--- PAGE 89 ---
articulate the disenchantment of significant segments of the
citizenry. But it cannot alone transform social relations and
political arrangements. Politically charged music can rein-
force important social values, but it cannot establish them. 
MED 
70 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 70


--- PAGE 90 ---
chapter 5
Literature, Language, 
and Learning
Try as we might to quarantine knowledge, 
it invariably sneezes on us far beyond its
imposed limits.
71
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 71


--- PAGE 91 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 72


--- PAGE 92 ---
The writer’s gift can make us see ourselves and our moral pos-
sibilities differently than what our reality suggests.
I didn’t set out to be the sort of writer who observes society
to change it, which is what social critics do. I suppose, in ret-
rospect, I had two goals: to write like the writers I most ad-
mired, those writers my teachers pointed me to, and to write
as well as I could about things that mattered most to me.
When it comes to writing, even for social critics like me, read-
ing is fundamental. I knew fairly early that I had no talent for
writing fiction. Reading it, though, made me feel the hot
breath of imagination. I never had to leave the house to leave
home; I looked no farther than the page to see the world. I
chased whales with Melville. I hugged gulags with Solzhenit-
syn. I sank into the tongue of black preaching with James
Baldwin. Later, I sprouted wings with Toni Morrison. And I
skulked in bleak undergrounds with Fyodor Dostoyevsky.
I was born in language; I was nurtured in a rhetorical
womb.
At its best, social criticism is an inside job. The social critic
must grasp our frailties even as he urges us to rise above their
pull. She must know, like novelists know, that human life is
born in story. He must hear with poets the metrics of sorrow
and desire. And she must sense with playwrights the futility
and ambition that spark a moral tug of war between head and
heart.
73Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 73


--- PAGE 93 ---
I tucked Toni Morrison’s Song of Solomonbeneath my arm
when me and my pregnant wife were evicted from our apart-
ment — on Christmas Day. I didn’t feel completely disrobed
or unarmed: Morrison’s unblinking engagement with evil
helped prepare me for the worst. Her insistence on bending
language until it broke the seams of rationality helped me to
take refuge in symbols and metaphors. During that celebra-
tion of Christ’s birth in 1977, something new was born in me:
the determination to rise on the wings of language from the
ashes of my personal defeat.
Knowledge and truth are never divorced from the ends for
which they exist.
I first quickened to the rhythms of the critical voice when
I trudged headlong and ill-equipped into a book about the
transcendentalists. I read this volume and others like it out-
side of my junior high school curriculum. Most of my new
discoveries were retrieved from my weekly rummages in used
book stores. I supplemented my habit in a daily tryst with the
library turnstile inside my ghetto school. There I cornered
Jean Paul Sartre and George Santayana. Well, at least I
grabbed them by the spines as I swam in their weird and chal-
lenging and thrilling words. I strove furiously to subdue their
insights beneath my rapidly forming worldview. When I pur-
chased William Barrett’s Irrational Man and Walter Kauf-
man’s sleekly edited The Portable Nietzsche, I slid into
existentialism and the philosophical aphorism like a pair of
comfortable jeans.
74 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 74


--- PAGE 94 ---
I love black language’s sensuality, its signifying qualities,
its splendid idioms and vernaculars, and its accommodations
of high intelligence.
I’ve got no illusion that writing social criticism is the equiv-
alent of walking a picket line or delivering a fiery speech at a
protest rally. I’ve done all three, and each has its place in the
order of things. But there is supreme worth in engaging the
issues of the day with the help of the intellectual and literary
traditions we hold dear, or even the ones we ignore or despise.
True, the payoff may not be as immediate as a vote in Con-
gress. And the impact surely won’t be as visible as the uplift-
ing actions of full-fledged social reformers like Martin Luther
King or Mahatma Gandhi (although both took up writing as
social reform by other means), or even part-timers like Henry
David Thoreau. That’s why the social critic temporarily left
Walden Pond and landed in his local jail: to flesh out his view
that civil disobedience could help politics find a conscience.
Most social critics will not be so lucky, or so brave, to follow
the unsteady line that leads from the page to the public arena.
But there is great virtue in writing well about the possibilities
and obstacles in a democratic culture like ours.
The American voice often carries a British accent. 
Long before I learned what magical realism was, Toni Mor-
rison made me peer into the heart of what couldn’t be seen
by the naked eye. And years before explanations of her art
squiggled beneath the microscopic scrutiny of literary theory,
75Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 75


--- PAGE 95 ---
I caught a glimpse through Morrison’s work of how language
behaves.
Black culture lives and dies by language.
I discovered the voice of James Baldwin in 1970, and my
life hasn’t been the same since. I slept with Baldwin’s essays
like Coltrane slept with his horn. I fingered in my own imag-
ination the notes the writer played and charted the progres-
sion of chords in his symphonic meditation on the American
soul. I learned about Baldwin in class, but when I crashed
into his searing prose on the page, it was a train-wreck of rev-
elation: about his life, and therefore, mine, as a black male,
about our common ghetto roots, and about the desire to sing
of suffering and struggle with pitiless precision. I inhaled his
first and finest novel, Go Tell It on the Mountain,at age eleven,
but later, at fourteen, Notes of a Native Songrabbed me by the
brain and sent me reeling into passionate addictions. I have
read that book and all of Baldwin’s essays, some of the finest
in the English language, too many times, at too many differ-
ent places in my life — joy and grief, adolescence and adult-
hood, amateur scribe and professor — to remember when I
haven’t read him for sanity and salvation. 
Black women writers have dipped their pens in the blood
of ancestors to narrate our tribal griefs and gifts.
I met Toni Morrison in 1987 when she visited Princeton to
determine if she wanted to teach there. At fifty-six, she still
76 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 76


--- PAGE 96 ---
cut a strikingly beautiful figure, making as ferocious an im-
pression in person as her prose made on page. Toni’s shock
of naturally and intricately braided gray dreadlocks sprang
from her head like the mane of a mighty lioness. Her rich
golden brown face was centered by a perfectly shaped African
nose and anchored by gorgeous lips carved from sweet choco-
late hues. Her penetrating eyes fixed in a gaze that was at
once cerebral and sensual. Toni was simply sexy, and I saw
for myself the appeal that lay behind literary critic Houston
Baker’s animated testimony to me: at Howard, where Morri-
son once taught and where Baker was a student, he and his
fellow students jockeyed to sit at the front of the class to be
near their buxom and brainy instructor.
Poetry made me yearn to warble the idioms that sprang
from my heart, but I lacked the skill to clothe them in a lan-
guage that made others want to sing along.
My fifth grade teacher Mrs. James taught us the majestic
cadences of Margaret Walker’s “For My People,” which I can
still hear in the girlish bravado of the two young ladies Mrs.
James inspired to learn the poem by heart. I won my first
blue-ribbon for public recitation when she encouraged me to
speak from memory Paul Laurence Dunbar’s vernacular
poem “Little Brown Baby.” Long before the rise of hip hop,
Mrs. James taught me the value of black speech wrung from
the diction of common folk.
I want to make the life of the mind sexy for young people.
77Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 77


--- PAGE 97 ---
78 Can You Hear Me Now?
As a child I loved hearing my aunts talk because of their
Southern accents and colloquialisms. Even though my Mama
was the youngest of five farm-raised Alabama siblings, she
had virtually cleansed her tongue of any traces of her country
upbringing. But Aunt Lila Mae and Aunt Mary were deeply
twanged. What I loved most was Aunt Lila’s uncut, unfettered,
thick-as-Alaga-syrup brogue that poured deliciously and
slowly out of her mouth. Even when she was angry, she
snapped her speech in Southern italics. “Ahsker,” she com-
manded my cousin Oscar, who was a year older, “you bettasit
yo’self down on that couch and behave like you got some
sense, you heah me boy?” 
When Aunt Lila wasn’t around, I cherished visits from my
Aunt Mary, who’d moved with my mother’s brother Edgar and
their three children to Detroit in the mid-’60s. She was always
full of good humor. I loved how she got tickled and let roll off
her lips, “Boy, huuush yo’ mouth.” Or how she asked me to
find the “do-hickey” she was searching for, which, more than
likely, was “over yonder.” And I loved how Aunt Mary re-
marked on my love for Gladys Knight, circa 1967, when I
watched her on television and talked about her for days after-
ward. “Ooh, you just be lovin’ you up some Ms. Gladys, don’t
you?” Yes, Ma’am!
I read Albert Camus and caught a glimpse of Greek mythol-
ogy sporting the apparel of Algerian absurdity.
The fact that figures like Frederick Douglass and Martin
Luther King, Jr., were masters of so-called Standard English
doesn’t mean that they were not equally in control of Black
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 78


--- PAGE 98 ---
79Literature, Language, and Learning
English. These men, like all great black rhetoricians, under-
stood the value of “code-switching,” or knowing when to speak
so-called Standard English and when to speak Black English.
Nobody hates criticism like a critic.
My writing has been pressured, though hopefully not
trapped or disfigured, by social forces. That doesn’t mean I
can’t stand at a distance from the events I observe. It means I
don’t stand at a dangerousdistance, one clouded by the myth
of neutrality or the belief that the critic can remain unscathed
by the blisters of human striving.
Black female signifying is a special art that seems to be al-
most genetically transmitted from one generation to the other.
To get the full effect of how black women talk, you’ve got to
“be there” to see the hand gestures, the head movements, the
flicks of the wrists, the snaps of the fingers, the shifting of the
hips, the turning of the back, the rolling of the eyes, and the
like. For instance, you’ve got to see the black female imitation
of Diana Ross and the Supremes’ “Stop in the Name of Love”
request to “talk to the hand, boyfriend.” The gesture suggests
that all conversation has stopped, all nonsense has been
shelved, and Harry Truman’s “the buck stops here” mantra
has been reformed in the black female palm placed squarely
in your face. And you’ve got to witness firsthand what is
known in the vernacular as the “Z formation”: the Zorro-like
pantomime created when a sister snaps her fingers three
times in the signature style of the masked swordsman,
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 79


--- PAGE 99 ---
supplying a black female exclamation point to the ultimate
dis of a verbal opponent or errant mate.
The job of a cultural critic is to examine artistic and moral
effort with enlivened suspicion.
A significant event in my adolescence shaped my quest for
knowledge. I can vividly remember receiving a gift of The
Harvard Classics by a generous neighbor, Mrs. Bennett, when
I was in my early teens. Her husband, a staunch Republican,
had recently died. While first inclined to donate his collection
to a local library, Mrs. Bennett gave them instead to a poor
black boy who couldn’t otherwise afford to own them. I was
certainly the only boy on my block, and undoubtedly in my
entire ghetto neighborhood, who simultaneously devoured
Motown’s music and Dana’s Two Years Before the Mast.
Black English is the syntax of black survival; it is the gram-
mar of black self-definition in a white world that attempted
to will it, to write it, into oblivion.
Can we think intelligently about the American essay, that
venerable form of address that felicitously splits the difference
between opinion and art, without the elegiac anger of James
Baldwin and the knowing sophistication of Ralph Ellison?
It’s no insult to suggest that most black folk speak Black
English; they do. But we don’t speak the stereotypical version
80 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 80


--- PAGE 100 ---
of Black English that is a concoction of dim-witted, mean-
spirited hacks. Our language is meant to define our identities
and defend our humanity.
Language simply, supremely, reminds us that we exist at
all.
When I first read Invisible Man, the only novel Ralph Elli-
son published during his lifetime, the first line cut through
my tender teen mind like a sword. He wrote: “I am an invisi-
ble man.” It sliced me open and helped give shape to the
vague, haunting outlines of race that I only barely grasped. I
knew immediately that I had been found out by a book that
had been written twenty years before it discovered me. I un-
derstood intuitively that the invisibility to which Ellison re-
ferred had to do with me, a poor black boy in Detroit’s
desperate ghetto. 
If Ellison’s first sentence was foundational, his fourth sen-
tence established the summary law of black life in a white
world: “I am invisible, understand, simply because people re-
fuse to see me.” As I matured, I knew what it meant to live in
the shadows, unperceived, unnoticed, an implausible figment
of the American imagination. I was fortunate early in my life
to find protection in the sort of strong black community that
Ellison traces in his eloquent narrative. Their pride in me was
my protection. And one of their truest gifts to me was their de-
mand that I cope with my color by fighting back on the page.
As a public intellectual I seek to cast a scholar’s eye and a
prophet’s tongue on the rituals of citizenship and governance.
81Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 81


--- PAGE 101 ---
Before I wanted to write the world, I sought to right it.
This is what kills me about people. First of all, they tell us
if we don’t master the language, we dumb. Then, when we be-
come sophisticated and past masters of it, we abstract. Well,
damn, which one is it? Then when we get too common, we’re
barbarically folk-driven. Well, how come we can’t be every-
thing at the same time? We gonna give out some shrimp and
some chitlins’ and some filet mignon and some gravy. You
pick up what you need. If you down with “repristinated mime-
sis,” you check that. If you like Derrida and Foucault, you get
that. If you like Socrates and Aristotle, you get that. If you like
“H to the Izz-O, V to the Izz-A / Fa shizzle my nizzle / I used
to dribble down in VA,” you get that. Know what I’m saying?
Intellectuals have an obligation to be as smart as we can
possibly be, but we have an even greater obligation to be good
with the smarts we possess.
I’m down with you on everything you say about the need
for intellectuals to be activists, Rev. [Jesse] Jackson, and take
a lot of heat for it. Don’t get me wrong — I’m not saying this
from a position of security. Especially in an academy that
looks down on, and is skeptical about (a), being able to speak
to a broader audience without using jargon or obscure lan-
guage and (b), is suspicious of the intent to speak to a broad
audience. So you’re not talking to somebody who doesn’t un-
derstand that. And I’ve been with you in marches plenty of
82 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 82


--- PAGE 102 ---
times. But this is what I’m saying: When I worked at the car
wash, I worked the windows. Homeboy say, “You hit them
windows?” I say, “Yep, I got ’em.” Now I can’t also do the front
lights, because homeboy in the front got them, and homeboy
in the back got the tail pipe; and somebody’s got the side
doors. Division of labor is critical. 
That’s like me asking a factory laborer, “How come you
ain’t at the university teaching?” He’d say, “’Cause my job is
to be an arc-welder.” And I’ve been an arc-welder, ’cause I did
that before I went to college at twenty-one. All I’m arguing for
— I think we’re on the same page — is that we can have con-
cerned, committed intellectuals who make the choice to make
their gifts available to a broader public. But we must remem-
ber this cat here can’t do this, but this person over here can
do this. “I can write, I can think, I can make sociological
analysis. My name is William Julius Wilson. I can write a book
that can inform public policy for the next fifteen years. I don’t
have to march because my books become the fodder for the
cannons being fired on the front lines of those who march.”
I want to seduce young people into excellence, since they’ve
often been sabotaged by mediocrity.
One of the critiques of intellectuals I often hear is that we’re
out of touch with “the folk.” Well, when I preach and lecture,
I’m reaching “the folk.” Those critics who say that intellectuals
are out of touch have often stereotyped “the folk.” Further, they
feel free to speak for, and identify with, “the folk,” and they
feel free to attack intellectuals in the name of “the folk.” But
I’ve often discovered that “the folk” — these very souls whom
critics seek to protect through claims of our irrelevance — are
83Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 83


--- PAGE 103 ---
hungry for intellectual engagement. In the meantime, “the
folk” are out-reading, out-thinking, and out-intellectualizing
the very people who defensively and condescendingly argue
in their name that they won’t get what we’re doing, won’t un-
derstand what we’re up to, or will be automatically suspicious
of our aspirations. I am always in the ’hood, going to the bar-
ber shop and the barbecue joint and hanging with “the folk.”
And not for ethnographic titillation or anthropological
voyeurism, but as a legitimate participant in vibrant black
folk culture, the kind from which I sprang and in which I feel
quite comfortable.
Writing is ultimately about rewriting.
I’m attempting to excel at the height of my profession and
at the top of my game, like Michael Jordan. I have no bones
about that. I want to represent on that level where people go,
“Damn, did you hear what that brother said?” ’Cause I want
young people to say it ain’t just got to be about sport, it
doesn’t just have to be about some athletic achievement — as
great as that may be — or about Oprah or Bill Cosby, as great
and ingenious as they are at what they do. I want young peo-
ple to say the same thing about intellectual engagement. I
want them to have a desire to deploy a variety of jargons,
grammars, rhetorics, languages, and vocabularies to articu-
late views in defense of African American or marginalized
identities, as I attempt to do. I want young people to say, as
the folk in the ’60s and ’70s used to say, “Got to be mo’ careful
’bout myself,” in admiration of such linguistic and intellectual
skill. Not for show, but for war — against ignorance, misery,
84 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 84


--- PAGE 104 ---
85Literature, Language, and Learning
and oppression. I want young folk to say, “I wish I could do
that. I wish I could be like Mike!”
Try as we might to quarantine knowledge, it invariably
sneezes on us far beyond its imposed limits.
Jewish comedy has given us a vocabulary of witticisms, in-
terpretations, philosophies, and character types — think of
Penny Marshall and Cindy Williams hop-scotching during the
opening credits of Laverne and Shirley, chanting in unison,
“schlemiel, schlimazel.” Or for that matter, think of all the
Yiddish terms deployed by acerbic Jewish comedians, from
schmuck or schmo, to terms we now take for granted, such as
schmaltz, schmear, schmooze,or schlock. And consider all the
Yiddish words injected into the American language that de-
rived from that wonderfully hyperactive prefix schm, that,
when replacing a word’s initial consonant or used before the
first vowel, gives a sense of gentle, rhyming derision, like
fancy, schmancy, or dirt, schmirt, or money, schmoney,and so
on, a practice largely popularized by Jewish comedians.
Kenneth Cockrel exerted a significant influence on my un-
derstanding and use of language in the service of social resis-
tance and racial emancipation. Cockrel was a Detroit activist
who eventually served on Detroit’s city council. Had he lived,
he would surely have had a serious chance of succeeding
Coleman Young as Detroit’s mayor. In my adolescence, Cock-
rel made his reputation by successfully defending three black
youth accused of murdering some Detroit policemen in the
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 85


--- PAGE 105 ---
early ’70s. That celebrated case was a crucial blow in black
Detroiters’ war against a repressive police agenda — appro-
priately named STRESS (Stop the Robberies Enjoy Safe
Streets) — that resulted in the killing of several black men. I
was riveted by Cockrel’s relentless, high-speed, and bravely
loquacious appearances on television, and by his colorful
quotes in the local newspapers. Cockrel made verbal facility
seductive; he shaped words into weapons to be wielded on be-
half of the oppressed. By watching and reading Cockrel’s dar-
ing assaults on the racism of elected officials and policemen,
and by listening to his linguistic skill in defending black
 interests, I became convinced that race and rhetoric are
 indissoluble. 
Knowledge exists for a lot more than its own sake.
We were taught by Mrs. James in fifth grade to believe that
the same musical genius that animated Scott Joplin lighted
as well on Stevie Wonder. We saw no essential division be-
tween I Know Why the Caged Bird Singsand “I Can’t Get Next
to You.” Thus the postmodern came crashing in on me before
I gained sight of it in Derrida and Foucault.
The belief that “my story” is a reflection of “our story” has
been with us for a while. From Frederick Douglass’s to Angela
Davis’s stories, the black autobiography is testimony of indi-
vidual genius and moral purpose. It is also a record of the
race’s struggle to achieve shared goals.
86 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 86


--- PAGE 106 ---
Like a good sermon or a well-tailored suit, theory shouldn’t
show its seams.
Black public intellectuals have a great responsibility: to
think clearly, to articulate eloquently, to criticize sharply, to
behave humanely, and to raise black folk’s and America’s vi-
sion of what we might achieve if we do away with racism and
the vicious forces of black self-defeat taking us down from
within. 
MED 
87Literature, Language, and Learning
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 87


--- PAGE 107 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 88
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 108 ---
chapter 6
Sports
Joe Louis captured the genius of American
citizenship and the protest of blacks against
their exclusion from full citizenship in a single
gesture: the punch that sunk German boxer
Max Schmeling at the height of Nazism.
89
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 89


--- PAGE 109 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 90


--- PAGE 110 ---
I joked with Kobe that he came to Washington and killed my
Wizards by banking in a running 12-foot jumper over All-Star
forward Caron Butler with 25 seconds left to clinch a two-
point victory. Without missing a beat, he replied, “Yeah, I
couldn’t drop a bucket in the ocean that night.” The amazing
thing is he was referring to a game he had played two months
ago! True, he had had only scored 5 of 17 goals from the field,
but he hit 13 of 14 free throws in scoring 23 points. But I was
stunned that, two months after a relatively insignificant game
against a lame team, this three-time NBA world champion,
reigning MVP of the league, and two-time league scoring
champion who dropped 81 points on the Toronto Raptors in
2006, and another 61 in 2009 at Madison Square Garden —
the most in that storied arena’s history — would even remem-
ber how he had performed. That kind of attention to all
games, and that kind of memory of the areas where he needs
to better his performance, and his ready recall of his poorer
efforts, not only proves that he is still hungry to win after
being in the league for 12 years with 3 championship rings —
but it also shows why he’s the best player on the globe today,
and without question one of the greatest basketball players of
all time. 
Black sports often acquired a heroic dimension, as viewed
in the careers of figures such as Joe Louis, Jackie Robinson,
Althea Gibson, Wilma Rudolph, Muhammad Ali, and Arthur
Ashe. Black sports heroes transcended the narrow boundaries
of athletics and gained importance as icons of cultural excel-
lence; they embodied possibilities of success that were denied
to other people of color. But they also captured the obsession
with sport as a means to express black style and as a way to
pursue social and economic opportunity.
91Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 91


--- PAGE 111 ---
Michael Jordan was perhaps most famous for his alleged
“hang time,” the uncanny ability to remain suspended in
midair longer than other basketball players while executing
his stunning array of improvised moves. But Jordan’s “hang
time” is technically a misnomer and can be more accurately
attributed to Jordan’s skillful athletic deception, his acrobatic
leaping ability, and his intellectual toughness in projecting an
aura of uniqueness around his craft than to his defiance of
gravity and the laws of physics. No human being, including
Michael Jordan, can successfully defy the law of gravity and
achieve relatively sustained altitude without the benefit of
machines. For basketball players, as Douglas Kirkpatrick has
argued, hang time is the velocity and speed with which a
player takes off combined with the path the player’s center of
gravity follows on the way up. At the peak of a player’s vertical
jump, the velocity and speed is close to, or at, zero; hanging
motionless in the air is the work of masterful skill and illu-
sion. Michael Jordan, through the skill and style of his game,
only appeared to be hanging in space for more than the one
second that human beings are capable of remaining airborne.
Heroism is often tied to sports as individual or team efforts
embody certain virtues, skills, and mastery. For example, bas-
ketball heroes are celebrated for the virtue of rigorous prac-
tice, expert physical skills, and a mastery of craft required for
excellent performance in a team sport.
When the mainstream embraced Kobe Bryant, it did so be-
cause of his athletic genius, his good looks, his magnetic
92 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 92


--- PAGE 112 ---
smile, his clean image, his easy rapport with the public —
and, as with O. J. Simpson, because of the widely shared be-
lief that he has transcended race, or more to the point, that
he has escaped the stigma of blackness. Let’s not forget that
Bryant has been hailed for being the Anti–Allen Iverson, peel-
ing away the thug image glued to the ex-Philadelphia 76ers
corn-rowed, tattooed, and hip-hop loving superstar. In addi-
tion, Bryant is considered a “Renaissance man” because he is
fluent in Italian, even as the more impressive multilingual tal-
ent of athletes like Hakeem Olajuwon and Dikembe Mutombo
is discounted because their roots, and the source of their mas-
tery, are African. Like Michael Jordan before him, and Simp-
son before them both, Bryant made millions by making it safe
for whites to consume blackness.
O. J. Simpson’s sleek form and catlike grace as a running
back brought glamour to a brutal sport. Simpson beautifully
combined judgment and intuition. His sixth sense for where
his pursuers were likely to pounce on him allowed him to
chisel arteries of escape around heaving bodies.
The exploits of athletes give them influence beyond the
boundaries of sport. This is hardly natural. After all, why
should athletes receive tons of money and notoriety beyond
the recognition and compensation they earn in sports? The
absurdity of this is masked by the fact that we take for granted
that such things should occur. That’s not to say sports don’t
teach us valuable lessons about life. Sports are often a pow-
erful training ground for moral excellence. Take the case of
Willis Reed, the injured center for the 1969–1970 New York
Knicks who was not expected to play in the seventh and de-
93Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 93


--- PAGE 113 ---
ciding game for the NBA championship. When Reed emerged
from the locker room, limping but determined to compete,
several virtues were literally embodied: sacrifice of self for the
sake of the larger good; the courage to “play through pain”;
and the sort of moral leadership that rallies one’s teammates
and lifts their level of expectation and achievement. These
virtues transcend sport. They inspire ordinary people to over-
come obstacles in achieving their goals.
Some figures have served as heroic symbols of national
identity. Others have heroically represented achievement
against the artificial restrictions imposed on a group of peo-
ple. In those cases, a restriction was also placed on competi-
tion as an ideal of democratic participation. Joe DiMaggio, of
course, fit the first bill. His fifty-six-game hitting streak in
baseball thrilled America in 1941, a colossal feat of endurance
to which the nation would turn its attention time and again
as our preeminence as a world power began to fade after
World War II. Jackie Robinson fit the second meaning of
heroism. As major league baseball’s first black player, Robin-
son performed gallantly in the face of bitter opposition. His
gifted play paved the way for blacks in his sport and beyond
the bounds of baseball.
Joe Louis captured the genius of American citizenship and
the protest of blacks against their exclusion from full citizen-
ship in a single gesture: the punch that sunk German boxer
Max Schmeling at the height of Nazism. That punch trans-
formed Louis into an American hero. It also revealed the hid-
den meaning of Louis’s heroic art: beating white men in the
ring was a substitute argument for social equality. Louis’s
94 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 94


--- PAGE 114 ---
prizefighting was an eloquent plea to play the game of Amer-
ican citizenship by one set of rules.
Muhammad Ali’s self-promoting verse and brilliant boxing
proved to be sparring matches for his real battle: the defiance
of white authority because of his religious beliefs.
When Lee Evans, Larry James, and Ron Freeman finished
one, two, and three in the 400 meters race in the 1968 Olym-
pics, it was an enormously important moment in the history
of American sport. The myth of black singularity was over-
come by the substitute image of black solidarity. Isolated
blackness was displaced by cumulative blackness. The lone
black athlete striving against the odds — whether Jackie
Robinson in baseball, Jesse Owens in track and field, Bill Rus-
sell in basketball, Joe Louis in boxing, and so on — was offset
by the image of blacks collectively running the field and rep-
resenting not just themselves or their political interests but
America. These black men displayed back pride, athletic
achievement, and American identity in one fell swoop.
Dennis Rodman was acknowledged as the most gifted
 rebounder in the NBA of his day, and one of the greatest re-
bounders of all time in the NBA. His specialty was unavoid-
ably representative. He was  constantly grabbing the ball off
the backboard, taking shots that were left over from the failed
attempt to score, enhancing the ability of the team to win. His
genius on the court was, in précis, a symbolic expression of
black masculine identity; it was a major symbol of black mas-
culinity, since black men are constantly “on the rebound,” and
95Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 95


--- PAGE 115 ---
“rebounding” from some devastating ordeal. Black men are
continually taking missed shots off the glass, off the black-
board, and feeding them in outlet or bounce passes to some
high-flying teammate who is able to score on the opposition.
Ordinary and iconic black men are constantly helping Amer-
ican society to rebound from one catastrophe or another and
to successfully overcome the opposition in scoring serious
points, serious arguments, serious goals.
There was a time when blacks weren’t allowed to play pro-
fessional basketball. When they were relatively early in their
tenure in the NBA, in the early 1970s, Ebonymagazine did an
annual article that featured every black player on every team,
something unimaginable today. And don’t forget that the New
York Knickerbockers during this time were called by racist
fans the New York “Niggerbockers” because of the presence
of Walt Frazier, Earl “The Pearl” Monroe, Willis Reed, Dick
“Fall Back Baby” Barnett, and Henry Bibby.
Muhammad Ali’s fists and mouth — both in the boxing ring
and in the public arena — hammered home black courage.
Like Jackie Robinson before him, who broke the color barrier
in baseball and integrated American sports, and Michael Jor-
dan after him, whose will to fly raised the bar on athletic style
and standards, Ali’s physical skill symbolized black human-
ity.
Athletes like Althea Gibson, Jim Brown, Hank Aaron, and
Wilma Rudolph believed that what you did as an individual
athlete had racial consequences. They showed a commitment
96 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 96


--- PAGE 116 ---
to uplifting African American interests while tying these in-
terests to American goals. They believed that their perfor-
mance as athletes could somehow broker social acceptance
for black people outside of their sport.
Patrick Ewing made about $4.5 million for Georgetown in
ticket sales, in terms of television, in terms of publicity, in
terms of revenue that was generated. But he got something
like $48,000 for a scholarship for that school. So the reality is
on the college level, where these extraordinary athletes are
making millions and millions and, in some cases, collectively,
billions of dollars for the public education of American soci-
ety, they are not rewarded in anywhere near the proportion
to which they’ve invested their own lives and careers — and
they often don’t even get a good education. 
During the middle to late 1960s, the events of American so-
ciety impinged on the consciousness of many black athletes
in a way that had not happened before. One thinks of an ear-
lier epoch, for instance, in 1936, when Jesse Owens made his
famous run in the Olympics with Hitler in the stands. The op-
posing elements were clear: white supremacy on the one
hand, black athletic genius in the service of democratic ideals
on the other. But racial events didn’t come to a head the same
way they did in the 1960s, including the ongoing civil rights
movement, the enormous upheaval of the antiwar movement,
the peace movement, the social presence of the so-called hip-
pies and yippies, and the death of Martin Luther King, Jr., in
1968. Many black athletes became more aware of their roles
and responsibilities, not only as athletes but also as African
American athletes.
97Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 97


--- PAGE 117 ---
Any black athlete who gains a certain level of prominence
in America has attached to him, whether fair or not, the de-
sires of his people. Folks emulate these athletes just because
they’re athletes. They want to make the basket catch like
Willie Mays or, more recently, they want to “be like Mike.” In
the 1960s, such identification with black athletes was even
more intense and important because they were ambassadors
for black culture. Like entertainers Duke Ellington and Louis
Armstrong from an earlier era, these athletes carried the bur-
den and responsibility of a message to white America: “We
are intelligent, we are athletic, we are capable, we are not here
to burn your town down or to be offensive, but we are here to
exercise our craft. Furthermore, we’re bearing the responsi-
bility for all of those millions of other black people who will
never get a chance to come to your television or be seen on
your large screen, or on your local gridiron or baseball dia-
mond.” The more high profile they were, the more demands
they faced.
Those of us old enough to remember can hardly forget how
in a 1978 preseason game, Oakland Raiders football player
Jack Tatum, a safety, delivered a vicious blow and broke the
neck of New England Patriots wide receiver Darryl Stingley
— rendering him a quadriplegic — with no apology, contend-
ing at the time that an apology would be an untruthful admis-
sion that the hit was dirty. Sure, there’s a cerebral side to
sports as well. But it can hardly be denied that sports provide
vicarious outlets for millions of fans with a visceral and ag-
gressive payoff.
98 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 98


--- PAGE 118 ---
Mike Tyson is one of the most brilliant fighters ever to live,
and not just brilliant in the ring. He knows the history of the
fight game like few other fighters have ever known it —
 including obscure fights and fighters, stats about how many
punches they threw, what kind, and where on the body they
placed them. His genius only makes his suffering — and he’s
openly admitted his struggles with bipolar disease — that
much harder to witness.
Well before the 1960s, sports had a prominent function in
the culture, especially baseball, which was crowned “Amer-
ica’s favorite pastime” and enjoyed unparalleled supremacy
in capturing the national imagination. The boys of summer
ruled from the ’20s through the early ’60s. But in the late ’60s,
baseball got a serious challenge from within and outside its
borders. If baseball was seen as the quintessential American
sport, the unique articulation of American identity, its face
changed as integration and immigration brought black and
brown ballplayers into the fold. Then too, football began to
give baseball a run for its money, and much later basketball
supplanted baseball as the nation’s most popular sport. And
with the heightened visibility of the female athlete, spurred
in part by the feminist movement, things were in upheaval in
the sports arena and beyond.
Harry Edwards is an extraordinary figure in the history of
black athletics over the last thirty years. He was at the time a
smart sociologist well versed in the field’s theories and jargon
about race who also understood the internal dynamics of
sport. So he was a perfect bridge figure between those athletes
involved in the ’68 Olympics and the wider society. He was a
99Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 99


--- PAGE 119 ---
young man himself, not even twenty-five years old, and served
as an instructor in sociology at San Jose State with these
barely eighteen- and nineteen-year-old kids. So he was able
to get closer to them than other older, more estimable figures
in the black community. He understood their worldviews. And
yet at the same time he had his own charisma, his own au-
thority that derived from his considerable knowledge and ed-
ucation. As a result, he was able to spur their consciousness,
and of course he agitated people as well. But remember, Mar-
tin Luther King, Jr., was also viewed as an agitator by many
whites and a fair number of blacks. So in the late ’60s, Harry
Edwards was an extraordinary, difficult, and flamboyant fig-
ure. Now he’s on the sidelines of the San Francisco 49ers and
working with other mainstream groups helping them manage
their athletes. So times change and so does our understanding
of the figures that helped to change them. 
When some people look at Allen Iverson, they see swagger
and defiance, a thug. For these folks, Iverson is like the noto-
rious rapper Tupac Shakur — only with a jump shot. Others
view Iverson as a surly superstar whose work ethic is de-
plorable. Sure he has heart, they concede, but he has ethical
arrhythmia. When I look at Iverson, I see a young man who
has risen from poverty and suffering to seize the nation’s
imagination with his athletic genius. You see, Iverson has
been an underdog for most of his life. As a poor black male
born to a single mother in Virginia, Iverson faced the
prospects all of his number do: mediocre education, desultory
home life, father-deprivation, social stigma as a “bastard,” and
incarceration, that virtual rite of passage to black manhood.
He grew up in a home of multigeneration females who show-
ered him with love and outfitted him with mental toughness.
100 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 100


--- PAGE 120 ---
Iverson’s mother was fiercely dedicated to her son, teaching
him how to survive the mean ghetto streets of his impover-
ished neighborhood. 
As Iverson matured, he developed into a superb athlete and
eventually led his football team to the state championship as
the star quarterback. He could easily have gone to college on
a football scholarship, but his prospects for longevity were
greater in the basketball he effortlessly dominated. Let me put
my biases on the table: I love Allen Iverson. I love that he has
made a career out of capitalizing on a move that symbolizes
the strength of a minority group in its economic and cultural
ties to the mainstream — the crossover. I love that he has re-
mained true to his kith and kin — especially his mama, whom
I love as well — that loved him when he lived in mud, not
mansions. I love it that no matter how much money he
makes, he remembers to tap his ghetto roots. Iverson has won
respect, and in the process, perhaps opened some closed
minds — and hopefully a few doors — for kids who might not
get an even shake because of aesthetic or racial bigotry.
Hockey has been accepted as a ritual sport of violence for
masculinity in American society, so you can go in there and
beat each other’s brains out and then emerge as a greater
hero.
People tend to forget that in 2003, Donovan McNabb, the
famed quarterback of the Philadelphia Eagles, was under vi-
cious assault by Rush Limbaugh, who said Mr. McNabb re-
ceived kudos for his play precisely because he was a black
quarterback, and that people were trying to overlook his pass-
ing deficiencies and his obvious mediocrity. And a year later
101Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 101


--- PAGE 121 ---
McNabb was one of the highest-rated quarterbacks in the
league, a sure contender for MVP, and had an incredible sea-
son. So I find it interesting that Limbaugh could make those
statements — the conservatives can assault — and a year later,
when empirical evidence contradicts their claims, the conser-
vatives were not called out.
Mike Tyson crystallized the contradictions of a sport built
on blood and brutality. His success inside the ring depended
on his ability to harness an outsized fury that beyond the ring
could lead to great mayhem. Tyson’s occasional blurring of
the boundaries between his two worlds — symbolized in alle-
gations that he pounded his first wife, actress Robin Givens,
and a rape conviction — bruised a major premise of the
“sweet science” of boxing: that it is civilized violence. Tyson
became for many a sad brute. He was for his critics a beast in
boxer shorts whose primitivism was made a spectacle to be
bought on pay-per-view.
Jesse Owens represented an era when athletic prowess
alone was a symbolic gesture and a political act. When he per-
formed with Hitler in the stands and he ran for the United
States, he was racing for democracy against the scourge of
Nazism, for America against Germany.
That’s why sports are so charged and permanently appeal-
ing. They and the athletes who engage them are unavoidably
representative: we dream we can be like them or we live vic-
ariously through them. In the case of the 1968 Olympics black
athletes, the hopes and moral aspirations of millions of op-
102 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 102


--- PAGE 122 ---
pressed people, in America and around the globe, found ex-
pression in the raised fists of world champions who refused
to lower them for convention, tradition, or fear. Because they
raised their fists, a lot of us back home raised our heads in
pride and fought even more aggressively and passionately for
the things we believed in. That’s not simply the sign of a
champion; that’s the mark of a hero.
I spoke at the NBA rookie camp in 2003 that featured one
of the greatest classes of first year players in recent memory,
including future superstars LeBron “King” James, Dwayne
Wade, Carmelo Anthony and Chris Bosh. I remember meeting
James — or more precisely, looking up at him as I shook his
hand — and thinking to myself, “This just ain’t fair.” The guy
was 18 years old, yet he was a massive mountain of muscle
sculpted into a 6’ 8” frame that made him a “beast” by any
measure. Even then he looked like a man among boys, and
his play since he entered the league has proved that all the
hype may not have been enough! To be that fast, that strong,
that quick, that young and that good is mind boggling – I
mean he can pass like Magic Johnson, shoot like George
Gervin, dunk like Michael Jordan and play defense with Kobe
Bryant’s wily instincts! It’s scary to think of what he’ll be when
he’s 30 years old and at his prime. We may have never quite
seen the likes of a LeBron prototype in the NBA before.
Say what you will about Charles Barkley, but I love the
brother, because he’s one of the few sports commentators
world-class athletes — he was one of the greatest basketball
players we’ve seen, playing way above his height as a power
forward with a fierce determination to compete and he retired
103Sports
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 103


--- PAGE 123 ---
in 2000 as one of only four players to collect 20,000 points,
10,000 rebounds and 4,000 assists — who will speak his mind
and tell the truth as he sees it. Straight, no chaser. Sure, he’s
made some mistakes along the way, but he lives his life out
loud and in living color for the world to see and learn from,
warts and all. He possesses a kind of courage and honesty that
is both refreshing and instructive. Too many athletes and
celebrities take the money and keep their mouths shut about
all sorts of injustices and inequalities that their lesser known
brothers and sisters must suffer in relative silence and invis-
ibility. Barkley lays it on the line by shooting straight from the
lip!
MED 
104 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 104


--- PAGE 124 ---
chapter 7
Icons
Richard Pryor’s unruly comic genius spliced rage
into social commentary and brought America
face-to-face with its darker brother.
105
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 105


--- PAGE 125 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 106


--- PAGE 126 ---
Oprah Winfrey is a stunning figure, a woman who best rep-
resents our people’s magnificent spiritual genius. Oprah’s
show, and her sparkling, luminous presence in the world, has
done more good than a million sermons and acts of Congress.
Her will to better the American people by offering an alterna-
tive to smut media is remarkable and courageous. Her sup-
port for the black poor in this country when it wasn’t even
popular has been stirring. Her loving embrace of our brothers
and sisters in Africa has been nothing short of miraculous.
She is the symbol of our will to survival through the word and
spirit translated into therapeutic doses of information and
transformed moral habits that provide her the most powerful
pulpit in the world today. I applaud her sterling and impec-
cable sense of conscience, and her refusal to do anything to
tarnish the black moral treasury and integrity with which she
has been endowed. She has proved that white America can
listen to a black voice that resonates with pure love and ex-
traordinary compassion for the ordinary human being.
Rosa Parks sat down with dignity so that all black people
could stand up with pride.
Bill Cosby almost single-handedly changed how black peo-
ple are viewed on television. First in the ’60s in I Spy,with his
Alexander Scott character, who replaced buffoonish types
with a polymath, with a person who spoke several languages
and who was very bright. And then twenty years later, with
The Cosby Show,he brought into visibility upper-middle-class
black people, who were virtually hidden from broader cultural
view. It was incredibly important. I think Cosby is one of the
great comedic geniuses, not only of our time but in American
107Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 107


--- PAGE 127 ---
history, ranking up there near Mark Twain and Richard Pryor
in terms of his ability to tell stories whose humor brimmed
with moral vision that told on the American character, which
grew from the desire of our nation to understand itself
through humor.
To the world beyond the church, Aretha Franklin’s freakish
precocity seemed to emerge fully formed from obscure ori-
gins in the Detroit neighborhood where her father, C. L.
Franklin, a noted preacher, brought her up. In fact, it was in
Rev. Franklin’s legendary rhetorical womb that Aretha ges-
tated before hatching her monumental talent. As a bronze
gospel wunderkind, Aretha’s gift poured out in a theological
prescience so striking that her father, a past master himself
of the far-flung ecstasies and esoteric vibrations of the back
voice, must have felt that a double portion of the Spirit, his
spirit, had fallen on his woman-child. One can hear fourteen-
year-old Aretha on her first gospel recording declaring with
unforced believability that she was heading to a place where
she would “Never Grow Old.” Like all great artists, Aretha was
not so much speaking to us as speaking for us, at least for the
fortunate phalanx gathered at her father’s New Bethel Baptist
Church where the recording took place. In Aretha’s mouth,
the gospel standard temporarily dissolved its yearning for a
distant heaven and seized her youthful form to embody its
promise right now.
Muhammad Ali was a great jazz performer, because his
movements were like extended riffs on the great themes of
grace, power, and precision. But he was also symbolically im-
portant, and the metaphoric value of his craft was hardly lost
108 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 108


--- PAGE 128 ---
on his legions of followers, as he “floated like a butterfly,” like
a solo jazz melody arching effortlessly above the backdrop of
supporting instruments keeping time and pace. Except, of
course, Ali was a one-man combo, varying his pitch, and
punch, and the velocity and force of his delivery, “stinging like
a bee,” to razzle-dazzle his opponents and fans, much like
Miles Davis as he switched from Kind of Blue to Bitches Brew.
And in his flight, in his mobility, Ali also struck symbolic blows
against the demobilization of black culture and the restriction
of our unique voices, as did so many great jazz instrumental-
ists and vocalists, from Satchmo to Prez, from the Duke to
Bird, from Lady Day to Sassy. And this is where, perhaps, we
can see the relation between jazz and hip-hop, too, at least in
Ali’s artistry, because when Ali came out with his doggerel dis-
guised as edifying ring rhetoric — “rumble, young man, rum-
ble” and “I’m pretty” and “I shook up the world . . . I’m a bad
man” — his braggadocio behavior prefigured rap rhetoric.
Gordon Parks peeked through photographic and, later, cin-
ematic lenses to record the travail and triumph of black life. 
Sam Cooke answered the appropriation of black musical
styles by reappropriating them through his silky, sometimes
saccharine, occasionally raw black pop aesthetic. What
racism would restrict, Cooke would reinvent. His forays into
pop genres from R&B to jazz, from Tin-Pan Alley to supper-
club fare, allowed him to meet the world on his own terms
by conceding and combating the dictates of race and the
market. It was a tricky balancing act, one that led both to
transcendent art and musical ephemera. Still, among Cooke’s
most lasting contributions is that he helped bring the world
109Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 109


--- PAGE 129 ---
of black gospel — itself the product of jazz, blues, and rag-
time — to pop music, greatly influencing rhythm and blues
and giving rise to soul and funk. Even Cooke’s trademark
melismas — emotionally embellished extensions of a syllable
over several notes, especially his thrilling “whoa-o-a-o-o-o-o”
— were drawn from a gospel world then little noticed by the
mainstream.
Berry Gordy harnessed the musical genius of urban black
America. Gordy sought to transform the blueprint of Henry
Ford’s automobile empire into an ebony musical kingdom.
Motown Records Corporation adapted the assembly line as a
metaphor for producing hit records. Gordy fixed on elements
that made cars and musical careers sleek and appealing: reg-
ularity and efficiency of production; mechanical and technical
brilliance wed to aesthetic value; the elevation of a system
that, with few exceptions, credits the product, not its creators;
and an obsessive attention to quality control. In the flawed
genius of both Ford and Gordy, the quality of their control was
paramount.
Richard Pryor’s unruly comic genius spliced rage into so-
cial commentary and brought America face-to-face with its
darker brother.
The Moneta Sleet photo of Coretta Scott King consoling
her youngest daughter, Bernice, at her husband’s funeral, not
only snagged a Pulitzer Prize, but it tugged at the nation’s
heart. I remember tracing my nine-year-old hand along the
photo of her pretty face tilted by grief, sheathed beneath the
110 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 110


--- PAGE 130 ---
black netting on her pillbox hat. What dignity, what calm,
what courage. I met Coretta Scott King in person, for the first
time, more than a quarter-century later when I spoke at
Ebenezer Baptist Church, the congregation her husband had
co-pastored with his father until his assassination in 1968.
Without Coretta Scott King’s tireless efforts, her husband’s
legacy might not have as quickly garnered national, indeed,
global acceptance. And without her relentless advocacy, his
birthday surely would not have become a national holiday, the
first for a person of African descent in our country’s  history.
On What’s Going OnMarvin Gaye made the logic of black
Christian love accessible to millions who may have otherwise
dismissed its most ardent believers as parochial or irrelevant
or dangerously naïve. He took his tunes to church and bap-
tized them in the swelling currents of love of God and fellow
man that washed over him as the son of a Pentecostal
preacher. He glossed a hundred theology books and gleaned
the gist of a thousand sermons when he tied God’s love to love
for children and poor people and for the environment and in
defense of peace. Parts of Marvin’s album were a soulful up-
date of the Negro spirituals, or the sorrow songs of the slave,
plumbing the depths of black spiritual resistance to social de-
spair and personal hopelessness. Other parts of his musical
homily were drawn from biblical models of grieving for the
vulnerable and victimized — for instance, in the book of
Lamentations, where the prophet Jeremiah weeps over evil
instead of celebrating the destruction of the unrighteous.
Marvin’s prophetic vision drew on chords of empathy and dis-
appointment, a sign that one has neither given up the music
of community nor ignored the discord of one’s own short -
comings.
111Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 111


--- PAGE 131 ---
Though basketball is anchored in the metaphoric heart of
African American culture, Michael Jordan has paradoxically
transcended the negative meanings of race to become an icon
of all-American athletic excellence. In Jordan, the black male
body, still associated with menace outside of sports and en-
tertainment, was made an object of white desire. And black
desire found in Jordan, through his athletic ability, the still
almost exclusive entry into wealth and fame. The cultural
meanings that Jordan embodied represent a remarkable
achievement in American culture. We must not forget that a
six-foot-six American of obvious African descent was the
dominant presence in a sport which twenty years ago was be-
littled as a black man’s game, unworthy of the massive atten-
tion it receives today. He remains a metaphor of mobility to
the heights of excellence through genius and hard work.
There’s a concept in theology called the “scandal of partic-
ularity,” meaning when the universal God becomes a particu-
lar Jewish guy named Jesus. August Wilson’s scandal of
particularity is his unyielding attention to the specific details
of black life. What it means for black identity to be assaulted,
but also elevated. Assaulted by racial oppression, economic
misery. But elevated because, in his plays, moral vision is not
the property of the elite. There’s ethical wisdom in the every-
day struggles of black people. August Wilson has no desire to
translate this for whites, to give a grammar of explanation or
a thesaurus that might illumine. Just put black life there on-
stage and assume it exists. And yet by doing that, people can
tap into it and it can resonate universally, because it dares to
be particular.
112 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 112


--- PAGE 132 ---
Michael Jackson represents all that young black men have
yearned for: to turn their enormous talent into capital and
celebrity that frees them to pursue their lives with all their
might. He is one of the great prodigies of world musical his-
tory. You’d have to turn to a cat like Mozart for a parallel fig-
ure who, at six or seven years old, is already at such an
advanced level of mastery of his craft. Jackson’s prodigious
talent was extremely marketable because he was a chocolate,
cherubic-faced boy with an Afro halo; thus, both artistically
and aesthetically, he represented the aspirations for authentic
black style of a generation that came on the heels of the civil
rights/black power movement era. He put an entire genera-
tion of urban black people on his vocal chords for a while at
such a young age and carried them, symbolically, before hip
hop emerged as the vox populi. 
Michael Jackson, at his best, with all the changes he’s been
through — some remarkable, some ugly and tragic — is an
example of the willful transformation of the self as an artifact
of one’s own imagination. I mean, that’s a deep thing: Michael
Jackson made it apparent that the black self, collectively
speaking, is a work of art, an experiment of self-remaking.
Michael experimented with his face, and it changed dramat-
ically from an identifiably black visage to a curious racial car-
icature of Caucasian shade and sculpture. Michael’s face was
monstrously deconstructed of its African identity; his face be-
came a geography of distorted possibilities, a fleshly region
of racial ideals invaded by spooky European features that ren-
dered him ethnically opaque. It might sound clichéd to say
so, but Michael Jackson embodies all of the malicious demons
of identity that black people struggle with.
113Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 113


--- PAGE 133 ---
Susan Taylor’s fiercely articulate and melodic tone captures
the rhythms of the black heartland. Her words are often read
as the most pristine expression of black spiritual yearning in
our nation. Susan Taylor is black Americans’ Queen of Inspi-
ration, the perfect embodiment of racial pride and sisterly sol-
idarity in an age when either virtue has been diminished by
self-hatred or cultural attack. Under Susan, Essence magazine
was an especially crucial vehicle to rebut the vicious stereo-
types that plague black women. Susan Taylor — a woman of
entrancing speech who possesses the regal bearing of our
queenliest sisters; a woman whose trademark braids bespeak
a profound connection to the continent that birthed her; a
woman whose voluptuous lips suggest our sensuous inheri-
tance from lovely foremothers; a woman whose flawless
chocolate skin shines with the incandescent glow of African
beauty; a woman whose piercing eyes flash the brilliance of
wise ancestors full of majestic intelligence and ennobling
warmth; and a woman with a radiant smile that delivers light
to poor souls captured by the painful night of self-ignorance
— has not only told the truth. She has been the truth, for me,
and for millions more.
Johnnie Cochran has been called a modern-day Joe Louis.
In part, I can see that. He fought tough legal battles for some
of our most beleaguered black brothers: Jim Brown, Todd
Bridges, Michael Jackson, and O. J. Rascals all, in their own
ways. In representing them, Cochran slugged it out with a jus-
tice system that often punishes black men with frightening
frequency. Unlike the Brown Bomber, though, Cochran’s gifts
spilled forth from his golden throat. He was smooth and silky,
an orator of great skill whose rhetoric reflected his Baptist
roots and his early days as an insurance salesman. He per-
114 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 114


--- PAGE 134 ---
formed the law, dramatizing its arcane rituals of argument
and translating its esoteric dogmas into stirring, poetic dec-
laration. For many blacks Cochran was the law, masterfully
taming the chaos of white contempt camouflaged in legal lan-
guage and protected by obscure codes and regulations. 
The pride so many blacks felt in Cochran’s performance
had a lot to do with an ancient injury to black self-esteem that
not even Joe Louis could relieve: the white challenge to black
intelligence and its skillful defense in eloquent black speech.
Among his many racial functions, the black orator lends cre-
dence to claims of black rationality. When black folk in bar-
bershops and beauty salons said of Cochran that “the brother
can talk,” what they mean in part is that the brother could
think. Thinking and speaking are linked in many black com-
munities. And neither are abstract reasoning and passionate
discourse often diametrically opposed in such circles. Like all
great black orators, Cochran made style a vehicle for sub-
stance.
There are a lot of reasons why Tupac continues to be even
more popular in death than he was in life: his thug-revolu-
tionary-artiste persona that resonates in our occasionally bar-
ren pop artistic epoch; his extraordinary handsomeness and
perfectly sculpted physique that embody his youthfulness and
our vain adoration and envy of it; his diligent martyrdom, one
that he predicted, and thus, in part precipitated, setting him
apart from other fallen stars like Notorious B.I.G., who, de-
spite his lyrics, fought it like the plague; and his translation
of epic religious ideas into secular eulogies and cautionary
tales. But what ultimately makes Tupac a legend is the way
he made the music he made, and the way he made it easy for
others — producers, DJs, and rappers — to make something
115Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 115


--- PAGE 135 ---
of the poetry he left behind. Even that may not satisfactorily
explain his enduring appeal. Perhaps it is because he spoke
straight from the heart that we recognized that a troubled
prophet had risen to articulate a truth that we couldn’t possi-
bly live without. While that is certainly not true for all of us,
perhaps not even for most of us, it is true for enough of us.
For those folk, Tupac’s searing voice is a siren of sanity.
Angela Davis’s hairstyle in the ’70s was a crucial political
symbol to a people who had been taught to hate our bodies
and appearances. Her Afro was a symbolic salvo in the war
to liberate our identities from the worship of the white world,
a liberation that was embodied in the “Black Is Beautiful” slo-
gan that many blacks adopted. When Davis’s Afro’d image
mushroomed across the global mediascape, it did more than
highlight the extraordinary attractiveness of a political rene-
gade. Her presence underscored the legitimacy of black at-
tempts to wrest the dignity of our images from the vicious
machinery of self-denigration. Moreover, her willingness to
sacrifice her freedom in the most dangerous fashion possible
made an important statement about how social privilege
breeds moral responsibility. Angela Davis’s beauty didn’t
merely reside in her physical stature; it was bone-deep, rooted
in the love of black flesh, ’fros, and freedom. When ubiquitous
posters of her flooded the ghetto of Detroit, demanding her
freedom from political imprisonment in the early ’70s, I
pointed to them with a profound sense of identification that
I didn’t fully understand until years later, when my critical in-
stincts caught up with my “natural” impulses. 
116 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 116


--- PAGE 136 ---
When I met her in 1992, Myrlie Evers-Williams still ached
in the unfulfilled hope to destroy the bigotry that had marred
her family’s life and the lives of millions of others. She fairly
shook with rage at her martyred husband Medgar Evers’s
killer, who was free to spread his venomous beliefs. Evers-
Williams was an open wound of memory. She poured out sto-
ries of the fight for justice in what was arguably the most
racially menacing state in the nation. I found it refreshing that
her passions were palpable, and that her commitment to jus-
tice was steady and determined. Her pain was raw. Myrlie’s
discourse was hot with the blood of remembrance splashed
across its sharp edges — it was if Medgar had been murdered
yesterday. I admired her spunk, her fire, her war against am-
nesia, an amnesia that led too many of us to forget that, de-
spite our undeniable progress, we had not yet made it to the
Promised Land. Her birth certificate might have made her old
school, but her birthright as a daughter of suffering gave her
an instant passport into the geography of hurt that was occu-
pied by millions of poor black youth.
At first blush, it may seem that Denzel Washington failed
to stand and “represent” when he received his 2002 best actor
Oscar at the Academy Awards ceremony. But that would be a
severe misreading of the politics of signifying that thread
through black culture. Looking up to the balcony where Sid-
ney Poitier sat — having received an honorary Oscar earlier
before delivering a stately speech — Washington said, “Forty
years I’ve been chasing Sidney . . .” He joked with Poitier, and
the academy, by playfully lamenting his being awarded an
Oscar on the same night that his idol was feted. Washington,
for a fleeting but telling moment, transformed the arena of
his award into an intimate platform of conversation between
117Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 117


--- PAGE 137 ---
himself and his progenitor that suggested, “This belongs to
us, we are not interlopers, nobody else matters more than we
do.” Thus, Washington never let us see him sweat, behaving
as if it was natural, if delayed, that he should receive the high-
est recognition of his profession. His style was political in the
way that only black cool can be when the stakes are high and
its temperature must remain low, sometimes beneath the de-
tection of the powers-that-be that can stamp it out. This is not
to be confused with spineless selling out. Nor is it to be seen
as yielding to the cowardly imperative to keep one’s mouth
shut in order to hang on to one’s privilege. Rather, it is the
strategy of those who break down barriers and allow the
chroniclers of their brokenness to note their fall.
Betty Shabazz waged an important war to rescue her hus-
band Malcolm X’s reputation from naysayers who claimed he
was a divisive symbol of violence and hatred. Betty Shabazz
worked indefatigably to rear her six children and to make cer-
tain that Malcolm’s true legacy was honored. Because Mal-
colm insisted on blacks loving and learning from themselves
before they invited the wider, whiter world into the fold, he
was a less obvious choice than Martin Luther King or Medgar
Evers to be feted by cultural forces beyond — and at times,
within — his community. But Shabazz’s efforts helped to un-
derscore the ecumenical and international dimensions of
Malcolm’s surprisingly catholic racial politics.
Chris Rock is a brilliant comedian who lampoons and sat-
irizes some of the weaknesses he finds in black communities.
In his instant classic HBO comedy special, Bring the Pain,and
in his comedic audio recordings, Rock is a genius in figuring
118 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 118


--- PAGE 138 ---
out a middle ground between the vicious assault on black cul-
ture and the self-critical practices that are demanded of any
serious social commentator. One of the ingenious things that
Chris Rock is doing is making white America aware of the
contradictions and conflicts within black culture of which
they may have been oblivious. In one sense, Rock is a cultural
translator, an arbiter of contested black meanings in a safe
public space of comedy where he’s able to broach controver-
sial issues. Even if we are turned off by what Chris Rock says,
it is healthier to have open rather than closed cultural con-
versations — I suppose it’s where Chris Rock meets Karl
 Popper. 
In that sense, I celebrate Chris Rock’s transgressive notions
of blackness. I think it’s crucial, even if it is hurtful and con-
troversial, for Chris Rock to go on television — including his
appearance on Oprah, a show watched by 20 million people,
most of whom are white — and talk with devastating accu-
racy, as well as some measure of pitiless self-examination, of
our culture. That’s why I think he’s one of the most important
African American comedians and critics. His Bring the Pain
ranks right up there with classic black stand-up comedic per-
formances caught on tape, including Richard Pryor’s Richard
Pryor: Live and Smokin’ and Richard Pryor: Live in Concert,
Bill Cosby’s Bill Cosby: Himself,and Eddie Murphy’s Delirious
and Raw. Whether we agree with him at every turn or not,
Chris Rock is a crucial cultural presence, a valuable gadfly,
and above all, a great comedian, which I’m sure is his ultimate
goal. 
Mary Wilson is one-third of the greatest girl group in the
history of music, The Supremes. I always had a huge crush
on Mary because she was a pretty chocolate doll, an adorable
119Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 119


--- PAGE 139 ---
chanteuse with a golden pair of pipes — although she never
got full credit for her talent — and a face and figure as comely
as her vocal gifts. When I met Mary at fifty-six she was still a
chocolate dream, her pretty face radiant and full, her beauti-
ful eyes alive and sparkling, her hair large and lovely, her lips
wet and pouty, her figure fetching and eye-grabbing. I also
like Mary because she was the group’s griot, its truth-teller,
and a politically sensitive scribe who penned books, made
music, and mounted her own career long after the great Diana
Ross flew the coop. I liked it that Mary proved she, too, was
great and gritty. Her earthy sensuality and her quick mind
were true assets in making her a diva who couldn’t be dis-
missed.
Jean-Michel Basquiat’s powerful and disturbing art under-
cut the notion of a single, or simple, black esthetic.
Vanessa Williams has made a career of reinventing herself.
From deposed Miss America to multifaceted recording artist
and actress on film, television, and stage, Williams’s many
successes have made her past troubles seem a necessary step
to achievement. Her first two albums imaginatively experi-
mented with dance grooves and brilliantly exploited her in-
herent sensuality as a performer. This last move was shrewd,
even courageous. For starters, Williams successfully trans-
formed and repackaged the sexuality that had drawn derision
from her critics when she posed nude. But with the critically
celebrated embrace of a sexual self in her music and on-
screen, Williams has flouted arbitrary conventions that bring
stigma to some artists while leaving others unscathed.
120 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 120


--- PAGE 140 ---
Dick Gregory built on the work of black comics who were
among the first to perform before mainstream crowds, in-
cluding Timmie Rogers, Nipsey Russell, George Kirby, and
Slappy White. But his penetrating racial observations cata-
pulted Gregory to greater acclaim and a bigger white audi-
ence than any black comic before him. Gregory’s influence
was at once mythic and smothering. Any young black comic
hoping to share even a fraction of Gregory’s spotlight would
have to shine with the gifts Gregory bequeathed: acerbic at-
tacks on the color line, witty self-mockery, and telling the
truth about black life in white America.
As Halle Berry strode to the podium to accept her 2002 best
actress Oscar, the first for a black woman, she wept uncon-
trollably and gasped, “This moment is so much bigger than
me.” Berry electrified her audience, speaking with intelligence
and rousing emotion of how her Oscar was made possible by
the legendary likes of Dorothy Dandridge, Lena Horne, and
Diahann Carroll. And in a stunning display of sorority in a
profession torn by infighting and narcissism, Berry acknowl-
edged the efforts of contemporary black actresses Angela Bas-
set, Jada Pinkett Smith, and Vivica Fox. But it was when
Berry moved from ancestors and peers to the future that she
spoke directly to her award’s symbolic meaning. She gave the
millions who watched around the globe not only a sorely
needed history lesson but instruction as well in courageously
identifying with the masses. Berry tearfully declared that her
award was for “every nameless, faceless woman of color” who
now has a chance, since “this door has been opened.” Black
pride couldn’t find a more eloquent voice. Berry’s courage and
candor are depressingly rare among famed blacks with a lot
on the line: money, prestige, reputation, and work. Many
121Icons
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 121


--- PAGE 141 ---
covet the limelight’s payoffs but cower at its demands. Even
fewer speak up about the experiences their ordinary brothers
and sisters endure — and if they are honest, that they them-
selves too often confront — on a daily basis. Berry proved that
on such occasions, black pride’s payoff is the shining and un-
apologetic representation of the aspirations of ordinary peo-
ple to do extraordinary deeds.
MED 
122 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 122


--- PAGE 142 ---
chapter 8
Justice and Suffering
Justice is what love sounds like 
when it speaks in public.
123
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 123


--- PAGE 143 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 124


--- PAGE 144 ---
Justice is what love sounds like when it speaks in public.
We have to be willing to wish for every other group what
we wish for our own if we are to make the identification of
the public good with the good of our group work.
The fact that rappers are struggling with suffering and evil
proves that in fact they are connected to a moral tradition that
they have seemingly rejected. 
The public good is hampered when we idolize our slice of
the social welfare and elevate our group above all others in
the political order. Such a thing is bad enough if groups sim-
ply aspire to unjust social dominance, but if they’ve got the
power to get it done, it greatly harms the commonweal.
In the Bible, in Ezekiel, it says, “I sat where they sat.” That’s
before he prophesized to them. That’s before he opened his
mouth. Because when you sit where they sit, you see what
they see. And when you see what they see, you hear what they
say. And when you hear what they say, after seeing what they
see, after sitting where they sit, you know what they know.
Ezekiel was a theological observer who was willing to be
humble in the face of the data he would collect before he
made analysis and prescription about the suffering he wit-
nessed.
125Justice and Suffering
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 125


--- PAGE 145 ---
If we are to maintain any semblance of fairness, we must
bring terrorists before international courts of justice that have
proved proficient in prosecuting war criminals from Nurem-
berg to Bosnia. To do less would be to extend a marred record
of American governmental justification of misdeeds in the
name of protecting our democracy. The ultimate safeguard
against such distortion is to behave justly, even when dealing
with the enemies of our country. Otherwise, we are no better
than the unprincipled and destructive terrorists we condemn. 
If Martin Luther King, Jr., were alive, he would talk about
the economic inequality and fundamental social injustice that
is ethnically based and racially informed — but also class
based, because poor white people themselves have been
duped by politicians who don’t have their best interests at
heart.
I suppose, in retrospect, it would be fair to say that one of
the reasons I became an intellectual was to talk back to suf-
fering — and if possible, to relieve it. I wanted to be as smart
as I could be about the pain and heartache of people I knew
were unjustly oppressed.
Some social scientific research suggests that the out-migra-
tion of blacks and Latinos from the postindustrial urban inner
cities left these people bereft of role models and moral capital
— that is, the ability to act right and behave right. That’s why
we’ve got all these terribly isolated families. And I think that’s
ridiculous. There is a kind of nostalgia that suggests, “Well,
back in my day, fifty years ago, when segregation happened,
126 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 126


--- PAGE 146 ---
we loved each other, we disciplined each others’ kids, and we
had a great community.” As if there was no economic inequal-
ity. As if there were not internal divisions that we have
scarcely talked about tonight. So I think we don’t have to ro-
manticize the past. But we also have to talk about how we can
make equality the principle for these collapsed postindustrial
urban centers where people are suffering enormously.
I am now far less interested in saving men’s souls from the
hell to come as I am in inspiring my listeners to relieve the
suffering of victims who live in hell in Detroit or Delhi.
The use of racial profiling, indefensible detentions, and un-
just raids only perpetuates the belief that our nation is prac-
ticing reverse terrorism. If we are to root out terrorism, we
must make certain that our efforts don’t negate the very prin-
ciples to which we claim allegiance: justice, truth, and free-
dom. If we deploy unjust practices to attain just ends, we not
only leave a legally twisted trail of justifications, but we un-
dercut the ethical legs upon which we stand in the resistance
to terrorism.
Charity is no substitute for justice.
When Martin Luther King, Jr., and other figures in the
1960s argued for a colorblind society, it was within the con-
text of a struggle — a bitter, colossal struggle — for freedom,
equality and justice. And black people in the past have mixed
their blood with the soil of American society to defend rights
127Justice and Suffering
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 127


--- PAGE 147 ---
that they could not themselves enjoy at home. And if African
American people, and Latino people, and Native American
people, and the Vietnamese and Pacific Islanders and whoso-
ever will — these “huddled masses” — have come here seeking
opportunity, and have had that opportunity, to a certain de-
gree, extended to them, then we must embrace the American
dream as an extension of the democratic project.
If we never challenge a social order that allows some to ac-
cumulate wealth — even if they decide to help the less fortu-
nate — while others are shortchanged, then even acts of
kindness may end up supporting unjust arrangements.
What guides all of my thought and action is the belief that
human beings who think creatively and act boldly can shape
history and relieve suffering for the good of the neighborhood
and the planet.
We must never ignore the injustices that make charity nec-
essary, or the inequalities that make it possible.
Black politicians very much have to be responsible to the
social justice issue. Many of them get up there and get a pass
because they are black — because they have black skin doesn’t
mean they represent black interests. And black interests
should not be narrowly defined.
128 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 128


--- PAGE 148 ---
129Justice and Suffering
Affirmative action is not about retaliating against white
Americans. It is about recognizing the legal and moral conse-
quences of practicing subjugation for well over three hundred
years. I wish this was a kind of sitcom, perhaps Bewitched,
where we could wrinkle our noses and erase memories of
racial and ethnic bigotry and brutality. But the reality is that
we live in the aftermath, with the consequences, of the sys-
tematic exclusion of African Americans and other minorities
from the larger circle of American privilege. This is not about
the politics of resentment; it is about the politics of justice
and equal opportunity. And equal opportunity means we not
only have to pay attention to the past, we must pay attention
to the present.
It ain’t about love. It’s about justice. And justice says that
“Even if I love you, don’t use my love for you to exploit me.”
Black people and Jewish people have in common the strug-
gle against oppression and suffering, by means of words, by
means of thought, by means of aesthetic expression, and by
trying to figure out our place in the world by locating our-
selves in relationship to God.
On 9/11, I think America felt for the first time the ugly in-
tensity of black vulnerability. Since black folk have valiantly
combated racial terror for so long in this country, the question
the nation must ask is whether it will behave like those
African American heroes who pressed their righteous cause
against a white supremacist government that hurt us. Did we
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 129


--- PAGE 149 ---
try to blow it up? No. Did we try to subvert the process of jus-
tice? No. We created more justice by loving the hell out of our
enemies.
If you’re a celebrity and you’ve got face recognition and
you’ve got high visibility, you’re just simply going to get a dif-
ferent brand of justice than the average Joe Schmo.
You can’t be courageous without having love. You can’t love
without having compassion. You can’t have compassion with-
out seeking justice. You know, as the common rally cry goes
forth, no justice, no peace. That signifies that the virtues are
unified — you can’t really have one without having them all.
Self-help only makes sense when the selves black folk work
valiantly to fashion can count on the opportunity and justice
their land promises all its citizens.
America has often been incapable of distinguishing its
valiant role in opposing injustice on one shore from its vicious
role in extending it in other theaters. 
Many colors were present in Hurricane Katrina’s multicul-
tural stew of suffering, but the dominant color was black.
From the sight of it, this was the third world — a misnomer,
to be sure, since people of color are two-thirds of the world’s
population. The suffering on screen created cognitive disso-
nance; it suggested that this must be somewhere in India, or
130 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 130


--- PAGE 150 ---
the outskirts of Biafra. This surely couldn’t be the United
States of America — and how cruelly that term seemed to
mock those poor citizens who felt disunited and disconnected
and just plain dissed by their government. This couldn’t be
the richest and most powerful nation on the globe, leaving be-
hind some of its poorest citizens to fend for themselves.
Former president George Bush’s slow response to black
suffering by wind and water in Katrina was but a symptom
of a larger, equally dangerous political neglect.
Bush’s obsession with fighting terror robbed him of the ca-
pacity to pay attention to the civil liberties and social justice
that, ostensibly, were part of the reasons the troops were in
Iraq to begin with.
Charity is episodic and often driven by disaster. We need
structures of justice that perpetuate the good will intended in
charity. Justice allows charity to live beyond crisis.
Unless we learn to talk about class, poverty, and color, and
the distinctive way they merge to deprive people of healthy
life chances, we are perpetuating a legacy of injustice.
Until we radically alter our educational system, and solve
the problem of poverty and social deprivation, our children
will continue to spiral down stairwells of suffering and
 oppression. 
131Justice and Suffering
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 131


--- PAGE 151 ---
Tupac constantly questioned his direction by filling his
lyrics with characters who were both the victims and perpe-
trators of crime, characters who were thugs begging God for
guidance through the minefields of self-destruction, charac-
ters leaving the ghetto while others stayed, characters who
asked why they suffered even as they imposed suffering. In
that haze of morbid contradictions, Tupac shone the light of
his dark, brooding, pensive spirit, refusing to close his eyes to
the misery he saw, risking everything to bear witness to the
pain he pondered and perpetuated. In a word, a show like The
Sopranos offers, in critic Ernest Becker’s term, an “anthro-
podicy,” where we hold each other accountable for the suffer-
ing and evil imposed, whereas Tupac wrestles with a theodicy,
the effort to square belief in God with the evil that prevails,
which is at root an attempt to explain the suffering of those
he loved.
Malcolm X was nobly committed to expressing how black
people were suffering; he was serious about detailing the na-
ture of the hell blacks endured.
The Harry Potter books have captured the imaginations of
youth and adults alike because they speak powerfully to the
alienation, stigma, and suffering that children face.
If sleep is the cousin of death, then depression is its little
brother.
132 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 132


--- PAGE 152 ---
The deeper Martin Luther King, Jr., sank into a private hell
of unquenchable bleakness, the higher he rose in pulpits and
rostrums across the nation to preach the fear from his own
breast, and those of his fellow strivers. Just as he gave most
of his pocketbook and preaching to the movement, King of-
fered up his despondency as well.
Martyrdom forced onto Martin Luther King’s dead body
the face of a toothless tiger. His threat has been domesticated,
his danger sweetened. His depressions and wounds have been
turned into waves and smiles. There is little suffering, only
light and glory. King’s more challenging rhetoric has gone un-
employed, left homeless in front of the Lincoln Memorial,
blanketed on freezing nights in dream metaphors, feasting on
leftovers of hope-lite, drinking discarded cans of diet opti-
mism.
Charity is a hit-or-miss proposition; folk who tire of giving
stop doing so when they think they’ve done enough. Justice
seeks to take the distracting and fleeting emotions out of giv-
ing. Justice does not depend on feeling to do the right thing.
It depends on right action and sound thinking about the most
helpful route to the best outcome.
For many conservative Christians, the matter is settled, cut
and dried, black and white: sinners suffer, the saved are
spared. But for many Christians, and believers of other faiths,
the problem of suffering presents a peculiar problem: how
one can maintain that God has all the power and goodness in
the world and yet allows evil to flourish. In classic theological
133Justice and Suffering
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 133


--- PAGE 153 ---
terms, that is the problem of theodicy, a problem that, after
Hurricane Katrina, or a train wreck, or the Iraq war, cries out
for an answer. It rushes forth in the question: where was God
in this crisis? Like latter-day Jobs, the faithful wrestle with
why God allows bad things to happen to good people. For
many conservative Christians, bad things mostly happen to
bad people.
Suffering is an unavoidable aspect of our human pilgrim-
age; the deepest faith cannot prevent our walk through the
valley of the shadow of death.
Frankenstein was the name of the doctor, not the monster.
In making the familiar argument that God refrains from
imposing on us the divine will, and instead permits human
action to count, for ill or good, we underscore an odd twist in
such a position: that it is God’s love for us that allows us to
suffer. At first blush, such a reading appears headed toward
theological masochism. On second thought, perhaps it is
proper to highlight the paradox nonetheless, if for no other
reason than to show that God is caught in the same dilemma
we are, but from the other side. God shares a frustration, born
of love and respect for human freedom, of not being able to
derail the machinery of time and circumstance to help us,
since that very machinery has at other moments brought such
pleasure and profit — from great works of art to splendid
human uses of nature’s forces.
134 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 134


--- PAGE 154 ---
The suffering that human beings endure is never God’s will.
The evil that is wrought by human beings and the chaos that
is unleashed by nature express neither God’s vision nor
vengeance, as punitive theologies suggest. God’s will is for
human beings to flourish and for us to live in harmony with
each other and nature.
To assume that New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina was
a greater divine target for wiping out poor blacks than bigger
cities with bigger black populations is to accuse God of poor
sight or planning. And if God wanted to destroy abortion clin-
ics, there are more in other states — say in California or New
York — than in Louisiana. Does New Orleans contain more
gay folk than Los Angeles? Of course, one supposes by this
logic that where wind fails, quaking earth quenches queer de-
sire all the same. But thousands of straight people die in
earthquakes, just as they do in hurricanes. Did no conserva-
tive Christians die in the flood? Either God’s aim is off, or the
advocates of divine wrath believe that these innocents are the-
olateral damage. But does God punish the innocent to get a
message to the guilty? What about the babies who died, who
practiced neither abortion nor voodoo, and who hadn’t
claimed their sexual orientation or engaged in racial politics?
Such a gesture is dirty pool, even for divinity.
We must be willing to be kept awake in another’s bed of
pain before lashing them for being morally asleep.
MED 
135Justice and Suffering
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 135


--- PAGE 155 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 136
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 156 ---
chapter 9
Arts
When we lived in a less sophisticated
technological era where we couldn’t get music
through a quick download or file sharing over
the Internet, we had to do it the old-fashioned
way: stand before “The Stereo” and place the
stylus over the rotating, compressed wax and
allow the analog vibrations to brush across our
soundscape and through our nearly busted
woofers and tweeters.
137
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 137


--- PAGE 157 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 138


--- PAGE 158 ---
Michael Jackson’s passage from music superstar to global
phenomenon leapt to life on May 16, 1983, with his mythic
dance performance of the “moonwalk” on the Motown 25tele -
vision special, which was beamed to almost 50 million view-
ers around the world. Jackson’s skill and imagination came
together in immortal movements which captured the genius
of street dance, Fred Astaire’s agile dance steps, and the cre-
ativity of black dancers like Bojangles, Sammy Davis, and
Katherine Dunham, who created great art despite huge odds.
The popular dances of the 1920s reflected the influence of
space on aesthetics. For instance, in polite society they
danced the quadrille, the mazurka, the waltz, and the polka
in association with chamber music. But when there were
open spaces and markedly vibrant dance halls, all character-
istically where “the folk” gathered, the dances were the slow
drag, the eagle rock, and the buzzard lope. All in all, the music
and dance outside “official” society — and music and dance
were intimately connected — reflected the infusion of African
aesthetic values by means of New Orleans Creoles.
Hip hop cannot be divorced from its roots in Jamaica. In
the 1960s, sound system operators hauled massive speakers
in wooden carts in working-class communities during back-
yard dances attended by “rude boys,” the Caribbean counter-
part to hip hop’s “b-boys.” Also, the Jamaican dance hall was
the site of a mixture of older and newer forms of Caribbean
music, including calypso, soca, salsa, Afro-Cuban, ska, and
reggae. One of the first great pioneers of hip hop, DJ Kool
Herc, was a West Indian immigrant to the West Bronx who
139Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 139


--- PAGE 159 ---
brought with him a hunger to recreate the memories and
mood of Jamaican dance hall music. Those roots nourish rap.
David LaChapelle’s film Rise highlights a specific kind of
dancing that their inventors call “Krumping.” It grows out of
L.A. street culture. Tommy Johnson, known as “Tommy the
Clown,” developed a unique dance form, which he called
“Clowning,” in response to the 1992 L.A. riots, as an aesthetic
form of highly skilled, athletically charged, speed-driven
movement viewed as an alternative to gang warfare. One set
of movements exchanged for the other, so to speak. “Clown-
ing” morphed into “Krumping,” and it definitely draws on
African tribal rituals.
Black artists used Abstract Expressionism and social
protest — and brushes, pens, invented materials, and found
objects — to fashion the textures and colors of a new black
humanity that challenged racial stereotypes. Our humanity
shines in Elizabeth Catlett’s Sharecropper,a portrait of a black
woman that conjures strength and elicits sympathy. It is
glimpsed as well in Bettye Saar’s The Liberation of Aunt
Jemima, a feisty revision of the black mammy myth, and in
Kara Walker’s black-cut paper silhouettes, including Insurrec-
tion! (Our Tools Were Rudimentary, Yet We Pressed On),which
play with racial stereotypes to undercut them.
The purpose of art is not simply to embrace and coddle, or
to affirm and to edify. Artists are also supposed to be irrever-
ent, and to poke fun at pieties, and to force people to think
more critically about themselves.
140 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 140


--- PAGE 160 ---
Dave Chappelle looked like he was crazy because he made
a sane decision: “I will not allow money to define my maturity
or my mental health. I will walk away from fifty million dol-
lars before I will sacrifice my integrity.” And people thought
he was crazy because he turned the money down. They didn’t
think he was sane because he made a choice that he would
not be a servant of the very thing that alienated him from his
craft. You don’t have to be a Marxist economist to understand
that if you’re alienated from the work that you love and pro-
duce, then you’re alienated from yourself. Chappelle simply
wanted to reconnect to his art and the spiritual inspiration
that motivated him to create in the first place. If a brother
steps up and says, “Look, I ain’t gonna be a slave to a contract,
but I want to be my own man, my own comedian, my own
artist, and I want to stand up and represent as best I can,” he
shouldn’t be thought of as crazy.
Jewish comedy in the ’30s, ’40s, and ’50s really set an in-
credibly high standard that continues to define how we under-
stand what’s funny in America today. What’s remarkable, of
course, is that an ethnic group that was being mistreated and
oppressed in the larger society seized this medium of cultural
expression and expanded the boundaries of Jewish identity
even as they translated their experience into universal terms
that were appreciated by the masses. Their success is summed
up in that old Jewish saying in entertainment, especially in
comedy, that goes something like “think Yiddish and write goy-
ish.” The insecurities, idiosyncrasies, and ingenuities of Jewish
identity were brilliantly compressed into a brand of comedy
that built on sharp social observation, self-deprecation, and
141Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 141


--- PAGE 161 ---
relentless signifying. From Jack Benny to Milton Berle, from
Shecky Green to Alan King, from Jerry Lewis to Jerry Sein-
feld, from Lenny Bruce to Robert Klein, from Gracie Allen to
Penny Marshall, from George Burns to Billy Crystal, and from
the Borscht Belt to Broadway, Jewish comedians have in-
jected profound moral, aesthetic, and spiritual qualities into
American comedy, transforming it with their own views of
human identity and existence.
There’s no question that the most gifted figures in the Black
Arts Movement (BAM), including Larry Neal, Hoyt Fuller,
Amiri Baraka, Nikki Giovanni, and Sonia San chez, understood
that politics was central to artistic vision. The Black Arts
Movement, which lasted from the mid-’60s through the mid-
’70s, argued that art is a servant of the masses. In BAM there
was a great effort to make literature accessible to everyday
black folk, especially through live poetry performances. BAM
also brought art to the masses through the plays of figures like
Ed Bullins, who penned In the Wine Time,and Amiri Baraka’s
Dutchman. Bullins’s work led to the founding of the New
Lafayette Theatre (NLT), and Baraka’s play helped to establish
the Black Arts Repertory Theatre/School (BART/S), the fruit
of BAM’s beliefs. And the visual art of the Black Arts Move-
ment was intended to help clarify the esoteric meanings and
abstract images of experimental Afro-expressionism, showing
how they were rooted in black resistance and liberation —
from Ademola Olugebefola’s 1968 work Space Dance to Lev
Mills’s 1972 collage I’m Funky, but Clean.
I’m a huge Hannah Arendt fan. I went to see, in New York,
the Kate Fodor play, Hannah and Martin, that dramatizes the
142 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 142


--- PAGE 162 ---
relationship between Arendt and her mentor, and later her
lover, Martin Heidegger. There are so many moments where
her brilliance is blistering. In that Eichmann book she wrote,
she talks about “the banality of evil,” how evil has been made
routine, even acceptable. And that has been an incredibly im-
portant concept for me in trying to explain how the groundless
grotesque, and the transcendent tragic, can get reduced to rou-
tine, to the quotidian, to everyday stuff that comes out as
pathology. So her work has been very important to me.
Anna Deavere Smith’s play Fires in the Mirror is a haunting
portrait of the small agreements and large grievances between
blacks and Jews. Smith’s characters reveal the rituals and val-
ues that hold racial communities together in crisis (in this
case, the death of a black boy struck by a car driven by Ha-
sidic Jews in Brooklyn, and the subsequent Crown Heights
riots during which a Hasidic scholar was killed by a black
youth). Smith’s poignant vignettes explore racial difference
without lapsing into a simplistic vision of universality — of
how we can all get along. Smith forces us to take stock of our
conditions as people. She invites us to confront the racial, so-
cial, and cultural events that bind us, even if loosely, around
a core of meaningful beliefs and behaviors. And she shows
how we all hunger for stability in a rapidly changing world.
Refusing to impose lessons from above, Smith allows the
moral worldviews of fractured, and often opposed, commu-
nities to register in their own words — sometimes harsh and
bitter, but always honest and uncompromising.
The politics of race percolate in rock maverick Stew’s stir-
ring and introspective musical Passing Strange.The conceit of
143Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 143


--- PAGE 163 ---
the play is the pursuit of The Black Real, or how black folk de-
fine what’s racially and culturally authentic. That’s a question
that vexes both hardcore rappers and, quite obviously,
prophets and politicians. In Stew’s hands, it’s at the heart of
the various explorations of blackness of a young rock musician
as he traipses from his native haunt of ’70s Los Angeles, where
he was filled with religious ideas of purity and danger, to Am-
sterdam’s sense of free love, and on to ’80s Berlin political ag-
itprop. The play ingeniously weaves together high culture and
pop culture to discuss authentic blackness and who can be
said to own it. As the narrator says, he is concerned with the
“reinvention, transformation and the limits of blackness.” Or
as one song’s chorus contends, “I let my pain **** my joy and
I call the bastard art.” To put forth a black rock musician to
help understand authentic blackness is complex and irrever-
ent, and challenges cultural insiders and outsiders alike.
August Wilson brilliantly explored the terrain of twentieth-
century black life in a series of plays whose sheer elegance is
a testimony to the black will to survive the worst that life
 offers.
Alvin Ailey’s dance troupe — especially in the sweep of Ju-
dith Jamison’s limbs — won appreciation for the grace of
black movement, even as the rhythms of black tap created a
heartbeat through the soles of Sammy Davis, Jr., Gregory
Hines, and Savion Glover.
Break dancing was the attempt to take preexisting forms
and movement — especially Brazilian caopoeira — and
144 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 144


--- PAGE 164 ---
fuse them with New York street style as a marker of identity.
It was a way of saying, “I’m going to take the breaks of life
and use them creatively.” The breaks in the music were taken
by the DJs in one direction — expanded and looped to form a
new musical expression from an existing musical form — and
in another direction by dancers, who used the musical exper-
imentation with break beats to create dances that incorporate
a variety of ethnic gestures. The break — something relatively
minor in the musical arsenal — has now been highlighted and
made a major creative element.
Not all of us can sing or dance well, but all of us can sing
our own songs, dance our own dances, and support artists
whose views reflect our values. Artists play a critical role by
doing what they do, and if they do more than that — like
being socially and politically active — then it’s a blessing,
bonus, and boon.
In an earlier era, the exotic Southern black supposedly had
more soul, was closer to nature as a semi-literate savage,
could sing and dance well, was more innately spiritual, was
oblivious to the caste system that kept her in poverty, and
hence, was happy to be the white Southerner’s slave, servant,
or entertainer. The art created by poor blacks was rarely rec-
ognized by whites unless it confirmed crude stereotypes of
black sensual longing and intellectual emptiness. The com-
plex and demanding creations of poor blacks, whether a so-
phisticated blues lyric or a visual art piece of high quality, was
either dismissed or ignored, or at best, seen as exceptional to
the inferior work of other black artists.
145Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 145


--- PAGE 165 ---
Two photos helped shape perceptions of race in the after-
math of Hurricane Katrina. In the first photo, a young black
man clasps items in each arm as he forges through the flood
waters. The caption to the AP (Associated Press) photo of him
reads: “A young man walks through chest deep flood water
after looting a grocery store ” in New Orleans. In the second
photo, also from AP, a young white man and woman tote food
items in their hands as they carry backpacks and slush
through the flood waters, as the caption accompanying their
photograph reads: “Two residents wade through chest-deep
water after finding bread and soda from a local grocery store ”
after Hurricane Katrina landed.
The captions help lend value, and a slant, to essentially neu-
tral photographs, pictures which, on their own, suggest soli-
darity of circumstance between the black and white youth.
But the identical character of their experience is shattered by
the language which casts their actions in contrasting lights:
the white youth have been favored by serendipity and thus
“naturally” exploit their luck in “finding” food, a gesture
which relieves them of culpability; the black youth, by com-
parison, has interrupted the natural order of things to seize
what didn’t belong to him and thus remains responsible for
his behavior. How black folk are “framed” — how we are dis-
cussed, pictured, imagined, conjured to fit a negative idea of
blackness, or called on to fill a slot reserved for the outlaw,
thug, or savage — shapes how we are frowned on or favored
in mainstream society.
Back then, in 1984, in a failed Orwellian future, when we
lived in a less sophisticated technological era where we
couldn’t get music through a quick download or file sharing
over the Internet, we had to do it the old-fashioned way: stand
146 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 146


--- PAGE 166 ---
before “The Stereo” and place the stylus over the rotating,
compressed wax and allow the analog vibrations to brush
across our soundscape and through our nearly busted
woofers and tweeters. Crackles and snaps surged through the
speakers, and the needle rapidly unraveled the tightly config-
ured lines on the album’s black face — and no matter how ex-
pertly you cleaned your vinyl disc it was bound to emit faint
noises from a sharp object impressing a moving, flat surface.
The Motown Museum is chock-full of memorabilia drawn
from an era when black entrepreneurial ingenuity met tran-
scendent talent. Together, these forces transformed music into
history in a city whose cultural and economic motors were
not yet stalled by postindustrial collapse, gentrification, car-
jacking, white flight — and black track — to the suburbs, and
political corruption. Those small rooms and humble instru-
ments, which produced such big results, remind me of just
how much of a David-versus-Goliath story Motown really
was. And seeing Berry, Michael, Diana, Marvin, Smokey, and
Claudette, the Temps, the Four Tops, and the rest of the crew
in black-and-white photos recalls an era of faux innocence
tragically shattered later in de-Africanized faces, infanticide,
egomaniacal ambition, ripped-off royalties, and chemical
slavery.
There’s a way in which Jewish comedy, in terms of its vast
ranges of signification, has now become American comedy.
The genius of Jewish comedy is to be able to translate Yid-
dish idiosyncrasy — and an engagement with their particular
marginal slice of the world — into what America is about.
Sarah Silverman has been cut off in a certain way. We don’t
147Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 147


--- PAGE 167 ---
understand her signification. We don’t understand the modes
through which she expresses her sense of irreverence or irony
or parody, because we’re not used to women at a certain level
doing that. When we discuss Sarah Silverman’s art and craft,
we can talk about Jewish comedians, about female comedi-
ans, and even about Jewish female comedians in particular.
But the reality is that women don’t get the chance to be that
ironic or parodic in a way that signifies on stereotypes like
Ali G can. I think it’s partly gender. But also, her comedy
moves in two directions because she’s trying to force Jews to
think critically about their own stereotyping, and about how
they’re being stereotyped. And that give-and-take, that kind
of postmodern Jewish irreverence, may not go over well with
some folk.
If the comic of color can’t help being representative, it is
because she embodies in her art the turmoil and suffering that
anonymous blacks regularly endure without the platform or
public sympathy the celebrity comic may enjoy. The black
comic need not surrender a complex or independent vision of
black identity to uphold her critical function; part of the ap-
peal of black comics is their irreverent perspectives that en-
courage pitiless cultural inventory and relentless self-critique.
There are dialects and vernaculars within comedy, but in
the end, humor is a universal language that can be under-
stood by everyone. Black folk can watch and enjoy Seinfeld
with its inside ethnic humor and its accessible jokes, and
whites can watch The Cosby Show and appreciate both its
racial accents and its universal themes.
148 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 148


--- PAGE 168 ---
Postmodernism may turn out to be modernism in drag. 
In Do the Right Thing, Spike Lee’s neonationalism leaps off
the screen through brilliant cinematography and riveting
messages. Do the Right Thing contains symbols of racism and
resistance to racism, representations of black life, and images
of black nationalist sensibilities and thought. Lee creates sym-
bols that reveal the remorseless persistence of racism in quo-
tidian quantity, exposing the psychopathology of everyday
racism as it accumulates in small doses, over the course of
days not unlike the one we witness in Do the Right Thing. Lee
shows us the little bruises, the minor frustrations, and the
minute but myriad racial fractures that mount without heal-
ing. Lee’s decision to provoke discussion about racism is
heroic. He exposes a crucial American failure of nerve, a stun-
ning loss of conscience about race.
With John Singleton’s Boyz N the Hood we have the most
brilliantly executed and fully realized portrait of the coming-
of-age odyssey that black boys must undertake in the suffo-
cating conditions of urban decay and civic chaos. Singleton
adds color and depth to Michael Schultz’s groundbreaking
Cooley High, extends the narrative scope of the Hudlin broth-
ers’ important and humorous House Party, and creates a stun-
ning complement to Gordon Parks’s pioneering Learning Tree,
which traced the painful pilgrimage to maturity of a rural
black male. Singleton’s treatment of the various elements of
contemporary black urban experience — gang violence, drug
addiction, black male-female relationships, domestic joys and
pains, friendships — is subtle and complex. He layers narra-
tive textures over gritty and compelling visual slices of black
149Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 149


--- PAGE 169 ---
culture that show us what it means to come to maturity, or
die trying, as a black male.
Dennis Hopper perceptively, and provocatively, helped
probe the anomie and rebellion for a whole generation of out-
siders in 1969’s Easy Rider,though his film about gang war-
fare in Los Angeles, Colors, less successfully traces the
evolution of social despair, urban absurdity, and yearning for
belonging that shed light on gang violence.
In his magnum opus, Malcolm X, the greatest black biopic
ever made, Spike Lee has poignantly and insightfully ren-
dered the life of an American original. Above all, in taking the
risk of defining and interpreting a controversial figure, he has
sent us back into our own memories, or to books and docu-
mentaries, in search of the truth for ourselves. And he has
done more than that. He has set the nation talking about a
figure whose life deserves to be discussed, whose achieve-
ments deserve critical scrutiny, and whose career merits the
widest possible exposure. Many great films have achieved
considerably less than that.
Matty Rich’s Straight Out of Brooklynis a desolate rejection
of liberal democracy: that individuals can act to realize them-
selves and enhance their freedom in the community or the
state. For the inhabitants of Brooklyn’s Red Hook Housing
Project, self-realization and freedom are stunted by the men-
acing ubiquity of the ghetto. Rich’s film rejects all pretensions
that the ghetto is not a totalizing force. It argues that it’s im-
possible to maintain the boundaries between geography and
150 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 150


--- PAGE 170 ---
psychic health implied by the expression “Live in the ghetto,
but don’t let the ghetto live in you.” It is precisely in showing
that the ghetto survives parasitically — that its limits are as
small or as large as the bodies it inhabits and destroys — that
Brooklyn achieves for its auteur a distinct voice among black
filmmakers.
Mario Van Peebles’s ghetto in New Jack City is a sinister
and languid dungeon of human filth and greed that is car-
toonish and campy. The sheer artifice of New Jack City ’s
ghetto is meant to convey the inhuman consequences of living
in a zone of civic horror, but its overdrawn dimensions sug-
gest a closer resemblance to ’70s blaxploitation flicks than to
neorealist portrayals of ghetto carnage in other recent black
ghetto films.
In Juice, director Ernest Dickerson’s moral strategy is to
explore the fatal logic of the gang as a family unit, a faulty
premise that overlooks the destructive consequences when
there are no moral constraints. Dickerson’s artistic strategy is
to move the cameras with the action from the observer’s
frame of reference, borrowing a few pages from Spike Lee’s
book (he has photographed many of Lee’s films) without
mimicking Lee’s penchant for throwing the observer off with
unusual angles and the fast pace of editing. Dickerson gently,
then insistently, draws us into his moral worldview; it is an
invitation to view the spectacle of black male loss of love by
degrees and effects.
151Arts
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 151


--- PAGE 171 ---
The Hughes brothers’ brilliant, disturbing 1992 debut, Men-
ace II Society,reveals the absurdity and terror that dog young
black males. Their terse, lean script — complemented by the
cast’s surprising economy of emotional expression, given the
genre’s tendency to trumpet more than whisper — sharply
contrasts with the harsh realities the film reveals: postindus-
trial urban collapse, the destructive personal and social effects
of drug economies, and the violence of everyday black male
life in urban America.
In many ways, Mario Van Peebles’s Panther (based on a
screenplay penned by his legendary father, Melvin Van Pee-
bles) captures black nostalgia for the days before crack and
crime gutted black neighborhoods, before the quest for up-
ward mobility trampled the fires of revolution. Although Pan-
ther creatively joins fiction to fact, anyone familiar with the
period can see that the film is bold, revisionist history. The re-
sults are edifying and disturbing. The film accents some neg-
lected truths while avoiding others, proving that cinematic
imagination can be empowered or poorly served by a selective
memory. The film unabashedly favors the Panthers’ perspec-
tive: it focuses on how they got started, what their goals were,
and how they pursued them. In so doing, Panther adds the
name of Mario Van Peebles to those of Oliver Stone and Spike
Lee, directors who deny that history can be seen objectively.
For these directors, film is inherently political; it’s about tak-
ing sides and making points. While some of their movies
bravely correct the fictions in accepted accounts of events,
they also wear blinders of their own.
152 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 152


--- PAGE 172 ---
153Arts
As Bulworth’s star, director, and co-writer, Warren Beatty
uses gangsta rap’s erotically charged violence and vulgar
speech, both literally and metaphorically, to reveal the cor-
ruption of electoral politics. Beatty is not only flipping the
script. He’s unabashedly embracing an art form that has been
scorned by white politicians and by the black bourgeoisie. In
colorful and comedic terms, Bulworth shows how the social
rituals and cultural conventions of gangstas and politicians
are driven by the same goals: getting paid, getting pleasure,
and getting props.
Realism in film is not made by taking a camera and train-
ing it on a block for a week and calling it a film. Realism de-
pends on artifice and fiction to create its effect.
Hustle & Flow is to pimpdom what Clint Eastwood’s Un-
forgiven is to the Western: a visual unmaking and cinematic
undoing of the very mythology on which the pimp rests. Hus-
tle & Flowdemythologizes the pimp narrative and mythology,
’cause the pimp is poorer than his hoes! So the film twists the
literal dependence of the pimp upon his hoes (after all, the
pimp depends on the economic earning power of his stable
of women) to a spiritual and moral dependence. It’s like he’s
a pimp who’s got his game on layaway, and his hoes are going
to get him out of debt. Or it’s like he’s a pimp with his game
in a pawn shop, and his hoes are going to get him out of hock.
Furthermore, this is a po’ broke pimp with a bootleg car, with
a “hooptie.” One of the most powerful and potent phallic sym-
bols — in pimping and in other masculine domains — is the
car. This pimp got a broke down ride! He ain’t got no air
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 153


--- PAGE 173 ---
conditioning. I don’t want to make this a feminist tale, be-
cause it still takes place within the context of a pimp-ho rela-
tionship. But that being said, it’s remarkable to what degree
DJay, the film’s pimp, relies on the intellectual insights of his
hoes — whether it’s his baby’s mama, Shug, who is providing
the hook for his raps, and a lava lamp for inspiration, or the
white ho, Nola, who always wanted to be more than a mere
ho, who eventually takes over DJay’s rap business while he’s
in jail.
People throughout the world resonated with Tupac’s pow-
erful artistic vision, a vision, I believe, that joined him to
artists and intellectuals like Samuel Beckett, Zora Neale
Hurston, Eugene Ionesco, Simone de Beauvoir, Langston
Hughes, Hannah Arendt, Paul Robeson, Frantz Fanon, and
Simone Weil, since they, like Tupac, sought to find a legiti-
mate voice through developing their gifts. People around the
globe felt Tupac’s spirit, felt his love, his passion, his anger,
his rage, his confusion, and the chaos of the conflicting ideals
that engulfed him. Above all, Tupac identified with the under-
dog, and that gave him cachet among the world’s downtrod-
den and those who faced huge odds, from poverty to political
oppression. Tupac represented and spoke to that brother, that
sister, that human being who in the face of enormous crisis
called on God, spirit, transcendent artistic and moral figures,
and their own passion as a resource to fight the destruction,
suffering, pain, and even death they encountered.
MED 
154 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 154


--- PAGE 174 ---
chapter 10
Gender
We’ve got to grapple with instances of
internalized sexism in women where the
ventriloquist magic of patriarchy is occurring —
women’s lips are moving, but men’s voices and
beliefs are speaking.
155
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 155


--- PAGE 175 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 156


--- PAGE 176 ---
Femiphobia — the fear and disdain of the female.
We’ve got to grapple with instances of internalized sexism
in women where the ventriloquist magic of patriarchy is oc-
curring — women’s lips are moving, but men’s voices and be-
liefs are speaking.
A great deal of the nation’s gender problem has to do with
how men think about women. Such thinking is largely rooted
in the belief that God has set up a hierarchy where women
fall beneath men in the natural order of things. But I think
it’s long past time that we reexamine our beliefs and come up
with different ideas about how things work, and how we
should behave in light of what we learn.
Black women have been a defining force in our liberation
struggles, so we shouldn’t seek to oppress the very sisters who
valiantly helped to win our freedom as a people, and as black
men.
We must battle those who use the Bible to justify some ter-
rible beliefs about black women. We get awfully upset — and
rightfully so — with how hip hop culture demeans and de-
grades sisters. We are outraged when a rapper resorts to epi-
thets to disrespect our women, and despite my great love for
hip hop, I’m sympathetic to that critique. But at the same
time, we permit some destructive ideas to flourish in the
church. These ideas are harmful because they influence how
we act, not only in church, but also in our homes and schools.
157Gender
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 157


--- PAGE 177 ---
We’ve got to find a new way to behave so that our children in-
herit a more positive future.
Black men can love black women by promoting the biblical
principle of mutual submission contained in the fifth chapter
of Ephesians. Mutual submission means that we act in a way
to enhance the interests of each partner in the relationship.
The text topples the notion that men should rule over a
woman’s life in home or society. Our liberating black religion
teaches us that nobody has ultimate authority over our lives
but God.
When most of our white brothers and sisters hear the word
“race,” they think “black” or “brown” or “yellow” or “Native
American.” They don’t think “white,” as if white is not one
among many other racial and ethnic identities. Men are the
same way. When black men hear male supremacy, we often
think, “white guys who control the world.” We don’t think,
“black guys who control our part of the world.”
Black men have to surrender our patriarchal pose and our
sexist strut. In our homes, that means that we’ve got to listen
to and learn from our women as we strengthen our relation-
ships. We must respect one another, encourage one another,
sacrifice for one another, and stand up for one another, even
against harmful gender ideas we’ve supported over the years.
A lot of black men are afraid to love black women with
abandon because we fear they won’t recognize the hurts that
158 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 158


--- PAGE 178 ---
black men face. But nothing could be further from the truth.
In fact, black women have been among the most vocal and
progressive advocates for black men. Who was way out front
on the issue of the prison-industrial complex that affects the
million black men locked away, many unfairly, and to warn
us about the injustice of incarceration? Angela Davis. Who
edited the book that rigorously explored the claim that black
males are an endangered species? Jewelle Taylor Gibbs. And
who sang a song about the destructive images of black men
in the culture and praised us for our moral beauty and our
strength? Angie Stone.
We don’t have to disrespect or dominate our women to feel
like men.
Black men must be careful not to justify our ugly treatment
of black women by pointing to our pain. We must avoid what
the scholar Barbara Christian calls “the oppression derby,”
where groups argue over who has suffered the most. Black
men can’t pretend that our oppression is worse than black
women’s. Neither can we take solace in our suffering as a way
to excuse our brutality toward our sisters. We cannot have a
hierarchy of pain. If it hurts, it hurts. All of our pain is legiti-
mate and real — if it is legitimate and real. So let’s not waste
any more time building a totem pole of catastrophe where we
cut our niche of misery deeper or higher than black women’s.
In a world where black women are battered by negative
half-truths in the media, and ambushed by brutal put-downs
from their own children in entertainment, the least we can do
159Gender
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 159


--- PAGE 179 ---
is to wrap sisters in the healing garments of reverence and
 respect.
Black men must not be intimidated by the strength and in-
tensity of our women’s speech. Some women have had their
voices muffled for so long that they shout when they can fi-
nally speak up. We should even encourage them to take “voice
lessons” as they join with other women in amplifying their in-
terests and desires.
We can’t lean on male supremacy to resolve conflicts or set-
tle disputes in our homes. Instead, we’ve got to appeal to rea-
son and to prayer, to negotiation and to consultation, to iron
out our differences.
A new understanding of black male and female relation-
ships that can truly help our communities should flow from
our churches. I believe that the black church is still the great-
est institution black folk have, and we’ve got to work hard to
keep it that way. That means we’ve got to move beyond the
spiritual apartheid we practice. Seventy-five percent of the
black church is made up of women, and yet they rarely have
access to the central symbol of power — the pulpit. We’ve got
to stop dragging our feet and begin to acknowledge just how
important black women are to our churches — and to our
mosques, temples, ashrams, and sanctuaries of all sorts. We
must also realize just how important black women are to our
success and survival as a people.
160 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 160


--- PAGE 180 ---
We’ve got to sacrifice the unfair privileges we’ve gained by
being men and seek to share power and responsibility with
our partners. We’ve got to be willing to argue our case, but
also to hear a case argued, as we make critical decisions that
affect our relationships.
If I dislike myself, if I dishonor myself, if I hate myself, I will
dislike, dishonor, and hate my partner. If I refuse to take care
of myself, I threaten the quality of my relationship. If I hate
myself I damage the person about whom my partner deeply
cares. If I fail to appreciate the gifts God gave me I deny their
expression to my partner, and perhaps, the world. If I have a
low estimation of myself, I obviously believe my partner’s judg-
ment of me is distorted. That is a weak foundation on which
to build any enduring relationship. That means that black male
self-hate is hatred of black women. And black male hatred of
black women is ultimately self-hatred. So the “bitch” we black
men really hate may be staring back at us in the mirror.
Pimping mimics chattel slavery, or owning bodies to garner
wealth. Pimping is the plantation in a Cadillac.
To compare the circumstances of poor black men and
women is to compare our seats on a sinking ship. True, some
of us are closer to the hub, temporarily protected from the
fierce winds of social ruin. And some of us are directly ex-
posed to the vicious waves of economic misery. But in the
final analysis, we’re all surviving or going down together.
161Gender
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 161


--- PAGE 181 ---
We’ve got to reckon with forms of male privilege that thrive
because we don’t acknowledge them. Male privilege is
strongest (so strong, in fact, that it was one of the first things
that white men permitted black men to share with them)
when we don’t question it. We insulate ourselves from knowl-
edge of its existence, especially when we take refuge in our
oppression, as if that could prevent us from dealing with how
we oppress more vulnerable folk.
I think black women have learned to absorb the pain of
their predicament and to keep stepping. They’ve learned to
take the kind of mess that black men won’t take, or feel they
can’t take, perhaps never will take, and to turn it into some-
thing useful, something productive, something toughly beau-
tiful after all.
Black feminist activity has been hampered by black
women’s loyalty to black men, often at the expense of their
own interests and identities.
Some of the same arguments directed at Anita Hill in her
charge of sexual harassment against Clarence Thomas are
being used against the young women who protested rapper
Nelly’s visit to Spelman College’s campus because of his sexist
video “Tip Drill.” Some critics claim that it took their genera-
tion too long to speak out, and that they were attacking a
“good” black man like Nelly who was far from the worst sexist
in hip hop. The same fault lines within the race that got re-
vealed in the Thomas-Hill affair have traced beneath the
 Spelman-Nelly dispute. Another generation of black women
162 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 162


--- PAGE 182 ---
acting in defense of themselves causes problems for patriar-
chal  authority.
Historically, it has been difficult for black men to under-
stand that although we’re victims, we also victimize; that al-
though we’re assaulted, we also assault; and that while we’re
objects of scorn, we scorn black women as well. As with all
groups of oppressed people, it’s never a clean-cut matter of
either/or; it’s both/and. You can be victimized by white su-
premacy and patriarchy and at the same time extend black
male supremacy.
Black men are also victims of male supremacy, patriarchy,
sexism, and misogyny. Those horrible traits actually make us
worse men. The profound investment in a violent masculinity
costs many black men their lives, especially on the streets
where codes of respect are brutally enforced. Closer to home,
many black men turn violent on their loved ones, striking
them instead of fighting a punishing social order for whom
their wives, or girlfriends, or babymamas, or children are the
unfortunate proxy.
Black men who can’t get good jobs often blame their
women who are employed.
Religious rhetoric was segregated by gender in the black
church. There were unspoken yet inflexible rules that gov-
erned when and where women could speak. The pulpit and
the deacon’s bench were strictly off-limits. I had seen
163Gender
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 163


--- PAGE 183 ---
ministers fall into utter conniptions if a woman so much as
glanced too strongly at the hallowed ground that was to be
traversed only by “God’s man.” Thankfully, the Sunday School
class, trustee board, vacation Bible school, Sunday pre-service
testimonial, and prayer meeting were acceptable arenas of fe-
male speech.
Real men aren’t afraid of real women.
A disturbing trend has gripped black America: young black
males love their mamas but hate their “babymamas” in pub-
lic. One of the reasons black males are violently vocal in con-
flicts with the mother of their children is that they’re often
young when fatherhood comes calling. Teen fathers who are
barely grown themselves may lack the maturity to handle
their beefs in private. As a former teen father with a turbulent
first marriage, I know firsthand how arguments between
young parents can slip easily into public view. Fortunately, I
had a caring father and a pastor who counseled me not to re-
solve domestic differences on the sidewalk.
In patriarchy, women are often blamed for the limitations
men impose on them. You hear this when young men justify
the exploitation of women in rap videos: “Nobody is making
these women appear in the videos; they must like it and want
to do it.” But that’s like making early black actors the heavies
when their only choice in movies was between stereotypical
roles. It’s not fair to blame those actors for the racist practices
that limited their roles in the first place. Men should say, “We
have limited the roles that black women can play in videos to
164 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 164


--- PAGE 184 ---
dime piece, hoochie mama, video vixen, eye candy, arm pleas-
ure, sexy dancer, and variations of the same.” Instead, we
blame women for accepting the crumbs from our sexist table.
We force many of them to eat our patriarchal leftovers. That’s
a spiritually unbalanced meal.
I’m hard pressed to tell the difference between Nelly’s “Tip
Drill” video and the time two hundred years ago when black
women and men had their gluteus maximus, latissimus dorsi,
pectoralis major, and their testicles examined so they could
procreate and support slavery. Isolating body parts like that
ties sexual fetish to the racist oppression of black bodies. It
reinforces the vulgar status of black humanity, even when it
has comic overtones like the troubling image created in the
Nelly video.
White culture venomously attacked black women long be-
fore the birth of hip hop. That helps to explain Don Imus’s
vulgar remarks that black members of the Rutgers University
women’s basketball team are “nappy-headed ho’s.” It is tragic
that hip hop has done more than its share to spread such
madness toward black females. Hip hop has made the assault
on black women stylish. It has made sexism more acceptable
by supplying linguistic updates, like the word “ho,” to support
deeply entrenched bigotry. Hip hop has helped desensitize our
culture to the systematic attack on black women.
The Spelman sisters who protested rapper Nelly’s visit to
their campus had to grapple with an unfair and absurd ques-
tion put to activist black women through the ages: “Are you
165Gender
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 165


--- PAGE 185 ---
female first or are you black first?” The reality is that black
women are black and female simultaneously — and in many
cases, poor too. Identity isn’t something one can parcel out.
As feminist theorist Elizabeth Spellman memorably put it, we
must not have an additive vision of identity, where you keep
adding elements to increase your minority status — black, fe-
male, poor, lesbian, and so on. Still, you can’t deny that black
women have a lot of complex realities to confront in their
bodies. Black women have displayed such extraordinary fi-
delity to the race that when they finally decide to speak up for
themselves, they are viewed as traitors. Black men have often
told black women that feminist concerns should only be ad-
dressed when the racial question is settled, but we all know
that if black women wait that long, justice will never come. 
MED 
166 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 166


--- PAGE 186 ---
chapter 11
Preachers and Preaching
The preacher is the magnificent center of
rhetorical and ritualistic gravity in the black
church, fighting off disinterest with a “you
don’t hear me,” begging for verbal response 
by looking to the ceiling and drolly declaring
“amen lights,” twisting his body to reach for
“higher ground,” stomping the floor, pounding
the pulpit, thumping the Bible, spinning
around, jumping pews, walking benches,
climbing ladders — yes literally — opening
doors, closing windows, discarding robes,
throwing bulletins, hoisting chairs, moaning,
groaning, sweating, humming, chiding,
pricking, and edifying, all to better “tell the
story of Jesus and his love.”
167
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 167


--- PAGE 187 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 168


--- PAGE 188 ---
C. L. Franklin was a “down-home” preacher, a lionized pulpi-
teer whose homilies spread over seventy-six recordings that
found wide circulation in black communities throughout the
nation. Ironically, I had to go all the way to the country — to
the Alabama farm of my grandparents on which my mother
was reared, and where she picked cotton — to hear for the
first time the oratorical wizardry of a Detroit icon. I listened
raptly and repeatedly to Franklin’s rhetorical gifts churning
through my grandfather’s archaic portable record player. He
possessed a powerful voice with a remarkably wide range.
Franklin could effortlessly ascend to his upper register to
squeal and squall. He was equally capable of descending to a
more moderate vocal hum and pitch, and then, at a moment’s
notice, he could recompose in dramatic whisper. The velocity
of his speech was no less impressive, too. Franklin was the
greatest exemplar of “whooping,” or the “chanted sermon,”
where ministers coarsen their articulation, deliberately and
skillfully stress their vocal cords, and transition from spoken
word to melodious speech. He was the shining emblem of folk
poetry shaped in the mouth of a minister whose mind was
spry and keen. Franklin’s style rarely undercut his substance.
Martin Luther King made speech a handmaiden of social
revolution.
Gardner Taylor’s unique blend of gifts may place him at the
forefront of the greatest cadre of preachers. His mastery of
the technical aspects of preaching is remarkable. He bril-
liantly uses metaphor and has an uncanny sense of rhythmic
timing put to dramatic but not crassly theatrical effect. He
condenses profound biblical truths into elegantly memorable
169Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 169


--- PAGE 189 ---
phrases. He makes keen use of parallels to layer and reinforce
the purpose of his sermons. His stunning control of narrative
flow seamlessly weaves his sermons together. His adroit mix
and shift of cadences reflects the various dimensions of reli-
gious emotion. He superbly uses stories to illustrate profound
intellectual truths and subtle repetition to unify sermons. And
his control of his resonant voice allows him to pliantly whis-
per or prophetically thunder the truths of the gospel. What
was once alleged of Southern Baptist preacher Carlyle Mar-
ney may be equally said of Taylor: he has a voice like God’s —
only deeper. Taylor’s magnetism lies in his intimate and
 unequalled command of the language and literature of the
 English-speaking pulpit.
In the best black oratory, style is not juxtaposed to argu-
ment; in fact, style becomes a vehicle of substance.
Throughout its history, black preaching has been widely
viewed as a form of public address brimming with passion but
lacking intellectual substance. Like black religion in general,
black preaching is often seen as the cathartic expression of
pent-up emotion, a verbal outpouring that supposedly com-
pensates for low self-esteem or oppressed racial status. Not
only are such stereotypes developed in ignorance of the variety
of black preaching styles, but they don’t take into account the
black churches that boast a long history of educated clergy.
Jesse Jackson’s words winced and winked in the battle
against white supremacy, even as he returned fire with every
weapon in his impressive rhetorical arsenal: gutbucket
170 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 170


--- PAGE 190 ---
metaphors, urban parables, extended analogies, street slang,
country grammar, theological sophistication, Southern dic-
tion, preacherly pacing, biting wit and humor, and an imper-
ishable will to clarity. Jackson made love in language; he
relished promiscuous verbal trysts with audiences around the
world, flexing and undulating and twisting his meanings in
an erotically agitated cadence that conjured the spirit and the
flesh in the same breath. His rhyming speech was an unavoid-
able homage to Muhammad Ali and a forerunner to hip hop,
as Jackson played rebel badass and strutting reverend with
equal vigor. Jackson’s verbal vitae also tentatively resolved in
style what couldn’t be bridged in philosophy or in person:
Malcolm X’s slashing and combative rhetorical fusillade and
the high elegance of King’s most finely wrought phrasing.
Jackson also combined King’s analytical sharpness with
Ralph Abernathy’s colorful down-home vernacular to offer en-
gaging snapshots of the black condition.
James Weldon Johnson’s classic poem “God’s Trombones”
provides a literary glimpse of the art and imagination of the
black folk preacher. C. L. Franklin’s recorded sermons, spread
out over sixty albums for Chess Records, brought the vigor
and ecstasy of the black chanted sermon — dubbed in black
church circles as “the whoop” — to the American public. By
and large, however, Americans have remained insulated from
the greatest rhetorical artists of the black pulpit.
James Forbes deftly blends prophetic criticism and priestly
patience. He possesses a sociospiritual acumen that addresses
issues like racism, sexism, classism, and homophobia, while
generating authentic pastoral responses to the people who
171Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 171


--- PAGE 191 ---
both combat and embody these ills. As a professor of preach-
ing at Union Theological Seminary, Forbes displayed a de-
lightful zest for what many considered a dying art form.
Under the discipline of a sanctified imagination, Forbes trans-
formed the tedium of homiletics into an exciting adventure
into the labyrinth of sacred speech. As a lecturer (most no-
tably, in Yale’s Beecher Lectures), conference speaker, and re-
vival preacher, Forbes has crisscrossed America in pursuit of
his vocation of making the word come alive. Forbes’s high vis-
ibility as the first African American to fill the famed pulpit of
New York’s Riverside Church gave a hearing to the homileti-
cal styles, rhetorical practices, and oral nuances of the best
black preaching.
The competing public images of Al Sharpton — glorified
racial ambulance chaser, racial poseur bent on stirring con-
troversy, camera-hogging activist more interested in the lime-
light than civil rights — often ignore his Pentecostal roots and
the influence on his style and approach by a diverse cadre of
mentors. Sharpton, born in 1954, was a bona fide prodigy of
the black pulpit: at the age of four, he began to extol the Lord’s
word in his Brooklyn Pentecostal church, and by the age of
ten, the pint-sized preacher who had been dubbed the “Won-
derboy” was officially ordained. Sharpton’s bread and butter
is turning the sacred spoken word to political use, using a
sharp wit to underscore social suffering, dramatizing social
injustice through bold public gestures, and projecting black
leadership through an ethic of swagger. Sharpton is a man of
enormous gifts, a former wunderkind of black homiletics who
fulfilled his early promise with a biting, brilliant tongue in de-
fense of the vulnerable, and with a skilled and inventive lead-
ership that, at its best, extends the legacy of King and Jackson.
172 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 172


--- PAGE 192 ---
The prosperity gospel movement is obsessed with getting
rich and reading the Bible through an exclusively entrepre-
neurial lens. The prophetic refrain of the black pulpit, as mar-
ginal as it has always been, is even more silenced in
entrepreneurial evangelism. Prosperity gospel’s most zealous
proponents say that God wants all believers to drive big cars
and live in big houses and make big money. Instead of criti-
cizing excess, they rabidly embrace it; they slight altogether
the structural forces that sustain poverty. Entrepreneurial
evangelists personalize poverty; the poor either rise to riches
or fall to being broke by their own sweat and prayers. It’s self-
help dispensed from a Mercedes-Benz or a private jet.
Broad segments of American society have sampled the rich-
ness of black preaching through the brilliant political oratory
of Martin Luther King, Jr., and Jesse Jackson. Both King’s and
Jackson’s styles of public speech — their impassioned phras-
ing, intellectual acuity, and imaginative metaphors — reflect
their roots in the black church. And their involvement in civil
rights and politics extends the venerable tradition of black
preachers serving as social critics and activists. But their or-
atory — like that of preacher-politicians from Adam Clayton
Powell to William Gray — has been shaped by the peculiar
demands of public life and informed by a mission to translate
the aspirations of black Americans to the larger secular soci-
ety. The aims of their public speech have led them to empha-
size certain elements of the black preaching and church
traditions such as social justice, the institutional nature of sin,
and the redistribution of wealth, while leaving aside such oth-
ers as the cultivation of the spiritual life, the nurturing of
173Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 173


--- PAGE 193 ---
church growth, and the development of pastoral theology.
Such varying emphases are usually framed as the difference
between “prophetic” and “priestly” religion. If the former has
been most visible to American society in the guise of church-
based civil rights activists, the latter has been closer to the
heart of the religious experience of most black Christians.
For all of its problems and limitations, the black pulpit, at
its best, is still the freest, most powerful, most radically au-
tonomous place on earth for black people to encourage each
other in the job of critical self-reflection and the collective
struggle for liberation.
Black preachers collect sermons with the zeal of avid fans
of baseball cards. At conventions of black denominations, the
CDs of famous ministers sell briskly. These CDs are especially
circulated and reproduced among younger preachers, serving
as models of preaching excellence and training in the high art
of sacred speech. Some even preach the sermons to their own
congregations, trying out fresh ideas and new words they have
gleaned from master storytellers. Frederick Sampson’s
“Dwelling on the Outskirts of Devastation,” Jeremiah Wright’s
“Prophets or Puppets,” Gardner Taylor’s “A Wide Vision
Through a Narrow Window,” Charles Adams’s “Sermons in
Flesh,” William Jones’s “The Low Way Up,” and Caesar Clark’s
“Elijah Is Us” have all acquired canonical status in a genre of
religious address that treats the plight of the preacher.
Paying attention to how you say what you say doesn’t mean
you have nothing to say.
174 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 174


--- PAGE 194 ---
Frederick G. Sampson was an American original, a tall,
commanding, impossibly literate dark-brown prince of the
pulpit who lived up to that title when it still resonated in the
world of homiletics. Sampson believed that those who
breathed the life of the mind must serve the people in whose
womb they came to exist. His thinking made sense to me be-
cause of how faithfully he adhered to his own principle. He
wasn’t a preacher who festooned his pulpit oratory with vio-
lent grunts or theatrical posing, though he was a verbal mas-
ter with dramatic flair. Sampson unabashedly laced his
rhetoric with the theology and poetry and philosophy he ar-
dently consumed. In the pulpit, he moved effortlessly from
Bertrand Russell to W. E. B. Du Bois, from Shakespeare to
Paul Laurence Dunbar, and from the King’s English spoken
to the Queen’s taste, to the wily black vernaculars that bathed
the tongues of his Southern kinsmen. Outside the pulpit,
Sampson’s insatiable curiosity lead him to devour books and
to traffic in ideas, wherever he could get good ones, whether
from the mouth of a learned colleague or the neighborhood
drunk. Critical encounter was nearly erotic to him, but the joy
and passion he brought to intellectual life didn’t obscure its
necessary everydayness, its practical application, its edifying
repetitiveness, and most of all, its usefulness to common folk.
Baptist preachers are always ripping each other off and
using the stories, illustrations, phrases, verbal tics, manner-
isms — and in some cases, whole sermons — we glean from
other preachers. That’s how we learn to preach; by preaching
like somebody else until we learn to preach like ourselves,
when our own voice emerges from the colloquy of voices we
175Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 175


--- PAGE 195 ---
convene in our homiletical imagination. And in the end, the
only justification for such edifying thievery among preachers
is that the Word is being preached and the ultimate author of
what we say is being glorified.
Martin Luther King spoke much the way a jazz musician
plays, improvising from minimally or maximally sketched
chords or fingering changes that derive from hours of practice
and performance. The same song is never the same song, and
for King, the same speech was certainly never the same
speech. He constantly added and subtracted, attaching a
phrase here and paring a paragraph there to suit the situation.
He could bend ideas and slide memorized passages through
his trumpet of a voice with remarkable sensitivity to his au-
dience’s makeup. King endlessly reworked themes, reshaped
stories, and repackaged ideas to uplift his audience or drive
them even further into a state of being — whether it was com-
passion or anger, rage or reconciliation — to reach for justice
and liberation. King had a batch of rhetorical ballads, long,
blue, slow-building meditations on the state of race, and an
arsenal of simmering mid-tempo reflections on the high cost
of failing to fix what fundamentally ails us — violence, hatred,
and narrow worship of tribe and custom. King knew how to
play as part of a rhetorical ensemble that reached back in time
to include Lincoln and Jefferson and stretched across waters
to embrace Gandhi and Du Bois in Ghana. But he played
piercing solos as well, imaginatively riffing off themes elo-
quently voiced by black preachers Prathia Hall and Archibald
Carey. In the end, King brilliantly managed a repertoire of
rhetorical resources that permitted him to play an unforget-
table, haunting melody of radical social change.
176 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 176


--- PAGE 196 ---
As a species of black scared rhetoric, whooping is charac-
terized by the repetition of rhythmic patterns of speech whose
effect is achieved by variation of pitch, speed, and rhythm.
The “whooped” sermon climaxes in an artful abbreviation or
artificial stretching of syllables, a dramatic shift in meter, and
often a coarsening of timbre, producing tuneful speech. In
black worship, whooping is central to the performance of
black sacred rhetoric.
Black preachers coin phrases, stack sentences, accumulate
wise sayings, and borrow speech to convince black folk, as
the gospel song says, to “run on to see what the end is gonna
be.”
Charles Adams was dubbed the “Harvard Whooper” be-
cause of an intellectual brilliance honed at Harvard Divinity
School that is joined to a charismatic folk preaching style
gained as a youth when he was immersed in the colorful ca-
dences of black religious rhetoric. Adams’s riveting sermonic
style is characterized by a rapid-fire delivery, keen analyses of
biblical texts, the merger of spiritual and political themes, a
far-ranging exploration of the varied sources of African Amer-
ican identity, and a rhythmic, melodic tone that rides above a
piercing rhetorical ensemble composed of deliberately stri-
ated diction, staccato sentences, variously stressed syllables,
alliterative cultural allusion, and percussive phrasing. Further,
Adams highlights the inherent drama of black religious rhet-
oric by embodying its edifying theatrical dimensions. As
preacher, he is both shaman and showman. In his brilliant
pulpit oratory, Adams nurtures the sacrament of perfor-
mance: ordinary time and events are flooded with a theolog-
177Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 177


--- PAGE 197 ---
ical sense of drama and spectacle. Adams, for instance, not
only preached a biblical story of a woman searching for a lost
coin; he took a broom into the pulpit and dramatized the
search for lost meaning in life and the need to reorder exis-
tential priorities. Adams is one of the foremost examples of
black preaching’s tremendous power, and of the baptism of
language and imagination for religious ends.
Martin Luther King’s speech was a clinic in the use of the
vocal instrument to vibrate in swooping glissandos and
poignant crescendos. King showed that there didn’t have to
be strife between lexis (style, such as metaphor) and pisteis
(argumentation and proof) as there is in Aristotle’s view of
rhetoric.
The preacher often said things that most black folk believed
but were afraid to say. He used his eloquence and erudition
to defend the vulnerable and assail the powerful.
In a 1993 poll conducted by Ebony magazine naming the
nation’s fifteen greatest black preachers, Jeremiah Wright was
second only to legendary pulpiteer the Rev. Gardner Taylor.
Wright’s preaching genius derives from a mix of numerous
strengths. He is clearly one of the most intellectually sophis-
ticated and scholarly ministers in the land, reading widely and
thinking deeply about the pressing religious and social issues
that occupy his literate sermons. He possesses a musical voice
whose intonations are brilliantly regulated during the course
of his sermon delivery, rising and falling as emotion and cir-
cumstance dictate. His diction is flawless, his articulation pre-
178 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 178


--- PAGE 198 ---
cise, and his universe of linguistic reference is international
given his command of several languages. Neither is Wright
afraid to resourcefully dip into the lexicon of his native black
birth and shape the grammatical constructions of his people
into the ethical eloquence for which our best prophets are
justly celebrated. Wright moves effortlessly from the streets
to the sanctuary in illustrating the social sweep of the Chris-
tian gospel. And he is unparalleled in the pulpit in framing
theological reflection with the insights and nuances of black
culture, the perfect embodiment of his church’s motto:
Unashamedly Black and Unapologetically Christian.
There is a humorous three-step rhetorical rule of citation
by which many black Baptist preachers operate. The first time
they repeat something they hear, they say, “Like Martin Luther
King said . . .” The second time they repeat it, they say, ‘Like
somebody said . . .” The third time they repeat it, they say,
“Like I always say . . .”
I try not to avoid difficult subjects as I preach, and some-
times what I say goes over like a brick cloud! Still, I try to se-
duce people into seeing things differently, as I make
arguments about why the opposition to gay and lesbian folk,
for instance, reeks of the same biblical literalism that
smashed the hopes of black slaves when white slave masters
deployed it. But I try to win the folk over first, by preaching
“in the tradition,” so to speak, warming them up first before
I lower the boom. When I was a young preacher and pastor,
one of my members told me, “You draw more flies by honey
than vinegar.” So I give honey before I give vinegar. I invite
the folk to the progressive theological, ideological, and
179Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 179


--- PAGE 199 ---
spiritual terrain I want them to occupy, but I try to issue that
invitation in ways that won’t immediately alienate them. And
once they’re there, they’re a captive audience.
The preacher is the magnificent center of rhetorical and rit-
ualistic gravity in the black church, fighting off disinterest
with a “you don’t hear me,” begging for verbal response by
looking to the ceiling and drolly declaring “amen lights,”
twisting his body to reach for “higher ground,” stomping the
floor, pounding the pulpit, thumping the Bible, spinning
around, jumping pews, walking benches, climbing ladders —
yes literally — opening doors, closing windows, discarding
robes, throwing bulletins, hoisting chairs, moaning, groaning,
sweating, humming, chiding, pricking, and edifying, all to bet-
ter “tell the story of Jesus and his love.”
Too often, parish ministers are caught in the grind of cru-
cial “housekeeping” chores — marriages, funerals, adminis-
trative tasks, prayer meetings, and church business — and
find, or take, little time to study the faith. While we love God
with our hearts and souls, we often forget to love God with
our minds. Mack King Carter is exemplary in his devout at-
tention to critical inquiry. His sermons are models of theolog-
ical gravitas. His sacred rhetoric fairly teems with a profound
wrestling with the weighty, and contradictory, matters of faith
and reason. Carter has never been afraid to stretch his con-
gregation’s spiritual imagination and to lift its theological I.Q.
through demanding preaching and teaching.
180 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 180


--- PAGE 200 ---
Black preachers inspired their people to survive by skillful
use of rhetoric. The way black preachers spoke about God con-
vinced black folk that God’s rule was unbroken by history’s
tragedies, and that black social and moral striving was a re-
flection of the divine will. The performance of religious rhet-
oric in a racial vein wasn’t just for “form or fashion,” as elders
in the black church say. Black sacred speech wasn’t simply
about wedding style to substance; but style itself was an index
of the peculiar experience of black people in the modern world
as they worshipped God in hostile circumstances.
Prathia Hall’s powerful preaching introduced me to the ge-
nius of black female homiletical artistry. She interwove bibli-
cal narratives with stories from her pioneering career as a
civil rights activist. Hall often topped off her sermons with
rhetorical flourishes and stylistic gestures gleaned from her
Baptist brethren and refined in her feminist crucible. Her ser-
mons also displayed a thrilling measure of the melodious
speech of “the whoop” or the “chanted sermon.” As ministers
say in black church circles, she had “the learnin’ and the
burnin’.”
MED
181Preachers and Preaching
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 181


--- PAGE 201 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 182
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 202 ---
chapter 12
Race and Identity
We must not reduce the problems of race 
to face and skin; we must also see them 
in structure and system.
183
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 183


--- PAGE 203 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 184


--- PAGE 204 ---
Race is not a card. It is a condition. 
Our goal should not be to transcend race, but to transcend
the biased meanings associated with race. Ironically, the very
attempt to transcend race by denying its presence reinforces
the power to influence perceptions because it gains strength
in secrecy. Like a poisonous mushroom, the tangled assump-
tions of race grow best in darkness. For race to have a less
detrimental effect, it must be brought into the light and
openly engaged as a feature of the events and discussions it
influences.
The paradox of our situation is that Americans are fatigued
and fascinated by race.
Proud of their roots, some blacks worship them. But roots
should nourish, not strangle, black identity.
Color can’t be the basis for analyzing culture because some
of the best insight on black folk has come from white brothers
and sisters. Conversely, some of the most leaden and unimag-
inative interpretations of black life have come from black folk.
Blackness has never really been about genetics anyway.
That’s because most black folk could point to somebody in
their family tree who couldn’t pass muster as pure Nubian an-
cestry. The varied skin shades testified to broad patterns of
racial mixing that black folk took for granted. And trying to
185Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 185


--- PAGE 205 ---
reduce race — any race, but especially blackness — to a ge-
netic calculation is nearly beside the point. What disturbs or
assures us about race has very little to do with blood or biol-
ogy. Sure, your color can get you pulled over for driving your
Ferrari in a white neighborhood, and it can get you followed
in a store where they think you don’t have enough plastic to
ring the cash register. But race plays out in the streets and in
our culture in a far more complicated way. It’s about how you
use language, understand your heritage, interpret your history,
identify with your kin, and figure out your meaning and worth
to a society that places values on you beyond your control.
We must not reduce the problems of race to face and skin;
we must also see them in structure and system.
You might protest to a passing cab that you are a mixture
of many races, but he might keep going because you look like
you’re black. But the cue he gets from your color isn’t about
your pigment alone; it’s about what that color means to him,
how it’s been jammed into his mind with a slew of stereotypes
about what a person who looks like you is likely to do, namely
rob, cheat, or kill him. He didn’t get that from a DNA swab;
he got that from talking heads on television seeking to warn
him about the carnage you might inflict — or, perhaps, from
the latest 50 Cent video.
We don’t have to embrace our American identity at the ex-
pense of our race. The two are not mutually exclusive. We
simply have to overcome the limitations imposed upon race,
186 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 186


--- PAGE 206 ---
to make sure that neither privilege nor punishment are vi-
ciously, arbitrarily assigned to racial difference.
It is also true that white allies to racial emancipation have
often sacrificed blood and body in refusing to be loyal to the
oppressive meanings of whiteness.
There are at least three different strategies of black identity
which are constantly in play to manage our lives on a cosmic
level. These strategies offer the world a picture of how we un-
derstand our blackness. The first strategy is accidental black-
ness; we, by the accident of birth, simply happen to be black.
In this strategy, our blackness is only the most obvious, not
the most important, element of our identity. The second strat-
egy of blackness is incidental blackness; we are proud to be
black, but it is but one strand of our identity. Our blackness
is surely important and valued, but it is not the only feature
of our identity that occupies our minds. Finally, there is in-
tentional blackness; we are proud of our blackness and see it
as a vital, though not the exclusive, aspect of our identity. Our
blackness is understood in its political forms and its social
manifestations. These strategies permit black folk to operate
in the world with a bit of sanity and grace. Black folk pass in
and out of these strategies over a lifetime. And one can be in-
tentionally black in one setting — say in a protest march
against police brutality — and incidentally black at the com-
pany picnic. Circumstances and politics make all the differ-
ence in how and when these strategies of blackness play out.
187Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 187


--- PAGE 207 ---
Premarital sex and illegitimacy were staples of the white
slave-owning sexual economy: slave masters pillaged and
plundered young girls and women at will, and produced a
constant stream of babies that would make the stereotypical
pimped-out, family-fleeing, children-abandoning, absentee-
fathering black male blush in embarrassment at his relatively
low productivity.
When O. J. Simpson took that long, slow ride down the L.A.
freeway in A. C. Cowlings’s Bronco, it wasn’t the first time he
used a white vehicle to escape a black reality.
There has been a profound resegregation of American
schools. More than seventy percent of black students in the
nation attend schools that are composed largely of minority
students. The segregation of black students is more than
twenty-five points below 1969 levels, but there are still plenty
of financially strapped schools that make a mockery of the ju-
dicial mandate for integrated education. White students typ-
ically attend schools where less than twenty percent of the
student body comes from races other than their own. By com-
parison, black and brown students go to schools composed of
fifty-three to fifty-five percent of their own race. In some
cases, the numbers are substantially higher; more than a third
of black and Latino students attend schools with a ninety- to
one-hundred-percent minority population. In tandem with
residential segregation, school resegregation amounts to little
more than educational apartheid.
188 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 188


--- PAGE 208 ---
It has become fashionable among many critics to claim
that the biggest harm to black America is self-imposed.
Racism, it is claimed, has largely run its course, and now only
the ambition and fortitude of black folk can save them; only
their foolish reliance on old racial scripts can lead them
astray. Blacks must bootstrap their way to prosperity like any
other immigrant group that overcame obstacles to find its
footing in the culture. What is lacking in this argument is that
most blacks were not immigrants, they were slaves, and even
after the core of the culture achieved freedom, they were set
the kinds of obstacles — death, dismemberment, and denial
of self — that no other immigrant group ever faced on these
shores.
One of the problems with neoliberalism is that it writes the
check of its loyalty to the black and Latino poor against the
funds of conservative rhetoric and social policy.
Although one may not have racial intent, one’s actions may
nonetheless have racial consequence. One may agree with
Barack Obama that there was no racial intent, no “active mal-
ice,” in the response to Katrina, and hold the view that there
were nonetheless racial consequences that flowed from the
“passive indifference” of the government to “the least of
these.” Active malice and passive indifference are but flip
sides of the same racial coin, different modes of racial menace
that flare according to the contexts and purposes at hand. In
a sense, if one conceives of racism as a cell phone, then active
malice is the ringtone at its highest volume, while passive in-
difference is the ringtone on vibrate. In either case, whether
189Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 189


--- PAGE 209 ---
loudly or silently, the consequence is the same: a call is trans-
mitted, a racial meaning is communicated.
White offenders routinely get treated to a brand of justice
that differs greatly from that meted out to blacks and other
minorities. We need standards of justice, and punishment for
offense, that are, like Fox News is supposed to be, fair and
balanced. A criminal justice system is criminal when it is ru-
ined by racial preference and white privilege.
You can be oppressed and still be doggin’ somebody else
who’s lower on the totem pole.
The tragic reign of slavery for 250 years, the colossal efforts
of the government and the legal system to extend white su-
premacy through Jim Crow law, and the monumental effort
of black folk to resist these forces while redefining black iden-
tity have formed the rhythms, relations, and rules of race. The
rhythms of race have largely to do with customs and cultural
practices that feed on differences between racial groups. The
relations of race have mostly to do with the conditions that
foster or frustrate interactions between racial groups. The
rules of race have to do with norms and behavior that reflect
or resist formal barriers to social equality. The rhythms, rela-
tions, and rules of race have both defined the forces against
which progress must be made and provided a measure of the
progress achieved. They help us understand that even when
fundamental changes in law and practice occur — say, the
Fourteenth Amendment, the Brown v. Board of Education
Supreme Court decision, or the Civil Rights Act of 1964 —
190 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 190


--- PAGE 210 ---
there is the matter of racial vision and imagination to con-
sider. They help us see that racial terror has bled through the
boundaries of law as surely as harmful racial customs and be-
liefs persist in deep pockets of a formally changed society.
The oversight of Latino, Native American, Vietnamese, and
Filipino suffering in the catastrophe of Katrina not only rein-
forces, for the latter three groups, their relative invisibility in
American culture, and for Latinos, their relative marginaliza-
tion in the region. It shows as well that our analysis of mi-
norities must constantly be revised to accommodate a
broader view of how race and ethnicity function in the cul-
ture. As important as it is, the black-white racial paradigm
simply does not exhaust the complex realities and compli-
cated interactions among various minority groups and the
broader society.
At their best, black leaders and thinkers have advocated
self-help philosophy while condemning the tragic social con-
ditions that make it necessary.
Most of the folk in this country are immigrants; it’s just a
matter of when you came. Scholars of immigration say that
this is the fourth great wave of immigration. The first wave
was the Western Europeans who founded the nation. The sec-
ond wave was in the middle of the nineteenth century, when
you had an Eastern European influx. Most Jews and Poles
and Italians arrived in the mid-1800s, late 1800s, or early
1900s. And of course, the nation was undergoing profound
industrialization then. The third stage included the first two
191Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 191


--- PAGE 211 ---
decades of the twentieth century. When you think of Ellis Is-
land — a million immigrants a year came to this country,
largely from Europe. And the fourth wave since the 1980s —
20 million people, mostly from Asia and Central America, are
coming to the nation. So there’s an extraordinary expansion
of what it means to be an American. E Pluribus Unum— “Out
of Many, One.”
Although most groups don’t have to pay the heavy identity
tax that blacks do for negative information circulating in the
culture, it is still a gesture of racial maturity to embrace our
complexity and tell the truth about the good and bad of black
life.
Katrina’s fury may have been race neutral, but not its ef -
fect: eighty percent of New Orleans’ minority households lived
in the flooded area, while the same was true for only fifty-four
percent of the city’s white population. The average household
income of those in the flooded area trailed those who lived on
New Orleans’ higher ground by $17,000. Concentrated
poverty rendered poor blacks much more vulnerable to the
effects of natural disaster.
Too many black youth are being warehoused in substan-
dard schools in poor communities until they are sent to
prison in unjustly disproportionate numbers.
It is no small irony that identity politics were denounced
as soon as race was debunked as a social myth. And once
192 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 192


--- PAGE 212 ---
racial stereotypes were toppled, it made sense to challenge ro-
mantic views of minority identity. It is unsurprising that iden-
tity politics, political correctness, and multiculturalism came
under attack just as minorities gained greater say-so in the
culture. It is a good thing to forcefully criticize insular or fas-
cist identity politics. But it is intellectually irresponsible to re-
nounce all forms of group solidarity. It is politically
self-serving to damn black pride while slighting the histories
and struggles that make it necessary.
Racial stereotypes may contain strands of truth wrapped
around knots of willful ignorance and deadly distortion.
Although Southern blacks and whites in many ways lived
in wildly different worlds, they had too much in common to
make their quarrel easy or clean. They were joined by the
Bible and the ham hock, by culture and cuisine. In fact, a mir-
ror version of the Southern way of life operated in black life,
even if it reflected a struggle against the inferiority imposed
on it by white society. Black self-hatred often stemmed from
the fear that what whites believed about blacks might be true.
Black guilt, on the other hand, had to do with the failure to
demand dignity and respect. The self-loathing that resulted
was a faithful barometer of the great need for black liberation.
But many blacks, convinced they were inferior and undeserv-
ing of equality, shrank further into a cocoon of self-hatred,
denying their fitness to participate in the fight for freedom
since they would be unworthy of its good results. They rein-
forced their chronic loss of self-worth by avoiding the struggle
to achieve it.
193Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 193


--- PAGE 213 ---
Like a camel on the loose, race has the capacity to do
greater injury when we attempt to coop it up as opposed to
when we let it run free.
Simple views of black life chase nuance and contradiction
to the sidelines.
Identity politics has been going on from the get-go in Amer-
ican culture, indeed, in cultures the world over. Aristotle and
Plato and their followers were ensconced in identity politics;
Descartes and Kant and their followers were negotiating iden-
tity politics; Foucault and Derrida and their followers are em-
broiled in identity politics; and Julia Kristeva and Luce
Irigaray and their followers are unquestionably involved in
identity politics, though they, as I suspect the others I’ve
named, would vehemently deny it. That’s because many of
them are, or were, caught in the dream of transcendental
truth, Enlightenment reason, deconstructive practice, or
semiotic analysis that, for the most part, severs questions of
identity from questions of racial politics.
It is supremely ironic that, under the banner of universal-
ism and “self-evident” rights, black folk fought to gain benefits
of citizenship that turned out to be neither self-evident nor
universal.
Immigration policies are directed against Jose. They are
not directed against Jurgen. Because we want Jurgen to come
194 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 194


--- PAGE 214 ---
over here and help us on the super-information highway,
whereas we fear Jose wants to take our jobs!
One need not believe that racism completely denies black
folk the freedom to act, to acknowledge that real victims do
exist. It is true that black addiction to victimization has some-
times turned issues better suited to small claims court into fed-
eral cases. The exaggeration of perceived racial injury among
some blacks has helped to ruin the sense of proportion that
should make the identification of real suffering a fairly simple
calculation. In truth, however, America has rarely willinglyac-
knowledged, much less responded to, black grievances.
This is a painful paradox of race: that blacks must often be
rejected into the American creed, that they are often included
only after their alienation from America reveals America’s
alienation from its social ideals.
When you think of the Father Knows Bestera — in the time
of black-and-white TV that we now romanticize — Lassie had
a television program, and Nat King Cole, a black man of enor-
mous talent, on whose back Capitol Records was built, had a
program that, due to racism, was cancelled and couldn’t stay
on television for a year!
A stereotype is a lazy assessment of the other, a sloppy pro-
jection of bias onto a vulnerable target.
195Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 195


--- PAGE 215 ---
What right did the North have to tell the South about
racism when it couldn’t acknowledge its own racial problems?
At least the South came clean about its dirt. It consciously, if
imperfectly, sought a way to live with the mess. The North,
on the other hand, claimed that it was already clean, and thus
largely sidestepped the always difficult task of fixing what
doesn’t appear to be broken.
In regard to race, we are living, as it’s been said, in the
United States of Amnesia. We’ve got to revoke our citizenship
in what Joseph Lowery terms “the 51st state, the state of
 denial.”
There’s no way to deal with race without going through
race; there’s no way of overcoming race without taking race
into account.
Hopefully, in a future that still appears too far away, whites
who speak against unjust privilege and power will join op-
pressed people around the globe as we create a world where
we can lay down the burden of race.
One of the great paradoxes of race is that whiteness is not
exclusively owned or produced by whites. White is also black.
As we discover how black whiteness is, we discover how in-
teresting and intricate whiteness is. We discover how whites
and blacks have cooperated in very shrewd ways to produce
an alternate to oppressive whiteness.
196 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 196


--- PAGE 216 ---
We’ve got to avoid the trap of spiritual puniness and racial
infantilism — and sidestep the pitfalls of a narrow black
 identity.
Blacks and Latinos should join hands when possible —
around issues of unemployment and xenophobia, language
and social stigmatization, and class and cultural prejudice.
Neither group has the luxury of arguing over which is really
more reasonable, needier, or more American. 
Progressives have temporarily lost the battle of language;
it is now the political and cultural right that has co-opted pro-
gressive metaphors of racism — as disease, as loss of vision,
of conscience corrupted and turned against its highest ends
— and won the right to tell the story of American race. Con-
temporary neoconservatives are drawn like vultures to pick
over the terms they helped to defeat, like “racial fairness” and
“equal playing ground,” giving them the opposite meaning in-
tended by their liberal creators.
Some black folk believe that because they’re black, they will
automatically know black history, life, and culture. But that
belief is simply not true. One cannot by means of osmosis ab-
sorb from black environments the collective memory of the
race, since it is not passed on through the membranes, or
though the nucleus or mitochondria of cells of racial experi-
ence. One must learn about black culture and history through
serious study.
197Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 197


--- PAGE 217 ---
When black folk stop obsessing about what our white
brothers and sisters think — and start concentrating on what
is just and righteous — we will not only love ourselves better,
but we may discover that we’ve got far more allies among
other races than we ever imagined.
The South was embroiled in the ugly evident. The ugly evi-
dent, or the obvious racism of the South, marched against the
inconspicuous evil of the North.
O.J. — the figure, the trial, the spectacle, the aftermath —
was a racequake. It crumbled racial platitudes. It revealed the
fault lines of bias, bigotry, and blindness that trace beneath
our social geography.
For many folk, excellence made blacks exceptions to, not
examples of, their race. Ironically, to be thought of as an ex-
ception to the race still denied a pure consideration of indi-
vidual merit. As long as race colored the yardstick, a real
measurement of individual achievement was impossible. It is
a bitter paradox that the evaluation of individual achievement
that blacks yearned for was subordinated to a consideration
of any achievement’s impact on, and relation to, the race.
Blacks were routinely denied the recognition of individual tal-
ent that is supposed to define the American creed. This his-
tory is barely mentioned now that blacks are made by critics
to look as if they duck individual assessment while embracing
group privilege.
198 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 198


--- PAGE 218 ---
The ideal of a color-blind society is a pale imitation of a
greater, grander ideal: of living in a society where our color
won’t be denigrated, where our skin will be neither a badge
for undue privilege nor a sign of social stigma. But we can
strive for a society where each receives his or her just due,
where the past in all its glory and grief is part of the equation
of racial justice and social equality. Then we won’t need to be
blind to color, which in any case is a most morbid state of ex-
istence. Then we can embrace our history and ideals with the
sort of humane balance that makes democracy more than a
distant dream.
A two-tiered universe of perception rotates around an axis
defined by race. While good fortune lights one side, despair
darkens the other. It is rarely sunny at the same time in white
and black America.
It is easy to understand how some blacks wanted to escape
the demands of being representatives of The Race, its shining
symbols. Standing in for the group was a burden. It was also
risky. You could never be sure that your efforts were taken se-
riously. In fact, a law of inversion seemed to apply. For most
blacks, only the negative acts seemed to count. Even the pos-
itive became a negative good: it only counted as a credit
against black liability, against all the wrong things black folk
inevitably did. The good you did simply meant that you, and
by extension, all blacks, didn’t mess up this time. When the
good was allowed to count, it only underscored one’s unique-
ness, that one was not like other black folk.
199Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 199


--- PAGE 219 ---
When dealing with their peers, blacks are seen as fair —
that is, neutral, just, and transcending race — only when they
oppose perceived black interests.
It is stunning how much ignorance about what really hap-
pened in our racial past poisons present debates about race.
Of course, we don’t benefit from a Joe Friday “just the facts,
ma’am” perspective of the past. There will be disputes about
the facts and what they mean. But we certainly need to work
as hard as possible to figure out what happened as we inter-
pret the history of race.
Race and racism are not static forces. They mutate, grow,
transform, and are redefined in complex ways. We must grasp
the hidden premises, buried perceptions, and cloaked mean-
ings of race as they show up throughout our culture. I realize
that race and racism are not living organisms. But they have,
besides an impersonal, institutional form, a quality of fretful
aliveness, an active agency. For instance, terms like “enlight-
ened” and “subtle” racism have been used to describe one
transformation of racism: the shift from overt racism to
covert forms that thrive on codes, signals, and symbols.
The “race card” metaphor is a limited way to understand
how race operates. It fails to show how racism poisons civic
life and denies the worth of human beings because of their
color. Race is a set of beliefs and behaviors shaped by culture,
rooted in history, and fueled by passions that transcend
 reason.
200 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 200


--- PAGE 220 ---
The black-white divide has been the major artery through
which the blood of bigotry has flowed throughout the body
politic for most of the history of America.
I love black folk, which is why I ain’t afraid of them. I’m
not afraid to disagree with mass black opinion, to call into
question beliefs, habits, dispositions, traditions, and practices
that I think need to be criticized. I seek to speak truth to
power in love, as the Bible suggests. I seek to address the high
and low, those on the inside and those locked out. That’s my
obligation and lifelong objective.
The path of least resistance for those looking to dodge the
burden of race is ignoring race. Although ignoring race is
often mistaken for self-hatred, they are not the same. Those
who confuse them commit what philosophers call a “category
mistake.” In such cases, shades of meaning slip off the edges
of sloppy distinctions. Those who ignore race, and those who
hate themselves because they can’t, do share self-defeating
habits: both deny the differences race makes and the lingering
effects of racism. But not all blacks who have these habits
hate themselves or consciously set out to ignore race. Some
blacks are simply nonconformists who seek to defy the bitter
boundaries of race, both within and beyond black life.
I think there is a juvenocracy operating in many urban
homes and communities. For me, a juvenocracy is the domi-
nation of black and Latino domestic and urban life by mostly
male figures under the age of twenty-five who wield consid-
erable economic, social, and moral influence. A juvenocracy
201Race and Identity
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 201


--- PAGE 221 ---
may consist of drug gangs, street crews, loosely organized
groups, and individual youths who engage in illicit activity.
They operate outside the moral and political bounds of tradi-
tional homes and neighborhoods. The rise of a juvenocracy
represents a significant departure from home and neighbor-
hood relations where adults are in charge. Three factors are
at the heart of such a shift: the extraordinary violence of
American life; an underground economy driven by crack and
other drugs which shifted power to young black and Latino
males in the homes and on the streets of major cities; and the
rise of the culture of the gun in our country.
If we’re going to have real progress in thinking and talking
about race, we must not reduce racial issues to black and
white. The tricky part is acknowledging the significant Latino,
Asian, and Native American battles with whiteness that have
taken place in our nation while admitting that the major race
conflict has involved African Americans resisting black sub-
ordination in the war against white supremacy. 
MED
202 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 202


--- PAGE 222 ---
chapter 13
Leadership
If we delude ourselves into believing that our
leaders, even our heroes, have not at times
fallen, we deny ourselves the powerful lessons
of their struggle for moral maturity.
203
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 203


--- PAGE 223 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 204


--- PAGE 224 ---
Those leaders who are in touch with their own limitations
often display a political prudence that matches their personal
humility. 
The death of American leaders and heroic figures like Abra-
ham Lincoln, and John and Robert Kennedy, made them the
subjects of national memory through eulogies and memorials,
and gained them even greater status as the vehicles of Amer-
ican moral and social redemption. 
In the magical arc of Colin Powell’s triumphant patriotism,
Frederick Douglass elbows Thomas Jefferson for a spot at
Dwight Eisenhower’s side.
There was, especially as a young black leader, a defiant
swagger in Jesse Jackson, an athlete’s bold self-possession:
the confidence of the utterly black-and-beautiful. And with
the rise of a black power esthetic that Jackson embraced, his
youthful Afro was the bane of the bourgeoisie, and a sign of
self-acceptance to the brothers and sisters in the streets who
struggled for self-recognition. Jackson’s black nationalist, and
at other times, ghetto country getup — dashikis and denim in
smooth sartorial rotation, and neck medallions and cowboy
boots too, and turtlenecks and suede sports jackets — were
the garb and accessories of his outcast spiritual shamanism.
His wardrobe signified both street mesmerism and ministe-
rial charisma, a symptom of the black working class’s excom-
munication from privileged black circles. Jackson became an
accessible icon for its grievances with black and white elites. 
205Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 205


--- PAGE 225 ---
Malcolm X’s name no longer belongs to him, no longer
refers simply to his tall body or to his short life. Like Martin
Luther King, Jr., Malcolm has come to mean more than him-
self. For some, Malcolm is an unreconstructed nationalist,
while for others he wed his nationalist beliefs to socialist phi-
losophy. Still others subject Malcolm to Marxist and Freudian
analysis, while others emphasize his vocation as a public
moralist. His stature derives as much from his detractors’ ex-
aggerated fears as from his admirers’ exalted hopes. He has
become a divided metaphor: for those who love him, he is a
powerful lens of self-perception, a means of sharply focusing
political and racial priorities; for those who loathe him, he is
a distorted mirror that reflects violence and hatred. 
Leaders who are blemish-free often possess a self-satisfac-
tion that stifles genuine leadership.
Thomas Jefferson was influenced by John Locke’s views on
liberalism, natural rights philosophy, and enlightenment ra-
tionality, and rejected Christianity’s status as revelation. Like
other advocates of the enlightenment, Jefferson declared re-
ligion to be a matter of opinion. This view led him to proclaim
that, should the neighbors of Americans say that there are
twenty gods, or no God, such a statement would neither
“break their legs or pick their pockets,” precisely because it is
not backed by the force of law. For Jefferson and the
Founders, such an opinion is distinguished from officially es-
tablished and recognized beliefs. Since the government is de-
rived from the natural rights of human beings and not divine
revelation, such opinions would neither mandate punishment
nor require exceptional protection for their utterance. To act
206 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 206


--- PAGE 226 ---
otherwise, as if the religious opinion that there was no God
or that there were twenty gods could cause injury to be in-
flicted upon its bearer, is to acknowledge that such an utter-
ance fractured a legally sanctioned belief about God. But this
would be contrary to the constitutional view of religion.
Black leaders in the early 1900s thought their youth were
just as morally wayward as the youth of our day. And many
of those leaders indicted popular culture for its vicious effects
on black youth. The remarkably humbling point to remember
is that those youth who were seen as heading to hell in a
handbasket became the grandparents and great-grandparents
whose behavior is held up as the example we should aim for.
Maxine Waters’s reputation draws from her bold, coura-
geous, and relentless pursuit of justice, not only for her im-
mediate constituents as a California congresswoman, but as
a national leader of the poor, besieged, and voiceless. Whether
addressing the inequities in applying the death penalty, the
ongoing need for equal pay for women, or the collusion of the
CIA in Contra drug trafficking in the ghetto, Waters has been
unafraid to speak her mind and tell the truth. She has spent
a life of dedicated service to speak for those who can’t speak
for themselves, a life driven by the palpable memory of dep-
rivation, and the recall of gentle souls who didn’t deserve the
predicament in which they were trapped. Maxine Waters is a
giant of a woman, a prophet in political dress who continues
to fire our social imaginations about the wondrous possibility
of helping those who can’t help themselves, and thus fulfilling
our highest obligation as citizens and human beings.
207Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 207


--- PAGE 227 ---
For many, Bill Clinton was our nation’s “First Bubba,” our
country’s “Trailer Trash Executive,” our nation’s “Poor White
President.” It tells on our bigoted cultural beliefs and social
prejudices that Clinton — a Georgetown University alumnus,
a Rhodes Scholar, an Oxford University and Yale University
Law School graduate, and a president of the United States —
could be construed in many quarters as a poor white trash,
“cracker” citizen. The study of whiteness prods us to examine
the means by which a highly intelligent man and gifted politi-
cian is transmuted into “Bubba” to be dismissed and demo-
nized.
If we delude ourselves into believing that our leaders, even
our heroes, have not at times fallen, we deny ourselves the
powerful lessons of their struggle for moral maturity.
Black leadership across America is entangled in the thick-
ets of a punishing irony: it is riddled by uncertainty precisely
when it should be enjoying its greatest impact in our nation’s
history. The problem derives from changing expectations gen-
erated by increased black participation in electoral politics
since the civil rights movement and concern about a transi-
tion in leadership styles.
James Madison, who contributed key phrases to the impor-
tant Virginia Declaration of Rights, an exemplary document
defending freedom of religion, proposed the language of the
First Amendment that was eventually revised and enacted by
the First Congress. In proposing the First Amendment, Madi-
son was as greatly influenced by the suffering of religious dis-
208 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 208


--- PAGE 228 ---
senters at the hands of the Church of England as by enlight-
enment ideals of reason’s superiority and the doctrine of nat-
ural rights. Madison argued that reason and conviction
should guide religion, and that the brutal battles over reli-
gious freedom made clear that religious belief should not be
established or imposed by the state. This was especially true
for a revealed religion like Christianity, whose claims to the
exclusive possession of truth also opened the possibility of re-
ligiously justified claims to political power. To prevent such a
prospect, Christianity had to be deprived of its potential po-
litical authority, a strategy achieved by challenging Christian-
ity’s biblical authority and claiming that it is a religion that is
governed by reason, which profoundly influenced Madison’s
views of religion.
A leader need not be perfect to be useful.
There is a gender hierarchy in black churches where
women do much of the labor but are largely prevented from
the highest leadership role: the pastorate. The ecclesiastical
apartheid of the black church, which is more than seventy per-
cent female, continues to reinforce the sexual inequality of
black women.
For much of our history, blacks have had to rely on
spokespersons to express our views and air our grievances to
a white majority that controlled access to everything from ed-
ucation to employment. For the most part, powerful whites
only wanted to see and hear a few blacks at a time, forcing us
to choose a leader — when we could. Often a leader was
209Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 209


--- PAGE 229 ---
selected for us by white elites. Predictably, blacks often dis-
agreed with those selections, but since the white elites had
the power and resources, their opinions counted. Such an
arrangement created tensions in black communities because
it reduced blackness to its lowest common denominator. Only
what could be condensed into speeches, editorials, and other
public declarations survived transmission to white elites.
Complexity was often sacrificed for clarity. It also made the
content of what was communicated about black culture con-
form to the spokesperson’s gifts, vision, or interests. Thus, a
spokesperson had a profound impact on what goods or ser-
vices the rest of his or her black constituency received. The
accountability of such leaders was often low.
Candor is rare among black leaders. Many have refrained
from public criticism of each other, for example, because of
the manipulative uses to which such criticism is often put by
white media and political opponents. But unless honest and
principled criticism of black leadership is encouraged within
black communities, an unhealthy silence will be reinforced,
tragically passing for communal loyalty and racial solidarity.
It is not hypocritical to fail to achieve the moral standards
that one believes are correct. Hypocrisy comes when leaders
conjure moral standards that they refuse to apply to them-
selves and when they do not accept the same consequences
they imagine for others who offend moral standards.
Colin Powell’s story combines elements of racial mythology
with ideals of national character. His personal immigrant’s
210 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 210


--- PAGE 230 ---
tale highlights and reinforces the defining features of Ameri-
can identity. Powell heroically turned the liabilities of race to
great advantage. He conquered racism as a military hero, and
in that role he shined the (often diminished) brilliance of
black American life onto foreign lands and into closed minds
closer to home. Powell’s focus on the American dream some-
times blinds him to America’s nightmares. But the general is
also capable of a sober reveille: he knows the costs of denied
opportunity.
Often a spokesperson for the race was selected because his
themes, style, and ideology were acceptable to the white ma-
jority. Many black leaders were viewed skeptically by their
constituencies. Booker T. Washington is a prime example of
this model of leadership. Naturally, these conditions intro-
duced considerable tension into the relationship between
those who did the speaking and those who were spoken for.
Black spokespersons acquired influence because they were
given legitimacy by the white majority, whose power to estab-
lish such legitimacy was far greater than that of the black mi-
nority. As a result, those spokespersons used their power in
black communities to reward loyal blacks and punish dissi-
dents. This arrangement meant that patronage more than
moral principle determined the allocation of the limited re-
sources for which the spokesperson was a funnel. As a result,
few blacks benefited from the leadership that was supposed
to speak for them all.
Only recently have we had detailed histories of grass-roots
leaders — often church-based women — who worked in local
communities to make the black freedom struggle effective.
211Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 211


--- PAGE 231 ---
Though not as famous as their male counterparts, Fannie Lou
Hamer, Ella Baker, Jo Ann Robinson, and Septima Clark were
invaluable in helping black communities muster their moral
might to resist white supremacy.
Martin Luther King, Jr.’s flaws magnify his greatness be-
cause they provide a glimpse into a soul struggling with the
knowledge that he was neither perfect nor pure. King’s guilt
about being widely celebrated, and about his own moral fail-
ures, gave him a humility that is virtually absent in contem-
porary leaders.
His disputes with Malcolm X aside, Louis Farrakhan has
proved to be a brilliant twin to the personality Malcolm
shaped in the Nation of Islam. Farrakhan is one-half the ful-
fillment of Malcolm’s divided mind about which route —
 separatist or limited solidarity with progressive whites —
black folk should take to survive in America. If Farrakhan is
Malcolm’s shadow self — at least the half of Malcolm that was
disdainful of white folk while he was in the Nation, and cau-
tious about proceeding with their help once he departed —
Farrakhan aggressively shields himself from Malcolm’s
brighter, perhaps blinding, other half. That half of Malcolm
believed that caste and class should be attacked as well as
race. That half of Malcolm believed that black folk should be
open to socialist, humanitarian, and democratic strategies for
racial uplift. That half of Malcolm believed that white folk re-
ally weren’t devils. Farrakhan totes his contempt for that
other side of Malcolm around his neck as a talisman. It wards
off the amnesia that Farrakhan believes clouds black prophets
once they go soft. It is a reminder to Farrakhan of the price
212 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 212


--- PAGE 232 ---
black leaders pay once they lose their way in a racial wilder-
ness where they are lured by misty dreams of cooperating
with the enemy.
Al Sharpton’s rise as a black leader in New York came at a
time when there was a displacement of manufacturing jobs
by the dominance of the financial, insurance, real estate, and
advertising sectors. As a result, the economy shifted away
from working-class workers and favored the well-trained mid-
dle- and upper-managerial classes. The New York of the ’70s
and ’80s for black communities was marked by rising unem-
ployment, dramatic spikes in homelessness, and vastly in-
creased crime, driven in large part by the crack cocaine
underground economy. There was also a zealous police state
imposed on poor black communities, with a pronounced in-
crease in publicized police brutality cases. This is the political
and social vacuum into which Sharpton stepped to exercise
his brand of leadership: an aggressive public response to the
erosion of black civil rights by conjuring the parallels, and
drawing distinctions, between New York and the South; link-
ing his actions to, and patterning his public protests after,
those of well-known black leaders like King and Jackson, and
thus seeking to establish his pedigree and legitimacy; and pro-
tecting the black working and working poor classes from
white hate mobs and a vicious police state.
Charismatic leadership has many virtues. One of them is
the ability to inspire the masses and to dramatize the push
for equality. It has vices too; charismatic leaders often don’t
find useful ways to transfer power or transmit authority.
Lethal forms of competition are the norm more than cooper-
213Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 213


--- PAGE 233 ---
214 Can You Hear Me Now?
ation. There are vulnerabilities and weaknesses of charismatic
authority: it hinges on displacement and deceit, on vanity and
viciousness, on the part of those who would carve their niche
on the totem pole of black leadership. It also highlights the
rule of ruthless ambition in charismatic leadership circles
where the desire to point the way and be on top is a classic
example of Martin Luther King’s warning against the “drum
major instinct.” Instead of seeking to serve, the desire for pre-
mier status, to serve as “president of black America” among
charismatic black leaders, fosters an intensely competitive en-
vironment fueled by succession syndrome.
We are plagued by either-or ethics. Some believe that
morality is judged by examining the private behavior of lead-
ers — that what one does in the bedroom is just as important
as what one does in public. Others claim that private behavior
has little consequence in measuring political character. The
truth may lie somewhere between these extremes. Conserva-
tives too often reduce the complexity of character to a test of
sexual propriety. In assessing moral failure, they pay little at-
tention to how political judgments may reveal ethical poverty.
As long as a decision, say, to cut millions of the needy from
welfare rolls is made by a politician without a sexual problem,
the outrage it may cause is chalked up to ideology, not moral-
ity. On the other hand, liberals are infamous for underplaying
the relation between personal and public life. When liberals
justly defended Bill Clinton during the impeachment debacle,
few remembered that the same president had demanded Sur-
geon General Joycelyn Elders’s resignation after she sug-
gested that masturbation should be openly discussed with
young people. The obsession with sexual sin has distorted our
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 214


--- PAGE 234 ---
understanding of the morality of leadership. Our leaders can-
not possibly satisfy the demand for purity that some make.
And neither should they try.
I read and watched the appalling discourtesy that blan-
keted Congresswoman Barbara Lee in the press — and the
demeaning assaults on her reputation as well — all because
she chose, in good conscience, to withhold her vote of support
for a joint resolution of Congress authorizing the president to
“use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations,
organizations, or persons he determines planned, authorized,
committed, or aided the terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001.” While Lee listened to her conscience, others, even in
her own Party, found it difficult to heed her wise words and
action. Still, her convictions governed her vote — a gesture
that defied unregulated political power and defended princi-
pled pacifism. But the truth is that black women like Barbara
Lee have for centuries blessed our race and nation with wis-
dom, compassion, and moral vision. But too often, we have
punished them for their prophetic insight, and ignored their
gifts to our peril.
Our leaders will occasionally disappoint themselves and us.
If we demand that they be perfect, we risk disillusionment
when their shortcomings surface. The underlying flaw of our
unwritten compact with leaders is the desperate need to be-
lieve that they must be pure to be effective. The best leaders
concede their flawed humanity even as they aspire to lofty
goals.
215Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 215


--- PAGE 235 ---
Mary Church Terrell enjoyed a distinguished career as a
clubwoman, educator, writer, lecturer, and social activist for
over sixty years. Terrell’s social activism was jump-started in
1892 by the tragic death of her friend Thomas Moss at the
hands of a white lynch mob enraged by his success as a grocer
in her native Memphis. Mary Church Terrell and Frederick
Douglass met with President Benjamin Harrison in the after-
math of Moss’s lynching to complain of the rise of racial vio-
lence. The same year, she also became the leader of the
Colored Women’s League, and subsequently, in 1896, the first
president of the NACW (National Association of Colored
Women). For Terrell and her fellow NACW members, the fight
against racism and the uplift of black women went hand in
hand. 
Not even Terrell’s advanced age slowed her civil rights ac-
tivism. When she was eighty-six years old, Terrell, who was
born in 1863, led two other blacks and a white to request ser-
vice at a segregated Washington, D.C., restaurant. They filed
suit when the owner refused to offer them service. Eventually
the case went to the Supreme Court. In the meantime, Terrell
helped to boycott, picket, and sit-in at several other Washing-
ton, D.C., eateries. A year later, on July 24, Terrell died, just
two weeks before the Supreme Court outlawed segregated
public schools in Brown v. Board of Education and one year
before Rosa Parks sparked the Montgomery bus boycott. Her
courage and commitment to black freedom and women’s
rights provided a strong example of leadership.
As the most gifted and vigilant black leader in the post-King
era, Jesse Jackson has helped to guide black America through
cycles of white backlash, the assertion of black power, the in-
stitutionalization and attack on affirmative action, Reagan-
216 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 216


--- PAGE 236 ---
ism, post–civil rights racial politics, the social and racial con-
sequences of crack, the age of hip hop, and bitter black class
warfare. Jackson’s two presidential races, in 1984 and 1988,
altered the black political landscape. Jackson garnered 3.5
million voters in his first run for the White House, and more
than doubled that number in 1988. His efforts registered mas-
sive numbers of black citizens and mobilized progressives
across the country. Jackson founded the National Rainbow
Coalition in 1984 to forge connections among various racial
and ethnic groups with an eye to transforming the American
political scene. Jackson also expanded his freedom efforts
globally, winning the release of hostages and political prison-
ers from Kuwait and Cuba. Jackson has been a relentless
force in the media, brilliantly leveraging his celebrity to ex-
plore on television and radio complex ideas, while advocating
for social change.
Barack Obama must sort through three models of leader-
ship in dealing with race. The first model of leadership is one
that transcends race. In one version of race transcending lead-
ership, key features of the racial situation are suppressed. The
nation’s past is largely ignored. Although this option is seduc-
tive, it is ultimately one that will not serve Obama or the na-
tion well. Such an approach is based on a willful amnesia
about race that is too steep a price to pay in order to reach
what is essentially a false racial peace, an empty racial accord.
The second model is one that translates race. In this model of
leadership, all the significant features of the social order are
spoken in the language of race, are translated into the idiom
of color. This model is too narrow because it reduces the com-
plex social strata to its racial dimensions, while other com-
pelling features of the social order are slighted, ignored, or
217Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 217


--- PAGE 237 ---
erased. This model compensates the failure to consider race
with the equally flawed approach of only considering race. Fi-
nally there is leadership that transforms race. In this model,
a compelling account of racial facts and history is joined to
an expression of what race can and should be. This model of-
fers Obama the greatest intellectual and political freedom to
explore the history of race while transforming its meaning in
the future. Race transforming leadership does three good
things: acknowledges racial facts and history, challenges
racial orthodoxies, and links anti-racist struggle to other
forms of political struggle.
Martin Luther King, Jr., is, arguably, the greatest American
ever produced on our native soil. Figures like Abraham Lin-
coln and Thomas Jefferson seized the national imagination
while holding public office. By contrast, King helped to rede-
fine our country’s destiny as a private citizen in a remarkable
career that lasted a mere thirteen years. As a religious activist
and social prophet, King challenged our nation’s moral mem-
ory. He bid America to make good on promises of justice and
freedom for all persons, promises that had been extended al-
most two centuries before. Part of King’s enormous genius
was the ability to force America to confront its conscience.
He also brilliantly urged America to reclaim a heritage of de-
mocracy buried beneath cold documents and callous deeds. 
Martin Luther King, Jr., is the defining American of our na-
tional history. His social vision at its best captured the deepest
desire for freedom that any American has ever expressed.
King’s quest for true democracy is as great a pilgrimage as
any American has undertaken. His hunger for real equality is
as stirring a hope for national stability as any American has
ever harbored. His thirst for racial redemption is as pure a
218 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 218


--- PAGE 238 ---
faith in human morality as any American has dared to em-
brace. King’s surrender of his life to the principles he cher-
ished is as profound an investment in the worth of American
ideals as any American ever made. King’s career, with all of
its flaws and failures, is simply the most faithful measure of
American identity and national citizenship we are likely to
witness.
MED
219Leadership
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 219


--- PAGE 239 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 220
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 240 ---
chapter 14
Hip Hop and Youth Culture
A lot of things in early hip hop were like
chitlins — the stuff that was largely cast away,
but then poor folk took hold of it and made it 
a dynamic part of the musical diet.
221
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 221


--- PAGE 241 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 222


--- PAGE 242 ---
Jazz was the rap of its time. 
Artists like KRS-1 and Boogie Down Productions, Public
Enemy, X-Clan, A Tribe Called Quest — and more recently
2Pac, Talib Kweli, Common, Mos Def, Bahamadia, Lauryn
Hill, The Coup, Dead Prez, and Nas — have infused their art
with political awareness. They have also occasionally linked
their work to quests for social justice, whether making a song
to galvanize social response to police brutality or to dramatize
and inspire social outrage against an unjust war. At the height
of politically conscious rap, during hip hop’s golden age,
groups like Public Enemy depended on a kind of racial and
political literacy for folk to grasp what they were saying. 
The hip hop notion that if you ain’t poor and black you ain’t
authentic may have been generated by folk outside of the
ghetto. A lot of people in the ghetto are trying to get the hell
up out of there. They don’t want to romanticize it. So it’s not
the ghetto that’s being romanticized — its physical geography
— so much as the intellectual attachment and intimacy that
it breeds, a bond established among those who suffer and
struggle together, who long for an exit from its horrible limits. 
Many of these young hip hoppers certainly need to be
talked to, and talked about, but more importantly, we should
listen to them. Because the messages that they often put in
our faces — messages that we don’t want to hear because they
make us uncomfortable — are messages that we need to hear.
The political process can only be enhanced; the American
democratic project can only be strengthened; and the citizen-
223Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 223


--- PAGE 243 ---
ship of America can only be deepened with a profound en-
gagement with some of the most serious problems that these
young people represent — and tell us about. 
Hip hop took root in a culture of hardship. Even the tech-
nology that played such a crucial role in rap’s origins derived
from hardship. Many black and brown kids in vocational
school were sent to work repairing the turntables for rich sub-
urban school kids. But that circumstance drove their experi-
mentation with various technologies to expand hip hop’s
aesthetic base. So these young folk ended up putting turntables
next to each other, and out of that emerged the practice of
cuing up one record while the other one is playing, and you’re
listening to it, finding the exact spot to extend and repeat the
break beat through scratching, and eventually with looping. 
A lot of things in early hip hop were like chitlins — the stuff
that was largely cast away, but then poor folk took hold of it
and made it a dynamic part of the musical diet. That survival
habit — of turning pork bellies into desirable menu items and
eventually big business as commodities on the futures market
— grew out of a culture of political and social suffering. It re-
minds us that politics is not only what we hear in hip hop
lyrics, but it’s also in the aesthetic and technical forms that
derive from the cultural and intellectual imperatives of rest-
less black innovation. 
Hip hop needs to be called out for its lesser qualities, for
its abysmal failures. But hip hop’s critics ignore how some of
the sharpest criticism comes from within hip hop’s borders.
224 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 224


--- PAGE 244 ---
It’s a mistake for folk who are singing or rapping about po-
litical matters — as important as that is, especially in our era
when traditional politics is a hard sell to youth — to believe
that what they’re doing is a substitute for social struggle and
political engagement.
It’s rare that female artists in hip hop are able to express
an alternative worldview where their ideas, interests, and
agendas are taken seriously.
By denying its musical and artistic merit, hip hop’s critics
get to have it both ways: they can deny the legitimate artistic
standing of rap while seizing on its pervasive influence as an
art form to prove what a terrible effect it has on youth.
The limited success that women have enjoyed in hip hop
— as lawyers, managers, and of course some record execu-
tives — should challenge the narrow roles imagined for
women by some of its lyricists and rhetoricians. This stuff
didn’t start with hip hop; the reality is that patriarchy and sex-
ism and misogyny are tired-and-true American traditions
from which hip hop derives its understanding of how men
and women should behave, and what roles they should play.
But these ancient forms of sexism, patriarchy, misogyny, and
femiphobia that shape the personal, and business, relation-
ships between men and women in hip hop culture are rarely
brought into view when the focus is young black folk. 
225Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 225


--- PAGE 245 ---
Many hip hop critics end up wearing their feelings on their
peeves.
The same black youth culture that is frowned on for al-
legedly glamorizing dull thought — an allegation not hard to
prove in the sort of hip hop obsessed with materialism,
machismo, and misogyny — has also made a hero out of a
fallen poet who made deep thinking sexy. His calling card con-
sisted of politics, history, and race as much as it did raunchy
boudoir talk. And given the sheer volume of Tupac’s posthu-
mous output, and the growing catalog of books about him —
there are already more than a dozen in the marketplace rang-
ing from pictorials to academic treatises — Tupac’s lyrical and
literary immortality are secure.
The DJ commands a pair of phonograph turntables. Among
other functions, the DJ plays fragments of records through a
technique called scratching: manually rotating a record in
sharp, brief bursts of back and forth rhythmic movement over
isolated portions of a song producing a scratching sound.
There are lyrics contained in the songs of the great Jelly
Roll Morton that would make Snoop Dogg wince in embar-
rassment. You can read Morton’s lyrics in their most distin-
guished place of storage, the Library of Congress. Does this
mean that that august institution will one day house the
Dogg’s Magnum Snoopus, “Doggystyle,” for future genera-
tions to lap up or howl at?
226 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 226


--- PAGE 246 ---
Its critics often fail to acknowledge that hip hop is neither
sociological commentary nor political criticism, though it
may certainly function in these modes through its artists’
lyrics. Hip hop is still fundamentally an art form that traffics
in hyperbole, parody, kitsch, dramatic license, double enten-
dres, signification, and other literary and artistic conventions
to get its point across.
The fact that three of the most gifted rappers come from
highly educated mothers — Dr. Brenda Green is Talib Kweli’s
mother, the late Dr. Donda West was Kanye West’s mother,
and Dr. Mahalia Ann Hines is Common’s mother — doesn’t
detract from their authenticity in my mind. Perhaps the op-
portunity that flowed from their lower-middle-class existence
gave them perspective on the horrors they witnessed. None
of these geniuses were by any means rich, so they were close
enough to the ghetto to narrate the truth of what they wit-
nessed, and maybe even lived.
I’m not suggesting we can’t be critically engaged with our
children’s aesthetic expression. But how can we be effectively
engaged if we don’t know what we’re engaging with? We don’t
have to romanticize our young rhetorical artists to appreciate
them. Our moral traditions may lead us to repudiate most of
what the worst of them do while applauding much of what
the best of them do. The problem is we don’t know how to
make those distinctions, and a large part of not knowing how
is bound up with our ethical aversion to the style these
rhetoricians adopt. There’s a way to be seriously critical —
after all, folk who know and love hip hop manage to do it —
227Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 227


--- PAGE 247 ---
and still appreciate the sheer magnitude of talent that char-
acterizes the best of pavement poetry.
Maybe hip hoppers wouldn’t talk so much about material
things if we helped give them a sense of meaning, and a
means to connect to sustaining spiritual and moral and intel-
lectual traditions. We can’t hypocritically condemn the
younger generation for their bling and their materialism, es-
pecially since those are staples of American culture. Money is
critical to having a good life in our society. But we want to
teach young folk that one can’t reduce the good life to the
shape of a car or the size of a house.
It’s unfair to charge hip hop with a political failure that it
was not accountable for to begin with. That’s like holding Cur-
tis Mayfield, who sang “Keep on Pushin’,” accountable for the
failure of the late-phase, Northern-based arm of the civil
rights movement in the late 1960s, or holding James Brown,
who sang “I’m Black and I’m Proud,” responsible for the fail-
ure of the black power struggle in the early 1970s.
When hip hop started, the DJ had control and rocked the
party through his sonic play and technical experimentalism.
Look how it happened on the ground: what was essentially an
attempt to repair broken turntables was used to generate an
alternative sonic culture full of technological innovation that
supposedly ignorant black and brown folk have now turned
into a billion-dollar industry. Anthropologists call it bricolage,
a French term first used by Claude Lévi-Strauss to mean using
what is literally at hand to create something — a style, an ap-
228 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 228


--- PAGE 248 ---
proach, a practice. So these young black and brown folk took
the technological leftovers of a richer consumer culture and
fashioned a cultural and musical expression that has lasted
to this day.
Hip hop captures the bigotry toward women, and gays and
lesbians, found in the larger society — but on steroids, so to
speak. It’s the ugly exaggeration of viewpoints that are taken
for granted in many conservative circles across the nation.
Like hip hop, jazz has a history of cultural attack. That his-
tory has been buried under an avalanche of nostalgia that
hides jazz’s grittier roots. For instance, during the Jazz Age
and the Harlem Renaissance, the response to jazz by a large
segment of the black bourgeoisie, black intellectuals, and
black artists anticipated the attack on rap. Such responses re-
flected, and were partly driven by, the negative response to
jazz of large segments of white society. Jazz was viewed as a
cultural and artistic form that compromised decency and
morality. It was linked to licentious behavior and lewd artistic
gestures. With its “jungle rhythms,” its blues base, its double
entendre lyrics, and its sexually aggressive dancing, jazz, like
hip hop today, was the most widely reviled music of the 1920s
and ’30s.
Hip hoppers joined pleasure and rage while turning the de-
tails of their difficult lives into craft and capital. This is the
world hip hop would come to “represent”: privileged persons
speaking for less visible or vocal peers. At their best, rappers
shape the tortuous twists of fate into lyrical elegies. They rep-
229Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 229


--- PAGE 249 ---
resent lives swallowed by too little love or opportunity. They
represent themselves and their peers with aggrandizing an-
thems that boast of their ingenuity and luck in surviving.
Had more support been given to so-called positive hip hop-
pers and to revolutionary rappers who detested body bags and
beer bottles; who encouraged black men to “be a father to
your child”; who advocated love and respect for black women;
who sought to build black communities; and who encouraged
youth to study black history, the gangsta rap tide might have
been stemmed. At the least, gangsta rappers might have been
forced to take the internal criticisms of their hip hop peers
more seriously because such criticisms would have had moral
and economic support. After all, it’s easier to get an album
made if you’re “pimpin’ hoes,” “cockin’ glocks,” or generally
bitch-baiting your way through yet another tired tale about
how terrible it was to come up in the hood without your fa-
ther while blaming your mama for the sorry job she did than
if you’re promoting radical black unity or the overthrow of
white racism.
The MC, or rapper, recites lyrics in a rhythmic, syncopated
fashion. The rapper’s rhetorical quirks, vocal tics, rhyme flow,
and verbal flourishes mark his or her individual style. In the
early days of rap, MCs often simulated sonic fragments with
their voices, causing some rappers to be dubbed human beat
boxes. Rappers can use a variety of rhyme schemes, from cou-
plets in tetrameter to iambic pentameter. Their rhyme
schemes can employ masculine and feminine rhymes, asso-
nantal and consonantal rhymes, or even internal rhymes.
Rappers may use enjambment, prosody, and sophisticated
230 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 230


--- PAGE 250 ---
syncopations to tie their collage of rhymes into a pleasing
sonic ensemble.
While it’s easy to see why hip hop is deemed a postmodern
art form — quotation, pastiche, contingency, fragmentation
and the like help define its presence — it may be that its
homegrown nostalgia and hunger for purity and authenticity
betray modernist obsessions.
A lot of real gangsters prefer Al Green to Ice T. 
When my dear friends Wynton Marsalis, Stanley Crouch,
and other critics perched aloft the wall of high black culture
throw stones at hip hop, they forget that such stones were
once thrown at their music of preference. Bebop was once hip
hop. Ragtime was once rap. Bluesmen were once b-boys.
What is now noble was once notorious. 
Hip hop culture has come a long way since its fledgling start
in the late 1970s. Early hip hoppers were largely anonymous
and could barely afford the sound systems on which the genre
is built. By contrast, contemporary artists reap lucrative con-
tracts, designer clothing lines, glossy magazine spreads, fash-
ionable awards, global recognition, and often the resentment
of their hip hop elders. If there is a dominant perception about
today’s rap superstars among hip hop’s purists, it is that they
have squandered the franchise by being obsessed with shaking
derrieres, platinum jewelry, fine alcohol, premium weed, pimp
culture, gangster rituals, and thug life. Although hip hop has
231Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 231


--- PAGE 251 ---
succeeded far beyond the Bronx of its birth, it has, in the
minds of some of its most ardent guardians, lost its soul.
The global portrayal of black life surely cannot rest on the
images or words of barely postadolescent entertainers. This
is not to deny that a single video by a rap artist can more suc-
cessfully shred international boundaries than a hundred
books by righteous authors. Neither is it to deny the huge re-
sponsibility such artists bear in confirming or combating
hateful and ignorant beliefs about black folk that circulate
around the globe. But that is just it: these beliefs are part of
the ancient legacies of colonialism, racism, and regionalism,
legacies that persist despite the efforts of intellectuals, artists,
and leaders to destroy them. Is it fair to expect DMX to
achieve what W. E. B. Du Bois could not, or for Tupac to suc-
ceed where Archbishop Tutu failed? The complex relationship
between art and social responsibility is evident, but we must
be careful not to place unrealistic, or even unjust, demands
on the backs of artists. Their extraordinary influence cannot
be denied, but the very argument that is often used against
them — that they are not politicians, leaders, or policymakers,
just entertainers who string together lines of poetic meter —
is often conveniently forgotten when it might work to hip hop-
pers’ advantage.
Taking the time to learn what our youth are thinking and
why they create the art they do demands a capacity for de-
ferred justification that most adults lack. They seek to ensure
the legitimacy of their moral critique by rendering quick and
easy judgments about the art form. Many critics of hip hop
do not have the ethical patience to empathize with the formi-
232 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 232


--- PAGE 252 ---
dable array of choices, conflicts, and dilemmas that many
poor black youth confront.
The gangsta rap genre of hip hop emerged in the late ’80s
on the West Coast as crack and gangs ruled the urban centers
of Los Angeles, Long Beach, Compton, and Oakland. Since hip
hop has long turned to the black ghetto and the Latino barrio
for lyrical inspiration, it was inevitable that a form of music
that mimicked the violence on the streets would rise. Left in
the shadow of East Coast rap for years, West Coast rap rein-
vigorated the hip hop game by reinventing the premise of rap:
to groove the gluteus maximus. As Ralph Ellison said, geogra-
phy is fate. West Coast hip hop tailored its fat bass beats and
silky melodies for jeeps that cruise the generous spaces of the
West, and for the open spaces of the Midwest and the South. 
For the past two decades, rap artists — who as informal
chroniclers of black youth culture translate the unspoken suf-
fering of poor black masses into articulate anger — have
warned of the genocidal consequences of ghetto life for poor
blacks. Their narratives, though plagued by vicious forms of
misogyny and homophobia that merit strong criticism, com-
municate the absurdity and desperation, the chronic hope-
lessness, which festers inside many urban areas.
The ghetto became the source root, the major metaphor,
for Tupac’s art and life, and the means by which he trans-
formed his existence. Through his fixation on the ghetto,
Tupac made sure that there was a black tint on the universal
human quest for meaning. I think in this regard about Victor
233Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 233


--- PAGE 253 ---
Frankl and logotherapy, or the quest for meaning in the midst
of the horror and death of the Nazi concentration camps.
Tupac was articulating, in a sense, a kind of ghetto logother-
apy, a quest for existential wholeness in the midst of the hor-
ror of poverty, material deprivation, and social dislocation.
By remaining true to exploring the specific elements of the
ghetto experience, he gave it universal appeal.
White kids are adopting the dress, diction, and demeanor
of urban black youth. From baggy pants to oversize shirts, the
“gear” of hip hop culture has been mass-produced and worn
by youth of every ethnic and racial group. The slang of hip
hop is now widely used. The swagger of black youth, the sul-
try way they combine boasting and self-confidence, has influ-
enced the styles of upper-middle-class white youth. For many
white parents, however, such a trend is cause for concern.
While white youth already face their version of the generation
gap — they’ve been dubbed “slackers” and “Generation X” —
emulating the styles, speech, and behavior of urban black
youth is even more menacing. It wasn’t until rap made a huge
impact on white kids that the music was so roundly attacked.
As long as the “bad” effects of rap were restricted to black
kids, its menace went undetected, unprotested, or it was flat-
out ignored.
Although widely celebrated as the East Coast’s answer to
the rhetoricians of glorified violence out West, Biggie Smalls
could deliver brilliant social analysis and moving portraits of
poverty with metaphoric wittiness and rhythmic flow, as he
does on a lyric from his first album, Ready to Die, remember-
ing how “the landlord dissed us / No heat, wondered why
234 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 234


--- PAGE 254 ---
Christmas missed us / Birthdays was the worst days / Now we
sip champagne when we thirsty / Damned right I like the life
I live / ’Cause I went from negative to positive.” Biggie’s lyrics
speak directly to the question of black suffering and what’s
known in theological circles as “the problem of evil.” Biggie
shares honors with Tupac in the articulation of a grassroots
secular urban theodicy.
I caught Jay-Z in concert at Madison Square Garden in
May of 2008, and he weighed in on George W. Bush, and
Barack Obama too. With a huge portrait of the president pro-
jected on the screen behind him, the lyrically sophisticated
griot stopped the music so that his words of critique would
sink in as deep as the waters that soaked the Gulf Coast dur-
ing Katrina, the subject of his riveting “Minority Report.”
After declaring that his people “were poor before the hurri-
cane came” the rapper defended those survivors who were de-
monized, by asking in a powerful couplet: “Wouldn’t you loot,
if you didn’t have the loot? / Baby needed food and you stuck
on the roof.” Jay-Z observed in compelling cadence the bitter
irony of how a helicopter “swooped down just to get a scoop
/ Through his telescopic lens but he didn’t scoop you.” 
But the rapper reserved his most biting indictment for an
indifferent “commander-in-chief who just flew by” and refused
to share even the space in his plane with the suffering sur-
vivors. Jay-Z imagined what might have happened “if he ran
out of jet fuel and just dropped, Huh, that woulda been some-
thing to watch / Helicopters doing fly-bys to take a couple of
shots / Couple of portraits then ignored ’em, He’d be just an-
other bush surrounded by a couple orchids / Poor kids just
’cause they were poor kids, Left ’em on they porches / Same
old story in New Orleans.” After asking his throng of revelers
235Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 235


--- PAGE 255 ---
if they were ready for change — but not without offering a dis-
claimer that his gesture wasn’t endorsed by the presidential
contender — Jay-Z flashed a picture of Obama onscreen as his
audience roared its approval. The rapper’s partisan vibe car-
ried the day as an interlude to his entrancing performance.
Unlike Ralph Ellison’s character in his famous novel Invis-
ible Man and the bulk of black folk for a long stretch of our
history, black youth suffer, not from invisibility, but from hy-
pervisibility. The surplus sighting, and citing, of young black
bodies — in crime stories on the news, in congressional hear-
ings about demeaning imagery in pop music, in shopping
malls where they hang out, in police profiles where they are
stigmatized, in suburban communities where they are sur-
veilled — has draped paranoia and panic around their very
limbs. In all the wrong ways, black youth are overexposed. Is
it any wonder, then, that they dress in oversize clothing to
hide their demonized bodies, to diminish the measuring of
their alleged menace?
The producer has several devices at her command, includ-
ing a beat box and digital sampler. The beat box, or drum ma-
chine, is an electronic instrument that simulates the sound of
a drum set. A digital sampler is a synthesizer that stores in its
computerized memory a variety of sounds (a James Brown
scream, a TV theme song, a guitar riff, a bass line) that are re-
produced when activated by the producer. The DJ and the pro-
ducer work together in laying down backing tracks for the MC.
The tracks consist of rhythms, scratches, beats, shrieks, noise,
other sound effects, and loops, which are fragments of existing
songs reworked and repeated in new musical contexts.
236 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 236


--- PAGE 256 ---
In 2005, hip hop legend Nas joined his noted musician fa-
ther Olu Dara for an imaginative duet on the song “Bridging
the Gap” that plunged deeply into the Delta region’s distinc-
tive musical history. From its opening blues vamp, drenched
in a Bo Diddley-meets-Muddy Waters rhythmic swagger, it is
clear that Nas and Olu Dara have wed two powerful art forms
in exploring the area’s vibrant musical tradition. By now it’s
a cliché for hip hoppers to join the rap-rock brigade. But there
are precious few rappers who’ve bothered to tap the fertile
sonic vein that produced rock — and hip hop as well. After
all, with its double entendres, colorful language, relentless
boasting, homespun machismo, and tragicomic sensibility,
the blues are a forceful parent to rap. Olu Dara and Nas bril-
liantly play off of the kinship of their music and manhood on
their powerful collaboration. “Bridging the Gap” is a soulful
tribute to the roots shared by father and son, by the rural and
the urban, and by two supremely gifted artists.
The best hip hop rhetoricians, in their social and artistic
functions, have a great deal in common with some of the
greatest rhetoricians ever. One thinks about Shakespeare or
Chaucer or the writer of The Decameron. One thinks about
Melvin Tolson, or Langston Hughes, or Nikki Giovanni, or
Sonia Sanchez. One thinks about Walt Whitman. One thinks
about Yeats or Rilke. One thinks about a whole range of po-
etic meters and inventions and rhythms and tonalities. One
thinks of Yosef Koumunyakaa, Elizabeth Alexander and Jayne
Cortez, or Thomas Sayers Ellis experimenting with the beat
of go-go music in his poetic meter. So when you think about
all this, the amazing thing is that these young rhetoricians are
237Hip Hop and Youth Culture
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 237


--- PAGE 257 ---
denied the legitimacy of their accomplishment because we
pathologize them on a moral level. The moral qualms of some
black folk have obscured the genius of their own children
who, like jazz artists, have to go foreign before they become
familiar. They have to go global before they find local appeal.
We saw this with the magazines. Before they were put on
black magazines they were put on white magazines. Before
they were featured on BET, they were on MTV. So they had
to go away before they could come home.
What these young folk in hip hop do with the language is
nothing short of remarkable. They don’t simply replicate what
they’ve been given; they stretch it out, break some of it off, re-
constitute it, and prove that literary critic Jacques Derrida is
right, that we “only ever have one language” that is “not at
one with itself.” We have a plurality of voices and rhetoric,
and that there’s “no such thing as a language.” We should
practice linguistic humility — and not rhetorical condescen-
sion — and be mindful of our children’s sheer verbal wizardry
and inventiveness.
Amnesia and anger have teamed up to rob many blacks of
a balanced perspective on our kids. With such balance, we
might justly criticize and appreciate hip hop culture. Without
the moderating influence of historical insight, joined to what
might be called the humility of memory, we end up mirroring
the outright repudiation our kids face across this country. 
MED
238 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 238


--- PAGE 258 ---
chapter 15
Homosexuality 
and Homophobia
Are gays and lesbians who remain faithful to
their partners committing a greater sin than
married heterosexuals who commit adultery?
239
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 239


--- PAGE 259 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 240


--- PAGE 260 ---
Sacred orientation is more important than sexual orientation. 
All of us have to confront the sexism, misogyny, patriarchy,
and homophobia that are so deeply rooted in our culture. I
try to embrace and live by feminist principles, but I’m con-
stantly at war with the deeply ingrained sexism of the culture
that seeps into my brain. The same is true for homophobia.
That’s the challenge I face: to confront and reject male su-
premacy and heterosexist bigotry even as we together con-
front and reject them in the broader society. 
We say that God took on flesh and became a human being
— not an idea, not a cosmic principle, not a theory, not a po-
litical abstraction. That’s why we must treat the human body
with respect. All bodies deserve love and protection — gay
bodies and straight ones, colored bodies and white ones, fe-
male bodies and male ones, foreign bodies and American
ones, poor bodies and rich ones, imprisoned bodies and free
ones. All human bodies are important because they are the
product of God’s imagination meeting up with human cir-
cumstance. 
I happen to believe that gays and lesbians can no more get
up tomorrow morning and be heterosexual than heterosexu-
als can get up tomorrow morning and be gay or lesbian. 
The gay male upsets the social order for the straight male.
Straight males want to celebrate male athletes or religious fig-
ures without fear of being charged with an erotic or sexual
241Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 241


--- PAGE 261 ---
attraction to them. The presence of a gay male throws things
off, and therefore, the straight male argues for erotic segre-
gation, so that rigid lines can be drawn between the kind of
desire that straight and gay males have. You can understand
that there’d be a lot of self-questioning, self-doubting, and
questioning and doubting of others, as a result of homoerotic
desire invading the fortress of straight male desire.
Are gays and lesbians who remain faithful to their partners
committing a greater sin than married heterosexuals who
commit adultery? 
We’ve been having a huge debate in American society about
gay and lesbian marriage, and one thing we could depend
upon was black and brown communities offering extraordi-
nary support to the conservative former president Bush and
his allies in their assault on the liberties and civil rights of
these gay and lesbian people. Bush appealed to conservative
evangelical beliefs about sexuality, and gender, and a narrow,
literal reading of the Bible that appeals to a lot of blacks and
Latinos. That always trips me out because I wonder how peo-
ple who were illiterate less than 150 years ago could be bibli-
cal literalists! After all, the same kind of biblical literalism
used to justify black oppression and enslavement is now used
to justify resistance to gays and lesbians — and many black
folk are in league with them. That’s just tragic, and I say this
as an ordained Baptist preacher rooted deeply in progressive
evangelical territory.
242 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 242


--- PAGE 262 ---
243Homosexuality and Homophobia
Black Christians, who have been despised and oppressed
for much of our existence, should be wary of extending that
oppression to our lesbian sisters and gay brothers.
If we, as heterosexual men, see two lesbians kissing each
other, not only are we not necessarily turned off, we might
even be turned on. Lesbian sexuality can in some cases be tol-
erated, even encouraged, because it can be useful to hetero-
sexual male desire: two for the price of one. We can swing the
women our way to allow us to participate in a ménage à trois!
You can imagine a brother saying, “Oh, I don’t mind if you get
into bed with me with your other girl because she might please
us both.” So there’s great room in the heterosexual world for
situational lesbianism that serves straight male sexuality.
Young black male rappers are obsessed with the terms and
tensions of black manhood, often employing women and gays
as rhetorical foils in exploring what they think is authentic
masculinity.
What’s intriguing to me about the tensions, and therefore,
the connections, between homophobic and homoerotic men
is that they both have stakes in the same body. Straight and
gay men are equally invested in the same testosterone-soaked
athletic contest where men are slapping each others’ behinds
on the basketball court, or patting each others’ booties after
making a touchdown. The same straight and gay males go to
church and leap to their feet and vigorously proclaim, “I love
him! I love him,” speaking about another man — Jesus. The
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 243


--- PAGE 263 ---
same actions can count as heterosexual or homoerotic. Slap-
ping behinds, patting booties, hugging, and hollering about
Jesus — all these activities count for heterosexuals and ho-
mosexuals at the same time, depending on how you interpret
them.
The notorious homophobia of the black church just doesn’t
square with the numerous same-sex unions taking place, from
the pulpit to the pew. One of the most painful scenarios of
black church life is repeated Sunday after Sunday with little
notice or collective outrage. A black minister will preach a
sermon railing against sexual ills, especially homosexuality.
At the close of the sermon, a soloist, who everybody knows is
gay, will rise to perform a moving number, as the preacher ex-
tends an invitation to visitors to join the church. The soloist
is, in effect, being asked to sing, and to sign, his theological
death sentence. His presence at the end of such a sermon
symbolizes a silent endorsement of the preacher’s message.
Ironically, the presence of his gay Christian body at the high-
est moment of worship also negates the preacher’s attempt to
censure his presence, to erase his body, to deny his legitimacy
as a child of God. Too often, the homosexual dimension of
eroticism remains cloaked in taboo or blanketed in theologi-
cal attack. As a result, the black church, an institution that
has been at the heart of black emancipation, refuses to unlock
the oppressive closet for gays and lesbians.
Body piercing may now be seen as the body’s crochet nee-
dle, allowing participants to embroider the skin in striking
patterns of self-disclosure. Of course, as was true with disco
music, body piercing, which thrives in gay and lesbian cul-
244 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 244


--- PAGE 264 ---
tures, represents the “homosexualization” of American ex-
pressive culture while underscoring the exhibitionist impulses
of consumer culture. 
I often joke with my son, “If you’re so interested in protect-
ing yourself from gay men, you’re giving somebody an easy
shot at your butt with your pants sagging so low and your
draws showing.” So even in the most hallowed heterosexual
circles, homoerotic bonding occurs on the regular. That’s
bound to cause a lot of straight guys to worry about their own
sexuality, or to ask if what they’re doing is pure or being con-
taminated with homoerotic sentiment. You can see how easily
that might lead these straight men to question themselves,
and therefore, direct enormous fury at gay males and gay cul-
ture. It’s precisely because the meanings are shared, and sex-
ual meanings slide easily between straight and gay male
culture, that there is such huge hatred for homosexuals
among heterosexual men. 
Perhaps if gay and lesbian church members could come
out of their closets, they could leave behind as well the de-
structive erotic habits that threaten their lives. 
During the 2004 election, many conservative blacks voted
for Bush because of his opposition to gay marriage. This po-
litical red herring diverted critical attention from Bush’s fail-
ure to address the social and economic inequities that still
hamper progress and equality for millions of poor blacks.
This shift among black voters reinforced ugly homophobia.
But it also absorbed precious cultural resources that might
245Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 245


--- PAGE 265 ---
have relieved the suffering of the black poor instead of in-
creasing the suffering of gay, lesbian, transgender, and bisex-
ual brothers and sisters. The greater tragedy is that such
efforts were sparked by conservative figures that have proved
hostile to the interests of black folk.
As they say in Christian circles, God didn’t make any junk,
and that means that whomever God has made, whether ho-
mosexual or heterosexual, is a good person.
Homoerotic moments show up in hip hop in at least a cou-
ple of ways. First, when hip hop artists speak about M.O.B.
— “money over bitches” — they are emphasizing the crass re-
lation between commerce and misogyny. But there’s another
element to M.O.B. as well: that of placing one’s “homies”
above women, because men make money with men — or take
money from them. In any case, the male relation becomes a
fetish in hip hop circles: hanging with “my boys,” kicking it
with “my crew,” hustling with “my mens and them,” and dying
for “my niggas.” There is an unapologetic intensity of devo-
tion that surely evokes homoerotic union at some level. Sec-
ond, there is great exaggeration or even mythology about
sexual conquests performed in the presence of one or more
participating men. “I hit it, then my boy hit it,” some young
men brag, while others boast of multiple men having consen-
sual sex with a woman. One assumes that males expose their
sexual organs in such conquests — especially as they mimic
the sexual gestures adapted from the pornographic films that
are increasingly popular in certain hip hop circles. This is
surely a heated and heady moment of homoerotic bonding.
246 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 246


--- PAGE 266 ---
There is an aggressive, and progressive, gay, lesbian, bisex-
ual, transgender presence in black America that gains the po-
litical meaning of their identity by fighting both racism in gay
communities and homophobia in black life. They challenge
the monolithic conception of black identity while forging sol-
idarity in the fight against the terrors of race and class. In the
past, this group included James Baldwin, and more recently,
the late Audre Lorde, and today it includes Barbara Smith,
Randall Kenan, E. Lynn Harris, Keith Boykin and Meshell
Ndegeocello.
The obsession in black culture with the “positive” versus
the “negative” can sometimes be a problem. There’s bitter dis-
agreement about whether gay or lesbian people have a right-
ful spot at the table of black identity. And for people who are
in black churches, it’s negative to talk about homosexuality
and lesbianism. And yet those are our brothers and sisters.
When black folk say “our agenda,” what agenda is that?
You see, black America is now so split and fractured along
multiple axes. Race is a unifying fiction that still resonates in
black communities and gives unity to the experiences of many
individuals. But then, when you start breaking it down in sub-
sections and subcategories and so on, when you talking about
“we,” black people say, “We down for unity” — until we start
talkin’ bout the gay folk. “Well, we got to purify them ’cause
the Bible say they doin’ wrong.” Already you got a problem.
Because no longer is it a unified “we”; it’s a fractured “we.”
It’s “we” with an asterisk — everybody except the gays and les-
bians, transgenders, and bisexuals.
247Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 247


--- PAGE 267 ---
Given the history of American society in its bigotry toward
gays and lesbians, we must acknowledge that we live in a het-
erosexist culture that privileges the viewpoints of people who
happen to be “normal.” Normal is defined as those of us who
are heterosexual. Therefore, there is a particular kind of big-
otry that is directed toward people who are gay and lesbian.
It is sometimes a subspecies — that is the hatred of gays — of
attempted murder and we have to have laws that deal with
that.
There’s no question that George W. Bush was prosecuting
war on all fronts, so that cultural conflict became the war on
terror by other means. What I mean, more specifically, is that
all of this brouhaha occasioned by civil marriages versus gay
marriages, for example, just served to ratchet up an atmos-
phere of paranoia which seemed to say: “You had better watch
out because the terrorist that lurks outside is also the kind of
cultural terrorist that looms large domestically. Those who
support a gay or lesbian living next door to them are the same
people who were telling this country to be critical of the Bush
administration; they want to reject your evangelical Christian-
ity or your conservative Judaism. They’re now assaulting you.”
So I think there was a concerted ideological effort to create an
environment of paranoia around cultural values and to link
that cultural fear to political fear. That kind of ideological il-
lusion is brilliant, but I think it’s ultimately perverted.
Critics who seek to proof-text their opposition to homosex-
uality often neglect to interpret such biblical passages in their
larger theological meaning. For instance, the story of Sodom
and Gomorrah is more about understanding the necessity for
248 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 248


--- PAGE 268 ---
hospitality to strangers than it is about homosexual perver-
sion.
The terror to which lesbians, gays, bisexual, and transgen-
der citizens are vulnerable is often overlooked or scoffed at
by most of us who fall outside their ranks. The religious jus-
tification for the social stigma of homosexuality — and in
some cases, for the violence expressed toward gay and lesbian
people — is taken for granted in many quarters of the culture.
To be sure, many will claim that there is hardly a justifiable
comparison between what happened on 9/11 and the oppres-
sion faced by racial, gender, and sexual minorities. And yet
the same bigotry, and the violence it encourages, lay at the
base of what we witnessed on 9/11 and the experience of the
victims of racism, sexism, and homophobia. At its best, reli-
gion provides theological support for the most vulnerable
members of our culture and argues against the violence done
in God’s name to all victims of terror, whether their cause is
given global recognition or buried on the back pages of his-
tory. In fact, for those who suffer the latter fate, it is even more
reason to link their oppression to a suffering we readily un-
derstand and acknowledge, and with which we sometimes
empathize. In so doing, we meet the nearly universal moral
criteria of all religious faiths: to remember victims of all ter-
rors and to seek justice on their behalf, even if the national
mood or country’s self-image are challenged by our action.
There’s no homosexual exemption to racial self-hatred. In
fact, for the black gay or lesbian, there is greater danger: with
the black self and the gay self in tandem, there are more selves
to despise, resent, even hate.
249Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 249


--- PAGE 269 ---
Despite his Hebrew Pentecostal pedigree, with its rigidly
repressed views of sexuality, Marvin Gaye’s father, Rev. Gay,
was a flamboyant and effeminate man. He liked to dress in
women’s clothing and makeup. Rev. Gay’s sexual ambivalence
and “male femaling” — males who adopt female identities in
various ways and contexts with varying results — showed in
his overtly feminine speech and body language. Marvin’s
mother says that Rev. Gay preferred soft clothing. He also
liked to dress in her panties, shoes, gowns, and nylon hose.
Rev. Gay also favored colorful silk blouses and occasionally
straight-hair wigs. Rev. Gay would sometimes put waves in
his hair. At other times he let it grow long and curled it under.
Marvin often glimpsed Rev. Gay in his “male femaled” form.
Throughout Marvin’s ghetto neighborhood, Rev. Gay was re-
ferred to as “sissy.” Questions arose about Rev. Gay’s sexuality:
was he homosexual, bisexual or just weird? Neither Marvin
nor his mother knew for certain. But Rev. Gay loved beautiful
women with large buttocks and breasts. He is rumored to
have had several girlfriends. He exploited his pastoral position
to draw “sisters” at church to his bed.
The great R&B artist Leon Ware thinks that only the pro-
foundly insecure have to wage war to defend their religious
beliefs. Likewise, he thinks the same insecurity haunts het-
erosexual men who are unnerved by gay men. For Ware, the
bottom line is mutual respect and a sense of love that flows
from our sensual recognition of the other.
250 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 250


--- PAGE 270 ---
Unfortunately, differences within black life have been
viewed by many leaders and intellectuals as signs of our sur-
render to the corrupting influence of the white world. On this
view, homosexuality is for white folk, a perversion they in-
vented because they had too much leisure time gained in pil-
laging and plundering non-white peoples. Not only is being a
“fag” or a “dyke” downright unnatural, such logic goes, but it
misrepresents sexual traditions of black American society,
and before that, African culture. To believe that, you’ve got to
overlook the brilliant contributions and sexual habits of Alain
Locke and James Baldwin, or Bessie Smith and Audre Lorde.
The differences that these differences make within black cul-
ture are too important to simply be dismissed.
The force of class, the role of gender, and the rise of gay
sexuality to prominence in our culture cautions against seeing
race as the only lodestar of identity. These mixtures also chal-
lenge simple analyses of oppression that fail to grasp the cre-
olized character of American identity. 
I am wholly sympathetic to sharp criticism of gangsta rap’s
sexism and homophobia, though most of the critics of hip
hop’s bitterness toward women have made little of the latter
plague. “Fags” and “dykes” are prominent in the genre’s vo-
cabulary of rage. Critics’ failure to make this an issue only re-
inforces the inferior, invisible status of gay men and lesbians
in mainstream and black life. Homophobia is a vicious emo-
tion and practice that links mainstream black institutions to
the vulgar expressions of gangsta rap. There seems to be an
implicit agreement between gangsta rappers and political
251Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 251


--- PAGE 271 ---
elites that gays, lesbians, and bisexuals basically deserve what
they get.
One of the most vicious effects of the closet is that some of
the loudest protesters against gays and lesbians in the church
are secretly homosexual. In fact, many, many preachers who
rail against homosexuality are themselves gay. Much like the
anti-Semitic Jew, the homophobic gay or lesbian Christian se-
cures his or her legitimacy in the church by denouncing the
group of which he or she is a member, in this case an almost
universally despised sexual identity. On the surface, such an
act of self-hatred is easy. But it comes at a high cost. Homo-
phobic rituals of self-hatred alienate the gay or lesbian be-
liever from his or her body in an ugly version of erotic
Cartesianism: splitting the religious mind from the homosex-
ual body as a condition of Christian identity. This erotic Carte-
sianism is encouraged when Christians mindlessly repeat
about gays and lesbians, “we love the sinner but we hate the
sin.” A rough translation is “we love you but we hate what you
do.” Well, that mantra worked with racists: we could despise
what racist whites did while refusing to despise white folk
themselves, or whiteness per se. But with gay and lesbian
identity, to hate what they do is to hate who they are. Gays
and lesbians are how they have sex. I’m certainly not reducing
gay or lesbian identity to sexual acts. I’m simply suggesting
that the sign of homosexual difference, and hence the basis
of their social identification, is tied to the role of the sex act,
or the desire for it, in their lives.
The coming-out process is often especially volatile: it in-
volves the painful irony of self-identification with the very sex-
252 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 252


--- PAGE 272 ---
ual identity that has been culturally demonized. That’s why
there’s so much self-hatred among gays and lesbians.
One of the most crucial issues a liberating interpretation
of the Bible can address is the culture of dishonesty that
smothers homosexuals. Gays and lesbians often have had to
deny to themselves they were homosexual. They denied their
sexuality to others who might have perceived it even before
they did, a perception that might have caused them great dis-
comfort. They often have had to stay in a theological closet,
and to some degree, a biological closet, because they didn’t
want to suffer the consequences of coming out. The culture
of deceit imposed on gays and lesbians has to be relieved by
the church’s open affirmation of their legitimacy, so that they
don’t have a distorted consciousness and a bruised conscience
about their own sexuality. In the final analysis, we are liber-
ated into self-acceptance by a loving and forgiving God.
I’m not suggesting that white gays and lesbians cannot be
white supremacists, or that they cannot derive benefits, pleas-
ures, and perks from white skin privilege. In fact, their white
supremacist fantasies can be projected onto black bodies. For
instance, the well-endowed black male can be ravenously
sought by gay white men who possess stereotypical views of
black sexuality, aping the behavior of some white straight
communities. Still, I must add, without generalizing them,
that white gays and lesbians seem more aware as a group of
the complex racial dynamics of personal and social relations
than their straight counterparts. That’s just an informal ob-
servation about how one minority is sometimes sensitive to
the plight of another minority — although we know the
253Homosexuality and Homophobia
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 253


--- PAGE 273 ---
opposite is also true, since there’s plenty of ignorance and big-
otry to go around in straight black communities and in gay
and lesbian white communities.
We don’t have to stop being black to be saved. We don’t
have to stop being women to be saved. We don’t have to stop
being poor to be saved. And we don’t have to stop being gay
or lesbian to be saved.
MED
254 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 254


--- PAGE 274 ---
chapter 16
Poverty and Class
We should love the poor and hate poverty.
255
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 255


--- PAGE 275 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 256


--- PAGE 276 ---
God came to earth to die as one of the poor and outcast. 
The poor are, in effect, socially dead persons. They suffer
social alienation: they lack standing, status, and protection;
they are mercilessly flogged in the press, demonized by fellow
citizens, made a football by politicians, viciously criticized by
public policy makers, and assaulted by scholars and intellec-
tuals. The stigma the poor carry bans them from the pre-
sumption of political innocence, of being good citizens; they
carry the weight of social pariah. They walk in the door with
a capital “P” on their foreheads.
People who give money to the poor deserve praise; people
who give their lives to the poor deserve honor.
Whether black folk have set foot in the Promised Land, or
got lost in the wilderness, depends on whom you ask and
what you see. Quarters of black America have boomed into
the upper reaches of prosperity. The wealthiest black folk, and
the merely rich, have fared very well, more annoyed than
trumped by racial beliefs and barriers. Due in large part to af-
firmative action, the upper-middle classes continue to rise,
but their arc of triumph sometimes dead-ends in ceilings low-
ered on their professional ambitions, in particular for black
women. The lower-middle and middle-middle classes are
struggling but, to varying degrees, maintaining. The lower
classes, meanwhile, are suffering greatly. The working poor
are barely surviving, while the black impoverished — vari-
ously called the permanently poor, the ghetto poor, the under-
class, or the “outer class” because they are banished to the
257Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 257


--- PAGE 277 ---
outskirts of prosperity and respect — are struggling against
the odds to eek out a living.
We should love the poor and hate poverty.
We can abide the ugly presence of poverty so long as it
doesn’t interrupt the natural flow of things, doesn’t rudely im-
pinge on our daily lives or awareness. As long as poverty is a
latent reality, a solemn social fact suppressed from promi-
nence on our moral compass, we can find our bearings with-
out fretting too much about its awkward persistence. 
In America we can be affluent in any language. 
The black poor have been made a political piñata: public
policy makers, politicians, and cultural critics of varying
stripes blindfold themselves to the dignity and humanity of
the poor to strike at them with vicious stereotypes, and often
hardened hearts, savoring from their broken images the sweet
but soulless satisfaction of defeating the already defeated.
Although the black middle class has boomed, and is a more
sophisticated and complex population than suggested by E.
Franklin Frazier’s portrait of paranoia and insecurity, it lacks
the resources to pull the vast majority of blacks into its
precincts of privilege.
258 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 258


--- PAGE 278 ---
When my pregnant wife, Terrie, and I were kicked out of
our apartment on Christmas Day, things got far worse before
they got better. We found a vacant flat to rent, but it hardly
felt like home — the man with whom we shared the bathroom
pulled a pistol on me. Squirrels regularly scurried in and out
of a hole in the wall of our unit. We were often too poor to eat
every day, although occasionally a friend from church would
leave groceries on our steps. Terrie eventually had to give up
her job as a waitress when she started to show — she had one
of those jobs where the waitresses wore hot pants and tiny
tops — and I was eventually fired from my clerk’s job at
Chrysler that my wife’s uncle helped me to secure (an unjust
firing, I might add, as I’ll never forget my boss’s words, “It had
to be somebody’s ass, and I’d rather it be yours than mine.”)
We were forced to live on welfare, since I lost my job a little
more than a month before my son was born. We got food
stamps and government medical assistance to pay the costs
of delivering our baby. My wife was enrolled in W.I.C.
(Women, Infants and Children), and I stood many a day in
those long lines and collected packets of powdered milk and
artificial eggs — just as I stood in line at the welfare office,
where the civil servants were often rude and loud, making the
experience that much more degrading. 
If racism is destroyed tomorrow, many blacks and Latinos
who are poor will still be poor.
While others made war on the poor, Martin Luther King
made war on what made them poor. He moved in 1966 into a
Chicago slum for several months to dramatize the plight of
the poor, and to put flesh to the spirit of nonviolent resistance
259Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 259


--- PAGE 279 ---
to “the violence of poverty.” At the urging of activist Marian
Wright Edelman, King began the Poor People’s Campaign to
bring national attention to the poor of all races. He joined
with a coalition of activists across the racial and ethnic spec-
trum to fight poverty in a planned march on Washington,
D.C., in April of 1968. It was the first stage of a massive, ag-
gressively nonviolent movement that called on poor people
and their allies to take up residence in the nation’s capital for
months and, if necessary, to shut down traffic. At the invita-
tion of nonviolent apostle and activist James Lawson, King
journeyed to Memphis to march and protest the mistreatment
of poor sanitation workers on strike for better wages and just
treatment. Before he was murdered, King planned to disobey
a court injunction against marching to dramatize these poor
black workers’ plight.
We’re still in the closet about class in America.
By 1993 opportunity had blossomed but so had despon-
dency. The black upper class soared, the middle class rose,
then dipped, and the black lower class sunk so low that its
children were killing each other over scraps of imagined noth-
ingness. Never before had America seen such a chasm be-
tween rich and poor, a disparity that was amplified in the
blight of inner-city blacks as they were forced to watch the ex-
plosive wealth of their upper-crust brethren fail to drop the
crumbs of prosperity down from their banquet tables.
It was the policies put in place by President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt which first lifted many blacks out of poverty by cre-
260 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 260


--- PAGE 280 ---
ating programs that would today be labeled “workfare.” And
though these programs were not specifically designed with
blacks in mind, it would be the poorest Americans who bene-
fited most — and most of the poorest were black. The New
Deal brought relief to the rural poor and funneled money into
communities to create jobs, not handouts. Ironically, it would
also be some of these same programs that would disenfran-
chise the already working poor, in particular sharecroppers,
tenants, and farm laborers, none of whom were provided for
in the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933. This particular
piece of legislation would ultimately lay the groundwork for
the kinds of farm subsidies that would eventually undermine
the small family farm and drive even more poor rural blacks
into urban environments in search of  unskilled factory jobs.
And it would be in the urban environment, where black par-
ents were working numerous low- paying shifts to keep their
small households afloat, that largely unchecked black youths
would eventually turn to and on each other. 
A bitter civil war waged from the inside bloodies black
America. Among the greatest casualties are typically the de-
fenseless poor. They are further disgraced by the neglect, or
indifference, of their more fortunate kin. Well-positioned crit-
ics in the ruling black class snipe at the poor at the same time
as they offer amnesty to their mainstream enemies. When
staunchly conservative social critics witness the black fortu-
nate lambasting their poorer brothers and sisters, it offers in-
surance against the charge of racial insensitivity. After all, if
well-heeled blacks are harshly judging them, how can whites
who make similar comments be accused of indifference to the
black poor? The bitter criticisms of the black elite also em-
bolden radical conservatives to take similarly hard-line
261Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 261


--- PAGE 281 ---
stances that oppose social and political help for the most vul-
nerable. And the poor are wounded by friendly fire; even the
poor learn to loathe themselves and attack other poor people.
The black working class has been literally squeezed out of
its living spaces by gentrification in the inner city, where
structures are overtaken by individuals and businesses with
the means to rehabilitate marginal housing.
The New Deal showed blacks that they could have a place
at the table, even as that table was being burned along with
their churches. By funneling some poor blacks into work and
others into relief situations, Roosevelt’s brilliant solution to
the Depression created a definable schism within black cul-
ture whose repercussions are felt to this day.
The gulf in black and white incomes is the monetary
residue of inequality; it shows just how stubborn and system-
atic has been the denial of literal and symbolic capital to black
kin. Greater education significantly boosts the odds of black
folk getting bigger paychecks and more job security. For the
working poor, that security all but vanishes into a haze of
piecemeal jobs, part-time work, no benefits, sporadic re-
wards, and depressed wages — and hence, depressing
prospects. The desire to work is large, the absence of sustain-
ing work even larger.
The few resources that exist barely make it to the next black
generation. The subprime mortgage crisis will cost black folk
262 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 262


--- PAGE 282 ---
between $71 billion and $122 billion, the greatest loss of black
wealth in history. Only 17.2 percent of whites have high cost
loans; for blacks, the number is an astonishing 54.7 percent.
The parental lift up the ladder of status is missing several
rungs — gaps that accumulate as the arithmetic of negative
calculation of all the goods and perks that go missing for
black families, but which more well-positioned families take
for granted. It is the tendency to see as natural what has been
gained at someone else’s expense — one’s parents or grand-
parents, or other sources of both rightful and unjust inheri-
tance — that often turns the beneficiaries of unearned
privilege so harshly against the unfortunate.
Black folk from lower economic groups are less likely to
reach old age than members of other racial and ethnic groups,
and those from higher income brackets.
Rich black folk are not the same as poor black folk. We are
positioned differently in American culture, with different re-
sources to combat our suffering. We even have different re-
sources to be able to name what ails us.
Unspoken, and therefore, unresolved racial conflicts invite
bad eating habits and obesity, which are in turn enabled by a
shrewdly specific marketing agenda. What could possibly be
right about a Styrofoam bowl filled with bits of fried chicken,
mashed potatoes, corn, and cheese, smothered in gravy and
held out in black hands to black customers? At 740 delicious
calories (half of those from the fat content of the meal) and
2,350 milligrams of sodium — 98 percent of the recommended
263Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 263


--- PAGE 283 ---
daily allowance — is it any wonder that poor people, who can
more easily afford this conveniently packaged and priced food
than fresh meats and vegetables, are steadily becoming the
most obese among us?
We are perhaps the only country in the world where the
rich get thinner and the poor get fatter.
The lot of millions of poor folk is to endure the gulf be-
tween hope and heartbreak.
The life of poor black folk is caught between crime and
punishment. Most critics argue that those of us who beg for
rationality and clarity, and for consistency and fairness, in the
criminal justice system are seeking amnesty for all black crim-
inals, or an escape of responsibility for misbehavior. Neither
is true. Criminals should be held accountable for their crimes.
The practice of murder to resolve conflicts has ravaged too
many poor communities and must be opposed with every bit
of our strength. We must preach against it, legislate against
it, and march against it; but we must also demand an end to
the economic and social ills that make murder a convenient
tool to express aggression and secure goods in a perverted
moral outlook — largely at the expense of other poor people. 
The attempt to make poor blacks better has recently made
some rich blacks bitter.
264 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 264


--- PAGE 284 ---
Homicide is often the payoff for impoverished conditions;
it is the unsubtle and undisciplined hatred of the other-who-
is-like-me that blooms in the psyches of those who hate them-
selves and their plight even more.
During the Reagan era, economic suffering drove poor
black and brown youth to create something important out of
the fragments of culture. It was during this time that re-
sources were sparse, especially in cash-poor inner-city schools
which endured cruel budget cuts that depleted arts programs
and denied poor children access to instruments and broad
musical literacy. So when older folk, especially musicians,
complain that young folk don’t play instruments, they must
realize that there’s hardly support for young folk learning to
play the saxophone, or the clarinet, or the trumpet, or the
drums, because those are aesthetic artifacts of a bygone mu-
sical era when the opportunity to deepen one’s musical vo-
cabulary was far greater. But economic deprivation forced
poor black and brown kids into greater strategies of survival
and aesthetic creativity through rap music, graffiti, and break
dancing.
There’s a vibrant tradition of artists — whether in the Black
Arts Movement, or in the Harlem Renaissance before it with
figures like Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston — who
helped us become more aware of, and to struggle with, the
problems of the “folk” and of the poor. Their art helped black
folk to identify, and to cope with, the social misery of African
American people.
265Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 265


--- PAGE 285 ---
The burden of trying to feed mouths, and a ravenous ap-
petite for somebodyness, can eat one’s soul into depression
and suicide.
With crack’s rise, poor black and Latino communities were
besieged by drug gangs, increased crime, and police surveil-
lance and crackdowns. Besides the fact that poor black and
brown communities were flooded with a cheap but lethally
addictive form of cocaine, there was the problem of easy ac-
cess to automatic weapons. Thus, the crack epidemic fostered
the rise of violent figures that hijacked black urban America
and brought considerable personal terror and domestic
trauma in their wake. It also made poor black folk slaves to
high-risk diversionary pleasure as a means of psychic survival,
discouraging them from directly confronting the social dislo-
cation, and the lethargy and listlessness, which the crack epi-
demic only made worse.
Politics bleed beyond narrow definitions, and thus, when
rappers argue over scarce resources for their poor brothers
and sisters, and question why poor black folk don’t share in
the economic and social bounty of mainstream America, they
are behaving politically.
After I got Terrie pregnant at eighteen and married her, and
after our son Mike was born, Daddy and I grew much closer.
In fact, he’d often cook for me and Terrie because we were so
poor at times that we didn’t eat every day. In fact, at times,
we didn’t eat for two or three days in a row.
266 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 266


--- PAGE 286 ---
It’s not as if it was news to most folk that poverty exists in
the United States. Still, there was no shortage of eureka mo-
ments glistening with discovery and surprise in the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina. Poverty’s grinding malevolence is fed
in part by social choices and public policy decisions that di-
rectly impact how many people are poor and how long they
remain that way. To acknowledge that is to own up to our role
in the misery of the poor — be it the politicians we vote for
who cut programs aimed at helping the economically vulner-
able; the story of bootstrap individualism we tell while ignor-
ing the considerable benefits we’ve received as we bitterly
complain of the few breaks the poor might get; the religious
idea we cling to that the poor are poor because they aren’t
hungry enough for prosperity; and the resentment of the al-
leged pathology of poor blacks, fueled more by stereotypes
than empirical support, which gives us license to dismiss or
demonize them.
Concentrated poverty — where folk live in poor neighbor-
hoods, attend poor schools, and have poor-paying jobs that
reflect and reinforce a distressing pattern of rigid segregation
— is the product of decades of public policies and political
measures. For instance, the federal government’s decision to
concentrate public housing in segregated inner-city neighbor-
hoods fueled metropolitan expansion. It also cut the poor off
from decent housing and educational and economic oppor-
tunities by keeping affordable housing for poor minorities out
of surrounding suburbs. The effects of concentrated poverty
have been amply documented: reduced private-sector invest-
ment and local job opportunities; higher prices for the poor
in inner-city businesses; increased levels of crime; negative
consequences on the mental and physical health of the poor;
267Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 267


--- PAGE 287 ---
and the spatial dislocation of the poor spurred by the “black
track” of middle-class households to the suburbs.
Concentrated poverty does more than undermine academic
success and good health; since there is a strong relationship
between education and employment, and quality of life, it
keeps the poor from better paying jobs that might interrupt a
vicious cycle of poverty.
Katrina’s violent winds and killing waters have swept into
the mainstream a stark realization: the poor had been aban-
doned by society and its institutions, and sometimes by their
well-off brothers and sisters, long before the storm.
Lots of well-to-do black folk are doing a lot to help, but too
many of us have left the black poor stranded on islands of so-
cial isolation and class alienation.
What made Kanye West’s defense of the black poor so ad-
mirable is that it suggested the willingness of a rich black
celebrity to sacrifice his reputation, perhaps even his liveli-
hood, and surely his comfort, to speak out on behalf of his
less-fortunate brothers and sisters.
Some of the black aristocracy in the early twentieth century
used newspapers and pulpits to whip the black poor into
order, to shame them, if they could, into acting right, which
often meant acting white. 
268 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 268


--- PAGE 288 ---
Our being surprised, and disgusted, by the poverty that Ka-
trina revealed is a way of remaining deliberately naïve about
the poor while dodging the responsibility that knowledge of
their lives might bring. We remain ignorant of their circum-
stances to avoid the indictment of our consciences. When a
disaster like Katrina strikes — a natural disaster not caused
by human failure — it frees us to be aware of, and angered
by, the catastrophe. After all, it doesn’t directly implicate us;
it was an act of God. Even when human hands get involved,
our fingerprints are nowhere to be found. We’re not respon-
sible for the poor and black being left behind; the local, state,
or federal government is at fault. We are thus able to decry
the plight of the poor while assuring ourselves that we had
nothing to do with it. We can even take special delight in lash-
ing out at the source of their suffering — as long as it’s not
us. We are fine as long as we place time limits on the origins
of the poor’s plight — their poverty dates from the moments
we all spied it on television after the storm, but not the years
before when we all looked the other way. Thus we fail to con-
front our role in their long-term suffering. By being outraged,
we appear compassionate. But we continue to ignore the true
roots of their condition, roots that branch into our worlds and
are nourished on our political and religious beliefs.
Until we radically alter our educational system, and solve
the problems of poverty and social deprivation, our children
will continue to spiral down stairwells of suffering and op-
pression.
269Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 269


--- PAGE 289 ---
As a group, blacks are only slightly less likely to single out
individualistic factors in the cause of poverty than whites, but
at the same time, blacks embrace structural explanations
much more forcefully. Much more than whites, who favor in-
dividualist explanations in greater numbers, blacks embrace
both explanations of poverty. This intriguing set of beliefs
among blacks challenges flat either/or thinking, and may sug-
gest why black views on the causes of poverty are more com-
plex than usually allowed for. It is clear from social science
research that many black folk are capable of sustaining two
apparently contradictory views: recognizing that individual
responsibility for personal destiny is enormously important
to the culture, while at the same time acknowledging the
structural barriers that prevent both social justice and self-
 realization.
The conflicts among northern blacks of different classes in
the early twentieth century were nearly as bruising as those
between the races, blasting the delusion that, before segrega-
tion’s demise, black folk of every station were knit together in
harmony.
The black poor, like most black people, have a more sophis-
ticated and perhaps more complex understanding than we
might imagine about how they have come to be poor and
what they must do about it. Many black poor share some of
the same values that motivate many in the mainstream —
hard work, when they can get it; the desire for their children
to prosper; the dream of upward mobility; and the soulful em-
brace of decent living.
270 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 270


--- PAGE 290 ---
Most successful black folk appear to recognize that while
they have worked hard, applied themselves diligently, and
taken advantage of every opportunity to enhance their God-
given talents, that other black folk may not be as fortunate as
they are in realizing their educational and employment aspi-
rations. This sensitivity to less fortunate members of the race
counteracts the beliefs of those who lean far too heavily on
individual responsibility to explain social status. Since the
bulk of blacks embrace structural explanations for poverty
while leaving room for personal agency — and while the black
poor themselves often seek to exercise individual responsibil-
ity in the midst of incredibly difficult circumstances — it
stands to reason that fortunate blacks have a responsibility to
acknowledge that complexity in defending the most vulnera-
ble of the race. This holds even for conservative members of
the race. Although new-fangled black neoconservatives have
often forgotten this lesson, black conservatives from the past
were more willing to acknowledge structural barriers while
emphasizing personal initiative.
The need for loud lectures about hard work and personal
initiative is vastly overplayed, more an instance of the lecturer
needing to prove he is willing to take the poor to the wood-
shed than a case of the poor forgetting to do everything they
can to escape poverty.
To adapt an old saying in black America in explaining the
relative impact of social forces, if well-to-do-blacks have a
cold, then poor blacks surely have pneumonia.
271Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 271


--- PAGE 291 ---
To paraphrase Dorothy Day, the great Catholic social ac-
tivist who spent her life working with and loving the poor, but
not pitying them, we must work toward a world in which it is
easier for the poor to behave decently.
Exercising personal responsibility cannot prevent the
postindustrial decline in major northeastern cities, nor can it
fix the crumbling educational infrastructure that continues
to keep the poor, well, poor. Being personally responsible can’t
stop job flight, structural shifts in the political economy, the
increasing technological monopoly of work, downsizing, or
outsourcing, problems that middle-class folk, who are pre-
sumed to be more personally responsible than the poor, face
in abundance these days.
Even if they gave money to help hurricane survivors, a lot
of rich people back East felt that the poor in New Orleans got
that way because they didn’t work hard enough not to be poor.
But when the bottom fell out of Wall Street in 2008, when
greed and horrible investment decisions caused huge finan-
cial harm to markets and to millions of investors, they got an
up-close look at how easily, and unexpectedly, your economic
life can be ruined. A lot of folk lost their shirts because of Wall
Street bankers. There wasn’t much talk about personal re-
sponsibility for those who were affected; there was instead a
great deal of sympathy for their plight, unlike the sometimes
mean-spirited attacks on poor blacks and Latinos who lost
their houses in the subprime mortgage scandal. Let’s be real:
Wall Street couldn’t understand the poor of the Delta until
devastation dropped on New York’s financial district out of
nowhere. They couldn’t understand the language of natural
272 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 272


--- PAGE 292 ---
disaster, so it got translated into the grammar of economic
devastation. That was their Hurricane Katrina!
I’m glad when my conservative brothers and sisters become
concerned with the class issue and economic inequality. I’m
all down for the class issue. But don’t say class or race; say
class and race. Let’s yoke them together and then begin to do
a deep thing: if we get poor white folk who have been ex-
cluded from American society to join with African Americans
and Latinos and Native Americans — we can turn this mother
out!
A date with a prison cell is greatly increased for poor folk
stuck in poor schools.
Too often, poor people don’t have the opportunity to exer-
cise responsibility. Let me give you an example. I’m here in
New Orleans, where I’ve been since last Friday, arguing,
speaking, and participating in events to mark the one-year an-
niversary of Hurricane Katrina. And I’ve taken tours of the
Lower Ninth Ward, looking at home after home. I see young
black people and working black people saying, “Look, we have
trucks out here. We want to go out and remove cars. They bid
out the jobs, they prevent us on the local level from exercising
our autonomy much less our responsibility.” The government
gave $100 million no-bid contracts to big corporations like
Halliburton and Bechtel. So those who want to exercise per-
sonal responsibility are prevented by structural features like
no-bid contracts, factors that prevent them from maximizing
their potential. We will never be able to solve the problems of
273Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 273


--- PAGE 293 ---
poverty unless we engage in less demonizing and stigmatizing
of the poor, and begin focusing on the structural features —
as well as the personal habits and dispositions that may per-
petuate self-destructive behavior.
Even in the concentrated poverty of New Orleans, white
brothers and sisters who are living in poverty don’t live in the
same kind of concentrated poverty that African American
brothers and sisters live in. Which means, then, that there are
some effects of poverty that are exacerbatory — that make it
harsher for African American people who live under the os-
tensibly same conditions that white brothers and sisters live
under.
There has been a shift, a subtle but very powerful one, from
a war on poverty to the war on the poor. And the war on the
poor that’s being prosecuted, I think, is itself so deeply and
fundamentally flawed that unless we withdraw from it, we
will only perpetuate the devastation for the poor. Unless we’re
willing to say about the responsibility-versus-structural fac-
tors debate: “Hey, it’s both/and, not either/or,” we’re not going
to have a very enlightened conversation about poverty.
Poverty is the reason that in black neighborhoods some
billboards promote higher-nicotine cigarettes, or that liquor
ads are in poor black communities but not in rich white com-
munities — or black ones, for that matter. It’s why wealthier
white and black kids come in from suburbia to try to get their
“drink on” by going to the local liquor stores which dot the
landscape of our communities like churches do. So it’s about
274 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 274


--- PAGE 294 ---
having a lack of political power to keep eyesores out of your
community, or zoning laws that allow broken-down edifices
and horrible houses to occupy your community. And then it’s
the downsizing and outsourcing and the capital flight, and
the loss of nearly eight million jobs in the manufacturing in-
dustry. It’s the exploitation of indigenous workers in foreign
lands who will work far beneath a minimum wage as corpo-
rations flee the cities of our country in search of cheap labor
and tax breaks on foreign soil — and you don’t have a job. So
when you put all that stuff together, you have a much different
picture of poverty and the poor.
When you’re poor, you often can’t afford a washing ma-
chine. So you try to go to the Laundromat to get your clothes
clean. But some people can’t even afford the transportation
cost to get to the Laundromat, so they get these rent-to-buy
machines that are so costly. And yet, they’re not cost effective.
But poor people are caught betwixt and between. They don’t
often have a ride to the grocery store, so they have to ride with
somebody else by giving them money. They can’t take public
transportation to take care of their basic needs. The predica-
ment of poor people makes them so vulnerable — they’re buf-
feted by all these economic and social forces.
Of course, personal responsibility is critical; good behavior
is its own reward, because it gives you a sense of doing the
right thing in the world. And most poor people we know be-
have right. But good behavior will not address all of the other
factors that keep people poor, and that make them poor to
begin with.
275Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 275


--- PAGE 295 ---
Working poor people often rise up early every day and often
work more than forty hours a week, and yet barely, if ever,
make it above the poverty level.
The black poor consists of the desperately unemployed and
underemployed, those trapped in underground economies,
and those working poor folk who slave in menial jobs at the
edge of the economy. The black poor is composed of single
mothers on welfare, single working mothers and fathers, poor
fathers, married poor and working folk, the incarcerated, and
a battalion of impoverished children.
There were virtues to the old southern geographies that for-
merly dominated black life. In the South, even if they were
poor, black folk had open spaces in fields, but in the North,
their enhanced economic status confined them in tenements
that stretched upward several stories and choked the land-
scapes and skylines of ghettoes and slums.
The black ghetto working class, the working poor, and the
permanently poor have always been more complex, and more
resilient, than they have ever been given credit for.
Conservatives like Charles Murray contend that if we could
somehow improve poor black women’s initiative, their will to
upward mobility, we could solve the problem of a congenital
welfare syndrome. Most conservative analyses of welfare de-
pendency and initiative are notoriously one-sided, neglecting
the structural factors that prevent black women from flour-
276 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 276


--- PAGE 296 ---
ishing. Initiative often depends on the amount of reward one
receives for it. One’s motivation to continually seek employ-
ment will not be high when there is little prospect of finding
it. To help explain initiative, we must investigate the social
causes behind the fragile place of poor black women in the
economy; understand the sexist employment force, in which
women continue to earn only seventy percent of what men
make for comparable work; and measure the dominance of
the service industry over manufacturing, which has eroded
the wage base of poor black women, compromising their abil-
ity to support their families. Further, we must admit that a lot
of female labor is chronically casual and acknowledge the dis-
incentive of regulations that bar women from supplementing
their welfare incomes with work. All of this cautions against
simpleminded workfare solutions that tie welfare benefits to
employment.
The shift of the labor base of black males from high-wage,
low-skill jobs to scarcer service employment; the expanding
technical monopoly of information services; the part-timing
of American labor (leaving workers without employee bene-
fits); and the wrenching of the U.S. economy by crises in
global capitalism all bode ill for black males. These changes,
coupled with cycles of persistent poverty, the gentrification of
inner-city living space, the juvenilization of crime, and the de-
moralization of poor blacks through cultural stereotypes of
widespread loss of initiative, only compound the anguish of
an already untenable situation for black males.
The unfortunate part of the ghetto experience, of course, is
that material misery and economic deprivation bring psychic
277Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 277


--- PAGE 297 ---
harm and spiritual hurt to so many black folk. For every per-
son who gets out of the worst ghetto situations, there are
many more people who remain trapped in its punishing grip.
I certainly don’t romanticize poverty or the ghetto, although
I understand how they have come to be mythologized in many
black narratives of survival.
What I mean by “bourgie” — which is a pejorative term
shortened from “bourgeois” — is not simply middle class. I
mean by bourgie the construction of a self-determined per-
sona that is hostile to, and scornful of, ordinary black people.
You can be rich and not be bourgie. Class in black America
has been about more than how much money you make or
how many stocks you have; it’s also been about the politics of
style. I think that those of us who are privileged have an ab-
solute obligation to “give back” to the less fortunate. I think
we are bound by blood, history, and destiny to our brothers
and sisters, especially to those who will never know the priv-
ilege or positive visibility that many black elites enjoy. And we
should cross all lines — sexual, economic, religious, gender,
geographical, generational — in speaking for the oppressed.
For instance, that’s why I think it’s incumbent on me as a het-
erosexual black man to speak against the bigotry and injustice
faced by my brothers and sisters who are gay, lesbian, bisex-
ual, and other-sexed. And it’s equally important for educated,
upwardly mobile blacks to not forget those who have been en-
tombed in permanent poverty and miseducation. 
I attempt as much as possible to engage everyday black folk
struggling on the streets. I understand and feel what drives
them. It reminds me of where I was as a poor black kid in De-
278 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 278


--- PAGE 298 ---
troit, a teen father who was hustling, who was thought of as
a pathologized, nihilistic youth. I try to bring that dangerous
memory, deeply inscribed in my mind, body, and soul, into
the classroom through my style of teaching and lecturing —
very animated, emotionally present, deeply in tune with the
currents of social misery — and by means of some of the sub-
jects that I try to confront.
Compassion for the poor is the hallmark of true civiliza-
tion. 
MED
279Poverty and Class
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 279


--- PAGE 299 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 280
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 300 ---
chapter 17
Wisdom
Events take on a second life when memory and
wisdom mingle to give purpose to the past.
281
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 281


--- PAGE 301 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 282


--- PAGE 302 ---
Events take on a second life when memory and wisdom min-
gle to give purpose to the past.
I realize that the process of self-acceptance is a sign of our
spiritual maturity. It takes profound moral wisdom to claim,
with our own lives on full theological display, that what God
made is good.
The past should be a fountain of wisdom and warning. It
is inevitable that fictions attach to what used to be. But it is
immoral to make those fictions the ground of harsh judg-
ments of our children.
So many young black people are cut off from the political
wisdom they might receive if older black people would sit
down and talk to them, teach them, converse with them —
and yes, learn from them. 
Pride was widely denounced because it destroyed the car-
dinal virtues of courage, temperance, justice, and wisdom that
buttressed the political order and made the good life possible.
I was drawn to Wednesday night prayer meeting because I
was able to absorb the wisdom of the church’s senior saints
and gray-haired griots. In their collective testimonies and
prayers and prefatory comments to the songs they requested
us to sing, the elders gave a running commentary on the hid-
den injuries of race and class, and the enduring hope and love
283Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 283


--- PAGE 303 ---
that propelled them over these huge obstacles. When they
bore witness to the pains and pitfalls they had surmounted
through faith, they gave renewed poignancy to clichés like,
“God will make a way out of no way.” It was the opportunity
to hear the rich and surprisingly varied voices of the sisters
that was the greatest appeal of prayer meeting. At prayer
meeting, old black women — or “sore-head sisters” as they
sometimes called themselves in playful self-deprecation —
thumbed through the Bible and unleashed from its pages
golden nuggets of insight that rivaled those of most preachers
I’d heard. And their homespun wisdom was endearing. “I was
so green, you could plant me in the ground and I’d grow,” one
sister humorously remarked in recounting the naïveté that led
to a youthful error.
The debate about corporal punishment is raging in our na-
tion. There used to be a belief that there was a racial divide on
these matters, at least when we were growing up. Black folk
in favor, white folk opposed. Even though I don’t think it’s that
simple (where one lives, either in the city or the suburbs, and
one’s class identification are important too), I don’t deny that
racial differences exist. Recently, though, I think the gulf be-
tween black and white views on child rearing has probably
narrowed. A new generation of black parents has questioned
and often rejected the wisdom of whipping ass. To be sure, you
still hear black folk saying, “The problem with white folk is
that they let their kids get away with murder, let them talk and
act any way they want to without keeping them in check.” But
you also hear black parents and the experts they listen to ar-
guing that corporal punishment encourages aggressive behav-
ior, stymies the development of moral reasoning, hinders
self-esteem, and even causes children to be depressed.
284 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 284


--- PAGE 304 ---
A daughter of the black community, Jocelyn Elders, at-
tempted to bring the sharp insight and collective wisdom of
our tradition to a nation unwilling to ponder its self-destruc-
tive sexual habits. Let’s hope that her advice about the virtues
of autoeroticism won’t be lost on those closer to home. Like
Marvin Gaye, black churches and communities need sexual
healing. If we get healed, we might just be able to help spread
that health beyond our borders.
Mature men temper strength with wisdom and know how
to share power.
As a former resident of the ghetto, I wholeheartedly concur
with the notion that we can neither forget its people nor ne-
glect its social redemption through strategic action. Further,
I think it’s beautiful for folk who have survived the ghetto,
who’ve gotten out, to carry the blessed image of its edifying
dimensions in their hearts and imaginations, and to pledge
to never leave the ghetto even as they travel millions of miles
beyond its geographical boundaries. That means that they’ll
never betray the wisdom, genius, and hope that floods the
ghetto in ways that those outside its bounds rarely under-
stand. The ghetto is, after all, a portable proposition, a mobile
metaphor. But we must not seize on the most limited view
possible of ghetto life and sanctify it as the be-all and end-all
of black existence. That leads to kids killing each other in the
name of an authentic ghetto masculinity that is little more
than pathological self-hatred.
285Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 285


--- PAGE 305 ---
We must remember orphaned and foster children who are
robbed of the intimacies of family love and bereft of the ben-
efit of parental wisdom.
In his book Best Intentions: The Education and Killing of
Edmund Perry, author Robert Sam Anson sees Veronica
Perry’s swing from profound belief in the wisdom of God in
taking her son to a bitter denouncement of the police system
that killed him as a possible indication of her emotional in-
stability. (She had had a nervous breakdown.) In fact, her
“mood swing” may be understood as ad hoc theodicy, an at-
tempt to come to grips theologically as best she could with
the evil that killed her child. It is an attempt to vindicate —
through faith — belief in a good and loving God who may ap-
pear absent or silent in the face of human suffering, without
at the same time excusing the human beings who inflict that
suffering. It is a theme that runs through the African Ameri-
can religious engagement with the world, and it is a central
problem in Christian theology.
One of the reasons we suffer is because we ignore the wis-
dom of our women.
As debates about the literary canon continue, and as cur-
rents of suspicion about the wisdom of multiculturalism
swirl, the example of black culture’s constant evolution and
relentless self-recreation is heartening. At its best, African
American culture provides an empowering model of educa-
tion that combines the desire for broad learning and the
hunger for new forms of cultural expression. The ongoing
286 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 286


--- PAGE 306 ---
controversies generated by identity politics, hip hop culture,
and racial politics, and the rise of a host of other minority
voices, means that African American intellectual life will re-
main vibrant as it helps to redefine American literature and
democracy.
As a twenty-four-year-old pastor in Tennessee in the early
’80s, I tested the black church’s theological apartheid: I urged
my congregation to ordain three women as deacons. One Sun-
day after I finished preaching, a deacon suddenly jumped to
his feet and led the congregation in a vote to oust me, and for
one of the very few times in my life, I was crushed to complete
speechlessness. I had “swallowed my voice,” in Marcia Dyson’s
eloquent phrase. I was fired with a month’s severance pay and
nothing else to support my wife and five-year-old son. I cried
angry tears and packed my bags and found my way back to
school to complete my degree in philosophy.  But the lessons
I learned as pastor of Thankful Baptist Church — the irony
singes me to this day — are ones that I have never forgotten:
that change takes time, especially yours if you’re deeply in-
vested; that black folk who are oppressed by racism readily
turn to the same arguments used to keep them down to op-
press women; that many women are hard-pressed to find the
moral and social support to rebel against their own suffering;
and that the black church is often the ground of our liberation
and the soil that nurtures our most enslaving  bigotries.
We are under judgment ourselves if we do not preach the
gospel. If we are not being responsible for what God has given
to us, we are sinning ourselves. And that means we have to
sometimes oppose the wisdom of the world. Sometimes, like
287Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 287


--- PAGE 307 ---
Representative Barbara Lee, you’ve got to stand up by your-
self. It looks like nobody else is going to help you; nobody else
is with you. Even your former allies think you’re crazy for
what you’re doing. But if God has told you to do it, you’ve got
to stand up to do it.
The independent black press preserves the cultural and
racial wisdom of black folk away from the glare of main-
stream media.
Fannie Lou Hamer claimed that the mistake white folk
made with black folk is that they put us behind them, not in
front of them. Had they placed us in front of them, they could
have observed and contained us. Instead, white folk placed us
behind them in what they deemed an inferior position. As a
result, we were able to learn white folk — their beliefs, senti-
ments, contradictions, cultures, styles, behaviors, virtues, and
vices. Black survival depended on black folk knowing the
ways and souls of white folk.
The Cosby Show, in many respects, was a televised display
of wisdom about adults and adolescents where the philoso-
phies of Benjamin Spock and Marshall McLuhan easily em-
braced. Cliff, an obstetrician, and Clair, a lawyer, were an
exemplary dual-career couple. They smoothly melded tradi-
tion and change. They offered their family tender devotion
and tough love. Cliff and Clair blended parental authority,
and adolescent freedom and responsibility, in perfect mea-
sure.
288 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 288


--- PAGE 308 ---
The biggest knock on hard-core hip hop may be its tired,
cliché-ridden exploration of violence, a subject that demands
subtlety, artistic courage, and the wisdom to refrain from
using a sledgehammer where a scalpel will do.
What is especially appealing about theologian Dwight Hop-
kins’s lucid explanations of black religious belief is his
grounding in the wit and wisdom of his forebears. Hopkins
has never been afraid or ashamed to delve deeply into the folk
genius of black culture, whether it surfaced in a slave narra-
tive, a backwoods sermon, or the earthy eloquence of a com-
munity elder.
Malcolm X experienced profound personal and ideological
changes near the end of his life. That inspired him to write
an autobiography which viewed his life through a mythology
of metamorphosis that led to spiritual wisdom.
To hear legions of black adults tell it, there was a time when
a black child could be disciplined by any adult in the neigh-
borhood if he or she did wrong. Such a story is meant to show
the strength, unity, and durability of black communities of
the past. It is also meant to underscore the weakness, frag-
mentation, and collapse of black communities today. Once,
however, when I visited a university to lecture, I heard this
same story repeated by a black youth, all of eighteen years
old, who included her generation among the duly disciplined
children. Most blacks would say that her generation is unfa-
miliar with such an experience. That gave me a clue that such
stories are, in large part, rhetorical devices that transmit folk
289Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 289


--- PAGE 309 ---
wisdom from one generation to the next. Such stories help us
define the limits of acceptable behavior.
All in the Family showed us that Archie Bunker was the real
dupe because of his bigotry. Archie’s wife, Edith, was super-
ficially daffy but revealed humanity and wisdom beneath her
character’s loopiness.
Names influence events. 
For the victims, and survivors, of Hurricane Katrina, black
faith refuses to offer pat answers or theological clichés. It is a
tragedy of untold proportion, a catastrophe that causes the
heart of God to break. And while the survivors are surely
blessed, we must resist the notion that they are better than
those who died. Black spiritual wisdom cautions against such
presumptuous faith that feeds on pride. It helps us to resist
the temptation to ethical arrogance. Those who lost their lives
were victims of a force of nature that might have as easily
drowned those who escaped. This is one of the paradoxes of
black faith that we must not let collapse into black-and-white
theological certitude: Yes, God’s grace spared the survivors,
but that doesn’t mean that they are superior. The survivors
are, therefore, charged with responsibility to live even more
fully and purposefully in the awareness of their mysterious
fortune.
How much wisdom could one expect from an artist like
Tupac who barely lived beyond his twenty-fifth birthday, even
290 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 290


--- PAGE 310 ---
though he was hugely talented and precocious to a fault? It is
a testament to his gargantuan gifts — and to our desperate
need, which screams so loudly because of our failure to find
answers to pressing issues — that the expectation existed at
all. 
Black youth summon funeral directors to portray their
dead bodies with a style that may defeat their being forgotten
and that distinguishes them from the next corpse. If these
youth are cynically viewed as the canary in the coal mine —
since we all die, and death really is the mark of life, their ac-
tions embody the route we all eventually take to prepare for
our demise — the sacrifice of their bodies for spiritual wis-
dom is a symbol of our inhumanity. Even if our reasons for
allowing their suffering are not nearly as callous as that, the
culture of death that suffocates black youth is nonetheless
damning.
One of the things that black people have been afraid of ad-
mitting is that some of this stuff we deal with can make you
lose your mind. You know, we have songs, like the one by
DMX with the famous refrain, “Y’all gon’ make me lose my
mind, up in here, up in here.” But the reality is that there’s a
great deal of mental stress for black men who want to fulfill
the demands of a culture that tells us to walk, and then cuts
our legs off. Black men are often left in tiny spaces to negoti-
ate our psychic pain. That’s why our suffering often opens up
as wounds in public for the world to see. We don’t get much
private therapy and relief from the agony. We don’t often turn
to another brother to seek counsel and wisdom and direction.
There are few spaces for everyday black men to do that. There
291Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 291


--- PAGE 311 ---
appear to be even fewer spaces for well-known black men to
heal from punishing situations.
Bill Maher is one of the bravest and most brilliant social
critics we have in the aftermath of 9/11. Not only is he willing
to challenge received wisdom on political practices and public
policy, but he is capable of self-criticism, a rare trait among
contemporary pundits. 
One of the things I’ve tried to do in my work on the poor is
to suggest the common sense and wisdom of black people
who hold that if you’re in the middle class, you ain’t but a pay-
check or two from poverty yourself.
Since I’ve been booted out of the pastorate of a black
church for attempting to ordain women, and given that my
extremely liberal views on homosexuality run counter to the
received wisdom of many black theological lights, I must con-
fess that my version of the faith might provoke as many cries
of heresy as it may win converts.
Before Martin Luther King was baptized in the waters of
liberal white theological education, he drew deep from the
well of wisdom contained in the words of his church elders.
King also learned the art of masking hard truth in humor. And
he learned how to dress cultural observation in the colorful
cadences of tuneful speech.
292 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 292


--- PAGE 312 ---
Outkast is among the most progressive and culturally sen-
sitive hip hop groups now recording, one of the few rap
groups that perhaps knows or even cares who Rosa Parks is
or what she accomplished. Their song “Rosa Parks” invokes
her presence as a metaphor for insight and wisdom, as a cau-
tionary tale against an uninformed obsession with the past.
They also appeal to her symbolic presence to warn all pre-
tenders to their rap throne that they would have to move to
the back of the bus — in other words, that they would have
to take a backseat to Outkast’s preeminence. In the world of
hip hop verbal battles, that is indeed a gentle boast.
Martin Luther King was at his best when he was willing to
reshape the wisdom of many of his racial and national par-
ents. He ingeniously harnessed their ideas to his views to ad-
vocate sweeping social change.
One form of rhetorical resistance that has been promi-
nently featured throughout black cultural history is the black
sermon, the jewel in the crown of black sacred rhetoric. Here,
a minister, or another authorized figure, thrives in the delivery
of priestly wisdom and prophetic warning through words of
encouragement and comfort, of chastening and challenge.
Malcolm X was the rap revolution’s rhetorician of choice
in hip hop’s heyday, his words forming the ideological frame-
work for authentic black consciousness. His verbal ferocity
was combined with the rhythms of James Brown and George
Clinton, the three figures forming a trio of griots dispensing
cultural wisdom harnessed to polyrhythmic beats.
293Wisdom
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 293


--- PAGE 313 ---
By choosing to honor the memory of Emmett Till, we make
a covenant with our past to own its pain as our responsibility,
and to forgive its failures only if the wisdom we gain in the
process is made a part of our present pacts of racial peace.
Tell the truth gently. 
MED
294 Can You Hear Me Now?
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 294


--- PAGE 314 ---
Photography Credits
Page 2 Courtesy of Monica Morgan Photography
Page 18 Courtesy of Louis Myrie
Page 38 Courtesy of Darryl Turner
Page 54 Courtesy of Johnny Nunez Photography
Page 72 Courtesy of Impact Photo/Joe Photo
Page 90 Courtesy of Johnny Nunez Photography
Page 104 Courtesy of Regina Fleming Photography
Page 122 Courtesy of Matt Carr Photography
Page 136 Courtesy of Johnny Nunez Photography
Page 154 Courtesy of Mark Mehlinger
Page 166 Courtesy of Louis Myrie
Page 182 Courtesy of W. Hassan Marsh
Page 202 Courtesy of Monica Morgan Photography
Page 220 Courtesy of Johnny Nunez Photography
Page 238 Courtesy of Donna Payne
Page 254 Courtesy of Garlin Gilchrist II
Page 280 Courtesy of Nancy Kaszerman
295
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 295


--- PAGE 315 ---
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 296
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 316 ---
Acknowledgments
As usual, I want to thank Liz Maguire, my beloved late editor,
whose intellectual partnership and inspiration are all over
these pages. I want to thank publisher John Sherer at Basic
Civitas for his insight and good humor in supporting this
book and my work. I am also grateful to Robert Kimzey,
Michele Jacob, Mary McCue, Caitlin Fitzpatrick, and Jocelyn
Giannini at Basic for their good work. I am especially grateful
to the wonderful Nicole Caputo for her inspired cover design
and to Rick Schwab for his great cover photos. I am thankful
as well to the marvelous Christine Marra, who did her usual
excellent job in producing the book, along with her crack
team of copyeditor Gray Cutler, proofer Jeff Georgeson, and
designer/typesetter Jane Raese. I am grateful to the photog-
raphers whose excellent work appears in these pages: Monica
Morgan (feel better), Louis Myrie, Darryl Turner, Johnny
Nunez, Impact Photo/Joe Photo, Regina Fleming, Matt Carr,
Mark Mehlinger, W. Hassan Marsh, Donna Payne, Garlin
Gilchrist II, and Nancy Kaszerman.
I thank all the splendid folk at Georgetown for providing
me incredible support for my work: President Jack DeGioia,
Provost Jim O’Donnell, and all my colleagues in the Sociology
Department. I am grateful to the amazing support of my as-
sistant, Kirby Blem, and the support of the incomparable
 Derreck Brown. 
297
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 297


--- PAGE 317 ---
I send mad love, as always, to Susan “Queen” Taylor and
Khephra “Smooth” Burns. I owe a special shout out and mad
love to Marva Smalls for your incredible support of my work,
books, and intellectual vision (and to the amazing Stephanie
Phelps, Barbara Furlow, and David Bruson — I still might try
to steal them!), and to Ingrid Saunders Jones, Richard Plepler,
Johnny Furr, Mike Bantom, and Ken Chenault for your un-
failing support over the years.  
Finally, I am grateful to my family: my mother, Addie Mae
Dyson, my brothers Anthony, Everett (we’re getting you out
soon), Gregory, and Brian. And my gratitude goes to my chil-
dren Michael Eric Dyson, II (who’s still riding solo!), Maisha
Dyson-Daniels and Cory Daniels (and Layla Ophelia Rose
Daniels), and Mwata Dyson (and little Mosi Izaiah Ayomide
Dyson, welcome to the world). And above all I have love and
gratitude for Rev. Marcia Louise Dyson and her unstinting
loyalty and love, and for her profound commitment to
 humanity.
298 Acknowledgments
0465018833:Dyson  3/15/09  10:21 PM  Page 298

