=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Molefi Kete Asante, Yoshitaka Miike, Jing Yin, The Global Intercultural Communication Reader.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 367
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:31:14.646250
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 1
Page 1
The Global
Intercultural
Communication
Reader
The ﬁeld of intercultural communication seeks to understand the process of communicating
across cultural boundaries with an aim toward promoting positive relations between di ﬀerent
cultures and nations. The Global Intercultural Communication Reader is the ﬁrst comprehensive
anthology to take a distinctly non-Eurocentric approach to analyze and appreciate the diverse
ways of communicating in diﬀerent cultures, incorporating African and Asian as well as Western
perspectives. The volume’s international scope aims to expand and enlarge the ﬁeld by promot-
ing greater engagement with the closely related ﬁeld of international communication.
Featuring twenty readings by important intercultural and international communication
scholars, The Global Intercultural Communication Reader is edited by Moleﬁ Kete Asante, one of
the founders of the ﬁeld of intercultural communication, along with international scholars
Y oshitaka Miike and Jing Yin. The volume is ideal for undergraduate and graduate courses in
intercultural communication, particularly those with an international focus.
Moleﬁ Kete Asante  is Professor of African American Studies at T emple University. A proli ﬁc
author of more than sixty books, Asante is largely credited with founding the ﬁeld of intercul-
tural communication with the publication of his book The Handbook of Intercultural Communi-
cation (Sage, 1979).
Y oshitaka Miike is Assistant Professor in the Department of Communication at the University
of Hawai‘i, Hilo.
Jing Yin  is Assistant Professor in the Department of Communication at the University of
Hawai‘i, Hilo.


--- PAGE 3 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 2
Page 2


--- PAGE 4 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 3
Page 3
The Global
Intercultural
Communication
Reader
Moleﬁ Kete Asante, Y oshitaka Miike,
& Jing Yin
EDITORS


--- PAGE 5 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 4
Page 4
First published 2008
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New Y ork, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the T aylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2008 Taylor and Francis Group
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form
or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,
and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The global intercultural communication reader / (edited by) Moleﬁ Kete Asante,
Y oshitaka Miike, and Jing Yin.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Intercultural communication. I. Asante, Mole ﬁ K., 1942– . II. Miike, Y oshitaka.
III. Yin, Jing, 1974–
HM1211.G56 2008
303.48′2—dc22
2007027865
ISBN10: 0–415–95812–1 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–415–95813–X (pbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–93498–9 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–95812–7 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–95813–4 (pbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–93498–2 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“T o purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-93498-9 Master e-book ISBN


--- PAGE 6 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 5
Page 5
Contents
Dedication ix
Notes on Contributors xiii
Acknowledgments xix
Introduction 1
MOLEFI KETE ASANTE, YOSHITAKA MIIKE, & JING YIN
Part I Perspectives on Culture in Theory and Research 9
Concepts of “Culture”: Implications for Intercultural1
Communication Research 11
DREAMA G. MOON
Ethical Implications of the Ethnic “Te x t” in Multicultural2
Communication Studies 27
DOLORES V ALENCIA TANNO
The Centrality of Culture 373
ROBERT SHUTER
Part II Metatheoretical Frameworks for Future Directions 45
The Ideological Signiﬁcance of Afrocentricity in Intercultural4
Communication 47
MOLEFI KETE ASANTE
T oward an Alternative Metatheory of Human Communication: An5
Asiacentric Vision 57
YOSHITAKA MIIKE
v


--- PAGE 7 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 6
Page 6
Thinking Dialectically about Culture and Communication 736
JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA
Part III Contextual Approaches to Culture and Communication 93
Language and Words: Communication in the Analects of Confucius 957
HUI-CHING CHANG
Ubuntu in South Africa: A Sociolinguistic Perspective to a Pan-8
African Concept 113
NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU
Constructing the Other: A Critical Reading of The Joy Luck Club 1239
JING YIN
The Four Seasons of Ethnography: A Creation-Centered Ontology10
for Ethnography 143
SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA
Part IV Impact of Globalization on Intercultural Communication 165
The Hegemony of English and Strategies for Linguistic Pluralism:11
Proposing the Ecology of Language Paradigm 167
YUKIO TSUDA
The Intersecting Hegemonic Discourses of an Asian Mail-Order12
Bride Catalog: Pilipina “Oriental Butterﬂy” Dolls for Sale 179
RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI
Currents in History, Cultural Domination, and Mass13
Communication in the Caribbean 193
HUMPHREY A. REGIS
Part V Identity and Intercultural Communication Competence 213
Intercultural Communication Competence: A Synthesis 21514
GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA
Beyond Multicultural Man: Complexities of Identity 23915
LISE M. SPARROW
Applying a Critical Metatheoretical Approach to Intercultural16
Relations: The Case of U.S.–Japanese Communication 263
WILLIAM KELLY
vi  CONTENTS


--- PAGE 8 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 7
Page 7
Part VI Ethical Considerations in Intercultural Communication 281
Theoretical Perspectives on Islam and Communication 28317
HAMID MOWLANA
Ethics and the Discourse on Ethics in Post-Colonial India 29718
ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI
Peace and the Middle East 31719
EDWARD W. SAID
Mutual Learning as an Agenda for Social Development 32920
TU WEIMING
Permissions 335
Index 337
CONTENTS  vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 8
Page 8


--- PAGE 10 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 9
Page 9
Dedication
In Honor of Dr. Everett M. Rogers (1931–2004)
Moleﬁ Kete Asante, Yoshitaka Miike, & Jing Yin
On October 21, 2004, Dr. Everett M. Rogers, Distinguished Professor Emeritus in the Depart-
ment of Communication and Journalism at the University of New Mexico, passed away peace-
fully at his home in Albuquerque after a prolonged battle with kidney cancer. It is to his memory
that we dedicate this collection of essays written on the theory and practice of intercultural
communication. Ev remains monumental in his in ﬂuence, inspiration, and philosophy in the
study of culture and communication. Although there are areas in which we disagreed with him,
it is impossible to ignore his profound impact on the way we think about communication across
national borders and cultural boundaries. Ev was certainly not alone in advancing the ﬁeld of
intercultural communication (see Rogers and Steinfatt, 1999), but none spoke or wrote with any
more clarity of purpose or in such earnestness as Ev.
While he was trained as a rural sociologist, Ev followed in the footsteps of the late Dr. Wilbur
Schramm— whom he admired and called “the founder of the ﬁeld of communication study ”
(Rogers, 1994, p. 446)— and became a pioneer in the discipline of communication in the United
States. For nearly half a century, his book Diﬀusion of Innovations  (ﬁrst published in 1962 and
now in its 5th edition in 2003) has been a provocative and catalytic work adding to the under-
standing of how a new idea, practice, or object is disseminated, accepted, or resisted in a given
cultural context. In the years after its publication, it was translated into over ﬁfteen languages
and helped to inspire an entire generation of communicationists and culturalists. He was a
lightning rod for some and a magnet for others. Subsequent to its publication, Ev distinguished
himself as an icon of international scholarship in the philosophy of development and the politics
of social change. From his theory of di ﬀusion have come scores of dissertations and numerous
books, both scholarly and popular. He became within a few years of the ﬁrst publication of
Diﬀusion of Innovations a signiﬁcant presence in the ﬁeld of communication. During his 47-year
scholarly career, he wrote more than thirty books and ﬁve hundred articles.
Ev was born in Carroll, Iowa, on March 6, 1931. Growing up on a family farm, he was puzzled
and frustrated by farmers in his home community, including his father, for their delay in
adopting agricultural innovations such as the new hybrid seed corn that could have bene ﬁted
them. After serving as an Air Force o ﬃcer during the Korean War for two years, he returned to
Iowa State University, where he received a bachelor ’s degree in agriculture (1952), for graduate
work. He earned an M.A. (1955) and a Ph.D. (1957) both in rural sociology there. It was his
ambition then to learn something about how innovations spread (see Rogers, 2003, pp. xv –xxi
for his detailed personal account). What caused some agricultural ideas to be adopted and others
rejected? In the course of this worthwhile endeavor, he discovered, among other things, the value
ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 10
Page 10
of culture and the sustaining power of cultural agency in the transmitting of all messages. He
concluded that di ﬀusion is “a special type of communication concerned with the spread of
messages that are perceived as new ideas” (Rogers, 2003, p. 35).
While we aptly and eagerly use the ideas and concepts ﬁrst suggested by Ev as if they were
natural, they are indeed ideas that we have inherited from his genius. We are aware of the fact
that many marketers and Wharton school graduates do not know that notions of adopters, early
or late, majorities, early or late, are Rogerian. T oday, we speak of the di ﬀusion of innovations
(Rogers, 2003), communication and development (Rogers, 1976), international communica-
tion (Rogers, 2002), communication technology (Rogers, 1986), and homophily and heterophily
(Rogers & Bhowmik, 1970/1971) with ease, although when Ev began to write these ideas, if they
existed, were in the specialized vocabularies of a few enlightened ones in the communication
discipline. In the sense that he gave so much of his intellectual energy and moral vision to the
problem of human interaction across cultures, he becomes for us one of the enduring symbols
of intercultural communication.
Ev’s distinction is that he developed his own special approach to international issues and
demonstrated by the evolution of his intellectual interest what ought to be the trajectory of the
scholar. The incredible beauty of his work, in an aesthetic form, is that it covered so many areas
of communication with the same gentle narration of our common humanity (see Singhal &
Dearing, 2006). He is indeed a champion for humanity. Scholars found in his work something of
value if they were interested in di ﬀusion theory, a history of communication study, how media
communicated the dangers of volcanoes to the public, systems theory, computer-mediated
communication, especially the Internet, information theory, cybernetics, intercultural com-
munication, health communication, and terrorism communication. How can one scholar touch
so many lives and be read so broadly?
There was nothing in communication under the sun that did not interest Ev. Sometimes
when we heard him talk it was like he knew something about communication everywhere. If one
asked him about Africa and the Internet he was ready with an answer that the lack of strong
infrastructures contributed to the lack of Internet access. It was impossible to have strong
Internet access without reliable systems like consistent telephones and so forth. If one asked him
about Asia, he would say that it was expanding its capacity at a rapid rate and would be the area
of greatest growth in the next few years. In classrooms, Ev often shared the mistakes that he had
made and the lessons that he had learned in other cultures (sometimes the “hard way” as he put
it): dining etiquettes and wedding rituals in India, the importance of facework in Indonesia, and
the practice of nemawashi in Japan, for example.
When he wrote Diﬀusion of Innovations in 1962, Ev did not know the route he would take or
be taken by his academic interests. He held faculty positions at Ohio State University (1957–63),
Michigan State University (1964 –73), and the University of Michigan (1973 –75). He was the
Janet M. Peck Professor of International Communication at Stanford University (1975 –85) and
the Walter H. Annenberg Professor and Associate Dean for Doctoral Studies in the Annenberg
School for Communication at the University of Southern California (1985 –93). He also taught
at the National University of Colombia (Bogotá), the University of Paris (France), the University
of Bayreuth (Germany), Nanyang T echnological University (Singapore), and Johns Hopkins
University.
At the end of his life, however, Ev had come to believe in the need for intercultural communi-
cation so strongly that he had devoted his last years to creating and sustaining a doctoral
program at the University of New Mexico (UNM). He chaired the UNM Department of Com-
munication and Journalism from 1993 to 1997 (see Hart, 1998). As his role model Schramm
founded the ﬁrst doctoral program in “communication,” he founded the ﬁrst doctoral program
in “intercultural communication ” after he successfully gained a total of sixteen approvals
from various administrative authorities. He was instrumental in writing a program overview,
x  DEDICATION


--- PAGE 12 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 11
Page 11
developing a curriculum, and securing funds. During New Mexico days, he also focused some of
his intensive energy on intercultural communication, especially its intellectual histories (Rogers,
1999, 2000; Rogers & Hart, 2002; Rogers, et al., 2002; Rogers & Steinfatt, 1999). He was a giant
scholar and wonderful teacher. But, above all, he was an excellent mentor. Throughout his career,
he directed over seventy dissertations and about ﬁfty M.A. theses.
Ev was open to new ideas and diﬀerent perspectives. He liked “a healthy critical stance” as he
often put it. He wrote at the end of his Preface in the 5th edition of Diﬀusion of Innovations :
“We do not need more-of-the-same di ﬀusion research. The challenge for di ﬀusion scholars of
the future is to move beyond the proven methods and models of the past, to recognize their
shortcomings and limitations, and to broaden their conceptions of the diﬀusion of innovations”
(p. xxi). Echoing his message as it applies to the ﬁeld of intercultural communication, we present
this volume in the hope that we will take future academic pursuits in culture and communica-
tion studies with such a challenging mind. Then, it is to his memory that we will carry forward
the spirit of humanity along with diversity that he taught us.
References
Hart, W. B. (1998). An interview with Everett M. Rogers: On the past and future of intercultural
relations study. The Edge: The E-Journal of Intercultural Relations, 1(3). Available: http://www. intercul-
turalrelations.com/v1i3Summer1998/sum98hartrogers.htm.
Rogers, E. M. (Ed.). (1976). Communication and development: Critical perspectives . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rogers, E. M. (1986). Communication technology: The new media in society . New Y ork: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1994). A history of communication study: A biographical approach . New Y ork: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1999). Georg Simmel ’s concept of stranger and intercultural communication research.
Communication Theory, 9(1), 58–74.
Rogers, E. M. (2000). The extensions of men: The correspondence of Marshall McLuhan and Edward T.
Hall. Mass Communication and Society, 3(1), 117–135.
Rogers, E. M. (2002). Funding international communication research. Journal of Applied Communication
Research, 30(4), 341–349.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diﬀusion of innovations (5th ed.). New Y ork: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M., & Bhowmik, D. K. (1970/1971). Homophily–heterophily: Relational concepts for communi-
cation research. Public Opinion Quarterly, 34(4), 523–538.
Rogers, E. M., & Steinfatt, T. M. (1999). Intercultural communication. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Rogers, E. M., & Hart, W. B. (2002). The histories of intercultural, international, and development com-
munication. In W. B. Gudykunst & B. Mody (Eds.), Handbook of international and intercultural
communication (2nd ed., pp. 1–18). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rogers, E. M., Hart, W. B., & Miike, Y. (2002). Edward T. Hall and the history of intercultural communica-
tion: The United States and Japan. Keio Communication Review, 24, 3–26.
Singhal, A., & Dearing, J. W. (Eds.). (2006). Communication of innovations: A journey with Ev Rogers . New
Delhi: Sage.
DEDICATION  xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 12
Page 12


--- PAGE 14 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 13
Page 13
Notes on Contributors
Moleﬁ Kete Asante  (Ph.D., University of California at Los Angeles, 1968) is Professor in the
Department of African American Studies at T emple University. Dr. Asante has published more
than sixty scholarly books and three hundred journal and magazine articles. Among the most
recent books are Erasing Racism: The Survival of the American Nation , The History of Africa: The
Quest for Eternal Harmony , and Race, Rhetoric, and Identity: The Architecton of Soul . He has
published more scholarly books than any contemporary African author and has recently been
recognized as one of the ten most widely cited African Americans. He created the ﬁrst Ph.D.
program in African American Studies and has directed over 125 Ph.D. dissertations. Dr. Asante
is the founding theorist of Afrocentricity. His books, Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change ,
The Afrocentric Idea, and Kemet, Afrocentricity and Knowledge are the key works in his ﬁeld. He
has been or is presently a consultant for more than twelve school districts for rewriting curricula.
Dr. Asante has received numerous awards and honorary doctorates including the 2002 Douglas
W. Ehninger Distinguished Rhetorical Scholar Award from the National Communication
Association. He is the founding editor of the Journal of Black Studies.
Anantha Sudhaker Babbili  (Ph.D., University of Iowa, 1981) is Dean of the College of Mass
Communication at the Middle T ennessee State University. Dr. Babbili also taught at T exas
Christian University and the University of Western Ontario in Canada. He has published his
research in several books including Communication Ethics and Universal Values, Critical Issues in
Media, Bosnia by Television , Mass Media in the Middle East , and The Press and the State . His
articles have appeared in Media, Culture & Society, Journal of Communication Inquiry, Newspaper
Research Journal , and International Third World Studies Journal . Dr. Babbili is the editor of
Journalism & Communication Monographs  and serves on the editorial boards of the Journal of
Mass Media Ethics  and Journalism Studies . He received the Barry Bingham Award from the
National Conference of Editorial Writers. The Carnegie Foundation and the Council for the
Advancement and Support of T eaching named Dr. Babbili the T exas Professor of the Y ear.
Hui-Ching Chang (Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1994) is Associate Pro-
fessor of Communication at the University of Illinois at Chicago, where she served as Graduate
Director from 1996 to 2001. She also served as President of the Association for Chinese Com-
munication Studies (1995 –1996) and was Visiting Scholar to the Graduate Institute of Com-
munication Studies at National Chiao Tung University (2001), Graduate Institute of Journalism
at National Taiwan University (2003 –4), and Department of Communication Studies at Hong
xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 14
Page 14
Kong Baptist University (2007). Her research focuses on interpersonal and intercultural com-
munication, and she has received several grants and top paper awards for her research. Her
publications have appeared in Discourse Studies , Research on Language and Social Interaction ,
Journal of Language and Social Psychology , Journal of Asian Paci ﬁc Communication, and Inter-
national and Intercultural Communication Annuals.
Guo-Ming Chen  (Ph.D., Kent State University, 1987) is Professor of Communication at the
University of Rhode Island. He received the 1987 outstanding dissertation award presented by
the Speech Communication Association International and Intercultural Communication Div-
ision. Dr. Chen is the founding president of the Association for Chinese Communication Stud-
ies. He served as chair of the Eastern Communication Association Intercultural Communication
Interest Group and the co-editor of the International and Intercultural Communication Annual
(2003–5). In addition to serving as an editorial board member of several professional journals,
Dr. Chen presently is the co-editor of China Media Research  and Intercultural Communication
Studies. His primary research interests are in intercultural/organizational communication,
including the areas of Chinese communication, global communication, communication com-
petence, and conﬂict management and negotiations. Dr. Chen has published numerous articles,
books, chapters, and essays. Those books include Foundations of Intercultural Communication ,
Communication and Global Society , Chinese Conﬂict Management and Resolution , and Theories
and Principles of Chinese Communication.
Sarah Amira De la Garza  (formerly Mar ía Cristina Gonz ález) (Ph.D., University of T exas at
Austin, 1982) is Associate Professor in the Hugh Downs School of Human Communication
at Arizona State University, where she serves as associate director of the North American Center
of Transborder Studies. Her research explores borderlands identities, emphasizing postcolonial
ethnographic methodology, and she received special commendation by the National Com-
munication Association’s Ethnography Division for her in ﬂuence on the ﬁeld’s scholarship in
2003. Her book, Maria Speaks: Journeys into the Mysteries of the Mother in My Life as a Chicana ,
explores the in ﬂuence of Mexican religious, cultural, and historical feminine icons on the self-
expression of women, developing a methodology for autoethnographic data generation. She has
held two Fulbright scholarships to Mexico. Also an a ﬃliate faculty member of the Women and
Gender Studies and Transborder Chicana/o and Latina/o Studies departments, she holds the
additional degree of D.Min., and her current work explores ethnicity, memory, and trauma in
the negotiation of narrative confusion.
Rona T amiko Halualani (Ph.D., Arizona State University, 1998) is Associate Professor of Lan-
guage, Culture, and Intercultural Communication in the Communication Studies Department
at San Jose State University. Her research interests include race relations, intercultural contact,
diversity, prejudice, critical intercultural communication studies, identity and cultural politics,
diasporic identity, and Hawaiians/Paciﬁc Islanders. Dr. Halualani possesses expertise in qualita-
tive and critical research methods. For the last three years, she has focused on examining
intercultural contact and race relations among university students. She teaches courses on inter-
cultural communication, racial/ethnic identity, cultural studies, diasporic and global movements
in relation to culture, quantitative and qualitative research methodology, and gender
communication.
Nkonko M. Kamwangamalu (Ph.D., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1989) is Pro-
fessor of Linguistics and English at Howard University in Washington, D.C. He has taught
linguistics at the National University of Singapore, the University of Swaziland, and the Uni-
versity of Natal in Durban, South Africa, where he was professor and director of the Linguistics
xiv  CONTRIBUTORS


--- PAGE 16 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 15
Page 15
Program. He has also received a Fulbright award. His research interests include multilingualism,
codeswitching, language policy and planning, language and identity, new Englishes, and African
linguistics. He has published widely in most of these and related areas. Currently, Dr. Kamwan-
gamalu is researching in the area of language and the economy, with a focus on Africa.
William Kelly (Ph.D., University of New Mexico, 2000) currently teaches in the Communication
Studies departments at the University of California, Los Angeles, and California State University,
Northridge. He also taught at Sagami Women’s University (1986), Sanno Junior College (1987–
96), and Aoyama Gakuin Graduate School (1995 –96) in Japan. His articles appeared in the
Speaking of Japan , Japan Strategic Management Journal , Sanno Junior College Bulletin , Public
Relations Review, and China Media Research. He regularly reviewed books for The Japan Times
and played a leading role in the development of the Society for Intercultural Education, Train-
ing, and Research (Japan). His research interests include dialogue between di ﬀerent regions of
the world, nonviolent communication, communicating for peace, and postcolonialism.
Judith N. Martin  (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University, 1980) is currently Professor of Com-
munication in the Hugh Downs School of Human Communication at Arizona State University.
She has also taught at the University of Minnesota and the University of New Mexico. Her
scholarship focuses on the role of communication in overseas sojourns, issues of ethnicity, race
and communication, and culture and new communication technologies. She has co-authored
several textbooks in intercultural communication, as well as numerous research articles.
Y oshitaka Miike (Ph.D., University of New Mexico, 2004) is Assistant Professor in the Depart-
ment of Communication at the University of Hawai‘i, Hilo. Inspired by Dr. Moleﬁ Kete Asante’s
Afrocentric idea, Dr. Miike has proposed the metatheory of Asiacentricity as an alternative
paradigm for the study of Asian cultures and communication. He received a 2004 Distinguished
Scholarship Award from the International and Intercultural Communication Division of the
National Communication Association for the “Outstanding Article” published in 2003. Dr. Miike
co-edited journal special issues on Asian Approaches to Human Communication and Asian Con-
tributions to Communication Theory . His articles have appeared in China Media Research, Com-
munication Monographs , Human Communication , Intercultural Communication Studies , the
International and Intercultural Communication Annual , Keio Communication Review , and the
Review of Communication . Dr. Miike was elected as the 3rd vice president of the Paci ﬁc and
Asian Communication Association for 2006 –8. He currently reviews manuscripts for several
professional journals.
Dreama G. Moon (Ph.D., Arizona State University, 1997) is Chair and Associate Professor in the
Communication Department at California State University, San Marcos. She holds an M.A. in
Human Relations and Organizational Development, and a B.A. in Criminal Justice. In her
scholarly work, she is interested in the social construction of domination and the ways in which
both dominant and non-dominant group members negotiate, acquiesce to, and oppose domin-
ation. Her research broadly focuses on how ideologies of domination, such as white supremacy,
classism, and sexism, are reproduced in and by communication as well as how they are con-
tested, disrupted, and resisted.
Hamid Mowlana  (Ph.D., Northwestern University, 1963) is Professor in the School of Inter-
national Service at American University. Dr. Mowlana served as the founding director of the
International Communication Program from 1968 to 2005. He has been a visiting professor at
universities in Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, and Africa and has worked for UNESCO
in Paris. Among his many books are Defeat or Victory? Essays on the American Invasion of Iraq ,
CONTRIBUTORS  xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 16
Page 16
Civil Society: A Critique , The Pattern (Model) of Islamic Press and Media , The Rise and Fall of
Modernity, Global Communication in Transition: The End of Diversity?  and Global Information
and World Communication: New Frontiers in International Relations. Dr. Mowlana was president
of the International Association for Media and Communication Research from 1994 to 1998. He
has won numerous national and international awards for outstanding scholarship, research, and
other professional contributions including the International Studies Association’s Distinguished
Senior Scholar Award.
Thomas K. Nakayama  (Ph.D., University of Iowa, 1988) is currently Professor in the Hugh
Downs School of Human Communication and founding director of Asian Paci ﬁc American
Studies at Arizona State University. His research is focused on developing critical approaches to
intercultural communication and public communication. He has written on whiteness, dialect-
ical approaches to intercultural communication and Asian American studies. He is a fellow of
the International Academy of Intercultural Research, a former Fulbrighter at the Universit é de
Mons-Hainaut in Belgium, Libra Professor at the University of Maine, and he served on the
Board of Directors of the Arizona Humanities Council.
Humphrey A. Regis  (Ph.D., Howard University, 1983) is Professor in the Department of Jour-
nalism and Mass Communication, and Director of the Program in Liberal Studies, at the North
Carolina A&T State University in Greensboro, North Carolina, USA. He has been a teacher, print
journalist, and radio journalist in Saint Lucia and in the United States for more than thirty years.
He studies the relationships between mass communication and cultural domination by re-
importation/re-exportation, orientation to reference groups, and location in global social space.
He also studies the relationships between the long history of the ancient World African Com-
munity and the current realities and imperatives in the lives of People of African Descent in the
Caribbean.
Edward W. Said  (Ph.D., Harvard University, 1964) was University Professor of English and
Comparative Literature at Columbia University. He was also a visiting professor at Harvard
University, Johns Hopkins University, the University of T oronto, and Y ale University. Dr. Said is
regarded as a founding theorist in postcolonial studies. He is the author of more than twenty
books, which have been translated into thirty- ﬁve languages, including the highly acclaimed
Orientalism, Culture and Imperialism , and Reﬂections on Exile and Other Essays . Dr. Said won
several prestigious awards for his memoir, Out of Place. He was a sought-after commentator on
Middle Eastern politics and regularly wrote for The Guardian of London, Le Monde Diploma-
tique, the Arab-language daily al-Hayat, and the Nation.
Robert Shuter (Ph.D., Northwestern University, 1973) is Professor and Chair of the Department
of Communication Studies at Marquette University. He has authored multiple books and scores
of articles that have appeared in leading journals including Communication Monographs, Journal
of Communication , Journal of Social Psychology , and Management Communication Quarterly .
Dr. Shuter has served on the editorial boards of many journals and is an associate editor of the
Journal of International and Intercultural Communication , the NCA ’s new quarterly journal
on intercultural communication. Committed to intercultural education for over thirty years,
Dr. Shuter is a past president of the National Communication Association ’s Intercultural Com-
munication Division and has served on numerous intercultural programs, panels, commissions,
and committees. A proponent of intracultural theory and research, he has attempted through his
work to return “culture” to preeminence in intercultural investigations.
Lise M. Sparrow  (Ed.D., University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 2005) has spent her life
xvi  CONTRIBUTORS


--- PAGE 18 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 17
Page 17
involved in intercultural work. Her interest in identity stems from her cross-cultural experiences
with life and language in Europe, Latin America, and Africa. She received her Master’s in English
as a Second Language and Spanish from the School for International Training and her Doctorate
in Culture, Language, and Literacy from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. She taught
for more than twenty-ﬁve years at the School for Intercultural Training in V ermont, focusing on
issues of intercultural communication, identity, and diversity. More recently, she has been
involved, both overseas and in V ermont, with issues of identity and religious diversity.
William J. Starosta  (Ph.D., Indiana University, 1973) is Graduate Professor of Rhetoric and
Intercultural Communication at Howard University. He is founding editor of the Howard Jour-
nal of Communications . His most recent research concerns Gandhian Satyagraha, coverage of
interethnic conﬂict, double emic criticism, intercultural listening, and third culture building. His
work appears in International Philosophical Quarterly , Political Communication and Persuasion ,
International and International Communication Annual , World Communication , International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, Journal of Black Studies, Educational Communication and Tech-
nology Journal, Quarterly Journal of Speech, and in other speech communication journals.
Dolores V alencia T anno (Ph.D., University of Southern California, 1990) is currently Associate
Dean of the Honors College at the University of Nevada, Las V egas. Before taking on an adminis-
trative role, she was a professor of Communication specializing in intercultural communication
and ethics of communication research. Dr. Tanno has been a visiting professor at Arizona State
University (1996) and at Roskilde University in Denmark (2002). She has been invited to give
presentations in Poland, Denmark, Mexico, New Zealand, and Costa Rica, as well as across the
United States. Dr. Tanno has published three books and many articles in national, interdisciplin-
ary, and international journals.
Yukio Tsuda (Ph.D., Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, 1985) is currently Professor at
the Doctoral Program in Modern Cultures and Public Policies in the Graduate School of
Humanities and Social Sciences at the University of Tsukuba in Japan. His major academic
interests include global language policy, critique of the hegemony of English, international
communication and English language teaching. He has published a number of books including
Language Inequality and Distortion in Intercultural Communication: A Critical Theory Approach
(1986), Eigo Shihaino Kouzou [The Structure of the Hegemony of English ] (1990), Eigo Shihaieno
Iron [ Objections to the Hegemony of English ] (1993), Eigo Shihaitoha Nanika  [ What is the
Hegemony of English? ] (2003), and Eigo Shihaito Kotobano Byoudou  [The Hegemony of English
and Linguistic Equality] (2006).
Tu W eiming (Ph.D., Harvard University, 1968) is Professor in the Department of East Asian
Languages and Civilizations at Harvard University and Director of the Harvard-Y enching Insti-
tute. He is the ﬁrst professor of Confucian studies at any English-language university, a position
awarded to him in 1999. Dr. Tu has also taught at Princeton University, the University of
California at Berkeley, Peking University, Taiwan University, the Chinese University of Hong
Kong, and Ecole des Haute Etudes in Paris. He was invited by the United Nations as a member of
the Group of Eminent Persons to facilitate the Dialogue among Civilizations in 2001 and gave a
presentation on civilizational dialogue to the Executive Board of UNESCO in 2004. Dr. Tu has
published over a dozen books in English including Confucian Thought: Selfhood as Creative
Transformation and Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity . His ﬁve-volume collected
works were published in China in 2001. He is currently studying the modern transformation of
Confucian humanism in East Asia and tapping Confucian spiritual resources for human ﬂour-
ishing in the global community.
CONTRIBUTORS  xvii


--- PAGE 19 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 18
Page 18
Jing Yin (Ph.D., Pennsylvania State University, 2003) is Assistant Professor in the Department of
Communication at the University of Hawai ‘i, Hilo. Dr. Yin ’s research interests include the
impact of globalization, media discourse and representation, and non-Western feminist dis-
course. She has published in such journals as China Media Research, Critical Discourse Studies ,
Discourse Processes , the Howard Journal of Communications , the Journal of the Association of
University Technology Managers , the Review of Communication , and Technovation. Her works
have also appeared in several scholarly books including Chinese Communication Studies: Con-
texts and Comparisons  and Systems and Policies for the Globalized Learning Economy . Dr. Yin
translated several theoretical essays on culture and communication into Chinese, which were
published in Intercultural Communication and Theories and Principles of Chinese Communica-
tion. She is a member of the editorial board of Human Communication: A Journal of the Paci ﬁc
and Asian Communication Association . She won a top paper award from the International and
Intercultural Communication Division of the National Communication Association.
xviii  CONTRIBUTORS


--- PAGE 20 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 19
Page 19
Acknowledgments
We would like to extend our sincere appreciation to Matthew Brynie, senior editor in media and
cultural studies, and Mr. Stan Spring, editorial assistant, at Routledge, for their advice and
guidance. We are also indebted to Dr. Michael L. Hecht at Pennsylvania State University,
Dr. Rona Tamiko Halualani at San Jos é State University, and the other anonymous reviewers
for their comments and criticisms and to all the authors of the present volume for their works
that broaden and deepen our understanding of the processes and politics of intercultural com-
munication. We wish to express our heartfelt thanks to the Department of African American
Studies at T emple University and to the Department of Communication at the University of
Hawai‘i, Hilo, for their timely support and ready cooperation. Finally, we are grateful to Ms. Ana
Y enenga for always being caring and considerate as we made progress toward the completion of
this book and to Dr. Corinne L. Shefner-Rogers for providing us with accurate information
about the life and work of Dr. Everett M. Rogers.
xix


--- PAGE 21 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 20
Page 20


--- PAGE 22 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 1
Page 1
Introduction
Issues and Challenges in Intercultural
Communication Scholarship
Moleﬁ Kete Asante, Yoshitaka Miike, & Jing Yin
The intercultural communication enterprise has been driven by an emphasis on the relation-
ships between the modern European world, as expressed by the dominant cultures of North
America and Europe, and various native peoples of America, Asia, and Africa. From the outset,
the ﬁeld’s academic emphasis, following general commercial and trade interests, has been on
interpreting “other” cultures in search of the most productive pathways to the consumers of
those societies. This strategic alterity has proven signi ﬁcant in theoretical and methodological
developments in the ﬁeld. Indeed, it is the basis for the work of many contemporary scholars in
intercultural communication. As globalization and localization intensify in every corner of the
world, however, the ﬁeld is increasingly confronted by more fundamental issues of identity,
community, and humanity. In e ﬀect, intercultural communication is the only way to mitigate
identity politics, social disintegration, religious conﬂicts, and ecological vulnerability in the global
village. Human survival and ﬂourishing depends on our ability to communicate successfully
across diﬀerences.
In response to this worldwide sense of urgency, the intellectual nature and scope of the
intercultural communication ﬁeld are evolving and transforming. Intercultural communication
studies are at a crossroads today. Certainly, the ﬁeld has gone through many changes toward
methodological pluralism and re ﬁnements and has reached the turning point of thinking dia-
lectically about culture and communication. But the question still awaits an answer: Is the
intercultural ﬁeld truly intercultural? One may wonder if “the topics we pursue, the theories we
build, the methods we employ, and the materials we read adequately re ﬂect and respond to the
diversity of our communicative experiences in a globalizing world ” (Miike, 2003, pp. 243–244).
If the ﬁeld is in ferment, as Starosta and Chen (2003) noted, it is imperative for intercultural
communication researchers to further formulate critical re ﬂections on established theories and
proven methods, and to contemplate on past achievements and future directions.
Our aim in this volume, then, is to present the best works of some of the principal scholars on
the subject of intercultural communication in order to provide an impetus for the ﬁeld’s future.
Most of the essays selected for this collection are fugitive pieces scattered across di ﬀerent jour-
nals and books. They are essential readings that deserve due attention in the current intercul-
tural communication literature. For the present anthology, we strived to cover a wide range of
continents, countries, and cultures. However, we did not include the essays published in major
intercultural outlets such as the International and Intercultural Communication Annual  (e.g.,
Tanno & Gonz ález, 1997, 1998, 1999; Chen & Starosta, 2004; Collier, 2000, 2001, 2002; Orbe
et al., 2006; Starosta & Chen, 2003, 2005) as they are readily available. This edited reader is
1


--- PAGE 23 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 2
Page 2
designed primarily for graduate seminars and upper division undergraduate courses related to
the study of culture and communication.
Issues and Challenges in the Field
In selecting readings for this compilation, we focused speci ﬁcally on three unresolved issues in
the ﬁeld of intercultural communication: (1) Eurocentric intellectual imperialism in cross-
cultural communication research; (2) the neglect of indigenous perspectives in culture and com-
munication inquiries; and (3) communication equality and mutuality in intercultural contexts.
The fact that these three long-standing issues in the ﬁeld remain unresolved has little to do
with the methodological expertise of communication researchers.
The ﬁrst issue is Eurocentric intellectual imperialism in cross-cultural communication
research. The ﬁeld has produced some of the most outstanding contemporary intellectuals.
Their work is used in sociology, social work, political science, history, literature, and anthropol-
ogy. Nevertheless, there is a lacuna in the literature about the impact of communication imperi-
alism on the communicative situation itself. There seems to be a presumption in most cases that
the communication scholars have found the truth and the only thing left is the application of
that truth to various cultures of the world. They “would simply pack their tools from Western
organizational or interpersonal theory, make camp at the intercultural interaction, and unpack
the same instruments for work” (Asante & Vora, 1983, p. 294). It is like saying that your mother’s
cooking is the best cooking without ever tasting anyone else ’s food. Therefore, we believe that
these issues should be resolved openly and with the objective of creating a synergy of relationships
that extend beyond the imposition of one system on the other.
In 1979, the Handbook of Intercultural Communication  was produced with Mole ﬁ Kete
Asante, Eileen Newmark, and Cecil A. Blake as editors. This book was the ﬁrst attempt to explain
communication between cultures in a coherent manner. The editors were interested in calling
into question some of the old habits in the discipline of communication. The work was a success
in that it set the intercultural ﬁeld on a more theoretical path. However, by the time the second
Handbook of International and Intercultural Communication  edited by Asante and William B.
Gudykunst appeared in 1989, the ﬁeld’s character had changed, becoming far more interested in
socio-psychological dimensions. Books that concentrated on cultural learning, particularly as it
related to Asian societies, were popular. In one sense, communication interaction may be said to
have followed commercial interaction. While recent readers (Chen & Starosta, 2000; Gonzalez
et al., 2004; Fong & Chuang, 2004; Jackson, 2004; Jackson & Richardson, 2003; Jandt, 2004;
Leeds-Hurwitz, 2005; Lengel, 2005; Lustig & Koester, 2006; Martin et al., 2002; Milhouse et al.,
2001; Samovar et al., 2006; Shuter, 1990; Sitaram & Prosser, 1998) enrich the discourse by
bringing together a number of outstanding scholars to examine various aspects of intercultural
communication, Eurocentric intellectual imperialism is still pervasive in the ﬁeld. We must end a
Eurocentric era of the intercultural ﬁeld and begin a multicultural era of the intercultural ﬁeld
(Miike, 2003).
The second issue is the neglect of indigenous perspectives in culture and communication
inquiries. One only has to point to the numerous articles and books that have sought to provide
the Western reader with an understanding of the East or the South. As the late Edward W. Said
(1993, p. xi) once said, what is striking about these discourses is the prevalence of such terms as
“the Asian or African mind, ” “mysterious China,” and “force as the best measures for some of
these people.” Thus, the theoretical and methodological plinth retains some of the more naive
perspectives that one would ﬁnd during the era of Western imperialism. We “must not impose
Western categories, otherwise we make the mystiﬁcation of the intercultural encounter insoluble
because we operate in a cultural closet. By misunderstanding the complexity of the intercultural
questions, we short-circuit all reasonable answers ” (Asante & Vora, 1983, pp. 293 –294). We
2  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE, YOSHITAKA MIIKE, & JING YIN


--- PAGE 24 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 3
Page 3
should be alert to the fact that “The cultural values of the scholars who study intercultural
communication aﬀect what they investigate, with what methods, what they ﬁnd, and how they
interpret the ﬁndings” (Rogers & Steinfatt, 1999, p. 74).
It should not be expected, in the ﬁrst case, that all the writers from non-Western cultures have
been untouched by the phenomenon of deﬁning their own cultures by the boundaries set by the
West. T oo often, they have failed to utilize the experiences of their own cultures to add to the
discourse on communication. This failure has produced a troubling de ﬁcit in theoretical devel-
opments from those cultures because some scholars have been eager to demonstrate that they,
too, have been able to see through the same eyes as those European and American scholars who
have pioneered in this ﬁeld. One of the dangers often discussed by the late Everett M. Rogers was
that students arriving from Africa or Asia would accept the given molds of communication
rather than bring to the forefront the gifts that they have from their own cultures. As Ev and
others have understood it, this acceptance would be the rational response to cultural or com-
munication imperialism, not a rejection of the platform that had been established, but an
enlarging, re-mixing, and re-creation of it to include ideas, concepts, theories, and methods that
may have prevented the communication scholar of the past from examining other ways of
creating and maintaining communication.
Asante (1998, p. 71) stated that “Any interpretation of African culture must begin at once to
dispense with the notion that, in all things, Europe is teacher and Africa is pupil. ” He used the
teacher–student metaphor to refer to the issue of “culture as text and culture as theory ” that
Miike (2004) pinpointed. There has been an implicit tendency to approach Western cultures
from a student’s perspective and non-Western cultures from a teacher’s perspective in the study
of culture and communication. In fact, much intercultural communication research deals with
non-Western cultures as targets for analysis and critique, but not as resources for theoretical
insight. Even critical intercultural communication studies often fail to approach non-Western
cultures from a student ’s perspective and see cultures as texts for deconstruction rather than
theories for reconstruction. Therefore, it also promotes a teacher ’s perspective on non-Western
cultures, which decenters and dislocates non-Western people. We cannot appreciate cultures
when we always analyze and critique them. We can appreciate cultures when we learn from
them (Miike, 2006). The time is long overdue for intercultural communication professionals to
challenge and change this problematic structure of culture learning.
The third issue is communication equality and mutuality in intercultural contexts. It is impos-
sible to have communication equality, that is, an appreciation of the nuances, philosophies, and
bases of communication without confronting communication imperialism (Asante, 2005; Miike,
2007). It is essential for humans to attempt to “feel” into the other culture if we are to be
abundant communicators in intercultural contexts. Of course, feeling into is not enough. We
must seek to know the way individuals think and the nature of communities’ philosophies of life
if we are to be satis ﬁed that our messages have been adequately delivered and received. It is one
thing to deliver a message to someone; it is another thing for that message to be received, and yet
another for it to be received as you intended it.
Understandably, communication scholars trying to appreciate the varieties of cultural di ﬀer-
ences become subscribers to the most elaborate and complex theories about human relationship.
If one examines the early works in intercultural communication, what is clear is the singularity
of their progressive agenda, to construct a world of human cultures, without hierarchy, in the
best tradition of communication scholarship. Since the late 1970s, we have seen an explosion of
intercultural work. Scores of articles and manuscripts have been produced. Unfortunately, we
have often become victims of provincial and narrow attitudes about world cultures and there-
fore have produced a plethora of papers that detail ways to inﬂuence at a pragmatic level without
the necessary emphasis on substance in communication.
In particular, the impact of power on communication equality and mutuality has not been
INTRODUCTION  3


--- PAGE 25 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 4
Page 4
scrutinized in many intercultural communication studies. Asante (1980, p. 402) expounded on
the nature and role of power in communication across cultures as follows:
Indeed, as propounded by Eurocentric social scientists, the idea of interaction may be the
principal instrument of the transubstantiation of privilege and power into accepted reality.  It
legitimizes the values of a Eurocentric theoretical perspective on human communication
and makes it possible for the strengthening of the established power relations by obscuring
the power relations as power relations ....  T h e  d ominated culture legitimizes its own
domination by participating in the world view of the dominating culture ....  A s  l o n g  a s
the legitimizing concepts are acceptable to the “illegitimates,” the dominated, then there is
no need for the dominating culture to introduce brute reinforcement for the perception
and domination of its views because to do so would be to disturb the accepted balance of
power and creates an awakening in the “illegitimates” toward the true nature of the
communication interaction.
One of the formidable challenges that interculturalists are facing today is to ﬁnd a way to
properly account for complex issues of power and privilege embedded in communication itself
because, as Asante (1983, p. 9) tersely put, “Intercultural communication as a harmonious
endeavor seeks to create the sharing of power.”
In one way or another, the chapters that follow in the present anthology challenge Eurocentric
intellectual imperialism in cross-cultural communication research, provide indigenous insights
into the intersection of culture and communication, and address equality and mutuality in inter-
cultural communication contexts. We hope to remind scholars and students in the intercultural
ﬁeld of the openness that Asante and Vora (1983, p. 298) emphasized:
The opportunities for creative research into non-Western perspectives are numerous.
Collaborating with scholars from di ﬀerent cultural backgrounds, tapping international
students, living in a di ﬀerent culture for a relatively long period of time, researching with
persons from di ﬀerent but related disciplines in other cultures, and other approaches
provide tremendous exciting avenues for broad intercultural studies. We have the intel-
lectual capability to advance on this new frontier through the acceptance of openness
toward non-Western ideas, perspectives, and philosophies.
Overview of the Book
This edited volume is divided into six parts. Part I, Perspectives on Culture in Theory and
Research, is comprised of three re ﬂexive reviews of literature, which critically examine the
history of intercultural communication scholarship in light of its conceptualizations of culture.
In chapter 1, Dreama G. Moon interrogates how the notions of culture have been constructed
and changed in the intercultural communication literature over the years. In chapter 2, Dolores
Valencia Tanno challenges the often-employed “comparative approach,” which implicitly treats
one culture as the standard to judge another culture, and o ﬀers ethical guidelines for multi-
cultural research. In chapter 3, Robert Shuter argues that culture should not merely serve as a
laboratory for theory validation research and proposes an intracultural imperative as a new
research agenda that returns culture to preeminence.
Part II, Metatheoretical Frameworks for Future Directions, includes three thought-provoking
pieces that guide future theoretical development and methodological re ﬁnement in culture and
communication research. In chapter 4, Moleﬁ Kete Asante asserts that power, ideology, econom-
ics, politics, and symbols have been neglected in the intercultural communication ﬁeld and
suggests that theoretical postures based on African cultural heritages should be formulated in
4  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE, YOSHITAKA MIIKE, & JING YIN


--- PAGE 26 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 5
Page 5
future research on African communication. In chapter 5, Y oshitaka Miike propounds a com-
munication metatheory of Asiacentricity by envisioning its research objectives, content dimen-
sions, and methodological considerations. In chapter 6, Judith N. Martin and Thomas K.
Nakayama map out four contemporary approaches to the study of culture and communica-
tion and delineate six dialectics of intercultural communication practices that may be able to
integrate the ﬁeld’s metatheoretical diversity.
Part III, Contextual Approaches to Culture and Communication, assembles four culture-
speciﬁc inquiries. These emic studies take a careful look at cultural discourses in context and
proﬀer some theoretical and methodological insights into communication practices in particu-
lar communities. In chapter 7, Hui-Ching Chang explicates the what and why of verbal com-
munication among East Asians from a Confucian perspective and urges the importance of
understanding Asian philosophical thought to appreciate Asian styles of communication. In
chapter 8, Nkonko M. Kamwangamalu deﬁnes and delimits the pan-African concept of ubuntu
and its ethical implications for communication in local and global contexts. In chapter 9, Jing
Yin analyzes the construction of Chinese culture in the ﬁlm, The Joy Luck Club , and maintains
that the self –other dichotomy is achieved through selective representation, attribution, and
subsumption of class and gender to culture. In chapter 10, Amira De la Garza explores the
intersection of ontology and methodology and proposes the Four Seasons of Ethnography as a
context-sensitive, co-creative method of inquiry.
Part IV , Impact of Globalization on Intercultural Communication, presents three critical
interrogations about cultural exchange and change in the wave of globalization. In chapter 11,
Yukio Tsuda problematizes the frequent use of English in intercultural interactions as a form
of hegemony, which, in his opinion, is linked with globalization as Anglo-Americanization,
transnationalization, and commercialization. In chapter 12, Rona Tamiko Halualani scrutinizes
Asian mail-order bride catalogs as hegemonic constructions that subjugate Pilipina females to
commodities, sexual objects, and racial others. Such cultural texts, she posits, sustains and
reproduces the dominant Anglo patriarchal ideology and the inequitable racial and gender
relations. In chapter 13, Humphrey A. Regis examines re-importing and re-exporting issues in
global communication by analyzing how cultural practices and artifacts originated in Caribbean
African communities are transported to, and modiﬁed in, Europe and the United States and then
re-imported to Africans in the Caribbean region.
Part V , Identity and Intercultural Communication Competence, consists of three essays that
synthesize and challenge past conceptualizations of multicultural identity and intercultural com-
munication competence. In chapter 14, Guo-Ming Chen and William J. Starosta outline six
approaches to the study of intercultural communication competence and propose a model of
aﬀective intercultural sensitivity, cognitive intercultural awareness, and behavioral intercultural
adroitness. In chapter 15, Lise M. Sparrow challenges Peter Adler’s model of “multicultural man”
and questions if “marginality,” “in-betweenness,” and “uniqueness” are indeed essential charac-
teristics of multicultural identity. In chapter 16, William Kelly applies a critical approach to inter-
personal communication between White U.S. Americans and the Japanese and then presents his
own personal narratives to illustrate alternative visions of intercultural identity and competence.
Part VI, Ethical Considerations in Intercultural Communication, collects four well thought-
out writings for the future of the global society. They concern themselves with ethical issues in
local and global communication. In chapter 17, Hamid Mowlana o ﬀers an Islamic perspective
on ethical communication by highlighting the theory of tawhid, the doctrine of tabligh, the
concept of ummah, the principle of taqwa, and the meaning of amanat. In chapter 18, Anantha
Sudhaker Babbili addresses the contours and complexities of communication ethics in postcolo-
nial India by historicizing the nation ’s colonial experiences and detailing her religious foun-
dations. In chapter 19, Edward W. Said provides a vivid personal account of the question
of Palestine and suggests that the pieties, exuberance, and triumphalism of wars should be
INTRODUCTION  5


--- PAGE 27 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 6
Page 6
re-examined. This edited reader concludes with chapter 20, where Tu Weiming poses some
critical questions about global ethics and convincingly argues that mutual referencing and
learning is vital to human ﬂourishing and social development in the global community.
T oward Harmonious Coexistence
Consciousness expands with time and experience. Scholars working in intercultural communi-
cation have seen the tremendous advances made possible by expanded consciousness. What
those living in the West know about the civilizations of Africa, Asia, and South America is far
more than was known just a few years ago. Connected to vast regions of the world by the
Internet, we have all become organically linked to information. No one needs to declare provin-
ciality anymore. We are truly the world, and more immediate and contemporary images can
replace the old worn-out ones that we may have once had about others or ourselves. In this
regard, a form of globalization has already taken place. We can never be naive again about our
own place in the world. We are not just who we think we are; we are also who others think we
are. Somewhere in the convergence of the two perceptions, we discover always the meaning of
our existence.
So what are the implications for intercultural communication in this type of new world?
Implied in all of the selections in this collection is the idea that the people of the world can
communicate. There is a sense that we are against con ﬂict and in support of the harmonious
coexistence of humans. One does not become involved in communication at the interactive level
without some optimistic perspective in mind. The aim of the scholar as much as the communi-
cator in an ordinary interactive situation is to create a way to engage in harmony. This is no
pipe dream; it is in actuality the only reason why we communicate, that is, to make ourselves
understood in ways that produce harmony.
No one believes that harmony will occur all the time, but we do believe that it is essential that
the communicative doors are open to the possibilities of useful human coexistence. Once the
doors are closed to communication, one cannot have dialogue or discourse; the attitude of the
communicator in this new world should include an openness to the great varieties of human
creativity. The fact of the matter is that Jerusalem is no more sacred than Mecca, or Benares, or
Kyoto, or Ile-Ife to those who see their connections in those places. But neither are any other
places more sacred than Jerusalem. An enormous human creativity sits at the very gate of
our communication process. Until we are able to establish this type of consciousness in the
literature, we will not create it in the commonplaces of ordinary conversation.
T o claim that there is something of T okyo in every city and something of Lagos in every city is
to make a claim for international connectedness based on the exchange of ideas, thoughts, myth,
and goods. We are participants in a world running full speed toward a common language
transmuted, but not because it becomes a language embedded with world ideas rather than
those of a single culture. Of course, this is a new view, but an essential one in the sense that we
are determined to demonstrate by the present volume a variety of ways that we can approach
human communication in a global manner. Global cannot mean the prosecution of a single
cultural reality as if it is global; it must mean the acceptance of an integrative global system
where those who communicate are able to bring into consideration the yuan-fen and nkrabea as
well as Western concepts.
Our work as scholars is to assist in mapping where we have been and where we are going as
human beings. However, only a radical reassessment of our traditional patterns in communica-
tion can provide us with a model, a scheme, an understanding of our future (Asante, 2005). As
simple patterns of Western communication universalized to resemble a world system, the com-
munication models of the past have brought us to the brink of chaos. There is general agreement
that we cannot order and generalize about the nature of the human reality without assembling
6  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE, YOSHITAKA MIIKE, & JING YIN


--- PAGE 28 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 7
Page 7
more information from other than Western cultures. This is our challenge, and it is one that we
must confront fully if we are to appreciate causal relationships among phenomena in di ﬀerent
cultures and nations. Our map, therefore, is not simple; it is complicated, and the work of the
scholars we present in these pages is di ﬃcult but rewarding for those who wish to enter the
world of the complex which, after all, is the world we live in.
References
Asante, M. K. (1980). Intercultural communication: An inquiry into research directions. In D. Nimmo
(Ed.), Communication yearbook (Vol. 4, pp. 401–410). News Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Asante, M. K. (1983). The ideological signi ﬁcance of Afrocentricity in intercultural communication.
Journal of Black Studies, 14(1), 3–19.
Asante, M. K. (1998). The Afrocentric idea (Rev. ed.). Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Asante, M. K. (2005). Race, rhetoric, and identity: The architecton of soul . Amherst, NY: Humanity
Books.
Asante, M. K., & Vora, E. (1983). T oward multiple philosophical approaches. In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.),
Intercultural communication theory: Current perspectives (pp. 293–298). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Asante, M. K., & Gudykunst, W. B. (Eds.). (1989). Handbook of international and intercultural communica-
tion. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Asante, M. K., Newmark, E., & Blake, C. A. (Eds.). (1979). Handbook of intercultural communication .
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Chen, G.-M., & Starosta, W. J. (Eds.). (2000). Communication and global society. New Y ork: Peter Lang.
Chen, G.-M., & Starosta, W. J. (Eds.). (2004). Dialogue among diversities  [ International and Intercultural
Communication Annual, Vol. 27]. Washington, DC: National Communication Association.
Collier, M. J. (Ed.). (2000). Constituting cultural diﬀerence through discourse [International and Intercultural
Communication Annual, Vol. 23]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Collier, M. J. (Ed.). (2001). Transforming communication about culture: Critical new directions [International
and Intercultural Communication Annual, Vol. 24]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Collier, M. J. (Ed.). (2002). Intercultural alliances: Critical transformation  [ International and Intercultural
Communication Annual, Vol. 25]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fong, M., & Chuang, R. (Eds.). (2004). Communicating ethnic and cultural identity. Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littleﬁeld.
Gonzalez, A., Houston, M., & Chen, V . (Eds.). (2004). Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communi-
cation (4th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Jackson, R. L. (Ed.). (2004). African American communication and identities: Essential readings . Thousands
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jackson, R. L., & Richardson, E. B. (Eds.). (2003). Understanding African American rhetoric: Classical origins
to contemporary innovations. New Y ork: Routledge.
Jandt, F. E. (Ed.). (2004). Intercultural communication: A global reader. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (Ed.). (2005). From generation to generation: Maintaining cultural identity over time .
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Lengel, L. B. (Ed.). (2005). Intercultural communication and creative practice: Music, dance, and women’s
cultural identity. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Lustig, M. W., & Koester, J. (Eds.). (2006). AmongUS: Essays on identity, belonging, and intercultural
competence (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Martin, J. N., Nakayama, T. K., & Flores, L. A. (Eds.). (2002). Readings in intercultural communication:
Experiences and contexts (2nd ed.). New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Miike, Y. (2003). Beyond Eurocentrism in the intercultural ﬁeld: Searching for an Asiacentric paradigm.
In W. J. Starosta & G.-M. Chen (Eds.), Ferment in the intercultural ﬁeld: Axiology/value/praxis
(pp. 243–276). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Miike, Y. (2004). Rethinking humanity, culture, and communication: Asiacentric critiques and contri-
butions. Human Communication: A Journal of the Paci ﬁc and Asian Communication Association , 7(1),
67–82.
Miike, Y. (2006). Non-Western theory in Western research? An Asiacentric agenda for Asian communica-
tion studies. Review of Communication, 6(1/2), 4–31.
Miike, Y. (2007). An Asiacentric reﬂection on Eurocentric bias in communication theory. Communication
Monographs, 74(2), 272–278.
Milhouse, V . H., Asante, M. K., & Nwosu, P . O. (Eds.). (2001). Transcultural realities: Interdisciplinary
perspectives on cross-cultural relations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
INTRODUCTION  7


--- PAGE 29 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 8
Page 8
Orbe, M. P ., Allen, B. J., & Flores, L. A. (Eds.). (2006). The same and di ﬀerent: Acknowledging the diversity
within and between cultural groups  [International and Intercultural Communication Annual , Vol. 29].
Washington, DC: National Communication Association.
Rogers, E. M., & Steinfatt, T. M. (1999). Intercultural communication. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Said, E. W. (1993). Culture and imperialism. New Y ork: Vintage.
Samovar, L. A., Porter, R. E., & McDaniel, E. R. (Eds.). (2006). Intercultural communication: A reader
(11th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Shuter, R. (1990). Patterns of intracultural communication [Special issue]. Southern Communication Journal,
55(3), 237–328.
Sitaram, K. S., & Prosser, M. H. (Eds.). (1998). Civic discourse: Multiculturalism, cultural diversity, and global
communication. Stamford, CT: Ablex.
Starosta, W. J., & Chen, G.-M. (Eds.). (2003). Ferment in the intercultural ﬁeld: Axiology/value/praxis
[International and Intercultural Communication Annual, Vol. 26]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Starosta, W. J., & Chen, G.-M. (Eds.). (2005). T aking stock in intercultural communication: Where to
now? [ International and Intercultural Communication Annual , Vol. 28]. Washington, DC: National
Communication Association.
Tanno, D. V ., & González, A. (Eds.). (1997). Politics, communication, and culture [International and Intercul-
tural Communication Annual, Vol. 20]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tanno, D. V ., & González, A. (Eds.). (1998). Communication and identity across cultures  [International and
Intercultural Communication Annual, Vol. 21]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tanno, D. V ., & González, A. (Eds.). (1999). Rhetoric in intercultural contexts [International and Intercultural
Communication Annual, Vol. 22]. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
8  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE, YOSHITAKA MIIKE, & JING YIN


--- PAGE 30 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 9
Page 9
Part I
Perspectives on Culture in Theory
and Research


--- PAGE 31 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 10
Page 10


--- PAGE 32 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 11
Page 11
1
Concepts of “Culture”
Implications for Intercultural
Communication Research
Dreama G. Moon
A discursive formation can be seen as a system of statements that “set the context in which
constitutive statements are held to . . . be ‘true’” (Rice, 1992, p. 339). For Foucault, “truth” is
an “ensemble of rules . . . [and] a system of ordered procedures for the production, regulation,
distribution, and operation of statements” (1980, pp. 132–133). In essence, a Foucaultian genea-
logical inquiry seeks to trace the “descent” and “emergence” of new discursive formations and
to chart a discourse ’s lineage across the path of contradictions and logical discontinuities,
particularly the “accidents, chance, passion, petty malice, surprises . . . and power ” (Davidson,
1986, p. 224) that foster discursive formations (Rice, 1992).
In this Foucaultian sense, I interrogate the historical emergence of intercultural communica-
tion as a ﬁeld of inquiry and the subsequent impact this has had on intercultural communica-
tion scholarship. In addition, I examine how the con ﬁguration of the ﬁeld a ﬀects the ability
of scholars to engage in current theoretical debates. If it is true that disciplines as a group
“constitute systems of control in the production of discourse ” (Foucault, 1972, p. 222), inquiry
into the formation of intercultural communication discourse should serve to create a vision
of not only where we have been, but where we are and where next we might want to go as
intercultural communication scholars.
The task is to highlight a historical moment in the formation of intercultural communication
discourse in which particular statements came to be taken as “truth” within the ﬁeld. In course, I
brieﬂy revisit the era encompassing the work of Edward T. Hall at the Foreign Service Institute
(FSI), review a sample of intercultural communication scholarship published in communication
journals during the 1970s, and then discuss current theoretical debates and their impact — or
lack of— on intercultural communication scholarship. From a Foucaultian frame of power and
knowledge, I then examine the construction of the discipline of intercultural communication
and how certain statements became hegemonic and deﬁning while others did not.
In the course of developing the above argument, I pay particular attention to the text of
Leeds-Hurwitz (1990) as it attempts to provide the de ﬁnitive history of the ﬁeld. I deconstruct
that text to show the absence of alternative readings of culture. Next, I examine published work
in the 1970s and 1980s, when the discipline of intercultural communication becomes crystal-
lized. Finally, I end by examining contemporary work in the ﬁeld and indicating some con-
tributions that critical feminist theory can make to a broader intercultural communication
inquiry.
11


--- PAGE 33 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 12
Page 12
A Genealogy of Intercultural Communication
Employing a dialectic of continuity and discontinuity, Foucault (1980) argues that “historical
breaks always include some overlapping, interaction, and echoes between the old and the new ”
(p. 361). Through examining such ruptures, one can begin to “grasp historical events in their
real complexity” (Best & Kellner, 1991, p. 46). One such “break” with respect to intercultural
communication encompasses the creation of the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) and the role
played there by anthropologist Edward T. Hall. Indeed, this era is often marked as the “begin-
ning” of the ﬁeld of intercultural communication (Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990); its importance to the
development and formation of intercultural communication as a ﬁeld has been documented
(e.g., Harman & Briggs, 1991; Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990). However, according to Leeds-Hurwitz
(1990), Hall’s work “was shaped by the speci ﬁc context of the FSI ” (p. 260). More to the point,
his vision of and approach to the study of “culture” was substantially altered by his experiences
at the FSI. Though acknowledged by Leeds-Hurwitz (1990), the implications of Hall ’s trans-
formative experience at the FSI remain unexamined. In light of this, I revisit the development
of the FSI and Hall ’s experience there, paying particular attention to the connection between
power and knowledge.
Dis/abling legacy?: Edward T. Hall and the FSI
The Foreign Service Institute was formally established in 1947 to provide career-long inservice
training to Foreign Service o ﬃcials. In 1951, Edward T. Hall joined the sta ﬀ (Leeds-Hurwitz,
1990). It should be noted that the duties of Service o ﬃcers were not limited to diplomatic ones
in the strictest sense of the word. Much of their role included feeding important information
regarding their countries of assignment back to the U.S. government. If Foreign Service per-
sonnel were to be the “eyes and ears” of the government, however, they would require a variety
of specialized cultural training.
The training that Hall and his associates o ﬀered to foreign service personnel consisted of
“beginning instruction in the language of the country of assignment, orientation to the mission
and its philosophy, limited study of the country and area,” as well as limited anthropological and
linguistic conceptualizations of “culture” (Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990, p. 267). However, many of the
FSI students found the anthropological concept of culture as a shared historically transmitted
system of codes — or in Hall and Hall ’s (1989) words, “shared information along with shared
methods of coding, storing, and retrieving that information ” (pp. xiii–xiv)— diﬃcult to under-
stand and irrelevant, preferring more speci ﬁc and concrete information. The trainees ’ limited
perceptions and emphasis on goal achievement complicated the training task for Hall and his
associates. Hall (1956) writes:
The younger oﬃcers . . . because of the emphasis on “political” reporting, often were left
with the idea that there was nothing of importance to be learned from the foreigner as a
member of his culture, and that if they could just get to the “right person,” in the political
sense, the cold dope on any given situation could be obtained.
(p. 7)
This attitude re ﬂected what Hall (1956) called the “self-evident truths ” of the trainees —
unquestioned, unexamined, taken-for-granted beliefs assumed to be “true” and “common
sensical”— against and with which Hall struggled. Two of these taken-for-granted beliefs were
particularly problematic: the ﬁrst being the old saw that “people are the same wherever you go”
and the other being “the best way to learn is through personal experience ” (Hall, 1956). The
training situation was further complicated by other problems including bureaucratic red tape,
12  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 34 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 13
Page 13
disrespect for academics in general and anthropologists in particular, and the view that training
was unneeded and unimportant (Hall, 1956).
Unable to overcome these obstacles, Hall and his colleagues were forced to abandon an
anthropological view of “culture” and to treat “culture” in a pragmatic, goal-oriented manner.
According to Leeds-Hurwitz (1990), this decision set the agenda for intercultural communica-
tion as a ﬁeld of inquiry. She summarizes the connections between Hall ’s work and current
intercultural communication research in the following ways: (1) comparison of (national) cul-
tures rather than focus on a single culture, (2) a move from macroanalysis (i.e., culture in
general) to microanalysis (i.e., smaller cultural units such as tone of voice, gestures, time and
spatial relations), (3) a focus on interaction between members of di ﬀerent cultures (i.e., dyadic
emphasis), (4) communication as patterned, learned, and analyzable, (5) use of “real life” inter-
cultural experiences as teaching tools, (6) use of descriptive linguistics, and (7) an expanded
audience for intercultural training (i.e., international business) (pp. 263 –264). In short, when
taken together, these statements comprise the current discursive rules of inquiry within the ﬁeld
of intercultural communication. As such, they set the conditions of possibility for producing,
regulating, and distributing knowledge about intercultural communication discourse.
While it is clear that political interests of the time dictated how the notion of “culture” was
conﬁgured at the FSI, it is not clear why or under what circumstances this notion of “culture”
was later adopted by intercultural communication scholars. In fact, there is evidence that at
least during the decade of the seventies, what was de ﬁned as “culture” and as “intercultural
communication” was less constrained.
The “Habeas Corpus” of the 1970s
In this section I focus on intercultural communication articles found in journals published within
the discipline of communication and identi ﬁed as such in the Index to Journals in Communica-
tion Studies Through 1990  (Matlon, 1992) — the so-called Matlon Index. 1 As Matlon ’s Index is
published by the ﬁeld’s national professional association (Speech Communication Association),
it serves as an indicator of what is formally understood as “intercultural communication ”
research within the ﬁeld. Publication in journals such as those listed in Matlon ’s Index have an
impact on tenure and other career achievements made by communication scholars. With only
three articles published during the 1950s and six in the 1960s, Matlon (1992) cites 52 additional
intercultural communication articles published in the following communication scholarly jour-
nals during the 1970s: Journal of Communication (28), Communication Quarterly (5), Southern
States Communication Journal  (2), Communication Monographs  (3), Communication Research
(5), The Quarterly Journal of Speech  (3), Journalism Quarterly (2), Western Journal of Communi-
cation (1), Central States Speech Journal  (2), and Communication Education (1).
2 Several trends
are noted in this literature. These trends are discussed in turn.
Most signi ﬁcant in this body of work is the diverse ways in which “culture” is de ﬁned.
Although a series of articles dealing with the global impact of media deﬁne “culture” in terms of
nation-state (e.g., Pipe, 1979; Porat, 1978; Righter, 1979), most others conceptualize “culture” in
terms of race, social class, and gender identity. For instance, Daniel (1970a, 1970b) argues that
communication between the poor and the a ﬄuent should be viewed as a case of cross-cultural
communication. Whiting (1971) and Whiting and Hitt (1972) examine code-restrictedness
and problem-solving communication among lower and middle class black and white teenagers.
Philipsen (1975, 1976) examines how talk is used by working class white men. Rich (1971)
investigates interracial communication in the classroom between Black, Chicano, Anglo, Native,
and Japanese American students. Chesebro (1973) juxtaposes the goals and beliefs of
“establishment” and “counter” cultures that result in rhetorical conﬂicts.
While many of the studies cited above compare two or more cultures, a number of other
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 13


--- PAGE 35 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 14
Page 14
studies are concerned with the explication of one culture. For instance, Dubner (1972) examines
nonverbal aspects of Black English. Daniel and Smitherman (1976) explicate the Traditional
African Worldview and argue for its signiﬁcance in understanding African American communi-
cation. Shuter (1979) investigates the use of the “dap” in the military — a handshake used by
African American soldiers to express solidarity.
Also of note are the variety of methods employed in studying intercultural communication.
Philipsen (1975, 1976) utilizes ethnographic methods. Rich (1971) employs case studies. Whiting
and Hitt (1972) use a quasi-experimental design, and Dubner (1972) conducts a textual analysis
of ﬁlm, previous research, and popular literature.
Evident too in this body of research is a concem for and an involvement with social debates
of the 1970s. Gregg, McCormack, and Pedersen (1970), Daniel (1970a, 1970b), Rich (1971),
Dubner (1972), Lumsden, Brown, Lumsden, and Hill (1974), Daniel and Smitherman (1976),
Colquit (1977), Sayer (1979), and Shuter (1979) in various ways attempt to come to terms with
or oﬀer insight into the ways in which communicative di ﬀerences play into the social problems
between Anglo and African Americans. In a similar vein, Daniel (1970a, 1970b), Whiting and
Hitt (1972), and Philipsen (1975, 1976) attempt to highlight how social class di ﬀerences nega-
tively aﬀect communication. Indeed, a 1977 special issue of Journal of Communication  entitled
“When Cultures Clash” is devoted to the examination of the e ﬀects of new technologies, prod-
ucts, and systems of communication on “authentic” or traditional cultures (e.g., Katz, 1977;
Lomax, 1977). In addition, a number of articles address the eﬀects of the “New World Informa-
tion Order” on developing countries (e.g., Grossberg, 1979; Nordenstrong, 1979; Righter, 1979).
Lastly, a number of articles call into question some of the underlying assumptions of com-
munication inquiry. For instance, in a study of communication competence across social class,
Whiting (1971) suggests that as most researchers are middle class and insensitive to working
class communication strategies, scholarly investigations of “competence” may be class-biased. In
a similar vein, Colquit (1977) argues that de ﬁnitions of “competence” are race-biased and
privilege the communicative style of middle class white Americans. Dubner (1972) argues that
many of the communication problems between African Americans and Anglo Americans are
largely due to (faulty) interpretations of the behaviors of “Others” by dominant group members.
Shuter (1977) ﬁnds that Edward Hall ’s assumptions about nonverbal forms of communication
(i.e., proxemics and haptics) do not bear out when the gender of the participants is taken into
account. Noting the ethnocentrism of American communication scholarship and its isolation
from European thought (e.g., Marxism, structuralism), Carey (1975) asks: Where, if anywhere,
does ideology leave oﬀ and science begin?
In examining the articles published in the 1970s, some patterns emerge. Up until about 1977,
“culture” is conceptualized in a variety of ways (i.e., race, social class, gender, and nation),
diverse analytical methods are utilized, and there is deep interest in how intersections between
various nodes of cultural identity both play out in, and are constructed by, communication.
Starting about 1978, “culture” comes to be conceived almost entirely in terms of “nation-state”
and by 1980, “culture” is predominantly con ﬁgured as a variable in positivist research projects
(see Appendix for a chronological listing of published articles throughout the eighties). As
shown below, this view of “culture” becomes further entrenched throughout the decade of the
eighties.
Into the eighties
The ﬁrst article published in the decade of the eighties (Jin, 1980) is an empirical test of accul-
turation. By 1983, the intercultural communication literature begins to be dominated by Gudy-
kunst and associates and cross cultural tests of uncertainty reduction theory (e.g., Gudykunst,
1985; Gudykunst & Hammer, 1988; Gudykunst, Seung-Mock, & Nishida, 1985; Gudykunst,
14  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 36 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 15
Page 15
Sodetani, & Sonoda, 1987). Working out of a positivist tradition, the studies of Gudykunst and
associates account for almost one-half of the articles published during the 1980s — 12 out of the
29 published works. The conceptualization of “culture” as nation-state, comparison of cultures,
a focus on dyadic interaction between members of di ﬀerent cultures, and microanalysis charac-
terize much of the work published during this decade. Furthermore, Gudykunst and Nishida
(1989) outline their “objectivist” approach to the study of intercultural communication which
strikingly corresponds to the discursive rules for intercultural communication scholarship as
laid out by Leeds-Hurwitz (1990) and attributed to Hall.
Clearly, the year of 1980 represents a “disjuncture” in the study of intercultural communica-
tion. It is during this time that a heterogeneous notion of “culture” gets displaced. Foucault
(1972) observes that such “breaks” or “ruptures” are so radical that an entire way of knowing
a phenomenon is altered irrevocably. This certainly appears to be the case in regards to what
was published from the 1970s to the 1980s in the ﬁeld of intercultural communication. It is of
more than passing interest that this disjuncture occurs in conjunction with other ruptures, in
particular the rise of Reaganomics in the United States and Thatcherism in Great Britain.
How is this “disjuncture” to be accounted for, and what are the ramiﬁcations for the study of
intercultural communication? Casmir and Asuncion-Lande (1990) oﬀer some insight into these
issues. T oward the end of the 1970s, many studies were published that addressed the diﬀusion of
innovations from one culture to another, particularly so in the Journal of Communication. Indeed,
a special issue of the Journal of Communication was devoted to this topic in 1977 and di ﬀusion
studies dominated in both the 1978 and 1979 issues of the journal as well (see Appendix for a
chronological listing). Casmir and Asuncion-Lande (1990) suggest that the impact of these
studies on the ﬁeld of intercultural communication was in “moving the locus of communication
research from the United States to various cultures in which communication concepts, struc-
tures, styles, and functions [were] not similar to our own” (p. 288). In other words, the emphasis
on deﬁning “culture” as nation-state is attributed to the international interest created by these
diﬀusion studies.
In addition, the late 1970s witnessed dissent within the ﬁeld regarding the status of the
discipline of intercultural communication itself. Following the social sciences and eschewing
the “faddism” of the seventies, intercultural communication scholars extolled “methodological
rigor” as a means of transforming the discipline into one that would be taken seriously both
within and outside the academy (Casmir & Asuncion-Lande, 1990, p. 282). Not surprisingly,
“methodological rigor” involved the “careful application of statistical and mathematical models”
(Gudykunst, 1983a) and placed a priority on theory development and testing (Gudykunst,
1983b). Shuter (1990) observes that:
Intercultural studies in national and regional speech communication journals are neither of
an etic or emic nature; they are products of a nomothetic model developed in psychology
that drives communication research and aims at identifying laws of human interaction
rather than describing cultural patterns.
(p. 239)
Shuter goes on to argue that much intercultural communication research is concerned with
reﬁning existent communication theories (i.e., uncertainty reduction) wherein “culture” serves
principally as a “research laboratory for testing the validity of communication paradigms ”
(p. 238). Although Shuter argues for the importance of “culture” in intercultural communica-
tion inquiry, he does not question the conceptualization of “culture” in terms of national
boundaries. In fact, his above remarks are located in an introductory essay of a 1990 special issue
of the Southern Communication Journal  dealing with intracultural communication within and
across national boundaries.
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 15


--- PAGE 37 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 16
Page 16
In summary, it appears that the “disjuncture” that occurred around 1980 within the ﬁeld
of intercultural communication had its roots in a variety of in ﬂuences, including the political
and capitalist interests of the United States, the impact of di ﬀusion studies, and the felt need
to establish disciplinary status through the adoption of social scienti ﬁc approaches. What so
often gets lost in the traditional rhetoric of historical accounts is the interplay of power relations.
This is the single issue that intercultural communication research published in the 1970s speaks
to most clearly and one that the majority of the work in the 1980s obscures. By conceptualizing
“culture” in a variety of ways and challenging dominant de ﬁnitions of taken-for-granted com-
munication concepts such as that of “competence,” these scholars brought into question
hegemonic assumptions about the nature of “culture” and often “centered” the voices of the less
powerful (e.g., Daniel ’s 1970 discussion of communication from the perspective of the poor).
Diverse readings of “culture” encourage the inclusion of a power analytic in the study of
intercultural communication and contest the notion of “culture” as unproblematically shared.
A plurality of perspectives also encourages debate. For example, Colquit (1977) challenges
deﬁnitions of “competence” that privilege the communicative style of middle class white
Americans, while, in vehement disagreement, Sayer (1979) claims that mastery of a “socially
superior” (dominant) language is not racist. These and similar debates in much of the work
published in the 1970s show evidence for the inherently contested nature of “culture.” As Dirks,
Eley, and Ortner (1994) remind us, “culture [may be seen] as multiple discourses, occasionally
coming together in large systemic con ﬁgurations, but more often coexisting within dynamic
ﬁelds of interaction and con ﬂict” (p. 4). This contested nature of “culture” often gets lost in
homogenizing views of “culture as nationality ” where dominant cultural voices are often the
only ones heard, where the “preferred” reading of “culture” is the only reading. This certainly
seems the case in most of the intercultural communication work published in the eighties. As we
have seen, in many of these studies the experiences and self-reports of privileged members of the
United States and Japan represent “culture” for all cultural members.
Discussion
From my reading of the intercultural communication scholarship published in the 1970s, it is
clear that this body of literature deviates— often dramatically so— from the discursive rules that,
according to Leeds-Hurwitz (1990) now de ﬁne intercultural communication scholarship.
Indeed, according to Leeds-Hurwitz, this body of work is clearly not intercultural communica-
tion and is therefore absent in her account of intercultural scholarship. How might intercultural
communication scholars recover the seventies in order to create a broader intercultural com-
munication in the 1990s? Rumblings of this move to recover are already being heard within
the ﬁeld.
This essay calls for the insertion of more complex notions of “culture” into intercultural com-
munication scholarship. Such reconceptualizations would entail substantive rethinking of the
ﬁeld and attendant goals, desires, needs, and visions of our work. We must again, as in the 1970s,
seriously consider whose interests are served by continuing to construct “culture” primarily in
terms of national boundaries and by maintaining the current focus on the development of
“intercultural cookbooks” for interaction. This re-visioning needs to be a collective e ﬀort by a
community of scholars. I would like to o ﬀer some possible directions as suggested by critical/
feminist theoretical perspectives.
Most immediately, insights derived by critical/feminist scholars have the potential to expand
the predominant conceptualizations of “culture” currently accepted in intercultural communi-
cation inquiry. As a rule, intercultural communication scholars are not interested in the idea
of “culture” per se, but use operationalized notions of cultural variation (e.g., individualism/
collectivism) as one among many independent variables that a ﬀect the dependent variable
16  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 38 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 17
Page 17
(i.e., communicative phenomena such as uncertainty reduction, Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989).
“Culture,” at this level, is most often deﬁned as nationality, and the constructedness of this posi-
tion and its intersection with other positions such as gender and social class is not considered.
The outcome is that diverse groups are treated as homogeneous, di ﬀerences within national
boundaries, ethnic groups, genders, and races are obscured, and hegemonic notions of “culture”
are presented as “shared” by all cultural members. Moreover, intercultural communication
of this sort is most often studied within dyads wherein two disembodied, ahistorical beings
communicate across cultures.
The utilization of critical/feminist perspectives would allow intercultural communication
scholars to employ more sophisticated and politicized analyses of cultural identity in general and
to examine how these identities are constructed in communication, as well as how they a ﬀect
communication. For instance, feminist scholars such as Marsha Houston (1992), Patricia Hill
Collins (1993), and bell hooks (1989) argue that inquiry must address interlocking and overlap-
ping nodes of identity (i.e., race, class, and gender) rather than focus on any one node alone.
Wood (1994) reminds us that notions of femininity and masculinity, constructed di ﬀerently
across lines of race, class, nation, inform the communication process. Cultural feminists such as
Johnson (1989) argue that women are culturally diﬀerent from men and that “woman’s culture”
should be treated as analytically distinct from that of men.
Regarding the notion of “culture” as shared, Dirks et al. (1994) asks “By whom? In what
ways? and Under what conditions? ” (p. 3). Such insights have major implications for intercul-
tural communication scholarship. For instance, in light of the fact that Shuter (1977) discovered
that commonly accepted ideas about nonverbal communication across and within cultures
derived from the work of Edward T. Hall do not pertain when gender is taken into account, the
exclusion of this aspect of cultural identity in intercultural communication inquiry is diﬃcult to
understand or justify.
Another critical/feminist notion that intercultural communication scholars could ﬁnd useful
is Alcoﬀs (1988) idea of “positionality,” as it directs attention to the context in which subjects are
situated rather than focusing on the individual characteristics of the person. In this way, subjects
become embodied, contextualized, historicized— a site of contradiction rather than one that is
static, unitary, stable, ﬁxed, and thereby indiﬀerent to context and history. Assuming a diﬀerent
positional perspective has interesting implications for intercultural communication research.
For instance, research employing a construction of “culture-as-nationality” could include an
examination of interactants ’ positions within their own social structures in relation to gender,
social class, status group, ethnicity, religion, and so forth, and could explore how this positional-
ity a ﬀects and/or is constructed in intercultural interactions. In short, if “culture” signi ﬁes
the intersection of various subject positions within any given society, then ways of studying
intercultural communication that acknowledge this multi-facetedness are needed.
These approaches would require a vastly deeper understanding of intracultural communica-
tion than is currently available. Without a sense of how communication is patterned within
groups, we can have little understanding of how that communication di ﬀers from or resembles
communication between groups (Shuter, 1990). All too often intercultural communication
scholars focus their research eﬀorts on privileged Anglo American and Japanese college students.
The result has been the formation of what van Dijk (1987) calls “elite” discourse and what I call
“colonizer” discourse. In short, we know quite a bit about the communication patterns of social
elites in this and other countries, but little or nothing about those of “Others.” In part, our lack
of knowledge stems from the imposition of dominant de ﬁnitions and constructs onto the
communication of “Others,” with the resulting comparison of their communication to that of
the dominant group(s) in the language of dominance.
Nakayama’s (1994) “Other/wise” reading of texts oﬀers an alternative approach to colonizer/
ing discourse. In Nakayama ’s (1994) terms, an “Other” is called up — essentialized and
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 17


--- PAGE 39 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 18
Page 18
centered— in order to view social relations and communication from an “Other” place. This
strategy enables insights and perspectives usually ignored or marginalized. What would intercul-
tural communication look like when viewed from these “Other” places? Would uncertainty
reduction theory “hold water ” when viewed through the lens of Collins ’s (1993) Afrocentric
feminist epistemology which assumes that making connections is a primary motive in human
interaction rather than the reduction of uncertainty? How would understandings of intercul-
tural communication be enriched if the reduction of uncertainty/anxiety was assumed to be a
Western rather than a global concern? What could be learned if notions such as intercultural
communication competence were studied “Other/wise?” How would theories of intercultural
communication be enriched or expanded by taking such positions?
In this decade, we are seeing more scholarly work that takes communication within cultural
groups as a primary focus which, in turn, allows us to gain insight into intracultural communi-
cation patterns (e.g., Collier, Ribeau, & Hecht, 1986; Collier, 1988; Hecht, Ribeau, & Alberts,
1989; Hecht, Larkey, Johnson, & Reinard, 1992). This work allows us to understand communi-
cation patterns within groups in their own terms without the distraction of comparisons
with dominant group patterns. However, much of this research remains limited to cultural
groups within the United States.
In writing about ethnography, Kau ﬀman (1992) makes several points from which intercul-
tural communication researchers can bene ﬁt. Kau ﬀman argues that the positionality of the
researcher is implicit in every research e ﬀort, thus rendering research an explicitly political act.
This brings to mind Houston’s (1992) metaphor of “multiple jeopardy” in that not only are our
subjects infused with multiple, interlocking identities, but so are researchers. When researchers
perceive themselves as positioned and embodied beings — gendered, racial, sexual, and social
class— we can begin to acknowledge how these particularities shape our research. We can a ﬀect
what gets constituted as a “problem” worthy of study, whose reality/knowledge will be con-
structed as “answers,” and what ﬁndings will be selected or reported as “facts” (Kauﬀman, 1992,
p. 192).
Cultural studies, with its focus on popular culture, provides another alternative frame. Hall
(1981) argues that the media produce “representations of the social world, images, descriptions,
explanations, and frames for understanding how the world is and why it works as it is said and
shown to work ” (p. 35). In a similar vein, van Dijk (1987) claims that most of what white
Americans know about “Others” is gleaned from mass media. If we are to agree with Hall
(1981), then much of how we understand ourselves as cultural members and our interactions
with “Others” is too impacted by media representations. By examining these discourses, we can
better understand these processes and how they a ﬀect and are played out in intercultural
interactions.
With its emphasis on popular culture, feminist cultural studies suggests an alternative to the
study of intercultural communication that moves away from focusing on dyadic intercultural
encounters to popular representations of intercultural communication. In an age when media
images abound in “ﬁrst, second, and third worlds” and keeping in mind van Dijk’s (1987) claim
that much of what we know about “others” we learn from media, what we can learn from
analyses of popular cultural forms of intercultural communication and their audiences seem
especially promising. For example, one could argue that intercultural communication scholar-
ship should rightly include studies of the impact of foreign media communication on cultural
members. If one envisions the interaction between text and audience as another case of com-
munication, then one ’s watching of an Italian ﬁlm as a white American woman is a form of
intercultural communication. Indeed, cultural norms, values, and beliefs are communicated in
media which are actively constructed and deconstructed by audience members. This is worthy of
intense study.
18  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 40 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 19
Page 19
Into the Nineties: A Note in Closure
Matlon’s Index (1992) indicates twelve articles classi ﬁed as intercultural communication pub-
lished in communication journals in the ﬁrst year of the decade of the nineties. The ﬁrst such
work is a historical piece by Leeds-Hurwitz (1990) which lays out the discursive rules of the
ﬁeld attributed to Hall. In a 1990 special issue of the Southern Speech Communication Journal
devoted to intracultural communication, Shuter (1990) calls for the reinsertion of “culture” into
intercultural communication scholarship. He argues that the development of intracultural
communication theory is critical for three reasons:
First, it provides a conceptual framework for analyzing interaction within a society
and world region. Second, intracultural theories demonstrate the inextricable linkage
between communication patterns and sociocultural forces. And, lastly, it provides a con-
ceptual basis for making intercultural communication comparisons between dissimilar
societies.
(p. 243)
The articles in this special issue describe patterns of intercultural communication in groups as
diverse as the Y oruba of Nigeria (Asante, 1990), Greeks (Broome, 1990), Mexicans and Mexican
Americans (Gonzalez, 1990), the North Y emini (Frye, 1990), Chinese and Americans (Ma, 1990),
and Japanese (Di Mare, 1990). Interestingly, these research e ﬀorts do not “qualify” as intercul-
tural communication scholarship under the discursive rules laid out in Leeds-Hurwitz (1990).
As discussed earlier, the late 1980s and early 1990s also exhibit a turn to the intracultural in
terms of domestic cultures within the United States (e.g., Hecht, Ribeau, & Alberts, 1989). These
are hopeful signs. These eﬀorts alone, however, are insuﬃcient to move the ﬁeld of intercultural
communication to include an analytic that recognizes the contested and power-infused nature
of “culture” within intercultural communication.
In this essay, I have examined how the ﬁeld of intercultural communication has been con-
structed and how certain deﬁnitions have become hegemonic, thereby reading others out. I have
paid attention to Leeds-Hurwitz ’s historical account of the ﬁeld and have shown how this
account leaves out the proliﬁc intercultural communication scholarship published in communi-
cation journals during the 1970s. Moreover, I have traced the emergence of the discipline
identifying the disjuncture at which current conceptualizations of intercultural communication
inquiry became hegemonic. Lastly, I suggest how critical/feminist insights might contribute to a
broader intercultural communication inquiry.
Notes
1. Matlon ’s Index is utilized as an external indicator of what is considered as “intercultural communication”
research within the ﬁeld of communication. It is published by the Speech Communication Association,
the discipline’s national professional and academic association. Since Matlon’s as yet has not published
an index covering the years 1992–1995, the intercultural communication articles published in the ﬁeld’s
journals during these years could not be considered here.
2. The Appendix provides a chronological listing of these research articles so that the reader may see
the foci of these inquiries as they evolved during the decade of the seventies. In addition, all of the
published works termed as “intercultural communication” by Matlon are contained in the Appendix in
chronological order by decade as well.
References
Alcoﬀ, L. (1988). Cultural feminism versus post-structuralism: The identity crisis in feminist theory. Signs:
Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 13, 405–436.
Asante, M. K. (1990). The tradition of advocacy in the Y oruba courts. Southern Speech Communication
Journal, 55, 250–259.
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 19


--- PAGE 41 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 20
Page 20
Best, S., & Kellner, D. (1991). Postmodern theory: Critical interrogations . NY: The Guilford Press.
Broome, B. J. (1990). “Palevone”: Foundations of struggle and conﬂict in Greek interpersonal communica-
tion. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 55, 260–275.
Carey, J. W. (1975. Communication and culture. Communication Research, 2, 173–191.
Casmir, F. I., & Asuncion-Lande, N. C. (1990). Intercultural communication revisited: Conceptualization,
paradigm building, and methodological approaches. In James A. Anderson (Ed.), Communication
Yearbook 12 (pp. 278–309). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Chesebro, J. W. (1973). Cultures in con ﬂict— a generic and axiological view. Communication Quarterly ,
21, 11–20.
Collier, M. J. (1988). A comparison of conversations among and between domestic groups: How intra- and
intercultural competencies vary. Communication Quarterly, 36, 122–144.
Collier, M. J., Ribeau, S., & Hecht, M. L. (1986). Intracultural communication rules and outcomes with
three domestic cultures. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 10, 434–457.
Collins, P . H. (1993). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment. New
Y ork: Routledge.
Colquit, J. L. (1977). The student’s right to his own language: A viable model or empty rhetoric? Communi-
cation Quarterly, 25, 17–20.
Daniel, J. (1970a). The facilitation of white-black communication. Journal of Communication , 20,
134–141.
Daniel, J. (1970b). The poor: Aliens in an aﬄuent society: Cross-cultural communication. Communication
Quarterly, 18, 15–21.
Daniel, J. L., & Smitherman, G. (1976). How I got over: Communication dynamics in the Black community.
Quarterly Journal of Speech, 62, 26–39.
Davidson, A. (1986). Archaeology, genealogy, ethics. In D. C. Hoy (Ed.), Foucault: A critical reader
(pp. 221–233). New Y ork: Basil Blackwell.
Di Mare, L. (1990). Ma and Japan. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 55, 319–328.
Dirks, N. B., Eley, G., & Ortner, S. B. (1994). Introduction. In N. B. Dirks, G. Eley & S. B. Ortner (Eds.),
Culture/power/history: A reader in contemporary social theory  (pp. 3 –45) Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Dubner, F. S. (1972). Nonverbal aspects of Black english. Southern Speech Communication Journal , 37,
361–374.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. New Y ork: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, M. (1980). The history of sexuality. New Y ork: Vintage Books.
Frye, P . A. (1990). Form and function of North Y emeni Qat sessions. Southern Speech Communication
Journal, 55, 292–304.
Gonzalez, A. (1990). Mexican “otherness” in the rhetoric of Mexican Americans. Southern Speech
Communication Journal, 55, 276–291.
Gregg, R., McCormack, A. J., & Pedersen, D. (1970). A description of the interaction between black youth
and white teachers in a ghetto speech class. Communication Education, 19, 1–8.
Grossberg, L. (1979). Interpreting the “crisis” of culture in communication theory. Journal of Communica-
tion, 29, 56–68.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1983a). Intercultural communication theory, current perspectives. In W. B. Gudykunst
(Ed.), International and intercultural communication annual 7 (pp. 13–20). Beverly Hills: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1983b). T oward a typology of stranger-host relationships. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 7, 401–413.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1985). The inﬂuence of cultural similarity, type of relationship, and self-monitoring on
uncertainty reduction processes. Communication Monographs, 52, 203–217.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Hammer, M. R. (1988). The in ﬂuence of social identity and intimacy of interethnic
relationships on uncertainty reduction processes. Human Communication Research, 14, 569–601.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1989). Theoretical perspectives for studying intercultural communication.
In M. F. Asante, & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Handbook of international and intercultural communication
(pp. 17–46). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., Seung-Mock, Y., & Nishida, T. (1985). A cross-cultural test of uncertainty reduction
theory: Comparisons of acquaintances, friends, and dating relationships in Japan, Korea, and the U. S.
Human Communication Research, 11, 407–455.
Gudykunst, W. B., Sodetani, L. L., & Sonoda, K. T. (1987). Uncertainty reduction in Japanese-American/
Caucasian relationships in Hawaii. Western Journal of Communication, 51, 256–278.
Hall, E. T. (1956). Orientation and training in government for work overseas. Human Organization, 15,
4–10.
Hall, E. T., & Hall, M. R. (1989). Understanding cultural diﬀerences. Y armouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
20  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 42 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 21
Page 21
Hall, S. (1981). The whites of their eyes. In G. Bridges & Rosalind Brunt (Eds.), Silver linings: Some strategies
for the eighties (pp. 28–52). London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Harman, R. C., & Briggs, N. E. (1991). SIETAR survey: Perceived contributions of the social sciences to
intercultural communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 19–28.
Hecht, M. L., Larkey, L., Johnson, J., & Reinard, J. C. (1992). African American and European American
perceptions of problematic issues in interethnic communication eﬀectiveness. Human Communication
Research, 19, 209–236.
Hecht, M. L., Ribeau, S., & Alberts, J. K. (1989). An Afro-American perspective on interethnic communica-
tion. Communication Monographs, 56, 385–410.
hooks, b. (1989). T alking back: Thinking feminist, thinking black. Boston: South End Press.
Houston, M. (1992). The politics of di ﬀerence: Race, class and women ’s communication. In L. F. Rakow
(Ed.), Women making meaning (pp. 45–59). New Y ork: Routledge.
Jin, K. (1980). Explaining acculturation in a communication framework: An empirical test. Communication
Monographs, 47, 155–179.
Johnson, F. L. (1989). Women’s culture and communication: An analytical perspective. In C. M. Lont &
S. A. Friedley (Eds.), Beyond boundaries: Sex and gender diversity in communication  (pp. 301 –316).
Fairfax, V A: George Mason University Press.
Katz, E. (1977). Can authentic cultures survive new media? Journal of Communication, 27, 113–121.
Kauﬀman, B. J. (1992). Feminist facts: Interview strategies and political subjects in ethnography.
Communication Theory, 2, 187–206.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1990). Notes on the history of intercultural communication: The Foreign Service
Institute and the mandate for intercultural training. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 76, 262–281.
Lomax, A. (1977). Appeal for cultural equity. Journal of Communication, 27, 125–138.
Lumsden, G., Brown, D. R., Lumsden, D., & Hill, T. A. (1974). An investigation of di ﬀerences in verbal
behavior between Black and white informal peer group. Communication Quarterly, 22, 31–36.
Ma, R. (1990). An exploratory study of discontented responses in American and Chinese relationships.
Southern Speech Communication Journal, 55, 305–318.
Matlon, R. J. (Ed.). (1992). Index to journals in communication studies through 1990. Annandale, V A: Speech
Communication Association.
Nakayama, T. K. (1994). Show/down time: “Race,” gender, sexuality, and popular culture. Critical Studies in
Mass Communication, 11, 162–179.
Nordenstrong, K. (1979). Behind the semantics— a strategic design. Journal of Communication, 29, 195–198.
Philipsen, G. (1975). Speaking like a “man” in T eamsterville: Cultural patterns of role enactment in an
urban neighborhood. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 61, 13–22.
Philipsen, G. (1976). Places for speaking in T eamsterville. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 62, 15–25.
Pipe, R. (1979). National policies, international debates. Journal of Communication, 29, 114–123.
Porat, M. U. (1978). Global implications of the information society. Journal of Communication , 28,
70–80.
Rice, J. S. (1992). Discursive formation, life stories, and the emergence of co-dependency: “Power/
knowledge” and the search for identity. The Sociological Quarterly, 33, 337–364.
Rich, A. L. (1971). Some problems in interracial communication. Central States Speech Journal , 22,
228–235.
Righter, R. (1979). Who won? Journal of Communication, 29, 192–194.
Sayer, J. E. (1979). The student ’s right to his own language: A response to Colquit. Communication
Quarterly, 27, 44–46.
Shuter, R. (1977). A ﬁeld study of nonverbal communication in Germany, Italy, and the United States.
Communication Monographs, 44, 298–305.
Shuter, R. (1979). The dap in the military: Hand-to-hand communication. Journal of Communication, 29,
136–142.
Shuter, R. (1990). The centrality of culture. The Southern Communication Journal, 55, 231–249.
van Dijk, T. A. (1987). Communicating racism: Ethnic prejudice in thought and talk . Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Whiting, G. C. (1971). Code restrictedness and opportunities for change in developing countries. Journal of
Communication, 21, 36–57.
Whiting, G. C. & Hitt, W. C. (1972). Code-restrictedness and communication dependent problem solving:
An exploratory study. Communication Monographs, 39, 68–73.
Wood, J. T. (1994). Gendered lives: Communication, gender, and culture. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 21


--- PAGE 43 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 22
Page 22
Appendix
Decade of the 1950s
1951 November Campa, A. L. Language barriers in intercultural relations. Journal of Com-
munication, 7, 41–46.
1952 May Knode, D. P . The Iron Curtain refugee in a new world. Journal of Communi-
cation, 2, 1–5.
1958 Spring Bakonyi, S. Divergence and convergence in culture and communication.
Journal of Communication, 3, 24–30.
Decade of the 1960s
1963 June Keller, P . W. The study of face-to-face international decision-making. Journal
of Communication, 8, 67–76.
1964 Autumn Chu, G. C. Problems of cross-cultural communication research. Journalism
Quarterly, 61, 557–562.
1966 December Wedge, B. Nationality and social perception. Journal of Communication , 16,
278–282.
1966 December Flack, M. J. Communicable and uncommunicable aspects in personal inter-
national relationships. Journal of Communication, 16, 283–290.
1966 December Stewart, E. C. The simulation of cultural di ﬀerences. Journal of Communica-
tion, 16, 291–304.
1968 December Lorimar, E. S., & Dunn, S. W. Reference groups, congruity theory, and
cross-cultural persuasion. Journal of Communication, 18, 354–368.
Decade of the 1970s
1970 January Gregg, R., McCormack, A. J., & Pedersen, D. A description of the interac-
tion between black youth and white teachers in a ghetto speech class.
Communication Education, 29, 1–8.
1970 Spring Bostian, L. R. The two-step ﬂow theory: Cross-cultural implications.
Journalism Quarterly, 67, 109–117.
1970 June Daniel, J. The facilitation of white-black communication. Journal of
Communication, 20, 134–141.
1970 Winter Daniel, J. The poor: Aliens in an a ﬄuent society: Cross-cultural communica-
tion. Communication Quarterly, 18, 15–21.
1971 March Whiting, G. C. Code restrictedness and opportunities for change in develop-
ing countries. Journal of Communication, 21, 36–57.
1971 Winter Rich, A. L. Some problems in interracial communication. Central States
Speech Journal, 22, 228–235.
1972 March Whiting, G. C. & Hitt, W. C. Code-restrictedness and communication
dependent problem solving: An exploratory study. Communication Mono-
graphs, 39, 68–73.
1972 Summer Dubner, F. S. Nonverbal aspects of Black english. Southern Speech Communi-
cation Journal, 37, 361–374.
1973 Spring Chesebro, J. W. Cultures in con ﬂict— a generic and axiological view.
Communication Quarterly, 21, 11–20.
1974 Fall Lumsden, G., Brown, D. R., Lumsden, D., & Hill, T. A. An investigation of
diﬀerences in verbal behavior between black and white informal peer group.
Communication Quarterly, 22, 31–36.
22  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 44 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 23
Page 23
1975 February Philipsen, G. Speaking like a “man” in T eamsterville: Cultural patterns of
role enactment in an urban neighborhood. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 41,
13–22.
1975 March Miller, D. T. The e ﬀect of dialect and ethnicity on communication e ﬀective-
ness. Communication Monographs, 62, 69–74.
1975 April Carey, J. W. Communication and culture. Communication Research , 2,
173–191.
1975 Winter Woodward, G. C. Mysti ﬁcation in the rhetoric of cultural dominance and
colonial control. Central States Speech Journal, 26, 298–303.
1976 February Philipsen, G. Places for speaking in T eamsterville. Quarterly Journal of
Speech, 62, 15–25.
1976 February Daniel, J. L., & Smitherman, G. How I got over: Communication dynamics
in the Black community. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 62, 26–39.
1976 Summer Fine, G. A. Obscene joking across cultures. Journal of Communication , 26,
134–140.
1977 January Stevenson, R. L. Studying communications across cultures. Communication
Research, 4, 113–128.
1977 Spring Katz, E. Can authentic cultures survive new media? Journal of Communica-
tion, 27, 113–121.
1977 Spring Dissanayake, W. New wine in old bottles: Can folk media convey modern
messages? Journal of Communication, 27, 122–124.
1977 Spring Lomax, A. Appeal for cultural equity. Journal of Communication, 27, 125–138.
1977 Spring Pool, I. del Sola. The changing ﬂow of television. Journal of Communication,
27, 139–149.
1977 Spring O ’Brien, R. C. Professionalism in broadcasting in developing countries.
Journal of Communication, 27, 150–153.
1977 Spring Cassirer, H. R. Radio as the people ’s medium. Journal of Communication, 27,
154–157.
1977 Spring Martin, T. H., Byrne, R. B., & Wedemeyer, D. J. Balance: An aspect to the
right to communicate. Journal of Communication, 27, 158–162.
1977 Autumn Kent, K. E. M., & Rush, R. R. International communication as a ﬁeld: A study
of Journalism Quarterly citations. Journalism Quarterly, 54, 580–583.
1977 Fall Colquit, J. L. The student ’s right to his own language: A viable model or
empty rhetoric? Communication Quarterly, 25, 17–20.
1977 November Shuter, R. A ﬁeld study of nonverbal communication in Germany, Italy, and
the United States. Communication Monographs, 44, 298–305.
1977 Winter Goodyear, F. H., & West, A. An organizational framework for cross-cultural
communication. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 42, 178–190.
1978 July Kreiling, A. T oward a cultural studies approach for the sociology of popular
culture. Communication Research, 5, 240–263.
1978 July Leed, E. J. Communications revolutions and the enactment of culture.
Communication Research, 5, 305–319.
1978 July Golding, P ., & Murdock, G. Theories of communication and theories of
society. Communication Research, 5, 339–356.
1978 Winter Rogers, E. M. The rise and fall of the dominant paradigm. Journal of Com-
munication, 28, 64–69.
1978 Winter Porat, M. U. Global implications of the information society. Journal of
Communication, 28, 70–80.
1978 Winter Parker, E. B. An information-based hypothesis. Journal of Communication ,
28, 81–83.
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 23


--- PAGE 45 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 24
Page 24
1978 Winter McAnany, E. G. Does information really work? Journal of Communication ,
28, 84–90.
1979 Spring Masmoudi, M. The new world information order. Journal of Communication,
29, 172–185.
1979 Spring Androunas, E., & Zassoursky, Y. Protecting the sovereignty of information.
Journal of Communication, 29, 186–191.
1979 Spring Righter, R. Who won? Journal of Communication, 29, 192–194.
1979 Spring Nordonstrong, K. Behind the semantics — a strategic design. Journal of
Communication, 29, 195–198.
1979 Summer Pipe, R. National policies, international debates. Journal of Communication ,
29, 114–123.
1979 Summer Eger, J. M. U. S. proposal for progress through negotiations. Journal of
Communication, 29, 124–128.
1979 Summer Heintz, A. The dangers of regulation. Journal of Communication, 29, 129–134.
1979 Summer Freese, J. The dangers of non-regulation. Journal of Communication , 29,
135–137.
1979 Summer Saur, R. A. C. Protection without protectionism. Journal of Communication,
29, 138–140.
1979 Summer Mendelsohn, H. Delusions of technology. Journal of Communication , 29,
142–143.
1979 Summer Hamelink, C. J. Informatics: Third world call for new order. Journal of
Communication, 29, 144–148.
1979 Summer Jacobson, R. E. The hidden issues: What kind of order? Journal of Communi-
cation, 29, 149–155.
1979 Fall Starosta, W. Roots for an older rhetoric: On rhetorical e ﬀectiveness in the
Third World. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 43, 278–287.
1979 Winter Grossberg, L. Interpreting the “crisis” of culture in communication theory.
Journal of Communication, 29, 56–68.
1979 Winter Sayer, J. E. The student ’s right to his own language: A response to Colquit.
Communication Quarterly, 27, 44–46.
1979 Winter Shuter, R. The dap in the military: Hand-to-hand communication. Journal of
Communication, 24, 136–142.
Decade of the 1980s
1980 August Jin, K. Explaining acculturation in a communication framework: An empir-
ical test. Communication Monographs, 47, 155–179.
1980 Winter Jain, H. C, Kanungo, R. N., & Goldhaber, G. M. Attitudes toward a com-
munication system: A comparison of Anglophone and Francophone hospital
employees. Human Communication Research, 6, 178–184.
1981 February Stanback, M. H., & Pearce, W. B. Talking to “the man”: Some communication
strategies used by members of “subordinate” social groups. Quarterly Journal
of Speech, 68, 21–30.
1981 April Mansell, M. Transcultural experience and expressive response. Communica-
tion Education, 30, 93–108.
1982 Fall Chesebro, J. W. Illness as a rhetorical act: A cross-cultural perspective.
Communication Quarterly, 30, 321–331.
1982 Winter Yum, J. O. Communication diversity and information acquisition among
Korean immigrants in Hawaii. Human Communication Research , 8, 154 –
169.
24  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 46 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 25
Page 25
1983 Summer Wolfson, K., & Pearce, W. B. A cross-cultural comparison of the implications
of self-disclosures in conversational logics. Communication Quarterly , 31,
249–256.
1983 Fall Gudykunst, W. B. Similarities and di ﬀerences in perceptions of initial intra-
cultural and intercultural encounters: An exploratory investigation. Southern
Speech Communication Journal, 49, 49–65.
1983 Winter Korzenny, F., Neuendorf, K., Burgoon, M., Burgoon, J. K., & Greenberg,
B. S. Cultural identi ﬁcation as predictor of content preferences of Hispanics.
Journalism Quarterly, 60, 677–685.
1984 March Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. Individual and cultural in ﬂuences on
uncertainty reduction. Communication Monographs, 51, 23–36.
1985 Spring Gudykunst, W. B., Seung-Mock, Y., & Nishida, T. A cross-cultural test of
uncertainty reduction theory: Comparisons of acquaintances, friends, and
dating relationships in Japan, Korea, and the U.S. Human Communication
Research, 11, 407–455.
1985 September Gudykunst, W. B. The in ﬂuence of cultural similarity, type of relationship,
and self-monitoring on uncertainty reduction processes. Communication
Monographs, 52, 203–217.
1985 Fall Gudykunst, W. B. An exploratory comparison of close intracultural and
intercultural friendships. Communication Quarterly, 33, 270–283.
1985 Winter Johnson, J. D., & Tums, A. R. Communication factors related to closer inter-
national ties. Human Communication Research, 12, 259–273.
1986 March Wheeless, L. R., Erickson, K. V ., & Behrens, J. S. Cultural di ﬀerences in dis-
closiveness as a function of locus of control. Communication Monographs ,
53, 36–46.
1986 Spring Choe, J. H., Wilcox, G. B., & Hardy, A. P . Facial expressions in magazine ads:
A cross-cultural comparison. Journalism Quarterly, 63, 122–126.
1986 September Stewart, L. P ., Gudykunst, W. B., Ting-T oomey, S., & Nishida, T. The eﬀects of
decision-making style on openness and satisfaction within Japanese organiza-
tions. Communication Monographs, 53, 236–251.
1986 Winter Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. The in ﬂuence of cultural variability on
perceptions of communication behavior associated with relationship terms.
Human Communication Research, 13, 147–166.
1987 February Gudykunst, W. B., Y ang, S. M., & Nishida, T. Cultural di ﬀerences in self-
consciousness and self-monitoring. Communication Research, 14, 7–34.
1987 Summer Gudykunst, W. B., Sodetani, L. L., & Sonoda, K. T. Uncertainty reduction in
Japanese-American/Caucasian relationships in Hawaii. Western Journal of
Communication, 51, 256–278.
1987 Fall Foeman, A., & Pressley, G. Ethnic culture and corporate culture: Using Black
styles in organizations. Communication Quarterly, 35, 293–307.
1988 Spring Collier, M. J. A comparison of conversations among and between domestic
culture groups: How inter and intracultural competencies vary. Communica-
tion Quarterly, 36, 122–144.
1988 Spring Ting-T oomey, S. Rhetorical sensitivity style in three cultures: France, Japan,
and the United States. Central States Speech Journal, 39, 28–36.
1988 Summer Gudykunst, W. B., & Hammer, M. R. The in ﬂuence of social identity and
intimacy of interethnic relationships on uncertainty reduction processes.
Human Communication Research, 14, 569–601.
1988 December Yum, J. O. The impact of Confucianism on interpersonal relationships and
communication. Communication Monographs, 55, 374–388.
CONCEPTS OF “CULTURE” 25


--- PAGE 47 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 26
Page 26
1989 Spring Chen, G. M. Relationships of the dimensions of intercultural communica-
tion competence. Communication Quarterly, 37, 118–133.
1989 Fall Gonzalez, A. “Participation” at WMEX-FM. Western Journal of Communica-
tion, 53, 385–410.
1989 December Hecht, M. L., Ribeau, S., & Alberts, J. K. An Afro-american perspective on
interethnic communication. Communication Monographs, 55, 385–410.
1989 Winter Gudykunst, W. B., Nishida, T., & Schmidt, K. L. The in ﬂuence of cultural,
relational, and personality factors in uncertainty reduction processes. Western
Journal of Speech Communication, 53, 13–29.
The year of 1990
1990 February Leeds-Hurwitz, W. Notes on the history of intercultural communication: The
Foreign Service Institute and the mandate for intercultural training. Quarterly
Journal of Speech, 76, 262–281.
1990 Spring McCroskey, J. C, Burroughs, N. F., Daun, A., & Richmond, V . P . Correlates of
quietness: Swedish and American perspectives. Communication Quarterly, 38,
127–137.
1990 Spring Shuter, R. The centrality of culture. Southern Speech Communication Journal,
55, 231–249.
1990 Spring Asante, M. K. The tradition of advocacy in the Y oruba courts. Southern
Speech Communication Journal, 55, 250–259.
1990 Spring Broome, B. J. “Palevone”: Foundations of struggle and con ﬂict in Greek
interpersonal communication. Southern Speech Communication Journal , 55,
260–275.
1990 Spring Gonzalez, A. Mexican “otherness” in the rhetoric of Mexican Americans.
Southern Speech Communication Journal, 55, 276–291.
1990 Spring Frye, P . A. Form and function of North Y emeni Qat sessions. Southern Speech
Communication Journal, 55, 292–304.
1990 Spring Ma, R. An exploratory study of discontented responses in American and
Chinese relationships. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 55, 305–318.
1990 Spring Di Mare, L. Ma and Japan. Southern Speech Communication Journal , 55,
319–328.
1990 Fall Andersen, P . A., Lustig, M. W., & Andersen, J. F. Changes in latitude, changes
in attitude: The relationship between climate and interpersonal communica-
tion predispositions. Communication Quarterly, 38, 291–311.
1990 Fall Collier, M. J., & Powell, R. Ethnicity, instructional communication, and
classroom systems. Communication Quarterly, 38, 334–349.
1990 Fall McCroskey, J. C. & Richmond, V . P . Willingness to communicate di ﬀering
cultural perspectives. Southern Speech Communication Journal, 56, 72–77.
26  DREAMA G. MOON


--- PAGE 48 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 27
Page 27
2
Ethical Implications of the Ethnic
“Text” in Multicultural Communication
Studies
Dolores Valencia T anno
Understanding the role of communication in multicultural communities continues to gain
importance in our discipline. Our increased awareness of a diverse society has helped make
the context of “culture” seem less strange alongside other communication contexts such as the
interpersonal, organizational, political, and so on.
Within a multicultural context, communication acts are enriched as they are informed by
a variety of value systems, philosophies, traditions, and histories. A multicultural discursive
community results form an interplay between a speci ﬁc culture’s values and philosophies and
those of the society at large as they play out in language. In some cultural communities, bilin-
guality adds a third dimension to this interplay. These dimensions manifest themselves in
“thick” communication (Geertz, 1973), suggesting not layers of communication but rather an
intertwining, so that it becomes diﬃcult to know where one dimension ends and another begins.
Any knowledge about multicultural communication, therefore, must account for the often
indistinguishable interdependence among these dimensions of communication.
Both the complexity and the relative newness of the multicultural communication context
in our discipline calls for what Bazerman (1992) has described as the “reﬂexive rhetorical
turn” that focuses attention on language and its impact. The “reﬂexive rhetorical turn ” in this
chapter focuses on the multicultural communication research process, paying particular atten-
tion to the language of multicultural research, its relationship to knowledge gained through
comparison rather than dialogue, some ethical imperatives arising therefrom, and what these
may imply for researchers. The ethnic “text” is the pivotal point around which this examination
takes place.
Introduction
An explanation about my use of the terms “multicultural,” “ethics,” and ethnic “text” is appro-
priate at this point. I use the term “multicultural” to describe all the contexts (variously known
as intercultural, cross-cultural, intracultural, international, etc.) within which communication
between, among, and within cultural communities take place. At the same time that the term
“multicultural” captures the diversity of cultural communities and contexts, it is also a reminder
of the multitude of cultural voices waiting to be engaged in empowering dialogue.
The issue of empowerment is embodied in the term “ethics” as one ties it conceptually to
choice. Choice is one part of the essence of ethical communication, the other part being
responsibility for the impact of our communication. In 1968, Winterowd captured this dual
27


--- PAGE 49 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 28
Page 28
essence of ethical communication when he de ﬁned language as “perhaps the only human and
humane act” by which “we can literally talk ourselves to death” (p. 14).
When using the term “text” in relation to the word “ethnic” I follow Bazerman ’s lead in
“The Interpretation of Disciplinary Writing ” (1992). Arguing that his study of social scienti ﬁc
texts “reverses” traditional hermeneutic assumptions, Bazerman (1992) writes: “When looking
at a text in isolation, I look at how the text reaches out beyond the page, what connections
it makes with the reader, the ambient natural world, the ambient social world. I look at how
a text de ﬁnes or reorders relationships and de ﬁnes activities ” (p. 35). This “rhetorical self-
consciousness” (Bazerman, 1992, p. 37) begins with a keen awareness of language use and its
relationship to knowledge. Within critical and social scienti ﬁc multicultural studies, our lan-
guage choices for deﬁnitions, identifying labels, interpretations, and conclusions have the poten-
tial to leap “beyond the page ” and impact groups of people in ways we never intended nor
imagines. Furthermore, the language of our studies composes the knowledge base of multi-
cultural understanding. I will argue that the term “ethnic” becomes an exemplar of a speci ﬁc
“text” in multicultural studies that extends into society, creating a particular and not always
accurate perception about members of cultural groups.
Currently, much of our understanding of multicultural communication is based on the
pursuit of comparative knowledge. We gather information and evaluate it by comparing it to
often unconsciously assumed a priori norms or by comparing it to consciously developed frames
of reference. One result of this is an attribution of relative worth of one norm over another.
Discussing genres of discourse, Hariman (1986) argued that “the act of comparing discourses
implies both manifest de ﬁnitions of substance and latent attributions of status for each genre ”
(p. 38).
In and of itself, comparison is not an unproductive approach for pursuing knowledge and
understanding. In the context of multicultural communication research, however, the act of
comparing communication practices between and among cultures has the potential for the same
consequences of the attribution of greater or lesser status that Hariman speaks about. As an
example of how this might happen, I oﬀer a brief glimpse of the passage through time the word
“ethnic.”
The Ethnic “T ext,” Then and Now
In 1975, Glazer and Moynihan provided a short history of the word “ethnicity,” indicating that,
in its sense of describing the “character or quality of an ethnic group, ” it was ﬁrst used in 1953
by David Riesman in his essay “Some Observations on Intellectual Freedom ” (p. 1). In 1986,
Werner Sollors provided a more comprehensive examination of the use of “ethnicity,” tracing
it back again to Riesman, but reporting that the “apparently ﬁrst occurrences ” of this term
were found in W. Lloyd Warner’s (1945) study of a Massachusetts city (p. 23). In fact, the root
word “ethnic” can be traced back to Greek times. It derived from ethnikos, the Greek word for
nation, and the Ecclesiastical Late Greek word for heathen or pagan; thus to be ethnic was to be a
member of a heathen nation. This meaning survived relatively intact through the eighteenth
century.
Ethnic as heathen or pagan
Examples of “ethnic” as it relates to paganism are found in social, philosophical, and historical
treaties as well as in poetry. In 1588, in An Admonition to the Nobility , William Allen warned:
“This I faie, yf he obeie not, or heare not the churche, let him be taken for an ethnike” (p. xxxvii).
In Leviathan, published in 1651, Hobbes addresses the apostles ’ eﬀorts to warn converts about
“their then Ethnique Princes ” (p. 338). In his A Complete History of Algiers , Morgan (1731)
28  DOLORES VALENCIA TANNO


--- PAGE 50 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 29
Page 29
describes those he perceives as barbarous as “the blindest and most wretched of all heathens,
Ethnikes, Pagans, and Idolaters” (p. 77). The English traveler Thomas Coryate (1611) carries
through on this theme of barbarity; observing visitors to St. Mark ’s square in V enice, he note:
“here you may both see all manner of fashions of attire, and heare all the languages of christen-
dom, besides those that are spoken by the barbaripus [ sic] Ethnicikes (p. 177). Writing about
John Sterling, Thomas Carlyle (1851) describes Sterling ’s break with the church “as good as
altogether Ethnic, Greekish” (p. 51).
In its sense of heathen or pagan, “ethnic” is also found in poetry. Longfellow ’s “Drinking
Song” reﬂects this meaning: “These are ancient ethnic revels / of a faith since forsaken / Now the
Satyrs, changed to devils /Frighten mortals wine-o’ertaken.”
Ethnic as empirically inferior
During the Age of Enlightenment, the meaning of the word “ethnic” changed. This period
marked the shift from pietism to scientism and from faith to fact, so it is not surprising that
ethnicity was no longer de ﬁned on the basis of religious di ﬀerence. Instead, ethnicity was
deﬁned on the basis of observable and veriﬁable physical features. One who documents this state
of aﬀairs with great insight and completeness is Charles Rosenberg (1976) in No Other Gods:
On Science and American Social Thought . Rosenberg addresses how the scienti ﬁc community
resorted to “facts” to prove the inferiority of women and to argue for the value of eugenics by
comparing the “grading” racial traits. As an example, Rosenberg reports that Charles Davenport,
the father of eugenics, argued that skin color was directly correlated to superiority — the lighter
the color, the more superior the individual.
In The Inequality of Human Races (1915), Arthur de Gobineau deﬁned as superior those races
more prone toward civilization and de ﬁned the civilized as those “compelled, either by war or
peaceful measures, to draw their neighbors within their sphere of in ﬂuence” (p. 28). Gobineau
“scientiﬁcally” rank-ordered the superior, civilized races according to skin color, with the
“ethnics,” or dark-skinned, relegated to the most inferior positions.
In 1914, Edward Alsworth Ross ( The Old World in the New: The Signi ﬁcance of Past and
Present Immigration to the American People ) referred to African, Chinese, Japanese, Greeks, and
others as the “lesser ethnics ” (p. 168), and went on to state: “to the practiced eye, the physi-
ognomy of certain groups unmistakably proclaims inferiority of type ” (p. 286), particularly
the “hirsute, low-browed, big-faced persons of obviously low mentality ” (p. 285). In 1939, C. S.
Coon attempted to understand di ﬀerences in height, shape of face, size of head, and nose
structure, but appeared to reserve the term “ethnic” to describe only the Jewish population.
In and of itself, the focus on di ﬀerences in observable and empirically veri ﬁable physical
features might be granted some respectability. But it was the value judgments placed on those
diﬀerences that e ﬀectively set the standard for the pursuit of scienti ﬁcally based comparative
knowledge. The aforementioned Edward Alsworth Ross (1914) concluded that di ﬀerences in
facial features were correlated with “ethical endowments”: “That the Mediterranean people are
morally below the races of northern Europe is as certain as any social fact ....  T h e  N o r t h e r n e r s
seem to surpass the southern Europeans in innate ethnical endowments ” (p. 239). The relating
of ethnicity and morality was still occurring in the 1950s and 1960s when Lawrence Kohlberg
discussed the relationship between complex societies and high moral reasoning. As Anthony
Cortese (1990) argues in his book Ethnic Ethics, Kohlberg’s moral development theory is based
on the placement of societies “on a continuum from simple to complex,” but then is extended to
relate complexity to moral superiority and simplicity to moral retardation (p. 147). As Cortese
describes it, Kohlberg’s measurement of the relative simplicity or complexity of societies occurs
through the comparative process whereby he examines the relative sophistication of social and
political infrastructures. But like Edward Alsworth Ross before him, Kohlberg proceeded to place
ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE ETHNIC “TEXT” 29


--- PAGE 51 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 30
Page 30
a value judgment on the relative worth of “simple” societies by designating them as morally
inferior.
Ethnic/white ethnic as foreign or exotic
In the early-to-mid twentieth century, the in ﬂux of immigrants to the United States gave a new
meaning to the word “ethnic.” Captured in this word were the styles, rituals, traditions, and
value systems of the Irish, Italians, Dutch, Jews, Poles, Russians and others. Indeed, during this
period, the word “ethnic” and the phrase “white ethnic” were used interchangeably, indicating
how diﬀerences in rituals, traditions, and language identi ﬁed the outsider. Julian Huxley and
A. C. Haddon (1935), although addressing the issue of ethnicity in Europe rather than in
America, nevertheless o ﬀer one of the most enlightening treatises on the issue of ethnicity.
Huxley and Haddon use the term ethnic “to signify the complexity of such factors as language,
ritual, and tradition as deﬁning factors of a group” (p. 30), and argue for the relative importance
of socialization process over biological factors.
As a result of a study conducted between 1930 and 1935, Warner and Srole (1945) examined
the adjustment to the United States of “the ethnic groups [of] the Irish, French, Canadians, Jews,
Italians, Armenians, Greeks, Poles, and Russians” (p. 1) and described these groups as “foreign”
in the sense of strange or unfamiliar rather than in the sense of coming from another land
(p. 283). S. M. Miller (1964) addressed the political and economic issues of “the white ethnics—
ﬁrst the Irish, later the Jews, and still more recently the Italian ” (p. 297). In a 1979 Journal of
Communication article, Je ﬀries and Hur de ﬁne “white ethnic groups ” as, among others, Irish,
Italians, Poles, Slavs, and in a departure from the norm, the Puerto Rican/Chicano (p. 116).
Using “ethnic” and “white ethnic ” interchangeably suggests that di ﬀerences in cultural
behaviors and language, rather than a skin color, served to identify groups of people. The stigma
of inferiority prevailed, however. In the Times Literary Supplement of November 17, 1961, a book
review critique describes “the former ‘ethnics,’ a polite terms for Jews, Italians, and other lesser
breeds just inside the law” (“Eggheads,” p. 823).
Ethnic as “people of color”
As our cultural consciousness has matured, we have attempted to ﬁnd other words or phrases
that we think move us away from implications of value. “People of color” is such a phrase. T oday,
“ethnic” largely means to be a person of color. Ethnicity as a function of language, rituals, and
so on, has not been dismissed; but increasingly it appears it is only the languages, rituals, and
traditions of people of color that undergo intellectual scrutiny. Although African Americans,
Latino/as, Asian Americans, and Native Americans have always constituted a part of the American
population, they were rarely mentioned in connection with American ethnicity studies done
before the 1950s and 1960s. This changed with the Civil Rights Movement, the Chicano Move-
ment, and the American Indian Movement. Protesting their invisibility, members of these cul-
tural groups worked to be seen and heard by proclaiming their respective black, brown, and red
power movements. The strategy of choosing a color as an identifying label cannot have been
accidental, and it served to set the stage for the eventual change of meaning for the word
“ethnic.” In the introduction to Interethnic Communication: Current Research, Kim (1986) pro-
vides a deﬁnition of ethnicity as the combination of the “objective . . . symbolic markers [such]
as race, religion, language, national origin ” and the “‘subjective’ identi ﬁcation of individuals
with an ethnic group ” (p. 10). The compelling aspect of this de ﬁnition is that it does not limit
ethnicity as a descriptor only of people of color; it encompasses all ethnic groups, including
“white” ethnics. It is revealing, however, that the greater number of articles comprising this
anthology focus exclusively on people of color — Eskimos, Hispanics, and blacks — so although
30  DOLORES VALENCIA TANNO


--- PAGE 52 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 31
Page 31
Kim’s deﬁnition is encompassing, studies continue to deﬁne ethnics as “people of color.” Within
that same volume, ethnicity is sometimes de ﬁned even more narrowly: “ethnicity (black versus
white)” (p. 205), or ethnicity as “the social demands of being, for instance, a black, or a Mexican-
American” (p. 102).
There are two themes running through these various de ﬁnitions of “ethnic.” The ﬁrst theme
is marginalization; like the groups of people it de ﬁnes, “ethnic” has historically been used as an
exclusionary rather than a merely descriptive label. Our pursuit of knowledge about ethnics
began when individuals or communities were identi ﬁed as being outside the de ﬁned standards
of religious practices, physical appearances, traditions, or skin colors. Thus the label “ethnic”
encapsulated assumptions, conscious or otherwise, about cultural others. The studies described
above serve as representative cases illustrating how language choices reinforced marginalization
through the use of “scientiﬁc” studies. The relationship between language and knowledge
points to the second themes cutting across the various de ﬁnitions of “ethnics,” one that is
essentially the foundation for marginalization, that is, comparison followed by value judgment.
Clearly, marginalization happens whenever one group is compared to another and found “deﬁ-
cient” in some way or another. As stated earlier, comparison is not a bad approach to the pursuit
of knowledge, especially when what is being compared is devoid of cognition or emotion.
Furthermore, were the process to stop at comparison, we could have understanding — and
perhaps appreciation— of diﬀerence.
Limits of Comparative Knowledge
But the comparison technique is fundamentally grounded in what Woelfel and Napoli (1984)
have described as a “standard reference frame ” (p. 118). When applied to sentient beings,
unexamined standards of reference have the potential for great harm because a set of values is
embedded in any deﬁnition of the “standard.” As examples, we have only to recall the standards
revealed in the di ﬀerent meanings of “ethnic” that led to value judgments about the worth of
the diﬀerences observed. Thus religious di ﬀerence could be projected to mean “irreligious” or
“unenlightened,” shapes of noses could mean “moral bankruptcy,” varying rituals could mean
“alien,” and skin color could relegate groups of people to “subcultures.” In 1965, Edwin Black
wrote: “the aims of a man [woman] will display their symptoms in what he [she] says and how
he [she] says it” (p. 17). This is as true of the individual who engages in public discourse about
political and socioeconomic issues as it is of researchers who engage in the discourse of cultural
discovery and understanding. Words — labels— convey volumes about assumptions and per-
ceptions, as do conclusions of studies that generalize to an entire community on the basis of
a single identifying label, in this case the label “ethnic.” The language of multicultural ethnic
studies creates a “text” that often serves as the only knowledge connection among researchers
and between researchers and the cultural communities they attempt to study and de ﬁne.
A recent debate illustrates how “texts” are often created. Published in volumes 14, 17, and
18 of the International Journal of Intercultural Relations  (Hecht et al., 1990, 1993; Mirand é &
Tanno, 1993a, 1993b; Delgado, 1994), the debate centers around issues of researcher perspec-
tives, contextual validation, and ethnic labeling in the study of multicultural communication in
the Latino community. Researcher perspective addresses the value of etic or emic approaches
to the study of cultural communities. The argument for contextual validation through dialogue
is grounded in the idea that a richer and deeper understanding of multicultural communication
would occur if we allowed “members of the cultures an opportunity to literally ‘talk back’ to
the researcher ” (Mirand é & Tanno, 1993a, p. 154). But it is the issue of labeling that lies at
the heart of both researcher perspective and contextual validation. By inventing the multiple
labels by which they wish to be identiﬁed, members of cultural groups are communicating a very
important fact about their heterogeneity. When researchers choose to use data only from
ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE ETHNIC “TEXT” 31


--- PAGE 53 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 32
Page 32
participants who use a particular label (e.g., Mexican American), reject data from those who
self-identify di ﬀerently (e.g., Chicana, Latino, Mexican, etc.), and then generalize to an entire
cultural community, they are communicating homogeneity. This inaccurate perception of cul-
tural homogeneity ﬁnds its way into print and becomes the knowledge base or “text” of the
Latino community that is read by other researchers. This “text” of cultural homogeneity may
also become the frame of reference for subsequent studies.
If frames of reference are to be used, they should be constructed from within the culture
being studied, with the help of members of that particular cultural community. Geertz ’s (1973)
suggestion that the study of cultures should be to seek meaning rather than laws provides a
powerful rationale for the co-construction of frames of reference that will eventually lead to
co-constructed texts. Fisher ’s (1987) concept of narrative as the process by which we give
meaning and order to our lives oﬀers a strategy for gaining insight into diﬀerent cultural “texts”
or stories created by the cultural members themselves. Understanding the diﬀerent meanings of
communication in multicultural contexts is bound to be enriched when the values and assump-
tions underlying selected frames of reference are commensurate with the values and assumptions
of the particular culture being studied.
An ethnic “text” based on lack of rhetorical sensitivity about labels and frames of reference
serves to marginalize groups, even if such is not the conscious intent of researchers. As Starosta
(1984) argued, it matters little “that one attempts to ‘empathize’ with native conditions; one
maintains the change emphasis of the rhetorician. And identi ﬁcationist-extractionist distinc-
tions dissolve into mattes of strategy, not substance. Both aim to create that ‘frame of reference’
within which things or new ideas can take root ” (p. 234).
Foucault’s (1972) argument that inequality is the product of a standard discourse of a
cultural and Starosta ’s comment about the researcher as change agent ring true in the context
of multicultural communication studies. Tafoya (1984) reinforces the idea of discourse as a
force of marginalization and inequality when she argues that, “One of the paradoxes found in
some cross-cultural texts and studies is that their authors, while claiming to adhere to process
notions deﬁning a culture as something that is constantly evolving or changing, somehow fell
conﬁdent that they can label or identify particular or speci ﬁc characteristics or behaviors of
members of the culture(s) reviewed. It is distressing to see so few quali ﬁer when so much is
dynamic and diﬀuse” (p. 48). Foucault’s insights speak to the power of discourse generally and
Tafoya’s insight speaks to the particular power of multicultural research studies and conclusions.
There insights also illuminate what has been, until recently, the monologic characteristic of
the ethnic “text” in multicultural studies, a characteristic rooted in what Robert Bellah (1975)
has described as the American “rational, technical, utilitarian, ideology” that has given us much
information, but little wisdom (p. xiv).
Research-as-Dialogue
Bellah (1975) also has argued that “the ﬁrst step toward . . . wisdom is humility ” (p. xv). In a
research context, wisdom may come when researchers are able to participate in authentic dia-
logue with members of cultural communities and thus co-create a richer “text.” Walter Fisher
(1992) has argued that “genuine communication cannot be the usual forms of monologic
discourse . . . whether in debate [or] in conversations ” (p. 201), or, it could be argued, in
multicultural research studies.
This idea of dialogue as a means of gaining knowledge (and wisdom) is not peculiar to
multicultural communication studies. It is, for example, at the core of current debates in higher
education and visual communication.
With regard to higher education, dialogue has been addressed by several individuals (for
example, Boyer, 1990; Christensen et al., 1991; Arnett, 1992). Arnett (1992) provides the
32  DOLORES VALENCIA TANNO


--- PAGE 54 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 33
Page 33
grounding for dialogue: a willingness to be open, a commitment to a ﬃrmation, and a desire to
ask value questions about the application of knowledge (p. 10). While Arnett (1992) focuses on
dialogue between teacher and student, his observation about “viewing dialogue as reaching out
to the other in an authentic fashion, [and being] willing to try to meet and follow the unpredict-
able consequences of the exchange ” applies equally to the interaction between research and
participant (p. 11).
In the context of visual communication, Ruby (1991) argues: “While most documentaries are
V ertovian, that is, the ﬁlmmakers/‘authors’ present us with their vision, some documentarians
have aspired to replicate the subject’s view of the world....  T h e  d ocumentary is assumed to give
a ‘voice to the voiceless,’ that is, portray the political, social and economic realities of oppressed
minorities and others previously denied access to the means of producing their own image. From
this perspective, the documentary is not only an art form, it is a social service and a political act”
(p. 51). The documentary is thus created through dialogue that give forces also to the image of
the “documented” where before it gave force only to the image of the documentarian. In
addition, integrating the possibility of social service and political empowerment serves to give
equal force to the discourse of the participant in higher education, in visual communication, and
in multicultural research. But research-as-dialogue demands that some ethical imperatives be
in place.
Ethnical Imperatives for Multicultural Studies
In A Short History of Ethics, Alasdair MacIntyre (1966) helps us understand how ethical analysis
can “insulate itself from correction ”: “In ethics it can happen in the following way. A certain
unsystematically selected class of moral concepts and judgments is made the subject of atten-
tion. From the study of these it is concluded that speci ﬁcally moral discourse possesses certain
characteristics. When counter-examples are adduced to show that this is not always so, these
counterexamples are dismissed as irrelevant, because [they are] not examples of moral discourse;
and they are shown to be nonmoral by exhibiting their lack of the necessary characteristics ”
(p. 4).
In similar fashion, we can “insulate” ourselves against the process of re-examining how we go
about gaining understanding about multicultural communication. We do this by accepting,
without constant reassessment, certain methodological characteristics and certain language
choices. If we are truly to gain rich understanding of the communication patterns of di ﬀerence
cultural groups, it seems to me that the overarching ethical imperatives are ﬁrst, a keen aware-
ness about and concern for the language we use in our studies and critical analysis, and second,
an emphasis on dialogues in the research process.
Geertz (1973) described the study of culture as “not an experimental science in search of law
but an interpretive one in search of meaning ” (p. 5). Rhetorical sensitivity and dialogue will
allow the creation of shared meanings, the co-writing of a cultural “text.” As researchers/critics
we must be concerned about language we use insofar as it a ﬀects how we describe, prescribe, or
otherwise rhetorically characterize cultural groups. We can address this concern about language
in three ways.
First, whatever label we anticipate applying to groups of others, we must ﬁrst apply to ourselves.
What does the label mean when I apply it to myself? How would I feel if it were frequently used
to describe me? As an example, let me use the label which gave rise to this essay. In spite of the
current practice of de ﬁning it narrowing as “people of color, ” ethnic in its broadest meaning
refers to groups with a common cultural heritage. If we accept that, all of us can be so labeled,
and yet many of us would not think to use that word as a self-descriptor. Why? In the process
of pursuing answers, we may unearth those assumptions behind the label with which we are
most comfortable or uncomfortable and in that way come closer to understanding the moral
ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE ETHNIC “TEXT” 33


--- PAGE 55 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 34
Page 34
consequences of applying that— or any similar— label to others exclusive of oneself. Krippendorf
(1989) referred to this process as the “self-referential imperative, ” which admonishes us to
“include yourself as a constituent of your own constructions” (p. 83).
Second, the language of our studies should re ﬂect the relationship between diversity and univer-
sality. While the form of communication may di ﬀer from culture to culture, it may be that the
purpose behind the communication may be universal. As Lu and Frank (1993) argue: “A
multicultural perspective of rhetoric should assume cultural diversity and universality ....  w e
should seek out and learn from the di ﬀerences in cultural expressions....  H o w e v e r ,  this diver-
sity may be connected by a culturally invariant recognition of the role played by speech in
human aﬀairs” (p. 461). All cultures have been in ﬂuenced by philosophic ideas, by events that
tear people apart, and by traditions and rituals that keep them together. These in ﬂuences mani-
fest themselves in a diversity of patterns of language. But as Lu and Frank (1993) rightly point
out, language itself is a universal endeavor, and the surest way of not losing sight of this
important insight is by assiduously avoiding making value judgments about the various patterns
of discourse.
Third, the language of our studies should promote the relationship between social enhancement
and research. In general, the use of language entails moral responsibility. But in multicultural
studies speciﬁcally, moral responsibility requires that we incorporate into the study and analysis
process the answer to several question: Does this knowledge enhance the lives of the cultural
groups we are studying? How does the language of our studies serve to empower them? Does our
language minimize isolation or marginalization? Does it promote acceptance? For example, in
assessing how ancient Eastern and Western religions provide us with a rich source of guidelines
for communication ethics, Jensen (1992) concludes that ancient religions “go beyond the three
fundamental purposes of rhetoric . . . to inform, to persuade, and to please — and add a fourth,
to edify” (p. 65). Does the language of the conclusions of our various studies uplift members
of cultural group morally, spiritually, and politically? Arguably, this question suggests the possi-
bility that while knowledge in and of itself is a necessary motive, it may no longer be a su ﬃcient
motive for conducting multicultural communication research.
One of the means by which we, as researchers/critics, can enhance our sensitivity about
language choice is by emphasizing dialogue as part of the research process. Elsewhere in this
chapter I have addressed the relationship between language and knowledge and between dia-
logue and wisdom. The relationship between language and wisdom may be enhanced by seeking
knowledge through genuine dialogue with the participants of multicultural studies . In his book
Dialogic Education , Arnett (1992) writes: “Dialogic education asks the question, what will be
the impact on others when information is implemented? ” (p. 9). This question applies equally
well to multicultural studies, and we cannot hope to gain answers to it until and unless we
incorporate dialogue into the research process.
General Implications for Multicultural Researchers/Critics
The major implication of research-as-dialogue is essentially one of re-visioning our role in the
research process. In the pursuit of multicultural understanding, we need to see ourselves more
as participants in the co-construction of meaning and less as autonomous experts seeking
generalizable laws to explain what are, in essence, groups with great internal diversity. We need
also to see ourselves as potential persuaders and possible change agents, since our studies do
“deﬁne” cultural groups and in that sense impact general as well as particular perceptions
of them.
The re-visioning process requires commitment and time, and if we are successful, it means
that the research process itself will become more time consuming, The results of the process,
however, cannot but yield a truer, richer body of knowledge.
34  DOLORES VALENCIA TANNO


--- PAGE 56 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 35
Page 35
Summary
Tracing the label “ethnic” as it has been used over time, addressing the limits of comparative
knowledge as it a ﬀects perceptions of marginalization, and arguing for dialogue as a necessary
part of the research process constitute an attempt at “rhetorical self-consciousness” (Bazerman,
1992) that culminated in what I consider to be the ethical imperatives of multicultural com-
munication research and the implications for researchers/critics. This self-consciousness repre-
sents a beginning, and it is communicated in the hope that it will engender a dialogue about
research-as-dialogue and its impact on the language and process of inquiry.
Considering that multicultural communication studies have the potential to create ethnic
texts with a potential for negatively impacting cultural groups, the ethical imperatives of
research in this context are ones that we should take to mind and to heart.
References
Allen, W. (1588/1971). An Admonition to the nobility. Y orkshire, England: Scolar Press.
Arnett, R. (1992). Dialogic education: Conversation about ideas and between persons . Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois University Press.
Bazerman, C. (1992). The interpretation of disciplinary writing. In R. H. Brown (Ed.), Writing the social
text: Poetics in social science discourse  (pp. 31–38). New Y ork: Aldine de Gruyter.
Bellah, R. (1975). The broken covenant: American civil religion in time of trial . New Y ork: Seabury Press.
Black, E. (1965). Rhetorical criticism: A study in method.  Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Boyer, E. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the Professorate. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie Foundation
for the Advancement of T eaching.
Carlyle, T. (1851/1903). The life of John Sterling. New Y ork: Scribner’s.
Christensen, C. R., Garvin, D., & Sweet, A. (Eds.). (1991). Education for judgment: The artistry of discussion
leadership. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Coon, C. S. (1939). The races of Europe. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Cortese, A. (1990). Ethnic ethics: The reconstruction of moral theory . Albany, NY: State University of New
Y ork Press.
Coryate, T. (1611). Coryats crudities. London: Scolar Press.
Delgado, F. (1994). The complexity of Mexican American identities: A reply to Hecht, Sedano, and Ribeau
and Mirande and Tanno. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 18, 77–84.
Eggheads and ﬂoating voters. (1961, November 17). Times Literary Supplement, p. 823.
Fisher, W. (1987). Human communication as narration: Toward a philosophy of reason, value, and action .
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Fisher, W. (1992). Narration, reason, and community. In R. H. Brown (Ed.), Writing the social text
(pp. 199–217). New Y ork: Aldine de Gruyter.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge and the discourse on language . (A. M. Sheridan Smith
Trans.). New Y ork: Pantheon Books.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New Y ork: Basic Books.
Glazer, N., & Moynihan, D. P . (Eds.). (1975). Ethnicity: Theory and experience . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
de Gobineau, A. (1915). The inequality of human races . (Adrian Collins, Trans.). New Y ork: Putman and
Sons.
Hariman, R. (1996). Status, marginality, and rhetorical theory. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 73, 38–54.
Hecht, M., Ribeau, S., & Sedano, M. (1990). A Mexican American perspective on interethnic communica-
tion. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 14, 31–55.
Hecht, M., Sedano, M., & Ribeau, S. (1993). Understanding culture, communication, and research: Applica-
tion to Chicanos and Mexican Americans. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 17, 157–165.
Hobbes, T. (1651/1946). Leviathan; or, The matter, forme, and power of a commonwealth ecclesiastical and
civil. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Huxley, J. S., & Haddon, A. C. (1935). We Europeans: A survey of “racial” problems. London: Jonathan Cape.
Jeﬀries, L. W., & Hur, K. K. (1979). White ethnics and their media images. Journal of Communication, 29,
116–122.
Jensen, J. V . (1992). Ancient Eastern and Western religions as guides for contemporary communication
ethics. In J. A. Jaksa (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second National Communication Ethics Conference  (pp.
58–67). Annandale, V A: Speech Communication Association.
ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE ETHNIC “TEXT” 35


--- PAGE 57 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 36
Page 36
Kim, Y. Y. (1986). Introduction: A Communication approach to interethnic relations. In Y. Y. Kim (Ed.),
Interethnic communication: Current research (pp. 9–18). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Krippendorf, K. (1989). On the ethics of constructing communication. In B. Dervin, L. Grossberg, B.
O’Keefe & E. Wartella (Eds.), Rethinking communication: Vol. 1 Paradigm issues (pp. 66–96). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Longfellow, H. W. (1893). The complete poetical works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . Boston: Houghton,
Miﬄin.
Lu. X., & Frank, D. A. (1993). On the study of Ancient Chinese rhetoric/bian. Western Journal of Communi-
cation, 57, 445–463.
MacIntyre, A. (1966). A short history of ethics . New Y ork: Macmillan.
Miller, S. M. (1964). Poverty, race, and politics. In I. L. Horowitz (Ed.), The new sociology: Essays in social
science and social theory  (pp. 290–312). New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Mirandé, A., & Tanno, D. (1993a). Labels, researcher perspective, and contextual validation: A Commentary.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 17, 149–155.
Mirandé, A., & Tanno, D. (1993b). Understanding interethnic communication and research: “A rose by any
other name would smell as sweet.” International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 17, 381–388.
Morgan, J. (1731/1970). A complete history of Algiers. New Y ork: Negro University Press.
Riesman, D. (1953/1954). Some observations on intellectual freedom. American Scholar, 23, 9–25.
Ross, E. A. (1914). The old world in the new: The signiﬁcance of past and present immigration to the American
people. New Y ork: Century Co.
Rosenberg, C. (1976). No other gods: On science and American social thought. Baltimore, MA: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Ruby, J. (1991). Speaking for, speaking about, speaking with or speaking alongside. Visual Anthropology
Review, 7, 50–67.
Sollars, W. (1986). Beyond ethnicity: Consent and descent in American culture . New Y ork: Oxford University
Press.
Starosta, W. J. (1984). On intercultural rhetoric. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods for
intercultural communication research (pp. 229–238). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Tafoya, D. W. (1984). Research and cultural phenomena. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods
for intercultural communication research (pp. 47–65). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Warner, W. L., & Srole, L. (1945). The social system of American ethnic groups  (Vol. 3 of Y ankee City Series).
New Haven, CT: Y ale University Press.
Winterowd, W. R. (1968). Rhetoric: A synthesis. New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Woelfel, J., & Napoli, N. R. (1984). Measuring human emotion: Proposed standards. In W. B. Gudykunst
& Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods for intercultural communication research  (pp. 117 –127). Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
36  DOLORES VALENCIA TANNO


--- PAGE 58 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 37
Page 37
3
The Centrality of Culture
Robert Shuter
Intercultural communication has been examined for many years by communication scholars
with the terms ﬁrst appearing in Edward Hall’s Silent Language published in 1959. Edward Hall
is an anthropologist with a keen interest in human interaction. His early writings on culture
and communication in ﬂuenced many disciplines including speech communication where they
spawned a new ﬁeld of inquiry: intercultural communication.
Edward Hall’s (1959, 1966, 1976) research reﬂects the regimen and passion of an anthropolo-
gist: a deep regard for culture explored principally by descriptive, qualitative methods. A theoret-
ician as well, Hall (1976) developed communication theories like high context/low context
cultures which he used to categorize societies and explain communication in which particular
cultural groups engage. His theories are intracultural in nature; that is, they are generated from
an understanding of shared values and interaction patterns within similar societies. However,
he applies these theories interculturally to explain communication issues between dissimilar
national cultures.
Unlike Hall, researchers in communication who conduct intercultural research do not gener-
ally exhibit in their published studies a passion for culture, an interest in descriptive research, or
a desire to generate intracultural theories of communication. Instead, much of the published
research in intercultural communication, particularly in the national and regional speech com-
munication journals, is conducted to re ﬁne existing communication theories: culture serves
principally as a research laboratory for testing the validity of communication paradigms.
1
While this research agenda has produced signi ﬁcant insights on selected communication
theories, it has virtually ignored the heart and soul of intercultural research: culture. As a result,
intercultural researchers, as documented in the following section, have produced few published
investigations of global regions, scattered examinations of communication in particular soci-
eties, and scant intracultural communication theories that can be applied interculturally. The
challenge for intercultural communication in the 1990s, as argued in this essay, is to develop a
research direction and teaching agenda that returns culture to preeminence and reﬂects the roots
of the ﬁeld as represented in Edward Hall’s early research.
Research on Intercultural Communication: A T en-Y ear Overview
Since 1980, there have been 51 intercultural communication studies published in the national
and regional speech-communication journals, and the overwhelming majority of these arti-
cles are theory validation studies not cultural research. Theory validation research conducted
37


--- PAGE 59 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 38
Page 38
interculturally is aimed at testing the validity and generalizability of extant communication the-
ories like uncertainty reduction (Gudykunst, 1988; Gudykunst, Chua, & Gray, 1987; Gudykunst
& Nishida, 1984; Gudykunst, Y ang, & Nishida, 1985), initial interaction (Gudykunst & Hammer,
1987; Nakanishi, 1986; Shuter, 1982), intercultural communication competence (Hammer, 1984;
Hwang, Chase, & Kelly, 1980; Nishida, 1985), communication apprehension (McCrosky, Fayer,
& Richmond, 1985; Watson, Monroe, & Atterson, 1989), intercultural adaptation (Kim, 1987;
1988), and relationship development (Cronen & Shuter, 1983; Gudykunst, 1983, 1985) — the
theories most frequently examined in intercultural research over the last decade. While theory
validation is often classi ﬁed as etic research, it is not, at least according to John Pike ’s (1966)
original discussion of etic and emic “. . . as standpoints for the description of behavior ” (p. 37).
For Pike, a linguist and anthropologist, etic researchers use predetermined analytical categor-
ies for investigating language behavior within particular societies with the principle aim of
describing cultural patterns. While these cultural descriptions may help generate uni ﬁed theor-
ies of human behavior, the etic researcher is ﬁrst and foremost interested in cultural description,
much like the emic investigator who also describes cultural patterns without being guided by
external predetermined analytical categories and schemes.
Etic and emic similarities and diﬀerences are best stated, writes Pike (1966), “. . . in the words
of Sapir who anticipated this position years ago: (p. 39).
It is impossible to say what an individual is doing unless we have tacitly accepted the
arbitrary modes of interpretation that social tradition is constantly suggesting to us from
the very moment of our birth. Let anyone who doubts this try the experiment of making
a painstaking report (an etic one) of the action of a group of natives engaged in some
activity, say religious, to which he has not the cultural key (i.e., a knowledge of the emic
system). If he is a skillful writer, he may succeed in giving a picturesque account of what
he sees and hears or thinks he sees and hears, but the chances of his being able to give an
accurate picture of what happens in terms of what would be intelligible and acceptable to
the natives are practically nil. He will be guilty of all manner of distortion.
(Pike, 1966, p. 39)
Intercultural studies in national and regional speech-communication journals are neither of
an etic or emic nature: they are products of a nomothetic model developed in psychology that
drives communication research and aims at identifying laws of human interaction rather than
describing cultural patterns (Shuter, 1985a). Since the nomothetic model relegates culture to a
laboratory for reﬁning theory and generating laws, it is not surprising that a ten-year review of
national and regional journals did not uncover a series of studies dedicated to a global region or
a line of research on a particular culture except Japan.
For example, in the last decade not a single study had been published in the national or
regional speech-communication journals on Africa, South and Central American, or Southeast
Asia. European investigations include just four studies scattered among Sweden (Watson,
Monron, & Atterstrom, 1989), U.S.S.R. (Corcoran, 1983), Britain (Bass, 1989), and France
(Ting-T oomey, 1988). In East Asian, one study examines the region (Yum, 1988b), and the
remaining investigations focus on Japan and Korea (Gudykunst & Nishida, 1984; Gudykunst,
Sodetani, & Sonada, 1987; Gudykunst, Y ang, & Nishida, 1985; Stewart, Gudykunst, Ting-T oomey,
& Nishida, 1986; Gudykunst, Sodetani, & Sonada, 1987; Yum, 1982). Taiwan and People ’s
Republic of China are not examined in separate studies. There are a few studies on the Middle
East principally investigating Israel (Frank, 1981; Katriel, 1987) and Iran (Heisey & Trebing,
1983), and one additional investigation on South Asia (Carlson, 1986).
It is possible that the nomothetic bias of the discipline serves as an obstacle for accepting etic
or emic intercultural investigations in national or regional journals. This may be the case;
38  ROBERT SHUTER


--- PAGE 60 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 39
Page 39
however, after examining the published studies over the last ten years in the International and
Intercultural Communication Annual — the only speech-communication journal dedicated to
intercultural studies— one ﬁnds publishing patterns similar to those found in the national and
regional speech-communication journals. First, there is not a line of research on any global
region, and only East Asia (Cushman & King, 1985; Kume, 1985, Okabe, 1983; Yum, 1988a,
1988b), Europe (Hopper & Doany, 1989; Magiste, 1988; Punetha, Giles, & Y oung, 1988), and the
Middle East (Griefat & Katriel, 1989; Hopper & Doany, 1989) are examined in more than one
investigation. Africa, South and Central America, and Southeast Asia are not explored in the
studies published in the annual since 1980.
Moreover, the emphasis of communication studies in the annual has been on communication
theory validation and the development of intercultural communication theory. While the
annual has made signiﬁcant contribution to the discipline, its dedication to theory development
has resulted in a paucity of research on world regions and single cultures.
Not surprisingly, the last ten years has also resulted in few studies of an intracultural nature
in national and regional speech-communication journals except for scattered investigations on
selected U.S. and European co-cultures (i.e., ethnic groups and races within a particular society)
(Booth-Butterﬁeld & Jordan, 1989; Campbell, 1986; Gudykunst & Kim, 1986; Hammerback &
Jensen, 1980; Jensen & Hammerback, 1980; Lake, 1983; Stanback & Pearce, 1981). Since intra-
cultural investigations tend to focus on a particular society, they are not perceived as being
easily translated into intercultural communication theory. For this reason, researchers may
tend to avoid conducting intracultural studies and, instead, execute comparative intercultural
investigations.
In summary, intercultural communication research since 1980 has provided important valid-
ation studies of communication paradigms and signiﬁcant breakthroughs in the development of
intercultural communication theory. However, the decade ’s published research has neglected
people, context, and national culture. As a result, interculturalists have provided precious few
data based insights into how speciﬁc societies, world regions, and ethnic groups communicate. It
is time for a change in direction.
Intercultural Communication in the 1990s: A Cultural Imperative
Culture is the single most important global communication issue in the 1990s. New cultural
coalitions and alliances are redeﬁning global relationships. Western Europe, for example, strug-
gles with the development in 1992 of the European Economic Community, which strives to
unify European trading regulations within the Common Market without dismantling national
cultural traditions that provide the historical and contemporary identity of each member county
(Bruce, 1988; Montet, 1989). While Western Europe evolves into a uni ﬁed marketplace, North
America wonders about the development of “fortress” Europe— a monolithic cultural bloc that
may prevent North American products and communication from successfully penetrating the
European community (Reimer, 1989; Rosenbaum, 1989).
As Western Europe attempts to harmonize cultural di ﬀerences to achieve trade uni ﬁcation,
Eastern European countries proclaim their cultural independence by changing their political
systems and celebrating age-old cultural values, traditions, and communication patterns (Berend,
1988). With the diminution of Soviet control of Eastern Europe, there is a resurgence of national
cultures in countries that have traditionally surrendered a signi ﬁcant degree of cultural and
political independence to Soviet control.
Culture dominates the Paciﬁc Basin as well, with Japan reordering its relationships with East
and Southeast Asian countries to develop what some have described as the Paci ﬁc equivalent to
the European community (Y ahuda, 1988; Y ang, 1989). As Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and
Singapore develop sustained and cooperative trading relationships, these countries, at the same
THE CENTRALITY OF CULTURE  39


--- PAGE 61 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 40
Page 40
time, retain distinct cultural identities that are carefully preserved but sometimes cause cultural
rifts between them (Pearce, 1988; Tank, 1987).
Culture is also the central theme in Africa, the Middle East, South Asia, and Central and South
America. These diverse cultural regions struggle with maintaining traditional cultural systems
while developing technological and communications infrastructures that may threaten cultural
and religious values and national identities (Kelly, 1988; Kwarteng, 1988; Shamsuddin, 1988).
Culture is also the dominant issue within global societies (Rosen and Weissbrodt, 1988). In
the U.S., for example, cultural tensions are the result of long-standing con ﬂicts between co-
cultures as well as more recent communication issues posed by immigration into North America
(Roberts, 1988). Countries in Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, and South Asian struggle
with co-cultural tensions and confrontations fueled by racial divisions, religious and cultural
diﬀerences, and tribal identiﬁcations (Kelly, 1988; Rupesinghe, 1988; Weissbrodt, 1988). Societies
within Eastern and Western Europe are also coping with serious intracultural communication
issues that have evolved from age-old ethnic divisions and more recently changes in immigration
patterns (Armstrong, 1988).
Compelling global conditions require intercultural researchers to alter their research agenda
and return culture to preeminence in their studies. This can be accomplished by examining
intracultural patterns of interaction within societies and world regions.
An Intracultural Communication Research Agenda for the 1990s
Intracultural research identiﬁes and examines communication patterns endemic to a particular
country or co-culture within a society. This type of research generates cultural data that not only
increases understanding of a society, but also serves as a springboard for developing intracultural
communication theory.
Unlike intercultural theory, an intracultural perspective marries culture and communication
theory and, hence, produces communication paradigms about a co-culture, country, or world
region. This approach to theory development is best exempliﬁed in Kincaid’s (1987) Communica-
tion Theory: Eastern and Western Perspectives, which identiﬁes diﬀerences and similarities between
Korean, Chinese, Japanese, and Indian communication theories. While Kincaid ’s book stops
short of identifying diﬀerent Western communication theories— French versus British communi-
cation theory for example— it is a most signiﬁcant contribution in intracultural communication
theory development.
Intracultural communication theory is critically important for several reasons. First, it pro-
vides a conceptual framework for analyzing interaction within a society and world region.
Second, intracultural theories demonstrate the inextricable linkage between communication pat-
terns and sociocultural forces. And lastly, it provides a conceptual basis for making intercultural
communication comparisons between dissimilar societies.
With an intracultural perspective, researchers can concentrate on developing a line of research
on a society or world region. This approach should produce comprehensive communication
data on countries and world regions as well as establishing the foundation for developing culture
specialists— researchers and teachers who are experts on a particular country and world region.
Culture specialists in communication are vital if global and co-cultural con ﬂicts are to be
understood and ameliorated.
An intracultural perspective also has implications for teaching intercultural communication.
With comprehensive intracultural data, teachers should be able to design multiple courses in
intercultural communication that focus on interaction within a society and world region — a
marked improvement over many intercultural curricula that currently consist of a single course
oﬀering called Intercultural Communication. For example, with su ﬃcient intracultural data, a
series of communication classes could be o ﬀered on Africa, East Asia, or South Asia with
40  ROBERT SHUTER


--- PAGE 62 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 41
Page 41
seminars also available on speciﬁc countries within these regions. Currently, this type of curric-
ulum is not easily developed because intercultural researchers have devoted limited attention to
intracultural communication. Without an expanded intercultural curriculum, it will be diﬃcult
to develop students and teachers who are culture specialists in communication.
Conclusion: Back to the Future
The goal of this essay is to set a new intracultural agenda for scholars and teachers of intercul-
tural communication. An intracultural perspective examines patterns of intracultural com-
munication “those common, unstated experiences which members of a given culture share,
communicate without knowing, and which form the backdrop against which all other events are
judged” (Hall, 1966, p. 4). They are, according to Ruth Benedict (1934), the cultural forms and
processes that are an integral part of every society. When cultural patterns are linked to com-
munication, the terms refer to shared, recurring, and culturally derived ways of interacting that
are manifested in the ebb and ﬂow of human transactions within a society.
Pattern research tends to be descriptive in nature: it details the form and function of com-
municative behavior within a society. Methodologically, it can be conducted either quantitatively
or qualitatively in a research laboratory, ﬁeld study, or rhetorical analysis of primary or second-
ary sources. Because pattern research is not bound to a particular methodology, it can enhance
our understanding of intracultural nuances, producing fresh understanding of cultural mindsets
and dispositions. In fact, pattern research has the promise of unearthing hidden dimensions
of culture and communication that Edward Hall so eloquently described decades ago — the
treasures of human interaction that remain buried unless mined by the intraculturalist. In
fact, our modern age cries out for intraculturalists — communication teachers, researchers and
professionals with a deep understanding of speci ﬁc co-cultures, countries, and world regions.
Hopefully, this essay is small step towards achieving this goal.
Note
1. For this essay, the speech-communication journals reviewed for intercultural communication research
included: Central States Speech Journal, Communication Monographs, Communication Quarterly, Human
Communication Research, Quarterly Journal of Speech, Southern Communication Journal , and Western
Journal of Speech Communication.
References
Armstrong, J. (1988). T oward a framework for considering nationalism in East Europe. Eastern Europe
Politics and Societies, 2, 280–305.
Bass, J. (1989). An eﬃcient humanitarianism: The British slave trade debates, 1791–1792. Quarterly Journal
of Speech, 75, 152–165.
Benedict, R. (1934). Patterns of culture. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Berend, I. (1988). Crisis and reform in East-Central Europe. Studia Diplomatica, 41, 257–267.
Booth-Butterﬁeld, M. & Jordan, F. (1989). Communication adaptation among racially homogeneous and
heterogeneous groups. Southern Communication Journal, 54, 253–272.
Bruce, L. (1988). Where adversaries converge. International Management, 43, 70–73.
Campbell, K. (1986). Style and content in the rhetoric of early Afro-American feminists. Quarterly Journal
of Speech, 72, 434–445.
Carlson, C. (1986). Gandhi and the comic frame: Ad Belum Puriﬁcandum. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 72,
446–455.
Condon, J. C. (1984). With respect to the Japanese: A guide for Americans. Y armouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
Corcoran, F. (1983). The bear in the backyard: Myth, ideology, and victimage ritual in Soviet funerals.
Communication Monographs, 50, 305–320.
Cronen, V . E., & Shuter, R. (1983). Forming intercultural bonds. In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Intercultural
communication theory: Current perspectives (pp. 89–118). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
THE CENTRALITY OF CULTURE  41


--- PAGE 63 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 42
Page 42
Cushman, D., & King, S. (1985). National and organizational cultures in con ﬂict resolution: Japan, the
United States, and Yugoslavia. International and Intercultural Communication Annual, 9, 114–133.
Frank, D. (1981). Shalom Achshave: Rituals of the Israeli peace movement. Communication Monographs,
48, 165–182.
Griefat, Y., & Katriel, T. (1989). Life demands Musayara: Communication and culture among Arabs in
Israel. International and Intercultural Communication Annual, 13, 121–138.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1983). Similarities and di ﬀerences in perceptions of initial intracultural and intercul-
tural encounters: An exploratory investigation. Southern Communication Journal, 27, 49–65.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1985). An exploratory comparison of close intracultural and intercultural friendships.
Communication Quarterly, 33, 270–283.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1988). Uncertainty and anxiety. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in
intercultural communication (pp. 123–156). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykusnt, W. B., Chua, E., & Gray, A. (1987). Cultural dissimilarities and uncertainty reduction processes.
In M. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication yearbook  (Vol. 10, pp. 456 –469). New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Hammer, M. (1987). The e ﬀects of ethnicity, gender, and dyadic composition on
uncertainty reduction in initial interaction. Journal of Black Studies, 18, 191–214.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Kim, Y. Y. (Eds.). (1986). Interethnic communication. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1984). Individual and cultural in ﬂuences on uncertainty reduction.
Communication Monographs, 51, 23–36.
Gudykunst, W. B., Sodetani, L., & Sonada, K. (1987). Uncertainty reduction in Japanese-American and
Caucasian relationships in Hawaii. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 51, 256–278.
Gudykunst, W. B., Y ang, S. M., & Nishida, T. (1985). A cross-cultural test of uncertainty reduction theory.
Human Communication Research, 11, 407–454.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent culture. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Hammer, M. (1984). The e ﬀects of an intercultural communication workshop on participants ’ intercul-
tural communication competence. Communication Quarterly, 32, 352–362.
Hammerback, J., & Jensen, R. (1980). The rhetorical worlds of Cesar Chavez and Reises Tijerina. Western
Journal of Speech Communication, 44, 166–176.
Heisey, R., & Trebing, D. (1983). A comparison of the rhetorical visions and strategies of the Shah ’s White
Revolution and the Ayatollah’s Islamic Revolution. Communication Monographs, 50, 158–174.
Hopper, R., & Doany, N. (1989). T elephone openings and conversational universals: A study in three
languages. International and Intercultural Communication Annual, 13, 157–179.
Hwang, J. Chase, L., & Kelly, C. (1980). An intercultural examination of communication competence.
Communication, 9, 70–79.
Jensen, R., & Hammerback, J. (1980). Radical nationalism among Chicanos: The rhetoric of Jose Angel
Gutierrez. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 44,191–202.
Katriel, T. (1986). T alking straight: Dugri speech in Israeli Sabra culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Katriel, T. (1987). Rhetoric in ﬂames: Fire inscriptions in Israeli youth movement ceremonials. Quarterly
Journal of Speech, 73, 444–459.
Kelly, J. (1980). Class con ﬂict of ethnic oppression? The cost of being Indian in rural Bolivia. Rural
Sociology, 53, 399–420.
Kim, Y. Y. (1987). Facilitating immigration adaptation: The role of communication. In T. C. Albrecht,
M. B. Adelman et al. (Eds.), Communicating social support (pp. 192–211). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Kim, Y. Y. (1988). Communication and cross-cultural adaptation: An integrative theory . Clevedon, England:
Multilingual Matters.
Kincaid, D. L. (Ed.). (1987). Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives . San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Kume, T. (1985). Managerial attitudes toward decision-making: North America and Japan. International
and Intercultural Communication Annual, 9, 231–252.
Kwarterg, C. (1988). Diﬃculties in economic integration: The case of ECOWAS. Transafrica Forum, 5, 17–25.
Lake, R. (1986). Enacting red power: The consummatory function in Native American protest rhetoric.
Quarterly Journal of Speech, 72, 434–445.
Magiste, E. (1988). Changes in the Lateralization pattern of two immigrant groups in Sweden. International
and Intercultural Communication Annual, 9, 233–251.
McCroskey, J. C., Fayer, J. M., & Richmond, V . (1985). Don ’t speak to me in English: Communication
apprehension in Puerto Rico. Communication Quarterly, 33, 185–192.
42  ROBERT SHUTER


--- PAGE 64 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 43
Page 43
Montet, M. (1989). Europe’s spiritual organs. International Management, 44, 38–39.
Nakanishi, M. (1986). Perceptions of self-disclosure in initial interaction: A Japanese sample. Human
Communication Research, 13, 176–190.
Nishida, H. (1985). Japanese intercultural communication competence and cross-cultural adjustment.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 9, 247–269.
Okabe, R. (1983). Cultural assumptions of East and West: Japan and the United States. International and
Intercultural Communication Annual, 7, 21–41.
Pearce, J. (1988). Free port, no trade restrictions, mark Singapore development. Business Japan, 33, 31–32.
Philipsen, G. (1975). Speaking “like a man” in T eamsterville. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 61, 13–22.
Pike, J. (1966). Language in relation to a uni ﬁed theory of the structure of human behavior . The Hague, The
Netherlands: Mouton.
Punetha, D., Giles, H., & Y oung, L. (1988). Interethnic perceptions and relative deprivation: British data.
International and Intercultural Communication Annual, 9, 252–266.
Reimer, B. (1999, March 27). Europe may slap a quota on General Hospital. Business Week, pp. 46–47.
Roberts, A. (1988). Racism sent and received: Americans an Vietnamese view one another. Research in Race
and Ethnic Relations, 5, 75–97.
Rosen, S., & Weissbrodt, D. (1988). The 39th session of the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. Human Rights Quarterly, 10, 487–508.
Rosenhaum, A. (1989). Fortress or façade? A uniﬁed EC is far from ﬁnished. Industry Week, 238, 54–55.
Rupesinghe, K. (1988). Ethnic conﬂicts in South Asia. Journal of Peace Research, 25, 337–350.
Shamsuddin, M. (1988). UNSCO and the ﬂow of information: A case study. Pakistan Horizon, 41, 31–49.
Shuter, R. (1979). The Dap in the military: Hand-to-hand communication. Journal of Communication, 29,
136–142.
Shuter, R. (1982). Initial interaction of American Blacks and Whites in interracial and intraracial dyads.
Journal of Social Psychology, 117, 45–52.
Shuter, R. (1985a). The Hmong of Laos: Orality, communication, and acculturation. In L. A. Samovar & R. E.
Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (4th ed., pp. 102–108). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Shuter, R. (1985b). Nomothetic and ideographic approaches to developing an intercultural communication
curriculum. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association,
Chicago, IL.
Stanback, M. & Pearce, W. B. (1981). Talking to “The Man ”: Some communication strategies used by
members of subordinate social groups. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 67, 21–30.
Tank, A. (1987, April). Korea’s Japanese jinx. Management Today, pp. 88–90.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1988). Rhetorical sensitivity style in three cultures: France, Japan, and the United States.
Central States Speech Journal, 39, 28–36.
Watson, A. K., Monroe, E., & Atterstrom, H. (2989). Comparison of communication apprehension across
cultures: American and Swedish children. Communication Quarterly, 37, 67–76.
Weissbrodt, D. (1988). Country related and thematic developments at the 1988 Sessions of the UN
Commission on Human Rights. Human Rights Quarterly, 10, 544–558.
Y ahuda, M. (1988). The Paciﬁc Community: Not yet. Paciﬁc Review, 1, 119–127.
Y ang, D. J. (1989, April 10). Japan builds a new power base: Its emerging clout in East Asia could come at
America’s expense. Business Week, pp. 42–45.
Yum, J. O. (1982). Communication diversity and information acquisition among Korean immigrants in
Hawaii. Human Communication Research, 8, 154–159.
Yum, J. O. (1988a). Locus of control and communication patterns of immigrants. International and Inter-
cultural Communication Annual, 9, 191–211.
Yum, J. O. (1988b). The impact of Confucianism on interpersonal relationships and communication
patterns in East Asia. Communication Monographs, 55, 374–388.
THE CENTRALITY OF CULTURE  43


--- PAGE 65 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 44
Page 44


--- PAGE 66 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 45
Page 45
Part II
Metatheoretical Frameworks
for Future Directions


--- PAGE 67 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 46
Page 46


--- PAGE 68 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 47
Page 47
4
The Ideological Signiﬁcance of
Afrocentricity in Intercultural
Communication
Moleﬁ Kete Asante
At the Bellagio Conference on African Communication I advanced the position that there were
three broad views of cultural reality: Afrocentric, Eurocentric, and Asiocentric (Asante, 1980a).
Although it is possible to make more precise delineations, the basic tenets of my position have
been enhanced by the work of Ruch and Anyanwu (1981). The philosopher Anyanwu argues
correctly that Afrocentricity makes no sharp distinction between the ego and the world, subject
and object. He says, “In the conﬂict between the self and the world, African culture makes the
self the center of the world. Since the African world is centered on the self, every experience and
reality itself is personal. ” Not only has my position been substantiated by other ﬁelds, it has
become even more self-evident that the cultural di ﬀerences we face in the world are rooted in
diﬀerent views of reality.
The African world shares a common approach to phenomena.
1 Even a term like “person” or
“human” means something diﬀerent to a European and Asian than it does to an African. In this
sense all de ﬁnitions are contextual and grow out of a people ’s cultural heritage. For example,
while the European seeks to conquer nature, to subdue it, the Asian ﬂees from the illusions of
the world, and the African ﬁnds coexistence with nature and a harmonious relationship with all
of the elements of the universe. Diop (1978) has understood this as the Two Cradle theory of
human civilization: Europe and Africa, where Asia becomes a combination of the two cradles.
Actually for Diop the African Cradle predates the European but the special characteristics of
the European Cradle are associated with the glaciers, particularly as they relate to ﬁre and ice, the
dual gods of Westerners. In Iceman Inheritance (1978) Bradley extends Diop’s position, contend-
ing that Europeans carry within them the enduring myth of Ragnarok. There is a sense in which
Europe is still trying to resolve ice and ﬁre according to Bradley ’s thesis. There needs to be
further intensive work on European mythology and psychology.
What we are witnessing in the development of intercultural communication as a ﬁeld of
inquiry is the creation of theoretical postures from which to survey the whole of human inter-
action between cultures. What obtains in such circumstance is how power is de ﬁned and used,
that is, the question becomes the focus of the problem. How do Shona communicate with
British? Or how does a Kikuyu communicate with an Arab? What description can we give to the
intercultural communication between Y oruba and Portugese? All of these questions are at their
fundamental level questions of status power, perceived or real.
47


--- PAGE 69 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 48
Page 48
Power
I emphasize that intercultural communication at the international or national level is a matter of
power.2 The proper discussion of intercultural communication seems to reside in the examin-
ation of power relationship between people. In societies where cultural di ﬀerences exist and are
the bases for misunderstandings, the control problem is an imbalance of power. Ruling ideas do
rest with ruling classes; this is a historical fact. Where Africans have interacted with Europeans
with diﬃculty, that diﬃculty has been the result of perceived power and status. Thus we cannot
achieve intercultural communication which is mature and eﬀective until we address the material
conditions of the people. Power relationships dictate so much of what is right, correct, logical,
and reasonable. The limits are drawn by those who wield the economic, political, and cultural
power.
Consequently, my concern has turned more and more toward the ideological signi ﬁcance
of communication and Afrocentricity, the logical philosophical heir to Negritude. Social science
in the West is imperialistic, the disciplinary justi ﬁcation for expansion. Richards (1980) is
clear on this point. In her brilliantly provocative essay on the European mythology of domin-
ation she has exposed the European obsession with ﬁlling up space in the name of progress.
Richards is not alone in this interpretation of the European use of social science; indeed
Herbert Marcuse (1968) and Michael Bradley (1978) have provided ample demonstration of
positivism as the pillar upon which operationalism manages to expand. Communication is a
Western ﬁeld of inquiry, much like other analytical forms, seeking to analyze audiences, examine
data, and theorize about how humans are persuaded, in order to aid the persuaders, not the
audience. In this respect, communication as a science becomes another thrust into the belly of
non-Westerners.
My aim, therefore, is to clarify how Afrocentricity serves in an ideological fashion to enhance
the opportunity for e ﬀective interaction between Africans and non-Africans. The assumption
I make is simple; e ﬀective intercultural communication must be based upon the equality of the
interactants because the sharing of meaning is the fundamental prerequisite of communicative
understanding. A development of the Afrocentric view with regards to objective conditions
for the liberation of African minds demands a wholistic philosophy. Even rhetorical discourse
among Africans in the Western world is polluted, distorted and dismembered by the onslaught
of European images and symbols.
3 Sharing of images is reasonable, valuable, and positive; image
domination, however, is the same as other colonial conquests, vile, repressive, and negative. Thus,
my aim is to develop a metatheory out of which theories will emerge to explain intercultural
interactions.
Ideology and Economics
The discussion of a comprehensive approach, including communication, to the theory of
African liberation, both continental and diasporan, has been fraught with historically divergent,
partly dissociated, politically con ﬂicting, and conceptually incongruent patterns among our
leading thinkers (DuBois, 1961; Garvey, 1969; Diop, 1978; Karenga, 1978; Cruse, 1968; Cabral,
1973; Fanon, 1967; Nkrumah, 1970; and Nyerere, 1974).
4 They have argued di ﬀerent positions,
debating from their own ideological reference points, yet they have all sought to explain the
African relationship to the European in historical and contemporary times. This analytical
similarity, that is, as it refers to the relationship of African peoples to European peoples, has not
meant a congruent approach to the nature of cultural liberation. Numerous varieties exist in our
political orientations as well as in our understanding of the objective conditions of our lives.
Perhaps it is the di ﬀerences perceived in the objective conditions that give rise to the great
diversity in ideological approaches. One issue is settled among these scholars: no one can de ﬁne
48  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE


--- PAGE 70 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 49
Page 49
for us how we will behave in intercultural encounters. They recognize the need for a people to
deﬁne their own power vis-à-vis another.
Afrocentricity is the ideological centerpiece of human regeneration, systematizing our history
and experience with our own culture at the core of existence (Asante, 1980a). In its epistemic
dimensions it is also a methodology for discovering the truth about intercultural communica-
tion. We have needed more culturally sensitive treatments for our analysis of reality. Indeed the
principal theoretical analyses by Africans of the African political economy on the continent and
wherever it is substantial in the diaspora have often been enmeshed in reactionary thought.
Those analyses which have not been rigidly reactionary have often turned to Marxist referents.
Although both the capitalist and the Marxist positions are European and consequently derive
from European exeriences, that is no reason in and of itself to reject them wholeheartedly.
A more serious charge is that both theoretical positions encapsulate the interests and aspirations
of the masses of Africans, subsuming African interests to the dominant interests of Europe
(Rodney, 1980; Marable, 1982).
It is therefore necessary for us to explore alternatives in order to at least know what is possible
from an African cultural perspective. Wey and Osagie (1977) have proposed the integratism
inherent in all markets as the basis for Nigerian economic development and ultimately an
approach to all African economic development. The principal factor in Wey and Osagie’s system
is the cultural heritage of the people. The modifying and systematizing of this cultural heritage
along more successful economic lines becomes the major change element in ending the capital-
ist/socialist struggle. Although I am not an apologist for the past, I do believe that we can build
upon the foundations ﬁrmly entrenched in our culture. The afrologist must begin to explore all
economic analysis which must be seen as contributing to our symbolic system. But the relation-
ship between economics and communication remains one of a de ﬁnition of power. The gates
of world power are kept by guardians who conference among themselves to secure their places
and to thwart African communication or economic maturity, on the continent and in the
diaspora. A market system which seeks proﬁts correlates with a view of intercultural communi-
cation which seeks to use people. DeBeers Consolidated Diamonds controls the bulk of the
diamonds sold in the world through a distribution system open to 300 European diamond
dealers. Thus, through this arrangement only a select number of gem diamonds are placed on
the world market. This happens while the major diamond producing area of the world remains
Africa. In order for an African on the continent or in the diaspora to participate in the process of
securing gem diamonds, he or she must submit to the Europeans whose native lands produce
almost no gem diamonds. In no other continent and among no other peoples have outside
inﬂuences so thoroughly dominated economic life. Our battle is intense, the struggle we wage for
status power is serious and we cannot communicate as equals when our economic position is that
of servants.
Changes in the Western markets will tend to be toward more monopolistic vertical integration
which allows transnational companies to own and control the sources of their raw materials.
Walter Rodney, in his awesome work How Europe Underdeveloped Africa , showed the negative
character of the social, political, and economic consequences of European exploitation. In
Rodney’s view the viciousness of the colonial system with respect to African social services was
stunning. Colonized African populations were severely maltreated in health, education, and
welfare. In fact, Rodney’s thesis on colonized people deepened our understanding of the brutal-
ity of race exploitation underscored by the fact that the colonists owned and controlled the raw
materials which gave them enormous surplus and allowed them to ship massive amounts to the
various metropoles without returning equal proﬁts to the Africans who made it all possible. For
example, John Cadbury chaired the West African Cocoa Board and used this position to amass
wealth and to exploit the African cocoa farmers, becoming one of the richest chocolate manu-
facturers in the world. Almost every African colony had its white settlers or businessmen who
IDEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF AFROCENTRICITY  49


--- PAGE 71 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 50
Page 50
controlled vast areas of the country ’s natural resources. In too many examples, those settlers
were the most violent supporters of racism against Africans.
Politics and Symbols
Politics is the struggle for symbols, that is, the endeavor to secure some predetermined objective.
Power is the abilility to see those symbols materialized and the objective realized. On a basic level
the forces of SWAPO possess a vision for Namibia which they intend to implement; the imple-
mentation of that vision will be an indication of power. Theoretically, a person may have a vision
about securing assent to some philosophical position. The marshalling of evidence, data, and
arguments to obtain acceptance of that theory reveals intellectual power.
Intercultural communication as a harmonious endeavor seeks to create the sharing of power.
In the exchange, the interchange, we ﬁnd the source of creative understanding. For the African
scholar the principal audience is African and from that audience one makes contact with the
universal audience.
I am a Diopian in terms of philosophy and analysis, believing that no method is adequate if it
cannot explain the possibility of harmony. Every topic, economics, law, communication, science,
religion, history, literature, and sociology must be reviewed through Afrocentric eyes. When I
met Cheikh Anta Diop at IFAN, University of Dakar, in December 1980, and spoke to him about
symbols and culture, he emphasized the need to expand the understanding of African culture,
not defend it. In the mind of this outstanding scholar the future of African scholarship rested with
those scholars who would explore every subject afrocentrically. We must examine the African
invasions of Europe, African in ﬂuences on the court systems of Europe as it emerged from the
White Ages, and the African American origin of American science. The afrocentric line is not an
easy line, it is a diﬃcult analytical method, fraught with pitfalls, detours, and intellectual seduc-
tresses and seducers. Y et it is a worthwhile method, perhaps the only valid method, for a proper
understanding of our objective reality. Otherwise intercultural communication becomes a mere
pipe dream unrealized and unrealizable because Europeans and Africans have such limited
understanding of each other’s essential mythologies and motifs.
Eurocentric Aggression
McWorter (1980) has seen that the methods and conclusions of afrocentric scholars are often
diametrically opposed to European intellectual traditions and this objective fact means that
many scholars of African descent are not published in eurocentric journals. The opposition of
the two world views derives from the concept of origin. Michael Bradley ’s (1978) thesis is that
the rise of Europeans must be seen in the caves of Europe during the time of the glaciers. Their
use and worship of ﬁre arose in the same period. This led to a fear of strangers, xenophobia, and
an aggressive behavior, all for the protection of one ’s ﬁre. According to Bradley, the European’s
aggressiveness constitutes the single most important factor in his expansion throughout the
world. It was not only spatial but intellectual. As with geography what they saw they attempted
to ﬁll, even though there were other people or ideas in those places. Concomitant with the
European colonization of Africa was the European colonization of information about Africa. It
would be a mistake for any African theorist or philosopher to underestimate the extent of white
aggressiveness in the communication process. Since aggression is the primary reason for white
expansion (Richards, 1980; Bradley, 1978) in other spheres, Schiller (1976: 82) correctly sees the
struggle for domination over communication as essentially a creation of the capitalist ethos of
white western industrialized societies. According to Schiller (1976: 55), “western technology is
not only an integral part of an exploitative system of production but extends and deepens that
exploitation.” My own view is that Marxist technology also seeks to impose itself on Africa. In
50  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE


--- PAGE 72 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 51
Page 51
communication, as in other ﬁelds, the aim of the eurocentric aggression is to dominate through
the subjection of nature and people. Ultimately, this quest for domination is a quest for salvation
which Europeans ﬁnd only in the acquisition of more and more. The Hobbesian analysis of
European “man” that he desires and desires and there is no end to his desire seems as accurate
now as it was in the seventeenth century. Acquisition was often made a reality by changing the
names of things, places and even people and then treating them as if they were what Europeans
said they were, in eﬀect, objects.
The Europeans imposed themselves and gave new names to mountains, rivers, and villages.
Monopotapa existed long before there was any Rhodes or Rhodesia; Victoria Falls is an
imposition on the ancient water falls called Musi-wa-tunya, and New Y ork and Baltimore are
recent names to the geography of North America. In the world of ideas, Europeans imposed
new histories, new sciences, and new interpretations which disregarded the sacred histories
and sciences of the ancients. They were like children playing in the garden of adults. Progress
became a term for an antihuman thrust of racial vanity. Bradley (1978) is perhaps one of the few
white writers who correctly understands this penchant for progress as a “symptom of undis-
placed aggression resulting from Caucasoid psychosexual maladaptation. ” What other races
have viewed as civilization is puzzling to whites who view progress as civilization (Bradley, 1978;
Richards, 1980).
African scholars can never hope to achieve intellectual, cultural, or political liberation by
following in eurocentric footsteps; this is the exacting truth of history. The foundations of
eurocentric thought makes Africans anti-African. Neither can we expect to communicate if we
refuse to use our own voice. Our own voice is the source of e ﬀective interaction with others.
While anthropology, sociology, history, and economics exist as reasonable categories for study-
ing the world, it is in the development, analysis, and criticism of those disciplines that we will
ﬁnd our diﬀerences with eurocentric writers. We should not abandon the principal disciplines,
nor must we relinquish excellence, intellectual integrity, methodological clarity, and productiv-
ity. If it should become necessary to challenge the so-called Western disciplines, we must do so
from an afrocentric perspective using intellectual integrity which is comprised of an absolute
commitment to the discovery of truth. And truth is never against the people; it can only support
the best traditions because it is in harmony with nature. For example, if one is asked to discuss
anthropology, one must understand its racist origin. Classiﬁcation of humans was initially done
for racist reasons: to try to show white supremacy and the inferiority of every other people. Thus
when the white person spoke to the African or Asian he or she spoke with the perceptions of
white superiority. Many nonwhites, educated in white studies, assumed their own inferiority and
accepted the superiority of white culture as promulgated by white studies. The communication
between such a person and a white person is super ﬁcial and often meaningless.
Criticism and Knowledge
The bulk of what Africans have written has added to the body of European literature. Even our
criticism has been criticism from a European posture, that is, when we have been critical we have
used foreign critical categories. Our research often begins with a review of the European litera-
ture on our subjects. What we need is a method to prevent the invisibility of our own scholars
and history. The afrocentric approach to research permits a speciﬁc and a general survey in search
for African writers who have studied the topic on them. This is done to prevent provincialism
and racism. These two levels of inquiry will always reveal an African who has understood or
developed a perspective on an issue. If you are talking about systems theory, then explore the
question from the speciﬁc survey level. How does system theory work? What is its relationship to
society in the large? What signi ﬁcance does it have to Africans? These questions should give the
researcher enough information to ﬁnd an African who has written on the subject. If not, then
IDEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF AFROCENTRICITY  51


--- PAGE 73 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 52
Page 52
proceed to the next level, the general survey. What are the methodological approaches to this
topic? What mythological bases exist in African culture? When the answer is found we can
say, perhaps, that Marcus Garvey advanced systems theory long before von Bertanlanfy ever
dreamed of the concept. Garvey demonstrated the wholistic nature, the unitary nature of the
racist system. Moreover, at the general survey level one discovers that Ogotemmeli ’s exposition
on Dogon philosophy and works in Zulu and Y oruba philosophy show the interconnectedness of
the world. Even in umbanda, myalism, voodoo, and Rasta one has to understand the elements of
input-output equations, entropy, and leading force. So if we are to be truly afrocentric in our
research we will need to understand that our work must add to the body of information related
to our perspective; otherwise we are Africans doing eurocentric research. This is diﬃcult because
it causes us to thinks about the topics we tackle but more importantly how we tackle them. It is
too easy to disregard the communication research of African scholars; that is why it is necessary
to make a special eﬀort.
Collective worldview means that we have a common vision for our research; it does not mean
that all of our research must be on the same topics. Afrologists need three professional qualities:
competence, clarity of perspective, and understanding of the research object (Asante, 1980a). The
afrocentric method makes afrological study. So one may study any subject and be an afrologist
so long as the subject is studied afrocentrically. Everything is in relation to Africa, not Africa in
mere geographic terms but Africa as vision, ideal, and promontory.
History and tradition teach us that cultural power is the fundamental basis of economic
power. John Henrik Clarke is correct to observe that a major clothing industry among African
Americans could have been created if Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., had refused to wear any
clothes but those manufactured by Africans. Chopsticks will not be replaced in China by forks
and spoons, not even in the Westernization period, because whole villages are engaged in the
manufacturing of chopsticks; they are cultural and economic. Our economics is a symbol
system, what we wear and what we buy are symbols to those who see us.
Afrologists, as guiding theorists, can create the foundations for economic victory, but we have
to be willing to propose bold research plans which will redound to the image of a nation; indeed,
this is true imagination. Such an Ogunic thrust into the future is what we need to prepare
ourselves and our children for economic independence. This means that they look to create
rather than to join with the oppressor. Architects should build edi ﬁces which re ﬂect African
values and symbols. Scientists should examine the African secrets and mysteries related to herbs.
Linguisticians must decipher the Meroitic texts. Historians should write unifying histories of the
continent. Psychologists should examine white people, particularly as such examination into
racist behavior will make for interracial understanding, and report their ﬁndings in journals of
Black Studies and African research. My point is that ideology is essential to cultural action and
afrocentricity is the ideological posture which allows us to act creatively.
Afrocentric Counterbalance
Afrocentricity provides us with a counterbalance to the penetration of eurocentric ideology
in communication. Most doctrines of communication developed in the Western world are
meant to protect the status of the exploiter, the dominator or if they were not so intended have
become the reality. Free ﬂow of information, for example, strengthens the exploiter and keeps
the weak nations weak. As a concept, free ﬂow of information rises with American imperial
expansion and global hegemony. Freedom for capital expansion was therefore appreciated as
freedom for movement of information. My contention is that this view of the world haunts
our theoretical positions on intercultural communication. In fact, what I (1980b) have called
temporary communication estrangement or TCE occurs regularly in the interactions of Africans
with Europeans. The receiver who fails to interrupt an incorrect view in order to achieve
52  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE


--- PAGE 74 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 53
Page 53
some other purpose causes a communication problem. Thus, most creative solutions to the
intercultural communication estrangement are in our hands.
We are creatures of our history, and the brilliance of any liberation paradigm must be found
in that history. When we know, truly know, that the Isonghee of Zaire invented the ﬁrst mathe-
matical calculator 8000 years ago or that DuBois ’s bibliography lists 2377 articles and books, or
that Ifa with its 256 major odus covers more ethical material than either the Bible or Koran, or
that Tubman was a socialist and a revolutionary nationalist, or that geometrical principles were
used by the Africans of the Olduvai Gorge a million years ago, we can analyze contemporary
situations more accurately. I do not mean to make this too simple by citing only a few examples
because afrocentricity is a diﬃcult theoretical philosophy to perfect, yet it is the most historically
correct philosophy of scholarship and life for the African scholar. Our history is one of struggle
and victory; this knowledge is necessary as we attempt to reconstruct and mobilize. There are
two important attributes of the afrocentric person: (1) African symbolization and (2) culture
creation. We have no way of living but in culture; rituals and ceremonies organize our culture
for us. Without rituals and ceremonies we are a rudderless people ﬂoating in an abstract sea of
materialism. T o symbolize is to ﬁnd representatives for our thoughts, ideas, values, and attitudes
that teach us how to create and to enhance our creativity.
In the diaspora our cultural scientists must give more attention to rites of passage for our
children.
5 These rites, like all previous rites, must grow out of history. Karenga, more than any
of our contemporary scientists, has understood the creative and victorious value of cultural
nationalism. T o the degree that Karenga has seen the need for us to have rites, ceremonies, and
holidays that re ﬂect our values, he has opened the possibility for cultural stamina in the trad-
ition of Garvey and Elija Muhammad. Kariamu has created the mfundalai rite for young child-
ren. In this rite there is the passing from childhood to adulthood. At thirteen years of age the
girl or the boy must learn to recite from THE WAY, the book of Njia, interpret the recitation,
and apply it to situations in their lives. This rite is held in the presence of friends and family
who listen to the child ’s recitation of the deeds, events, and personalities in our history. If the
child is not successful, she must repeat the rite at the age of fourteen. We say rhythm is the
primary fact of life, participate in the rhythm of the universe and sense happiness. A discipline
which expands our rites, organizes our sciences, and enhances our cultural development is highly
desirable.
Nuclearism, the highest form of the Viking religion, the worship of weapon as deity, has
become the main obsession of Europeans. They even speak in apocalyptic terms about the
beauty of the weapon, the security it provides, and its awesome power. Since nuclearism has
become the god of the Europeans and they are poised for a violent Ragnarok, it is very essential
that our scholars, afrologists, not divorce ideology from science. We have been captured too long
by the notion that we cannot make value judgments in criticism, history, art, economics, law,
communication, anthropology, political science, and psychology. Y et our own experiences have
taught us or should have taught us that we must remain vigilant in our attack on dehumaniza-
tion. Communication theory derived from afrocentricity must be open to human development.
Awareness, therefore, is a relevant issue in cultural understanding and cultural nationalism. The
word “awareness” is derived from two aspects, namely, wariness and illumination. We must be
wary of psychic numbness and assume a mission of rescue for African culture by not separating
knowledge from feeling.
All cultural research must have dynamic symbolism.
6 The afrologist is engaged in an intense,
persistent, and ideological struggle to see a vision of the world realized. Surrounded by hostile
forces, even within the race, we cannot withdraw from creative theory tested by practice. Whole
courses should be taught on afrocentricity, Kawaida, the theories of Cheikh Anta Diop, DuBois,
ancestralism, Karenga, King, and Garvey. Our literature and political theories are rich and
varied. Afrologists who study communication must view African Studies wholistically where
IDEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF AFROCENTRICITY  53


--- PAGE 75 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 54
Page 54
Africans are joined politically, culturally, and economically. We must read the works of Soyinka,
Guillen, Obenga, Ravell, Nascimento, Roumain, Osagie, Diop, Aboaba, Wey, Anyanwu, Vandi,
Ikpewho, Nhiwatiwa among others from the continent, South America, and the Caribbean.
7 We
shall win the victory, that much is inexorable and so we call upon the spirit of our children and
their children to witness what we have done and who we are, to learn strength from us and truth
from us and be not afraid as we are not afraid and to come forth for you have been counted. It is
done!
Notes
1. This has been demonstrated by the new research coming out of the Bu ﬀalo School of African Com-
munication. A whole list of scholars: Boadu, Harrison, Appiah, Abarry, Vandi, Aboaba, Nhiwatiwa,
Hunter, Grant, and Holmes, have shown the unity of African culture. More explicitly, I have advanced
the position that Africans are united by ancestralism, extended kinship, rhythmic ritualism, and a Supreme
Deity. These concepts cross most boundaries of Africans.
2. There has not been a full power analysis of interpersonal communication. I believe that the status studies
and the hierarchical studies engaged in by traditional white communicationists skirt the principal
contradiction of power relationships among people.
3. African Americans have frequently adopted the language of the oppressor in order to achieve liberation.
Frantz Fanon predicted this behavior for all colonized people. It is necessary to reject symbols of
victimage in order to free our minds. Leachim Semaj ’s work on race and identity in children of the
African diaspora is important on this point (see Studia Africana, Fall 1981).
4. I see all discussions of science as discussions of human liberation. Thus in speaking of intercultural
communication I must address the issue of the liberation of the mind, the freeing of the soul, and the
personality, otherwise we participate in the worst kind of impractical research.
5. This is a concern of mine that has its origin in the doctrine of Kawaida which I recognize as a peculiarly
brilliant gift to mankind. A full appreciation of the African contact with the marauding Europeans,
especially in the middle passage and so-called new world, remains to be done. Rites are necessarily the
results of historical experience.
6. T o be able to employ one ’s own myths intelligently in conversation is to educate both those that
hear and oneself. I am convinced that only a practice of this sort will elevate our intercultural
interactions.
7. Intercultural communication between Y oruba and Ibo, Kikuyu and Luo, Mashona and Matebele, African
American and Jamaican, Ashanti, and Ewe must be based upon knowledge and humility. All intercul-
tural relations begin with the perception of self and then extend outward; but to be meaningful it must
be knowledgeable.
References
Asante, M. (1980a). Afrocentricity: The theory of social change . Bu ﬀalo, NY: Amule ﬁ Publishing
Company.
—— (1980b). Intercultural communication: an Afrocentric inquiry into encounter. In B. E. Williams &
O. L. Taylor (Eds.). International Conference on Black Communication: A Bellagio Conference,
August 6–9, 1979 (pp. 1–18). New Y ork: Rockefeller Foundation.
Bradley, M. (1978). Iceman inheritance. T oronto: Dorset.
Cabral, A. (1973). Return to the source. New Y ork: Monthly Review Press.
Cruse, H. (1968). Rebellion or revolution. New Y ork: William Morrow.
Diop, C. A. (1978). Cultural unity of Black Africa. Chicago: Third World Press.
Dubois, W.E.B. (1961). The souls of Black folk. New Y ork: Fawcett World Library.
Fanon, F. (1967). The wretched of the earth. New Y ork: Grove Press.
Garvey, A. (1969). The philosophy and opinions of Marcus Garvey. New Y ork: Antheneum.
Karenga, M. (1978). Essays in struggle. San Diego: Kawaida.
Marable, M. (1982). How capitalism underdeveloped Black America. Chicago: Southend Press.
Marcuse, H. (1968). One dimensional man. Boston: Beacon Press.
McWorter, G. (1980). Guide to Black scholarly publications. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Afro American
Research Institute.
Nkrumah, K. (1970). Class struggle in Africa . New Y ork: International Publishers.
Nyerere, J. (1974). Freedom and development. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
54  MOLEFI KETE ASANTE


--- PAGE 76 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 55
Page 55
Richards, D. (1980). European mythology: The ideology of “progress”. In M. K. Asante and A. S. Vandi
(Eds.). Contemporary Black thought: Alternative analyses in the social and behavioral sciences
(pp. 59–79). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rodney, W. (1980). How Europe underdeveloped Africa. Washington, DC: Howard University Press.
Ruch, E. A. & Anyanwu, K. C. (1981). African philosophy. Rome: Catholic Book Agency.
Schiller, H. (1976). Communication and cultural domination. White Plains, NY: Sharpe.
Wey, S. O. & Osagie, E. (1977). An ideology for social development. Lagos: Academy Press.
IDEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF AFROCENTRICITY  55


--- PAGE 77 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 56
Page 56


--- PAGE 78 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 57
Page 57
5
Toward an Alternative Metatheory of
Human Communication
An Asiacentric Vision*
Yoshitaka Miike
A metatheory or paradigm is a conception that includes a multiplicity of
theories; as such, it allows us to develop better interpretations, fuller under-
standings, and more e ﬀective articulations of the meaning of human goals
and interactions. A metatheory suggests the character and content of theories
by prescribing what a theory should explain . . . and what analytical tools are
required for revealing and establishing concepts....  A  m etatheory, then, is the
product of decision rather than discovery, and it is justi ﬁed by the theories
that are consonant to it.
Moleﬁ Kete Asante (1998, p. 45)
T o theorize about Asia is not the same as to theorize from the Asian perspective. One can address
and appraise Asian people and phenomena without reference to Asian languages, religions/
philosophies, and histories. Such an intellectual orientation is, however, fundamentally unsound
if one wishes to see the Asian world through Asian eyes because Asians think and speak in Asian
languages, believe in Asian religions/philosophies, and struggle to live in Asian historical experi-
ences. In order to truly understand and appreciate Asian thought and action, therefore, one
must successfully explore and examine the cultural agency of Asians in the linguistic, religious/
philosophical, and historical contexts of Asia. T o theorize from the vantage point of Asians as
centered is thus to theorize from Asian everyday languages, religious-philosophical traditions,
and historical experiences as vital resources.
European intellectual imperialism, which results in the intellectual dislocation of non-
Europeans, has been increasingly problematized and challenged across disciplines in recent years
(Asante, 1992, 1998, 2002, 2003). The ﬁeld of communication cannot escape from this inter-
disciplinary intellectual movement. Many researchers, Asian and non-Asian alike, in the ﬁeld have
assumed the universal applicability of the metatheory and methodology of Eurocentric com-
munication scholarship. In the case of knowledge production about Asian communication
practices, they have done extensive research through analytical tools grounded in European
intellectual traditions. Although some of their ﬁndings are insightful and useful, such Eurocentric
studies of Asian communication have often dislocated Asians out of their cultural context and
have thereby denied the centrality of Asians in the communication process.
One of the urgent tasks of Asian communication scholars at this critical juncture is to
conduct Asiacentric studies of Asian communication. They are now prodded to engage in
human communication scholarship whose concepts, models, and principles are derived from
57


--- PAGE 79 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 58
Page 58
Asian cultures as resources for theory building. In an attempt to propound an alternative
metatheory that guides such Asiacentric inquiries into Asian communication, the present essay
stipulates its research objectives, content dimensions, and methodological considerations. These
three components of the metatheory specify why, how, and what kind of communicative knowl-
edge from Asia ought to be pursued. Along with the theoretical assumptions outlined elsewhere
(Miike, 2002, 2003ab), they envision the contours of an Asiacentric communication paradigm.
1
Asiacentric Research Objectives
In this ﬁrst section, I wish to address why (or for what purpose) knowledge should be produced
in Asiacentric communication scholarship. There are ﬁve Asiacentric research objectives that I
would like to discuss herein: (1) to critique misleading Eurocentric studies of Asian communica-
tion behaviors; (2) to preserve Asian cultural values and modes of communication; (3) to
explore spiritual liberation through communication; (4) to depict multiple visions of harmony
among complex relationships; and (5) to examine (inter)cultural communication needs and
problems seen through Asian eyes. These interrelated research goals are designed to systematically
advance the Asiacentric knowledge of human communication.
The ﬁrst Asiacentric research objective is to critique misleading Eurocentric studies of Asian
communication behaviors . Asiacentric critics need to evaluate Eurocentric representations of
Asian cultures and communication from at least two angles: (1) questions of consequence; and
(2) questions of foundation. Theoretical perspectives and research ﬁndings, whether intended or
unintended, often have negative impacts on the researched community. They are also knowingly
and unknowingly misapplied to misrepresent the theorized people. It is the role of Asiacentric
communication critics to elaborate on how certain Eurocentric representations have come to do
harm to Asians. If such representations foster stereotyping, for example, they ought to elucidate
what kind of representation becomes a stereotype and why.
When Eurocentric social scientists use such constructs as interdependent self-construal, col-
lectivism, and high-context to characterize Asian individuals and cultures, do these characteriza-
tions promote the complex understanding and deep appreciation of Asian selves and cultures?
When Eurocentric interpretive observers describe Asian modesty simply as an interaction tactic
for a relational concern, does such an observation encourage non-Asians to practice Asian
communication styles? When Eurocentric critical interrogators scorn Confucianism as a cult of
oppression, do they really acknowledge the cultural agency of Asians and empower them? These
are questions of scholarly consequence.
Asiacentric communication critics must also address questions of scholarly foundation. If
Eurocentric theoretical frameworks and research methods are comprehensive and inclusive,
Asiacentric communicologists should be able to answer how elements of Thai or Filipino culture
substantially contributed to the conceptualization of the individualism-collectivism dimension,
how the observation criteria of the ethnography of speaking took the unique cultural context
and condition of Tibet into account, and how critical theorists learned from Hinduism in the
process of theory building. These questions should be posed not to completely dismiss the
usefulness or applicability of Eurocentric theory and research but to be aware of their limitations
and culture-boundness.
Asiacentric communication researchers ought to re ﬂect on what kind of inherent bias may
exist in Eurocentric theoretical origins, how inappropriate Eurocentric data collection and
analysis procedures may be to the conditions of doing research in Asia, and even how diﬀerently
Eurocentric research ﬁndings can be interpreted from Asiacentric perspectives. They need to
carefully reconsider who theorists are, how they develop theories for whom, and how they
standardize research processes and evaluations in Eurocentric communication scholarship, and
why their applications are possible or impossible in Asia.
58  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 80 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 59
Page 59
The second Asiacentric research objective is to preserve Asian cultural values and modes of
communication. There have been debates and controversies over “Asian values ” in political
discourse since Singapore’s Senior Minister Lee Yuan Y ew challenged the Eurocentric universal-
istic position that the Western version of democracy is ideal for the rest of the world (Zakaria,
1994; Kim, 1994; McCarthy, 1998). Asianness, however de ﬁned, has been condemned by many
Westerners without careful considerations. There is also a growing concern in Asia that positive
aspects of Asian cultures are being lost. Given these circumstances, the question of Asian values
is worthy of pursuit among Asiacentric communication professionals especially in light of
cultural preservation and protection.
Koh (1999) states that there is no agreement among Asian intellectuals as to whether or not
there is such a thing as “Asian values. ” There is probably no absolute Asianness that can
represent the cultural values of all Asians. But it is not necessary to answer such an either-or
question because, in any case, the searching process for Asian values itself is of immense value.
Whether Asian values are partially similar to, or di ﬀerent from, Western values is a secondary
question. The most important question is what are the cultural values that have shaped Asian
communicative life.
In seeking answers to this question, Asiacentric scholars also ought to examine their positive
and negative impacts on human communication. If Asian cultural values and communicative
modes are changing, they must try to understand why they are changing and evaluate such
changes. If they believe that those changes are not desirable, they have to argue convincingly why
certain cultural values and communicative modes should be preserved in the future. Further-
more, it is possible for Asiacentrists to estimate what are the costs and compensations of Asian
values and modes of communication rather than to absolutely determine which are good and
which are bad.
For example, Chen and Chung (2000) lay out communication costs and compensations in
Confucianism-inﬂuenced organizations. They isolate six costs: (1) the rule-learning cost; (2) the
long-term interaction cost; (3) the out-group exclusion cost; (4) the intermediary cost; (5) the
personal contact cost; and (6) the education cost. According to Chen and Chung (2000), these
communication costs are respectively paid o ﬀ by the following six compensations: (1) reduced
guesswork and uncertainty; (2) reduced apprehension and increased liking and mutual respect;
(3) easier motivation; (4) reduced con ﬂict; (5) loyalty and commitment; and (6) reduced mis-
understanding and clari ﬁcation e ﬀorts. This type of assessment merits increasing scholarly
attention.
The third Asiacentric research objective is to explore spiritual liberation through communication.
Asante (1980) characterizes Afrocentric personalism, Asiacentric spiritualism, and Eurocentric
materialism as three “broad” views of reality. According to him, the Afrocentric viewpoint holds
that “all modalities and realities are united and move in one grand manner. There can be no
separation of material and spiritual” (p. 405). The Asiacentric viewpoint holds that “the material
is an illusion; that the real only comes from the spiritual. Therefore Asian philosophical concepts
are enamored with spirit-over-matter notions ” (p. 405). The Eurocentric viewpoint holds that
“the material, the experiential, is real and that the spiritual is an illusion. Everything that is not
within sense experiences becomes nonsense” (p. 405). Although they are gross characterizations
that border on overgeneralizations, these worldviews are manifested in Afrocentric, Asiacentric,
and Eurocentric scholarship.
Whether social scienti ﬁc, interpretive, or critical, Eurocentric scholarship has largely neg-
lected spiritual dimensions of human communication due to its material emphasis. Asiacentric
communication professionals should compensate for this neglect by consciously focusing on
spirituality. Kincaid (1987a) points out that Western materialism and Eastern spiritualism may
lead to diﬀerent philosophical conceptions of self, freedom, and the role of communication:
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  59


--- PAGE 81 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 60
Page 60
The meaning of liberation in traditional Indian philosophy is intertwined with the related
concepts of oneness, nonindividuality, and material nonattachment. Freedom is something
attached when one gives up his/her individuality, renounces material things, and spiritu-
ally becomes one with something greater than oneself. Freedom, at least in the American
sense, is associated with the independence to pursue one’s own— often material— interests
in fair competition with other individuals. In the West you do something to achieve
whatever ends make you happy. In the East you become one with something greater than
yourself for no other conscious purpose. Both speak of freedom.
(p. 335)
Kincaid’s insightful observation implies that the Asiacentric ultimate meaning of communi-
cation is to become connected with, rather than isolated from, everyone and everything in the
universe, which does not contradict the ontological assumption for an Asiacentric paradigm —
everyone and everything are interrelated across space and time (Miike, 2002, 2003ab). The role
of communication is then to facilitate egolessness and connection toward Asiacentric spiritual
enlightenment— the oneness of the universe. Seen from this perspective, “the realization that the
self is imbedded in the whole and becomes complete only when one becomes egoless becomes
the basis of communication competence” (Yum, 1993, p. 6). Therefore, for example, “One of the
ﬁnal aims of Zen training is to get rid of ego or self and to reach the spiritual freedom of
selﬂessness” (Tsujimura, 1987, p. 115).
Dissanayake (1990) cautions that “as we seek ways and means of cultural integration in a
global age, we should not ignore the spiritual realm. As technology begins to dominate lives and
secularization becomes the cherished goal, there emerges a sense of spiritual void ” (p. 93).
Dissanayake (1990) predicts that “as a reaction to the pervasive impersonality generated in the
postindustrial society, a quest for fundamental meaning in life is likely to surface ” (p. 93). It is
against this background that Asiacentric scholars can warrant their theoretical contributions
to spiritual aspects of human communication in an age of modernization and urbanization
(see also Dissanayake, 1989).
If there are Eurocentric ego-centered theories of communication that encourage unique
individuality and material freedom, should not there be Asiacentric ego-decentered theories of
communication that encourage connectedness and spiritual liberation? If there are Eurocentric
conceptualizations of power and privilege in view of material freedom, should not there be
Asiacentric conceptualizations of them in view of spiritual liberation? If there is Eurocentric
material development communication and the di ﬀusion of material innovations, should
not there be Asiacentric spiritual development communication and the di ﬀusion of spiritual
innovations?
The fourth Asiacentric research objective is to depict multiple visions of harmony among complex
relationships. Harmony is one of the cardinal themes in the Asian worldview (Chen, 1993, 2002b;
Dissanayake, 1983, 1989; Yum, 1987, 1993). It is the ultimate Asiacentric goal of communication.
Although this prominent value has been extensively discussed in culture and communication
studies, most of the past discussions are limited in the sense that they only address social
harmony among humans in interpersonal, group, and organizational interactions. The axio-
logical assumption for an Asiacentric paradigm is that harmony is vital to the survival of
everyone and everything (Miike, 2002, 2003ab). Harmony in this sense is a more broad and
holistic concept and refers to harmony on every level in the whole universe.
Harmony always exists in relationships. The higher level of harmony one attempts to achieve,
the more complex relationships she or he needs to consider. It is therefore a challenging task for
Asiacentric communication specialists to holistically theorize ideal versions of harmony on
many levels among many relationships. Ishii (2001, 2003a) stresses harmonious triworld com-
munication among the worlds of supernatural beings, natural beings, and human beings. It is
60  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 82 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 61
Page 61
imperative that Asiacentric communication experts reconsider complex relationships among
these three worlds and indicate what should be their ideal relationships. Such an attempt is a
formidable yet important mission of Asiacentrists in the present age of “money-oriented values,
rich-poor discrepancies, wasteful lifestyles, environmental devastation, shortage of natural
resources, and mass destruction” (Ishii, 2003b, pp. 1–2).
Asiacentric depictions of harmony among complex relationships should be based on the
Asiacentric communicative assumption that mutual adaptation is of central importance in har-
monious communication processes (Miike, 2002, 2003ab). Harmony, particularly on its higher
levels, cannot be ideally achieved by control (Miike, 2003b). Controlling other human beings,
natural beings, or even spiritual beings for self-interest from the progressive view of science and
technology has not proved to be the successful strategy toward harmony in the universe. Asiacen-
tric visions of harmony must lead one to see the importance of making herself or himself change
toward a higher degree of harmony through mutual adaptation. This fourth Asiacentric research
goal of depicting multiple visions of harmony among complex relationships will go hand in hand
with the third Asiacentric research goal of exploring spiritual liberation through communication.
The ﬁfth Asiacentric research objective is to examine (inter)cultural communication needs and
problems seen through Asian eyes. The soil of Asia, due to its cultural diversity, has been “needed”
by Western principal investigators whose primary goal is to test Western theories for establishing
their universal generalizability (Sinha, 1996). It is their needs (or sometimes curiosities) that
have determined the directions of investigation. As a result, the needs of Asian societies have
been ignored. Such cross-cultural research, no matter how theoretically re ﬁned and method-
ologically sophisticated, has been irrelevant to the problems of Asia and, hence, has little utility
value for local residents in Asian communities.
Asia is not free from its own unique communication needs, issues, and problems in its
sociocultural milieu, which require socioculturally sensitive care, considerations, and solutions
also in local contexts. If Asiacentric communication researchers strive to thoroughly identify the
local needs and problems and systematically address their causes and solutions, they will pursue
new research programs. Such investigations will have local relevance and consequences because
they start from the researched community ’s needs and problems. Asiacentric communication
investigators have not yet engaged in these community-based projects, especially in relation to
geographical conditions, philosophical underpinnings, historical in ﬂuences, political systems,
economic situations, and educational practices.
Intercultural communication studies in global contexts, as well as intracultural communica-
tion studies in local contexts, can beneﬁt greatly from this scholarly priority of Asian needs and
problems. Chu (1986) points out that “Although much insight has been gained, one wonders
whether the conception of intercultural communication problems might have been biased by
the Western perception” (p. 4). Chu (1986) speculates that “[because] Intercultural communica-
tion involves two sides, it would be most useful if Asian communication researchers can bring
their insight and cultural perception into the research problems” (p. 4). Seen through Asian eyes,
then, what would be the needs and problems in intercultural communication both within and
outside Asia?
Future investigations of Asian communication needs and problems in both local and global
contexts can lead to an enhanced understanding of communication competence and ethics
because meeting needs and solving problems are matters of e ﬀectiveness and appropriateness
and matters of right and wrong. Recent literature in the intercultural ﬁeld pinpoints Eurocentric
biases in theorizing communication competence and ethics (Chen, 1993, 1994; Shuter, 2003;
Yum, 1993, 1994). From a Korean perspective, for instance, Yum (1994) makes a sharp observa-
tion that “mutual” (in)competence instead of “individual” (in)competence should be duly
emphasized. Asiacentric need/problem-centered conceptualizations of human communication
competence and ethics will provide rich insights into such an important theoretical issue.
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  61


--- PAGE 83 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 62
Page 62
Asiacentric Content Dimensions
The communication metatheory of Asiacentricity insists on viewing Asian cultures as central
sources in theorizing, not as peripheral targets in researching (see Misra and Gergen [1993] and
Sinha [1996] for discussions on the place or role of culture in knowledge production). The
content of theoretical knowledge in and from Asia ought to re ﬂect the diverse and distinct
cultural traditions of Asia. In this second section, I will expound on what kind of  knowledge
should be explored and theorized in Asiacentric communication scholarship. Three content
dimensions that I ﬁnd essential in search of the Asiacentric knowledge of human communica-
tion are (1) concepts in Asian everyday languages; (2) principles from Asian religious-
philosophical traditions; and (3) struggles in Asian historical experiences.
First, Asiacentric communication theorists should explore and establish Asian concepts in Asian
everyday languages in order to reconsider and reconceptualize the nature of human communication.
Concepts are vital to any theory because “The most basic element of a theory is its concepts ”
(Littlejohn, 2002, p. 20). In order to construct Asiacentric theories of communication, it
behooves Asiacentrists to de ﬁne, delimit, and develop Asian concepts in Asian languages
(Dissanayake, 1988; Miike, 2002, 2003ab; Okabe, 1991). Diﬀused concepts used in communica-
tion research about Asia originate in European languages, mostly in English, and hence re ﬂect
the linguistic worlds of Europeans or U.S. European Americans. Those Eurocentric imported
concepts, even though they are translated into Asian languages, remain quite foreign to Asians
who live in completely diﬀerent linguistic worlds.
Three fundamental tasks must be undertaken to valorize Asian indigenous concepts in Asian
languages as legitimate analytical tools for human communication research. The ﬁrst task is to
describe both synchronically and diachronically Asian words and phrases, particularly in every-
day use, whose meanings are directly and indirectly related to communication. Chen (2002a),
for instance, examines language expressions that were used to represent communication activ-
ities in traditional China. Such a linguistic examination has not been made to date in most Asian
languages to investigate how Asians have conceptualized the nature of human interaction. It
would be commendable for Asiacentric semanticists to further compare and contrast those
communication-related words and phrases across time with a view to assessing their semantic
continuities and changes and to speculate on the reasons behind them. Asian words and phrases
can also be analyzed from the perspective of etymological origins.
As for Asian words and phrases whose meanings are indirectly linked with human communi-
cation, Asiacentrists need to make clear what kind of bearing they have on the communication
process in which the creation, interpretation, and negotiation of meaning take place. They
sometimes dwell on what such words and phrases signify but do not explore their implications
speciﬁcally for communication inquiries. In that case, those words and phrases, no matter how
conceptually rich, cannot serve as useful concepts for communication studies. Miike (2003c), for
example, deﬁnes amae as message-expanding and message-accepting needs and discusses it in
enryo-sasshi and assertion-acceptance communication among the Japanese.
The second task is to identify and analyze relationships among Asian concepts so as to
explore cultural worldviews and values manifested in these concepts. Asiacentric theorists in
communication studies have thus far focused exclusively on one Asian concept and detailed it in
depth as it relates to cultural communication. They are prone to see that concept as the most
important and fail to locate it in a larger picture of the culture and communication landscape.
2
They need to take another step forward to consider the connections among the concepts so
that they can holistically reveal the deep structure of cultural worldviews and values manifested
in the surface structure of language expressions. This line of exploration will eventually help
Asiacentrists answer the question of Asian values and why certain aspects of culture and
communication are diﬃcult or slow to change.
62  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 84 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 63
Page 63
The third task is to compare and contrast Asian concepts in diﬀerent Asian languages in order
to understand their culture-general and culture-speciﬁc implications for communication. Asian
communication specialists have been so eager to compare Asian concepts with Western concepts
but have paid little attention to how Asian concepts in Asian languages di ﬀer among Asian
cultures. This is a serious mistake if Asiacentric communication experts wish to meaningfully
discuss the what and why of Asian values and to attempt to collectively preserve some, though
not all, aspects of Asianness. Such Asiacentric comparisons also preclude them from touching on
Asian concepts simply in consistency with established Eurocentric pseudo-etic concepts. Chung
et al.’s (2003) groundbreaking attempt represents this line of investigation. They compare and
contrast the East Asian concept of qi/ki/ch’i (energy ﬂow) in China, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan
and its historical development in each country for communicative implications.
As Kincaid (1987b) articulates, “Good concepts allow us to see new things or to see old things
in a new light. At the same time they divert our attention or blind us from seeing other things.
Escaping from this paradoxical situation is no easy task ” (p. xiv). Admittedly, Asian concepts
may also create blindness to the complexities of Asianness, but at least they open up new
intellectual dialogues and encourage non-Asians, especially Westerners, to learn Asian languages
in which Asians construct their social realities. This seems to be a right direction to go given that
“Eastern concepts are yet unknown to the vast majority of Western communication scholars,
particularly those in the United States, whose pseudo-scientiﬁc proliﬁcity has been unashamedly
ethnocentric” (Gunaratne, 1991, p. 53).
Second, Asiacentric communication thinkers should draw out fundamental principles of human
interaction from Asian religious-philosophical traditions and propose new theoretical models
of communication.  As Yum (1987) aptly notes, religious-philosophical traditions that have
permeated Asian societies for hundreds of years are “the proper starting points to discover the
fundamental patterns which in ﬂuence the communication behavior of the diverse cultures of
Asia, and they allow us to make cross-cultural comparisons that go beyond mere description ”
(p. 86). Most culture and communication studies have concentrated on how people behave
and have overlooked why they do (Starosta & Chen, 2003). In-depth inquiries into Asian
religious-philosophical traditions, which shape the core beliefs and values of Asian cultures,
will also demystify why Asians communicate as they do and, more importantly, why they
should.
It is extremely bene ﬁcial for Asiacentric students of communication to take advantage of
religious-philosophical perspectives on human interaction (see Sitaram, 1995). By so doing, they
can render even a very mundane topic refreshing. For example, the value and role of silence in
Asian cultures have been extensively documented in the intercultural communication literature
(e.g., Ishii, 1984; Jain & Matukumalli, 1996). Nonetheless, they have not yet been theorized
rigorously in terms of Asian religious-philosophical traditions. What does Hinduism say about
the forms and functions of silent communication? How and why have its teachings historically
inﬂuenced contemporary Hindu speech and silence behavior? Bruneau and Ishii (1988) under-
take a pioneering task of discussing communicative silences from several Asian religious-
philosophical perspectives. But they shed light only on the tip of the iceberg.
Lessons have not been learned from Asian religious-philosophical traditions even about basic
communication activities, namely, speaking, listening, writing, and reading. It is often said that
listening is more valued than speaking in many Asian cultures. Nevertheless, no attempt has
been made so far to theorize about listening, say, from Buddhist perspectives. Such Buddhist
theories on listening must have a great deal to do with the vital role of communication in
spiritual liberation and with harmony and peace in the universe. Except in Ishii ’s work (1992),
Buddhist preaching has not been tapped for theorizing about rhetorical communication prac-
tices from non-Western perspectives. Asian religious-philosophical traditions also oﬀer wisdom
about what kind of channel people should use when, where, for whom, and why.
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  63


--- PAGE 85 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 64
Page 64
Drawing out communicative principles from Asian religious-philosophical teachings, Asia-
centric scholars can reexamine Eurocentric theories of communication on every level (from
intrapersonal to public) and propound Asiacentric alternatives. As a case in point, Ishii (2003b)
constructs an Asiacentric model of intrapersonal communication grounded on the
consciousness-only epistemology of Mahanaya Buddhism. He reconsiders the components and
structure of Western intrapersonal communication and reconceptualizes Eastern intrapersonal
communication by locating eight consciousnesses (i.e., indriya-vijnana, mano-vijnana, manas-
vijnana, and alaya-vijnana). He not only systematically explicates the mechanism of mental
activities but also suggests the inherent causes of mental su ﬀerings and a ﬄictions. Here, again,
egolessness is the central theme for spiritual liberation.
Human-made Asian religious-philosophical traditions are not free from imperfections. They
have positive and negative consequences on Asian contemporary lives. Thus, Asiacentrists must
carefully ponder what we should (not) learn and how we should (not) apply their teachings in
future lives, which is expected to ful ﬁll the Asiacentric research goal toward the preservation of
Asian cultural values and communicative modes. The preservation of traditional cultures is not
the same as the uncritical acceptance of them (Nakamura, 1964). It is the discovery of the
“newness” of old ideas based on the Asian circular worldview. As Sitaram (1998) remarks,
“What began today as a ‘brand new idea’ has its origin in something that ended yesterday, and
today’s idea will begin a new one tomorrow ” (p. 4).
Third, Asiacentric communication historians should pay due attention to struggles in Asian
historical experiences in their attempts to enrich the theoretical underpinnings of human communi-
cation problems, ethics, and competence . Traditional researchers, either social scienti ﬁc or
interpretive, in Eurocentric communication scholarship have generally neglected Asian histories.
Critical scholars are prone to look at Asian histories only as targets of deconstruction through
their Eurocentric theoretical lenses. Consequently, there are few Asiacentric inquires in com-
munication research that utilize the rich histories of Asia as resources for theory building.
This is unfortunate because Asian historical struggles have much to o ﬀer in theorizing about
communication problems, ethics, and competence through Asian eyes.
Throughout their long histories, Asians have had intercultural contacts with diﬀerent people,
ideas, and products from di ﬀerent societies that must have initially caused confusion and fric-
tion in their communities. It is highly rewarding for Asiacentric communication historians to
investigate how each Asian society has historically coped with these intercultural encounters. In
particular, as Lee (2001) observes, the coexistence of indigenous and foreign religions, which
indicates some openness and tolerance for heterogeneous elements in Asia, can be a very
important area of inquiry to theorize about how to solve intercultural problems and conﬂicts in
human communication. In this connection, Lee (2001) goes so far as to say that “The song of the
East is a song of tolerance, which can inject a new harmony into the music of the West ” (p. 28).
Insights can also be obtained into allocentric and integrative ways of adapting mutually toward
harmonious communication (Miike, 2002, 2003a).
From an ethnohistorical perspective, for example, T oyama (1994) models what he calls
“communication archetypes” of Japanese people. He theorizes about the mechanism and pro-
cess of how the Japanese have eventually integrated something foreign into their indigenous
culture by analyzing the 1450-year intercultural history of Japan. He directs special attention to
the long-standing coexistence of the indigenous superbeings (kami) and the imported Buddhist
deities ( hotoke). He then applies his theoretical model to his own lifetime experiences of
intercultural encounters and other short-term cases of Japanese cross-cultural adjustment.
It goes without saying that Asia has not been always successful in resolving con ﬂicts peace-
fully or in respecting di ﬀerences harmoniously. Indeed, as Funabashi (1993) writes, “Whenever
unity seemed ascendant in the Asian world, history intervened ” (p. 76). Di ﬀerent versions of
Asian histories reveal that harmony was, and is, oftentimes a mask of oppression or a means
64  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 86 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 65
Page 65
of survival within and between Asian nations. All Asian countries have extensively experienced
the aggression and dominance of Western empires. Furthermore, Japan made the fatal mistake
to invade other Asian nations under the false ideology of the “Greater East Asia Coprosperity
Sphere.” Asiacentrists should not waste many historical pains in Asia that can serve as valuable
assets in theorizing about the Asiacentric ethics and competence of global/local harmonious
communication.
As brutal wars, unethical invasions, and ethnic con ﬂicts around the globe still continue,
what would be the messages of Asian histories about what is right and what is wrong in
human communication in order not to repeat past mistakes? From the Tibetan experience,
The 14th Dalai Lama advances two fundamental propositions toward peace communication:
(1) Human problems can be solved through human understanding; and (2) All human beings
seek happiness and avoid su ﬀering (Miike, 2001). One of the possible Asiacentric historical
contributions in communication studies is to envision peace communication by conceptualizing
“imagination competence” (Miike, 2003b) that allows us to see the past of human suﬀering and
pain. In so doing, Asian religious-philosophical perspectives can also be proﬁtably incorporated.
Theorizing from many narratives of historical oppression in Asia will disclose our inability to
understand human suﬀering and pain. As victims we have often been passionate in telling what
has been done to us, but as oppressors we are not aware of what we have done to others. Many of
us, in one way or another, are both victims and oppressors and are thus capable of sharing the
suﬀering and pain of all human beings. Y et as oppressors we keep creating the same human
suﬀering and pain of others by our ignorance and disinterest.
It is lamentable, for instance, that many Japanese do not want others to forget about the
atomic bombing in Hiroshima and Nagasaki whereas they show little interest in what their
ancestors did to other Asian nations. Both are, after all, stories of human su ﬀering and pain.
T ezuka (2002) analyzes the Japan–U.S. perception gap on the atomic bombing from the perspec-
tive of silence and silencing and concludes that “both countries have ended up being equally
unbalanced and less comprehensive in their respective perceptions ” (p. 79). More cooperative
eﬀorts can be made among Asiacentric communication historians to know more about human
suﬀering and healing in intercultural interactions within Asia and with the West.
Asiacentric Methodological Considerations
It is impossible to theorize truly from Asiacentric perspectives without challenging Eurocentric
methodological assumptions. Some Asian scholars harangue the cultural biases of Eurocentric
theoretical assumptions and yet completely fail to question Eurocentric methodological assump-
tions. Nevertheless, it is not so meaningful to seek to construct Asiacentric theories of com-
munication if they need to be ultimately tested against the Eurocentric research worldview in
order to become legitimate theories. For Eurocentric methodologists can dismiss Asiacentric
theories, no matter how insightful and useful, simply because they do not ﬁt their way of
theoretical validation. Thus, the methods used for building Asiacentric theories must also be
Asiacentric.
It is a daunting task to challenge Eurocentric methodological assumptions, formulate Asia-
centric methodological assumptions, and propose speci ﬁc Asiacentric methods. In this last
section, therefore, I will discuss three methodological issues as to how knowledge should
be pursued in Asiacentric communication scholarship: (1) the issue of data and evidence;
(2) the issue of validity and utility; and (3) the issue of visibility and invisibility. These issues
are Asiacentric initial considerations and respectively concern themselves with Eurocentric
methodological objectivism, empiricism, and materialism.
The ﬁrst Asiacentric methodological issue is the issue of data and evidence. What is considered as
“hard” data or “solid” evidence is socially constructed in the academic world. In Eurocentric
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  65


--- PAGE 87 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 66
Page 66
scholarship, certain data and evidence have more credibility than others. There seems to be the
hierarchical consciousness of data and evidence. Findings from questionnaire surveys, narratives
collected through ethnographic interviews, and recorded notes in participant observations
are conceived of as highly appropriate particularly by U.S. Eurocentric researchers. Many U.S.
Eurocentric scholars assume that obtaining and analyzing these “ﬁrst-hand” data and evidence
guarantees the originality and advancement of scholarship, whether or not topics are repetitive,
theories are mundane, and methods are ethical. As “second-hand” data and evidence, articles
and advertisements from newspapers and magazines and, most recently, movies are popular
texts especially in U.S. Eurocentric research.
With some exceptions (e.g., Sun & Starosta, 2002), little attention and credibility have
been given to allegories, autobiographies, calligraphy, corporate histories, diaries, etymological
origins, fables, idiomatic expressions, imageries, legends, metaphors, myths, novels, poems,
preaches, proverbs, paradoxes, and songs as data and evidence despite the fact that some of them
have survived for centuries. The Eurocentric hierarchical view of data and evidence appears to
be based on the degree of presumed objectivity and publicity. But the question here is who
determines what is more objective and public and what is more subjective and private. What is
highly objective or private in one group can be what is highly subjective or public in another.
Asiacentrists must reconsider this hierarchical view of data and evidence because Asia has rich
“subjective” data and evidence that are public to Asians.
Another prevailing assumption regarding the issue of data and evidence in Eurocentric
communication scholarship is that data and evidence should be “objectively” collected and
analyzed. Even some Eurocentric interpretive and critical scholars do not accept subjectivity in
the methodological worldview, although they acknowledge subjectivity (e.g., social constructiv-
ism) in the theoretical worldview. This pervasive tendency often deprives theory building of
ﬂexibility. Experienced researchers do and should know that sudden, unintentional, unplanned,
and unrecorded “conversations” are sometimes much more insightful, valuable, and revealing
than rigidly intentional, planned, and recorded “data and evidence.” This is especially the case in
Asia where people are not used to formal research and are likely to mark the researcher as an
outsider and the researched as an insider.
The ability to holistically and diachronically utilize a variety of resources may be one of the
sought-after qualities of a good Asiacentric communication researcher. Tsujimura’s (1987) work
demonstrates that, no matter how subjectively selective it is, a collection of data and evidence
from multiple sources across time lines can be extremely rigorous for theory building and
illustration. In order to elucidate ishin-denshin (meeting of the minds) in Japanese communica-
tion, he makes elegant use of Zen mondo (questions and answers between a master and a disciple
in Zen monk training), Ryunosuke Akutagawa ’s 1954 short story, Y asunari Kawabata ’s 1952
novel, Dogen’s 1004 Buddhist biography, and Eugen Herrigel ’s 1924–1930 personal experience
of Zen in kyudo (Japanese archery) in Japan.
For his elaboration on social causes of taciturnity, indirectness, respect for reverberation, and
kuuki (atmospheric constraints), Tsujimura (1987) skillfully touches on Japanese proverbs, a
Japanese children’s game called nirameko (staring contest), ki (energy ﬂow)-related idiomatic
expressions, and Jisaburoo Ozawa’s statement at the end of World War II. Especially impressive
is his content analysis of Hyakunin Isshu (100 Poems by 100 Poets), which is the 1235 anthology
of waka (Japanese ﬁve-line poems) collected for over 600 years. His concise analysis illuminates
such predominant communicative themes as life, love, human relationship, and nature among
the noble Japanese from the 7th century to the 13th century (see also Tsujimura, 1988).
The second Asiacentric methodological issue is the issue of validity and utility . The above-
discussed Eurocentric methodological objectivism is heavily grounded in Eurocentric method-
ological empiricism, which assumes that theories need to be externally validated, whether
quantitatively or qualitatively, outside theorists and those who can resonate with their theories.
66  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 88 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 67
Page 67
Eurocentric empirical researchers presume that every theory should be statistically testable or
directly observable. It comes as no surprise, then, that Asiacentric innovative theorists are often
reminded by Eurocentric empirical researchers that their theories are no more than “just ideas”
and asked to demonstrate how to measure or observe them.
Nevertheless, what has been neglected in this Eurocentric empirical worldview is that external
validity is not necessarily parallel to internal utility. Things objectively testable and observable
are not always subjectively useful and heuristic. In other words, even if the external validity of a
theory is high, its internal utility can be low. Furthermore, experiential knowledge can be much
more advanced than experimental knowledge. In Eurocentric methodological empiricism, how-
ever, ideas cannot become theories unless they are measurable or observable, no matter how
internally useful they are to consumers of theories in everyday life. T o put it in another way,
theories are deemed as “just ideas ” unless they are experimentally veri ﬁable, no matter how
experientially veriﬁable they are (Sinha & Sinha, 1997).
It is high time for Asiacentric communication specialists to call this taken-for-granted
Eurocentric methodological empiricism into question. Although external validity is of great
value in other disciplines for legitimate reasons, Asiacentrists should rethink to what extent it is
necessary and appropriate for the study of human communication — the ever-changing and
dynamic process of human interaction in context. A number of U.S. Eurocentric communica-
tion scientists, Asian and non-Asian alike, are so obsessed with their validation research that they
spend scores of years to validate what has been experientially known for decades. However,
they forget to question to what extent and how validated theories can be useful to, and resonate
with, people in real life and, more importantly, why external validity is essential to such useful-
ness and resonance. What obligates communication theorists to commit themselves to a true-or-
false dichotomy rather than to insight? In any case, just as “the cultural is the incompletely
understood” (Starosta, 1984, p. 203), so is the communicative.
Furthermore, Asiacentrists must ask themselves whether or not Eurocentric methodological
empiricism ﬁts the Asian worldview and is truly beneﬁcial to Asiacentric communication schol-
arship. The epistemological assumption for an Asiacentric paradigm is that everyone and every-
thing become meaningful in relation to others (Miike, 2002, 2003ab). This assumption is based
on the Asian emphasis on the relativity of truth. According to Hindu culture, for example,
“when no beliefs can be said absolutely true, no beliefs can be declared absolutely false ” (Jain &
Kussman, 2000, p. 89). Such a relativistic view of truth leads to the importance of “resonance” in
Asian cultures and communication (St. Clair, 1998/1999). Seen from this angle, ideas without
external validity can become theories as long as internal utility is expressed.
Additionally, Eurocentric methodological empiricism prevents Asiacentric theorists from
fully utilizing Asian religious-philosophical traditions. Buddhism, Confucianism, Hinduism,
Shintoism, and Taoism have low external validity but high internal utility. They may be mere
ideas in the Eurocentric sense but insightful theories in the Asiacentric sense. In fact, they have
historically shaped Asian cultural selves and values for ages. Nevertheless, the Eurocentric
validity-based methodological worldview has little tolerance toward Asiacentric theorizing and
researching emanating from these traditions and allows researchers to ignore them without
taking them seriously. Asiacentrists must search for methodological assumptions that encourage
them to be Asiacentric.
The third Asiacentric methodological issue is the issue of visibility and invisibility . The afore-
mentioned Eurocentric methodological empiricism is further nurtured by Eurocentric method-
ological materialism. There is a tendency, especially among U.S. Eurocentric communication
scholars, to exclude invisible and unobservable matters from targets of theorizing and research-
ing. The idea that theorizing about what is visible ought be conducted through what can be seen
characterizes much of U.S. Eurocentric communication research. Heavy reliance on material
texts in rhetorical analyses, strong faith in ethnographic notes, and literal interpretations of
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  67


--- PAGE 89 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 68
Page 68
narrative stories represent such a materialistic methodological worldview. Behind this method-
ological practice, two underlying assumptions exist: (1) what is visible is what is important in
human communication; and (2) much can be told from what is visible.
It is questionable, however, whether or not visible phenomena are always important in
human communication. What is invisible is oftentimes far more important in communication
than what is visible. Indeed, what can be seen are very limited parts of communication activities.
While it is true that much can be told from visible phenomena, it is equally true that much
cannot be told from them. Eurocentric methodological experts can be sometimes seriously
mistaken if they start from the visible to infer about the invisible. There is the possibility that
they will see completely diﬀerent realities if they start from the invisible. It must not be forgotten
that “Some research truths will always remain intuitable more than observable, and felt more
than directly observable” (Starosta & Chen, 2003, p. 20).
Asiacentric communicologists need to radically challenge this Eurocentric deep-seated trust
in visibility. Miike (2002) speculates that “Whereas Westerners have a general propensity to be
more outwardly and behaviorally active in communicative interactions, Easterners are, by and
large, predisposed to be more inwardly and perceptually active in communicative interactions ”
(pp. 10 –11). If such is the case, Eurocentric methodological materialism cannot gauge the
activeness of Asians in the communication process and ends up describing how passive they
are. It is also not certain that dynamic mutual adaptation and its related mental activities of
Asians can be conceptualized through this materialistically-oriented methodological worldview.
Sensitivity, empathy, contemplation, enlightenment, and spiritual liberation particularly in the
Asian sense are largely invisible because they take place within the communicator. Direct experi-
ence, which many Asian cultural teachings value, might be a sine qua non  for Asiacentric
researchers in theorizing about invisible aspects of human communication.
One of the consequences of methodological objectivism, empiricism, and materialism in
Eurocentric communication scholarship is the highly analytical mode of inquiry, which in turn
has made Eurocentric researchers con ﬁne themselves to complex models of communication.
These analytical models, featuring detailed categories and components, rely heavily on logic
and reasoning, not on feeling and imagination. Howell (1979), who believes that alternative
metaphoric models of communication are more useful to students and practitioners, contends:
An inevitable result of our being analytical in the study of communication is the
increasing complexity of paradigms and models. Extended analysis identi ﬁes more
variables, and since the parts are presumed to add up to the whole, none can be left out of
a diagrammatic representation. Thus modern models of the communication process are
not quickly and easily memorized and used.
A holistic approach to model design authorizes the designer to cluster groups of
unspeciﬁed variables in ways that dramatize the point [she or] he wishes to make. This
makes it possible to create simple models that say a great deal, because the model is
metaphor rather than realistic or literal symbolization. Instead of supplying all the details,
the metaphorical model guides the reader into a sequence of [her or] his own thoughts,
opinions, and experiences. Nonwestern cultures are, incidentally, much more comfortable
with the metaphoric model than with detailed, analytical representations.
(p. 28)
There are not many attempts to propose metaphoric models of communication from Eastern
perspectives. Y oshikawa’s (1980, 1984, 1987) double-swing model of intercultural communica-
tion is one of the few exceptions. Asiacentric communication theorists have thus far adhered to
analytical, complex theoretical models partly because of their strategy to make their Eastern
modes of communication understandable to the Western audience (e.g., Ishii, 1984; Hara, 2001,
68  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 90 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 69
Page 69
2002; Miike, 2003c). But they can explore the possibility of constructing metaphoric, simple
theoretical models that may appeal more to the ethos of Asian peoples. Asian religious-
philosophical traditions are full of suggestive metaphorical symbols that can serve as models of
communication. Asian linguistic forms such as Chinese characters can also be proﬁtably utilized
owing to their ideographic nature. Allowing many theoretical ideas to be presented without rigid
methodological regimens may be one Asiacentric step toward more democratic scholarship.
Concluding Comments
“Vision is the art of seeing things invisible, ” Jonathan Swift elegantly opines. 3 Engaging in this
art is not easy precisely because things are invisible. The present essay has undertaken such
a di ﬃcult task of seeing what is possible in Asiacentric communication scholarship. Much
thinking remains to be done for a more comprehensive and complete Asiacentric vision. The
intellectual mission of the Asiacentric project is to generate theory and research that can reson-
ate thoroughly with Asian experiences and to enrich human ways of being, knowing, and
valuing in the universe. This unaccomplished mission parallels the promotion of universal
humanity and the preservation of cultural diversity in an age of glocalization. For Asiacentric
approaches can delve more deeply into, and re ﬂect more earnestly on, both universal humanity
in cultural communication and cultural diversity in human communication.
Asiacentricity is neither a hegemonic Asiacentrism nor an Asian version of ethnocentric
Eurocentrism. Asiacentricity does not present the Asian worldview as the only universal frame of
reference and impose it on non-Asians. The Asiacentric metatheory, which demands the place-
ment of Asian ideals and interests at the center of inquiry, simply argues that the best conceptual
system of analysis for comprehending or even criticizing the agency of Asians in cultural context
is Asiacentric. In so doing, this alternative metatheory does not deny the value of other
non-Asiacentric perspectives on Asians but rejects the hegemonic idea that non-Asiacentric
theoretical standpoints are superior to Asiacentric ones and therefore can grossly neglect the
latter in the discussion and discourse surrounding Asian people and phenomena.
At the dawn of the new century, Lee (2001) passionately suggests that Asians create a diﬀerent
kind of music. He observes that Asians “have gained con ﬁdence by winning world acclaim
for our performance of Western music on Western instruments ” (p. 26). Y et Lee (2001) ﬁnds
it di ﬃcult to predict how Asians can “make a major contribution to the 21st century world,
with its new cultural paradigm, simply by virtue of our ability to perform Western music
better than Westerners” (p. 26). His suggestion is indeed timely. Asians ought to compose Asian
music on Asian instruments in the new millennium. This alternative idea of cultural agency is
the focal contention of the Asiacentric metatheory. With their ﬁrm belief in the East –West
cultural equality (Ishii, 1995), Asian communication scholars as well must produce their own
melody in the exciting opening of the new concert. With the Gandhian spirit of “I can wait 40
or 400 years ” (Starosta & Chaudhary, 1993), let us dream of Asian harmonious music in
full ﬂourish.
* I owe a special debt of gratitude to Professor Guo-Ming Chen at the University of Rhode Island and Professor
William J. Starosta at Howard University who have kindly served as my dialogical mentors. I am also most
grateful to Professor Wimal Dissanayake at the University of Hong Kong for having been my source of insight
and inspiration. Finally, my thanks go to Professor Karen A. Foss, Professor Bradford ‘J’ Hall, Professor Janet M.
Cramer, and Professor Everett M. Rogers at the University of New Mexico and Dr. William Kelly at the
University of California, Los Angeles for crystallizing my Asiacentric vision.
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION 
69


--- PAGE 91 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 70
Page 70
Notes
1. In accordance with my previous works (Miike, 2002, 2003ab), Asia in the present essay is geographically
conﬁned to China, India, Japan, and Korea (see Miike [2003b] for my operational de ﬁnition of Asia).
Nevertheless, the proposed Asiacentric research objectives, content dimensions, and methodological
considerations might be applicable to human communication scholarship in other Asian nations and
regions. As I acknowledge elsewhere (Miike, 2003b), my vision of Asiacentricity owes its intellectual
debt to Dr. Moleﬁ Kete Asante’s (1992, 1998, 2003) legacy of Afrocentricity.
2. This point was made by Dr. Guo-Ming Chen in his responses to the papers presented on the panel,
“East Asian Perspectives on Culture and Communication, ” at the 6th Asian Studies Conference Japan
(sponsored by the Institute of Asian Cultural Studies at International Christian University) on the
Ichigaya Campus of Sophia University in T okyo, Japan on June 22–23, 2002.
3. This quote is printed in a picture frame given to me by my German colleague, Dr. Britta H. Limary as a
sign of her encouragement of my Asiacentric critiques and contributions. I wish to take this opportunity
to express my deep appreciation to her for her friendship and support at the best and worst times of our
doctoral training. Dr. Limary is one of the most hardworking persons that I have met, and I know that
she has never taken advantage of others.
References
Asante, M. K. (1980). Intercultural communication: An inquiry into research directions. In D. Nimmo
(Ed.), Communication yearbook 4 (pp. 401–410). News Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Asante, M. K. (1992). Afrocentric metatheory and disciplinary implications. The Afrocentric Scholar, 1 (1),
98–117.
Asante, M. K. (1998). The Afrocentric idea (Rev. ed.). Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Asante, M. K. (2002). Intellectual dislocation: Applying analytic Afrocentricity to narratives of identity. In
J. L. Daniel (Ed.), Essays on African American communication scholarship  [Special issue]. Howard
Journal of Communications, 13(1), 97–110.
Asante, M. K. (2003). Afrocentricity: The theory of social change  (Rev. ed.). Chicago, IL: African American
Images.
Bruneau, T., & Ishii, S. (1988). Communicative silences: East and West. World Communication, 17(1),
1–33.
Chen, G.-M. (1993, November). Communication competence: A Chinese perspective . Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Chen, G.-M. (1994, November). A conceptualization and measurement of communication competence: A
Chinese perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association,
New Orleans, LA.
Chen, G.-M. (2002a). Problems and prospects of Chinese communication study. In W. Jia, X. Lu, &
D. R. Heisey (Eds.), Chinese communication theory and research: Re ﬂections, new frontiers, and new
directions (pp. 255–268). Westport, CT: Albex.
Chen, G.-M. (2002b). The impact of harmony on Chinese con ﬂict resolution. In G.-M. Chen, & R. Ma
(Eds.), Chinese conﬂict management and resolution (pp. 3–17). Westport, CT: Albex.
Chen, G.-M., & Chung, J. (2000). The “Five Asian Dragons ”: Management behaviors and organizational
communication. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (9th ed.,
pp. 301–312). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Chu, G. C. (1986). In search of an Asian perspective of communication theory. Media Asia, 13(1), 3–5.
Chung, J., Hara, K., Y ang, C., & Ryu, J.-M. (2003). Contemporary ch’i/ki research in East Asian countries:
Implications for communication theory. Intercultural Communication Studies, 15, 41–66.
Dissanayake, W. (1983). Peace and communication: A Buddhist point of view. Media Development, 30(2),
7–9.
Dissanayake, W. (1988). The need for Asian approaches to communication. In W. Dissanayake (Ed.),
Communication theory: The Asian perspective  (pp. 1 –19). Singapore: Asian Mass Communication
Research and Information Center.
Dissanayake, W. (1989). Modernization and the loss of self in the East. The World and I, 4(8), 527–541.
Dissanayake, W. (1990). Cultural integration in a global age. The World and I, 5(1), 83–93.
Funabashi, Y. (1993, November/December). The Asianization of Asia. Foreign Aﬀairs, 72(5), 75–85.
Gunaratne, S. A. (1991). Asian approaches to communication theory. Media Development , 38(1),
53–55.
Hara, K. (2001). The word is the thing: The kotodama belief in Japanese communication (Part 1). ETC: A
Review of General Semantics, 58(3), 279–291.
70  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 92 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 71
Page 71
Hara, K. (2002). The word is the thing: The kotodama belief in Japanese communication (Part 2). ETC: A
Review of General Semantics, 58(4), 408–419.
Howell, W. S. (1979). Theoretical directions for intercultural communication. In M. K. Asante, E.
Newmark, & C. A. Blake (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural communication  (pp. 23–41). Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Ishii, S. (1984). Enryo-sasshi communication: A key to understanding Japanese interpersonal relations.
Cross Currents, 11(1), 49–58.
Ishii, S. (1992). Buddhist preaching: The persistent main undercurrent of Japanese traditional rhetorical
communication. In D. W. Klopf (Ed.), Communication practices in the Paci ﬁc Basin [Special section].
Communication Quarterly, 40(4), 391–397.
Ishii, S. (1995). Cross-cultural/intercultural communication for a borderless world of diversity in harmony.
Journal of the Communication Association of Korea, 3, 17–23.
Ishii, S. (2001). An emerging rationale for triworld communication studies from Buddhist perspectives.
Human Communication, 4(1), 1–10.
Ishii, S. (2003a). Developing a Buddhist paradigm to induce innovations in Westerncentric communication
studies (in Chinese, J. Yin, Trans.). In G.-M. Chen (Ed.), Theories and principles of Chinese communica-
tion (pp. 295–308). Taipei, Taiwan: Wunan.
Ishii, S. (2003b, November). Proposing a Buddhist consciousness-only epistemological model for intrapersonal
communication research . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Communication
Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Jain, N. C., & Kussman, E. D. (2000). Dominant cultural patterns of Hindus in India. In L. A. Samovar &
R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader  (9th ed., pp. 81 –90). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Jain, N. C., & Matukumalli, A. (1996). The role of silence in India: Implications for intercultural communi-
cation research. Education in Asia, 16(2–4), 152–158.
Kim, D. J. (1994, November/December). Is culture destiny? The myth of Asia ’s anti-democratic values: A
response to Lee Kuan Y ew. Foreign Aﬀairs, 73(6), 189–194.
Kincaid, D. L. (1987a). Communication East and West: Points of departure. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Com-
munication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives (pp. 331–340). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kincaid, D. L. (1987b). Preface. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspec-
tives (pp. viii–xiv). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Koh, T. (1999). Diﬀerences in Asian and European values. Asian Mass Communication Bulletin, 29(5), 10–11.
Lee, O.-Y. (2001). The dawn of the Asian century. Japan Echo, 28(1), 23–28.
Littlejohn, S. W. (2002). Theories of human communication (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
McCarthy, T. (1998, March). In defense of “Asian values”: An interview with Lee Kuan Y ew. Time, 151(10),
p. 40.
Miike, Y. (2001, November). Implications of the 14th Dalai Lama ’s philosophy for intercultural communica-
tion in the 21st century . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Communication
Association, Atlanta, GA.
Miike, Y. (2002). Theorizing culture and communication in the Asian context: An assumptive foundation.
In G.-M. Chen (Ed.), Culture and communication: An East Asian perspective  [Special issue]. Intercul-
tural Communication Studies, 11(1), 1–21.
Miike, Y. (2003a). An Asiacentric paradigm of communication theory (in Chinese, J. Yin, Trans.). In
G.-M. Chen (Ed.), Theories and principles of Chinese communication  (pp. 55 –74). Taipei, Taiwan:
Wunan.
Miike, Y. (2003b). Beyond Eurocentrism in the intercultural ﬁeld: Searching for an Asiacentric paradigm.
In W. J. Starosta & G.-M. Chen (Eds.), Ferment in the intercultural ﬁeld: Axiology/value/praxis
(pp. 243–276). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Miike, Y. (2003c). Japanese enryo-sasshi communication and the psychology of amae: Reconsideration and
reconceptualization. Keio Communication Review, 25, 93–115.
Misra, G., & Gergen, K. (1993). On the place of culture in psychological science. International Journal of
Psychology, 28(2), 225–243.
Nakamura, H. (1964). Ways of thinking of Eastern peoples: India, China, Tibet, Japan  (P . P . Wiener, Trans.).
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Okabe, R. (1991). Intercultural assumptions of communication and rhetorical theories: East and West. In
P . G. Fendos, Jr. (Ed.), Cross-cultural communication: East and West (Vol. 3, pp. 71–93). Tainan, Taiwan:
Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, National Cheng-Kung University.
Shuter, R. (2003). Ethics, culture, and communication: An intercultural perspective. In L. A. Samovar &
R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader  (10th ed., pp. 449 –455). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
AN ASIACENTRIC VISION  71


--- PAGE 93 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 72
Page 72
Sinha, D. (1996). Culture as the target and culture as the source: A review of cross-cultural psychology in
Asia. Psychology and Developing Societies , 8(1), 83–105.
Sinha, D., & Sinha, M. (1997). Orientations to psychology: Asian and Western. In H. S. R. Kao & D. Sinha
(Eds.), Asian perspectives on psychology (pp. 25–39). New Delhi, India: Sage.
Sitaram, K. S. (1995). Culture and communication: A world view. New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Sitaram, K. S. (1998). Introduction: Multiculturalism for a higher humanity. In K. S. Sitaram & M. H. Prosser
(Eds.), Civic discourse: Multiculturalism, cultural diversity, and global communication (pp. 1–14). Stam-
ford, CT: Ablex.
Starosta, W. J. (1984). On intercultural rhetoric. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods for
intercultural communication research (pp. 229–238). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Starosta, W. J., & Chen, G.-M. (2003). “Ferment,” an ethic of caring, and the corrective power of dialogue.
In W. J. Starosta & G.-M. Chen (Eds.), Ferment in the intercultural ﬁeld: Axiology/value/praxis
(pp. 3–23). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Starosta, W. J., & Chaudhary, A. G. (1993). “I can wait 40 or 400 years ”: Gandhian Satyagraha East and
West. International Philosophical Quarterly, 33(2), 163–172.
St. Clair, R. N. (1998/1999). Cultural wisdom, communication theory, and the metaphor of resonance.
Intercultural Communication Studies, 8(1), 79–101.
Sun, W., & Starosta, W. J. (2002). A thematic analysis of the 20th century classical Chinese fairy-tales
collection: An implication for con ﬂict management. In G.-M. Chen & R. Ma (Eds.), Chinese conﬂict
management and resolution (pp. 73–84). Westport, CT: Albex.
T ezuka, C. (2002). An analysis of the Japan-U.S. perception gap regarding the atomic bombing from the
perspective of silence and silencing (in Japanese). Intercultural Communication Studies, 14, 79–97.
T oyama, J. (1994). Japanese communication archetypes: An ethnohistorical study (in Japanese). Intercul-
tural Communication Studies, 7, 25–46.
Tsujimura, A. (1987). Some characteristics of the Japanese way of communication. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.),
Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives  (pp. 115 –126). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Tsujimura, A. (1988). Contrast in “way of thinking” between East and West. In Christian Academy (Ed.),
The world community in post-industrial society: Vol. 4. Encounter between the East and the West and the
creation of a global culture (pp. 159–167). Seoul, Korea: Wooseok.
Y oshikawa, M. J. (1980). The dialogical approach to Japanese-American intercultural encounter. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Hawai‘i, Honolulu, HI.
Y oshikawa, M. J. (1984). Culture, cognition, and communication: Implications of the “paradoxical relation-
ship” for intercultural communication. Communication and Cognition, 17(4), 377–385.
Y oshikawa, M. J. (1987). The double-swing model of intercultural communication between the East
and the West. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives
(pp. 319–329). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Yum, J. O. (1987). Korean philosophy and communication. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory:
Eastern and Western perspectives (pp. 71–86). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Yum, J. O. (1993, November). Communication competence: A Korean perspective . Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Yum, J. O. (1994, November). A conceptualization and measurement of communication competence: A Korean
perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, New
Orleans, LA.
Zakaria, F. (1994, March/April). Culture is destiny: A conversation with Lee Kuan Y ew. Foreign A ﬀairs,
73(2), pp. 109–126.
72  YOSHITAKA MIIKE


--- PAGE 94 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 73
Page 73
6
Thinking Dialectically about Culture
and Communication
Judith N. Martin & Thomas K. Nakayama
A survey of contemporary research reveals distinct and competing approaches to the study of cul-
ture and communication, including cross-cultural, intercultural, and intracultural communica-
tion studies (Asante & Gudykunst, 1989; Y. Y. Kim, 1984).
1 Culture and communication studies
also reﬂect important metatheoretical diﬀerences in epistemology, ontology, assumptions about
human nature, methodology, and research goals as well as diﬀering conceptualizations of culture
and communication, and the relationship between culture and communication. In addition,
questions about the role of power and research application often lead to value-laden debates
about right and wrong ways to conduct research. Whereas these debates signal a maturation of
the ﬁeld, they can be needlessly divisive when scholars use one set of paradigmatic criteria to
evaluate research based on di ﬀerent paradigmatic assumptions (Deetz, 1996). The purpose of
this essay is to focus attention on the metatheoretical issues and conceptualizations that underlie
these various debates and to explore strategies for constructive interparadigmatic discussions.
In order to highlight the various metatheoretical assumptions of culture and communication
research, we ﬁrst identify four research paradigms based on Burrell and Morgan’s (1988) frame-
work categorizing sociological research. Although this framework has been borrowed often by
communication researchers and provides a useful “map” to di ﬀerentiate and legitimate theor-
etical research, a word of caution is in order. As Deetz (1996) notes, Burrell and Morgan ’s
emphasis on the incommensurability of these paradigms has resulted in a tendency to reify
research approaches and has led to “poorly formed conﬂicts and discussions” (p. 119). Therefore,
we present this framework, not as a reiﬁed categorization system, but as a way to focus attention
on current issues and to legitimate the various approaches.
We w ill ﬁrst brie ﬂy describe the framework and the resulting four paradigms. For each
paradigm, we identify concomitant metatheoretical assumptions and research goals, describe
how research in this paradigm conceptualizes culture and the relationship between culture and
communication and then give examples of current research conducted from this paradigm. It is
important to note that the research examples given are illustrative and do not necessarily re ﬂect
the scope and depth of each area.
Four Paradigms
Burrell and Morgan (1988) propose two dimensions for diﬀerentiating metatheoretical assump-
tions of sociological research: assumptions about the nature of social science and assumptions
about the nature of society. The assumptions about the nature of social science vary along a
73


--- PAGE 95 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 74
Page 74
subjective–objective dimension, and these categories have been described ad nauseam in com-
munication scholarship (Deetz, 1994). As described by Burrell and Morgan, objectivism assumes
a separation of subject (researcher) and object (knowledge), a belief in an external world and
human behavior that can be known, described, and predicted, and use of research methodology
that maintains this subject-object separation. On the other hand, subjectivist scholarship sees
the subject-object relationship not as bifurcated but in productive tension; reality is not external,
but internal and “subjective,” and human behavior is creative, voluntary, and discoverable by
ideographic methods. Gudykunst and Nishida (1989) used this subjective-objective distinction
to categorize then-current culture and communication research.
Burrell and Morgan ’s (1988) second and less discussed dimension describes assumptions
about the nature of society — in terms of a debate over order and con ﬂict. Research assuming
societal order emphasizes stability and regulation, functional coordination and consensus. In
contrast, research based on a con ﬂict or “coercion” view of society attempts to “ﬁnd explan-
ations for radical change, deep-seated structural con ﬂict, modes of domination and structural
contradiction” (p. 17).
According to Burrell and Morgan, the intersection of these two dimensions yields for distinct-
ive paradigms (see Figure 1). They use the term paradigm to mean strongly held worldviews and
beliefs that undergird scholarship, using the broadest of the various Kuhnian meanings (Kuhn,
1970). They also identify several caveats: These paradigms are contiguous but separate, have
some shared characteristics but di ﬀerent underlying assumptions, and are therefore mutually
exclusive (pp. 23–25).
It is important to note that research usually adheres more or less to the assumptions of
a speci ﬁc paradigm. For example, as Gudykunst and Nishida (1989) point out, probably no
contemporary intercultural communication research is strictly functionalist. Rather, it is more
useful to think the boundaries among the four paradigms as irregular and slightly permeable,
rather than rigid.
Functionalist paradigm
As discussed by many communication scholars, functionalist research has its philosophical
foundations in the work of social theorists such as Auguste Comte, Herbert Spencer, and Emile
Durkheim. It assumes that the social world is composed of knowable empirical facts that exist
separate from the researcher and re ﬂects the attempt to apply models and methods of the nat-
ural sciences to the study of human behavior (Burrell & Morgan, 1988; Deetz, 1994, Gudykunst
& Nishida, 1989; Mumby, 1997). Research investigating culture and communication in this
tradition become dominant in the 1980s and is identi ﬁed by various (and related) labels: func-
tionalist (Ting-T oomey, 1984), analytic-reductionistic-quantitative (Y. Y. Kim, 1984), positivist
(Y. Y. Kim, 1988), objective (Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989), and traditional (B. J. Hall, 1992).
Fig. 1. Four Paradigms of Culture and Communication Research
(Adapted from Burrell & Morgan, 1988, p. 22)
74  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 96 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 75
Page 75
As noted in Figure 2, research in this tradition builds on social science research, most notably
in psychology and sociology (see Harman & Briggs, 1991). The ultimate goal is sometimes to
describe, but often to predict human behavior. From this perspective, culture is often viewed as
a variable, deﬁned a priori by group membership many times on a national level (Moon, 1996),
and includes an emphasis on the stable and orderly characteristics of culture. The relationship
between culture and communication is frequently conceptualized as causal and deterministic.
That is, group membership and the related cultural patterns (e.g., values like individualism-
collectivism) can theoretically predict behavior (Hofstede, 1991; U. Kim, Triandis, Kagticibasi,
Choi, & Y oon, 1994).
Research in this paradigm often focuses on extending interpersonal communication theo-
ries to intercultural contexts or discovering theoretically based cross-cultural di ﬀerences in
interpersonal communication (Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989; Y. Y. Kim, 1984; Shuter, 1990; Ting-
T oomey & Chung, 1996), or both. Researchers have also investigated international and cross-
national mediated communication (see McPhail, 1989) and development communication (see
Rogers, 1995). Most functionalist research is conducted from an “etic” perspective. That is, a
theoretical framework is externally imposed by the researcher and research often involves a
search for universals (Brislin, 1993; Headland, Pike, & Harris, 1990; Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989).
Probably the best known and most extensively exemplars of functionalist research programs
are those conducted by W. B. Gudykunst and colleagues, extending uncertainty reduction theory
(recently labeled anxiety-uncertainty management) to intercultural contexts (Gudykunst, 1995),
and communication accommodation theory, a combination of ethnolinguist theory and speech
accommodation theory (Gallois, Franklyn-Stokes, Giles, & Coupland, 1988; Gallois, Giles, Jones,
Cargile, & Ota, 1995; Gile, Coupland, Coupland 1991). See also extensions of expectancy viola-
tion theory (Burgoon, 1995) and similarity-attraction theory to intercultural contexts (H. J.
Kim, 1991).
Another type of functionalist research seeks cross-cultural di ﬀerences using theoretical con-
structs like individualism and collectivism as a basis for predicting di ﬀerences (see U. Kim,
Triandis, Kagitcibasi, Choi, & Y oon, 1994). For example, Stella Ting-T oomey and colleagues have
conducted extensive research identifying cultural diﬀerences in face management (Ting-T oomey,
1994) and con ﬂict style (Ting-T oomey, 1986; Ting-T oomey et al., 1991). Min-Sun Kim and
colleagues have investigated cultural variations in conversational constraints and style (M.-S.
Fig. 2. Four Paradigmatic Approaches to the Study of Culture and Communication
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  75


--- PAGE 97 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 76
Page 76
Kim, 1994; M.-S. Kim & Wilson, 1994; M.-S. Kim et al., 1996). For the most recent complication
of functionalist research, see Wiseman (1995).
There are a few research programs like Y. Y. Kim (1988, 1995) that do not ﬁt neatly into one
category. Although she designates her systems-based theory of cultural adaptation as distinctive
from both functionalist and interpretive paradigms (Y. Y. Kim, 1988), one could argue that this
theory is based primarily on functional social psychological research on cultural adaptation, and
has generated primarily functionalist research (Y. Y. Kim, 1995).
Interpretive paradigm
Culture and communication research in the interpretive paradigm gained prominence in the
late 1980s. As noted in Figure 2, interpretive (or “subjective”) researchers are concerned with
understanding the world as it is, and describing the subjective, creative communication of
individuals, usually using qualitative research methods. The philosophical foundations of this
tradition lie in German Idealism (e.g., Kant) and contemporary phenomenology (Merleau-
Ponty, 1962), hermeneutics (Dilthey, 1976; Gadamer, 1976, 1989; Schleiermacher, 1977), and
symbolic interactionism (Mead, 1934). Interpretivism emphasizes the “knowing mind as
an active contributor to the constitution of knowledge ” (Mumby, 1997, p. 6). Culture and
communication research in this tradition has been described and labeled as interpretive
(Ting-T oomey, 1984), holistic–contextual–qualitative (Y. Y. Kim, 1984), humanist (Y. Y. Kim,
1988), and subjective (Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989).
The goal of interpretive research is to understand, rather than predict, human communica-
tion behavior. Culture, in the interpretive paradigm, is generally seen as socially constructed and
emergent, rather than deﬁned a priori, and it is not limited to nation-state collectives. Similar to
functionalist research, interpretivists emphasize the stable, orderly characteristics of culture,
reﬂecting an assumption of the social world as cohesive, ordered, and integrated. Communica-
tion is often viewed as patterned codes that serve a communal, unifying function (Carbaugh,
1988a; B. J. Hall, 1992). The relationship between culture and communication is seen as more
reciprocal than causal, where culture may in ﬂuence communication but is also constructed
and enacted through communication. Research is often conducted from an “emic” or insider
perspective, where the framework and interpretations emerge from the cultural community
(Headland, Pike, & Harris, 1990). The interdisciplinary foundations of this research are found in
anthropology and sociolinguistics.
The sociolinguistics theory of Dell Hymes (1972) has been particularly in ﬂuential on the
strongest exemplar of interpretive research— ethnography of communication studies conducted
by Gerry Philipsen and colleagues. They study cultural communication (vs. inter or cross-cultural
communication). That is, their goal is generally to describe communication patterns within one
speech community, for example, Philipsen ’s (1976) classic study of communication in “T eam-
sterville,” Donal Carbaugh ’s (1988b, 1990a) numerous studies of U.S. (primarily European
American) communication patterns, from “talk show communication” to more general studies.
However, some interpretive scholars are interested in intercultural communication, cross-
cultural comparisons, or both. See, for example, Braithwaite ’s (1990) meta-analysis of the role
of silence in many cultural groups, Fitch ’s (1994) cross-cultural comparisons of directives,
and Katriel’s (1986) studies of Israeli and Arab patterns of speaking, M. J. Collier ’s (1991, 1996)
work on communication competence, as well as Barnlund and colleagues ’ descriptive studies
of contrasts between Japanese and European American communication (Barnlund, 1975,
1996).
It should be pointed out that some interpretive research programs re ﬂect functionalist elem-
ents. One could argue that Collier ’s (1991, 1996) work, Hecht and colleagues ’ research on
ethnicity and identity (Hecht, Larkey & Johnson, 1992; Hecht, Collier, & Ribeau, 1993), and
76  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 98 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 77
Page 77
Barnlund’s (1989) research on Japanese American contrasts have produced emic, insider
descriptions, but also seem to imply behavior as deterministic, sometimes linked a priori to
cultural group membership. In addition, some of their studies do explicitly predict behavior,
conducted from a functionalist position, but the frameworks and hypotheses are based on
previous, emic research ﬁndings (e.g., Hecht, Larkey, & Johnson, 1992).
Other examples of interpretive theories are coordinated management of meaning (Cronen,
Chen, & Pearce, 1988), rhetorical studies (e.g., Garner’s [1994] and Hamlet’s [1997] descriptions
of African American communication. For recent complications of interpretive research, see
Carbaugh [1990b] and González, Houston, and Chen [1997]).
Recent culture and communication research reﬂects a renewed interest in research issues not
usually addresses by functionalist or interpretive research. These concerns of context, power,
relevance, and the destabilizing aspects of culture have led to research based on the remaining
two paradigms.
2 First, there seems to be a growing recognition of the importance of under-
standing contexts of intercultural interaction. Although functionalist researchers sometimes
incorporate context as a variable (e.g., Martin, Hammer, & Bradford, 1994), and interpretive
researchers address “micro” contexts, there has been little attention paid to larger, macro con-
texts: the historical, social, and political contexts in which intercultural encounters take place (an
exception is Katriel, 1995).
Secondly, there is an increasing emphasis on the role of power in intercultural communica-
tion interaction and research, re ﬂecting current debates among many communication scholars
(Deetz, 1996; Mumby, 1997). In functionalist research, power is sometimes incorporated as a
variable (see Gallois et al., 1995) and is alluded to in some interpretive research, e.g., Orbe ’s
(1994, 1998) research on African American male communication as “muted groups communi-
cation,” and notions of third-culture building (Casmir, 1993; Shuter, 1993). The recognition of
the role of power is commensurate with a notion of destabilizing and con ﬂictual characteristics
of culture. Culture is seen not as stable and orderly, but as a site of struggle for various meanings
by competing groups (Ono, 1998).
Scholars have also pointed out the possible consequences of power di ﬀerentials between
researchers and researched: How researchers ’ position and privilege constrain their interpret-
ations of research ﬁnding (Crawford, 1996; Gonz ález & Krizek, 1994; Moon, 1996; Rosaldo,
1989) and how voices of research participants (many times less privileged) are often not heard in
the studies about them (Tanno & Jandt, 1994).
Third, there is a recognition that intercultural communication research should be more
relevant to everyday lives, that theorizing and research should be ﬁrmly based in experience, and
in turn, should not only be relevant to, but should facilitate, the success of everyday intercultural
encounters (see Ribeau, 1997).
These issues have led to a growing body of research based on Burrell and Morgan ’s (1988)
remaining two paradigms, radical humanist and radical structuralist, both of which stress the
importance of change and con ﬂict in society.
3 This research re ﬂects the increasing in ﬂuence of
European critical theory, e.g., Bourdieu (1991), Derrida (1976), Foucault (1980), Habermas
(1970, 1981), and British cultural studies, e.g., S. Hall (1977, 1985) and Hebdige (1979). These
“critical” scholars have in ﬂuenced communication scholarship, primarily in media studies
(see Grossberg, Nelson, & Treichler, 1992; Lull, 1995) and organizational communication
(e.g., Deetz, 1996; Mumby, 1988, 1997; Wert-Gary et al., 1991), but critical ideas have been
less integrated into mainstream intercultural communication scholarship (some exceptions are
Lee, Chung, Wang, & Hertel, 1995; Moon, 1996). So these two paradigms are less clearly
deﬁned.
4 The research goal of both paradigms is to understand the role of power and con-
textual constraints on communication in order ultimately to achieve a more equitable society.
Research in both paradigms emphasize the con ﬂictual and unstable aspects of culture and
society.
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  77


--- PAGE 99 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 78
Page 78
Critical humanist paradigm
As noted in Figure 2, critical humanist research has much in common with the interpretive
viewpoint, as both assume that reality is socially constructed and emphasize the voluntaris-
tic characteristic of human behavior (Burrell & Morgan, 1988). However, critical humanist
researchers conceive this voluntarism and human consciousness as dominated by ideological
superstructures and material conditions that drive a wedge between them and a more liberated
consciousness. Within this paradigm, the point of academic research into cultural di ﬀerences is
based upon a belief in the possibility of changing uneven, di ﬀerential ways of constructing and
understanding other cultures. Culture, then, is not just a variable, not benignly socially con-
structed, but a site of struggle where various communication meanings are contested (Fiske,
1987, 1989, 1993, 1994).
Founded largely upon the work by Althusser (1971), Gramsci (1971, 1978), and the Frankfurt
school (Habermas, 1970, 1981, 1987; Horkheimer & Adorno, 1988; Marcuse, 1964), critical
humanist scholars attempt to work toward articulating ways in which humans can transcend
and reconﬁgure the larger social frameworks that construct cultural identities in intercultural
settings. From this paradigmatic perspective, there is a rapidly developing body of literature
investigating communication issues in the construction of cultural identity. Unlike interpretive
identity research (e.g., Carbaugh, 1990a; Collier & Thomas, 1988), critical research assumes no
“real” identity, but only the ways that individuals negotiate relations with the larger discursive
frameworks (e.g., Altman & Nakayama, 1991). An example of this research is Nakayama’s (1997)
description of the competing and contradictory discourses that construct identity of Japanese
Americans. Hegde’s work (1998a, 1998b) on Asian Indian ethnicity and Lee’s (1999) on Chinese
also explore the contradictory and competing ways in which identity is constructed.
This scholarship often draws directly from cultural studies scholars like Stuart Hall (1985),
who tells us that he is sometimes called “Black,” “colored,” “West Indian,” “immigrant,” or
“Negro” in diﬀering international contexts. There is no “real” Stuart Hall in these various ways
of speaking to him, but only the ways that others place and construct who he is. His identity and
his being are never to be conﬂated.
Other examples of research in this paradigm are critical rhetorical studies, e.g., Nakayama and
Krizek’s (1995) study of the rhetoric of Whiteness, and Morris’s (1997) account of being caught
between two contradictory and competing discourses (Native American and White). Finally,
there is also a growing body of popular culture studies that explore how media and other
messages are presented and interpreted (and resisted) in often conﬂicting ways. See, for example,
Flores’s (1994) analyses of Chicano/a images as represented by the media or Peck ’s (1994)
analysis of various discourses represented in discussions of race relations on Oprah Winfrey.
Additionally, very recent postcolonial approaches to culture and communication represent a
critical humanist perspective (see Collier, 1998b). It should be noted that studies in this tradi-
tion have focused primarily on cultural meanings in textual or media messages, rather than on
face-to-face intercultural interactions.
Critical structuralist
Critical structuralist research also advocates change — but from an objectivist and more
deterministic standpoint:
Whereas the radical humanists forge their perspective by focusing upon “consciousness”
as the basis for a radical critique of society, the radical structuralists concentrate upon
structural relationships within a realist social world.
(Burrell & Morgan, 1998, p. 34)
78  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 100 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 79
Page 79
Largely based upon the structuralist emphasis of Western Marxists (Gramsci, 1971, 1978;
Lukács, 1971; Volosinov, 1973), this approach emphasizes the signiﬁcance of the structures and
material conditions that guide and constrain the possibilities of cultural contact, intercultural
communication, and cultural exchange. Within this paradigm, the possibilities for changing
intercultural relations rest largely upon the structural relations imposed by the dominant struc-
ture (Mosco, 1996). As noted in Figure 2, culture is conceptualized as societal structures. So, for
example, interactions between privileged foreign students and U.S. American students cannot
be seen as random, but rather are a re ﬂection of structural (cultural) systems of privilege and
economic power. These larger structural constraints are often overlooked in more traditional
intercultural communication research. When power and structural variables are incorporated
into functionalist research (e.g., communication accommodation theory, di ﬀusion of innov-
ation), they are conceptualized as somewhat static, and the goal is not to change the structures
that reproduce the power relations.
The focus, like that of critical humanism, is usually on popular culture texts rather than
interpersonal interactions. For this reason, this scholarship has traditionally been de ﬁned as
mass communication and not intercultural communication per se (see Asante and Gudykunst’s
[1989] distinction between international and intercultural communication). These scholars
largely examine economic aspects of industries that produce cultural products (e.g., advertising,
media) and how some industries are able to dominate the cultural sphere with their products
(Fejes, 1986; Meehan, 1993). An example is Frederic ’s (1986) study on the political and ideo-
logical justiﬁcations leading to the establishment and maintenance of Radio Marti, the U.S. radio
presence in Cuba. Another example is Nakayama and Vachon’s (1991) study of the British ﬁlm
industry between World War I and World War II. They compare the quality of ﬁlms produced
in Britain and in the United States during this time. Based on a paradigmatic assumption that
economic structures constrain the kinds of texts (e.g., ﬁlms) that are possible, they argue that
British ﬁlms were inferior during this time, due to explicit economic strategies (e.g., Lend-Lease
Act) to undermine the British ﬁlm industry.
We should note that postmodern approaches (Mumby, 1997) to communication studies may
represent the future of culture and communication research, but at this point, it is too early to
articulate the relationship between the framework outlined here and a postmodern position.
Beyond the Paradigms
Understanding these four paradigmatic perspectives allows us to locate the source of many
scholarly debates, helps to legitimize and also identify strengths and limitations of contemporary
approaches, and presents the possibility of interparadigmatic dialogue and collaboration. The
source of debates can be clearly seen in the dramatic di ﬀerences among these four perspectives
(see Figure 2). How can identifying or acknowledging the existence of these traditions lead to
more productive research? There are probably a variety of responses or directions one may advo-
cate with respect to interparadigmatic research. We have identi ﬁes four positions that we think
can challenge our way of thinking about culture and communication research: liberal pluralism,
interparadigmatic borrowing, multiparadigmatic collaboration, and a dialectic perspective.
Liberal pluralism is probably the most common and the easiest, a live-and-let-live response.
This position acknowledges the values of each paradigmatic perspective, that each contributes in
some unique way to our understanding of culture and communication. One could point out
that research in the functionalist paradigm has provided us with some useful snapshot images of
cultural variations in communication behavior, that interpretive research has provides many
insights into communication rules of various speech communities and contexts. However, one
would also have to acknowledge that because cultures are largely seen as static and cultural
behavior as benign in those two paradigms, the structural dynamics that support any culture are
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  79


--- PAGE 101 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 80
Page 80
often overlooked. Critical researchers ﬁll this gap by focusing on important structural and con-
textual dynamics, but provide less insight on intercultural communication on an interpersonal
level.
Although the value of each paradigmatic tradition is acknowledged in this position, there is
little attempt to connect the ideas from one paradigm to another, or to explore how ideas from
one paradigm may enrich the understanding of research from other paradigms. This is analo-
gous to African Americans and Whites acknowledging and respecting both Kwanzaa and
Christmas traditions, but never actually talking to each other about the cultural signi ﬁcance of
these holidays.
There is a strong belief underlying this position that the best kind of research is ﬁrmly
grounded in solid paradigmatic foundations. As many have noted, paradigmatic beliefs are
strong and deeply felt, a sort of faith about the way that world is and should be, and it takes
extensive study and experience to become pro ﬁcient in research in one paradigm (Burrell &
Morgan, 1988; Deetz, 1996).
A second position is that of interparadigmatic borrowing. This position is also strongly com-
mitted to paradigmatic research, but recognizes potential complementary contributions from
other paradigms. Researchers taking this position listen carefully to what others say, read
research from other paradigms and integrate some concerns or issues into their own research.
This is seen in currently functionalist and interpretive research that has been in ﬂuenced by
critical thinking, for example, Katriel ’s (1995) essay on the importance of integrating under-
standing of macrocontexts (historical, economic, political) in cultural communication studies,
or Collier ’s recent essay incorporating notions of history and power di ﬀerentials in ongoing
studies of interethnic relationships (1998a) and cultural identity (1998b). This borrowing is
analogous to a traveler abroad learning new cultural ways (e.g., learning new expressions) that
they incorporate into their lives back home. However, the researcher, while borrowing, is still
fundamentally committed to research within a particular paradigm.
A third position is multiparadigmatic collaboration . This approach is not to be undertaken
lightly. It is based on the assumption that any one research paradigm is limiting, that all
researchers are limited by their own experience and worldview (Deetz, 1996; Hammersly, 1992),
and the di ﬀerent approaches each have something to contribute. Unlike the other positions, it
does not privilege any one paradigm and attempts to make explicit the contributions of each in
researching the same general research question. Though this sounds good, it is fraught with
pitfalls. Deetz (1996) warns against “teﬂon-coated multiperspectivalism” that leads to shallow
readings (p. 204). Others have warned against unproductive synthetic (integrative) and additive
(pluralistic, supplementary) approaches (Deetz, 1996; B. J. Hall, 1992).
Although it would be nice to move across paradigms with ease, most researchers are not
“multilingual.” However, one could argue that culture and communication scholars are parti-
cularly well positioned for interparadigmatic dialogue and multiparadigmatic collaboration;
that they, of all researchers, should have the conceptual agility to think beyond traditional
paradigmatic (cultural) boundaries. In a way this approach reminds us of our interdisciplin-
ary foundations, when anthropologists like E. T. Hall used linguistics frameworks to analyze
nonverbal interaction— a daring and innovative move (Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990).
Because it is unlikely that any one researcher can negotiate various paradigms simultaneously
and conduct multiperspectival research, one strategy is collaborative research in multicultural
terms (Deetz, 1996; Gudykunst & Nishida, 1989). An example of this is a current investigation of
Whiteness where scholars from diﬀerent research traditions (a critical position, an ethnographic
perspective, and a social scienti ﬁc tradition) and representing ethnic and gender diversity are
investigating one general research question, “What does being White mean communicatively in
the United States today? ” (Nakayama & Krizek, 1995; Martin, Krizek, Nakayama, & Bradford,
1996).
80  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 102 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 81
Page 81
In this collaborative project we are conducting a series of studies using multiple questions,
methods, and perspectives, but, more importantly, di ﬀerent paradigmatic assumptions. How-
ever, each study meets the paradigmatic criteria for one research orientation, representing what
Deetz (1996) described as an ideal research program — where complementary relations among
research orientations are identi ﬁed, diﬀerent questions at di ﬀerent moments are posed, but at
each moment answering to speci ﬁc criteria of an orientation. This multiparadigmatic orienta-
tion permits a kind of rotation among incompatible orientations and has led to new insights
about the meaning of Whiteness in the U.S. today.
A fourth position is a dialectic perspective . Like multiparadigmatic research, this position
moves beyond paradigmatic thinking, but is even more challenging in that it seeks to ﬁnd a
way to live with the inherent contradictions and seemingly mutual exclusivity of these various
approaches. That is, a dialectic approach to accepted that human nature is probably both
creative and deterministic; that research goals can be to predict, describe, and change; that
the relationship between culture and communication is, most likely, both reciprocal and con-
tested. Speciﬁcally, is there a way to address the contextual and power concerns of the critical
humanists-structuralists in everyday interpersonal interactions between people from di ﬀerent
cultural backgrounds? We propose a dialectic approach that moves us beyond paradigmatic
constraints and permits more dynamic thinking about intercultural interaction and research.
T oward a Dialectical Perspective5
The notion of dialect is hardly new. Used thousands of years ago by the ancient Greeks and others,
its more recent emphases continue to stress the relational, processual, and contradictory nature
of knowledge production (Bakhtin, 1981; Baxter, 1990; Cornforth, 1968). Aristotle ’s famous
dictum that “rhetoric is the counterpart of dialectic ” emphasizes the signi ﬁcant relationship
between modes of expression and modes of knowledge. Dialectic o ﬀers intercultural communi-
cation researchers a way to think about di ﬀerent ways of knowing in a more comprehensive
manner, while retaining the signiﬁcance of considering how we express this knowledge.
Thus, a dialectical approach to culture and communication o ﬀers us the possibility of
engaging multiple, but distinct, research paradigms. It oﬀers us the possibility to see the world in
multiple ways and to become better prepared to engage in intercultural interaction. This means,
of course, that we cannot become enmeshed into any paradigm, to do so ﬂies in the face of
dialectic thinking.
We are not advocating any single form of dialectic. The adversarial model utilized in forensic
rhetoric may be appropriate in some instances, whereas a more inward, therapeutic model
discussed by psychoanalysts may be needed in other situations. Di ﬀerent dialectical forms lead
to di ﬀering kinds of knowledge. No single dialectical form can satisfy epistemological needs
within the complexity of multiple cultures. T o reach for a singular dialectical form runs counter
to the very notion of dialectical “because dialectical thinking depends so closely on the habitual
everyday mode of thought which it is called on to transcend, it can take a number of di ﬀerent
and apparently contradictory forms” (Jameson, 1971, p. 308).
Y et, a dialectical approach oﬀers us the possibility of “knowing” about intercultural interaction
as a dynamic and changing process. We can begin to see epistemological concerns as an open-
ended process, as a process that resists ﬁxed, discrete bits of knowledge, that encompasses the
dynamic nature of cultural processes. We draw from the work of critical theorists who initially
envisioned their theory as a “theory of contemporary socio-historical reality in which itself was
constantly developing and changing” (Kellner, 1989, p. 11). For critical theorists, as well as our-
selves, there are many social realities that coexist among the many cultures of the world. Thus,
“dialectics for critical theory describe how phenomena are constituted and the interconnections
between diﬀerent phenomena and spheres of social reality” (Best & Kellner, 1991, p. 224).
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  81


--- PAGE 103 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 82
Page 82
A dialectical perspective also emphasizes the relational, rather than individual aspects and
persons. In intercultural communication research, the dialectical perspective emphasizes the
relationship between aspects of intercultural communication, and the importance of viewing
these holistically and not in isolation. In intercultural communication practice, the dialectical
perspective stresses the importance of relationship. This means that one becomes fully human
only in relation to another person and that there is something unique in a relationship that goes
beyond the sum of two individuals. This notion is expressed by Y oshikawa (1987) as the
“dynamic in-betweenness” of a relationship — what exists beyond the two persons. Research on
the notion of third-culture building is one attempt to develop a relational dialectic approach to
intercultural interactions (Baley, 1993; Casmir, 1993; Shuter, 1993; Starosta, 1991).
Finally, the most challenging aspect of the dialectical perspective is that it requires holding
two contradictory ideals simultaneously, contrary to most formal education in the United States.
Most of our assumptions about learning and knowledge assume dichotomy and mutual exclu-
sivity. Dichotomies (e.g., good –evil, subjective–objective) form the core of our philosophical,
scientiﬁc, and religious traditions.
In contrast, a dialectical perspective recognizes a need to transcend these dichotomies. This
notion, well known in Eastern countries as based on the logic of “soku,” (“not-one, not-two”),
emphasizes that the world is neither monistic nor dualistic (N. Nakayama, 1973, pp. 24 –29).
Rather, it recognizes and accepts as ordinary, the interdependent and complementary aspects
of the seeming opposites (Y oshikawa, 1987, p. 187). In the following sections, we apply the
dialectical perspective to intercultural communication theory and research.
A Dialectical Approach to Studying Intercultural Interaction
Interpersonal communication scholars have applied a dialectical approach to relational research
(Baxter, 1988, 1990; Baxter & Montgomery, 1996; Montgomery, 1992) and identiﬁed basic contra-
dictions or dialectics in relational development (autonomy –connection, novelty–predictability,
openness–closedness). Although we do not advocate a simple extension of this interpersonal
communication research program, we have identiﬁed six similar dialectics that seem to operate
interdependently in intercultural interactions: cultural –individual, personal/social–contextual,
diﬀerences–similarities, static–dynamic, present–future/history–past, and privilege–disadvantage
dialectics. These dialectics are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive but represent an
ongoing exploration of new ways to think about face-to-face intercultural interaction and
research.
Cultural–individual dialectic
Scholars and practitioners alike recognize that intercultural communication is both cultural and
individual. In any interaction, there are some aspects of communication that are individual
and idiosyncratic (e.g., unique nonverbal expressions or language use) as well as aspects that are
shared by others in the same cultural groups (e.g., family, gender, ethnicity, etc.). Functionalist
research has focused on communication patterns that are shared by particular groups (gender,
ethnicity, etc.) and has identi ﬁed diﬀerences between these group patterns. In contrast, critical
communication scholars have resisted connecting group membership with any one individual ’s
particular behavior, which leads to essentializing.
A dialectical perspective reminds us that people are both group members and individuals and
intercultural interaction is characterized by both. Research could investigate how these two
contradictory characteristics work in intercultural interactions. For example, how do people
experience the tension between wanting to be seen and treated as individuals, and at the same
time have their group identities recognized and aﬃrmed (Collier, 1991)? This tension is often at
82  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 104 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 83
Page 83
the heart of the a ﬃrmative action debate in the United States — a need to recognize cultural
membership and at the same time be treated as an individual and not put in boxes.
Personal/social–contextual dialectic
A dialectical perspective emphasizes the relationship between personal and contextual com-
munication. There are some aspects of communication that remain relatively constant over
many contexts. There are also aspects that are contextual. That is, people communicate in
particular ways in particular contexts (e.g., professors and students in classrooms), and messages
are interpreted in particular ways. Outside the classroom (e.g., at football games or at faculty
meetings), professors and students may communicate diﬀerently, expressing diﬀerent aspects of
themselves. Intercultural encounters are characterized by both personal and contextual com-
munication. Researchers could investigate how these contradictory characteristics operate in
intercultural interactions.
Diﬀerences–similarities dialectic
A dialectic approach recognizes the importance of similarities and di ﬀerences in understanding
intercultural communication. The ﬁeld was founded on the assumption that there are real,
important diﬀerences that exist between various cultural groups, and functionalist research has
established a long tradition of identifying these diﬀerences. However, in real life there are a great
many similarities in human experience and ways of communicating. Cultural communication
researchers in the interpretive tradition have emphasized these similar patterns in speci ﬁc cul-
tural communities. Critical researchers have emphasized that there may be diﬀerences, but these
diﬀerences are often not benign, but are political and have implications for power relations
(Houston, 1992).
There has been a tendency to overemphasize group di ﬀerences in traditional intercultural
communication research— in a way that sets up false dichotomies and rigid expectations. How-
ever, a dialectical perspective reminds us that di ﬀerence and similarity can coexist in intercul-
tural communication interactions. For example, Israelis and Palestinians share a love for their
Holy City, Jerusalem. This similarity may be overweighed by the historical di ﬀerences in mean-
ings of Jerusalem so that the di ﬀerences work in opposition. Research could examine how
diﬀerences and similarities work in cooperation or in opposition in intercultural interaction.
For example, how do individuals experience the tension of multiple di ﬀerences and similar-
ities in their everyday intercultural interactions (class, race, gender, attitudes, beliefs)? Are these
aspects or topics that tend to emphasize one or the other? How do individuals deal with this
tension? What role does context play in managing this tension?
Static–dynamic dialectic
The static–dynamic dialectic highlights the ever-changing nature of culture and cultural prac-
tices, but also underscores our tendency to think about these things as constant. Traditional
intercultural research in the functionalist tradition and some interpretive research have empha-
sized the stability of cultural patterns, for example, values, that remain relatively consistent over
periods of time (Hofstede, 1991). Some interpretive research examines varying practices that
reﬂect this value over time (e.g., Carbaugh ’s study of communication rules on Donahue dis-
course, 1990a). In contrast, critical researchers have emphasized the instability and ﬂeetingness
of cultural meanings, for example, Cornyetz ’s (1994) study of the appropriation of hip-hop in
Japan.
So thinking about culture and cultural practices as both static and dynamic helps us navigate
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  83


--- PAGE 105 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 84
Page 84
through a diverse world and develop new ways of understanding intercultural encounters.
Research could investigate how these contradictory forces work in intercultural interactions.
How do individuals work with the static and dynamic aspects of intercultural interactions? How
is the tension of this dynamic experienced and expressed in intercultural relationships?
Present–future/history–past dialectic
A dialectic in intercultural communication exists between the history –past and the present –
future. Much of the functionalist and interpretive scholarship investigating culture and com-
munication has ignored historical forces. Other scholars added history as a variable in
understanding contemporary intercultural interaction, for example, Stephan and Stephan ’s
(1996) prior intergroup interaction variable that in ﬂuences degree of intergroup anxiety. In
contrast, critical scholars stress the importance of including history in current analyses of
cultural meanings.
A dialectical perspective suggests that we need to balance both an understanding of the past
and the present. Also the past is always seen through the lens of the present. For example, Oliver
Stone’s ﬁlm, Nixon, was criticized because of the interpretation Stone made of (now) historical
events and persons. As Stone pointed out, we are always telling our versions of history.
Collier’s (1998a) investigations of alliance in ethnic relationships reveal the tensions of the
present and past in ethnic relationships. This and other research reveal the importance of
balancing an understanding the history, for example, of slavery and the African diaspora, the
colonization of indigenous peoples (Morris, 1997), the internment of Japanese Americans
(Nakayama, 1997), relationships between Mexico and the U.S., as well as maintaining a focus on
the present in interethnic relationships in the United States. How do individuals experience this
tension? How do they balance the two in everyday interaction? Many in ﬂuential factors precede
and succeed any intercultural interaction that gives meaning to that interaction.
Privilege–disadvantage dialectic
As individuals, we carry and communicate various types of privilege and disadvantage, the ﬁnal
dialectic. The traditional intercultural communication research mostly ignores issues of privil-
ege and disadvantage (exceptions include Pennington, 1989; Gallois et al., 1995), although these
issues are central in critical scholarship. Privilege and disadvantage may be in the form of
political, social position, or status. For example, if members of wealthy nations travel to less
wealthy countries, the intercultural interactions between these two groups will certainly be
inﬂuenced by their di ﬀerential in economic power (Katriel, 1995). Hierarchies and power dif-
ferentials are not always clear. Individuals may be simultaneous privileged and disadvantaged, or
privileged in some contexts, and disadvantaged in others. Research could investigate how the
intersections of privilege and disadvantage work in intercultural encounters. Women of color may
be simultaneously advantaged (education, economic class) and disadvantaged (gender, race), for
example (Houston, 1992). How are these various contradictory privileges and disadvantages felt,
expressed, and managed in intercultural interactions? How do context and topic play into the
dialectic? Many times, it may not be clear who or how one is privileged or disadvantaged. It may
be unstable, ﬂeeting, may depend on the topic, or the context.
Dialectical Intersections
So how do these di ﬀerent dialectics work in everyday interaction? These dialectics are not
discrete, but always operate in relation to each other (see Figure 3). We can illustrate these
intersections with an example of a relationship between a foreign student from a wealthy family
84  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 106 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 85
Page 85
and a U.S. American professor. Using this example we can see how contradictories in several
dialectics can occur in interpersonal intercultural interaction. In relation to the personal/social–
contextual dialectic, both the student and professor are simultaneously privileged and disadvan-
taged depending on the context. In talking about class material, for example, the professor is
more privileged than the student, but in talking about vacations and travel, the wealthy student
may be more privileged.
T o focus on another set of dialects, if the topic of international trade barriers comes up, the
student may be seen as a cultural representative than an individual and, in this conversation,
cultural di ﬀerences or similarities may be emphasized. When the topic shifts, these relational
dialectics also shift— within the same relationship.
These important dialectical relational shifts have not been studied in previous research, and
this is what makes the dialectical perspective di ﬀerent from the other three positions identi ﬁed
earlier (liberal pluralism, interparadigmatic borrowing, and multiparadigmatic research). That
is, this approach makes explicit the dialectical tension between what previous research topics
have been studied (cultural di ﬀerences, assumed static nature of culture, etc.) and what should
be studied (how cultures change, how they are similar, importance of history). The dialectical
perspective, then, represents a major epistemological move in our understanding of culture and
communication.
Conclusion
In this brief essay we have tried to challenge culture and communication scholars to consider
ways that their production of knowledge is related to the epistemological advances made by
those in other paradigms. Whereas there cannot be any easy ﬁt among these paradigmatic
diﬀerences, it is important that we not only recognize these di ﬀerences, but also seek ways that
these epistemological di ﬀerences can be productive rather than debilitating. Information over-
load can be daunting, but our dialectical perspective o ﬀers intercultural scholars, as well as
students and practitioners, a way to grapple with the many diﬀerent kinds of knowledge we have
about cultures and interactions.
In his own thinking about dialectical criticism, Fredric Jameson (1971) observes that there is
a breathlessness about this shift from the normal object-oriented activity of the mind to such
dialectical self-consciousness— something of the sickening shudder we feel in a elevator ’s fall or
in the sudden dig up in an airliner (p. 308).
This sudden fall in the ways we think about intercultural communication means letting go of
the more rigid kinds of knowledge that we have about others and entering into more uncertain
ways of knowing about others.
Fig. 3. Intersections of Six Dialectics of Intercultural Interaction
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  85


--- PAGE 107 ---
09:07:12:09:07
Page 86
Page 86
Notes
1. Cross-cultural communication denotes studies identifying cultural di ﬀerences in communication phe-
nomena, both interpersonal and mediated, e.g., Fitch’s (1994) study of directives in Boulder, Colorado,
and Bogata, Colombia. Intercultural communication has focused on the interaction of individuals from
various cultural backgrounds in interpersonal contexts, e.g., Houston ’s (1997) study of Black –White
women’s interaction, as well as mediated, for example, Pennington’s (1989) media study of Jesse Jackson’s
negotiations with Syria for release of an American POW. Intracultural/cultural communication studies
identify communication patterns within particular cultural communities, for example, Philipsen ’s
(1976) studies of White, working class male talk in a Chicago neighborhood.
2. These are not necessarily new issues. Scholars had emphasized the need to examine power di ﬀerentials
in intercultural encounters, e.g., Asante, 1987; Folb, 1982; Kramarae, 1981; Smith (aka Asante), 1973, but
they were largely ignored (see Moon, 1996; Ribeau, 1997). Concerning relevance, A. Smith (1981), in an
indictment of intercultural communication research, stated that the appropriate focus of scholars should
be on “relevant” topics — on eliminating poverty, oppression, and not on understanding sojourner
communication and other “frivolous” topics.
3. We use the terms critical humanist and critical structuralist to emphasize the critical theory foundations
of these paradigms.
4. One could argue that critical voices have been present in critical ethnography (Conquergood, 1991) and
critical rhetoric (McKerrow, 1989), which often address the intersection of culture and communication.
This, of course, brings up the question of the boundaries of the study of culture and communication,
which is beyond the scope of this essay. What is the appropriate focus for the study of culture and
communication? Will cultural studies, critical ethnography, etc., be incorporated along with intercul-
tural communication research to form a larger area of study? Or will intercultural communication
researchers simply borrow some of their ideas and retain more narrow boundaries?
5. Some of the material concerning the six dialectics appear in J. N. Martin, T. K. Nakayama, & L. A. Flores
(1998). A dialectical approach to intercultural communication. In J. N. Martin, T. K. Nakayama, &
L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in cultural contexts (pp. 5–14). Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
References
Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin and philosophy (B. Brewster, Trans.). New Y ork: Monthly Review Press.
Altman, K. E., & Nakayama, T. K. (1991). Making a critical di ﬀerence: A di ﬃcult dialogue. Journal of
Communication, 41(4), 116–128.
Asante, M. K. (1987). The Afrocentric idea. Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Asante, M. K., & Gudykunst, W. B. (1989). Preface. In M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Handbook of
international and intercultural communication (pp. 7–16). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin . (M. Holquist, Ed., and
C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin, TX: University of T exas Press.
Barnlund, D. C. (1975). Public and private self in Japan and United States. T okyo: Simul Press.
Barnlund, D. C. (1989). Communicative styles of Japanese and Americans. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Baxter, L. A. (1988). A dialectical perspective on communication strategies in relationship development. In
S. W. Duck (Ed.), A handbook of personal relationships (pp. 257–273). New Y ork: Wiley.
Baxter, L. A. (1990). Dialectical contradictions in relationship development. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 7, 69–88.
Belay, G. (1993). T oward a paradigm shift for intercultural and international communication: New research
directions. Communication Yearbook, 16, 437–457.
Best, S., & Kellner, D. (1991). Postmodern theory: Critical interrogations . New Y ork: Guilford.
Bourdieu, P . (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Braithwaite, C. A. (1990). Communicative silence: A cross cultural study of Basso ’s hypothesis. In
D. Carbaugh, (Ed.), Cultural communication and intercultural contact  (pp. 321 –328). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Brislin, R. W. (1993). Understanding culture’s inﬂuence on behavior. New Y ork: Harcourt Brace.
Burgoon, J. K. (1995). Cross-cultural and intercultural applications of expectance violations theory.
In R. L. Wiseman (Ed.), Intercultural communication theory  (pp. 194 –214). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Burrell, G., & Morgan, G. (1988). Sociological paradigms and organizational analysis . Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Carbaugh, D. (1988a). Comments on “culture” in communication inquiry. Communication Reports , 1,
38–41.
86  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 108 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 87
Page 87
Carbaugh, D. (1988b). T alking American. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Carbaugh, D. (1990a). Communication rules in Donahue discourse. In D. Carbaugh (Ed.), Cultural
communication and intercultural contact (pp. 119–149). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carbaugh, D. (Ed.). (1990b). Cultural communication and intercultural contact. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Casmir, F. L. (1993). Third-culture building: A paradigm shift for international and intercultural
communication. Communication Yearbook, 16, 407–428.
Collier, M. J. (1991). Con ﬂict competence within African, Mexican and Anglo American friendships.
In S. Ting-T oomey & F. Korzenny (Eds.), Cross-cultural interpersonal communication . Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Collier, M. J. (1996). Communication competence problematics in ethic friendships. Communication
Monographs, 63, 314–337.
Collier, M. J. (1998a). Intercultural friendships as interpersonal alliances. In J. N. Martin, T. K. Nakayama &
L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in cultural contexts (pp. 370–379). Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Collier, M. J. (1998b). Researching cultural identity: Reconciling interpretive and postcolonial perspectives.
In D. V . Tanno & A. Gonz ález (Eds.), Communication and identity across cultures  (pp. 122 –147).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Collier, M. J., & Thomas, M. (1988). Cultural identity in intercultural communication: An interpretive per-
spective. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication (pp. 94–120).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Conquergood, D. (1991). Rethinking ethnography: T owards a critical cultural politics. Communication
Monographs, 58, 179–195.
Cornyetz, N. (1994). Feitished Blackness: Hip hop and racial desire in contemporary Japan. Social Text, 41,
113–140.
Cornforth, M. (1968). Materialism and the dialectical method. New Y ork: International Publishers.
Crawford, L. (1996). Personal ethnography. Communication Monographs, 63, 158–170.
Cronen, V . E., Chen, V ., & Pearce, W. B. (1988). Coordinated management of meaning: A critical theory.
In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication (pp. 66–98). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Deetz, S. (1994). The future of the discipline: The challenges, the research, and the social contribution.
Communication Yearbook, 17, 565–600.
Deetz, S. (1996). Describing di ﬀerences in approaches to organization sciences: Rethinking Burrell and
Morgan and their legacy. Organization Science, 7, 119–207.
Derrida, J. (1976). Of grammatology  (G. Spivak, Trans.). Baltimore, MA: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Dilthey, W. (1976). Selected writings  (H. P . Rickman, Ed. & Trans.). New Y ork: Cambridge University
Press.
Fejes, F. (1986). Imperialism, media and the good neighbor: New Deal foreign police and United States
shortwave broadcasting to Latin America. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Fiske, J. (1987). Television culture. New Y ork: Methuen.
Fiske, J. (1989). Understanding popular culture. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Fiske, J. (1993). Power plays, power works. New York: Verso.
Fiske, J. (1994). Media matters: Everyday culture and political change . Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
Fitch. K. L. (1994). A cross-cultural study of directive sequences and some implications for compliance-
gaining research. Communication Monographs, 61, 185–209.
Flores, L. (1994). Shifting visions: Intersections of rhetorical and Chicana feminist theory in the analysis of
mass media. Unpublished dissertation, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
Folb, E. (1982). Who’s got the room at the top? Issues of dominance and nondominance in intracultural
communication. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader
(pp. 132–141). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings 1972 –1977 (C. Gordon,
L. Marshall, J. Mepham, & K. Soper, Trans.). New Y ork: Pantheon Books.
Frederic, H. (1986). Cuban-American radio wars: Ideology in international telecommunications . Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.
Gadamer, H. G. (1976). Philosophical hermeneutics (D. E. Linge, Ed. & Trans.). Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Gadamer, H. G. (1989). Truth and method. New Y ork: Crossroad Publishing.
Gallois, C., Franklyn-Stokes, A., Giles, H., & Coupland, N. (1988). Communication accommodation in inter-
cultural encounters. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication
(pp. 157–185). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  87


--- PAGE 109 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 88
Page 88
Gallois, G., Giles, H., Jones, E., Cargile, A. C., & Ota, H. (1995). Accommodating intercultural encounters:
Elaborations and extensions. In R. L. Wiseman (Ed.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 115–147).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Garner, T. (1994). Oral rhetorical practice in African American culture. In A. Gonz ález, M. Houston, &
V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communication  (pp. 81–91). Los Angeles,
CA: Roxbury.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (Eds.). (1991). Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied
sociolinguistics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
González, A., Houston, M., & Chen, V . (Eds.). (1997). Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communi-
cation (2nd ed). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
González, C., & Krizek, R. (1994, February). Indigenous ethnography. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the Western Communication Association, San Jose, CA.
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison notebooks  (Q. Hoare & G. N. Smith, Trans.). New Y ork:
International.
Gramsci, A. (1978). Selections from cultural writings . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Grossberg, L., Nelson, C., & Treichler, P . (Eds.). (1992). Cultural studies. New Y ork: Routledge, Chapman, &
Hall.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1995). Anxiety/uncertainty management (AUM) theory: Current status. In R. L. Wiseman
(Ed.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 8–58). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1989). Theoretical perspectives for studying intercultural communication.
In M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Handbook of international and intercultural communication
(pp. 17–46). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Habermas, J. (1970). On systematically distorted communication. Inquiry, 13, 205–218.
Habermas, J. (1981). Modernity versus postmodernity. New German Critique, 22, 3–14.
Habermas, J. (1987). The theory of communicative action: Lifeworld and system (Vol. 2. T. McCarthy, Trans.).
Boston: Beacon Press.
Hall, B. J. (1992). Theories of culture and communication. Communication Theory, 2, 50–70.
Hall, S. (1977). Culture, media, and the “ideological e ﬀect.” In J. Curran, M. Gurevitch, & J. Woollacott
(Eds.), Mass communication and society. London: Edward Arnold.
Hall, S. (1985). Signiﬁcation, representation, ideology: Althusser and the post-structuralist debates. Critical
Studies in Mass Communication, 2, 91–114.
Hamlet, J. D. (1997). Understanding traditional African American preaching. In A. González, M. Houston,
& V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communication  (2nd ed.; pp. 94 –98).
Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Hammersly, M. (1992). What’s wrong with ethnography? New Y ork: Routledge, Chapman, & Hall.
Harman, R. C., & Briggs, N. E. (1991). SIETAR survey: Perceived contributions of the social sciences to
intercultural communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15(1), 19–28.
Headland, T., Pike, K., & Harris, M. (Eds.). (1990). Emics and etics: The insider/outsider debate . Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The meaning of style. London: Methuen.
Hecht, M. L., Larkey, L., & Johnson, J. (1992). African American and European American perceptions
of problematic issues in interethnic communication e ﬀectiveness. Human Communication Research ,
19, 209–236.
Hecht, M. L., Collier, M. J., & Ribeau, S. A. (1993). African American communication: Ethnic identity and
cultural interpretation. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hegde, R. (1998a). Translated enactments: The relational con ﬁgurations of the Asian Indian immigrant
experience. In J. N. Martin, T. K. Nakayama, & L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in cultural contexts
(pp. 315–322). Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Hegde, R. (1998b). Swinging the trapeze: The negotiation of identity among Asian Indian immigrant
women in the United States. In D. V . Tanno & A. González (Eds.), Communication and identity across
cultures (pp. 34–55). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
hooks, b. (1990). Yearning: Race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South End Press.
Horkheimer, M. & Adorno, T. (1988). Dialectic of enlightenment  (J. Cumming, Trans.). New Y ork:
Continuum.
Houston, M. (1992). The politics of di ﬀerence: Race, class, and women ’s communication. In L. F. Rakow
(Ed.). Women making meaning (pp. 45–59). New Y ork: Routledge, Chapman, & Hall.
Houston, M. (1997). When Black women talk with White women: Why dialogues are di ﬃcult.
In A. González, M. Houston, & V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communica-
tion (pp. 187–194). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
88  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 110 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 89
Page 89
Hymes, D. (1972). Models of the interaction of language and social life. In J. J. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.),
Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication (pp. 35–71). New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart,
& Winston.
Jameson, F. (1971). Marxism and form. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Katriel, T. (1986). T alking straight: “Dugri” speech in Israeli Sabra culture . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Katriel, T. (1995). From “context” to “contexts” in intercultural communication research. In R. Wiseman
(Ed.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 271–284). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kellner, D. (1989). Critical theory, Marxism and modernity. Baltimore, MA: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kim, H. J. (1991). Inﬂuence of language and similarity on initial interaction attraction. In S. Ting-T oomey
& F. Korzenny (Eds.), Cross-cultural interpersonal communication  (pp. 213–229). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Kim, M.-S. (1994). Cross-cultural comparisons of the perceived importance of interactive constraints.
Human Communication Research, 21, 128–151.
Kim, M.-S., & Wilson, S. R. (1994). A cross-cultural comparison of implicit theories of requesting. Com-
munication Monographs, 61, 210–235.
Kim, M.-S., Hunter, J. E., Miyahara, A., Horvath, A.-M., Bresnahan, M., & Y oon, H.-J. (1996). Individual vs.
culture level dimensions of individualism/collectivism: E ﬀects on preferred conversational styles.
Communication Monographs, 63, 28–49.
Kim, U., Triandis, H. C., Kagitcibasi, I., Choi, S.-C., Y oon, G. (1994). Individualism and collectivism: Theory,
method, and applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kim, Y. Y. (1984). Searching for creative integration. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods for
intercultural communication research (pp. 15–28). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Kim, Y. Y. (1988). On theories in intercultural communication. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.),
Theories in intercultural communication (pp. 11–21). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Kim, Y. Y. (1995). Cross-cultural adaptation: An integrative theory. In R. L. Wiseman (Ed.), Intercultural
communication theory (pp. 170–194). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kramarae, C. (1981). Women and men speaking: Frameworks for analysis. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, W. S. (1999). One Whiteness veils three uglinesses: From border-crossing to a womanist interrogation
of colorism. In T. K. Nakayama & J. N. Martin (Eds.), Whiteness: The communication of social identity .
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lee, W. S., Chung, J., Wang, J. & Hertel, E. (1995). A sociohistorical approach to intercultural communica-
tion. Howard Journal of Communications, 6, 262–291.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1990). Notes on the history of intercultural communication: The Foreign Service
Institute and the mandate for intercultural training. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 76, 262–281.
Lukács, G. (1971). History and class consciousness: Studies in Marxist dialectics  (R. Livingston, Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lull, J. (1995). Media, communication, culture: A global approach. New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
Marcuse, H. (1964). One dimensional man. Boston: Beacon Press.
Martin, J. N., Krizek, R. L., Nakayama, T. K., & Bradford, L. (1996). Exploring Whiteness: A study of
self-labels for White Americans. Communication Quarterly, 44, 125–144.
Martin, J. N., Hammer, M. R., & Bradford, L. (1994). The inﬂuence of cultural and situational contexts on
Hispanic and non-Hispanic communication competence behaviors. Communication Quarterly , 42,
160–179.
Martin, J. N., Nakayama, T. K. & Flores, L. A. (1998). A dialectical approach to intercultural communica-
tion. In J. N. Martin, T. K. Nakayama, & L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in cultural contexts  (pp. 5–14).
Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
McKerrow, R. (1989). Critical rhetoric: Theory and praxis. Communication Monographs, 56, 91–111.
McPhail, T. L. (1989). Inquiry in international communication. In M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.),
Handbook of international and intercultural communication (pp. 47–60). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self, and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Meehan, E. R. (1993). Rethinking political economy: Changes and continuity. Journal of Communication ,
43(4), 105–116.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception  (C. Smith, Trans.). London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Moon, D. G. (1996). Concepts of culture: Implications for intercultural communication research. Com-
munication Quarterly, 44, 70–84.
Montgomery, B. M. (1992). Communication as the interface between couples and culture. Communication
Yearbook, 15, 475–507.
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  89


--- PAGE 111 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 90
Page 90
Morris, R. (1997). Living in/between. In A. Gonz ález, M. Houston, & V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in
culture, ethnicity, and communication (2nd ed.; pp. 163–176). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Mosco, V . (1996). The political economy of communication. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mumby, D. (1988). Communication and power in organizations: Discourse, ideology, and domination .
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Mumby, D. K. (1997). Modernism, postmodernism, and communication studies: A rereading of an
ongoing debate. Communication Theory, 7, 1–28.
Nakayama, N. (1973). Mujunteki, sosoku no ronri. Kyoto, Japan: Hyakkaen.
Nakayama, T. K. (1997). Dis/orienting identities: Asian Americans, history, and intercultural communica-
tion. In A. Gonz ález, M. Houston, & V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and
communication (2nd ed.; pp. 14–20). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Nakayama, T. K., & Krizek, R. L. (1995). Whiteness: A straight rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 81,
291–309.
Nakayama, T. K., & Vachon, L. A. (1991). Imperialist victory in peacetimes: State functions and the British
cinema industry. Current Research in Films, 5, 161–174.
Ono, K. (1998). Problematizing “nation” in intercultural communication research. In D. Tanno &
A. González (Eds.), Communication and identity across cultures (pp. 34–55). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Orbe, M. P . (1994). “Remember, it’s always Whites ’ ball ”: Descriptions of African American male com-
munication. Communication Quarterly, 42, 287–300.
Orbe, M. P . (1998). Constructing co-cultural theory: An explication of culture, power, and communication .
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Peck, J. (1993/94). Talk about racism: Framing a popular discourse of race on Oprah Winfrey. Cultural
Critique, 5, 89–126.
Pennington, D. L. (1989). Interpersonal power and in ﬂuence in intercultural communication. In
M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Handbook of international and intercultural communication
(pp. 261–274). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Philipsen, G. (1976). Speaking “like a man ” in T eamsterville: Culture patterns of role enactment in an
urban neighborhood. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 61, 13–22.
Ribeau, S. A. (1997). How I came to know “in self realization there is truth.” In A. González, M. Houston, &
V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communication  (2nd ed.; pp. 21 –27). Los
Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Rogers, E. (1995). Diﬀusion of innovations (4th ed.). New Y ork: Free Press.
Rosaldo, R. (1989). Culture and truth: The remaking of social analysis . Boston: Beacon Press.
Schleiermacher, F. D. E. (1977). Hermeneutics: The handwritten manuscripts (J. Duke & J. Forstman, Trans.).
Missoula, MT: Scholar Press for the American Academy of Religion.
Shuter, R. (1990). The centrality of culture. Southern Communication Journal, 55, 237–249.
Shuter, R. (1993). On third-culture building. Communication Yearbook, 16, 429–436.
Smith, A. (aka M. K. Asante). (1973). Transracial communication. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Smith, A. G. (1981). Content decisions in intercultural communication. Southern Speech Communication
Journal, 47, 252–262.
Starosta, W. J. (1991, May). Third culture building: Chronological development and the role of third parties .
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Chicago, IL.
Stephan, W. G., Stephan, C. W. (1996). Intergroup relations. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Tanno, D. V . & Jandt, F. E. (1994). Rede ﬁning the “other” in multicultural research. Howard Journal of
Communications, 5, 36–54.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1984). Qualitative research: An overview. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim (Eds.), Methods
for intercultural communication research (pp. 169–184). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1986). Conﬂict communication styles in Black and White subjective cultures. In Y. Y. Kim
(Ed.), Interethic communication: Current research (pp. 75–88). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ting-T oomey, S. (Ed.). (1994). The challenge of facework: Cross cultural and interpersonal issues . Albany:
State University of New Y ork Press.
Ting-T oomey, S., & Chung, L. (1996). Cross-cultural interpersonal communication: Theoretical trends and
research directions. In W. B. Gudykunst, S. Ting-T oomey, & T. Nishida (Eds.), Communication in
personal relationships across cultures (pp. 237–262). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ting-T oomey, S., Gao, G., Trubisky, P ., Y ang, Z., Kim, H. S., Lin, S. L., & Nishida, T. (1991). Culture, face
maintenance and styles of handling interpersonal con ﬂicts: A study in ﬁve cultures. International
Journal of Conﬂict Management, 2, 275–296.
Volosinov, V . N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language  (L. Matejka & I. R. Titunik, Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wert-Gary, S., Center, C., Brashers, D. E., & Meyers, R. A. (1991). Research topics and methodological
90  JUDITH N. MARTIN & THOMAS K. NAKAYAMA


--- PAGE 112 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 91
Page 91
orientations in organizational communication: A decade in review. Communication Studies , 42,
141–154.
Wiseman, R. L. (Ed.). (1995). Intercultural communication theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Y oshikawa, M. J. (1987). The double-swing model of intercultural communication between the East
and the West. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives
(pp. 319–329). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
THINKING DIALECTICALLY  91


--- PAGE 113 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 92
Page 92


--- PAGE 114 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 93
Page 93
Part III
Contextual Approaches to Culture
and Communication


--- PAGE 115 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 94
Page 94


--- PAGE 116 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 95
Page 95
7
Language and Words
Communication in the Analects of Confucius
Hui-Ching Chang
Tradition paints [Confucius] as a strict pedant, laying down precise rules for
men to follow in their conduct and their thinking. The truth is that he care-
fully avoided laying down rules, because he believed that no creed formulated
by another person can excuse any man from the duty of thinking for himself.
(Herrlee Creel, Confucius and the Chinese Way, 1960, p. 1)
Scholars of language and social psychology in Asian nations often invoke Confucianism to
explain Asian communication patterns (Chen, 1993; Chen & Chung, 1994; Cheng, 1987; Oliver,
1971; Yum, 1988). Others have linked Confucianism and language use in social life, showing
how it has inﬂuenced Asian cultural concepts important to communication, such as the Chinese
concepts of kuan-hsi (relation) (Chang & Holt, 1991), pao (reciprocity) (Chang & Holt, 1994),
and mien-tzu (face) (Cheng, 1986), as well as the Korean concept of uye-ri (righteousness) (Yum,
1987) and the Japanese idea of ningensei (human beingness) (Goldman, 1994). This is hardly
surprising, given Confucianism’s eﬀect on various Asian societies (Bond & Hwang, 1986; Chan,
1963; Cheng, 1986; Fung, 1983; Goldman, 1994; Hofstede, 1991; Okabe, 1983; Triandis, 1995;
Tu, 1985, 1996; Yum, 1988).
Although Confucian thought is important in shaping attitudes toward language and words
in Asian societies,
1 “Confucianism,” as an abstraction used to explain language and social life,
has often been cast in terms of other ideas such as collectivism (Triandis, 1995; Wheeler, Reis, &
Bond, 1989), social orientation (Y ang, 1981), and harmony (Oliver, 1971). I will argue that
subsuming Confucianism under these abstractions prevents us from developing appropriate
theories to account for language attitudes in Confucian societies.
Confucian teachings are based on a far more comprehensive and richly textured view of
language and words than is suggested by superordinate sociological and psychological ideas, as
shown by numerous observations about language, society, and cultural practice in the Analects
of Confucius, the most important Confucian text.
2 Although the Analects extensively treats such
issues, few studies have concentrated on the text of the Analects to provide a comprehensive look
at how attitudes toward language are advocated by Confucius;3 instead, current literature focuses
on the implications of Confucian systems of thought for Asian communication (Cheng, 1987;
Yum, 1988). Even when the Analects is discussed, analyses tend to be anecdotal (see Chen &
Chung, 1994). This article redresses this de ﬁciency by looking at how words are treated in
the entire corpus of the Analects to formulate more appropriate theoretical perspectives for the
analysis of communication in Confucian societies.
95


--- PAGE 117 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 96
Page 96
Confucian Philosophy as Key to Asian Communication — Current Interpretations
Most scholars agree that the people in Confucianist cultures emphasize relational hierarchy and
social harmony, translating Confucian values into a set of well-deﬁned rules regulating language
behaviors for diﬀerent relationships on diﬀerent occasions. Bond and Hwang (1986) summarize
the key elements of Confucianism:
In summary, the essential aspects of Confucianism in constructing a Chinese social psych-
ology are the following: (a) man exists through, and is de ﬁned by, his relationships to
others; (b) these relationships are structured hierarchically; (c) social order is ensured
through each party’s honouring the requirements in the role relationship.
(p. 216)
Although Bond and Hwang are referring speci ﬁcally to Chinese, their views are shared by other
scholars writing about other Asian societies, inﬂuenced by Confucian philosophy. As Yum (1988)
puts it, “[The] East Asian preoccupation with social relationships stems from the doctrines of
Confucianism, that considers proper relationships to be the basis of society ” (p. 374). Yum
(1988) further notes that the Confucian ideas of particularism, emphasis on long-term relational
development, asymmetrical reciprocity, the drawing of clear distinctions between in-group and
out-groups members, use of informal intermediaries, and the overlapping of personal with public
relations have led to four characteristics of East Asian communication patterns: (a) process
orientation, (b) di ﬀerentiated linguistic codes, (c) indirect communication emphasis, and
(d) receiver centeredness (p. 381).
4
The logic of these analyses is that relational hierarchical structures compel the individual to
emphasize maintaining social harmony and respecting the role of each individual in society,
leading, in turn, to language behavior that protects face, avoids con ﬂict, matches behaviors,
communicates indirectly, and places greater burdens on the receiver to interpret a given message
(Bond & Wang, 1983; Cheng, Bond, & Chan, 1995; Goldman, 1994; Gudykunst & Ting-T oomey,
1992; Kim & Bresnahan, 1994; Kim, Sharkey, & Singelis, 1994; Kim & Wilson, 1994; Ting-
T oomey, 1988). In a seminal analysis of Asian communication as observed from classical texts,
Oliver (1971) notes, “the primary function of discourse [of Asian rhetoric] is not to enhance the
welfare of the individual speaker or listener but to promote harmony” (p. 261).
Due to these emphases, attitudes toward language and words in Confucian societies are
said to contrast sharply with those in North America (Gudykunst & Kim, 1992; Oliver, 1971).
In addition to Hofstede ’s (1981) ﬁndings that many Asian societies tend to be high on both
collectivism and power distance (see also Bond & Wang, 1983; Cheng et al., 1995), Confucian
values are seen as virtually interchangeable with collectivist values, as summarized in this
description by Gudykunst and Ting-T oomey (1992):
The value orientation of collectivism, in contrast, constrains members of cultures such as
China, Japan, and Korea from speaking boldly through explicit verbal communication style.
Collectivist cultures like China, Japan, and Korea emphasize the importance of group
harmony and group conformity. Group harmony and group conformity are accomplished
through the use of imprecise, ambiguous verbal communication behaviors.
(p. 225)
Although Yum (1988) contends that the individualism –collectivism dichotomy (Triandis,
1988, 1995) “is not identical to the di ﬀerence between the East Asian ’s emphasis on social
relationships and North American emphasis on individualism ” (p. 375), characteristics of Con-
fucian communication described in her article — such as the tendency toward indirectness— are
96  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 118 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 97
Page 97
frequently cited as attributes of collectivist cultures (for example, Kim & Bresnahan, 1994). Yum’s
(1988) examination of Confucianism has been used to explain idiosyncratic features of Asian
communication, including high-context communication (Gudykunst & Kim, 1992) and tactics
of request (Kim & Bresnahan, 1994; Kim & Wilson, 1994).
These and other lines of research connect Confucianism and collectivism (said to be the prin-
cipal deﬁning feature of Asian cultures). Confucian philosophy is thus seen as a force inclining
Asian cultures toward high-context and collectivist communication that emphasizes role hier-
archy and relations rather than the expression of self through direct communication. Inevitably,
language behaviors shaped by Confucianism are found to be composed of sets of externally
prescribed rules (Goldman, 1994; Oliver, 1971; Y ang, 1981), or as Goldman (1994) describes it,
“codes of Confucian business and social etiquette requiring adherence to rule-governed inter-
action” (p. 34). Oliver (1971), in a similar fashion, concludes that Confucian traditions “stressed
the value of adhering strictly to patterns of expectations ” (p. 262).
Although such studies have contributed to better understanding of Asian communication,
they tend to conﬁne their analyses by referring exclusively to the factor of relational hierarchy as
espoused by Confucianism. As I look at the Analects in detail, it will be clear that the Confucian
view of language and words, built on a sophisticated moral and ethical cosmology emphasizing
integration between self and others, proves more complex and interesting than the picture
resulting from the current focus.
Issues of W ords and Speaking in the Analects
In the Analects, the focus is not on communication as such but on words and speaking.
Confucius either explicitly discusses, or refers to, words and speaking throughout the Analects.
Seventeen of 20 books address these issues in 63 chapters. Examination of these chapters reveals
four orientations Confucius takes toward language and words: (a) words de ﬁne and re ﬂect
moral development, (b) beautiful words lacking substance are blameworthy, (c) actions are more
important than words, and (d) appropriate speaking relies on rules of propriety. The Confucian
analytic framework concentrates not so much on problems associated with people talking to one
another and the process of communication but rather on what one chooses to talk about and in
what ways.
Words deﬁne and reﬂect moral development
Confucius claimed a direct link between words and virtue, viewing speech as neither simply a
tool for mutual understanding nor an instrument for personal gain but an indicator of the
speaker’s morality. This concern for consistency between internal character and external form
points up the most important aspect of Confucian speaking: How moral character is reﬂected in
the individual’s words. As a seeker of moral perfection, Confucius avoids plausible words (V , 24)
because “plausible words confound virtues” (XV , 26). Because slow speakers are unlikely to pay
attention to external appearances, to speak slowly and bluntly may in fact be closer to humanity
(jen) (XIII, 27).
Confucius elaborates the relation between virtue and words: “Those who are virtuous surely
have something good to say, whereas those who have something good to say are not necessarily
virtuous” (XIV , 5). If one cultivates oneself inside, character ﬂows out through one ’s words—
words that bene ﬁt society (Mao, 1988) — and one will have no problem in speaking. But the
opposite is not true: Eloquence is no proof of virtue, and those who merely talk may become
eloquent for the sake of eloquence (Soothill, 1968). These are people who can only talk, being
unable to put their words into action (Mao, 1988).
Moreover, attitudes toward one ’s own moral conduct are more important than words.
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  97


--- PAGE 119 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 98
Page 98
Responding to Duke Ting’s question about the common saying, “a single sentence could make a
country prosperous, ” Confucius explains that such an e ﬀect cannot be expected from one
sentence. Nevertheless, if Duke Ting were to understand the meaning of some statement, such as
“it is diﬃcult to be a prince, nor is it easy to be a minister,” then we might say this could almost
be considered as an example illustrating the principle that “one sentence can make a country
prosperous” (XIII, 15).
Because language is a natural product of moral quality, “From the accuracy or inaccuracy of a
man’s
5 speech his obliquity or uprightness may be gauged” (Soothill, 1968, p. 932). Being able to
detect the moral development of a speaker through careful examination of the words he or she
employs is seen as a major task in understanding others. As Confucius put it, “He who does not
know the force of words, cannot know men” (XX, 3). Because words are the most accurate index
of virtue, to know people is to know their words.
However, this understanding is not simply “knowing who the speaker really is, ” but an
essential task for humanity: Through examining words, one can distinguish good from bad.
“Not to speak with one who can be spoken with is to waste a man; to speak with one who cannot
be spoken with is to waste one ’s words. The intelligent man neither wasters his man nor his
words” (XV , 7).
Confucius also suggests that people should incorporate moral qualities in their talk, avoiding
speech that causes them to stray from virtue. Confucius comments that those who talk inces-
santly and whose conversation never ascends to what is just and right will have no way to attain
virtue (XV , 16). Soothill’s (1968) translation of the commentary notes: “When moral obligation
does not enter into conversation then talk becomes loose, and a demoralizing spirit is produced”
(p. 740). That is not to say that one should lecture others about what is right and wrong; the
importance of the lesson lies in the awareness of applying moral obligations as guiding prin-
ciples for speech. Confucius said that the virtues will necessarily have something good to say.
Through enrichment of the mind, one will be able to use moral standards to guide various forms
of conduct, among which words are but a single kind. Those who talk continually without regard
for what is moral, just, and right do so because they neglect to develop their moral qualities.
Confucius notes that one of the three kinds of bene ﬁcial pleasure is to discuss the excellence
of others (XVI, 5), exposing discussants to better human qualities, so that such qualities will
become a major concern and lead ultimately to gradual change in character toward morality. On
the other hand, the virtuous must avoid other kinds of talk: “[The] superior man . . . detests men
who proclaim others’ misdeeds, men who occupy lower positions [and] slander their superiors,
men who are bold and mannerless, and men who are persistently forward and yet obtuse” (XVII,
24). T o indulge in such language is to deny oneself the opportunity for spiritual improvement.
T o cultivate virtue, one must be cautious about what one says and re ﬂect before speaking.
Being quick to speak is incompatible with the cultivation of virtue (Legge, 1985, p. 385). For
example, Confucius notes: T o proclaim on the road what you hear on the way is to discard
virtues” (XVII, 14). If one hears something and repeats it without taking care to consider it
suﬃciently, one abuses language. Because words can be manipulated (that is, employed in ways
that do not reﬂect a speaker’s inner convictions), one who cannot discern the potential defects of
language cannot be virtuous.
The virtuous are always careful of their words (I, 14) because (as noted in a quotation from
Tzu-Kung in the Analects) “The superior man for one word is often deemed wise, and for one
word is often deemed foolish” (XIX, 25). Confucius lists nine points with which a superior man
must take care, including speaking: “In speaking, his care is to be conscientious ” (XV , 10), an
attitude equally applicable to learning. In learning, one must broadly study, put aside that which
is doubtful, and speak with due caution concerning the rest; in this way, one will seldom incur
blame (II, 18). Soothill (1968) notes that “to hear and observe much is the widening of culture;
to reserve the doubtful and risky is the essence of selection (discretion); to speak and act warily is
98  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 120 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 99
Page 99
the restraining advantage of self-control” (p. 168). Creel (1960) notes that “we must understand
what we can, and concerning the rest maintain suspended judgment ” (p. 135). Not being
demonstrative, the virtuous are often cautious about their words and slow in speaking, and thus,
able to discern the good from the bad, qualities that help them to attain virtue.
Along with a cautious attitude toward words, the Analects also praised the ability to express
oneself with humility. For example, Confucius lauds those who do not boast. The warrior, he
says, is the last to ﬂee in the face of defeat, and although this may be considered honorable, the
warrior refuses to boast. Instead, he says, “It is not that I dare to be in the rear; my horse would
not come [forward] ” (VI, 13). This gentle refusal to acknowledge accomplishment is praise-
worthy because if one remains humble, one is unsatis ﬁed, and to be unsatis ﬁed with oneself is
the best incentive to attain higher levels of virtue.
In discussing the dreams of four students, Confucius relates that one student expressed his
ambition in these terms:
Give me a kingdom of a thousand chariots, hemmed in by two great powers, oppressed by
invading troops, with famine suppurated, and let me have its administration — in three
years’ time I could make it brave and, moreover, make it know the right course to pursue.
At this, Confucius smiled. When another student asked why, Confucius replied, “The adminis-
tration of a country demands the rule of propriety, but his speech lacked modesty — that is why
I smiled at him ” (XI, 25). Although Confucius granted his student might have been able to
achieve his ambition, the student’s lack of modesty showed moral deﬁciency. Confucius believed
that governing a country depends entirely on the ruler ’s moral qualities (Fung, 1983). Because
cultivating moral qualities is the basis for ruling, rulers must be considerate toward subjects and
willing to accept advice given by others. Being bold and aggressive in speech shows lack of the
most important qualities needed to govern the nation.
From these examples, we observe the importance of humility in speech. T o be humble in
speech is not merely an external manifestation but the expression of a humble heart seeking
life’s best experiences to develop moral stature. Virtue is not only the basis for speaking, it is
essential to moral development. As King (1985) puts it, “Confucianism is distinctly concerned
with the concept of self-cultivation. Indeed, the moral autonomy of the self is unequivocally
aﬃrmed by Confucians” (p. 57).
Unfortunately, in scholarly discussion of Confucianism and Confucian philosophy, scant
attention is paid to Confucius ’s dictums about primacy of the self and its moral development.
Instead, the Confucian perspective is often rendered as a set of rules guiding speci ﬁc language
behaviors, irrespective of content, precisely the opposite of what Confucius taught. If we do not
inquire into the Analects to discover the true spirit of the Confucian view of language, we will
allow ill-conceived stereotypes about Confucian societies to dictate our analyses of their use of
language and words.
Beautiful words lacking substance are blameworthy
The Analects shows clearly Confucius’s distaste for artiﬁce in speaking. For Confucius, “Beautiful
words, insinuating manners, are lacking in human-heartedness [ jen]” (I, 3). Jen is the funda-
mental perfection of virtue, incorporating all moral qualities that guide human interaction.
Beautiful words that do not accord with true feelings but cleverly ﬂatter others are judged
hypocritical and, thus, lacking in jen (Legge, 1985, p. 126). Commenting on this passage, Mao
(1988) notes, “Jen emphasizes putting morality into action. In this hypocritical world, if one
wants to know the other’s morality, one needs to observe another’s actual behavior, rather than
to evaluate from the other’s language and manners alone” (p. 3).
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  99


--- PAGE 121 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 100
Page 100
Having lived through the violent Warring States period of Chinese history, Confucius most
despised the “sharp tongued” who overthrow the nation (XVII, 18), even while acknowledging
that such people can manipulate events: “The keen tongued can make things look the very
opposite, the worthy unworthy and vice versa, so that if a Prince believed them, it would not be
diﬃcult to overthrow his country ” (Soothill, 1968, p. 840). Through artful speech, right and
wrong can be confused, and people ﬁnd themselves unable to attain virtue. Hence, Confucius
argues, good people should ﬁrst distance themselves from the sharp tongued and then avoid
contradictory language (XIV , 39).
Unfortunately, glib speakers who confuse moral standards often seem to rule rather than
the exception. Observing politics, Confucius grieves: “A decadent age loves ﬂattery and takes
pleasure in external charms . . . without these it is hard to get on” (VI, 14; Soothill, 1968, p. 304).
One characteristic of the sharp tongued is that their artful speech often does not accord with
what they think, but is only uttered verbally (Soothill, 1968). Because of the potential danger
inherent in sharp-tongued speech, Confucius said that, to govern, one must “distance [oneself]
from specious talkers” (XV , 10).
The wisdom needed to detect falsehood in artful political speech is equally useful in personal
life. Much as governors are advised to distance themselves from specious talkers, one should
not make friends with such people because they may damage one ’s virtue. Elaborating the
distinction between good and bad qualities of friendship, Confucius described three kinds
of harmful friends: “Plausible men, [those with] insinuating manners, and the glib-tongued ”
(XVI, 4). One must avoid friends who are simply polite without being straightforward, practice
insincere ﬂattery, and engage in empty talk without substantial information (Soothill, 1968,
p. 788).
This attitude toward words can also be seen in two stories of interactions between Confucius
and his students. At one point, Confucius praises a student, noting that although the person
seldom speaks, whatever he says hits the right point (XI, 13). Another story concerns making
excuses. In an argument over a military action proposed by a student ’s Prince, but which
Confucius thought inappropriate, Confucius criticized the student for not being able to perform
his duty as an o ﬃcer by guiding the Prince to do the right thing. The student replied by telling
Confucius the reason why the action was necessary and unavoidable. However, Confucius
responded, “A superior man detests those who decline to say plainly that they want a thing and
insist on making excuses in regard hereto ” (XVI, 1). Such dishonesty, insincerity, and inconsis-
tency between the internal and external stand in opposition to the Confucian view of language.
An important Confucian virtue is “basic stuﬀ” (chih, and its accompanying quality, upright-
ness). T o cultivate chih, one must project true outward expressions, not deceive others, and
reject all empty form and falseness (Fung, 1983). Confucius never hesitated to show his distaste
for those who cultivate forms of speaking not consonant with their genuine internal states. As
Oliver (1971) puts it, Confucian philosophy “turned attention inward, inviting people to exam-
ine themselves, rather than outward, to seek to in ﬂuence others . . . a man who cannot rectify
himself . . . surely cannot improve others” (p. 132).
By attending to internal content and avoiding external manipulation, we let sincerity and
truthfulness guide our words. Whether one is sincere in uttering words determines whether one
will be accepted by others:
If you are sincere and truthful in what you say, and trustworthy and circumspect in what
you do, even if you are in a barbarian land you will get on with people without any
diﬃculty; if you are not sincere and truthful in what you say, neither are you trustworthy
and circumspect in what you do, you will not be able to get on with people in your own
home town.
(XV , 5)
100  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 122 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 101
Page 101
The student Tzu-Lu could solve a dispute by “a half sentence ” because he never broke a
promise (XII, 12). Soothill (1968) notes, Tzu-Lu ’s “sincerity and acuteness made men submit
to his decisions without waiting for him to ﬁnish speaking ” (p. 582). The power of words,
then, rests on such speaker attributes as sincerity and truthfulness. When people trust the
speaker’s sincerity, words themselves are unimportant, because whatever the speaker says will be
accepted.
Because speech comes from within, readiness to speak is also unimportant (V , 4). The Analects
recounts several instances in which people who do not talk very well are nevertheless virtuous.
Observing his student Hui receiving instruction, Confucius notes the importance of conduct as
contrasted with the unreliable index of language:
I have talked with Hui for a whole day and he never raised an objection, as if he were
stupid; but when he withdrew and I examined his conduct when not with me, I neverthe-
less found him fully competent to demonstrate what I had taught him ....  H e  was not
stupid at all!
(II, 9)
Readiness to speak often leads one to focus on external expression and ignore the internal
mind, and hence, one can only engender dislike in others (V , 4). How should one use language
for self-expression? As Confucius stated, “in language it is simply required that it convey the
meaning” (XV , 40). As long as language is suﬃcient for clear meaning, whether it is ornate or not
is unimportant.
From observations like these, one sees the essence of language and speaking in Confucianism:
Language and words must be used according to what is right and appropriate, as determined by
the speaker’s level of spiritual training. Confucius considered one Chinese classic, the Book of
Odes, an important teaching resource. Advising students to study the book, Confucius noted:
“Odes serve to stimulate the mind, to train observation, to encourage social intercourse, and to
modify the vexations of life” (XVII, 9). Thus, the Book of Odes serves as a basis for people to engage
in social intercourse with others: “If you do not learn the Odes, you will not be ﬁt to converse
with” (XVI, 13). Well-cultivated, superior people enrich themselves internally before expressing
themselves to others.
These tenets of Confucianism — that external forms are untrustworthy and one should be
unwilling to express oneself outwardly until one is cultivated inside — are virtually ignored in
scholarly literature. On the contrary, hesitancy in language use is often cast, not as a self-initiated
attempt at internal re ﬁnement, but the result of society-imposed constraints. Such accounts
diminish the essential role played by the speaker in Confucian societies and lead us mistakenly to
conclude that language use in Confucian societies is a mechanistic response to structure. This is
a considerable distance from the Confucian teaching that beautiful words often are blameworthy
because they lack substance.
Actions are more important than words
A third issue regarding the role of speaking is to be deduced from the relation between speaking
and actions. According to Confucius, there must be a match between words and actions: “The
superior man is ashamed of his speaking exceeding his actions” (XIV , 29). In speaking, the most
important thing is to be able to put words into practice; otherwise, words are merely empty
form. T o Confucius, actions were far more important than speaking. Confucius de ﬁned a
superior person as one who wishes to be slow in speech but earnest in his actions (IV , 24), or
more speciﬁcally, as someone who “acts before he speaks, and afterwards speaks according to his
actions” (II, 13). Confucius praised the excellence of ancient people in speaking: “People of
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  101


--- PAGE 123 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 102
Page 102
ancient times did not readily give utterance to their words out of shame lest they should come
short in deed” (IV , 22). However, one must also note that making actions correspond with one’s
words is not the result of blind persistence but rather because such actions accord to what is
right (I, 13).
Four important points clarify the Confucian view of word-action correspondence. First, the
importance of action in Confucian philosophy is seen in Confucius ’s emphasis on observing
one’s words against one ’s behavior. Confucius cautioned that even if a person ’s speech and
discourse seem solid, one is still not sure that this individual must be a superior person (XI, 20).
Legge (1985) notes “we may not hastily judge a man to be good from his discourse ” (p. 269).
Words create a world that extends beyond one ’s actions. Therefore, one must not simply trust
others’ words without checking their deeds: “Observe what the person does ....  H o w  can a
person hide himself!” (II, 10) (see also XII, 20). Although Confucius would like to trust people’s
words as guarantees of their conduct, unfortunately, such an ideal situation seldom exists in a
morally imperfect world. Criticizing one of his students who overslept, Confucius remarked,
“Formerly, my attitude toward others was to hear their words and give them credits for their
deeds. Now my attitude toward others is to listen to their words and note what they do ” (V , 9).
However, checking the conduct of others against their words does not mean that one should
make rigid, indiscriminate judgment about others. Confucius taught that “the superior man
does not promote a person simply on account of his words, not does he put aside good words
because of the man ’s character” (XV , 22). In other words, when participating in politics, one
must be able to discriminate between people and what they say (Soothill, 1968, p. 746). One
must be cautious not to be overwhelmed by others ’ words, but at the same time, one must
remain open minded in accepting good words uttered by someone who may be wicked. Even a
wicked person may be sincere when uttering good words. Moreover, there are also situations in
which one’s words are usually good. Master Tseng said, “When a bird is about to die, his notes
are mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good ” (VIII, 4).
A second indication of the importance of action in Confucian thought is seen in observations
about giving advice. “T o words of just admonition can anyone refuse assent? ” Confucius asks.
“But it is amendment that is of value. With advice gently but persuasively oﬀered can anyone be
otherwise than pleased? But it is the application that is of value. Mere interest without applica-
tion, mere assent without amendment — for such a man I can do nothing whatever ” (IX, 23).
Even though one may be willing to follow advice, only advice that is applied is important —
otherwise, advice has no impact.
Third, because of the worry over being unable to carry out one ’s words, boasting and exag-
gerating, together with other forms of extravagant speech, are especially to be avoided because
“he who speaks without modesty will perform with di ﬃculty” (XIV , 21).
6 In giving advice to
one of his students who had a loose tongue, Confucius said that a virtuous man is one who
is hesitant in his speech (XII, 3). Soothill (1968) notes: “The good man is not demonstrative,
hence his hesitancy in speech . . . which forms one feature of moral character ” (p. 562). Because
Confucius emphasized the correspondence between words and actions, if one is unable to
perfect linkage, one should simply refuse to say anything. Hence, being hesitant in speech is one
way to cultivate virtue (Mao, 1988, p. 185). On the other hand, being sincere in carrying out
one’s words constitutes only the ﬁrst step toward humanity. When asked what constitutes a
scholar, Confucius replied that the most important factor is a sense of shame, the next being
ﬁlial and fraternal, and the next being “sincere in what they say and carrying our what they do ”
(XIII, 20).
Fourth, the relative importance of words and deeds can be seen in the nature of things.
Universal principles manifest themselves directly for human beings to contemplate, and for this
reason, words may not be important at all. Unfortunately, few people understand the depth of
universal principles; rather, they treat language as the only means to acquire truth. This point is
102  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 124 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 103
Page 103
exempliﬁed in the following story. “I wish I could do without speaking,” Confucius said. “If you
do not speak, Sir, ” asked Tzu-Kung, “what should we disciples pass on to others? ” Confucius
replied, “What speech does Heaven have? The four seasons run their courses and all things
ﬂourish, yet what speech does Heaven have?” (XVII, 19). T o this, Soothill (1968, p. 842) translates
the commentary as follows: “So every motion of the Sage was a revelation of his profound Truth
and essential rectitude, indeed [a manifestation of] Heaven itself, and why wait for speech to see
him revealed.” The sage wished to model himself after Heaven; for this reason, “it is no wonder
that Confucius said very little about the Way of Heaven; he simply preferred to follow Heaven ’s
example and remain speechless on the subject (Liu, 1996, p. 94). Confucius set up examples
through his own conduct rather than his words. The discrepancy in recognizing the importance
of language in searching for universal principles between Confucius and his students explains
why Confucius is considered as the Master (Fung, 1983).
Words are but an imperfect means through which one gets in touch with the world; they are
used to compensate for the inability of the human mind to comprehend Heaven ’s teaching
through the manifestation of things. The words of the sage serve to lead people to the funda-
mental realization of the universe, which then serves as a model for them to emulate. Hence, the
superior person stands in awe of the words of sages, whereas the inferior person insults the
words of sages (XVI, 8). Here we see the interconnection among moral development, words, and
the principles of the universe. When one is able to observe and contemplate the world directly
and comes to understand the universal principle, Ta o (the Way), and to act in accordance with it,
words are simply not necessary.
7
For Confucius, language stands at the nexus between human a ﬀairs and the universe. If the
universe can manifest itself through the multiplicity of extant things and if actions can speak for
themselves, one often need not bother with words. It is unfortunate that such an elevated view of
language is almost never encountered in current literature which focuses primarily on the easily
observed aspects of language and words in Confucian societies, too frequently concluding that
unwillingness to speak results from the overwhelming eﬀects of social structure.
Appropriate speaking relies on rules of propriety
Because speaking has such strong moral connotations, use of language, for Confucius, is not
simply an external act following a rigid moral code, but must accord to one’s own heart and the
cultivation of virtue (Creel, 1960). This attention to the human mind can be re ﬁned by attend-
ing to li, the rules of propriety, which are based on human emotion and the principles of Heaven
and Earth (Fung, 1983). Observation of human emotion in turn leads to appropriate speaking
according to diﬀerent situations and relationships.
According to Fung (1983), “All the rules for everything pertaining to human conduct may be
included under the terms of li” (p. 68). It is only through li that one learns to be a superior
person, someone able to carry li into practice by genuine nature (Fung, 1983). Li is the basis
of human-heartedness ( jen). When asked what is jen, Confucius contended that to restrain
oneself to respond to propriety ( li) is the essence of jen, and that without li, one has no way to
establish oneself (XVI, 13). Hence, words should be employed to keep away from vulgarity and
impropriety (VIII, 4). Confucius further elaborates four aspects of human conduct that must be
in accord with li: looking, listening, speaking, and moving (XII, 1). Cultivation of virtue must
come from one’s seemingly insigniﬁcant everyday conduct (Mao, 1988), including speaking and
behaving.
Li arises from human emotion; hence, one ’s speech much also correspond to what is appro-
priate according to human emotion. Propriety implies that the speaker needs to be attuned to
emotional concerns relating to the other and ﬂexible in appreciating diﬀerent contexts.
Because a major focus in Confucianism lies in delineating interpersonal relationships, it is
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  103


--- PAGE 125 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 104
Page 104
important to see how the content of speech varies according to di ﬀerent types of relationship.
For example, although people may consider frankness as expression of sincerity, Confucius con-
tended that frankness without rules of propriety will lead one to rudeness (VIII, 2), and hence be
against human emotion. One well-known example is Confucius ’s contention that a son aggres-
sively criticizing his father for misconduct is not upright because such behavior is against human
nature (XIII, 18). Given the emotional tie between the father and son, it is only natural for a
father to conceal the misconduct of his son, and the son do the same on behalf of his father.
“Mutual screening between father and son is the highest law of Nature, and of humanity ”
(Soothill, 1968, p. 632). Fung (1983) explains that “the son either wished to get the name of
uprightness through sacri ﬁcing his father, or lacked feeling toward his father. Hence this could
not be true uprightness ” (p. 67). Uprightness must be expressed in a re ﬁned or cultured way:
“Love of straightforwardness without a love to learn ﬁnds itself obscured by warped judgment ”
(XVII, 8).
Talking is a form of politeness as well as an exhibition of “being cultured.” In serving superior
people, Confucius contends that appropriate speaking depends on the right timing. There are
three kinds of errors regarding speaking: speaking before the time to speak, not speaking when it
is time to speak, and speaking without observing the superior man ’s countenance (XVI, 6). One
of the virtues discussed in the Analects is to speak only at an appropriate time so that people will
not be tired of one ’s talk (XIV , 14). Because the superior man is serious in showing respect
toward his own conduct, even in boarding a carriage, he does not talk hastily (X, 17). While
eating and while in bed, Confucius did not speak (X, 8). Only by so doing did Confucius feel in
accord with etiquette (Fung, 1983).
T o speak appropriately, one must have the ﬂexibility to attend to di ﬀerent situations and
diﬀerent types of relationships. For example, in his village, Confucius talked with simplicity
and humbleness as if he had not gifts of speech, whereas in the ancestral temple or at the Court,
he expressed himself readily and clearly (X, 1). In the village, one interacted with relatives and
friends, so that there was no need to speak ﬂuently, whereas in the places such as Court or
temple— the source of law— where things must be placed in discrete order, it was necessary that
talk be precise, ready, clear, and speci ﬁc, though spoken with a reserved manner (Legge, 1985,
p. 244; Mao, 1988). In talking to people of di ﬀerent ranks, Confucius also conducted himself
diﬀerently: He was free and straightforward when talking to o ﬃcers of lower rank, a ﬀable and
precise when talking to o ﬃcers of higher rank, and when the Prince was present, he conducted
himself respectfully and with self-possession (X, 2). An Analects passage by Tzu-Hsia well
describes Confucius himself: “The superior man varies from three aspects. Seen from a distance
he appears stern, when approached he proves gracious, as you listen to him you ﬁnd his language
ﬁrm and serious” (XIX, 9). Here the emphasis is placed on the meaning and spirit of the social
forms rather than simply on the outer form and manner of expression. It is imperative that “a
man must have a sincere genuineness before he may practice ceremony and etiquette ” (Fung,
1983, p. 66).
It should be noted that Confucius himself does not argue against people who are gifted at
speech. In one chapter (XI, 2), for example, gifts of speech are considered to be an accomplish-
ment
8 of one of his students. In another chapter (V , 7), Confucius points out that one student—
who was famous for his knowledge of rules of ceremony, particularly relating to dress and
conversational intercourse (Legge, 1985) — could be employed to converse with guests, even
though he did not know whether this student could be said to have perfect virtue. Although
Confucius argued against beautiful words because they lack sincerity as their foundation, he
viewed speaking appropriately and adjusting to di ﬀerent situations and relationships as a gift.
Speaking itself is not against the perfect virtue of jen; it is only when words uttered do not accord
to humanity that words should be condemned. Appropriate speaking in accordance with moral
development is to be highly esteemed.
9
104  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 126 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 105
Page 105
This ﬂexibility in speaking according to di ﬀerent kinds of situations is especially important
when one must deal with a disordered world. “When order prevails in the nation, one may be
bold in speech and bold in action, but when the nation is disordered, one may take bold action
and should lay restraint on one’s speech” (XIV , 4). Soothill’s (1968) translation of Chu Hsi’s com-
mentary on the Analects notes that “the man of honour must hold his convictions unshaken, but
there are times when to escape calamity he may not dare to express himself freely ” (p. 652).
Legge (1985) notes, “What one does must always be right; what one feels need not always be
spoken— a lesson of prudence (p. 315). Mao (1988) explains:
Restraint in one ’s language is not uttering fake words, nor does it reverse truth and
falsehood; it just means that one should be more circumscribed in one’s words . . . it is ﬁne
if one is restrained in one ’s words to protect oneself, but it is wrong if it leads the society
to calamity.
(p. 214)
When accused of being glib by reclusive Taoists, Confucius replied, “A glib talker I would not
dare to be, and I should hate to be obstinately immovable” (XIV , 34). T o Confucius, what is more
important is to help the nation restore order, a process in which language plays a signiﬁcant role.
So long as one ’s external expression matches inner genuineness, speaking cannot be faulted.
Thus, the Confucian ideal of speaking must be viewed as active and oriented toward the world.
10
The discriminating application of rules for speaking is not what is conventionally considered
“playing di ﬀerent games in di ﬀerent situations. ” One ’s ability to adjust to di ﬀerent contexts
eﬀortlessly is a stage achieved only after a life-long learning process.
Although many investigators have often sought explanations for Asian communication
behaviors in the presumed inﬂuence of Confucian relational hierarchy, conceptions of relational
hierarchy remain very narrowly de ﬁned. Instead of a ﬂexible social mechanism attuned to
diﬀerent degrees of emotion and situational factors (as articulated by the Analects), scholars tend
to construe relational hierarchy as culturally imposed rules clearly spelling out how people of
diﬀerent relations ought to behave toward each other. This not only distorts Confucianism, it also,
in general, reinforces mistaken assumptions about how rules are used to guide social actions,
whether in language use or otherwise.
Rethinking attitudes toward language and words in Confucian societies
Recapturing the Confucian vision
The Confucian model treats language use as inextricably tied to the speaker ’s moral reasoning
and appreciation of varying relationships and situations based on human emotion, viewing
language as merely an imperfect means through which individuals convey ideas. T o have force,
words must be backed by a highly developed moral character. If one’s morality— including one’s
sincerity, truthfulness, genuine state of mind, and ability to follow propriety — has been appro-
priately developed, one should be able to formulate messages naturally and spontaneously, and
these words will a ﬀect others regardless of the form in which they are expressed. Confucius
reasoned that words will be e ﬀective not because one is able to articulate language to construct
images but because listeners will naturally be moved (persuaded) by the virtue of speakers.
Confucius held that one must not be oriented exclusively toward the self but must be cogni-
zant of the presence of others who occupy various social positions. For Confucius, the personal
and the social are not two con ﬂicting categories: It is the integration of the two that constitutes
the foundation of any individual’s morality. More important, the ability to integrate the personal
and the social in one ’s use of language represents not merely constraints imposed by the social
rules but also the possibility to achieve understanding of the in ﬁnite multitude of possible
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  105


--- PAGE 127 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 106
Page 106
interpersonal connections and the social fabric they weave. Indeed, the e ﬀective communicator
is someone who can prioritize actions ahead of words, who appreciates contexts and relation-
ships, and who need not be a particularly ﬂuent speaker. The goal is to re ﬁne the language one
uses not simply because society formally dictates it but because the formal language itself carries
the spirit of social complexity as constituted in the diverse relationships among those who
occupy various social roles.
Problems of current interpretation
Although links established in scholarly literature between Asian attitudes towards words and
Confucianism (in all of its admittedly considerable complexity) have been valuable, these studies
have obviously been limited. As I have shown, among four orientations in the Analects, only
one— communication according to diﬀerent relationships— has been extensively discussed, leav-
ing the remaining three essentially ignored, thus resulting in a distorted picture of the Confucian
view of language. This should be particularly troubling to scholars of language and social
psychology because the key element in constructing theories of language use in Asian cultures
(the Confucian view of language) has been misapprehended — if the key element is misunder-
stood, then the theory as a whole must be called into question.
Especially problematic is the prevailing view that assumes that indirect forms of communica-
tion result from role prescriptions that work at the expense of individual self-expression. This
assumption, coupled with a narrow rendering of the Confucian idea of di ﬀerent orders of
relationships, paints a picture of Asian use of language as a process plagued by restraint and
limitation rather than the product of a sophisticated yet ﬂexible moral reasoning that underpins
externally manifested communicative activities. This interpretation — laden with Western value
judgments— prevents us from developing better theories to account for language attitudes and
behaviors in Confucian societies. Speciﬁcally, there are ﬁve problems with current interpretation.
The ﬁrst problem may be one of scholarly priorities. By foregrounding the collectivist meta-
phor (with associated concepts of situational orientation and social harmony), scholars have
subordinated the complete Confucian view.
11 Under the powerful in ﬂuence of the idea of
collectivism— particularly as opposed to individualism— scholarly have favored a structural view
of Confucian societies that ignores the role of the individual. The harder one tries to diﬀerentiate
individualism and collectivism, the easier it is to conclude that collectivist (that is, nonindividua-
list) cultures use language in collectivist ways — that is, according to the dictates of external
rules and constraints.
As King says, “[T]he fundamental weakness of the structural conception of Chinese society
lies in its failure to recognize that the individuals who comprise the society have selves, which are
particularly stressed, as shown above, in Confucian ethics ” (King, 1985, p. 60). Countering
the widespread view that Confucius emphasized collectivist values, King (1985) oﬀers the notion
of “self-centered voluntarism ” (p. 57) to show how central Confucian ethics are to Chinese
cultures. Triandis (1995) notes that “when reading Confucius . . . one is struck by the extent to
which some of his statements urged people to be individualists ” (p. 21). By putting individual
speakers back into analyses of language in Confucian societies, we will be better able to construct
theories not merely about how social structure in ﬂuences language but also how people use
discourse relevant to their moral judgments to create and reconstruct their social identities.
A second problem, closely related to the structural interpretation of Confucian views of
language, comes from assuming that social position is incompatible with individual will. Assum-
ing this, scholars conclude that if culture does not emphasize individual free will, it must
emphasize control through social position. This dichotomous thinking is a problem not only
with cross-cultural research but also with studies of social cognition and language use. Harr é
(1981) sees this separation of individual and society as problematic: “Not only is much of our
106  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 128 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 107
Page 107
social knowledge socially located, but . . . some very important cognitive processes are not inner
and private, but public and collective” (p. 212).
Confucius, too, refused to see society as opposed to the individual. As King (1985) says,
“Confucians focus on the organic relationship between the individual and society and consider
the two inseparable and interdependent . . . the problem is that ‘society’ is only vaguely deﬁned,
as is the idea of ‘group’ if one is referring to a unit larger than the family ” (p. 57). Although the
current consensus is that Confucian values emphasize the in-group, the concept of ‘in-group”—
at least for the Chinese— is not precisely deﬁned (Chang & Holt, 1991; King, 1985; Ward, 1968).12
Surprisingly, whereas scholars acknowledge that, in the main, individuals are central in pro-
ducing social discourse, theories of language use in Confucian societies generally ignores the
signiﬁcance of the individual. This leads theorists to disregard the complexity of language
behaviors in such cultures and thereby to miss the most noteworthy linguistic achievements of
their people.
The connections between individual and society, actualized by dynamic, even-expanding webs
of relationships enacted by those in Confucian cultures, engenders an expressive and sophisti-
cated discourse not conﬁned by but integrating social rules. Although current thinking suggests
that in using language, speakers should strive to go beyond social rules — to break out of limita-
tions implied by social structure — the Confucian attitude suggests that the ability to integrate
social rules with socially enacted language represents a higher level of development that must be
seen as less, not more, limited. In accounting for di ﬀerences between Confucian and non-
Confucian societies, we need to look not at di ﬀerences in how much members ’ language
behaviors are controlled by social rules but how social rules can be actualized diﬀerently through
language use in Confucian and non-Confucian cultures. We would do well to heed Robinson and
Giles (1990), who suggest that research needs to “be open-minded and careful in the application
of models derived in one culture when attempting to export them to others ” (p. 4). If we can
jettison the Western conception that individual will and social positioning are incompatible, we
stand a better change of gaining new insight into language behavior in Confucian cultures.
A third problem is the exclusion of moral character from discussions of language use in
Confucian societies. As we have seen, Confucius viewed communication according to di ﬀerent
orders of relationships as manifesting moral character, a lifelong developmental process through
which one learns to let emotion express itself naturally. It is essential, then, to take the moral
element into account when constructing theories about language use in Confucian societies.
Current accounts limit communicative activity in Confucian cultures only to what society
dictates should be said and how, leaving unaddressed questions of how speakers in these cul-
tures, despite relational prescriptions, use sophisticated reasoning that builds on and re ﬁnes
the internal moral foundation.
An example will serve to illustrate. The fact that Chinese, more than Westerners, avoid direct
confrontation in con ﬂict situations has less to do with avoidance of con ﬂict to protect social
harmony than with the belief that if the con ﬂicting parties are sincere toward each other, the
conﬂict will be resolved in the course of events, without the necessity for con ﬂicting parties to
bring up the matter themselves. Moreover, emphasis may be placed on self-examination and
self-development before expressing one’s own viewpoint, particularly when criticizing the other
party. Scholars attempting to theorize about this communicative context (ubiquitous through-
out Confucian cultures) are apt to mistakenly conclude that role constraints prevent expression
of dissatisfaction toward the other party.
A fourth problem in the current view lies in assuming that personal freedom is the essence of
the ability to reason and formulate messages (as implied by the widespread applications of
theories about elaborated code and low-context communication). Assuming this, scholars con-
clude that because it restricts personal freedom, the Confucian dictum that language be used
simply to convey ideas without ornamentation is, in either a mental or a social sense, limited.
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  107


--- PAGE 129 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 108
Page 108
Confucius said that those who focus too much on linguistic embellishment lose the ability to
cultivate themselves internally. Those who utter words lacking in substance are morally deﬁcient.
Thus, elaborated code, particularly if unsupported by the speaker ’s morality or actions, is con-
demned as merely an expression of meaningless linguistic ornamentation. In theorizing about
language use in Confucian societies, scholars should realize that it is possible that restricted
speakers may simply be unwilling to use language to create a reality that exceeds what they
perceive as their level of internal development.
In other words, theoretical explanations of observed divergence between language use by
members of Confucian and non-Confucian cultures may not lie in personal freedom or creativ-
ity but rather in another variable, perhaps relating to whether people in Confucian societies
consider language use necessary. Scholars should look for causes not solely in the broader social
structure but also in the conversants’ subjective assessment of the need to speak.
This distinction is particularly important because Confucius saw actions as more important
than words— actions speak for themselves. Confucius repeatedly says that words or messages can
be done away with if suitable action has occurred. At the very least, there must, in the Confucian
ideal, be a match between words and actions. Indeed, one of the ultimate goals of Confucian
philosophy is to contemplate the principles of the universe without even using words. It is
misguided to assume that Confucianism a ﬀects Asian societies either by in ﬂuencing them to
dispense with words as merely as way to avoid disruption of social harmony or else as a helpless
bending to the power of omnipotent hierarchical interpersonal structure. In fact, it should now
be clear that the emphasis on external formality devoid of substance is the last thing Confucius
would advocate.
The ﬁnal problem with the current view comes from the tendency to explain Confucianism
retroactively after analyses about language behaviors in Confucian societies have been made (see
Wheeler et al., 1989). The assumption is that what is observed in Confucian societies re ﬂects
what was taught by Confucius. Without understanding the complexity of Confucian philosophy,
observed communication practices in Confucian societies are likely to be labeled rigid and
constraining, compared to the Western ideal of the expressive, free-willed speaker. By tying such
practices back to Confucian philosophy, the belief that Confucian values emphasize primarily
relational hierarchy and social harmony are reaﬃrmed.
Although social and political reality in various Asian nations may result in negative interpreta-
tions of Confucianism
13 (Liu, 1996), insights about speaking and words in the Analects are far
more complex, provocative, and interesting than is suggested by current accounts. If we are to
construct appropriate theories about language use in Confucian cultures, we must know whether
we are making judgments based on hidden Western cultural assumptions or on valid premises
that permit us to conduct further analysis.
T o appropriately theorize about the Confucian view of language— and perhaps more import-
antly, how language is used in modern-day Confucianist cultures— one must appreciate the full
scope of Confucian perspectives on human emotion, the role of emotion plays in diﬀerent orders
to relationship, the cultivation of virtue and moral character, the coordination of form and
substance, the establishment of society, and the overall view of the universe. It is only through
such in-depth understanding of the philosophical roots and worldviews of Asian cultures that
one can come to understand the meaning of Asian communication.
Epilogue
The semantic dimension of speech (its relation to issues of moral development, need for action,
and sense of self) must be explored before venturing into analysis of language behavior in
Confucian societies. Because research into the subtle and sophisticated elements of Confucius
and Confucianism and their e ﬀects on Asian communication have thus far been so narrowly
108  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 130 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 109
Page 109
constricted, in the following, I oﬀer a few suggestions concerning theoretical and methodological
questions that might be addressed by scholars in the future.
First, how are roles structured and what are their levels of complexity, as understood by
speakers of Confucian societies? What precisely are the relations between role hierarchy and these
speakers’ language behaviors? Although it is true that role relationships in Confucian societies
are important in fashioning verbal strategies, the causal connection between the role hierarchy
and constrained verbal style cannot be taken for granted.
It is important for scholars to be sensitized to the true referents of the generic term role
as applied to people of Confucian cultures and how they use this referent to construe their
linguistic performances. One could examine the range of manifestations of hierarchical
relationships in these societies by examining recorded descriptions in a standard anthro-
pological database such as the Human Relations Area Files. Once the complexity of role
hierarchy is understood, scholars will then be in a better position to examine the impact
it might have on language behavior. Discourse data on actual conversations of people in
Confucian societies should be analyzed to determine how the variable “role hierarchy” relates
to the variable “verbal style.”
Second, other than structural variables such as role hierarchy, what are some other variables
that could account for language behavior in Confucian societies? When analyzing speech
behaviors in Confucian societies, account must be taken of other in ﬂuencing variables. Instead
of focusing on role hierarchy as the sole predictor variable for speech behavior, scholars may ﬁnd
it fruitful to introduce individual-level variables such as moral reasoning or emotional considera-
tion either as additional independent variables or as intervening variables to account for language
behavior. These variables might be operationalized by asking respondents to generate statements
about moral qualities and emotional consideration associated with a speci ﬁc speech or conver-
sational event and to use these to analyze that event ’s degree of complexity. It is quite possible
that moral reasoning and emotional consideration may prove better predictors for speech
behavior than role hierarchy.
Third, apart from commonly used constructs such as collectivism, social harmony, and
social orientation, are there alternative ways to describe key features of Confucian societies?
Scholars must be dissuaded from giving unjusti ﬁable preference to collectivist metaphors such
as social harmony in explaining Confucianism because they fail to adequately account for the
subtleties— particularly with respect to the individual ’s central place— in the Confucian view of
communication. One way to do this would be to propose alternative metaphors (in the manner
of the “generative metaphors” suggested by Schön, 1979) to account for conversational behavior
in Confucian societies (Chang, 1996). As Sch ön (1979) notes, when metaphors (such as col-
lectivist metaphors) become exhausted from overuse, it is only by introducing fresh, generative
metaphors that productive discussion can be reengaged and new insight acquired. For example,
if scholars were to describe Confucian societies as emphasizing moral orientation, they would be
more likely to acknowledge speakers ’ active contributions to communicative performance, and
not simply as responding to demands of society. This would provide an alternative picture of
language behavior in Confucian societies.
Of course, these possibilities only skate the surface of what can be done. The point is that a
ﬁrst step— that of recognizing that what we think we know about Chinese communication and
its “Confucian” roots is limited— has now been taken. It is up to scholars of language and social
psychology to carry this initial step forward to a new understanding of communication in both
Asian and Western cultures.
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  109


--- PAGE 131 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 110
Page 110
Notes
1. Several examples from data collected in Taiwan illustrate how Confucian ideas surface in people ’s
speech or conversation. In commenting on why it is not necessary to communicate complaints to one’s
relational partner, a male respondent said, “Life is like a silent movie,” in that much of what is going on
is understood without need for verbal explanations. This comment reminds us of Analects passage
XVII, 19, in which Confucius wonders why Heaven has any need to speak. In another example, a female
informant evaluated the Dale Carnegie course in the following terms: “It’s better to talk to your parents
about these suggestions, because they have sincerity. ” This echoes the Confucian teaching that words
lacking internal foundation are merely external ornamentation. Finally, in interviewing many Taiwan-
ese people regarding whether they should make clear to others what they have done for them, most
said it would not be necessary. Almost unanimously, they said, “As long as you try your best, people
will know who you are. ” This statement re ﬂects the Confucian ideal of the person “who wishes to be
slow in speech but earnest in actions ” (IV , 24).
2. Creel (1960) notes that Analects was “not written by [Confucius] but in the main composed near his
own time and on the basis of traditions preserved by his disciples ” (p. 111).
3. One exception is Oliver (1971), whose approach is rhetorical rather than socio-psychological.
4. Similarly, Chen and Chung (1994) identify the following as indicative of Confucian in ﬂuence on
communication in organizations: (a) explicit communication rules, (b) complementary relationships,
(c) in-group/out-group distinction, (d) intermediaries, (e) vague boundaries between personal and
public relationships, and (f) similar communication contexts (p. 100).
5. In ancient China, only men were allowed the opportunity to study. The Confucian notion of the “super-
ior man” also refers to women. Moreover, because all of Confucius ’s students were male, the transla-
tion of Analects adopts the male pronouns he and him in light of the sociohistorical circumstances in
which the text was composed.
6. Book XIV , chapter 21 of Analects has alternative interpretations. Mao (1988), for example, explains this
chapter in the following terms: “For a person who is not ashamed of his words, his daily conduct will
not be easy” (p. 222). Only if one can face his or her consciousness, can one relate to other people. Such
a spiritually elevated state is di ﬃcult to attain if the person does not practice virtue in his or her
everyday life.
7. This thesis is shared by Confucius with other important ﬁgures. Such as Lao-Tzu, in classical Chinese
philosophy (see Fung, 1983).
8. The four subject matters mentioned in this chapter — virtue, language, political aﬀairs, and literature—
were later called the “four classes” of the Confucian school (Legge, 1985; Mao, 1988). It is interesting to
note that language is one of these four classes.
9. Perhaps this is what distinguishes Confucius from the Taoists, who hold that language is more often
than not misleading. Taoists exhibit a distaste for language in general, viewing it as an imperfect means
of communication. Confucius does not agree with this position.
10. Confucius aimed for balance between internal and external. While maintaining personal virtue, one
must also take care of the external world. For Confucius, this meant “looking upon all the worlds as one
family, and on China as one person, and he could never for a day forget this” (Soothill, 1968, p. 706).
11. Because Confucian ideals appear to be irreconcilable with Western conceptions, these ideals were
subsumed under the umbrella of the collectivist metaphor so that con ﬂicts in cultural values between
Confucianism and other perspectives can be resolved (see Xiao, 1995).
12. The Chinese concept of chia (home or family), for example, can be extended to include members of a
lineage, people who share same interests, and in fact, any person whom another person wants to include.
It depends on the individual who serves as the center of a given role relationship (King, 1985).
13. Scholars have pointed to the distinction between Confucian values and Confucianization (as occurred
in the case of Chinese) and to the need to take into account historical factors underlying the develop-
ment of Confucianism (Chang, 1976; King, 1985). King contends that in the Confucian value system,
the ﬁve cardinal relations were symmetrical. It was through Hsiao Ching that the concept of ﬁlial piety
became the center of the Chinese ethics system, resulting in asymmetrical relationships that denied
recognition of the independent existence of the individual. With further institutional support, Chinese
laws underwent a Confucianization that upheld the hierarchical harmony of the family as an unques-
tioned value. Simply put, problems come from trying to superimpose a governmentally convenient
hierarchy onto an essentially unhierarchical philosophical system. Liu (1996) also argues that there are
three possible ways to understand Confucianism: as philosophical insights, as a political ideology, and
as a storehouse of popular values (p. 111).
110  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 132 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 111
Page 111
References
Bond, M. H., & Hwang, K.-K. (1986). The social psychology of Chinese people. In M. H. Bond (Ed.), The
psychology of the Chinese people (pp. 213–266). Hong Kong, Oxford University Press.
Bond, M. H., & Wang, S. H. (1983). Aggressive behavior in Chinese society: The problem of maintaining
order and social harmony. In A. P . Goldstein & M. Segall (Eds.), Global perspectives on aggression
(pp. 58–74). New Y ork: Pergamon.
Chan, W.-T. (1963). A sourcebook in Chinese philosophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chang, H.-C. (1996. November). “Collectivism” or “competitive bidding”: An alternative picture of Chinese
communication. Paper presented at the annual convention of the Speech Communication Association,
San Diego, CA.
Chang, H.-C., & Holt, G. R. (1991). More than relationship: Chinese and the principle of kuan-hsi.
Communication Quarterly, 39, 251–271.
Chang, H.-C., & Holt, G. R. (1994). Debt-repaying mechanism in Chinese relationships: An exploration of
the folk concepts of pao and human emotional debt. Research on Language and Social Interaction ,
27(4), 187–351.
Chang, Y. N. (1976). Early Chinese management thought. California Management Review, 19(2), 71–76.
Chen, G.-M. (1993). Self-disclosure and Asian students ’ abilities to cope with social di ﬃculties in the
United States. Journal of Psychology, 127(6), 603–610.
Chen, G.-M., & Chung, J. (1994). The impact of Confucianism on organizational communication.
Communication Quarterly, 42, 93–105.
Cheng, C., Bond, M. H., & Chan, S. C. (1995). The perception of ideal best friends by Chinese adolescents.
International Journal of Psychology, 30(1), 91–108.
Cheng, C.-Y. (1986). The concept of face and its Confucian root. Journal of Chinese Philosophy, 13, 329–348.
Cheng, C.-Y. (1987). Chinese philosophy and contemporary human communication theory. In D. L. Kincaid
(Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives  (pp. 23–43). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Creel, H. G. (1960). Confucius and the Chinese way. New Y ork: Harper & Row.
Fung, Y.-L. (1983). A history of Chinese philosophy  (D. Bodde, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Goldman, A. (1994). The centrality of ningensei to Japanese negotiating and interpersonal relationships:
Implications for U.S.-Japanese communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 18(1),
29–54.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Kim, Y. Y. (1992). Communicating with strangers: An approach to intercultural
communication (2nd ed.). New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Ting-T oomey, S. (1992). V erbal communication styles. In W. B. Gudykunst & Y. Y. Kim
(Eds.), Readings on communicating with strangers  (pp. 223–235). New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Harré, R. (1981). Rituals, rhetoric, and social cognition. In J. P . Forgas (Ed.), Social cognitions (pp. 211–224).
London: Academic Press.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London: McGraw-Hill.
Kim, M.-S., & Bresnahan, M. (1994). A process model of request tactic evaluation. Discourse Processes, 18,
317–344.
Kim, M.-S., Sharkey, W. F., & Singelis, T. M. (1994). The relationship between individuals ’ self-construals
and perceived importance of interactive constraints. International Journal of Intercultural Relations ,
18(1), 117–140.
Kim, M.-S., & Wilson, S. R. (1994). A cross-cultural comparison of implicit theories of requesting. Com-
munication Monographs, 61, 210–235.
King, A. Y. C. (1985). The individual and group in Confucianism: A relational perspective. In D. H. Munro
(Ed.), Individualism and holism: Studies in Confucian and T aoist values  (pp. 57 –70). Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Legge, J. (Ed. & Trans.), (1985). The four books: A Chinese-English version. Taipei: Culture Book Co.
Liu, S.-H. (1996). Confucian ideals and the real world: A critical review of contemporary neo-Confucian
thought. In W.-M. Tu (Ed.), Confucian traditions in East Asian modernity  (pp. 92 –111). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Mao, T.-S. (Ed. & Trans). (1988). Lun-yu-chin-tsu-chin-i [Analects: Commentary and interpretations of the
present day]. Taipei: Taiwan Sun-Wu.
Okabe, R. (1983). Cultural assumptions of East and West: Japan and the United States. In W. B. Gudykunst
(Ed.), Intercultural communication theory (pp. 21–44). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Oliver, R. T. (1971). Communication and culture in ancient India and China . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press.
COMMUNICATION IN THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS  111


--- PAGE 133 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 112
Page 112
Robinson, W. P ., & Giles, H. (1990). Prologue. In W. P . Robinson & H. Giles (Eds.), Handbook of language
and social psychology (pp. 1–8). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Schön, D. A. (1979). A perspective on problem setting in social policy. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and
thought (pp. 251–283). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Soothill, W. E. (Trans.). (1968). The Analects of Confucius. New Y ork: Paragon Books.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1988). Intercultural conﬂict styles: A face-negotiation theory. In Y. Kim & W. Gudykunst
(Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication (pp. 213–256). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Triandis, H. (1988). Collectivism vs. Individualism: A reconceptualization of a basic concept in cross-
cultural social psychology. In G. K. V erma & C. Bagley (Eds.), Cross-cultural studies of personality,
attitudes, and cognition (pp. 60–95). New Y ork: Macmilan.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Tu, W.-M. (1985). Selfhood and otherness in Confucian thought. In A. J. Marsella, G. DeVos, & F. L. K. Hsu
(Eds.), Culture and self: Asian and Western perspectives (pp. 232–251). New Y ork: Tavistock.
Tu. W.-M. (Ed.). (1996). Confucian traditions in East Asian modernity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Ward, B. E. (1968). Sociological self-awareness: Some uses of the conscious model. Man, 1, 201–215.
Wheeler, L., Reis, H. T., & Bond, M. H. (1989). Collectivism-individualism in everyday social life: The
Middle Kingdom and the melting pot. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(1), 79–86.
Xiao, X. (1995). China encounters Darwinism: A case of intercultural rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech,
81, 83–99.
Y ang, K. S. (1981). Social orientation and individual modernity among Chinese students in Taiwan. Journal
of Social Psychology, 113, 159–170.
Yum, J. O. (1987). The practices of uye-ri in interpersonal relationships in Korea. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.),
Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives (pp. 87–100). New Y ork: Academic Press.
Yum, J. O. (1988). The impact of Confucianism on interpersonal relationships and communication
patterns in East Asia. Communication Monographs, 55, 374–388.
112  HUI-CHING CHANG


--- PAGE 134 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 113
Page 113
8
Ubuntu in South Africa
A Sociolinguistic Perspective to a
Pan-African Concept
Nkonko M. Kamwangamalu
During apartheid, language was used as an instrument of social control and division among the
country’s various ethnic groups. In the postapartheid era, however, language seems to have
become instrumental in the country’s eﬀorts to unite its previously divided communities. This is
evident in, for instance, TV slogans such as Simunye, which are intended to emphasize the
oneness of the new nation; and in concepts such as ubuntu, which of late seems to have attracted
much attention particularly in the business sector.
My aim is to discuss ubuntu from a sociolinguistic perspective. This is not the only perspec-
tive from which ubuntu could be studied. A socio-historical study would equally make an
important contribution to understanding this pan-African concept. Such a study would have a
wider scope to include an analysis of ubuntu not only in the African context but also in the
Western context. It would, for instance, focus on the roots of notions such as humanitas (human-
ity), humanismus (humanism) and caritas (dearness, a ﬀection, caring), for they are related in
many ways to the concept of ubuntu.
The paper is divided into three main sections. The ﬁrst part considers some of the tenets of
ubuntu, with a focus on “interdependence” and “communalism”. T o underline the socio-
linguistic nature of ubuntu, these tenets will be illustrated with a selection of Bantu proverbs, for
proverbs constitute one of the media through which the virtues of ubuntu were transferred from
one generation to another. This paper stresses, as does Tshimpaka Y anga (1996, p. 12), that “the
relevance of ubuntu as a universal African conception of life should not be blurred in unstated
attempts to sacriﬁce a continental ideal for some form of ethnic philosophy”.
The second section critically examines the uses to which ubuntu has been put in South Africa,
especially in the business sector. I argue that for a society where ubuntu has been eroded as a
result of apartheid, what is needed, is revival rather than commercialization of the virtues of
ubuntu. Suggestions are made for a bottom-up revival, so that the country can bring ﬁrst its
communities, not its business sector, together and build a new nation, based on the virtues of
ubuntu.
Then I consider brie ﬂy whether ubuntu is uniquely African, or whether its virtues can be
found in other societies and cultures. Using historical facts such as slavery, colonialism and
apartheid in Africa, and holocaust and Naziism in the West, I challenge the unqualiﬁed claim in
some studies that the virtues of ubuntu, such as “respect for human dignity ”, “ﬁgures very
strongly in Western thinking” (Prinsloo, 1996, p. 120).
113


--- PAGE 135 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 114
Page 114
Ubuntu: A Pan-African Concept
Morphologically, ubuntu, a Nguni term which translates as “personhood”, “humanness”, con-
sists of the augment pre ﬁx u-, the abstract noun pre ﬁx bu-, and the noun stem -ntu , meaning
“person” in Bantu languages. The concept of ubuntu is also found in many African languages,
though not necessarily under the same name. Quoting Kagame (1976), Y anga (1997, p. 13)
remarks that this concept has phonological variants in a number of African languages: umundu
in Kikuyu and umuntu in Kimeru, both languages spoken in Kenya; bumuntu in kiSukuma and
kiHaya, both spoken in Tanzania; vumuntu in shiTsonga and shiTswa of Mozambique; bomoto in
Bobangi, spoken in the Democratic Republic of Congo; gimuntu in kiKongo and giKwese,
spoken in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola, respectively.
Sociolinguistically, ubuntu is a multidimensional concept which represents the core values of
African ontologies: respect for any human being, for human dignity and for human life, collect-
ive sharedness, obedience, humility, solidarity, caring, hospitality, interdependence, communal-
ism, to list but a few. What this means, to paraphrase Kwame Gyekye (1987), is that despite
Africa’s cultural diversity, threads of underlying a ﬃnity do run through the beliefs, customs,
value systems, and sociopolitical institutions and practices of the various African societies. Of
the value systems, one that is found in most of these societies is the ubuntu system, of which
recent literature oﬀers the following deﬁnitions:
 Ubuntu means humanness. It is the humanistic experience of treating all people with
respect, granting them their human dignity. Being human encompasses values like uni-
versal brotherhood for Africans, sharing, treating and respecting other people as human
beings (Bhengu, 1996, p. 5).
 Ubuntu is a process and philosophy which reﬂects the African heritage, traditions, culture,
customs, beliefs, value systems and the extended family structures (Makhudu, 1993, p. 40).
 Ubuntu is the key to all African values and involves humanness, a good disposition
towards others, and a moral nature. It describes the signi ﬁcance of group solidarity and
interdependence in African culture. It places great value on dignity, respect, conformity
and reconciliation in the midst of conﬂict and hardship (Mthembu, 1996, p. 216).
 Ubuntu is the “collective consciousness” of the people of Africa. It involves alms-giving,
being sympathetic, caring, sensitive to the needs of others, being respectful, considerate,
patient and kind (Prinsloo, 1996, pp. 113–114).
 The concept of ubuntu is understood as a collective solidarity whereby the self is perceived
primarily in relation to the perception of others, that is, persons are perceived less as
independent of one another, and more as interdependent of one another (Laden, 1997,
p. 134).
 Ubuntu is a statement about being human, about fundamental things that qualify a person
t o  b e  a  p e r s o n ....  B eing human is achieved as a person shows characteristics that qualify
him or her to be so regarded . . . Ubuntu is about how you relate to people and is . . . a
fountain from which actions and attitudes ﬂow (Dandala, 1996, pp. 70, 72).
These de ﬁnitions, and others, have one theme in common: ubuntu is a value system which
governs societies across the African continent. It is a system against whose values the members of
a community measure their “humanness”. These values, like the ubuntu system from which they
ﬂow, are not innate but are rather acquired in society and are transmitted from one generation
to another by means of oral genres such as fables, proverbs, myths, riddles, and story-telling.
Below I discuss two of these values, communalism and interdependence, and illustrate them
with proverbs from Ciluba, a Bantu language spoken in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(formerly Zaire).
114  NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU


--- PAGE 136 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 115
Page 115
Some Core V alues of Ubuntu
Ubuntu as communalism
Communalism is one of the core values of ubuntu. It is a value according to which the interest of
the individual is subordinate to that of the group. In other words, the group constitutes the focus
of the activities of the individual members of the society at large. Communalism insists that the
good of all determines the good of each or, put di ﬀerently, the welfare of each is dependent on
the welfare of all. As Adonisi (1994, p. 311) observes, “traditional African values foster a com-
munalistic world-view towards life”. Nobody in an African context lives for himself. We live for
the community. Africa, wrote Sekou T oure, is fundamentally communocratic. The collective life
and social solidarity give it a basis of humanism which many peoples might envy (see Sekou
T oure, quoted in Gyekye, 1987, p. 209). These human qualities, argues Sekou T oure, also mean
that an individual cannot imagine organizing his life outside that of his family, village or clan.
The view that Africa is communalistic is also expressed in Jomo Kenyatta ’s comments about
the traditional life of the Kiguyu people in Kenya. He points out that according to Gikuyu ways
of thinking,
nobody is an isolated individual. Or rather, his uniqueness is a secondary fact about him;
ﬁrst and foremost he is several people’s relative and several people’s contemporary . . . this
fact is the basis of his sense of moral responsibility and social obligation.
(Kenyatta, 1965, p. 297, quoted in Gyekye, 1987, p. 209)
What Jomo Kenyatta says about the Gikuyu people is equally true of any ethnic group in Africa
whose ways of life are governed by ubuntu. From Dakar in Senegal to Addis-Ababa in Ethiopia,
and from Cairo in Egypt to Pretoria in South Africa, one ﬁnds evidence of ubuntu and of one of
its cardinal virtues, communalism, in particular. One must admit, though, that as a result of
contacts with Western cultures, communalism is perhaps not as much practised in urban Africa
as it is in rural Africa. Comparative studies of ubuntu might shed light on the extent to which
communalism is practised in these areas. It suﬃces to note, however, that “in Africa, communal-
ism is a strong and binding network of relationships ” (Mthembu, 1996, p. 220). Children, for
example, belong not only to their biological parents, but are also under the authority and control
of any adult in the community. Kinship terms attest to the nature of the relationships that bind
the members of a community together. In South Africa and elsewhere in the continent, a
member of a community can use the term sister, for instance, to refer to any female and not
necessarily to one’s sibling. Similarly, children are taught from young age that they must refer to
anyone who is the same age as their father/mother as father/mother, and never to call such people
by their names as this would be considered disrespectful.
In what remains of traditional Africa, communalism as core value of the ubuntu system is
taught not at school but rather through oral genres such as proverbs, fables, riddles, etc. The
following Ciluba proverbs are illustrative. They clearly underscore the rationale behind com-
munalism and support the point that Gyekye (1987, p. 156) makes in relation to Akan proverbs
in Ghana, “that extreme individualism could not thrive in traditional African culture; and that
in spite of individual talents and capacities, the individual ought to be aware of his or her
insuﬃciency to achieve his or her welfare through solitary e ﬀort”.
(a) Ngonga umwe
 katu udila pa mukaba  [Lit: “One bell cannot ring on the belt. ”] (One
ﬁnger cannot lift up a thing.)
(b) Tshiadima umwe tshiadia bangi  [Lit: “Harvested by one, eaten by many.”]
(c) Nkunda ya bangi  itu iboba ne mata  [Lit: “Beans cooked by many can cook with
saliva.”] (Unity is strength.)
UBUNTU IN SOUTH AFRICA  115


--- PAGE 137 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 116
Page 116
(d) Babidi kabakukumi batu bakushiya diulu nsoso  [Lit: “If two people ﬁght against one
person they will win the ﬁght.”]
These proverbs teach communalism, and unity in particular. One notes that each of the proverbs
makes reference to numbers: In (a) umwe  “one” is followed by the negative particle katu  “not”
to stress the fact that one only ﬁnds strength in working in and with the community; in (b)
umwe is used to stress the fact that in Africa we live for the community, and that what one
achieves through individual e ﬀort, one must share with the members of the community; in (c)
bangi “many” is the plural form of umwe  “one” and serves also to underline the importance of
collectiveness or unity, much as does babidi  “two” in (d). The fact that these proverbs extol
communalism does not necessarily imply negation of individualism. Rather, and to quote
Gyekye (1987, p. 156), “communalism is the recognition of the limited character of the possi-
bilities of the individual, which limited possibilities whittle away the individual ’s self-
suﬃciency”. The Ciluba proverb Bayaya waya biashala washadilamu [Lit: “Go when everyone is
going, if you stay behind, you stay for good.”], for instance, extols individual competitiveness but
it does not necessarily undermine communalism.
Ubuntu as interdependence
The essence of ubuntu is that an individual owes his or her existence to the existence of others. “I
am” because “you are” and you are because “I am”. Mbigi and Maree (1995, p. 2) put it this way,
“the cardinal belief of Ubuntu is that a man can only be a man through others ”; while Bhengu
(1996, p. 2) says that “the person . . . cannot exist of himself, by himself, for himself; he comes
from a social cluster, [and] exists in a social cluster . . . ”. This interpersonal character of ubuntu
is the source of many of its distinctive virtues that have been highlighted in the literature, such as
patience, hospitality, loyalty, respect, conviviality, sociability, vitality, endurance, sympathy,
obedience, sharing, to list but a few (Shutte, 1996; Prinsloo, 1996; Mbigi and Maree, 1995).
Interdependence corresponds to the concept of organic solidarity , which Emile Durkheim,
uses in his theory of social production of culture. Organic solidarity, which Durkheim (1915)
contrasts with mechanic solidarity, is intended as an explanation for how modern societies, with
people specializing in so many di ﬀerent areas, hold together. What it entails, is that these
societies hold together because their members exchange services with one another, e.g. a farmer
exchanges his produce with the teacher who, in return, educates his children. On the other hand,
mechanic solidarity, which corresponds to communalism in the ubuntu system, “is a practice
according to which traditional societies held together because the shared beliefs and understand-
ings of a people constituted their collective consciousness, and this collective consciousness
governed their thoughts, attitudes, and practices” (Griswold, 1994, p. 46).
Interdependence is valued highly in Africa, much as it is in Asia. However, in the West,
independence rather than interdependence is the norm. Consequently, these two values,
independence and interdependence, tend to clash when those who hold them come into contact.
Consider, for instance, the concept of the nursing home, which is an integral part of the Western
medicine but is rejected outright in Africa and Asia. In intercultural communication, concepts
such as these can cause a clash of cultures. For instance, Y ousef (1978, pp. 56 –58), reports the
clash between the Thompsons, a middle-class American family and their African friend, Grace, a
Zambian student, who found it strange if not downright unfeeling and irresponsible that the
Thompsons were planning to put Mr. Thompson ’s elderly mother in a nursing home. Y ousef
explains that Grace’s reaction is based on her having grown up in a high-context culture, while
the Thompsons’ behaviour is based on their having grown up in a low-context culture. High
context-cultures are marked by behavioural patterns of interdependence and they re ﬂect pat-
terns and value systems of people intensely involved in each other ’s lives; patterns according to
116  NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU


--- PAGE 138 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 117
Page 117
which members of a household are bound for life in cycles of expectations and obligations to
each other and to their extended families, friends, tribes, and clans. In cultures such as these the
group, as Hinkel (1995, p. 331) points out, de ﬁnes and controls the individual, that is the
individual owes his/her existence to the existence of the group. Unlike high-context cultures,
low-context cultures emphasize independence. Therefore, relationships among the members of
these cultures are looser and less binding than is the case in high-context cultures. Like other
virtues of ubuntu (e.g. communalism, conviviality, etc.), in traditional Africa interdependence is
taught through oral genres, as illustrated in the following Ciluba proverbs.
(a) Muntu apa muntu apa ki mbowa  [Lit: “A man here a man there means no fear. ”] (We
can achieve anything if we support one another.)
(b) Mwena mutumba mmwanenu  [Lit: “A neighbour is a sibling. ”] (Care for your neigh-
bours in the same was as you do for your siblings.)
(c) Bukwata nyanebe mbukukwata [Lit: “Y our friend’s problem is your problem.”]
(d) Bubedi bwa disu mbubedi bwa diulu [Lit: “The sickness of the eye is the sickness of the
nose.”] (Y our neighbour’s problem is your problem.)
These proverbs indicate the value of mutual aid and interdependence as necessary conditions
not only for an individual ’s welfare, but also for the welfare of the community as a whole.
Interdependence has implications for South African society, and particularly for the walls that
apartheid erected among the country ’s communities. For instance, if neighbours treat one
another as siblings in the ubuntu sense, as Bhengu (1996, p. 3) puts it, “regard my neighbours’
mind as an open book of discovered knowledge, recognize my neighbours as the reverse side of
an entity to which I am the obverse ”, the walls that apartheid erected among the communities
will not take long to come down. Bringing these walls down is, in my view, one of the most
serious challenges that post-apartheid South Africa faces at the moment.
The values of ubuntu are, of course, too numerous to discuss them all here. However, I
assume that those illustrated above, interdependence and communalism, provide a glimpse into
what ubuntu is about and how it is transmitted from one generation to another in the African
context.
Ubuntu, Culture and the Business Sector in South Africa
I shall argue that ubuntu is ﬁrst and foremost a social rather than a business concept. Therefore,
if post-apartheid South Africa is to build a society based on ubuntu, one must ﬁrst raise aware-
ness about and revive the apartheid-eroded virtues of ubuntu at the grassroots level before one
embarks on disseminating these virtues in the business sector. Doing the opposite, as seems to be
the case, is tantamount to building a house without ﬁrst laying a foundation.
Ubuntu and culture
Culture is the socially learned, shared assemblage of practices, perceptions, attitudes, world view,
value system and beliefs that determine the texture of our lives as members of a given com-
munity (e.g. Sapir, 1963; Bowers, 1992). Quoting Peterson (1979), Griswold (1994, p. 3) remarks
that when sociologists, for instance, talk about culture they usually mean one of four things:
norms, values, beliefs, or expressive symbols. Roughly, Griswold notes, norms are the way people
behave in a given society, values are what they hold dear, beliefs are how they think the universe
operates, and expressive symbols are representations, often representations of social norms,
values, and beliefs themselves. We express these values, beliefs, perceptions, etc. in a number of
ways, one of which is language. As Hyde (1994, p. 300) observes, “though people are not
UBUNTU IN SOUTH AFRICA  117


--- PAGE 139 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 118
Page 118
necessarily prisoners of their language, it is undoubtedly true that the way a culture sees the
world is reﬂected in its language”. This is because “as people come to value certain things and do
them in a certain way, they come to use their language in ways that re ﬂect what they value and
what they do” (Wardhaugh, 1992, p. 218). The concept of the nursing home referred to earlier,
which according to Y ousef (1978) caused the clash of cultures between an American family and
their African guest, illustrates how what is considered a value in one community or culture may
not be so regarded in another. What people value, culturally or otherwise, is context-bound.
Accordingly, “while management principles are universal, the context in which they are imple-
mented is critical to the form and shape they should take in any particular environment ”
(Lessem and Nussbaum, 1996, p. 11). It is against this background that ubuntu seems to have
found its way into the business sector in South Africa.
Ubuntu and the business sector
In present-day South Africa, ubuntu has become the hallmark of the business sector. Its use in
this sector is, among other things, primarily intended to enable business leaders to understand
the cultural and behavioural context in which they are developing their approach to business; to
develop management principles which incorporate African values; to give cultures that were
previously kept apart by apartheid an opportunity to celebrate their diversity and build on the
strengths of that diversity; and to enable business leaders to shift paradigms in the conduct of
business (Mbigi, 1995; Lessem, 1996). Shifting paradigms entails, in the words of Lessem (1996,
p. 7), “changing management style from dictatorship to relationship, shifting orientation from
manager to mentor, engaging in a ﬃrmative action, and thereby reversing discrimination and,
ﬁnally, following the indigenous African management practice of ubuntu”, practice which builds
on virtues such as those discussed in previous sections, namely interdependence and communal-
ism. The popularity of ubuntu in the business stems both from these and several other ingredi-
ents regarded as critical to Western psychological therapies — warmth, forgiveness, compassion,
respect, dignity, empathy, supportiveness, co-operation, mutual understanding and a shared
world view, ingredients which can be used pro ﬁtably in the business sector. These ingredients
contrast, as Adonisi (1994, p. 311) observes, with clinical approaches. The latter, to a large extent,
reﬂect positivistic assumptions about people, tend to elevate the individual above his social
group, encourage the individual to strive for personal goals, and in the process compete against
the very social entity that has brought individuals into being. Because ubuntu insists on the spirit
of togetherness, “it is inconceivable that individual careers can be formed and actualised outside
of the communal context that provides meaning and anchors in life for people ” (Adonisi, 1994,
p. 311). In this regard, Lessem (1996, p. 187) remarks pointedly that “unless business leaders in
southern Africa can tap such a spirit of ‘ubuntu’, align it with eastern and western management
techniques and turn it into a material force for reconstruction and development, they will have
no collective or individual future.” Accordingly, ubuntu is expected “to transform our economic
practices and make us as competitive as any other economy that has transformed itself by
discovering the fundamental values of its social context” (Dandala, 1996, p. 71).
The next section looks at how the business sector disseminates ubuntu to transform eco-
nomic practices and increase production.
Disseminating ubuntu in the business sector
Since ubuntu is now seen as Godsend to help business prosper, management has developed
strategies to disseminate the values of ubuntu in the business sector. Some of these strategies
include, for instance, conferences, seminars, workshops as well as training courses on ubuntu.
The focus of all these activities has been on the teamwork and sense of group responsibility
118  NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU


--- PAGE 140 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 119
Page 119
ﬂowing from ubuntu— in contrast to the sometimes destructive individualism and over-
competitiveness in Western systems. Besides, books have been written to advise companies on
how best they can use ubuntu to manage their business, ensure good human relationships
among their personnel and, above all, have a competitive edge. Among the books, one notes
the following, African Management: Philosophies, Concepts, and Applications  (Chrissie, Lessem,
& Mbigi, 1994); Sawubona Africa: Embracing Four Worlds in South African Management (Lessem
& Nussbaum, 1996); Ubuntu: The Spirit of African Transformation Management  (Mbigi &
Maree, 1995).
All the above is good news indeed, but only in so far as no pro ﬁt is lost or no company goes
bankrupt. However, one must pause and ask: Is ubuntu really about pro ﬁt-making? Isn ’t the
basic point of departure for ubuntu the view of man as social being? How much ubuntu do
business leaders, as social beings, practice themselves at the grassroot level? Do they, for instance,
treat their neighbours as siblings as required in the ubuntu culture? T o what extent does business
encourage free ﬂow of information within its ranks? From the ubuntu perspective, members of a
group or company are dependent on one another for their own welfare as well as for the welfare
of the group or company as a whole. Therefore, Khoza (1994) cautions that one cannot cultivate
a community spirit, which companies claim to pursue in their business, by withholding infor-
mation from one another. In short, slogans such as “information is power ” (Adonisi, 1994),
whose goal is to guard knowledge, defy the virtues of the very ubuntu system the business sector
claims to promote.
It seems to me that the e ﬀorts to extol ubuntu via published literature, training courses,
workshops, and conferences risk remaining a pie in the sky if those involved in these e ﬀorts do
not perceive the contrast between the virtues of ubuntu and the proﬁt-based modus operandi of
the business sector. On this particular point, South Africa is perhaps the only country in Africa
where ubuntu is so much talked about. This is understandable especially as ubuntu has been
eroded by apartheid and the walls it has erected among communities. In other African countries,
however, ubuntu is the norm, it is felt, it is practised and re ﬂected in the daily behaviours of the
members of a community. With the walls that divide South Africa still standing tall, one won-
ders whether eﬀorts to revive ubuntu shouldn’t focus on bringing these walls down ﬁrst rather
than on teaching companies how to use ubuntu to remain competitive.
I now shall turn to the last part of this paper and examine brieﬂy whether ubuntu is uniquely
African or whether its virtues can be found in other cultures. I shall argue that some of
the virtues of ubuntu, such as interdependence, may be unique to African and Asian cultures,
for these are high-context cultures, as described earlier. Other virtues, such as hospitality,
compassion, empathy, tolerance, respect, etc. could be found in other cultures.
Ubuntu in Other Cultures
One issue that Western philosophers have raised in regard to ubuntu is whether it is unique to
Africa or whether its virtues can be found in other societies around the world (Broodryk, 1996;
Prinsloo, 1996; Shutte, 1994). Broodryk (1996) notes that for something to be unique, it needs to
be extra-ordinary and incomparable. Consequently, when one considers the uniqueness of
ubuntuism, one has to ask whether there are characteristics (e.g. compassion, respect, hospitality,
solidarity, togetherness, etc.) which cannot be identiﬁed in any other -isms, of which he lists the
following: Communism, Marxism, Communalism, Capitalism, Liberalism and Conservatism.
After describing the characteristics of each of these ideologies, Broodryk (1996, pp. 31 –35)
argues that “if ‘unique’ means unusual, incomparable or extra-ordinary, then ubuntuism is not
unique to one culture, for all people have this magic gift or sadly lack it. In some of us, these
qualities exist”. Makhudu (1993) supports this view by saying that the qualities of ubuntu or
humanness exist in every person, though I must emphasize, once again, that these qualities are
UBUNTU IN SOUTH AFRICA  119


--- PAGE 141 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 120
Page 120
not innate but are rather acquired through socialization. Along these lines, Edgard Sienaert
(1984, p. 226), quoting Paul Renucci (1953, p. 9), views humanism as
the will to seize the whole history of art and thought and to mobilize it to serve man,
the most perfectible of all beings and the only one able to understand and master the
universe. The main task of a humanistic enterprise is to destroy dark zones and barriers
of the past, to discover and put back in use the treasures of science, wisdom and beauty
that have become obtuse or have been forgotten or despised. It (humanism) is not to
reject anything of the past without prior serious and patient investigation; it is to look into
the errors and crimes of the past and to ensure that, by studying them, they are never
committed again.
(my translation)
Ubuntu is indeed unique to Africa, where the Bantu languages from which it derives are
spoken. However, the values it evokes seem to be universal since they are apparently shared by
societies world over, as the above and the following quotations suggest. For instance, Prinsloo
(1996, p. 120) points out that “human dignity ﬁgures very strongly in Western thinking, espe-
cially in legal and religious contexts and forms a strong basis for (Western) humanism”. He goes
on to say that “sharing” is also regarded as part and parcel of socialism and even of capitalism
where participatory management is or was applied. Thus, argues Prinsloo, “ubuntu shares a
world spirit and serves, perhaps, to emphasize this world spirit and remind Western and other
thinkers of its importance” (1996, p. 120). This discovery, Prinsloo concludes, can lead to a joint
application of principles of human dignity to all spheres of life in order to create relatively
harmonious communities. Unlike Prinsloo, and in what appears to be an afterthought, Broodryk
(1996, p. 36) notes that some aspects of ubuntu may be unique to Africa.
Ubuntu may be diﬀerent from other ideologies on the aspect of humanism. This human-
ism appears to be more intense than humanistic approaches in other ideologies. What
the motivation of this is, is unclear. Could it be that this is a result of former colonial
situations where the humanity of people was shattered?
There is, as an anonymous reviewer has remarked, the need to engage, at least brie ﬂy, in the
semantics of humanism to avoid blurring the meaning of this concept. If the ﬁrst sentence in the
above quotation is anything to go by, it seems that Broodryk distinguishes between ubuntu and
humanism. T o him, ubuntu is an ideology of which humanism is but an aspect. It seems to me,
however, that ubuntu can be encoded in English as humanism. Put di ﬀerently, ubuntu means
humanism, the art of being human. Therefore, trying to separate the two, as Broodryk does, is
misleading and can create confusion.
If one assumes with Broodryk and others that ubuntuism is neither unique nor “purely
African”, and that “human dignity ﬁgures very strongly in Western thinking ” (Prinsloo, 1996,
p. 120), then a number of historical facts, among them holocaust, Naziism, slavery, colonialism
and apartheid, require an explanation. How could these facts originate in the West where, if
Prinsloo and others are right, there is a strong belief in human dignity and in the values of
humanism. This is an important question, but one which is beyond the scope of this paper.
Similar questions can be raised in regard to pre-colonial, equally dehumanizing practices,
such as muti and witchcraft-related killings in the South African context. Are these practices
ubuntuistically acceptable? With regard to witchcraft for instance, Nekhudzhiga of the Institute
for Multi-Party Democracy (Braamfontein), cited in Y anga (1996, p. 17) from The Citizen, 5 May
1996 remarks that:
120  NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU


--- PAGE 142 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 121
Page 121
it is not a question of whether witchcraft is a reality or myth. Many men, women and
children are dead through witchcraft, suspicion and related activities . . . Can we in South
Africa at this point continue with that type of belief, that to improve the status of an
individual, we sacriﬁce another? Is that our culture? Is this what Ubuntu is all about?
Besides, how can Africa, a continent which has produced innumerable political human monsters
and dictators, have humanistic pretensions. It seems to me that ubuntu (i.e. humanism) is an
ideal whose virtues are perhaps too numerous and of too high a standard for any human being
or community, whether in Africa or in the West, to conform to them all. Black South African
communities, for instance, though well aware of the virtues of ubuntu, have not been able to live
up to them, for they continue to engage in dehumanizing practices such as muti, a practice
which involves killing a human being for the purpose of using his body ’s parts to advance one’s
own cause or status in the community. Similarly, apartheid was designed in South Africa despite
the fact that its architects were well aware of the virtue of humanism (Broodryk, 1996; Prinsloo,
1996).
Conclusion
This paper has critically examined the concept of ubuntu and its use in African societies, with a
focus on South Africa. I have argued that ubuntu is ﬁrst and foremost a social rather than a
business-related ideal. Therefore, there is a need to understand, revive, and promote the virtues
of ubuntu ﬁrst at the social, grassroot level, to practice ubuntu in our own communities and with
own neighbours if one is to build a better society, a society where neighbours treat one another
not just as neighbours but as siblings in the ubuntu sense; a society where people acknowledge
and value interdependence and develop mutual respect for their diverse cultures. Only after we
have made progress in these areas can we claim to be good agents for societal change and for the
spread of ubuntu in other sectors including the business and management sector.
The need for developing ubuntu culture is expressed in the following letter, quoted in Sonja
Laden (1997, p. 135) from Drum Magazine (1995). This letter, incidently, calls for “reviving the
spirit of neighbourliness (Ubuntu) in our communities ”:
Looking back over the years, some of us can remember how important it was to have the
companionship of neighbours. Calling each other Makhi or buur, we helped each other in
all areas of life. Alas, those happy days of borrowing and lending anything from letswai
(salt) to money without fear of getting cheated, are gone . . . If we let ubuntu live, our
souls, minds, hearts, and bodies will bene ﬁt. Let there be that neighbourly spirit of love,
warmth, friendliness, kindness, joy and security. And of course Neighbourhood Watch
must be every person’s job.
References
Adonisi, M. (1994). The career in community. In P . Christie, R. Lessem & L. Mbigi. (Eds.) African
management: Philosophies, concepts, and applications  (pp. 309–314). Randburg: Knowledge Resources
(Pty) Ltd.
Bhengu, M. J. (1996). Ubuntu: The essence of democracy. Cape T own: Novalis Press.
Bowers, R. (1992). Memories, metaphors, maxims, and myths: language learning and cultural awareness.
ELT Journal, 46(1), 29–38.
Broodryk, J. (1996). Is Ubuntuism unique? In J. Malherbe (Ed.), Decolonizing the mind: Proceedings of the
2nd Colloquium on African Philosophy  (pp. 31 –37). Pretoria: UNISA Research Unit for African
Philosophy.
Christie, P ., Lessem, R. & Mbigi, L. (Eds.). (1994). African management: Philosophies, concepts, and applica-
tions. Randburg: Knowledge Resources (Pty) Ltd.
UBUNTU IN SOUTH AFRICA  121


--- PAGE 143 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 122
Page 122
Dandala, H. M. (1996). Cows never die: Embracing African cosmology in the process of economic growth.
In R. Lessem & B. Nussbaum (Eds.), Sawubona Africa: Embracing four worlds in South African
management (pp. 69–85). Sandton: Zebra Press.
Durkheim, E. (1915,1965). The elementary forms of the religious life  (J. W. Swain, Trans.). New Y ork: Free
Press.
Griswold, W. (1994). Cultures and societies in a changing world . London: Pine Forge Press.
Gyekye, K. (1987). An essay on African philosophical thought: The Akan conceptual scheme . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hinkel, E. (1995). The use of modal verbs as a re ﬂection of cultural values. TESOL Quarterly , 29(2),
325–344.
Hyde, M. (1994). The teaching of English in Morocco: the place of culture. ELT Journal, 48(4), 295–305.
Kagame, A. (1976). La philosophie bantu comparee. Paris: Presence Africaine.
Kenyatta, J. (1965). Facing Mount Kenya. New Y ork: Vintage.
Khoza, R. (1994). The need for an Afrocentric approach to management. In P . Christie, R. Lessem, &
L. Mbigi (Eds.), African management: Philosophies, concepts, and applications (pp. 117–124). Randburg:
Knowledge Resources (Pty) Ltd.
Laden, S. (1997). Middle-class matters, or How to keep Whites whiter, Colours Brighter, and Blacks
Beautiful. Critical Arts, 11(1–2), 120–141.
Lessem, R. (1996). South Africa ’s business-sphere. In R. Lesse & B. Nussbaum (Eds.), Sawubona Africa:
Embracing four worlds in South African management (pp. 35–46). Sandton: Zebra Press.
Lessem, R. (1996). From hunter to rainmaker: The Southern African businessphere . Johannesburg: Know-
ledge Resources.
Lessem, R. and Nussbaum, B. (Eds.). (1996). Sawubona Africa: Embracing four worlds in South African
management. Sandton: Zebra Press.
Makhudu, N. (1993, August). Cultivating a climate of co-operation through Ubuntu. Enterprise Magazine,
48, 40–42.
Mbigi, L. and Maree, J. (1995). Ubuntu: The spirit of African transformation management . Randburg:
Knowledge Resources.
Mthembu, D. (1996). African values: Discovering the indegenous roots of management. In R. Lessem
& B. Nussbaum (Eds.), Sawubona Africa: Embracing four worlds in South African management
(pp. 215–226). Sandton: Zebra Press.
Peterson, R. A. (1979). Revitalizing the culture concept. Annual Review of Sociology, 5, 137–166.
Prinsloo, E. (1996). The Ubuntu style of participatory management. In J. G. Malherbe (Ed.), Decolonizing
the mind: Proceedings of the Second Colloquim on African Philosophy  (pp. 112–127). Pretoria: UNISA
Research Unit for African Philosophy.
Sapir, E. (1963). Language. London: Hart-Davis.
Shutte, A. (1994, July). The Ubuntu project. Paper presented at the 22nd Congress of Philosophical Society
of Southern Africa, University Natal, Durban.
Sienart, E. (1984) Les lais de marie de France. Du conte merveilleux a la nouvelle psychologique . Paris:
Editions Champions.
Wardhaugh, R. (1992). An introduction to sociolinguistics (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Blackwell.
Y anga, T. (1996, May). African studies and the concept of Ubuntu . Paper presented at the Southern African
Folklore Society Regional Conference. Hebron College of Education, Johannesburg.
Y anga, T. (1997, September). African languages and the discourse of African Renaissance . Paper presented at
the Transformation Forum of South Africa Conference on African Renaissance: Setting the Agenda for
the 21st Century. Johannesburg.
Y ousef, F.S. (1978). Communication patterns: some aspects of non-verbal behaviour in intercultural com-
munication. In E. L. Ross (Ed.), Interethnic communication: Southern Anthropological Society Proceed-
ings 12, 49–62. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.
122  NKONKO M. KAMWANGAMALU


--- PAGE 144 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 123
Page 123
9
Constructing the Other
A Critical Reading of The Joy Luck Club
Jing Yin
In 1993, Amy Tan’s (1989) best-seller novel The Joy Luck Club was made into a movie with the
same title by Disney. With the two-million-copy book sale, Tan became an overnight celebrity in
the early 1990s. Tan’s enormous success symbolized the acceptance of Asian Americans to the
mainstream American culture. The movie production further added to this fervor. The movie,
The Joy Luck Club (directed by Wayne Wang), soon proved a box-oﬃce hit. It was ranked 48 in
terms of box-oﬃce income in the ﬁscal year of 1993. It generated approximately $32,901,136 in
the U.S. domestic market alone. The New York Times’ Century Box O ﬃce ranked this movie as
one of the T op Three Movies of that year.
The movie, just like the book, was hailed by many for two reasons: (a) the universal female
theme and (b) Asian actors moving into mainstream. For example, Linda Lopez McAlister
(1993) applauded the movie for the universal mother–daughter bonding:
And though these mothers and daughters are speci ﬁcally Chinese, the theme is universal
and speaks to every woman who ever had a mother and/or a daughter, across ethnic and
racial diﬀerences.
Film critic Roger Ebert (1993) credited the movie as a breakthrough for Asian actors moving
from margin to center:
The movie is a celebration, too, of the richness of Asian-American acting talent . . . But
often they were marginalized, or used in “exotic” roles, or placed in stories that were based
on what made them di ﬀerent from the dominant culture, instead of what makes them
human and universal. “The Joy Luck Club ” is like a ﬂowering of talent that has been
waiting so long to be celebrated.
The Washington Post praised this ﬁlm as “nourishing for its avoidance of Asian stereotypes ”
(Howe, 1993). In fact, another review in The Washington Post  blamed the movie for its
eagerness to present Asian American women in a positive light to ﬁt its “feminist ideology ”
(Hinson, 1993).
All these reviews shared the same theme — Asians or Asian Americans are not “human and
universal” until they become acceptable to the mainstream (dominant culture). The claim of
universality is essentially problematic in that rather than representing a full range of human
beings, it in fact projects or naturalizes particular groups — for example, White, middle class,
123


--- PAGE 145 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 124
Page 124
heterosexual, able-bodied, male, etc. — as “human and universal, ” while it designates others as
less human. Thus, the claim of universality works as a mechanism of exclusion that perpetuates
existing social hierarchies and power structures.
The claim of universality works in all social domains involving power. This particular ﬁlm,
however, concentrates this claim on the issue of race. Asians or Asian Americans can be
upgraded to the “human and universal” category only if they can produce elements shared by
the White audience. This assumption requires Asians or Asian Americans, or all racial or ethnic
minorities for that matter, to give up their own cultural values in order to be assimilated into the
mainstream U.S. culture (M. McAlister, 1992; Y ep, 2002).
Despite the universality that critics credited it with, the movie The Joy Luck Club  reinforced
stereotypical images of Chinese and Chinese Americans. In her website titled “Why The Joy Luck
Club Sucks,” Al Wong (1997), a Chinese-American, wrote that the movie is full of stereotypes of
Chinese Americans or Asian Americans. For example, the movie actually perpetuated the stereo-
type of Chinese women as sexual objects, the “China Doll” (e.g., see Sun, 2003, for a review of
stereotypical media portrayals of Asian American women).
Moreover, rather than breaking stereotypes, this movie further reaﬃrmed the notion of Asia
as the monolithic Other.
1 Indeed this Hollywood presentation confounded the negotiations and
struggles over identities engaged in by Asian Americans or Asians. Kathleen Wong(Lau) (2002)
documented one incident in which a well-meaning White woman claimed to have learned a
lot about her Korean American colleague ’s culture from this movie. Thus, although Asian
Americans are permitted to join the elite class ﬁnancially as the “model minority,” they still
could not escape cultural and political marginalization. They are seen as forever foreign
although they have been living in the United States for several generations, longer than many
European descents (Nakayama, 1988). This double bind is what M. McAlister (1992) called the
new Orientalist/Assimilationist paradigm, which “simultaneously insists on the exotic ‘otherness’
of Asian culture and on the necessity — for Asian Americans— of putting aside all but the most
superﬁcial elements of that culture in order to be assimilated into America ” (p. 104).
The popularity and the ostensible progressiveness of The Joy Luck Club made it the represen-
tative voice of Asian Americans. A couple of years ago, several White female colleagues of mine,
after viewing this movie, showed tremendous sympathy toward me, the “poor” (oppressed)
Chinese girl. Shohat (1991, p. 51) argued that Western ﬁlms assume “the ethnographic and
quasi-archaeological power ” in presenting Others and in turn de ﬁning the “Western” self. It
constructs Chineseness, Asianness, and Asian Americanness for its audiences, Asian or non-
Asian alike. Unlike Tan’s novel, which has been both praised and criticized (e.g., V . Chen, 1995;
M. McAlister, 1992), with the exception of Al Wong’s (1997) critique of stereotypes, the ﬁlm has
not been critically analyzed as a politically charged cultural text. The movie deserves scholarly
attention especially in the context that the U.S. cultural politics reduces the experience of racial
minorities into mere ornamentation to sustain the myth of a diverse society without funda-
mentally challenging the racial hierarchy (M. McAlister, 1992). A critical examination of
the movie The Joy Luck Club  can help us disentangle how such cultural politics and media
representations contribute to the struggle of meanings over cultural or racial identities.
Articulating the Movie T ext
Many communication researchers agree that the mass media are the most powerful storytellers
in modern society (Severin & Tankard, 1997). Indeed the original motivation for communica-
tion study in the United States was the fear of mischievous eﬀects of the media (McQuail, 1987).
The media have become an important source of information and interpretation, especially
for what could not be obtained through ﬁrst-hand experiences (Nimmo & Comb, 1990).
Western ﬁlms, as a form of popular culture, function as “Philosophy, Egyptology, Anthropology,
124  JING YIN


--- PAGE 146 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 125
Page 125
Historiography and Geography” in constructing other (non-Western) cultures (Shohat, 1991). A
very useful way to tackle the discursive power of a movie is to examine it as socially, politically,
culturally, and historically situated text.
My treatment of the text draws from critical and cultural studies. This tradition of research
focuses on two central issues: (a) the politics of textuality (the nature of signi ﬁcation) and (b)
the relationship between the cultural and the social (Grossberg, 1984). These two central issues
lead to dual tasks for the researcher: a hermeneutics of faith and a hermeneutics of suspicion. A
hermeneutics of faith deals with interpreting the meaning of the text; whereas a hermeneutics of
suspicion requires examining the connection between the text and the context in which the text
is produced, distributed, and consumed. The intersection of these two hermeneutics deﬁnes the
“ideological function” of the text (Grossberg, 1984, p. 393).
Examining textual power from this perspective, Althusser (1971) argued that rather than
merely reﬂecting the social order, or producing a system of meaning supporting the existing
social order, the media text works as practices that present its own meaning system as real or
natural. Thus, the power of the text is not re ﬂecting or conﬁrming, but normalizing or natural-
izing certain practices. Building on Althusser ’s argument and Ernesto Laclau ’s (1977) book
Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory, Stuart Hall (1986) contended that the mechanism of the
media text to reinforce normalcy as well as marginality is “articulation.” That is, the media text
does not simply distort or misrepresent the reality (consciously or unconsciously). Rather, it
works through the process that forms “the connection that can make a unity of two di ﬀerent
elements, under certain conditions” (p. 53). This connection is “a linkage which is not necessary,
determined, absolute, and essential for all time ” (p. 53). In other words, articulation is the
connection between two distinct discursive elements that would not ordinarily or naturally be
connected. It is through articulation that a linkage is established. The discursive unity created by
articulation is arbitrary and contingent. Thus, articulation is also a process of intervention of
ideology into language. The dominant group that has institutional, material, and discursive
resources naturalizes its own practices through the control of articulation. The struggle over
meaning is essentially the struggle over articulation.
The theory of articulation is not conﬁned to the domain of discourse. It also has implications
for social forces. Unlike orthodox Marxists, Hall (1986) rejected the necessary correlation
between ideology and social class (or social forces). He maintained that ideological elements do
not have necessary belongingness. A particular form of ideology does not intrinsically belong to
a particular social-economic class. Rather, such connection is contingent and non-necessary.
One’s social identity (class, gender, race, sexuality, etc.) does not necessarily determine one ’s
consciousness. It is through articulation that an ideology discovers and speaks to its political
subjects. An ideology that enables people to make sense of the world and their own positions can
also function to unify those people, political subjects, as a social force or class. For example,
being a female does not necessarily make a woman a feminist. She can be a feminist only if she
accepts the articulation of feminist ideology and uses it to interpret social a ﬀairs. By the same
token, a man can also subscribe to feminist ideology even if he does not have a female identity.
It is precisely because articulation is not necessary, inherent, or determined that any articula-
tion can be broken down and rearticulated in di ﬀerent ways (Hall, 1986). This is where the role
of human agency comes into play. Rather than merely the products of dominant discourse,
human beings, as social actors, can intervene in the articulation process. Thus, they can resist the
dominant discourse through a process of deconstruction-reconstruction.
Therefore, the investigation of the process of how certain meanings and practices are “articu-
lated” or made a coherent unity not only is important to understand the function of media texts
in naturalizing dominant experiences and identities while marginalizing those of the dominated,
but also is critical for challenging the dominant discourse and producing the possibility of
hope. Giroux (2000) argued that “texts are now not only as objects of struggle in challenging
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  125


--- PAGE 147 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 126
Page 126
dominant modes of racial and colonial authority but also as pedagogical resources to rewrite the
possibilities for new narratives, identities, and cultural spaces ” (p. 494). His contention that
media texts should be treated as forms of public pedagogical resource involves more than
deconstruction, it further includes a process of re-construction or re-articulation.
A critique of the movie The Joy Luck Club  is an excellent way to engage in public pedagogy.
This ﬁlm was accepted by many in the United States as a “classic,” “the representative voice of
Asian-Americans.” Indeed, intercultural communication researchers and educators even use
this movie (as well as Tan ’s book) to teach Chinese cultural values and communication styles
(e.g., Athanases, 1993; Hamilton, 1999; Sueda, 1993). Feminist critics either challenge this movie
as an example of female oppression in China, or celebrate it as alternative female narratives or
Asian American feminist literature (e.g., V . Chen, 1995; X. Chen, 1994; Lu, 1998). Many viewers
(including Asian Americans) believe that this movie represented authentic Chineseness or even
Asianness. A Caucasian woman claimed this movie taught her a lot about her Korean American
colleague’s culture (Wong(Lau), 2002). Many of my American students argue that this movie is
very accurate, authentic, and non-stereotypical because Amy Tan and Wayne Wang (the director
of the ﬁlm) are Asian Americans. When hearing my project on The Joy Luck Club , colleagues,
friends, and students always would question me “How on earth could you bash such a nice
(positive) movie about Chinese culture? ” The “ethnographic” power that this movie assumed
in the mainstream U.S. culture makes it problematic and dangerous in the increasingly
diverse society in which we dwell.
2 Thus, we need to critically read this Hollywood movie to
explore how the articulation process contributes to the struggle over meanings of cultural or
racial identities.
My reading of The Joy Luck Club is grounded in sociolinguistics and critical discourse analy-
sis. Sociolinguistics studies the use of language with regard to the interlocutors ’ social/cultural
identities, relations, and contexts (e.g., Fowler, 1996; Gee, 1999; Halliday, 1971; Hatch, 1992). For
example, Fowler ’s (1996) theory of “point of view ” of a narrative tackles the relationships
among characters and with the larger context. Critical discourse analysis deals with “the role of
discourse in the (re)production and challenge of dominance” (van Dijk, 1998, p. 367). Van Dijk
(1988a, 1988b, 1997) and Fairclough (1992, 1995) examined how the dominant ideology is
perpetuated by the structure and content of news. The integration of these two approaches
enables the researcher to not only interpret the meanings of the ﬁlm, but also discern the
ideologies articulated in the movie text.
My treatment of this ﬁlm is not a typical “textual analysis.” T extual analysts seldom delineate
their methods in their research, they, nevertheless, primarily rely on Freudian, Foucaultian, or
Lacanian psychoanalysis of “desire,” which is manifested is the gendered “gaze” (Olesen, 1998).
The theory of “gaze” deals with how the power relations between the origin of the gaze
(e.g., Western males) and the object of the gaze (e.g., women, non-Western cultures, nature, etc.)
are communicated in visual terms (Chow, 1995). Critics of the psychoanalytical ﬁlm approach
contend that the preoccupation on sexual desires ignores other factors such as race and class, as
well as the importance of the context (e.g., Pribram, 1988). De Lauretis (1984) proposed to
explore alternative ﬁlm analysis methods, for example, semiotic theories of iconicity and nar-
rativity. Therefore, rather than focusing on the subconscious psyche, my approach emphasizes
the actual use of language in the movie text. Inspired by sociolinguistics and critical discourse
analysis, I examine the ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club as a socially, politically, culturally, and historically
situated text.
Clashes of Cultures3
Hall’s theory of articulation directs our attention to the connections between certain meanings
and practices established by the text. My analysis of the movie The Joy Luck Club focuses on the
126  JING YIN


--- PAGE 148 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 127
Page 127
articulation process by which the movie text associated speci ﬁc meanings with Chinese and
American cultures.4
This movie presents a series of stories about four Chinese mothers and their American-born
daughters. The development of the mother/daughter relationships centered on con ﬂicts, with
the mothers’ attempts to maintain control on the one hand and the daughters ’ wishes to run
free. Contrary to what ﬁlm critics claimed to be universal women bonding, the movie articulated
the mother/daughter conﬂicts as clashes between the American and Chinese cultures.
An example of such construction is June ’s piano lessons. June had no interest in the piano;
however, her mother forced her to play it in order to compete with Auntie Lindo, whose daughter
was a gifted chess champion. Lacking genuine interest and internal motivation, June resented the
piano lessons. As a result, her debut ended in disaster. After that, June saw no reason to continue
this torture, but her mother would not give up the idea. Then a conﬂict took place (see Example 1).
Example 1:
1 Mother: Four o ’clock. Turn oﬀ TV . Practice piano time. What I say? Four o’clock.
2 June: I am not gonna play anymore. Why should I?
3 Mother: What did you say?
4 June: I am not your slave. This isn ’t China. Y ou can’t make me!
5 Mother: Get up!
6 June: No! No, I won ’t! No!
7 Mother: (grabs June and forces her to sit in front of the piano).
8 June: Y ou want me to be someone I am not. I’ll never be the kind of daughter you
9 want me to be.
10 Mother: There two kind of daughters, obedient or follow own mind.
Only one kind of
11 daughter could live in this house, obedient kind.
12 June: Then I wish I wasn ’t your daughter! I wish you weren’t my Mom!
This story was narrated from June’s point of view. June, as the narrator, was the center of the
sympathetic portrayal. She was a child who had her own will and opinion. She resisted her
mother’s imposing things on her against her own will. In Lines 2 and 6, she verbally declared
that she would not continue practicing the piano, which she perceived as an imposition. For her,
she could only be what she is rather than “someone I am not ” (Line 8). In addition to this
declaration, she resorted to her right of freedom by saying “I am not your slave! ” (Line 4). In
the same line she backed her utterance up by insisting that such imposition was not the norm in
the United States, “This is not China. Y ou can’t make me!”
A story can be constructed in diﬀerent ways from diﬀerent perspectives. The point of view of
a narrative determines the relationships among characters and with the outside world. It reﬂects
the ideology of the author (or the ﬁlm makers) (Fowler, 1996). In this case, the character June
was given the power to deﬁne her relationship with her mother and to make sense of the world.
Her insistence on individual freedom echoes the myth of the American culture, which makes her
the “normal.”
The construction of her mother was through June ’s eyes. The mother was portrayed as a bit
abusive, verbally and physically. She tried to shape her daughter ’s future according to her own
ideal without considering her daughter ’s feelings. Faced with June ’s resistance, the mother
resorted to verbal demands “get up” (Line 5), physical force (Line 7), and her authority by virtue
of her status as mother. She put emphasis on the obligations of the daughter and used it as a
threat, “There two kinds of daughters, obedient or follow own mind. Only one kind of daughter
could live in this house, obedient kind” (Lines 10–11).
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  127


--- PAGE 149 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 128
Page 128
From June’s point of view, her mother ’s action was de ﬁned as imposition and her intention
was deﬁned as unjustiﬁed, using June to compete with Auntie Lindo. The mother ’s perspective
was ignored, as a result, she was deprived of the power to voice her interpretation of the issue.
Furthermore, the mother’s reasoning— asking the daughter to be obedient — does not resonate
with the norms and values of the mainstream U.S. American culture, which makes her abnormal
or less humane. The mother, thus, contrary to June, was presented as the oppressive Other.
Cross-generation conﬂict may not be particular to any culture, but what needs to be noted
here is that the con ﬂicts in this movie were constructed as cultural rather than idiosyncratic or
universal. Throughout the movie, the mother –daughter conﬂicts were constructed in one pat-
tern, that is, all the daughters were trying to assert their well-deserved individuality, where
the mothers tried to prevent that for reasons that were bizarre or ridiculous. For example, Lindo,
Waverly’s mother, used her daughter ’s chess championship to show o ﬀ in Chinatown, which
was seen as an embarrassment by Waverly. In a quarrel with her mother, Waverly also perceived
her mother as a force of repression: “I’m never gonna play chess again! Y ou can’t make me! Y ou
can torture me all you want. I still won’t!”
Thus, by representing the conﬂicts as patterned, this movie suggests that those con ﬂicts were
in fact clashes between the American and Chinese cultures. With the absence of a White center,
the American-born daughters, who were eager to be assimilated into the White middle-class
American culture, were promoted to the center, while the Chinese mothers represented the
Other, Chinese culture. In addition, this movie further associated speci ﬁc values with each
culture. The American culture was linked to freedom and humanism, whereas Chinese culture
was connected to abuse (e.g., “Y ou can torture me all you want ”), coercion, and irrationality.
Through this type of articulation, the movie constructed the dichotomy between the humane
Self and the sexist, oppressive, mysterious, inscrutable, exotic, and savage cultural/racial Other
(Bhabha, 1994; Said, 1978). The reinforcement of the Other in turn sustains the myth of the
positive and normal Western Self (Jandt & Tanno, 2001).
In this movie, the construction of the two cultures was accomplished through dichotomized
articulation. The American culture was presented as normal and competent, while Chinese
culture was depicted as deﬁcient. This manifested in the languages that the mothers and daugh-
ters speak. Although both mothers and daughters speak English on most occasions, the mothers’
English is broken or fractured with a Chinese accent, (e.g., “What I say” in Line 1 and “There
two kind of daughters, obedient or follow own mind ” in Line 10 in Example 1). This kind of
pidgin English was viewed as de ﬁcient or stupid by their daughters. In sharp contrast to their
mothers, the daughters speak perfect White middle-class American English. This both re ﬂects
and reinforces the linguistic prejudice that is prevalent in the American society. The so-called
“standard English” (i.e., that of White middle class), is considered as intelligent and uplifting.
Any deviation from this norm is seen as stupid, uneducated, or de ﬁcient. In this movie, the
mothers’ less perfect English was a source of embarrassment for the daughters. At times,
they assumed that their mothers were too incompetent to communicate with others so they
volunteered to serve as translators. By so doing, they helped silence the mothers.
However, contrary to the contempt of the mothers ’ failure in acquiring a second language,
English, the daughters ’ inability to understand their mothers ’ Chinese was represented as
unproblematic. The Chinese language, which was impenetrable to the daughters, was linked to
conspiracy or corruption. The two di ﬀerent types of speech codes — systems of symbols, which
can be more than one language (Philipsen, 1992) — thus, were articulated in association with
diﬀerent values: one stupid, impenetrable, and cunning; the other competent, promising, and
uplifting. Indeed, White middle-class American English was treated as the norm against which
the mothers’ language was evaluated and judged. The Chinese language was constructed as a
barrier to assimilation into the mainstream American culture.
This dichotomized articulation is also manifested in the construction of the rational Self
128  JING YIN


--- PAGE 150 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 129
Page 129
versus the irrational Other. American cultural values, represented by the daughters, were pre-
sented as rational and reasonable, whereas Chinese cultural values associated with the mothers
were made to appear irrational or ridiculous. The mother–daughter bonding stories were indeed
a cluster of value collisions. For example, Lindo and Waverley’s conﬂicts were often around cul-
tural/relational assumptions. They had an argument before Waverley’s wedding (see Example 2).
Waverly had oﬀered to accompany her mother to the beauty parlor before the wedding, but later
she called Lindo to excuse herself.
Example 2:
14 Mother: So you see I still kept my promise to my mother. But years later, things were
15 somewhat di ﬀerent with my daughter Waverly’s wedding.
16 (Phone rings)
17 Mother: Wei.
18 Waverly: Ma, It ’s me.
19 Mother: Oh, Waverly-ya, you already at the beauty parlor?
20 Waverly: No.
21 Mother: No?
22 Waverly: No. I ’m . . . I have a headache.
23 Mother: Headache? Y ou have a headache so you cannot keep your promise to your
24 mother?
25 Waverly: Ma!
26 Mother: No, don ’t come. Why should I want you to come? Why not you telling me
27 you don ’t want to come?
28 Waverly: Ma, that ’s not what I said!
29 Mother: What ’s wrong with the way I look now. I just go to wedding with my old
30 hair. (hangs up the phone)
31 Waverly: Shit! She always does that!
In this story, two di ﬀerent assumptions were underlying their communication. For the
mother, a daughter should not consider herself as the center of everything, and she should
give higher priority to her mother. Once a promise is made to the mother, it should be kept
(e.g., Lines 14–15, 23–24). However, for Waverly, breaking an arrangement is no big deal, and it
can hardly be seen as breaking a serious promise. Her individual interests should be given
highest priority in any consideration. It is not necessary for her to sacri ﬁce herself for her
mother. She could cancel a previous arrangement with her mother for a good reason, “I’m  ...  I
have a headache” (Line 22).
The di ﬀerent assumptions resulted in frustration on both sides. Lindo and Waverly both
assumed that the other party was insincere and manipulative. The mother perceived that her
daughter was not willing to be there for her (Lines 26 –27) and was telling her excuses, that is, a
“headache” (Line 23). The daughter interpreted that her mother was ignoring her personal will
and need. For Waverly, her mother was very authoritarian and tried to coerce her to do things
against her own wish.
Unlike the story of June ’s piano lesson, this story was narrated from the mother ’s point of
view. However, like the previous story, this story did not shed positive light on the mother.
Walter Fisher (1984, 1985, 1987) argued that persuasion can take place only if audiences accept
the truthfulness of the text. By truthfulness, Fisher does not mean the authenticity of the text or
some notion of absolute truth. It is whether the text resonates with the values shared by audi-
ences. In this case, to most of the middle-class audience members in the United States, who share
individualistic beliefs and values, Waverly ’s reason for not going to the beauty parlor is more
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  129


--- PAGE 151 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 130
Page 130
acceptable than her mother ’s request to keep her promise. Lindo ’s requests were based on
collectivistic assumptions. They do not ring true to American audiences. As a result, she
sounded demanding and needy. By merely presenting the mother ’s behavior without necessary
contextalization (i.e., to put those behaviors in their historical, cultural backgrounds within
which those behaviors were generated and shared), the movie constructed Chinese cultural
values as strange, oppressive, and less humane. Once more, Chinese culture was articulated as
the strange, exotic, mysterious, and inscrutable cultural/racial Other, as opposed to the normal
positive American Self.
Representation of Cultures
The movie The Joy Luck Club  as part of the new Orientalist/Assimilationist discourse simul-
taneously insists on “universality” and “otherness” (M. McAlister, 1992). In other words, it
directs Asians or Asian Americans to be assimilated into the mainstream American culture, at
the same time it denies them the opportunity for full participation (Y ep, 2002). On the one
hand, cultural heritages of ethnic or racial minorities were always associated with negative
meanings, such as uncivilized, backward, poverty, etc.
5 This results in self-hatred and hatred of
the Other. Shedding those cultural identities was made an imperative for liberation, freedom,
and prosperity (Morris, 2004). However, on the other hand, ethnic or racial minorities are
forever seen as foreign. Certain cultural symbols such as Chinatown, sushi, and karate were
insisted upon to maintain the exotic “otherness” (M. McAlister, 1992). In this section, I will use
this ﬁlm as a case study to delineate the articulation strategies of new orientalist/assimilationist
discourses.
The media text works through conditioning audience members’ interpretations (Hall, 1980).
Audience members from marginalized groups might be able to read the text oppositionally, but
to do so requires extra work and the access to counter-rhetorics (Condit, 1991). That is, mem-
bers of marginalized groups need to realize the dominant meaning of the text before they can
engage in oppositional readings. Although recognizing the potential resistance of audience
members, this study focuses on the process through which the text exercises its ideological power
through diﬀerent articulations (S. Hall, 1986).
In this section, I will focus on three types of articulation through which the movie text
established certain discursive connections to construct the positive Self and the negative Other.
These three types of articulation include: selective presentation, attribution, and subsumption.
Selective presentation
The primary power of media text is selective presentation (S. Hall, 1980). In the process of
selection and representation, certain discursive elements were allowed to appear in the text,
while others were excluded. This selectionre-presentation process de ﬁnes the range of potential
interpretations (Corner, 1983). Wolfe (1992) argued that, rather than idiosyncratic, interpret-
ation of the text is “a culturally determined practice rooted in codes shared by message-makers
and -consumers belonging to the same culture ” (p. 272). The text constitutes meanings for the
audience by highlighting certain meanings while excluding others (Carragee, 1990). Even when
the audience engages in critical or oppositional reading, he or she still ﬁrst realizes the preferred
reading of the text (Condit, 1991; Corner, 1983). Thus, what is included in and what is excluded
from a text are crucial to understand the ideological nature of the text.
The ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club, like any other forms of cultural texts, is the product of selective
representation. The producers of the ﬁlm, consciously or unconsciously, chose to include only
the negative aspects of Chinese culture, while excluding the positives. All the mothers ’ stories,
which took place in China, were tragedies.
130  JING YIN


--- PAGE 152 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 131
Page 131
Lindo’s mother arranged for her to marry a 10-year-or-so-old boy whom she had never met
before the wedding. Her cruel mother-in-law treated her as a reproduction machine and con-
stantly blamed her for not having a baby with the boy, who was too young to be a husband.
Yingying was married to a womanizer husband. She killed her own baby because of the rage she
felt due to her husband ’s inﬁdelity and abuse. Suyan left her twin baby girls in the street while
taking refuge during the war. An Mei lived in the misery of her mother. An Mei ’s mother was
thrown out of the family by her own mother because she had been raped on a trip. Homeless
and pregnant, An Mei ’s mother was forced to marry the rapist. Eventually, she committed
suicide to end her suﬀering.
All these Chinese stories were presented as examples of irrationality or madness. The movie
discourse invites the audience to believe that it is Chinese culture, which is cruel, oppressive, and
irrational, that predetermined and caused the mothers’ agony. Leaving Chinese culture is a literal
and ﬁgurative escape from misery and suﬀering. The representation of the mothers’ stories thus
articulated Chinese culture as the negative, sexist, repressive, and inhumane cultural Other.
Contrary to the negative Other, Chinese culture, the representation of the American culture
showed the positives only. The United States was constructed as a haven for the oppressed
mothers. Only in the United States could they leave that su ﬀering behind. And only in the new
country were they able to provide their daughters with material comfort. The only thing that
prevented them from further prospering is the baggage that they carried from China. This
baggage was not only the barrier that prevented them from being assimilated into the main-
stream American culture, but also the cause of the mother–daughter conﬂicts. Indeed, the movie
constructed the mothers as the carriers of the negative Other, Chinese culture, who would
pollute the positive Self.
Although American culture was not constructed as homogeneous as in the case of Chinese
culture, it included only the middle-class culture. The middle class was projected as the universal
class in the United States. The movie implies that anyone who comes to the United States will
automatically become a member of the middle class. All the Chinese mothers, who had been
miserable in China, got married, had children, and bought big houses after they came to the
United States. Any deviation from the “American dream ” can be attributed to laziness or
stupidity of the individual. And none of them had a place in this movie.
The daughters’ stories further conformed to this theme. Unlike their mothers’ experiences in
China, the daughters ’ encounters in the United States were constructed as generally positive.
Waverly’s White middle-class ﬁanceé had genuine interests in Waverly as an individual and her
cultural baggage, her family. He made eﬀorts to adapt to exotic Chinese customs. Rose’s husband
rescued her from his mother ’s blatant racism. It was Rose ’s subservient Chinese character and
lack of spirit that made her unlovable. Once she got rid of them, her husband fell in love with
her all over again. The only incident that was completely negative was Lena ’s marriage to a
Chinese American man, who was not fully American. This Chinese American man was Lena ’s
employer and made seven times more than she did. However, this calculating man insisted on
Lena paying 50 percent for all their expenses.
This movie thus associated Chinese culture with the negative — war and chaos, lack of free-
dom, gender inequality, brutality, and savageness — while it connected the American culture to
the positive— freedom, prosperity, and civilization. Selective presentation is critical to the con-
struction of the dichotomous relationship of the positive Self and the negative Other, because
the positive Self image is possible only when it is placed against the negative Other that repre-
sents the lack of values (Jandt & Tanno, 2001). This ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club  presented a direct
contrast of the Self and the Other in the opening narration:
On her journey she [the Chinese woman] cooed to the swan: “In America I will have a
daughter, just like me. But over there, nobody will say her worth is measured by the
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  131


--- PAGE 153 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 132
Page 132
loudness of her husband’s belch. Over there, nobody will look down on her, because I will
make her speak only perfect American English. And over there, she will always be too full
to swallow any sorrow.”
This narration juxtaposed the negative China and the promises of the new land, the United
States. Compared with China, the patriarchal and hierarchical society, the United States was
presented as a place that promised gender equality and free competition based on individual
ability and achievement — being able to “speak only perfect American English. ” Above all, the
United States was associated with happiness or pleasure, as opposed to China, which was con-
nected to “sorrow.” In this movie, the abstract concept of happiness or pleasure was further
substantiated with consumerism in June’s narration:
Now the woman was old. And she had a daughter growing up speaking only English, and
swallowing more Coca-Cola than sorrow.
The selective representation was achieved not only through the principle of inclusion/
exclusion, but also through de-contextualization. In addition to representing the negatives only,
this ﬁlm abstracted Chinese communicative acts out of the socio-cultural contexts in which
they are socially constructed, shared, and intelligible.
Philipsen (1992) argued that any type of talk (or other communicative acts) is culturally and
historically constituted. It re ﬂects a distinct way of thinking or distinct system of meanings. It
can be understood properly only in that local context. Once the communicative act is removed
from its local context, misinterpretation or misunderstanding might occur. The Joy Luck Club
abstracted some Chinese communicative acts, which are based on Chinese frame of reference,
and re-signiﬁed them into the White middle-class American system of meanings. This process of
appropriation robs o ﬀ the original meanings — bound by the historical and cultural forces yet
multiaccentuate (Fowler, 1996)— and enciphers them into the system that ﬁts American middle-
class ideology (Ono & Buescher, 2001). The issue here is not that re-signi ﬁcation or appropri-
ation distorts some authentic meaning. Rather, it contributes to establish, maintain, and
reinforce certain ideology — White middle-class American ideology in this case — while chal-
lenging, contesting, and undermining others (i.e., Chinese cultural values).
For example, one theme throughout the movie is the notion of “hope.” In her introduction to
the Joy Luck Club, a casual association of the Chinese mothers, June narrated:
For so many years these women feasted, forgot past wrongs, laughed and played, lost and
won, and told the best stories. Each week they hoped to be lucky. And that hope was their
only joy. Their connections with each other had more to do with hope than joy or luck.
This notion of “hope” was originated in Chinese culture and was bounded by its historical
and cultural contexts. In Chinese culture, people are understood in regards to their relations to
the collective rather than as individuals (Chen & Starosta, 1998). A person is not a complete
entity without considering his or her origins (ancestors) and decedents. The ancestor –self–oﬀ-
spring circle constitutes the past –present–future entity of the individual. The notion of hope
needs to be interpreted in relation to the Chinese notion of personhood. It is more than the wish
that one has for oneself. It is something that people wish, expect, plan, and attempt for them-
selves and their o ﬀspring. Oftentimes a hope for a particular family member would also mean
sacriﬁce on the part of other members. The family, as a whole, would work toward that hope.
Thus, hope involves more than wishes. It is associated with interdependence, sacriﬁce, and hard
work. Hopes for children are considered as a responsibility of parents. Not being able to ful ﬁll
this responsibility is viewed as the failure of being a person.
132  JING YIN


--- PAGE 154 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 133
Page 133
However, the term hope was deprived of its historical –cultural contexts in the ﬁlm and was
re-contextualized and given the frame of reference of the White middle-class American culture.
As a result, the Chinese notion of hope, with the presence of its form only, was interpreted as
restraints and burdens on the free will of the individual. The daughters, who identify themselves
with middle-class Americans, resented this Chinese version of hope and perceived it as a barrier
to being “normal” and “free.”
In the ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club, selective representation is the primary form of articulation that
constructed Chinese culture as the negative Other, and the middle-class American culture as the
positive Self. Through strategic exclusion, it represented Chinese culture as the composite of the
lack of values, the racial Other, which in turn con ﬁrmed the positive Self image of the United
States. Moreover, the articulation process is more than establishing connections. It is achieved
also through obscuring or disengaging connections that would not serve the interest of the
dominant group. This ﬁlm disconnected Chinese communicative acts of their culture-speci ﬁc
interpretive framework in which they are constituted and socially shared. By so doing, it denied
the potential for positive interpretations of Chinese cultural values and communicative acts.
Culture vs. personality
Another type of articulation in this ﬁlm is attribution. Attribution is the process of making
sense of certain behaviors or events. Attribution is an attempt for people to explain human
experiences by locating some sort of cause. It provides a sense of closure for people. Attribution,
however, is also a means of articulation because it makes connections of human actions to
speciﬁc reasons, thus assigning speciﬁc meanings to those actions.
The movie The Joy Luck Club used diﬀerent attribution mechanisms in representing Chinese
and American cultures. The mothers’ miserable experiences were attributed to Chinese culture.
However, the daughters’ encounters with mean people in the American society were attributed
to individual personalities.
In this movie, Chinese culture was constructed as a monolithic collective. Each member was a
representative or a part of the whole entity. Any individual negative incident or wrongdoing
was rooted in the collective. Culture, in this case, is treated as a script, which determines
the behaviors of its members (B. “J.” Hall, 1992). It is the cruel, sexist, irrational nature of the
culture that predetermined the fates of all the four women (the mothers). Compared to the
negative force of the culture, individual eﬀorts and struggles for change were futile or negligible.
All the four mothers’ stories, as argued earlier, were tragedies. Although diﬀerent women have
diﬀerent experiences, all those experiences were represented in similar ways. They all happened
in an irrational manner, in madness. The audience was told that there was no rationality in
Chinese culture and that Chinese people were diﬀerent. In fact, Mark R. Leeper (1993) remarked
on the movie:
Y et by the time the full story is revealed we have seen how diﬀerent mainland Chinese
culture is from our own and we will come to understand Suyuan ’s actions.
(emphasis added)
The attribution of the mothers ’ dreadful experiences to Chinese culture rather than particu-
lar situations accented the notion of Chinese culture as the cruel, sexist, inscrutable, irrational
Other. This rea ﬃrmed that all the Chinese cultural values were opposite to enlightenment,
freedom, or humanity. Thus it reinforced the notion that members of minority groups need to
cast oﬀ their cultural values in order to be liberated or emancipated (Morris, 2004).
Contrary to the representation of Chinese culture, the American culture was constructed as
an aggregation of individuals. Each individual is responsible for his or her own rational choices
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  133


--- PAGE 155 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 134
Page 134
rather than for the group as a whole. Negative experiences in American culture can be inter-
preted as encountering particular kinds of individuals, some jerks, who are di ﬀerent from the
“decent” middle class. In this case, culture is viewed as a loosely structured community, in which
all the rational members reside. Culture, thus, is not directly connected to individual incidents.
Nor is it deterministic force on personal actions. Individuals (i.e., their personalities, psyches, or
pathology) are responsible for their behaviors and the subsequent consequences. As a result,
members of this community can change their lives by alternating their behaviors.
Ignoring inequalities caused by the social political system in the United States, the movie
constructed a free world, the positive Self, which promises everyone equal opportunity. It con-
nected the U.S. American culture to “true humanity,” or universal humanity. This humanity is
also that standard against which all other cultures should be evaluated and judged.
Speciﬁcally, in this movie, the unpleasant experiences in the daughters’ stories were attributed
to the individuals rather than culture. For example, in her marriage to a Chinese American man,
Lena had to pay for 50 percent of their expenses, despite the fact that Lena worked for that man
and only made one-seventh of his salary. This Chinese-American man, unlike Chinese men in
China who were blatantly brutal, was portrayed as a jerk as opposed to the model immigrants
that the daughters represented.
6 Thus, the movie implied that what kind of person one turns out
to be in American culture is completely a personal matter. Any link between the devious
behavior of a particular person and the American culture or the whole system was denied.
Furthermore, the jerk image of the Chinese-American man also rea ﬃrmed the notion that
Asian-Americans, by their association with the negative Other, were not fully American. They
remain as outsider or foreigner no matter what.
Unlike Lena’s Chinese American husband, the White males in Waverly and Rose ’s lives were
represented as positive. Waverly’s ﬁancé was a lovely White middle-class man, who was inter-
ested in exploring the exotic Chinese American culture. In order to be accepted by his future
in-laws, he even tried to acquire some exotic Chinese customs, for example, using chopsticks to
eat. However, this “well-meaning” White person was still rejected by the mean, picky, authorita-
tive, and inscrutable Chinese mother, Lindo. This story invites audiences to view Chinese culture
through the voyeurist lens. Chinese culture, like any racial Others, is treated as a primitive land,
which invites the White man to venture and to conquer.
Rose’s White upper-class husband, T ed, had a more heroic image in this movie. When she
ﬁrst met T ed’s parents, Rose was faced with T ed ’s mother ’s blatant racism (see Example 3).
Mrs. Jordan, T ed’s mother, like many White people who are blind to their own discriminative
attitude and behavior, claimed that her family was a “liberal family” (Line 32). However, despite
that claim, she felt no hesitation to express her objection to Rose because of her cultural or racial
background (Lines 35–37). She further justiﬁed her discrimination by saying that is “the way the
world is” (Line 41) and “how unpopular Vietnam is” (Lines 41–42).
Example 3:
32 Mrs. Jordan: I want you to know, Rose, that we ’re a very liberal family.
33 Rose narrating: I couldn ’t believe what she was telling me. It came straight out of
34 some awful racist movie, like The World of Susie Wang.
35 Mrs. Jordan: T ed is going to be working with his father’s company, and he’s
36 going to be judged by people of a di ﬀerent standard,
publishers,
37 authors, critics and their wives. And they wouldn ’t be as
38 understanding as we are.
39 Rose: Mrs. Jordan, you sound as if T ed and I are getting married. That is
40 hardly the case.
134  JING YIN


--- PAGE 156 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 135
Page 135
41 Mrs. Jordan: Oh, I know dear, It ’s just, that well the way the world is, how
42 unpopular Vietnam is.
43 Rose: I am not a Vietnamese. I am an American.
44 Mrs. Jordan: Of course you are. It ’s just, I understand you. That’s all I am
45 trying to say. Do you understand?
46 T ed: Mom.
47 Mrs. Jordan: Hello, darling. We’re having a wonderful conversation.
48 T ed: Y ou know I always knew you were a . . . jerk. But shit, this is the
49 ﬁrst time in my life I am ashamed of you.
50 Mrs. Jordan: How dare you use that language? I think you better apologize right
51 now!
52 T ed: I’m sorry Mom, you made a fucking asshole of yourself in front of
53 the woman I love. We ’re out of here Rose.
Although the movie exposed and criticizes the racist elements in American culture, it still
constructed racism as an individual matter. Mrs. Jordan was depicted as a super-conservative
and hypocritical woman, who was not to be seen as a representative of the whole culture. Rose’s
narration in Lines 33–34 implied that this was an atypical encounter for a Chinese American like
herself. By presenting racism as aberrant incidents, the movie further projected the United States
as a free land with no systematic inequalities. That is, although some terrible incidents might
happen, the system in the United States is generally good. Rose’s response further conﬁrmed this
projection. Instead of claiming her Chinese heritage, Rose defended herself by avowing her
identity as “an American” (Line 43). This assertion was a double bind. It was of course Rose ’s
attempt to ﬁght back against Mrs. Jordan’s discrimination and to gain an equal standing. At the
same time, however, it assumed that the identity of “an American” was superior to any other. It
also reﬂected the illusion that model minorities such as the daughters were permitted to become
full members of the mainstream U.S. American culture.
As the story developed, T ed came to Rose’s rescue. He confronted his mother by declaring “I
always know you were a . . . jerk ” (Lines 48 –49). This again convinced the audience that the
presence of racism depends on the particular individual. Therefore, racism has nothing to do
with the social structure or larger ideology. Furthermore, the con ﬂict pertaining to the racial
issue was revolved in a sexist fashion in which the female was weak and needed to be rescued by
her hero.
In a nutshell, attribution is another means of articulation in the constructing of cultures in
this movie. The mothers’ suﬀerings were attributed to the collective, Chinese culture, which was
portrayed as homogenous. Chinese culture predetermined the fates of its people, which could
not be changed by human e ﬀorts. The attribution to the collective deprived Chinese people of
human agency and made Chinese culture into the negative Other, which is opposite to the
positive or normal Self. On the other hand, negative incidents in United States were explained as
a result of individuals (jerks) who should be accountable for their own actions. This attribution
transformed societal or system issues into the personal. It thus denied the need for collective
actions to challenge the existing social and political relationships.
Class, gender vs. culture
Still another type of articulation in the movie The Joy Luck Club is the subsumption of class and
gender to culture. Ono and Buescher (2001) noted that in Disney ’s appropriation of other
cultures, the boundaries of class, gender, and race collapse, that is, racism and sexism are
intertwined in the process of commodiﬁcation. The media text evokes racial and gender inequal-
ity simultaneously. Therefore it should not be read through a single lens. However, in any text,
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  135


--- PAGE 157 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 136
Page 136
not all the three elements have equal weight. One may be more prominent. It subordinates the
other two. In The Joy Luck Club , the issues of class and gender are subsumed to the issue of
culture (race). Class and gender are denied or translated into the cultural or racial terms.
For instance, in this movie, class was never a real issue. In Chinese culture, where human
suﬀering was pervasive, class was somehow not the cause of grief. Chinese people lived dreadful
lives regardless of their socio-economic standings. A rich girl (Yingying) was married to a
womanizer husband; a wealthy widow (An Mei’s mother) was raped by a brutal rich guy and was
deserted by her own family; a wife of a military o ﬃcer (Suyuan) lost her babies during the war.
Even in the case of Lindo, who came from a poor family and was married into a rich one
through a family arrangement, class was not accented as the cause of Lindo’s misery. She was not
sold because of the situation of her family. It was the bizarre “arranged marriage ” custom in
Chinese culture that resulted in her unhappy life. By rendering socio-economic classes irrelevant
or negligible, The Joy Luck Club laid the blame on Chinese culture, the negative Other.
In American culture, class was further diminished. All the Chinese immigrants and their
descendants were model immigrants, who join the middle class through working hard in the free
land. All the Americans that those Chinese immigrants encountered were middle or upper-
middle class. Class struggles did not exist in the movie. The concept of class itself becomes an
invisible category beyond commonsense.
The subsumption of class into culture helped construct a hierarchy of cultures, with Chinese
culture at the bottom, American culture at the top, and Chinese American culture in the middle.
In this movie the American White middle class was the center of true humanity, to which
Chinese culture, the negative Other, was the complete opposite. Unlike their mothers, who were
the real exotic Other, the Chinese American daughters were becoming closer to the mainstream
American culture through assimilation. When the White center was absent, the American-born
daughters were promoted to the center as model minorities to con ﬁrm that the system in the
United States is working (Nakayama, 1988). Such subsumption reinforces the idea that shedding
one’s cultural identity is the only means of liberation and prosperity (Morris, 2004).
Although the movie temporarily promoted the daughters to the center with the absence of
the White center, it still managed to construct the Chinese-American culture as a collective.
When the White center did appear, the American-born daughters were demoted to the margin
again. Thus, despite their economic success, Asian Americans are never real members of the Self
no matter how hard they have been trying (Takaki, 1998; Y ep, 2002). They are required to keep
certain cultural elements as ornaments to sustain their Otherness. Contrary to mainstream
ﬁlm critics’ arguments, The Joy Luck Club reinforced stereotypical images of Chinese or Chinese
American women as “the lotus baby ” or “China doll, ” the sexual object (Sun, 2003) and
Chinese men as sexist and brutal. Those stereotypes perpetuate the foreignness or otherness of
Chinese Americans who have lived in the United States for generations.
Unlike class, gender did play a major role in this movie. However, instead of patriarchy, the
movie attributed female issues to Chinese culture, the cultural/racial Other. Rather than men,
this movie depicted those Chinese women who endorsed cruel cultural customs as the real cause
of female suﬀerings. Lindo’s unhappy marriage was arranged by her own mother, although her
father was also present in the movie. It was not the cruel and insensitive boy-husband, but her
ridiculous mother-in-law who expected her to have a baby with the 10-year-old husband.
Instead of the man who raped her, the grief endured by An Mei’s mother was caused by her own
mother and that man ’s second wife. Her own mother ’s intolerance forced her to marry the
rapist. And that man’s second wife had trapped An Mei’s mother for the rape and later took her
baby away. It was women themselves, rather than men, who caused pain for other women.
Unlike feminist scholars who argue that in the process of hegemony women are inscribed in
dominant patriarchal ideology (e.g., hooks, 1994), this movie ascribed it to Chinese culture.
Gender thus collapses into the cultural in the ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club.
136  JING YIN


--- PAGE 158 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 137
Page 137
What needs to be noted is that although this movie challenged women ’s problems in the
context of Chinese culture, it turned blind to gender issues in the United States. The movie
deﬁned the gender issue as a unique Chinese problem, which did not exist in the United States. It
projected that in the United States, women would enjoy equal rights as men do, a myth ascribed
by people both in and outside the United States. For example, June ’s mother believed: “In
America I will have a daughter, just like me. But over there, nobody will say her worth is
measured by the loudness of her husband’s belch.”
Even in cases when the gender issue did arise, such as in Rose’s marriage, the movie managed
to categorize it as a Chinese problem. Rose gave up her chance to study abroad in order to
support her husband’s career. However, after a while her husband found her boring and had an
extramarital aﬀair. Instead of addressing it as a gender issue, the movie constructed that it was
the Chinese cultural baggage that prevented Rose from speaking up for herself. An Mei, Rose ’s
mother, explained the situation in the following words:
I tell you the story because I was raised the Chinese way. I was taught to desire nothing, to
swallow other people’s misery, and to eat my own bitterness. And even though I taught my
daughter the opposite, but still she came out the same way. Maybe it is because she was
born to me and she was born a girl, I was born to my mother and I was born a girl. All of
us like stairs, one after another, going up, going down, but always the same way.
The diﬀerent articulation of gender issues in this movie subsumed gender to culture. It in
fact rea ﬃrmed the racist “saving brown women from brown men ” ideology (Shohat, 1991).
Ironically, while constantly lamenting the cruel treatments of women in China, and presuming
that women have the rights they deserve in the United States, this movie actually helped to
legitimize and perpetuate the vulnerable images of females by presenting them as objects of
being protected, rescued, and loved by males. Rose was rescued by her boyfriend from the insult
of his “jerk” mother and thus fell in love with her hero.
Concluding Thoughts
This study used Stuart Hall ’s theory of articulation to analyze the ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club .
Through articulation, this movie constructed Chinese culture as the sexist, oppressive, mysteri-
ous, inscrutable, exotic, and savage cultural Other (Bhabha, 1994; Said, 1978). The representa-
tion of the negative Other in turn sustains the myth of the White middle-class American culture
as the positive Self. This construction re ﬂects the new Orientalist/Assimilationist paradigm,
which simultaneously requires Asian Americans to be assimilated into mainstream American
culture and maintains the exotic “otherness” of Asian cultures (M. McAlister, 1992). On the one
hand, it insists that members of minority groups need to cast o ﬀ their cultural identities and to
obey and follow the rules of the dominant group. On the other hand, however, it would not
permit those people to fully participate in creating those rules (Y ep, 2002).
My reading of the ﬁlm The Joy Luck Club in this study may not represent the interpretations
of average audience members. Radway (1984) reminded us that the audiences or readers may
use interpretive strategies diﬀerent from literary critics. T extual analysis is elitist for it privileges
the readings of scholars rather than those of the average audience (Turner, 1990). The arguments
made in this article may be di ﬀerent from the interpretations of ordinary audience members.
However, a critical examination of popular culture texts is a political project that aims at
empowerment and emancipation. It is an attempt to understand the power of the ﬁlm as a
politically charged cultural text and as part of public pedagogy (Giroux, 2002).
Scholars such as Tanno (1997), Tanno and Jandt (1993/1994) and Jandt and Tanno (2001) have
raised our awareness about the knowledge production process that perpetuates the monolithic
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  137


--- PAGE 159 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 138
Page 138
cultural Other as the object of research. They argue that we need to encode self-determination
through “appreciation of diﬀerences” and “label appropriation” (the practice of labeling through
conscious choices) in multicultural research and education. Popular culture is equally, if not
more, powerful in the creation and perpetuation of the negative cultural/racial Other. It has
ethnographical power in constructing non-Western cultures (Shohat, 1991). Treating popular
culture as resources for public pedagogy involves more than a critical analysis (deconstruction)
of a particular cultural text. Rather it should be seen as an opportunity for empowerment, that
is, it should include the possibility for alternative narratives or reconstruction. Tanno and Jandt’s
suggestions would certainly be very helpful in teaching popular culture as public pedagogy.
However, the real appreciation of diﬀerences can only be realized when conscious choices have
been made to reverse the negative representation of non-Western cultures. Asante (1998)
reminded us that what members of minority groups desperately need is positive interpretations
of their cultural values. A productive reconstruction of popular texts should strive to go beyond
challenging the myths associated with the negative cultural Other to provide positive and
contextualized interpretations of those cultural values.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Dr. Carolyn A. Stroman, Dr. Fred E. Jandt, and the other anonymous reviewer
for their insightful comments and helpful suggestions. I also thank Dr. Henry A. Giroux at
McMaster University, Canada, Dr. Bradford “J” Hall at the University of New Mexico, and Dr.
William Kelly at the University of California, Los Angeles for their consistent support and
encouragement. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the National Communication
Association Meeting, New Orleans, LA, November 2002.
Notes
1. For mainstream ﬁlm critics and the White middle class American audience, Asian or Asian-Americans
all look alike. They seem to see no need to di ﬀerentiate Asians from Asian-Americans, or Chinese/
Chinese Americans from other groups of Asians/Asian Americans.
2. Certainly audience members could read this movie in multiple ways. V . N. Volosinov ’s (Mikhail
Bakhtin’s) (1986) theories of polyphony and multiaccentuality and John Fiskes ’ (1987) notion of
polysemy suggest that the media text provides semantic potentials for multiple interpretations. Recep-
tion researchers demonstrate such multiple interpretations in their audience research (e.g., Liebes, 1988,
1990; Lull, 1980a, 1980b, 1982; Morley, 1980, 1986; Radway, 1983, 1984). The text, nevertheless, condi-
tions audience members’ interpretations (S. Hall, 1980). The use of words in the text tends to reduce the
polyphonic, multiaccentual, or polysemic nature of signs and symbols to one direction by suppressing
other meanings (Fowler, 1996). Audience members could restore the polyphony or multiaccentuality in
critical reading, however they often need to realize the “primary” meaning before they could apply a
diﬀerent frame of reference to the text (Corner, 1983; Hay, 1989; Wolfe, 1992).
3. Raymond Williams (1976, p. 87) noted “culture is one of the two or three most complicated words in
the English language. ” He outlined the three most widely accepted uses of this term: (a) “a general
process of intellectual, spiritual, and aesthetic development, ” (b) “a particular way of life, whether of a
people, a period, a group, or humanity in general, ” and (c) “the works and practices of intellectual and
especially artistic activity ” (p. 90). In this particular case, I adopted the second de ﬁnition of culture,
which is based on ethnicity or race, and sometimes class.
4. The movie is not a simple translation of Tan ’s book. It is a reproduction— a new process of articulation.
Compared to Tan’s book, this movie is more complicit to the dominant ideology and leaves less room
for diﬀerent interpretations.
5. Such ideology in fact confounds class with ethnicity, race, or culture. It also disguises the system
structure that work against all marginalized groups (Wong(Lau), 2004).
6. Sun (2003) argued that Asian American males are more silenced, marginalized and stereotyped in media
representation than their female counterparts. When Asian American females were getting a certain
amount of recognition, Asian American males were virtually non-existent in the media.
138  JING YIN


--- PAGE 160 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 139
Page 139
References
Althusser, L. (1971). Ideology and ideological state apparatuses. In B. Brewster (Ed.), Lenin and philosophy
and other essay (pp. 127–186). New Y ork: Monthly Review Press.
Asante, M. K. (1998). The Afrocentric idea (rev. ed.). Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Athanases, S. Z. (1993). Cross-cultural swapping of mother and grandmother tales in a tenth grade
discussion of The Joy Luck Club. Communication Education, 42, 281–287.
Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Carragee, K. M. (1990). Interpretive media study and interpretive social science. Critical Studies in Mass
Communication, 7, 81–96.
Chen, G.-M. & Starosta, J. W. (1998). Foundations of intercultural communication. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Chen, V . (1995). Chinese American women, language and moving subjectivity. Women and Language ,
18(1), 3–8.
Chen, X. (1994). Reading mother’s tale reconstructing women ’s space in Amy Tan and Zhang Jie. Chinese
Literature: Essays, Articles, Reviews (CLEAR), 16, 111–132.
Chow, R. (1995). Primitive passions: Visuality, sexuality, ethnography, and contemporary Chinese cinema .
New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
Condit, C. M. (1991). The rhetorical limits of polysemy. In R. K. Avery & D. Eason (Eds.), Critical
perspectives on media and society  (pp. 365–386). New Y ork: Guilford.
Corner, J. (1983). T extuality, communication and media power. In H. Davis & P . Walton (Eds.), Language,
image, and media (pp. 266–281). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
De Lauretis, T. (1984). Alice doesn’t: Feminism, semiotics, cinema. London: Macmillan.
Ebert, Roger. (1993, September 17). Memories of Chinese-American women unfold at Joy Luck Club.
Chicago Sun-Times, p. 48.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Media discourse. New Y ork: E. Arnold.
Fisher, W. R. (1984). Narration as a human communication paradigm: The case of public moral argument.
Communication Monographs, 51, 1–22.
Fisher, W. R. (1985). The narrative paradigm: An elaboration. Communication Monographs, 52, 347–367.
Fisher, W. R. (1987). Judging the quality of audience and narrative rationality. In J. L. Golden & J. J. Pilotta
(Eds.), Studies in honor of Chaïm Perelman. Boston: D. Reidel.
Fiske, J. (1986). T elevision: Polysemy and popularity. Critical Studies in Mass Communication , 3,
391–408.
Fowler, R. (1996). Linguistic criticism (2nd ed.). New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Gee, J. P . (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method . London: Routledge.
Giroux, H. A. (2000). Racial politics, pedagogy, and the crisis of representation in academic multicultural-
ism. Social Identities, 6, 493–510.
Grossberg, L. (1984). Strategies of Marxist cultural interpretation. Critical Studies in Mass Communication,
1, 392–421.
Hall, B. “J.” (1992). Theories of culture and communication. Communication Theory, 2, 50–70.
Hall, S. (1980). Encoding/Decoding. In S. Hall, D. Hobson, A. Lowe, & P . Willis (Eds.), Culture, media,
language: Working papers in cultural studies 1972–1979 (pp. 128–138). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1986). On postmodernism and articulation: An interview with Stuart Hall (Edited by L. Gross-
berg). Journal of Communication Inquiry, 10, 45–60.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1971). Linguistic function and literary style: An inquiry into the language of William
Golding’s The Inheritors . In S. Chatman (Ed.), Literary style: A symposium  (pp. 330 –368). London:
Oxford University Press.
Hamilton, P . (1999). Feng shui, astrology, and the ﬁve elements: Traditional Chinese belief in Amy Tan ’s
The Joy Luck Club. MELUS, 24, 125–145.
Hatch, E. (1992). Discourse and language education. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hay, J. (1989). Advertising as cultural text. In B. Dervin et al. (Eds.), Rethinking Communication (Vol. 2,
pp. 129–152). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hinson, H. (1993, September 24). Joy Luck Club : Misfortune smiles. The Washington Post , p.C1. com/
wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/thejoyluckclubrhinsona0a844.htm
hook, b. (1994). Outlaw culture: Resisting representations. New Y ork: Routledge.
Howe, D. (1993, September 24). My mother: Mah-Jong. The Washington Post, p. N42.
Jandt, F. E. & Tanno, D. V . (2001). Decoding domination, encoding self-determination: Intercultural com-
munication research processes. Howard Journal of Communications, 12, 119–135.
Laclau, E. (1977). Politics and ideology in Marxist theory: Capitalism, fascism, and populism . London:
NLB.
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  139


--- PAGE 161 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 140
Page 140
Leeper, M. L. (1993). The Joy Luck Club. http://us.imdb.com/Reviews/21/2152.
Liebes, T. (1988). Cultural di ﬀerences in the retelling of television ﬁction. Critical Studies in Mass Com-
munication, 5, 277–292.
Liebes, T. (1990). Cultural di ﬀerence in the retelling of television ﬁction. In B. L. Brook, R. L. Scott, &
J. W. Chesebro (Eds.), Methods of rhetorical criticism (pp. 461–476). Detroit, IL: Wayne State University
Press.
Lu, J. (1998). Enacting Asian American transformations: An interethnic perspective. MELUS, 23,
85–99.
Lull, J. (1980a). The social uses of television. Human Communication Research, 6(3), 197–209.
Lull, J. (1980b). Family communication patterns and the social uses of television. Communication Research,
7, 319–334.
Lull, J. (1982). How families select television programs: A mass-observational study. Journal of Broadcasting
and Electronic Media, 26, 801–811.
McAlister, L. L. (1993). The Joy Luck Club : A review. http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/T opic/
WomensStudies/FilmReviews/joy-luck-club-mcalister
McAlister, M. (1992). (Mis)Reading The Joy Luck Club. Asian America: Journal of Culture and the Arts , 1,
102–118.
McQuail, D. (1987). Mass communication theory (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Morley, D. (1980). The “nationwide” audience: Structuring and decoding . London: British Film Institute.
Morley, D. (1986). Family television. London: Comedia.
Morris, R. (2004). Living in/between. In A. Gonzalez, M. Houston, & V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in
culture, ethnicity, and communication (4th ed., pp. 217–227). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Nakayama, T. K. (1988). “Model minority ” and the media: Discourse on Asian America. Journal of
Communication Inquiry, 12, 65–73.
Nakayama, T. K. (1994). Show/down time: “Race,” gender, sexuality, and popular culture. Critical Studies in
Mass Communication, 11, 162–179.
Nimmo, D. & Comb, J. E. (1990). Mediated political realities. New Y ork: Longman.
Olesen, V . (1998). Feminisms and models of qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The
landscape of qualitative research (pp. 300–332). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ono, K. A. & Buescher, D. T. (2001). Deciphering Pocahontas: Unpacking the commodiﬁcation of a Native
American woman. Critical Studies in Media Communication, 18, 23–43.
Philipsen, G. (1992). Speaking culturally: Explorations in social communication. Albany, NY: State University
of New Y ork Press.
Pribram, E. D. (1988). Introduction. In E. D. Pribram (Ed.), Female spectators: Looking at ﬁlm and television
(pp. 1–11). London: V erso.
Radway, J. (1983). Women read the romance: The interaction of text and context. Feminist Studies, 9(1),
53–78.
Said, E. W. (1978). Orientalism. New Y ork: Vintage.
Severin, W. T. & Tankard, J. W. (1997). Communication theories: Origins, methods, and uses in mass media
(3rd ed.). London: Longman.
Shohat, E. (1991). Gender and culture of empire: T oward a feminism ethnography of the cinema. Quarterly
Review of Film & Video, 13, 45–84.
Sueda, K. (1993). An analysis of The Joy Luck Club  from the perspective of intercultural communication.
Hokusei Review, 30, 79–105.
Sun, C. F. (2003). Ling Woo in historical context: The new face of Asian American Stereotypes on television.
In G. Dines & J. M. Humez (Eds.), Race, gender, and class in media: A text-reader  (pp. 656 –664).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Takaki, R. (1998). A larger memory: A history of our diversity, with voice . Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
Tan, A. (1989). The Joy Luck Club. New Y ork: G. P . Putman’s Sons.
Tanno, D. V . (1997). Ethical implications of the ethnic “text” in multicultural communication studies. In
J. M. Makau & R. C. Arnett (Eds.), Communication ethic in an age of diversity  (pp. 73–88). Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.
Tanno, D. V . & Jandt, F. E. (1993/1994). Redeﬁning the “other” in multicultural research. Howard Journal of
Communications, 5, 36–45.
Turner, G. (1990). British cultural studies: An introduction. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
van Dijk, T. A. (1988a). News as discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
van Dijk, T. A. (1988b). News analysis: Case studies of international and national news in the press . Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
van Dijk, T. A. (1997). Discourse as interaction in society. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse as social
interaction (pp. 1–37). London: Sage.
140  JING YIN


--- PAGE 162 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 141
Page 141
van Dijk, T. A. (1998). Principles of discourse analysis. In J. Cheshire & P . Trudgill (Eds.), The sociolinguistics
reader: Gender and discourse (Vol. 2, pp. 367–393). London: Arnold.
Volosinov, V . N. (1986). Marxism and the philosophy of language  (L. Matejka & I. R. Titunik, Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Williams, R. (1976). Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society. London: Fontana.
Wong, A. (1997). Why The Joy Luck Club sucks . http://www.olagrande.net/~webguy/writings/
joysucks.html#Stereotypes
Wong(Lau), K. (2002). Migration across generations: Whose identity is authentic? In J. N. Martin, T. K.,
Nakayama, & L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in intercultural communication: Experiences and contexts
(2nd ed., pp. 95–101). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Wong(Lau), K. (2004). Working through identity: Understanding class in the context of race, ethnicity, and
gender. In A. Gonzalez, M. Houston, & V . Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and
communication (4th ed., pp. 256–263). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Wolfe, A. S. (1992). Who’s gotta have it? The ownership of meaning and mass media texts. Critical Studies
in Mass Communication, 9, 261–276.
Y ep, G. (2002). My three cultures: Navigating the multicultural identity landscape. In J. N. Martin, T. K.
Nakayama, & L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in intercultural communication: Experiences and contexts
(2nd ed., pp. 60–66). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
CONSTRUCTING THE OTHER: THE JOY LUCK CLUB  141


--- PAGE 163 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 142
Page 142


--- PAGE 164 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 143
Page 143
10
The Four Seasons of Ethnography
A Creation-Centered Ontology for Ethnography
Sarah Amira De la Garza*
1. Background
My ﬁrst professional encounters with the study of culture came under the tutelage of Asante
(1987, 1988, 1990) to whom I was assigned as research assistant at the State University of New
Y ork at Buﬀalo in 1980. He taught me much about the interaction between ontology and
notions of race and ethnic identity by exposing me to his work on Afrocentricity and sensitizing
me to the ways ethnicity and race manifested in organizational and academic politics. I was then
a student of organizational and interpersonal communication. Dr Asante has remained my
friend and mentor over the last two decades, and his in ﬂuence has been tremendous. During
that time, I was encouraged to study ethnography from anthropologist Fred Gearing, known for
his work among Native Americans. I was also taught statistics, methods of network analysis,
conversation analysis, organizational auditing, and interactive computerized surveys. This
multi-methodological approach would continue to characterize my experience as a doctoral
student at the University of T exas at Austin, where I studied sociolinguistics with the British
linguist Bickerton (1992, 1996), conversation analysis with the late Hopper (1992), variable
analytic research with Ed Hayes and with John Daly (see Daly et al., 1997, 1998), rhetorical
analysis with Hart (1987, 1996) and grounded theory and ethnography with Browning (see
Browning & Shetler, 2000) and the sociologist Snow (1993).
While a Fulbright professor in the city of Chihuahua, Mexico during 1988–1989, I was sent to
the faculty of psychology at the Universidad Aut ónoma de Chihuahua to teach qualitative
research methods. This was the ﬁrst year of the administration of President Salinas de Gortari,
and a massive e ﬀort to ‘modernize’ Mexico was underway, with government expectations of
unquestioned solidarity. During that year, I conducted a study of the identity of Chihuahuans
during this process of modernization. Based on my daily observations that many Mexicans
seemed to pride themselves on both their modernity and their traditionalism, I wanted to see
what they would choose if faced with questions designed to identify their preference. The study
was multi-methodological and conducted in various phases, including interviews, focus groups,
and factor analysis of survey items generated to re ﬂect an array of views held to be either
modern or traditional according to the work of Inkeles and Smith (1971). What I found was that
Mexicans in Chihuahua could not be identi ﬁed as ‘either/or,’ but both modern and traditional.
The resulting paper which I presented at a 1991 border studies conference in Mexico (Gonz ález
& Cole, 1991) questioned the cultural assumptions of factor analytic methodologies and their
appropriateness for use in cultures that do not value exclusive binary categorization of experience.
143


--- PAGE 165 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 144
Page 144
If contradiction is not culturally problematic, then consistency in response can not be taken to
be an indication of validity.
Reliability becomes practically moot as an issue.
It was largely in this sort of intellectual environment that I was led to question how it is that
persons come to believe they understand a culture in the ﬁrst place. I could see what I believed to
be a tremendous interplay between the methodologies accepted for the study of culture and the
cultures themselves that produced those methodologies.
Upon my return from Mexico, I spent the time from December of 1989 to July 1992, prepar-
ing for, engaging in, and writing an ethnographic exploration of the sharing of Native American
(chieﬂy Lakota) spirituality between ‘Indians and non-Indians ’ (see Gonz ález, 1997). During
that time, I watched the constant construction and deconstruction of individuals ’ ethnic iden-
tities as such related to the rights of access, ownership, practice, and dissemination of spiritual
traditions and practices. Additionally, I witnessed debates on the rights of individuals to de ﬁne
themselves ethnically. The individuals I confronted and grew to know well during this study
were marginal in many ways. The ‘white’ non-Indians identifying with Native American cul-
tural traditions, changing their names, abandoning their families and disassociating from their
own cultural histories, were ‘choosing’ this identity as a voice against the ‘meanings’ of being
non-Indian. It was a way to disassociate one’s self from the history of one’s cultural group and to
identify with an idealized other. In a fascinating way, the re-identiﬁcation that took place allowed
for high levels of self-deprecation and rejection of one’s family and history as a perceived way to
increase the ‘correctness’ or ‘worth’ of the self. The Native Americans sharing and teaching
spiritual practices also were creating and maintaining an identity that had privileges of sover-
eignty and ownership of their traditional ways. This manipulation of ethnicities drew my atten-
tion because of the implicit awareness of the signi ﬁcance of identi ﬁcation, in many instances
seemingly related to a desire to disassociate from cultural, familial, national, or personal histories
of oppression, abuse, failure, waste, and other manifestations of domination. I realized that in
many ways, this dynamic seemed present in the methodological trends in our ﬁeld.
The Four Seasons of Ethnography are introduced as a methodology for ethnography that
stemmed from my awareness that the dynamics we ﬁnd in often problematic intercultural
contexts are often pervasive in studies of culture. I considered the reality that the taken-for-
granted approaches to reasoning and rhetoric which we put forth as academic discourse were
themselves exemplars of a greater cultural ontology that assumes hierarchical relations of dom-
ination. How could I proceed to seek insight into the questions that motivated me without
further reifying those structures? In 1987, Mole ﬁ Asante suggested a di ﬀerent, Afrocentric,
ontology for rhetoric, and demonstrated its implications. Asante ’s approach to reconceptual-
izing taken-for-granted ontologically rooted structures motivated me. I asked myself, what
would the ethnographic study of others look like if it were done from a perspective that at this
point in our history is not taken-for-granted?
This is the question that motivated me in 1991 to begin formulating a methodological
approach to ethnography that grew out of a cultural ontology of organic, circular order, one that
I call ‘creation-centered’ (Fox, 1991, 1994, 1996), signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from a received western,
linear, mechanistic and positivistic worldview. I was frustrated by the outcomes of works
inspired by Lincoln and Guba ’s (1985) hallmark work on the ‘naturalistic’ paradigm. The
enthusiastic ‘new’ research which graduate students and others developed often seemed to me
to simply ‘dress up’ otherwise still western, linear understanding. I struggled with the growing
awareness that my own indigenous
1 cultural ontological position was informing a di ﬀerent
reading of Lincoln and Guba. The Four Seasons of Ethnography evolved from my gradual
realization that the same methods can be used within di ﬀerent methodologies, re ﬂecting the
source ontologies which themselves reﬂect cultural location and taken-for-granted assumptions.
I was inspired by the joint works of scientists and theologians Capra and Steindl-Rast (1992) and
144  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 166 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 145
Page 145
Swimme and Berry (1992). They were able to critique the mechanistic worldview without
rejecting its contributions. The objective and subjective were part of the same experience, not in
diﬀerent boxes. I wanted to do the same. The problems I saw with our received view were not
because it was ‘evil’, but because when treated as if it is a separate view, its implications are
problematic. I searched non-traditional sources for insight, including my own cultural position-
ing as a woman scholar of Mexican mestizo ancestry.
2. Birth of the Four Seasons as Ontology for Ethnography
Capra and Steindl-Rast (1992) discuss paradigmatic con ﬂicts in the natural sciences. In their
dialogue, Capra claims that the traditional scienti ﬁc paradigm does not allow for any work
conducted from other paradigmatic perspectives to even be called  ‘science’. However, they
assert, this does not mean that science is not possible from other perspectives. Systematic
observation and development of theory are the necessary components for the development of a
science. The oral traditions of the creation-centered non-materialist and organic cultures of the
world are replete with assertions of ‘learning by watching ’. The cycles of nature become the
experiential source of a circular cultural ontology. The scienti ﬁc knowledge of people not gov-
erned exclusively by positivist rules for knowing is oftentimes disregarded due to the implicit
and tacit forms of their accustomed methodologies. In order for science conducted within these
paradigms distinct to the traditional western academic ‘received’ view to be understood, the
ways of those alternatives must be articulated.
Capra and Steindl-Rast explain that social communities, and indeed cultures, are themselves
paradigmatic and therefore oﬀer alternatives to the traditional ways to do science. However, the
European/American models for science, based on domination and control, they say, have
become so prevalent, that even in nations whose everyday cultures are quite distinct, scienti ﬁc
work tends to re ﬂect the traditional ‘western’ paradigm. When the methodology is driven by
the paradigmatic source, the work will always re ﬂect that paradigm, regardless of the culture or
personal/political leanings and preferences of the researchers.
The Four Seasons is my attempt to reformulate the task of ethnography, as it might be viewed
through the methodology of a circular ontology as experienced and often expressed by Native
American ‘Indian’
2 cultures. My own experience as a child was heavily inﬂuenced by the lessons
taught to me by my Mexican Indian-Spanish grandparents. The ‘folk’ theories of my grand-
father Manuel (of Comanche and Rar ámuri Mexican ancestry) were all based on his systematic
observation of human behavior and nature. His life as a social and political activist was rooted in
these tacit theories and aided by his spiritual practice of praying to the Mother at sunrise, noon,
and sunset each day. My grandmother Fina (of Lipán Apache Mexican ancestry) was a champion
unobtrusive observer, sitting dutifully by her window each day watching the community come
and go in the Mexican barrio where I lived as a child. We called her juzgona,
3 teasingly referring
to her opinions freely given based on those observations. She had a daily spiritual practice and
was a weather-watcher, often walking many miles in a day to gather and deliver the herbs that
were needed by someone in the community.
My grandfather Cosme of Basque and Sephardic Spanish ancestry, was a silent, meditative
man who read rigorously and compared the newspaper reports daily, able to provide situated
opinions on the circumstances that surrounded him. Orphaned after his father was murdered by
a conspiratorial group of T exans seeking to gain access to lands owned by Mexicans, he spent
time during his childhood as a servant to an Anglo-T exan family and watched his last name
changed from the Basque Urueta to Ureta, which was easier for Anglos to pronounce. Develop-
ing alcoholism in his adult years, he taught me of the pain existing in the spaces ‘between’, not
too diﬀerent from the pain of having to present our cultural realities through only one set of
lenses (see González, 1995).
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  145


--- PAGE 167 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 146
Page 146
Mama Carmelita, my paternal grandmother, kept daily journals for over 50 years, and she
wrote in them faithfully each night, recording the events of the day and her observations of those
events. She shared her reﬂections on the present by comparing it to her experience growing into
womanhood— the daughter of a soldier in the Mexican Revolution, and ﬂeeing to the USA from
the religious oppression of post-revolutionary Mexico. From her I learned of the pain of hegem-
ony and of the complexity of a life story, as well as the strength that can be maintained through
dutiful practice of recording one’s accounts.
These were my models for my ethnographic practice and research identity, long before I used
such terms. They provided the cultural ontology that served as the backdrop for my practice of
ethnographic methods I would one day learn. From them all, I learned a methodology that was
rooted in a spirituality of the seasons of life, action gauged in response to one ’s environment. It
is from this ontology, garnered through the lived experience of indigenous culture and years of
commited study and practice of the metaphysical spiritual traditions of my Native American
ancestors, that the Four Seasons were born.
3. Ontology and Methodology
If rooted ﬁrmly in the taken-for-granted assumptions of an ontological position, the method-
ology for the application of particular methods will reﬂect the ontology in the ways the methods
are developed, utilized and interpreted. The results of one ’s research can not be assumed to
reﬂect a particular ontological position, simply because of the prototypic appearance of the
methods. Research by many in the social sciences has moved increasingly toward a validation of
a relativist ontology, often in the guise of postmodernism, at other times simply re ﬂecting the
politics of positionality. This has been re ﬂected in the utilization of qualitative, narrative, situ-
ational, and autobiographical methodologies for data collection, analysis, and writing (Denzin,
1996; Ellis & Bochner, 1996; Goodall, 1989, 1991, 1996, 2000; Banks & Banks, 1998).
It has been my experience in the pedagogy of qualitative research methods that recent
converts and zealous students new to the freedom of applied relativism will often be drawn
by the aesthetics and/or emotional appeal of the subjective methodologies, not fully under-
standing the ontological approach that supports them. An ontology involves far more than a
diﬀerence of opinion; it is the basic structuring set of assumptions of what can be taken as
real. It follows that then an absence of ontological awareness, comprehension, or commit-
ment can appear in taken-for-granted claims of ontological validity which are assumed
simply on the evidence of the subjective methodologies used. The resultant problems in
deﬁnition and accountability can result in seriously na ïve claims about the signi ﬁcance of
methods on face value alone. Altheide and Johnson (1994) warn ethnographers of the central
importance of accountability in ethnographic work. Without an honest accounting of one ’s
methods and decisions along the path of an emergent design (Lincoln & Guba, 1985), it is
diﬃcult to learn the nature of one ’s craft, or one ’s assumptions. The most positivistic, linear,
and deterministic of assumptions can be cloaked in the sheep ’s clothing of qualitative
methods assumed to be on face value ontologically distinct in their application due to a non-
traditional textual form.
This argument is particularly relevant to the presentation of the Four Seasons of Ethnography
methodology. The methods that are utilized will be familiar to students and advocates of eth-
nography. The Four Seasons methodology does not assume to introduce new methods, per se,
but rather to demonstrate the application of a variety of already familiar ethnographic methods,
along with other familiar methods from introspective and analytic traditions, when rooted in a
holistic ontology of circular order . What results is a research process and outcome that is inten-
tionally and necessarily both personally and academically tentative and dynamic. Like the circu-
lar progress of a spiral, the researcher and theories develop cumulatively and rhythmically, with
146  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 168 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 147
Page 147
no claims of absolute knowledge. Rather, the results are reported with tentative certainty
(González, 1994, 1999), a paradoxical term which is characteristic of a respect for the power of
nature to determine the circumstances or ‘facts’ of our human experience. Conceptual dyna-
mism, or ‘new ideas,’ are only ‘new’ in that they revisit where we have already been, as funda-
mental to the ideas’ present and equally dynamic state. History and tradition are fundamental to
our current understanding. Theory is not to be refuted or disproven, but contextualized and
ampliﬁed. Things get bigger, not smaller and tighter, as we understand them.
4. Guiding Ideals of the ‘Received View’ of Ethnography
When I refer to the ‘ethnographic method ’, I am assuming the array of methods which in
consort become both process and outcome of a study of the creation and maintenance of
meanings which can serve to identify social groups and their individual members. This creation
and maintenance of meanings can happen through (among innumerable others) conversation,
nonverbal behavior, routines and rituals (both formal and informal), and even through personal
introspection. The methods for its study, however, are fairly straightforward, and the Four
Seasons methodology incorporates them: pre-ethnography, ethnography proper (immersion,
observation, and interviews utilizing ﬁeld notes and transcriptions), synthesis and analysis of
transcriptions and notes, and the decisions and actions of writing an account of the cultural
aspects explored. A classic explication of this sort of methodology can be found in Glaser and
Strauss (1967), and Buraway et al. (1991) present a strong collection of the sorts of ethnographic
essays that result from solid participant observation ethnography. The following comparison of
guiding ideals of traditional ontologically framed work is not a rejection of such exemplary
ethnographic works, but is rather a comparative explication, for the purposes of demonstrating
how signiﬁcant decision points in research might end in di ﬀerent ontologically based research
strategies and actions.
I borrow the term ‘guiding ideals’ from Guba’s The Paradigm Dialog (1990), in which Guba
describes the ‘ideals’ which guide the work within positivistic, naturalistic (constructivist), and
critical theory research. The guiding ideal, in e ﬀect, serves as an implicit ideological marker by
which the researcher can gauge his or her ‘success’ within the given paradigm of research. I have
expanded the use of the term to include multiple ideals which exist on a taken-for-granted level
due to the cultural situatedness of ‘western’ research. Guba’s use, I believe, accounts for ideals
which characterize the conscious intent of researchers who ascribe to a given ‘paradigm’. My
extension of the use takes into account the very powerful ideals which are driven by cultural
assumptions, in such a fashion that they are not recognized as driving ideals, but rather as
taken-for-granted reality or nature. The force of these ideals persists, I believe, in the same
fashion that one’s primary cultural frames persist and resurface during intense experience.
It is important to mention that the separation presented in these two sets of ideals is itself
part of our received view. Although the Four Seasons is presented in this text as separate, care
should be taken to note that it incorporates the other as part of the many, many ways in which
we experience our realities during the seasons of our experience. As Swimme and Berry (1992)
point out:
No experience can be simplistically divided up into inner and outer aspects where the
outer aspects . . . refer simply to the objectively existing universe, and the inner refers
simply to the subjectivity . . . the elements of experience cannot be assigned a simple,
univocal origin.
(1992, p. 40)
Similarly, it is hoped that the following dualist presentation can be recognized as a heuristic and
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  147


--- PAGE 169 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 148
Page 148
not as the deﬁnition of a battleground of separate opposites. Following are four ‘guiding ideals’
of the received view and also of the Four Seasons ontology.
Received guiding ideal #1: Opportunism . This ideal is often discussed under the mantel of
linear and material orientations to time and process. I have called it opportunism in that
underlying beliefs about the passing of time, including the concepts of ‘losing’ and ‘wasting’ of
time manifest themselves in activity for the sake of activity before an opportunity ‘is lost ’ or
‘passes by’. Interviews might be conducted because a member of the culture is present ‘today’
and might not be there ‘tomorrow’, even if the researcher is not really aware of a purposive
need for the interview.
The linear and material orientation to process manifests itself in beliefs that research methods
and outcomes should reﬂect predictable forms. Therefore, if data and observations do not lend
themselves to the planned form or design, the form takes precedence over the integrity of the
data. Linear and material orientations to time allow for the existence of the myth of ‘one time’
opportunities. Because time can be ‘lost’, it is important to plan and schedule one ’s research.
These beliefs, rooted in the same basic cultural assumption, create a guiding ideal that values and
rewards ‘seizing the opportunity ’ and encourages the perception of ‘windows of opportunity ’.
An action orientation to ﬁeld work develops, in which ‘doing’ something is necessary for it to
be regarded as an appropriate ‘use’ of time.
Received guiding ideal #2: Independence of researcher . The idea that the researcher is some-
how separate from that being studied, a key epistemological issue, is at the root of this ideal.
Culturally, the ability to conceive of such a separation must exist within a belief system that
unitizes the world and believes that somehow the separation of entities allows for manipulation
of one by another. In many ways, this guiding ideal is actually a necessary condition for the
existence of the third guiding ideal, entitlement. The independent researcher can engage in any
multitude of activities and relationships while in the ﬁeld and by implicit deﬁnition not consider
the eﬀects and implications of the activity on his or her understanding of the culture. The belief
in independence allows for immersion research to be understood as ‘researcher in contact with
culture’ and not more radically, ‘researcher as part of cultural context’.
Although much traditional literature on ethnography discusses at great length the reality of
involvements and relationships ‘in the ﬁeld’, and encourages methods to deal with this, it
should be noted that the assumption is that methods are intended to correct and remedy the
‘problems’ which arise when the independence of the researcher is violated. (See Stringer, 1996
for an excellent explication of these sorts of dynamics.) Such ‘violating’ in ﬂuence is not
regarded as an integral part of the research process itself.
Similarly, a reaction formation response is possible by those who inherently remain western
in their primary cultural orientation (Hall, 1983), as unpalatable as it might be to some on
political or personal grounds. In this case, a hypersubjectivity and epistemology of involvement
is adopted, not as a taken-for-granted position, but as a hypervigilant reaction to the independ-
ence position. I have seen this often in graduate students who adopt an ideological opposition to
‘tradition’, only to reify the validity of the traditional stances through their vehement adoption
of ‘non-traditional’ methods. Their reason for the adoption is anti-traditional, rather than
organically rooted in a di ﬀering ontology. This distinction is precarious, but vital to the under-
standing of ontology in research.
Guiding ideal #3: Entitlement. Entitlement is similarly linked to a set of cultural assumptions,
in this case, regarding one ’s relationship to experience and the world. Social hierarchy is a
taken-for-granted, and the human being, translated as self, is seen as in a dominant relationship
to that which is external to him or her, including nature and the unusual. Therefore, frustrations
exist when this dominance can not be exercised, as in being able to determine the form and
nature of data or experience a priori.
It is manifested most intriguingly on the relation-concept level, a level that exists when one ’s
148  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 170 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 149
Page 149
access to information is dependent on the cooperative provision of that information by an
external party. Since the taken-for-granted natural relationship is one of dominance to anything
external to the familiar self, simply having a question is seen as grounds for being able to obtain
one’s ‘answer’ upon demand. Curiosity becomes suﬃcient grounds for entry into a culture and/
or community for study. Tanno and Jandt (1994) provide an insightful discussion of these sorts
of entitlement dynamics.
Information gathered throughout one’s ethnography is in the control of the owner, as owner-
ship is a manifestation of dominance. Ownership implies ability to control activities, form, or
presentation. Therefore, this guiding ideal of entitlement demonstrates itself in any number of
issues of assumed access, rights to information, representation, and respect and/or understand-
ing of interpersonal and social boundaries.
It is of interest as well that aspects of the self not known or understood could be seen as
unwelcome intrusions, therefore making honest reﬂection diﬃcult, too.
Guiding ideal #4: Primacy of rationality . Spiritual, physical-material, and psycho-emotional
experience are made valid subjects of the rational interpretive voice. Historically rooted, the
‘splits’ between the dimensions of human experience are often simpli ﬁed in discussions as
‘mind–body’ dualisms, etc. The framing of human experience as either mind or body itself
implies the primacy of the rational thought as mind, by positioning all other experience within
the realm of the body (the physical, emotional and spiritual), with the extreme forms found in
physiological explanations provided for spiritual and emotional experience. Given that the
paradigm assumes the duality, it is logical that the resulting science would provide explanations
which would support the collapsing of categories of human experience (Asante, 1987).
While ‘in the ﬁeld’, this can be seen by the insatiable need to explain all things within already
accepted categories. It can become extremely problematic when the particular meaning of a
cultural phenomenon is so primary to a culture that its members take its de ﬁnition for granted
through its simple or implicit reality to them. The instant that the ethnographer begins, on his or
her own, to speculate explanations for these implicit meanings, the rationality of the ethnographer
is privileged above the authentic embodied experience of the participants in the culture.
4
The primacy of the rational is particularly of issue in the creation of texts that describe
cultural experience. Because the written word and many academic forms are rooted in the same
cultural assumptions, an authentic rendering of the understanding that might have been
attained is made diﬃcult if not impossible. What occurs in the privileging of the rational voice is
essentially a veiled repetition of the cultural theme of dominance of the self which operates
through the preceding ideals. Ultimately, it will be the interpretation of the rational writer that is
assumed as the voice of the ‘other’.
5. Guiding Ideals of the Four Seasons
The guiding ideals for a creation-centered circular ontology, as assumed by the Four Seasons
methodology are presented below.
Four Seasons guiding ideal #1: Natural cycles (appropriateness) . The most central guiding
ideal is rooted in the belief that all natural experience is ordered in cycles, which are then
reﬂected in the processes and experiences of all living beings. With the Four Seasons, one such
cycle is used to demonstrate the circular process of preparation, growth, harvest, and rest with
‘rest’ moving naturally into ‘preparation’ without a ﬁxed point of experiential demarcation.
These cycles are inevitable and multiple, layered upon each other due to the multiplicity of
experiential domains, yet all continuing in their natural rotation. For instance, a sudden frost in
spring may impede the preparation for growth of crops in summer, thereby a ﬀecting the fall
harvest, and the nature of winter experience. These natural realities are used allegorically in their
application to methodology.
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  149


--- PAGE 171 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 150
Page 150
The awareness of this cycle carries with it the interdependent notions of appropriateness and
necessity, which can be confused with opportunity if the spiraling nature of circular order is not
experienced ontologically. Opportunity is never ‘lost’, simply delayed for the reoccurrence of a
season. This perspective requires that predetermined designs and outcomes be abandoned as
dictators of activity. A sensitivity to seasonal cues must develop to appropriately respond
throughout one’s research, requiring much of the researcher as a human instrument. If the seeds
are not planted at the appropriate time, in other words, allowing for the development of deep
analytic skills and awareness-in-practice of the value of all forms of research-related experience,
researchers not accustomed to such necessary heightened awareness can ﬁnd it fatiguing. In the
worst cases, researchers might lend themselves to a fatalistic approach in which they avoid the
interaction of the human instrument with experience. A balanced system involves a human
being who makes wise choices on the basis of awareness of the cycles and their in ﬂuence on
one’s environs.
Four Seasons guiding ideal #2: Interdependence of all things (awareness) . The interdependence
of all things deals with the arbitrary nature of boundaries that we construct for ourselves in our
social experience. However, it does not imply by arbitrary that they are unnecessary or without
value. Rather, the awareness of the nature of boundaries calls for a further awareness of the
obfuscation that occurs if we reify boundaries and perceive separateness where we have con-
structed it for functionalist reasons.
This guiding ideal will manifest itself most obviously in the seeming disregard for rigid
disciplinary and academic dictates of what ‘counts’ as a source of knowledge or information.
This is particularly apparent in the formal establishment of one ’s expertise, or theoretical sensi-
tivity,
5 during which sources of information and insight might come from any academic discip-
line, from ﬁction, popular culture and the media, or other non-traditional fonts of knowledge
and insight.
In the ﬁeld, it manifests in the awareness of the inability to compartmentalize experience as
‘data collection ’ or ‘just being there ’. Similarly, interviews begin with the ﬁrst contacts and
eﬀorts to schedule an interview and continue with everyday encounters, rather than simply in
the asking of formal guided questions. All that exists and occurs within a culture is data and
related to the awareness of meanings for the persons for whom it provides primary human
grounds for interpretation and execution of experience.
Personal relationships in the ﬁeld, including those of the researcher with ‘outsiders’, become
related to the study. What develops in one who operates within this ontology is an extension of
the heightened awareness referred to in guiding ideal #3. One realizes that all experience is part
of the whole process. Therefore, a discipline for one ’s life as an ethnographer must develop
which respects the process and eventual report as a demonstration not just of the focus of the
study, but also of the nature of the researcher, as part of that study.
Four Seasons guiding ideal #3: Preparedness . The spiritual traditions of those people whose
practices are rooted in the observation and notion of interdependence with nature always have
an element present that incorporates the awareness of the nature of cyclic processes. This
element is the notion of preparedness, that one simply can not enter into that for which he or
she is not prepared appropriately. A seed will not grow without being planted! This manifests
itself in the appearance of personal reﬂexivity in the reports of one’s ethnographic research, and
the value given to rich descriptions of personal and experiential context for one’s ‘ﬁndings’. The
coexisting ideal of appropriateness governs implicitly the awareness that an honest and authen-
tic report of context will demonstrate the meaning of those ﬁndings, including the interpret-
ations and assumed meanings reported by the researcher. In many ways this guiding ideal
incorporates the notion of letting go of control, giving the upper hand to ‘nature’ (see
Gonzaález, 1997). An example of this can be identi ﬁed when I was studying the sharing of
spirituality between non-Indian and Indian (Native American) persons. While preparing, the
150  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 172 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 151
Page 151
many layers of my own mixed Native American/Mexican/Spanish ancestry and my correspond-
ing attitudes and feelings about ‘culture sharing’ had to be the object of my own deep re ﬂection
and honesty. I relied heavily on members of the groups I got to know throughout the eth-
nography for their observations on my observations. I could not have done this at a time in my
life when I was tightly attached to my identity or opinions as somehow factual. I ﬁnd graduate
students, who want to study major life events while learning methods, are often hampered when
they face the reality of their (un)readiness. There is no crime in this — no defect— it is perhaps
simply not the season for that topic. The importance of heightened personal awareness can not
be stressed too much.
Four Seasons guiding ideal #4: Harmony/balance (discipline) . The preceding ideals, with their
necessary responsiveness to the awareness of nature and relationships within it, will manifest
themselves in the ultimate awareness that all forms of experience must be respected and given
attention, due to their interdependent nature. As such, the rational is no more valuable than the
spiritual, the material no more signiﬁcant than the emotional. The awareness that builds due to
the belief that all things are interdependent will ultimately lead to the growth of one ’s personal
discipline and rigor as a human instrument and ethnographic scholar. This discipline will be
rooted, not in the expectations of one’s academic ﬁeld or career, but in the awareness that what is
not taken care of now will inevitably be dealt with again in a future cycle of seasons.
One’s methodology in the ﬁeld will begin to re ﬂect a cyclical awareness of experience within
individual events and situations. Field notes and forms of recording experience will respect the
natural cycles that the researcher is living. The ultimate report will reﬂect an insightful selection
of what can be reported, and in what form, so as not to upset the balance of meaning.
Ethics are incorporated into this highly intuitive form of discipline. The taken-for-granted
requirements for competent and ‘rigorous’ methodology are authenticity and honesty with
one’s self as the research is conducted and texts written and shared. The skill of introspection
and the ability to accept and process feedback regarding very personal aspects of one ’s work are
probably the most important attributes of a researcher who functions within this ontology. The
instrument in ethnographic qualitative research is, as so well stated by Lincoln and Guba (1985), a
human instrument. We, the ethnographers, hold the information, insights, and conceptual turns
of our research. We gather the data and process it. Nothing is produced that has not been part of
us, as researchers. The research is intimate, organic and interdependent.
This sort of ‘naturalist’ paradigm is best described for me in the writings of Lincoln and Guba
(1985). I have adopted and adapted insights from naturalism in my exposition of the Four
Seasons. This naturalist paradigm which they presented in their 1985 work could also be called a
‘constructivist’ paradigm (Guba, 1990), or even the ‘holographic’ paradigm (Lincoln & Guba,
1985; Talbot, 1991). Sometimes it is simply referred to as qualitative research. Some might call it
‘postmodern’. In juxtaposing the paradigm of positivism with these views as I apply them in
this work, I have preferred to call the ontology of the Four Seasons a paradigm of paradoxical
tentativeness. It is the tentative and paradoxical nature of knowing which characterizes the Four
Seasons, due to the cyclical nature of experience and discovery. All ‘new’ knowledge is also
paradoxically old, necessarily reﬂecting all preceding knowledge that led to its discovery. And as
the cycles continue, any ﬁndings are necessarily tentative. A good example, related to nature, is a
weather report.
Lincoln and Guba (1985) do an admirable job arguing that a worldview or paradigm is more
than just an alternative perspective. It is not just ‘standing in a di ﬀerent place’. It is seeing with
diﬀerent eyes. Based on this, all experience, not just the research process, would di ﬀer for some-
one operating from a paradigm of paradoxical tentativeness. One of the most signi ﬁcant diﬀer-
ences is found in the subjectivity –objectivity dialectic. The paradoxical tentativeness paradigm
places emphasis on the subjective experience, while the positivist places emphasis on the object-
ive. However, within paradoxical tentativeness, objectivity is paradoxically incorporated as a
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  151


--- PAGE 173 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 152
Page 152
form of subjective experience of equal value to (not privileged above) all others. This is accom-
plished through the conscious acknowledgement of the functional, yet arbitrary, boundaries,
which result in a variety of standpoints. In a sense, boundaries and bracketing of those boundar-
ies (Becker, 1992), are a manifestation of the illusion of objectivity which is necessary to operate
within constructed realities. Objectivity in this sense, however, does not imply the lack of
inﬂuence by external factors, rather it highlights the awareness of the researcher regarding the
inﬂuence of individual factors. Since all such factors can never be accounted for, boundaries are
simply an illusory heuristic for the purposes of cooperative human behavior.
The scholar who operates from the circular paradigm of paradoxical tentativeness acknow-
ledges the human instrument , the researcher as a whole person, as the means of collecting,
synthesizing, and analyzing data. In ethnography, the ﬁeld worker in the midst of a culture being
studied, is through his or her experience — physically, socioemotionally, rationally, and spiritu-
ally—‘ collecting data’. Because of this, a profound awareness and understanding of the nature of
the constructed boundaries of one’s own identity and personal experience is critical to being an
eﬀective ‘human instrument’. In positivist research, much time is spent in the preparation and
‘perfection’ of a good research instrument. There is a constant awareness that the nature and
quality of one ’s data and ﬁndings is dependent on the nature and quality of one ’s instrument.
Unfortunately, while there is much romanticism about the human instrument, and much lip
service about the need to prepare for one ’s ethnographic experience, there has been little yet
existing that approaches what might be adequate forms of preparation of the human instru-
ment, as required by the circular ontology of paradoxical tentativeness (for an exception to this,
one might look at the work of Goodall, 2000).
Viewing the ethnographic process from a creation-centered cyclical perspective provides a
means for framing one ’s preparation for ﬁeldwork. By using this approach, I have also found
a means for framing the entire ethnographic process — it is a spiritual enterprise, situated in a
human context (Gonz ález, in press). As creation-centered, I have chosen to view the ethno-
graphic process through the cycles of the Four Seasons of nature. Creation-centered cultures
share a close relationship with nature, and with the yearly cycles that govern life. Spiritual and
social rituals reﬂect those cycles, respecting the interdependence between all things. Depending
on geography, the seasons may have diﬀerent characteristics, but cycles still exist, and at all levels
of experience. This holographic reality is today being recognized by scholars and technologists
(Talbot, 1991). When someone is culturally predisposed to view things ontologically and para-
digmatically as circular and paradoxically tentative, the assumptions behind the Four Seasons
will not be problematic; they are in sync with reality. For others, culturally ‘western’, linear and
objectivist in their assumptions about reality, the Four Seasons will be a serious challenge to
learn. But as many persons not culturally ‘western’ seem to succeed at mastering methodologies
foreign to their ontologies and implicit paradigms, I believe the methodology of the Four
Seasons can be learned— but hope that it might be a less traumatic experience.
I personally believe that the experience reported by many underrepresented groups in the
academy, who have been forced into conducting and reporting their ethnographic work through
lenses of an ontology and paradigm that is in discord with their own, is an example of the
trauma which can occur if forced to repeatedly prove one ’s value as a scholar through an alien
ontological position (see Padilla & Ch ávez Ch ávez, 1995, for graphic narrative accounts of
Latina/os in US higher education). For this reason, I personally do not believe it ethical (or
sound) to expect persons to totally ‘deconstruct’ and eliminate the present ontology or para-
digm as requisite for acceptance as a member of the academy or one of its subgroups.
This much said, I believe that because the ideals of the positivist paradigm and its resultant
ontology predispose persons to believe in the existence of truth vs. non-truth, any other way of
looking at the world will tend to be viewed as inferior through those lenses crafted to perceive
dichotomies of value. As such, I can understand why some would move to ‘eliminate’ the
152  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 174 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 153
Page 153
positivist paradigm. This desire is a residue of positivistic thinking. Paradigmatic change
should be voluntary, based on the gradual awakening and changing of individuals and society.
Imposition would simply be a replication of the hierarchical domination already present.
With paradoxical tentativeness, even forces experienced as oppositional and destructive or
dominating reﬂect something of the interdependent cyclical world in which we live. T o deny
the reality of variance is foolish, nor can we control it any more than we can control tornadoes or
earthquakes.
It is the application of the methods within a paradigm that often demonstrates the ontological
positioning of the researcher. I believe that the Four Seasons methodology is very compatible
with what I have read concerning the naturalist/constructivist paradigm. Paradoxical tentative-
ness and holographic interdependent realities are diﬃcult to handle, but especially so if one does
not implicitly operate in his or her world according to these ideals. Just rationally or intel-
lectually ‘agreeing’ with a concept, or ‘seeing its point ’ is not the same as taking it for granted
in the application of one’s research methods.
In order to present the Four Seasons in a language that will trigger fewer predisposing
constructs, I will largely abandon social science style in writing in favor of the language of
ceremony from creation-based cultures that do indeed have a circular ontology. I gather much
from my direct experience in ritual. What follows in an attempt to describe the essence of a Four
Seasons approach to methodology.
6. The Nature of the Four Seasons
In creation-centered traditions, ceremony is much more than the ritual proper. Ceremony
involves phases, which like seasons, re ﬂect the natural process of the ceremony, itself re ﬂecting
the cycles in creation. There is a preparation, or ‘spring’, as I will call it, which is the foundation
for all that will come. It is followed by the ‘summer’, or actual recognizable ritual acts. The
‘fall’, or harvesting portion of a ceremony is the time when the fruits of the ceremony are shared
and celebrated communally. The ‘winter’ is the time of rest and waiting, and it is often the time
when the meaning of the ceremony is received and understood. The phases of nature can be
observed to provide wisdom about the phases of all human experience. What follows is a
description of the ethnographic process using the four seasons to highlight the methodology
and signiﬁcance of the season to the overall ethnographic project.
6.1. Spring
Like the fast of the ﬁrstborn before the ﬁrst Passover seder, or the fasting and ritual puriﬁcation
before the traditional Lakota hanbleceya,6 the spring of ethnography is that time during which
the ethnographer must prepare for what is ahead (Fig. 1). It is the foundation of all the work that
will come. During this time, there is much speculation and dreaming about what the ethno-
graphic project will be like. The future is uncertain, and there is excitement, anticipation, and
often some reservation. In the traditional ways, one is a fool not to have some measure of fear. It
demonstrates a lack of respect for what is about to be experienced. Likewise, not having some
measure of fear about one ’s ethnographic experience demonstrates immaturity and serious
naiveté concerning the entrance into the lifeworld of others.
In some ceremonial traditions, it is necessary to ask permission to be allowed to participate in
the ceremony. Preparation can not begin until that is granted. Often, in the western social
scientiﬁc traditions, there is an assumed ‘right’ to study what one is curious about. From the
perspective of the Four Seasons, this is always presumptuous and disrespectful, demonstrating
clearly the inappropriateness of timing for the research. In creation-centered traditions, a dem-
onstration of sincere respect is of utmost importance. This respect might be demonstrated
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  153


--- PAGE 175 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 154
Page 154
Fig. 1. Synthesis of Integral Concepts for the Four Seasons of Ethnography
Spring
Related Metaphors:
 preparation, puriﬁcation, tilling the soil, vision/vigil, childhood
Basic Nature:
 foundation for all the work that will come
 dreams of what might be
 establishment of patterns of interaction and behavior
 playful/experimental, not compulsively rule-bound
 planting of “seeds,” the ideas and relationships that will later blossom
“ fasting”— the gradual removal from the habituated and familiar
 meditation, focusing, introspection
Methods/T asks:
 getting permission, allowing “insiders” to tell you honestly if they perceive you as ready or able to
understand them
 assessment of tacit knowledge, theoretical sensitivity, personal biases, expectations, triggers, shadow
issues
 learning how to bracket through practice at spontaneous reaction and positioned analyses of self
 reading, media viewing, passive observation of relevant contexts and cultural sites
 identiﬁcation of boundaries, foci, and targets for inquiry/investigation
 personal journaling
Cautions:
 dependent on the researcher ’s indigenous time orientation and/or ontology, could be tempted to
“skip” spring
 assuming understanding of issues and topics prior to exposure or introspection/re ﬂection
“ spring fever”— laziness due to zealous enthusiasm, no attention to detail
 being pragmatically blinded — having personal or professional motives that make you reluctant to
admit your limitations or possible ethical problems — not willing to adjust when the blind spots are
pointed out
Summer
Related Metaphors:
 growth, labor, community-building, work, youth
Basic Nature:
 intensity
 requires nourishment, “rain”
 attention to details and nurturing
 testing of limits on all dimensions
 rebellion, conﬂict, “heat”
 rules are semi-learned, form is emerging
Methods/T asks:
 gathering data in ﬁeld notes
 participant observation
 coding
 interviewing
 personal journaling & daily “checks”
 theoretical memos and constant comparison
 member-checking
Cautions:
 culture shock— need to be aware of one’s reactions and perceptions and how these aﬀect experience
 establishment of personal relationships in the ﬁeld can complicate the process — especially if deep
emotions are experienced, such as intimacy, conﬂict, jealousy, competition
 tendency to resist the need to practice bracketing, and need to consider having a con ﬁdant
 temptation to believe that participation and observation are clearly separate activities
 exhaustion— being sure to respect the needs of the self to regenerate and recuperate
Autumn
Related Metaphors:
 harvesting, release, celebration, adulthood     
154  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 176 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 155
Page 155
through patient waiting to receive word that one can participate. Some people wait years to
know that the time is right to participate in a ceremony. Similarly, just knowing that you want to
study something does not mean it is the right time to do so. Respect is about ‘looking at
something again’, getting to really know it. It is not about rushing.
Basic Nature:
“ reaping what was sowed”
 community celebration
“ gestalt” of experience begins to form
 winding down, breaking away
 self knowledge
 feasting and celebration of accomplishments
Methods/T asks:
 compiling all gathered forms of data
 theoretical saturation is reached, memos have been developed and tried in the ﬁeld
 celebration of completion of ﬁeld work
 leave-taking behaviors which respect the relationships formed
 leaving the ﬁeld
 organization of materials
 decisions about focus begin to be made
 personal journaling
Cautions:
 overwhelming feeling may consume you as you realize the breadth of data
 temptation to believe it’s “over” in order to avoid the equivocality of memos and perspectives
 going native as they realize they are not indigenously “in-group” but are feeling the natural emotional
pains of separation and accommodation
 for indigenous ethnographers, the relief of being able to relax and refrain from frequent bracketing of
their everyday experience can tempt them to forget that writing will require much of the same
 ethics regarding commitments to people and communities must be remembered
 preparation for re-entry culture shock should be done
 personal journaling should not be stopped
Winter
Related Metaphors:
 incubation, hibernation, retreat, waiting, solitude, elder
Basic Nature:
 slower pace
 conservation of energy
 wisdom
 incubation period of creativity
 success is determined by previous “year”
 confronation of “mortality”, cold
Methods/T asks:
 writing the ethnography
 submissions, revisions, performances
 decisions regarding extent to which your knowledge will be shared
 journaling about new tacit knowledge, theoretical sensitivity, and personal development
 speculation on future directions, both personally and professionally
 decision regarding how relationships from the ﬁeld will be maintained
 rest
Cautions:
 freezing: writer’s block
 believing there is nothing more to be known
 abandoning tentativeness when asked to report
 not resting or taking time to reﬂect on the process
 being driven by constraints rather than allowing the work to be grounded and naturally evolving
 freezing: discovery of issues that make reporting diﬃcult on ethical grounds
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  155


--- PAGE 177 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 156
Page 156
During the spring, the human instrument is being prepared for ﬁeldwork. This is a time for
much introspection and honest observation of the self. What are your strengths and ﬂaws? This
will tell you much about your methodological preferences and choices once you are out in the
ﬁeld. The blatant extrovert, for example, will often want to rely mostly on interviews and
conversation, while the more introvert researcher will want to be an unobtrusive observer. By
honestly accepting these bits of information about the self, you can prepare for your study,
knowing what other types of data you will need to strengthen your work, knowing what
methods will best triangulate with what you personally prefer. Personal ‘ﬂaws’ are not prob-
lems. They are what characterize you. What you think is a ﬂaw simply tells you what is culturally
valued, not what is ‘wrong with you’. They are guides that lead you in the direction of what you
might need. Because of this, the ethnographer who refuses to see his or her own characteristics,
both positive and negative, is limited. Denial guarantees that you will not see the weaknesses in
your method, because you do not see the weaknesses in your instrument — you.
During the spring of ethnography, you should honestly assess your biases. Unlike positivist
research, biases are not problematic. They are part of your subjectivity, and they provide insight
into the unique perspective that you will provide in your ethnography. Without an awareness of
them, however, you will not know what your perspective is, and neither will your eventual reader.
It will weaken your ﬁnished work. Some examples of work that have been done utilizing this
ontology are those of Krizek (1994), Stage (1997), Broadfoot (1995) and Mendoza (1999).
Further introspection should guide you to look for your limitations and boundaries in terms
of what you are personally capable of stomaching and tolerating. This will tell you what the
scope of your study can be. Because as tentativists we do not pretend to represent whole
populations with our work, it is not necessary that we have a scope that speci ﬁcally accounts for
all aspects of a culture. The holographic nature of reality will interestingly enough provide you
with information about the breadth of the culture if you are watching carefully, with an eye of
wholeness rather than separateness.
Respect others . Boundaries, because they are socially constructed, are there for a reason.
Crossing them has implications— a price— and you will pay it, one way or another. In traditional
ways of creation-centered practices, violating order in a ceremony is a grave transgression that
carries a spiritual, if not physical, price. There are things that can and can not be done. During
the spring of ethnography, we listen to others who have gone before us and know of the culture.
They can help us to identify the rules. We are not all-privileged in all situations. Research does
not entitle us to be able to enter, ask or do as we wish. Like in a ceremony, there are limits and
boundaries of appropriateness. Spend time identifying them. Listen when they are identi ﬁed to
you by others, and respect them. One of my students learned this very powerfully when in her
curiosity while in a sweat lodge in Porcupine, SD, taking an ethnography class in ﬁeld methods
which I was teaching, she attempted to approach the man who was running the ceremony. He
very curtly informed her that it was not to be allowed — ceremony time was not the time for
doing anything but ceremony.
Search your heart . This is very important, and is perhaps the most important aspect of
preparation. Why are you doing this? A traditional medicine person will turn you away if you do
not at some level know why you want to participate in a ceremony. If you don ’t know why you
want to study something in this highly intimate way, then maybe you aren ’t ready. Spend more
time reading, studying other things, learning about yourself. If you are impatient or rebellious,
take time to ﬁgure out why. Y ou are about to enter into other people ’s life worlds. Be honest
about your motives, even if they are embarrassing. Don ’t do it disrespectfully. And this goes for
looking at your own life as the subject of ethnography as well! It is a grave disrespect to
participate in a ceremony ‘just to see what it ’s like ’, or to talk about it publicly just for the
attention. There has to be a conscious spiritual reason, not just an assumption of spirituality.
Likewise, in ethnography, what is your reason? And be honest. If you don ’t know what your
156  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 178 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 157
Page 157
reasons are, you aren’t ready. Learn to wait. Sometimes, the ethnographic process will startle you
if you can not answer this. One student, while coding her ﬁeld notes, was stunned when her
biases against men became glaringly apparent in that she had not included any codes of negative
experiences of women in a matriarchal society. She was forced to see that she had an underlying
agenda for the study, which, had it not been recognized when she submitted her codes for
grading, would have led her to write a report that systematically distorted what she experienced.
6.2. Summer
Just as with seasons, one wakes to the summer of ethnography gradually. It is an emergent
progression from one ﬂuid state to another. Suddenly one day you realize that you are in the
midst of ﬁeld work proper; you are no longer preparing. This emergent realization is only
possible if preparation has been adequately conducted, for spring is actually a gradual entry into
the ﬁeld, a sort of ‘pre-ethnography’. If this pre-ethnography has not taken place, then one feels
a jolt with what can be a violently rejected culture shock. What is considered a normal part of
ﬁeld work from a traditional academic perspective (culture shock) is a sign of not being able to
be present where you are. Preparation in the spring should teach you how to handle this more
appropriately, so you can handle the culture shock better. Y ou can not force seasons to change,
and from this perspective you can not begin your work until it ’s time.
During the summer, it is the time to maintain steady involvement with the culture. It is the
time for discipline, but not as in traditional conceptions of rigor. Discipline here implies that
you have become a disciple of the culture. Y ou are learning it not as an outsider, but in order to
be part of it, as yourself. It is never the same to merely watch a ceremony as it is to participate
in it. The level of depth of understanding you can attain through this type of participation
is true understanding rooted in experience. And you need not change yourself. Change occurs
naturally— when it doesn’t, it is a form of violence. Summer is a time of intense realizations.
It is this intensity, this ‘heat’, which will determine how the rest of the year will proceed. Like
an all-consuming summer heat, it can not be escaped, even at night when alone in bed. This is
what true immersion ﬁeldwork is like. That is what is so frightening and threatening about it. It
is during the summer that one is most apt to want to cry, ‘I wanna go home! ’ but not out of
culture shock. Rather, like in a ceremony, because heat makes one quickly realize what is really
involved. Making it through the summer of ethnography means working even when fatigued,
heat-exhausted, and weary. This fatigue will be mental, emotional, and spiritual as well as
physical.
The skilled ethnographer in the ﬁeld learns to believe in the circle of time, in the inevitability
of changes. If there is too much focus on one ’s speci ﬁc experience, the product of the eth-
nography will be narrow and non-holistic. It will not capture the essence of the culture. Rather,
each and every experience within the culture is an example of the whole culture. And the essence,
therefore, is tentative and paradoxical. Wisdom begins to grow from this aspect of summer, as
fruit that reaches its full size and begins to ripen. The Sun Dancer in Lakota tradition learns the
meaning of his or her people through the dance. The dancer who focuses on his or her thirst
rather than the dance , can not understand its essence anymore than an ethnographer who
focuses on speciﬁc behaviors and the recording of those speci ﬁc behaviors can understand that
which gives them meaning— the context, the culture.
Summer is a time of paradox. The heat makes the body naturally lazy, but work at the same
time must pick up if one is to be ready for fall. Because of this, work during the summer of
ethnography must always be tempered by e ﬀorts to conserve energy. The amplitude of experi-
ence that o ﬀers itself in the summer provides the ground for learning one ’s limits as a human
instrument. As relationships build and fatigue grows, the potential for con ﬂict and confronta-
tion of personal biases increases. It is in the summer that the idealized ‘subjects’ in the ﬁeld lose
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  157


--- PAGE 179 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 158
Page 158
their romance. They become people — ordinary people with human frailties and faults. It is in
this aspect of the summer that the value of honesty during the spring can best be appreciated.
Having ‘sold’ one’s self to get access by making the human instrument seem ‘too good to be
true’, or denying the reality of one ’s limitations, will become apparent as the immersed human
instrument shows his or her humanity along with that of the native members of the culture. The
irony is that it is the con ﬂict that begins to arise here which is integral to obtaining a true
understanding of another culture.
Until one learns to engage in conﬂict and stay, one does not know what members of a culture
are like. The does not mean watching con ﬂict between others, it means accepting one ’s own
involvement in conﬂict as a member of the social dynamics of the ﬁeld. It means perceiving this
conﬂict not as a ‘methodological issue’, but as lived cultural experience. Not only the enjoyable
or entrancing is worthy of our attention. I remember the problems I had with my landlady
during the early stages of ethnographic work in Mexico in the fall of 1998. She lectured me daily
on religion and morality, and when she found me buying a gift bottle of tequila in a grocery
store, she snatched the money out of my hand and attempted to in ﬂuence my behavior. I spent
much time interviewing other women informally about this encounter, and in the process,
learned much about the roles of women in con ﬂict in Mexico. Rather than try to explain my
position ad nauseum, I tried to ﬁnd out why they found the situation to be permissible, although
aggressive. This was not an enjoyable phase of my ethnography, but vital.
Having planted one’s crops and leaving them when they begin to be choked by weeds is not
the way to prepare for a good harvest. It is similarly the undesirability of one’s work that tests the
human instrument’s ability to obtain the ‘data’ which will allow an ethnography that demon-
strates true understanding to be written. It is always possible to alter one ’s tasks by focusing on
journals and note-taking, on categorizing and interviewing, during this phase. The seasonal
approach to ethnography sees those enterprises as important, but not central  to one ’s work.
What is central is the involvement with the culture, and although we have called it ‘immersion’
into a culture, it is more like infusion. The human instrument must be steeped in the culture,
allowing him or herself to be transformed through the research. Only through this transform-
ation will he or she ever understand the culture implicitly. This is what will enable him or her to
write the essence of a culture rather than describe it.
What is needed in the summer is the ability to let the indigenous participants in the culture
teach the human instrument how to function as a human being in their world. This is not in
order to understand them as ‘subjects’, but to fully participate as one ’s self in their world. This
means that aspects of his or her personality and preferred ways of doing things will need to be
put aside for the duration of the research. One learns to make choices within the cultural
frame— sacriﬁce and laboring are needed. This is not in order to demonstrate skill or endurance,
but because the human instrument is gathering data in the way he or she best does it — through
experience. It becomes part of him or her. I once heard the head dancer of a Lakota Sun Dance
joking with a group of non-Indian dancers after a particularly grueling day of dancing, ‘Put that
one in your book, Jim! ’ At another time, he added, ‘Some things aren ’t able to be known ‘out
there’ with pictures and words; some things can only be known inside. ’ When the human
instrument begins to know this intuitively rather than intellectually, fall is approaching.
6.3. Fall
The intuitive sense of knowing in an implicit unexplainable way is as comforting as the ﬁrst cool
breeze of autumn after a long hot summer. Autumn is the cool down; it is exhilarating and
intoxicating to reach a sense of completion that is dangerously misleading. The year is not over,
but it feels as if the work is. This is the stage when the ethnographer needs to concentrate on his
or her task, because it is at this point that winter is anticipated. And winter is the deadliest of
158  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 180 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 159
Page 159
seasons if one is not prepared. Winter will be the time of writing and publishing, of sharing
one’s work publicly. Without a good harvest, one’s eﬀorts will be for naught.
In the autumn of ﬁeldwork, the human instrument begins to reframe the experiences of the
summer. Instead of saying, ‘I wanna go home ’, he or she is more apt to say, ‘I don’t know if I
wanna go home’. Having made it through con ﬂict with members of the culture, there is apt to
be a sense of bonding and comfort with the ‘host’ culture. This is when it is tempting to believe
that one has actually become a member of the culture. While decisions to continue relationships
with members or aspects of the cultures studied may indeed be part of the life experience of
many ethnographers, caution needs to be taken as a researcher during the fall. The ethnographic
task from a circular, holistic perspective is to understand the culture as a whole. By being lured
into purely subjective personal experience with no ‘eye’ for the whole picture, the ethnographic
task is endangered. This is when one ’s journals and notebooks again become important. Sum-
mer’s tasks are misleading in that they could lead one to believe that that is when note-taking is
most important. From this perspective, it is actually autumn when most notes should be recorded.
It is during autumn that theoretical memos should be written and necessary interviews con-
ducted. It is the time to harvest. And this is a harvest from within the human instrument.
During autumn, the researcher should know enough about the culture to know what is being
analyzed. Earlier, in the spring, the focus was on preparation of the instrument. In the summer,
it was on learning the culture. Once both seasons have passed, memos can be written. From a
holographic perspective, there is no problem in recording events at this time, and not only when
in their midst. It does not mean that no notes can or should be taken during the summer, but
merely that it is not the sole time, nor always the most appropriate. With repeated experience in
the ﬁeld over years, one’s memory will begin to develop in ways that will facilitate harvesting in
the fall. The fruit gathered in the summer is far from ready for harvesting. One must wait until
fall. Clarity of one’s experience is a characteristic of a well-prepared fall, like crisp clear autumn
nights. Now, decisions on the perspectives for analysis must be made.
From a creation-centered perspective, all knowledge is valuable, but wisdom is only attained
from completion of cycles. The insight of wisdom into a culture requires tenacity and willing-
ness to wait until one is ready to ‘know’. And even then, ‘knowing’ is tentative. It is during the
fall that the temptation will grow to believe that one has certainty about the culture. That is why
I have formulated the concept of ‘tentative certainty’ to characterize the knowledge acquired
through creation-centered ethnography stemming from a circular ontology. Rooted in relativity,
tentative certainty respects the boundaries of subjective context as determinants of what is
known. During the fall, the ethnographer begins to create categories for what he or she has
experienced, and to chronicle experiences within those categories. Categories are related to each
other in explanatory expositions called theoretical memos (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). But at all
times, these relationships and category assignments are subject to redeﬁnition; they are tentative.
Practicing this frame of mind during the autumn prepares one for writing in the winter. One ’s
writing can not re ﬂect tentativeness if the writer does not intrinsically experience it. It is not
being ‘wishy-washy’ or noncommittal; it is the ability to believe something wholeheartedly
without being attached to it. Learning how to detach one ’s self from things held dear, including
one’s ideas, was at ﬁrst practiced in the spring by bracketing one’s biases and limitations. Later it
was practiced in the summer by learning to continue in endeavors when one does not rationally
want to continue. In the fall, it is practiced through expressions of tentative certainty. All three
seasons ultimately prepare for winter.
6.4. Winter
In the winter, the researcher ‘leaves the ﬁeld’. In classic ﬁeldwork, this is meant literally. The
researcher breaks away physically from personal contact and presence. This may or may not be
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  159


--- PAGE 181 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 160
Page 160
the case with indigenous ethnography, but the human instrument must still somehow break
away from dynamic lived experience to write about it. The very act of recording in writing the
essence of culture changes it to something it is not. It freezes it. And the possible deathly
consequences of winter’s deep freezes are excellent metaphors for the costs of careless writing.
Writing about a culture, even when one is or has become a member of it, always involves
leaving the culture in one ’s mind. This is why during the winter of ethnography, I believe it is
necessary for the human instrument to physically retreat. This is not in order to leave one ’s
subjects and setting, but rather to contemplate the separations one will create with writing.
Some might call this ‘considering ethics’. But the issue is not whether one is right or wrong eth-
ically— it is considering what will be given back to the people with one ’s work. It is time to
consider what the human instrument has experienced subjectively. It is a time to anticipate one’s
future life, having been through the ethnographic experience. It is a time to journal honestly
while simultaneously explicating one’s theories and ideas about the culture.
In the winter, the human instrument can not become so absorbed in his or her work that the
self is neglected. Winter is a cold time. It is often lonely. Writing about a culture removes you
from it, so that even if you are part of it, you no longer are in the same way. This is the winter of
ethnography. Even if relationships established in the ﬁeld are maintained, writing about it in a
way that will become public transforms the writer. The human instrument has done something
which will re ﬂect back on him or her, and the culture about which is written. In traditional
creation-centered societies, this is at the core of justice without need for elaborate legal systems.
If what you do will re ﬂect back, or come back, to you, then actions must logically be careful.
What one writes about the people will inevitably come back to the writer in his or her life. It is
not a light enterprise. In fact, it is quite serious.
Words are sacred in creation-centered traditions. They create realities with which we must
live. Discussing open systems in human communication, we sometimes talk about irreversibility.
In traditional creation-centered views, it is not just that something cannot be reversed; it is
that whatever we say will keep moving along the circle of life and come back to us. Words are
spiritual— they carry with them power and energy which lives through them. It is this spiritual
force of words which enables them to create reality. It is also the reason behind the unwillingness
of traditional native people to speak when they have nothing to say. Similarly, the human
instrument should write to say something . One should not express out of obedience or strict
obligation; one should express only when there is something to say. Accordingly, what is
expressed by someone who truly believes it, is serious. It is not taken back. It has been ex- pressed,
sent out, with an understanding that its spiritual force will come back to the sender.
This is what winter is all about. It is the culmination of all that the other seasons have
involved. And it, like the other three seasons, can last for a very long time. One should not be
tempted to think that the annual aspect of the seasonal metaphor implies that the Four Seasons
of Ethnography re ﬂects a calendar year. The Four Seasons highlight many real aspects of a
creation-centered approach to ethnography, but the seasons of a year are fairly ﬁxed in terms of
their duration. In ethnography, the duration of seasons is determined by the subjective, spiritual
experience of readiness on the part of the human instrument during a cycle that has its own
rhythms.
This intuitive sense of knowing when to ‘go on’ to the next season means that one ’s work
may not correspond to formal organizational requirements. But if we are honest with ourselves,
formal organizational requirements rarely are natural. The Four Seasons propose an approach to
understanding other cultures that is creation-based, organic, and not imposed. It requires new
deﬁnitions of academic performance. For example, I believe that the well-developed and sup-
ported theoretical memo must begin to be recognized as a viable contribution to scholarship.
Similarly, entries from ‘spring journals’ must begin to be accepted methodological reports. By
allowing work that reﬂects the progress at all seasons to be recognized as the viable scholarship it
160  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 182 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 161
Page 161
is, ethnographers who use the Four Seasons approach to ‘govern’ their research would ﬁnd they
can be productive even before the ethnography is ‘done’. All seasons are beautiful and sacred in
their own way. T o stress the works of one season above another is to work in an unbalanced way.
When there is a lack of balance, something will fall or break eventually. By choosing to do
ethnography as a reﬂection of the natural, organic, order in the universe, I am choosing to do my
research in a way that allows me to maintain balance and harmony.
Maintaining balance in this sense does not mean eliminating con ﬂict. Harmony does not
mean carefully orchestrated synchrony. Balance is the precarious experience of dynamic ten-
sion, with the constant awareness that ‘things could tip ’ at any point in time, if a move is
made too abruptly or too dramatically with too much force. From a state of balance, all
actions are ‘weighed’ with regard to their e ﬀect on the balance. It is not a position of comfort.
It is the position of dialectic tension, of the constant awareness of opposites. Balance is the
union of those opposites, and rather than eliminate the tension, it is the experience of it.
Similarly, harmony is like the morning song of birds waking to the new day. They all sing
diﬀerent songs at the same time, at di ﬀerent paces, but with respect to each other ’s song. All
come through. T o do ethnography from a place of harmony does not mean it is without
conﬂict or challenges or displeasure. It means that the goal of one ’s voice is authenticity and
mutual participation. In order to do this, all the seasons must be lived fully. From this
position, one would eventually come to the place of not having to ask oneself, ‘Why do I do
what I do? ’ When balance and harmony become a way of life, then one ’s work is merely an
extension of it, and its purpose is not compartmentalized as distinct from other aspects of life
(Fox, 1994). Harmony and balance exist when individuals are themselves, and when they act
from a con ﬁdent awareness of that knowledge. Our ethnographic work begins to answer, not
the demands of structured organizations or careers, but the question of a source far greater — a
question that asks, ‘What is the reason for which I am called to do this work? ’ (Kamenetz,
1998). Imagine if birds, if trees and four-legged animals, waited for their career plans to tell
them what they should do next!
Native, creation-centered people living traditional earth-based lives, have always learned how
to act organically— by watching nature. Many of the traditional tales and stories of animals are
reﬂections of the awareness developed of archetypal organic ordering (Taylor, 1998) that is
developed from observing and living an experience of creation, of nature. As such, animals and
plants are seen to have the same potential as humans and vice versa. This approach to looking at
members of ‘other’ cultures has much to o ﬀer those who have been overly a ﬀected by the
notions of scienti ﬁc objectivity and the myth of possible separation of parts. Everything is
related, and therefore what we do in our work with others will inevitably be done to us.
7. Afterward
There is an old Hopi story about Coyote and her e ﬀorts to get food for her pups. On one of her
ventures, she encounters a sacred kiva, and she is overcome by curiosity. Her curiosity is so great
that she violates norms in order to look into the hole on top. What she sees is lots of people —
four-leggeds, birds, humans — all learning how to transform themselves into other creatures.
Twice, their magic is interrupted because they realize that someone is watching, and they search
for her outside the kiva, taking time from their normal activities to stop the interference. On the
second search, they ﬁnd her and take her in. They might as well — she has already seen them at
work. Coyote is asked if she would like to learn their secret. She decides she will become a rabbit,
because then she could run much faster and catch her prey. Like the others, she jumps through a
hoop and is transformed into the animal she desired to be. They then tell her to go on her way
and to come back another time, when they will tell her how to return to her previous form.
When she leaves, the others laugh at her naivete and ignorance. Imagine, they think, she actually
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY  161


--- PAGE 183 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 162
Page 162
thought they would tell her all their secrets! Meanwhile, Coyote runs home in the form of a
rabbit, and upon arriving home to her hungry pups, they eat her.
Ultimately, her own were the ones who su ﬀered from her venture. Had she only tried to live
her own life, rather than attempting to know what was not meant to be her knowledge — by
attempting to do her work in the form of another.
There are many lessons here for us as ethnographers if we will only pay attention to the
creation around us.
Notes
* This article was originally published under the author ’s former name of María Cristina González.
1. I use the term ‘indigenous’ to refer to a cultural conceptual ‘place’ of origin, as opposed to speci ﬁc
physical location or nation-state identiﬁcation.
2. Native American peoples, as I use the term, includes those cultures that populated the lands from what
is now Arctic Canada and Alaska to the southern tip of South America, prior to the arrival of European
refugees, conquerors and settlers.
3. One who observes in order to judge or give an opinion.
4. This would seem somewhat less likely in an indigenous ethnography, if the ethnographer were particu-
larly reﬂexive and possessing a high awareness of his or her own culture. The strength of the received
view is demonstrated in that academic socialization can function to distance a cultural member from his
or her own culture.
5. This formal academic preparation which utilizes theories and literature to serve as a backdrop for
awareness I refer to as theoretical sensitivity, broadening the use of the term coined by Glaser and
Strauss in their 1967 work, The Discovery of Grounded Theory.
6. Literally, ‘crying for a vision ’, the Lakota ceremony popularly called a ‘vision quest ’, which entails
being placed in a pit or up on a hill to await one ’s vision.
References
Altheide, D. L., & Johnson, J. M. (1994). Criteria for assessing interpretive validity in qualitative research. In
Y. Lincoln & N. Denzin (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Asante, M. K. (1987). The Afrocentric idea. Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Asante, M. K. (1988). Afrocentricity. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Asante, M. K. (1990). Kemet, Afrocentricity and knowledge. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Banks, S., & Banks, A. (1998). Fiction and social research: by ice or ﬁre. Thousand Oaks, CA: AltaMira
Press.
Becker, C. (1992). Living and relating: an introduction to phenomenology . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Bickerton, D. (1992). Language and species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bickerton, D. (1996). Language and human behavior. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Broadfoot, K. (1995). Theory of a faceted cultural self: the role of communication . Unpublished Master ’s
Thesis, Arizona State University, T empe, AZ, USA.
Browning, L. D., & Shetler, J. C. (2000). Sematech: saving the US semiconductor industry . College Station:
T exas A&M University Press.
Buraway, M., Burton, A., Ferguson, A. A., Fox, K. J., Gamson, J., Gartrell, N., Hurst, L., Hurzman, C.,
Salzinger, L., Schiﬀman, J., & Ui, S. (1991). Ethnography unbound: power and resistance in the modern
metropolis. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Capra, F., & Steindl-Rast, D. (1992). Belonging to the universe: explorations on the frontiers of science and
spirituality. San Francisco, CA: Harper.
Daly, J. A., McCroskey, J. C., & Ayres, J. (1997). Avoiding communication: shyness, reticence and communica-
tion apprehension. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Daly, J. A., McCroskey, J. C., & Martin, M. (1998). Communication and personality: trait perspectives .
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Denzin, N. (1996). Interpretive ethnography: ethnographic practices in the 21st century . Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Ellis, C., & Bochner, A. (1996). Composing ethnography: alternative forms of qualitative writing . Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Fox, M. (1991). Creation spirituality: liberating gifts for the peoples of the Earth . San Francisco, CA:
Harper.
162  SARAH AMIRA DE LA GARZA


--- PAGE 184 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 163
Page 163
Fox, M. (1994). The reinvention of work. San Francisco, CA: Harper.
Fox, M. (1996). Original blessing: a primer in creation spirituality . Santa Fe, NM: Bear and Company.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). Discovery of grounded theory . Chicago, IL: Aldine.
González, M. C. (1994). An invitation to leap from a trinitarian ontology in health communication
research to a spiritually inclusive quatrain. In S. Deetz (Ed.), Communication Yearbook XVII. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
González, M. C. (1995). In search of the voice I always had. In R. Padilla & R. Ch ávez Chavéz (Eds.), The
leaning ivory tower: Latino professors in American universities . Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
González, M. C. (1997). Painting the white face red: intercultural contact presented through poetic
ethnography. In J. Martin, T. Nakayama & L. Flores (Eds.), Readings in cultural context . Mountain
View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
González, M. C. (2003) Ethnography as spiritual practice: a change in the taken for granted (or an
epistemological break with science). In J. Mandelbaum & P . Glenn (Eds.), Festschrift for Robert Hopper.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
González, M. C., & Cole, M. (1991). The development of a culture based scale of modernity in Chihuahua:
a meaning-centered approach. In Conference on Border Issues of the Instituto Norteamericno de
Cultura, Chihuahua, Mexico.
Goodall, H. L. (1989). Casing a promised land: the autobiography of an organizational detective as cultural
ethnographer. Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press.
Goodall, H. L. (1991). Living in the rock ‘n’ roll mystery: reading context, self and others as clues. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois Press.
Goodall, H. L. (1996). Divine signs: connecting spirit to community . Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press.
Goodall, H. L. (2000). Doing ethnographic research. Thousand Oaks, CA: AltaMira Press.
Guba, E. (1990). Paradigm dialog. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hall, E. (1983). The dance of life: the other dimension of time . New Y ork: Anchor.
Hart, R. (1987). The sound of leadership: presidential communication in the modern age . Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Hart, R. (1996). Modern rhetorical criticism . Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Hopper, R. (1992). Telephone conversations. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Inkeles, A., & Smith, D. H. (1971). Becoming modern: individual change in six developing nations. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kamenetz, R. (1998). In Stalking Elijah: adventures with today ’s Jewish mystical masters. San Francisco, CA:
Harper.
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Mendoza, L. (1999). In Annual meeting of the National Communication Association, Chicago.
Padilla, R., & Ch ávez Ch ávez, R. (Eds.) (1995). The leaning ivory tower: Latino professors in American
universities. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Snow, D. A. (1993). Down on their luck: a study of homeless street people . Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Stage, C. (1997). An examination of organizational communication cultures in American subsidiaries doing
business in Thailand. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, T empe, AZ, USA.
Stringer, E. T. (1996). Action research: a handbook for practitioners. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Swimme, B., & Berry, T. (1992). The universe story. San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins.
Talbot, M. (1991). Holographic universe. New Y ork: Harper Collins.
Tanno, D. V ., & Jandt, F. E. (1994). Rede ﬁning the ‘other’ in multicultural research. Howard Journal of
Communications, 5, 36–45.
Taylor, J. (1998). The living labyrinth: exploring universal themes in myths, dreams and the symbolism of
waking life. Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press.
THE FOUR SEASONS OF ETHNOGRAPHY 
163


--- PAGE 185 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 164
Page 164


--- PAGE 186 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 165
Page 165
Part IV
Impact of Globalization on
Intercultural Communication


--- PAGE 187 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 166
Page 166


--- PAGE 188 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 167
Page 167
11
The Hegemony of English and
Strategies for Linguistic Pluralism
Proposing the Ecology of Language Paradigm
Yukio Tsuda
One of the most important tasks that scholars ought to perform is to discover questions out of
the taken-for-granted knowledge of existing reality. The question I want to raise in this essay
concerns the use of English, which is very much taken for granted in international communica-
tion today. Speaking from a non-English-speaking perspective, I believe the use of English should
not be taken for granted but should be examined as a problem of linguistic hegemony. It is
evident that English is the de facto language of international communication today. It is also
evident, however, that the dominance of English causes not only linguistic and communicative
inequality but also feelings of anxiety and insecurity, especially on the part of non-English-
speaking people in a rapidly globalizing world. Thus, there is a need to propose a paradigm to
counterattack the hegemony of English so that linguistic and cultural pluralism will be secured.
Here I want to achieve two goals. One is to raise the problem of the hegemony of English by
discussing the two aspects: neocolonialism and globalism. The other goal is to discuss what I call
the “Ecology of Language Paradigm ” as a counterstrategy to the hegemony of English and its
implications for international communication and linguistic pluralism. Addressing the problem
of linguistic hegemony is crucial to developing human and cultural security.
Dominance of English as Neocolonialism
It is often said that English is the most widely used language for international and intercultural
communication. A number of linguists have tracked the global spread of English and have
shown that it is the most prevalent language today. Ammon, for example, points out several
statistical indicators of the dominance of English. The number of English speakers has grown to
1.5 billion people. English is designated as an o ﬃcial language in as many as 62 nations. English
is the most dominant language in scientiﬁc communication, being the language of 70–80 percent
of academic publications. English is the de facto o ﬃcial and working language in most inter-
national organizations. English is the most-taught foreign language around the world (Ammon,
1992, pp. 78–81).
English is indeed the most dominant language and operates as a common medium for
international communication. Because it is dominant, however, English is also the “hegemonic”
and “neocolonialist” language. It creates both a structure of linguistic and communicative
inequality and discrimination between speakers of English and speakers of other languages and
a form of indirect rule over many aspects of life.
The use of English has been taken for granted in most international interactions, and it has
167


--- PAGE 189 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 168
Page 168
almost never been called into question. In the English-dominated Western academic community,
the use of English has never been perceived as the problematic, as far as I know. Strangely
enough, international and intercultural communication studies are quite indi ﬀerent to the
dominance of English, while sociolinguistics centers on the objective description of the spread of
English and thus legitimates the function of English as an international language.
I have been attempting to critically examine the dominance of English as the problematic in
international communication (Tsuda, 1986, 1990, 1992, 1993a, 1993b, 1994, 1996). I have found
that the dominance of English causes serious consequences, which include: (1) linguistic and
communicative inequality to the great disadvantage of the speakers of languages other than
English; (2) discrimination against non-English-speaking people and those who are not pro-
ﬁcient in English; and (3) colonization of the consciousness of non-English-speakers, causing
them to develop linguistic, cultural, and psychological dependency upon, and identi ﬁcation
with, English, its culture and people.
Linguistic and communicative inequality
In a situation where English dominates communication, the non-English-speaking people are
inevitably disadvantaged. They become mute and deaf and are therefore prevented from fully
participating in communication. Let us look at an example from international conferences.
Takahashi, a Japanese anthropologist, having observed the proceedings of an international
conference where English was the only o ﬃcial language, argues that English-dominated inter-
national conferences are bound to serve as an arena for linguistic and communicative dis-
crimination (Takahashi, 1991). In his view, native speakers of English take full advantage of
the linguistic and communicative inequality to their own bene ﬁt. Takahashi reports on his
observation as follows:
There is a great gap in the working knowledge of English between native speakers and
non-native speakers, especially those speakers whose mother tongues are linguistically
distant from English. Thus, native speakers of English intentionally try to push non-native
speakers out of discussions by making a full use of tactics that stem from phonetic,
idiomatic, syntactic, and pragmatic characteristics unique only in English ....  F o r
example, they step up the speed of speech, use a large number of jargons and idioms, or
make utterances that are grammatically complex ....  T hese communicative tactics are
used to take advantage of lower proﬁciency of non-native speakers in English.
(Takahashi, 1991, pp. 188–189)
As Takahashi observed, it seems that native speakers of English in the English-dominated con-
ferences, use their linguistic advantage to magnify their power so that they can establish an
unequal and asymmetrical relationship with the non-English-speakers and thus push them out
of the mainstream of communication.
There are a great many other examples of linguistic and communicative inequality arising
from the dominance of English, but it is suﬃcient to report one more.
W. J. Coughlin, an American journalist, wrote about the mokusatsu mistake that lead to the
atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (Coughlin, 1953). He reported that the Japanese
prime minister ’s response of Mokusatsu to the Allies ’ demand for complete surrender was
misinterpreted to mean “reject” the demand, driving American President Harry Truman to
decide on the atomic bombing. Mokusatsu actually means both “ignore” and “no comment.”
The point in this historic misunderstanding of a word is that in the English-dominated
Japan–U.S. communication, the Americans always have semantic control and the subtle nuances
of Japanese semantics are “ignored” or “overlooked.” In other words, in English-dominated
168  YUKIO TSUDA


--- PAGE 190 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 169
Page 169
communication, English speakers are in a position to control communication to their own
advantage.
Linguistic discrimination and social inequality
The dominance of English also creates prejudices and stereotypes that, in turn, create discrimina-
tion against those who do not or cannot speak English. For example, those who cannot speak
English ﬂuently are labeled incompetent and thus insulted and perceived to be inferior.
Let me present two examples of discrimination as a result of the dominance of English. The
ﬁrst example comes from a Time magazine article that reports on a Chinese immigrant to the
United States. He was con ﬁned in a mental institution for 31 years because of “the incompre-
hensible English” he spoke. The article reports that when the Chinese visited a doctor, he was
diagnosed as “abnormal” because of the English he spoke ( Time, January 9, 1984).
The second example illustrates discrimination among non-native speakers of English. Kazuo
Kojima, a Japanese journalist, wrote an essay about the role of English as a basis of discrimina-
tion in Southeast Asia (Kojima, 1996). Being able to speak English is such a source of pride for
the people in these countries that some pro ﬁcient speakers of English are inclined to insult and
discriminate against those who cannot speak English. Kojima himself heard an Indian say, “Iraqis
are beasts, because they can’t speak English.”
I believe this is a rather extreme case, and most Indians do not hold such a discriminatory
attitude. These two examples suggest, however, that the dominance of English is such that the
stereotypes and prejudice are easily created and lead to discriminatory perceptions and attitudes
toward those who do not and cannot speak English. In other words, English, because of its
dominant prestigious status, functions as a basis of discrimination and therefore legitimates and
reproduces the perceptions of linguistic prejudice and discrimination.
Discriminatory perceptions and attitudes toward non-English-speakers justify the social
hierarchy, which places native speakers of English at the top of the order with non-native
speakers of English placed in the middle and the people who do not speak English placed at the
bottom. The dominance of English is such that pro ﬁciency in the language serves as a criterion
by which to classify people.
Thus, native speakers of English reign as a prestigious ruling class of international communi-
cation: they can easily express their ideas any time, while non-native speakers and people who do
not speaker English constitute the “muted” working class of international communication: they
are compelled to learn English and have di ﬃculty expressing their ideas. This is what I call the
“Class Structure of International Communication” on the basis of proﬁciency of English.
Colonization of the consciousness
The third and ultimate consequence of the dominance of English is what is usually called
“colonization of the consciousness, ” which refers to the mental control of the colonized by the
colonizer. Colonization of the mind occurs as a result of the domination of the colonizer ’s
language over the language of the colonized. Ngugi wa Thiong ’o, an African writer famous for
his book, Decolonizing the Mind , describes how colonialism takes control of the mind of the
colonized.
[Colonialism’s] most important area of domination was the mental universe of the
colonized, the control, through culture, of how people perceived themselves and their
relationship to the world....
For colonialism this involved two aspects of the same process: the destruction or the deliberate
THE ECOLOGY OF LANGUAGE PARADIGM  169


--- PAGE 191 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 170
Page 170
undervaluing of a people ’s culture, their art, dances, religions, history, geography, education,
orature and literature, and the conscious elevation of the language of the colonizer. The domina-
tion of a people ’s language by the languages of the colonizing nations was crucial to the
domination of the mental universe of the colonized (Ngugi, 1981, p. 160).
As Ngugi clearly points out, linguistic domination leads to mental control. This implies that
the global dominance of English today is leading to the control of the mind of the global
population by speakers of English and their nations and governments.
Ngugi also points out that mental control is made possible by a combination of “the destruc-
tion or the deliberate undervaluing of a people ’s culture” and “the conscious elevation of the
language of the colonizer.”
In the face of this mental controlling, the colonized/dominated are usually coerced into
complying with the force of mental controlling, which facilitates the execution of the coloniza-
tion of the mind. In short, the dominated are led to identify with the dominator and glorify
the dominator’s language while devaluing their own language and culture. This psychological
identiﬁcation with the dominators and their language is the ultimate result of the colonization
of the mind. The process of colonization of the mind, which involves identi ﬁcation, gloriﬁca-
tion, and devaluing, is clearly re ﬂected in an African sociolinguist ’s comment on linguistic
imperialism:
The phenomenon in which the minds and lives of the speakers of a language are dominated
by another language to the point where they believe that they can and should use only that
foreign language when it comes to transactions dealing with the more advanced aspects of
life such as education, philosophy, literature, government, the administration of justice,
e t c ....  Linguistic imperialism has a subtle way of warping the minds, attitudes, and
aspirations of even the most noble in a society and of preventing him from appreciating
and realizing the full potentialities of the indigenous languages.
(Quoted in Phillipson, 1992, p. 56)
The sociolinguist is aware of the mental control that dominated su ﬀers, but most of the
dominated unknowingly comply with the force of mental colonization.
Learners of English, as they try to master the language, unknowingly fall prey to the coloniza-
tion of the mind. The following passage by a Japanese student well exempliﬁes the mental control
of learners of English by English:
The primary goal of this journey was to learn the American way of life, not to mention
learning how to speak English a lot better. T o learn how English really works, it would be
best to take out all the Japanese words from my brain and ﬁll it up with English instead.
I must use English all the time, even when I speak to myself, write my diary, and speak to
a dog!
(Quoted in Tsuda, 1990, p. 145)
What we witness here is not mere linguistic and cultural learning but the transformation of
a person ’s mind, from a Japanese mind to an English-centered one — the colonization of a
person’s mind and the conscious devaluating her own language.
Dominance of English as Globalism
While the dominance of English as neocolonialism occurs at the level of international inter-
personal communication, the dominance of English as globalism operates at the level of inter-
national mass communication, which involves issues such as cultural and media imperialism,
170  YUKIO TSUDA


--- PAGE 192 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 171
Page 171
Americanization of global culture, McDonaldization and Dallasization of society, unequal ﬂow
of international news and information, dominance of English on the Internet, and so on.
In short, the dominance of English operates as a means of promoting globalization. The
dominance of English no doubt facilitates globalization. Globalization, in turn, assumes and
encourages the use and dominance of English. In other words, the dominance of English is a
reﬂection of the structure of global relations.
Australian applied linguist A. Pennycook, for example, points out the interrelationship
between the dominance of English and the structure of global relations:
[I]ts widespread use threatens other languages; it has become the language of power and
prestige in many countries, thus acting as a crucial gatekeeper to social and economic
progress; its use in particular domains, especially professional, may exacerbate di ﬀerent
power relationships and may render these domains more inaccessible to many people; its
position in the world gives it a role also as an international gatekeeper, regulating the
international ﬂow of people; it is closely linked to national and increasingly non-national
forms of culture and knowledge that are dominant in the world; and it is also bound up
with aspects of global relations, such as spread of capitalism, development aid and the
dominance particularly of North American Media.
(Pennycook, 1994, p. 13)
Thus addressing the dominance of English is crucial to understanding the structure of global
relations.
According to sociolinguist Roland Robertson, one of the most prominent scholars on global-
ization, globalization as a concept refers to “the crystallization of the entire world as a single
place” (quoted in Arnason, 1990, p. 220) or “the compression of the world and the intensiﬁcation
of consciousness of the world as a whole” (Robertson, 1992, p. 8).
Globalization in a more concrete sense is taking place primarily in economic domains in
which transnational corporations act as agents to conduct business and trade beyond national
borders. As a result, we live in a global culture in which our lives are ﬁlled with products and
information imported from overseas.
Globalism, therefore, is a belief or a form of knowledge that globalization should happen.
Globalism accepts globalization as natural, inevitable, and beneﬁcial for all (Pennycook, 1994).
As I mentioned, however, globalization, in fact, causes the Americanization of world culture
and McDonaldization of society: it is not a process carefully planned but a mere a ﬃrmation of
the structure of the unequal global relations in which a few center nations dominate over the
periphery nations.
Thus globalism justi ﬁes globalization as it is occurring today. Globalism prevents us from
recognizing the three consequences of globalization: Anglo-Americanization, transnationaliza-
tion, and commercialization of contemporary life.
Globalization as Anglo-Americanization
The most serious problem caused by globalization is the Anglo-Americanization of the world
culture, based on the Anglo-American monopoly of the global information and entertainment
market.
Take movies, for example. Of 87 countries surveyed in 1992, as many as 63 countries
imported the largest number of movies shown from the United States, and 20 out of 25 European
countries showed 60–70 percent American movies. Also in Japan, more than half of the movies
shown are imported from the United States (Tsuda, 1996).
It seems that the dominance of American products is evident in the entire international mass
THE ECOLOGY OF LANGUAGE PARADIGM  171


--- PAGE 193 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 172
Page 172
communication market: American videos, music, news, magazines, TV programs, and so on, are
exported throughout the world. This inevitably results in “ideological control ” of the world
population, especially by the United States. American ways of feeling and thinking have become
very visible and therefore in ﬂuential as American cultural and information products have been
received and welcomed by the whole population of the world.
Thus, Anglo-Americanization and globalization go hand in hand, putting the United States
in a position to be able to control, in ﬂuence, and dominate other countries in terms of values,
beliefs, and thought. The dominance of American media products provides the United States
with a power to promote and facilitate globalization as well as to spread their values across the
world. It also facilitates the global spread of English. The rest of the world is simply bombarded
with images, ideas, and values that are not their own. Americanization and globalization thus
cause ideological invasions of countries throughout the world and interfere with cultural and
political self-determination of most of the countries.
Globalization as Transnationalization
The most striking characteristic of globalization is its transnationalizing force. Due to rapid
developments in telecommunication technologies and networks such as communication satel-
lites, personal computers, and the Internet, most messages and information are disseminated on
a global scale, easily going beyond national borders. These transnational messages are so power-
ful that the image from the West is believed to have in ﬂuenced the people of East Germany and
caused the collapse of the Berlin Wall. This leads us to believe that whoever controls the
channels and media of transnational telecommunication can control global relations. Rather, I
would say the present system of transnational telecommunication, which is heavily dominated
by the advanced Western capitalist countries, is merely a re ﬂection of the unequal power
structure between the center countries and the periphery countries.
Although there was an urgent demand for a more nearly equal ﬂow of international informa-
tion, as demonstrated in the UNESCO attempt to establish a “New World Information and
Communication Order” started in the 1970s, such a call from the non-Western nations has been
mostly ignored by the United States and the United Kingdom as they withdrew from UNESCO
in the middle of the 1980s.
The introduction of the “Information Superhighway” by the United States and the global
spread of the Internet in the 1990s resulted in loss of interest in the issues of imbalance and
inequality in the ﬂow of international information. Above all, the dominance of English on the
Internet and in international information is not merely creating inequality in communication
and homogenization of culture but is also a ﬃrming and reinforcing the structure of inequality
between English and other languages.
Thus the transnationalizing aspect of globalization does not contribute to the establishment
of a more nearly equal international communication. Rather, globalization consolidates the
power structure of global relations in which the advanced capitalist countries such as the United
States dominate all the rest.
Globalization as Commercialization
T oday for the English-speaking countries English is the best commodity that can be exported
throughout the world. English is the best-selling product every year. This means that the English-
speaking countries have more linguistic capital than countries of other languages. Because
English is the most widely used and taught language, it is accepted easily in almost any place in
the world. Because of this great communicability and acceptability, English-language related
products ranging from movies, videos, and compact discs to jeans, T-shirts, discos, and so on
172  YUKIO TSUDA


--- PAGE 194 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 173
Page 173
are exported and consumed all over the world. One of the problems with this globalization of
English products is that it creates “cultural domination ” by the United States as well as by
transnational corporations over the non-Western countries and the Third World. Herbert
Schiller, an American critical scholar, characterizes the global spread of cultural domination as
“transnational corporate cultural domination” (Schiller, 1991) which causes the commercializa-
tion of our life:
Excluding the public’s voice, denying the right to political expression, extolling shopping
as the primary activity of human existence, owned privately, the mall is the foremost
expression of contemporary capitalism, providing the daily social experience of millions
of people. If the transnational corporate order has a vision, possibly an absurd notion,
surely it must be that of a global shopping mall.
(Shiller, 1989, p. 43)
Schiller thus points out that American and transnational corporations ’ cultural domination
spreads in all the spheres of our daily lives, commercializing all our physical and mental spaces.
American cultural products such as Disneyland, rock and roll, McDonald ’s, and so forth
appeal to and satisfy the libido of the people, thus transforming them into mere consumers of
these products who willingly continue to purchase them without really knowing that they are
trapped in a cycle of consumption. Once trapped in the cycle, people accept it as inevitable and
thus become happily enslaved to consuming English products.
Globalization of English products thus not only gives rise to “cultural domination” of the
United States and transnational corporations but also causes commercialization of all spheres of
life. We become consumers willing to purchase English products, unknowingly helping to
reproduce the structure of cultural domination and commercialization of life.
The Ecology of Language as Counterstrategy to the Hegemony of English
We have seen in the above discussions that the hegemony of English creates and reproduces
inequality, discrimination, and colonization of the mind as well as Americanization, transna-
tionalization, and commercialization of contemporary life. In order to solve these problems and
realize equal and emancipatory communication, the Ecology of Language Paradigm is very
much needed as a theory of resisting the hegemony of English. The Ecology of Language
Paradigm serves as a theory or perspective for promoting a more nearly equal language and
communication policy of world.
I ﬁrst talked about the Ecology of Language Paradigm in 1993 in Honolulu at the East-West
Center’s Internationalization Forum. The two paradigms are as follows:
The Diﬀusion of English Paradigm, which is a dominant position not only in the Anglo-
American world but also in the former British colonies in Asia and Africa, is characterized
by theoretical orientations such as capitalism, science and technology, modernization,
monolingualism, ideological globalization and internationalization, transnationalization,
Americanization, homogenization of world culture, and linguistic, cultural, and media
imperialism.
In contrast, an alternative theoretical orientation critical of the Di ﬀusion of English
Paradigm is what I call the Ecology of Language Paradigm. This paradigm is based on the
theoretical positions such as the human rights perspective, equality in communication,
multilingualism, maintenance of languages and cultures, protection of national sovereign-
ties, and promotion of foreign language education.
(Tsuda, 1994, pp. 58–59)
THE ECOLOGY OF LANGUAGE PARADIGM  173


--- PAGE 195 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 174
Page 174
Thus the Di ﬀusion of English Paradigm, or what I call the Hegemony of English Paradigm,
evidently serves Western capitalism and civilization, while the Ecology of Language Paradigm
is critical to the underlying philosophy of Western civilization, which advances modernization.
For example, the philosophy of language in the Hegemony of English Paradigm is basically
functionalism in that it sees language as a mere tool or instrument for communication and fails
to understand that it is an essential component of culture and identity. Thus the Hegemony of
English Paradigm disconnects language from culture and the people using it.
On the other hand, the Ecology of Language Paradigm assumes that language is culture and is
a source of personal identity. Moreover, in the Ecology of Language Paradigm language is a
precious environment that creates us and our culture. Language is not a mere instrument but is
an environment that inﬂuences and shapes us.
Also, the Ecology of Language Paradigm holds that language is people and people are
language. Therefore, inequality among languages means inequality among people. The death pf
one language is the death of its speakers.
Based on these views of language, the Ecology of Language Paradigm advocates: (1) the right
to language; (2) equality in communication; and (3) multilingualism and multiculturalism. By
advocating these goals, the Ecology of Language Paradigm attempts to promote linguistic and
cultural security for the non-English-speaking people. Let us look at each of them.
The right to language
The Ecology of Language Paradigm regards “the right to language” as an essential right for every
person. The “right to language ” primarily refers to an individual ’s right and freedom to use a
language of his or her choice in any circumstances. It therefore assumes an individual’s right and
freedom not to use a language that is not his or her choice but is imposed.
The central concept of “the right to language ” resides in the use and recognition of an indi-
vidual’s “mother tongues.” T ove Skutnabb-Kangas and Robert Phillipson, authors of Linguistic
Human Rights, deﬁne “linguistic human rights’ and “mother tongues” as follows:
We will provisionally regard linguistic human rights in relation to the mother tongue(s)
as consisting of the right to identify with it/them, and to education and public services
through the medium of it/them. Mother tongues are here deﬁned as “the language(s) one
has learned ﬁrst and identi ﬁes with. ” In relation to other languages we will regard lin-
guistic human rights as consisting of the right to learn an o ﬃcial language in the country
of residence, in its standard form.
(Skutnabb-Kangas & Phillipson, 1995, p. 71)
Skutnabb-Kangas and Phillipson emphasize two factors in their de ﬁnition. One is “identiﬁca-
tion with an individual ’s mother tongues. ” They believe that emotional attachment to one ’s
mother tongues should be recognized as a part of “the right to language. ” Second, they
emphasize social participation and integration. They recognize language as a channel that
enables people to participate and integrate into society. They recognize access to an o ﬃcial
language as a part of linguistic human rights.
Therefore, we can provisionally say that “the right to language” involves an individual’s right
to use, learn, and identify with a language of his or her choice including his or her mother
tongues and oﬃcial languages of the country in which he or she lives.
174  YUKIO TSUDA


--- PAGE 196 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 175
Page 175
Equality in communication
The prerequisite for equality in international communication is equality among languages. If a
speaker of language A and a speaker of language B communicate by speaking either one of the
two languages, inequality in communication occurs.
One of the most inﬂuential factors justifying the use of English in international communica-
tion is the taken-for-granted assumption that English should be used. English-speaking people
unconsciously believe English to be used by all people; that is, they unconsciously have a lin-
guistic imperialist consciousness. Meanwhile, non-English speaking people assume that the use
of English is inevitable, indicating the colonization of the mind on their part.
A consciousness revolution is thus needed to alleviate imperialistic consciousness as well as
colonization of the mind.
One practical approach to establishing equality in international communication is “linguistic
localism,” or the use of local languages by all participants in communication. For example, when
an international conference meets in France, every participant speaks French; if a conference is
held in Japan, Japanese should be used. By practicing linguistic localism we can develop an
intercultural awareness of sharing the burden of using and learning foreign languages.
Eﬀective use of translators and interpreters is also encouraged to promote equal use of
languages.
Use of a third language, or what I call “neutralingual communication,” is another approach.
When an American and a Chinese communicate in a third language, such as French, Russian, or
Malay, they engage in linguistically equal communication in comparison with communication
in English, which favors the American one-sidedly.
Another strategy for promoting equality in communication is equalizing the linguistic handi-
caps of the participants in communication. For example, if each one of us speaks a foreign
language or a planned, constructed language such as Esperanto, we will be able to establish
equality in our linguistic handicaps, which will lead to equality in communication.
The primary reason for emphasizing equality in communication is that it will establish
“symmetry” among people, enabling them to exchange ideas without much constraint, as
German social theorist J ürgen Habermas points out when he talks about “the ideal speech
situation”:
pure intersubjectivity exists only when there is complete symmetry in the distribution of
assertion and dispute, revelation and concealment, prescription and conformity, among
the partners of communication.
(Habermas, 1970, p. 371)
Of all the symmetries, linguistic symmetry is the most important for realizing equality in
communication and “the ideal speech situation.”
Multilingualism and multiculturalism
Multilingualism and multiculturalism can also be called “linguistic and cultural pluralism, ”
suggesting a critical theoretical position against monolingualism and monoculturalism, which
aim at one language and one culture in a society.
The history of modernization was a process of building monolingual and monocultural
societies, as the standard languages were developed for e ﬃcient communication at the expense
of innumerable local languages and dialects. As a result, linguistic hierarchization emerged,
and it caused social strati ﬁcation and inequality as well as discrimination. Globalization as it
is occurring today is bringing about a new “global class society ” in which English and Anglo-
American culture dominate as a “global ruling class.”
THE ECOLOGY OF LANGUAGE PARADIGM  175


--- PAGE 197 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 176
Page 176
Linguistic and cultural pluralism is counterstrategy against the force of monolingualism and
monoculturalism. It opposes monolithic singularism because diversity is the most important
index of a truly democratic society. Pluralism is a philosophy of tolerance and conviviality that
pursues a harmonious coexistence of di ﬀerent cultures, languages, and people. Pluralism also
pays most attention to minorities, the dominated, and the disadvantaged, as it believes that these
people should be given equal opportunities.
Thus, linguistic and cultural pluralism not only criticizes monolingualism and monocultural-
ism but also serves an important indicator of whether a certain society is truly democratic or
not. The philosophy of pluralism is very necessary if we really wish to realize the democratiza-
tion of international communication.
Implication of the ecology of language paradigm
The ideas and goals advocated by the Ecology of Language Paradigm should be incorporated
into the theories and practices of international communication, especially for the purpose of
democratizing it. Let me summarize some of the implications of the Ecology of Language
Paradigm for the betterment of international communication today.
1. The Ecology of Language provides a critical perspective for the present English-dominated
international communication and raises consciousness about issues such as the right to
language and equality in communication.
2. The Ecology of Language serves non-English-speaking people by providing a theoretical
base for building strategies to ﬁght the hegemony of English and promote their cultural
security and empowerment. In other words, it serves as a strategy for creating a balance of
cultural and linguistic power between English and other languages.
3. The Ecology of Language provides a theoretical foundation for the development of a
global language policy, especially from the position of promoting multilingualism and
multiculturalism.
4. The Ecology of Language serves English-speaking people by providing them with a critical
awareness and knowledge with regard to the dominance of English, raising the conscious-
ness about equality in communication, the right to language, and linguistic and cultural
pluralism.
The Ecology of Language Paradigm is not without faults and weaknesses. Perhaps linguistic and
cultural isolationism is one likely pitfall. If multilingualism, for example, is pursued to the extreme
at the expense of everything else, the speakers of minority languages might be con ﬁned in their
languages and thus unable to communicate with the world outside of their linguistic and cultural
boundaries. In order to prevent linguistic and cultural isolation, we should recognize “ecology-
conscious” ideas such as “communication globalism” and “liberal localism” developed by Majid
T ehranian (1993) and integrate them into the Ecology of Language Paradigm.
Conclusion
Whenever I criticize the hegemony of English, I am asked the same question: “I understand what
you are talking about. But look, English is the lingua franca today. How can we communicate
without it?”
I am not denying the use and learning of English. Rather, what I am challenging is the very
knowledge or consciousness that makes it possible for people to ask such a question: the
knowledge that takes for granted the existing reality, accepts it as natural, inevitable, and even
beneﬁcial; the knowledge that refuses to envision the alternative.
176  YUKIO TSUDA


--- PAGE 198 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 177
Page 177
We need to examine the existing reality and then try to ﬁll the gap between the status quo and
the ideal by exploring the problems and providing solutions to them.
In conclusion, I would like to make three suggestions.
The ﬁrst one is directed to scholars of international and intercultural communication. That
is, I suggest that the hegemony of English should become the subject of academic inquiry in the
area of international and intercultural communication, especially in the English-speaking
countries.
The second suggestion is directed to English-language teaching professionals. I suggest that
the English-language education should incorporate the Ecology of Language Paradigm into the
contents and methods of teaching as well as teacher education.
The last suggestion goes to all speakers of English. I suggest that both native speakers and
non-native speakers of English learn the philosophy of the Ecology of Language so that they will
become more sensitive to the ethical aspects of international communication.
References
Ammon, U. (1992). Gengo-to sono chii (Y. Hieda & H. Y amashita, Trans.). T okyo: Sangensha.
Arnason, J. P . (1990). Nationalism, globalization and modernity. In M. Featherstone (Ed.), Global culture
(pp. 207–236). London: Sage.
Coughlin, W. J. (1953). The great mokusatsu mistake: Was this the deadliest error of our time? Harper’s
Magazine, 206(1234), 31–40.
Habermas, J. (1970). T owards a theory of communicative competence. Inquiry, 13, 360–375.
Kojima, K. (1996, January 9). Eigoken-no kuni-ga harau daishou. Mainichi Shimbun.
Ngugi wa Thiong ’o. (1981). Decolonizing the mind: The politics of language in African literature . London:
J. Currey.
Pennycook, A. (1994). The cultural politics of English as an international language . London: Longman.
Phillipson, R. (1992). Linguistic imperialism. London: Oxford University Press.
Robertson, R. (1992). Globalization: Social theory and global culture . London: Sage.
Schiller, H. (1989). Disney, Dallas and electronic date ﬂows: The transnationalization of culture. In
C. W. Thomsen (Ed.), Cultural transfer or electronic imperialism? (pp. 33–43). Heidelberg: Carl Winter
Universitatverlag.
Schiller, H. (1991). Not yet the Post-Imperialism Era? Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 8, 13–28.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T., & Phillipson, R. (Eds.). (1995). Linguistic human rights: Overcoming linguistic dis-
crimination. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Takahashi, J. (1991). Kokusai kaigi-ni miru Nihonjin-no ibunka koushou. In J. Takahashi et al. (Eds.),
Ibunka-eno sutoratejii (pp. 181–201). T okyo: Kawashima Shoten.
T ehranian, M. (1993). Ethics discourse and the new world dysorder: A communitarian perspective. In
C. Roach (Ed.), Communication and culture in war and peace (pp. 192–215). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Tsuda, Y. (1986). Language inequality and distortion in intercultural communication: A critical theory
approach. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Tsuda, Y. (1990). Eigo shihai-no kouzou [The structure of the dominance of English ]. T okyo: Daisan Shokan.
Tsuda, Y. (1992). The dominance of English and linguistic discrimination. Media Development , 39(1),
32–34.
Tsuda, Y. (Ed.) (1993a). Eigo shihai-eno iron  [ Objections to the dominance of English ]. T okyo: Daisan
Shokan.
Tsuda, Y. (1993b). Communication in English: Is it anti-cultural? Journal of Development Communication ,
4(1), 68–78.
Tsuda, Y. (1994). The diﬀusion of English: Its impact on culture and communication. Keio Communication
Review, 16, 48–61.
Tsuda, Y. (1996). Shinryaku-suru Eigo, hangeki-suru Nihongo  [ The invading English, the counterattacking
Japanese]. T okyo: PHP .
THE ECOLOGY OF LANGUAGE PARADIGM  177


--- PAGE 199 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 178
Page 178


--- PAGE 200 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 179
Page 179
12
The Intersecting Hegemonic Discourses
of an Asian Mail-Order Bride Catalog
Pilipina “Oriental Butterﬂy” Dolls for Sale
Rona T amiko Halualani
Western societies typically associate romance with magic, altruism, love aﬀairs, and heterosexual
marriage (Adelman & Ahuvia, 1991; Radway, 1984, 1986). But the ideology grounding this
perspective on romance— at least reﬂected in popular texts — also tends to reinforce patriarchal
power structures, male domination, and female subordination in social relations (Modleski,
1982; Mussel, 1984; Snitow, 1979). While Radway (1986) demonstrates how individuals might
ﬁnd pleasure from such seemingly oppressive texts, most scholars identify the ways texts laden
with patriarchal signiﬁcation exert authority and create self-promoting images. This knowledge,
in turn, can be used as a potential source of resistance for female readers (Radway, 1984, 1986;
Rakow, 1986).
The ideology of “romance” is conceived as an extension of hegemony, or “the various means
through which those who support the dominant ideology in a culture are able to continually to
reproduce that ideology in cultural institutions and products while gaining the tactic approval of
those whom the ideology oppresses” (Dow, 1990, p. 262; Fiske, 1987; Fitlin, 1982; Gramsci, 1971;
Hall, 1980). A hegemonic tool for supporting Anglo patriarchal ideology, romance in popular
culture texts like novels and soap operas celebrates the male and simultaneously punishes a
masochistic female (Modleski, 1982). This seductive, illusory romance also underscores Asian
mail-order bride catalogues and the ﬁrms that produce them. These discourses manufacture a
sexually and racially di ﬀerentiated power relationship between Anglo male consumers and
Pilipina female products.
1
Asian Romance  is one such mail-order bride ﬁrm. It uses a hegemonic construction of
romance to sustain dominant Anglo patriarchal ideology at the expense of a subordinated
Asian Pilipina female image through various intersecting discursive strategies: commodiﬁcation,
opposition and inoculation, euphemization, and racist ideology embedded in a specialized
“Oriental Butterﬂy” grammar. These strategies, which intermingle economic, sexual, and racial
hegemony, create an ideal product — the Pilipina “Oriental Butterﬂy” doll— that functions as a
self-reﬂexive mirror of the face of Anglo patriarchal power. Just as Marchetti (1993, p. 6)
discovered in Hollywood ﬁlm discourses, the Asian Romance mail-order bride ﬁrm employs a
set of discursive codes which “create a mythic image of Asia that empowers the West and
rationalizes Euro-American authority over the Asian [female] other.”
While some scholars describe the mail-order bride phenomenon (Chow, 1991; Joseph, 1984),
others critique Asian mail-order bride services in terms of the subjugation of di ﬀerent Asian
women (Lai, 1988; Villapando, 1989). None, however, uses cultural feminism as a framework for
uncovering the intricate and intersecting discourses in such services for how Anglo patriarchal
179


--- PAGE 201 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 180
Page 180
capitalist hegemony is aﬃrmed under the guise of romance. This essay analyzes the interrelated
hegemonic operations manifest in Asian Romance , an Asian mail-order bride catalog that
functions rhetorically to celebrate dominant Anglo patriarchal ideology and perpetuate the
colonization of the Asian Paciﬁc “other.”
The Lens of Feminist Cultural Studies
Drawing from cultural studies and feminist criticism, feminist cultural studies investigates
socio-political constructions of women, women’s subordination on the basis of gender, race, and
class, especially in media representations, and women ’s resistance to such de ﬁnitions (Baehr &
Dyer, 1987; Hobson, 1982; Lont, 1993; McRobbie & Wartella, 1986). T extual analyses uncover the
“ideological underpinnings of social structures . . . and their e ﬀects on the humans who create
and inhabit those forms ” (Bowen & Watt, 1993, p. 4). Feminist cultural studies scholars also
recognize that many media images “reﬂect not only sexism but . . . other forms of oppression
based on class, race, and nationality ” (Lont, 1993, p. 241; Baehr, 1981); in addition, they hold
economics, politics, and socio-cultural factors responsible for creating ideology in texts. Con-
sequently, feminist cultural studies show strains of Marxism because it embraces the view that
capitalist social structures exploit and oppress individuals, especially women (Lont, 1993;
Steeves, 1987). Thus, because it highlights the “critical intersection of race, class, ethnic back-
ground, and gender” in capitalistic systems (Treichler & Wartella, 1986, p. 2), feminist cultural
studies is an appropriate approach from which to examine Asian Romance.
Ideology and hegemony are two principle constructs of feminist cultural studies. Schwich-
tenberg (1989) used both to investigate representations of “femininity” and women, and drew
from the work of other scholars to develop these critical instruments and the “diﬀusion of
consent” (Hall, 1982). They are also associated with power relations and, speci ﬁcally, with the
ways in which symbolic forms “establish and sustain relations of domination ” (Thompson,
1990, p. 58).
Hegemony refers to the continuous and intricate reworking of dominant interests to win and
re-win the willing consent of subordinate groups (Althusser, 1971; Fiske, 1987; Gramsci, 1971).
The di ﬀerence between hegemony and ideology is that the former seeks to win consent and
reproduce dominant ideas largely through coopting oppositional elements that protest prevalent
ideologies. Symbolic forms, then, become sites of struggle between dominant and subordinate
interests; these tensions embody various shades of domination, opposition, resistance, and
recuperation (Fishe, 1987; Schwichtenberg, 1989). In addition, discourses re ﬂecting hegemonic
practices often incorporate oppositional, negotiated, and decoratively designed ideas especially
when capitalist economics are at issue (Almquist, 1984; Chow, 1991; Gitlin, 1986; Lai, 1988).
Ideology and hegemony, then, provide the critical foundation for exploring forms of domination
and their operations within symbols, language, and discourses.
When applied speciﬁcally to Pilipina women, however, this feminist cultural studies approach
runs the risk of oppressing women at another level — a meta-critical level if you will. Pilipina
women comprise a group symbolizing the convergence of gender, race, and sexuality (hooks,
1984). For these reasons, Asian feminist scholars argue that Asian Paci ﬁc women and their
experiences have been articulated only under the broader concerns of “women” and “femi-
nism,” concerns which reﬂect mostly “white middle class women’s interests” (Chia, 1983; Chow,
1989, 1991; Dill, 1983; Loo & Ong, 1982; Y amada, 1981), and further push Asian Paciﬁc women
to the margins of academic discourse (Chia, 1983; Chow, 1989). Chow (1991) and Y amada
(1981) ground their analyses of Asian Paciﬁc women within the political intersection of gender,
race, class, and culture, and within the more traditional social contexts of an Asian patriarchal
hierarchy. Only by viewing Asian Paciﬁc women within a cultural milieu of male domination, role
constraint, and subordinate placement in their own Asian communities can their experiences be
180  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 202 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 181
Page 181
adequately uncovered and chronicled (Chia, 1983; Chow, 1989, 1991; Y amada, 1981). This
analysis of Asian Romance commences via a feminist cultural studies framework but with sensi-
tivity toward Pilipina women so as to avoid marginalizing their identity under the generic labels
“feminist” and “women.”
Hegemony and the Ideology of Patriarchal Romance
The Asian mail-order bride trade, begun in the early 1940 ’s, continues to be a booming enter-
prise today throughout Europe, Australia, and parts of the United States (JCAL, 1985; Joseph,
1984; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984; Villapando, 1989). The contemporary version di ﬀers only in that
what once were family arranged unions are now more impersonal ﬁnancial transactions based
on gender and racial imbalances (JACL, 1985; Villapando, 1989). Approximately ﬁfty of these
bride services operate in America. Sporting names like “Love Overseas” and “Lotus Blossom,”
they advertise brides from Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines in mainstream
newspapers and magazine publications (JACL, 1985; Joseph, 1984; Villapando, 1989).
Several articles discussing this phenomenon attempt to characterize both women and men
who procure the services of mail-order bride ﬁrms. Brides, for example, are likely to be vulner-
able and dependent on their new husbands (JACL, 1985; Joseph, 1984; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984;
Villapando, 1989). Because money is exchanged for them, they also may feel emotional and
ﬁnancial obligations to meet their husbands’ needs and demands (JACL, 1985; Lai, 1985; Serita,
1984; Villapando, 1989). Also, Asian brides who are unfamiliar with the United States’ immigra-
tion procedures and the American legal system are signi ﬁcantly disadvantaged for this lack of
knowledge can potentially be used by male spouses as a mechanism of control and guarantee of
dominance in the marriage (JACL, 1985; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984; Villapando, 1989).
In contrast, male clients tend to be active initiators of the “marriage” transaction (JACL,
1985; Joseph, 1984; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984; Villapando, 1989). The customer pro ﬁle features
older, divorced European and Anglo American men interested in traditional family oriented
Asian women (JACL, 1985, Joseph, 1984; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984; Villapando, 1989). One man ’s
explanation is illustrative: “I wanted a wife who isn’t career-oriented, who participates very little
in the world outside, who does not have high aspirations, who is useful, and whose life revolves
around me” (Joseph, 1984, p. 1).
These “marriage agencies” package Asian women as goods for sale. Catalogs and videos come
complete with pictures and answers to such questions as “How would you described your
breasts?” and “Do you believe in women ’s liberation?” (Serita, 1984, p. 39; Villapando, 1989).
Other catalog descriptions read: “They love to do things to make their husbands happy ”, and
“Most, if not all, are very feminine, loyal, loving, and virgins” (Lai, 1988, p. 168). Asian brides are
depicted as obedient and erotic, the keys to ful ﬁlling males’ demands (JACL, 1985; Serita, 1984;
Villapando, 1989). Thus, these Asian women are marketed as “exotic, subservient wife imports”
for sale and as alternatives for men sick of independent “liberal” Western women (JACL, 1985;
Joseph, 1984; Lai, 1988; Serita, 1984; Villapando, 1989).
In resurfacing, however, ﬁrms trading in marriage deﬁne themselves not as the archaic “mail-
order bride services” of yesterday, but as contemporary “romance manufacturers” or “introduc-
tion agencies ” (Lai, 1988; Serrati, 1984; Villapando, 1989). One of these companies is Asian
Romance, a Davis, California business run by husband and wife, Michael and Chantal Donahue.
Relocated to Davis from the San Francisco Bay Area in 1991, the ﬁrm publishes a bi-monthly
magazine/catalog targeted for Anglo males. The catalog features pictures and biographical
information (age, height, weight, education) of Pilipina women, a description of the company ’s
services, an order form, and cartons depicting Anglo male and Pilipina bride romance. Asian
Romance provides a complex set of discourses sexually and racially reproducing the mythic
image of “Oriental femininity.”
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  181


--- PAGE 203 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 182
Page 182
The hegemonic force of romance which constructs dominant and subordinate relations based
on gender and race appears in four major forms throughout the Asian Romance catalog: com-
modiﬁcation, opposition and inoculation, euphemization, and racist ideology. These devises
promote Anglo patriarchal superiority in economic, social, and sexual spheres.
Commodiﬁcation
Commodiﬁcation is product of capitalism and mass media. As Fiske (1987, p. 259) notes. “the
circulation of commodities in the marketplace is . . . the circulation of meaning and identities. ”
Goldman and Wilson (1983) explain the ideological role of this hegemonic device both practic-
ally and symbolically. Practically, the meaning of a commodity is determined by its use or
exchange value; its symbolic value depends upon the degree to which it functions as a
“commodity-sign.” A commodity-sign consists of two parts: a “signifying unit” or signiﬁer is an
object, picture, or individual, while “signiﬁed meaning” is the image associated with the signiﬁer.
Thus, when individuals purchase a product, they also acquire its associated image. As Goldman
and Wilson (1983) illustrate, a Mercedes Benz automobile may be useful as a car but it is more
symbolically valued for the social status it allegedly o ﬀers to purchasers. Thus, it functions as a
commodity-sign because what it signiﬁes is equated with what it is. The power of the commod-
ity form lies in its ability to lead purchasers to see the sign only in terms of what it signiﬁes, or to
be what one buys (Goldman & Wilson, 1983).
Commodiﬁcation in Asian mail-order bride catalogues legitimizes the American capitalist
system and its dominant social relation of gendered and racialized domination –subordination
(Almoquist, 1984; Chow, 1991; Gitlin, 1986; Goldman & Wilson, 1983; Lai, 1989). An instru-
ment of hegemony, commodiﬁcation strips Pilipina women of their uniqueness as humans and
transforms them into signifying products of Anglo male power that can be purchased, attained,
and therefore socially legitimated (Goldman & Wilson, 1983). Sexual and racial oppressions
emerge as socially accessible products. Thus, through commodiﬁcation, ethnic gender is rendered
inferior and objecti ﬁed, and Anglo male ideology is a ﬃrmed. Asian Romance texts use three
recurrent tactics— abstraction, equivalence, and rei ﬁcation— to complete the commodi ﬁcation
of the Pilipina female and facilitate the ideology of patriarchal romance.
Abstraction. Abstraction detaches a commodity from its unique properties and separates
consumers from real contexts (Goldman & Wilson, 1983). The e ﬀect is to connect consumers
and products exclusively through consumption. Through abstraction, human characteristics
become “exchangeable”; as a result, consumers acquire certain qualities by purchasing a product.
As Fiske (1987) observes, glamorous models on game shows represent sexuality and are objecti-
ﬁed along with the commodities they display; sexuality, then, can be purchased by consumers.
Ideally, abstraction creates a new context which suppresses uniqueness and individuality.
In the Asian Romance text, abstraction occurs through replacing the individuality of the male
consumer and the female commodity with generalized identities. For instance, male consumers
are referred to as “American gentlemen,” “gentlemen,” and “serious marriage-minded gentle-
men,” thus depicting them by virtue of social standing. The ambiguity of this label valorizes the
white male customer, adding prestige and respectability to his persona.
Similarly, Pilipina women ﬁnd their identities muted. For example, they are visually pre-
sented in identical pictures which are also numbered and equal in shape. Such a portrait is, in
Kuhn’s (1985, p. 9) terms, “highly coded discourse which, among other things, constructs
whatever is in the image as objects of consumption — consumption by looking, as well as often
quite literally by purchase.” Pilipina women are products sold on a shelf. Moreover, all are shown
from the neck up. The photograph highlights lips, eyes, hair, and cheekbones. These fragments
are “zones of consumption ” that signify femininity (Goldman, Heath, & Smith, 1991, p. 337),
and convey the message that “femaleness and femininity are constructed as a set of bodily
182  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 204 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 183
Page 183
attributes reducible to a sexuality which puts itself on display for a masculine spectator ”
(Kuhn, 1985, p. 43).
Biographical accounts of the women accompany the pictures. They feature other physical
characteristics or “zones of consumption,” as the following example indicates:
101. (Name)
DOB: 1/4/63, HT: 5’4, WT: 107 lbs. Education: B.S. in Accounting. Occupation:
Accountant. Describes herself as caring, devoted simple lady with no vices. Seeks cor-
respondence with honest loving marriage-minded gentlemen age 28 to 45.
Bold print attends a woman’s height, weight, and assigned number. These elements depersonal-
ize bride-to-be because they abstract generic “feminine” features only. Pilipina women are
also positioned as numbered entries in three columns with date of birth, height, and weight
dominating their descriptions. Compared to these features, their names are almost invisible. In
arrangement, Pilipina brides are assigned by consecutive number, a characteristic intimating
the irrelevance of their personal identities. They are also typically labeled as “select attractive
Pilipina ladies,” “beautiful ladies, ” and “most attractive, young ladies. ” These women are not
just any commodities, but beautiful, youthful products. Furthermore, the term “lady” is associ-
ated with Pilipina brides, but not as a counterpart to their “gentlemenly” purchasers; rather, the
label is derogatory for it is connected to images of fragility and helplessness. Female subordin-
ation through this term re ﬂects the view that language “maintains the secondary status of
women by de ﬁning them and their place ” (Henley, 1987, p. 3; Eitzen & Zinn, 1989). Pilipina
women are attractive generic feminine commodities, not surprisingly, references to individual
personalities, interests, and thoughts are virtually nonexistent.
The texts’ abstraction of persons into roles of consumer and commodity hierarchically pos-
ition the Anglo male as a superior gentleman in relation to the Pilipina woman as a sexualized,
racialized, and objecti ﬁed commodity for sale. Visually and verbally, the consumption process
enables the abstracted consumer to purchase and possess the abstracted product.
Equivalence. Because commodiﬁcation elevates exchange value over use value, any commod-
ity can become equivalent to any other commodity as long as an overarching or universal form
of equivalence— like money— exists. Equivalence functions in such a way that the commodity
form’s particularities are suppressed and replaced with a standardized value designating its
worth (Goldman & Wilson, 1983).
Economic and economical equivalence is evident throughout Asian Romance, but particularly
through order forms, discount details, and product guarantees. The catalogues ’ exchange
value— in American dollars— ranges from $57 to $285 depending upon the type and number of
orders made. The worth of the Pilipina women is de ﬁned in economic terms as well for inclu-
sion of one picture costs approximately 50 cents. Pilipina women equal commodities because
they are advertised in catalogs. Subscribers check a “box” to purchase a yearly subscription or
specialty issues advertising living, “generic” sexual products.
Asian Romance features “Supersaver” deals which oﬀer bargains and discounts; that is, more
pictures of women for less money. One such bargains is a “Supersaver 1000 Packet ” which
includes black and white photographs of over 1000 Pilipina women, one issue of the magazine,
pictures and addresses of 95 women, three issues of Asian Romance Bi-Monthly  with 300 +
women featured, the “Ladies Ages 30 to 50” issue with 350 women featured, and the “Black and
White Bonus Issue ” featuring 300 women. In addition, a purchaser might choose the “Asian
Romance Guide to Marriage By Correspondence ” and several immigration forms for the pros-
pective bride’s entry into the United States. Other “Supersaver” deals oﬀer the “Supersaver 1000
Packet” plus one of the specialty issues mentioned above in either the black-white or color
format.
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  183


--- PAGE 205 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 184
Page 184
Some special interest issues showcase women according to their age and occupation. For
example, a “T eenage Issue” features Pilipina women around the age of 17; another is the “Ladies
Ages 30 to 50 Issue. ” Those related to occupations include a “Nurse and Health Professionals
Issue,” and “T eachers and Accountants Issue.” All issues portray Pilipina women similarly as
zones of consumption. Special issues simply frame Pilipina objects more speci ﬁcally according
to the preferred interests of Anglo male customers. The “Supersaver” discounts re ﬂect the
equivalence of women as commodities through demographic preferences of male customers and
through the bargain principle of chalking them as “cheap” products.
Commodiﬁcation is augmented by Asian Romance’s commitment to quality: it provides its
male customers with a “Marriage Guarantee Card. ” This product guarantee states that if the
client is not married within a year, he is entitled to a free subscription of the catalog. Pilipina
women are again equated with product commodities through a “Satisfaction Guaranteed or
Y our Money Back” certiﬁcation.
Reiﬁcation. Reiﬁcation refers to the process by which a commodity comes to mean something
else. In this case, the Pilipina woman rei ﬁes Anglo patriarchal power and superiority, and has
value only as a mirror for that image. Subject becomes object through a process in which the
“tendency for social relations to be transformed into things ” results in endowing commodi ﬁed
products with desirable human traits and attributes (Goldman & Wilson, 1983, p. 128). Buying
a product enables a consumer associatively to gain a certain quality of social relation because
that product represents an “active” ready-made package of attractive qualities.
In the context of the Asian Romance catalog, reiﬁcation occurs by way of a textual sequence
that positions the male client to purchase the Pilipina commodity and then to conceptualize
himself as part of a group of prestigious male customers. Initially, through ordering and pur-
chasing Pilipina women, customers demonstrate their purchasing power and a ﬃrm their eco-
nomic status in a competitive capitalistic society. Similarly, this purchase a ﬃrms a sense of
masculinity as it reinforces males as “breadwinners” who foot the bill for the catalogues,
marriage guides, visa forms, and other publications required to secure a spouse.
The Asian Romance texts ’ identi ﬁcation of customers as an elite, select group of “serious,
marriage-minded American gentlemen ” furthers the principle of rei ﬁcation. For example, the
statement, “We expect that . . . the serious marriage-minded gentleman is already convinced of
the many advantages to having a loving Asian lady for a wife, ” demonstrates the positioning of
the male client as a superior gentleman in pursuit of a good investment. Social prestige underlies
this statement: “We maintain a high standard in the solicitation of new subscribers. ” This
enables the male to envision himself as an exclusive member of a social club. Similar to Adelman
and Ahuvia’s (1991, p. 285) conclusion about dating and introducing services, Asian Romance
projects an image of elite clientele for “increased social legitimacy” and popularity.
Visual elements accompany the language of reiﬁcation. Comic strips scattered throughout the
publication construct the male client in elitist ways. For example, one cartoon frames a con-
servatively dressed “nerdy” Anglo male client, replete with bow tie and glasses, displaying an
exotic, long-tressed, petite Pilipina wife. Other men around him admire his acquisition with
such statements as “How’d Hank even ﬁnd such a gorgeous wife?” and “Maybe she has a sister!”
Because the cartoon focuses principally on the relationship between the male client and the male
spectators, the Pilipina bride emerges as a trophy reinforcing the client ’s masculinity to other
men. The male consumer, then, gains social status by owning a product that other men
would like to possess. In this comic strip, men engage in a “spectator sport, ” a competition
whose purpose is to gain respect from one another (Friedman, 1985). This male customer also
generates sexual power because he has purchased a body to use for sexual pleasure; the bride
occupying this body, of course, is presumed willing to accommodate his sexual needs.
Through his economic purchasing power, the male consumer gains social standing and
ownership of a physical, sexual product; he also, however, enjoys control or dominance in terms
184  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 206 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 185
Page 185
of gaze and later possession. The spectator of the Asian Romance magazine “can choose to gaze
at length, to retune again and again, to a favorite photography and like voyeurism, there is a
pleasure in looking, a pleasure of power and the look a controlling one” (Kuhn, 1985, p. 28). But,
this male spectator is allowed to go one step further: he can purchase these objects of visual
pleasure.
Further, Kuhn (1985, p. 26) observes that “photographs stand as evidence that whatever is
inside the frame of the image really happened, was really there: it is authentic, convincing, true.”
In other words, photographs are not mere images but, according to Sontag (1986, p. 392),
“interpretations of the real.” Whereas a painting refers to a central subject, a photograph appears
to be the actual subject or “an extension of the subject and a potent means of acquiring it, of
gaining control over it.” Thus, photographs redeﬁne, “enlarge,” and “imprison” reality (Sontag,
1986, pp. 393, 397). Viewers of photos in Asian Romance are likely to associate Pilipina women
with qualities implied by the photographic images — commodiﬁed products for sale. Acting on
those images, the male consumer can also possess the reality of them, thus materializing and
consummating the commodiﬁcation of Pilipina females. Subscribing to the catalogues provides
the customer with economic, social, and sexual power and reiﬁes masculine control over Pilipina
femininity as well as a social relationship grounded in domination–subordination. T o the degree
that this hegemonic discourse of commodiﬁcation circulates in Asian Romance through abstrac-
tion, equivalence, and rei ﬁcation, so too does its end product, commodi ﬁed and fetishized
Pilipina oppression (Goldman & Smith, 1983).
Opposition and inoculation
As mentioned earlier, hegemony embodies various means through which a dominant ideology is
continually reproduced in cultural institutions and products (Dow, 1990; Fiske, 1987; Gitlin,
1986). One marker of hegemony in a capitalist system is its ability to “domesticate oppositions,
absorbing it into forms compatible with the core ideological structures ” (Gitlin, 1986, p. 526).
Barthes (1972) refers to this practice as “inoculation,” arguing that inoculation protects the
dominant ideology from radical change by incorporating small amounts of oppositional ideol-
ogy. Thus, a hegemonic social text leaks alternative viewpoints in order to achieve popularity
and power over thought simultaneously (Dow, 1990; Fiske, 1987; Gitlin, 1986). Gitlin ’s (1986,
p. 526) observation that “consent is managed by absorption as well as by exclusion” is supported
by Dow (1990) who notes that those embracing an oppositional ideology may be satis ﬁed that
their demands are being addressed even if the creators of a text make only cosmetic changes.
Such appropriated ideologies, then, are small “patches” scattered across a larger pervasive ideo-
logical structure and connected by dominant ideological seams. Hence, inoculation relies on the
premise that “major social con ﬂicts are transported into the cultural system where the hege-
monic process frames them, form and content both, into compatibility with dominant systems
of meaning (Gitlin, 1986, p. 527).
The commodiﬁed dialogue of Asian Romance presents contradictory images juxtaposing a
dominant patriarchal discourse with that of a feminist Pilipina discourse. What emerges are
divergent images of the Pilipina woman as sexy, submissive object and independent, modern
woman, and marriage as male ownership and equal partnership.
Pilipina Women as Sex Objects and Independent Subjects. Asian Romance  shapes the Pilipina
woman as a sexualized and racialized object through recurring visual and verbal images promot-
ing exotica and obedience. For example, photographs of women accompanied by a biographical
section listing their height, weight, and age emphasize the values of physical appearance and
attractiveness. Women’s marketability stems from pictures and measurements. Much of the
same occurs with the visual construction of the Pilipina woman in comic strips. She appears in
these frames as sensuous, as “exotic” with long black tresses and skimpy tank tops and skirts. Her
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  185


--- PAGE 207 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 186
Page 186
erotic physical appearance — long ﬂowing hair, curvaceous body, and form- ﬁtting clothing —
constructs pleasurable images visually and sexually.
The texts also portray the Pilipina women as obedient and submissive. For instance, the Asian
Romance text reads, “Finding your lifetime partner — an attractive unspoiled Asian lady who is
enthusiastically devoted to pleasing you— may be easier than you ever dreamed.” Here the Asian
woman is described as willingly subservient to her potential mate. Moreover, the statement “old
fashioned, wholesome family values never went out of style in the Philippines ” links tradition
and family to female ethnic subservience. The owner of Asian Romance captures this patriarchal
ideology in the catalog ’s introduction as he speaks of his wife, a former Asian mail-order
bride: “Her gentle smile, soft touch, and sweet love songs have turned my heart into butter. ”
Complacency and demureness, then, are also characteristic of the Pilipina bride.
An oppositional discourse presenting the Pilipina woman as an independent, educated
worker coexists with the portrait of the sexy, submissive wife. As the biological entry illustrates,
“education” is a key quality for Pilipina women are depicted as articulate and intelligent. Special-
ized “working women” issues also paint teachers, nurses, and accountants as “sign objects meant
to stand for feminist goals of independence and professional success ” (Goldman, Heath, &
Wilson, 1991, p. 336). In one sample letter, for example, a Pilipina woman describes her civil
engineering and problem-solving background as acquired skills enabling her to accomplish her
goal of becoming a “pathﬁnder of civilization. ” Asian Romance  appears to endorse feminist
ideology through specters of educational and occupational achievements, individual freedoms,
and ambition. Collectively, these discourses portray Pilipina women as passive objects of desire
and active, empowered subjects of substance simultaneously. Y et, the contradictory images
recuperate dominant patriarchal ideology by intimating that even independent, educated, work-
ing Pilipina women are motivated to ﬁnd happiness and satisfaction through serving their Anglo
male mates.
Marriage as Male Ownership and Equal Partnership. Asian Romance also incorporates contra-
dictory discourses on marriage. Marriage as male ownership dominates the discourses, but the
texts also emphasize marriage as an equal partnership and an intimate relationship grounded in
common values.
The order form is a telling example of the dominant patriarchal discourse for it de ﬁnes
marriage as “Pilipina product ownership.” The male customer controls the institution of mar-
riage by purchasing a wife; included in this transaction are his instructions regarding all of the
details of marriage. Because only male buyers have access to information enabling them to make
decisions about who their “brides” will be a ﬃrms the legitimacy of the power of male clients
over Pilipina women. Michael Donahue, the magazine ’s owner, reinforces this discourse of
subjugation by including his own comments, but not those of his wife, Chantal, in promotional
publications for Asian Romance. However, an oppositional discourse emphasizing marriage as an
equal partnership underlines Asian Romance texts. For example, terms like “common values,”
“sharing,” and “relationship” frequently appear in the magazine. In addition, the catalog’s cover
sports a picture of Michael and Chantal Donahue together (both of whom allegedly jointly own
the business), and their signatures appear on the backcover, thus oﬀering the illusion of equality
in marriage.
The contrary images of marriage as male ownership and equal partnership work together to
produce an ideology of marriage centered in white male control and power. Apparently, mar-
riage is an equal partnership as long as he wills it. This paradoxical form of “inoculation” simply
maintains dominant Anglo patriarchal ideology. While oppositional images are “domesticated
into hegemonic forms,” as Gitlin (1987, p. 510) explains, “commercial culture does not manu-
facture ideology; it relays and reproduces and processes and packages and focuses ideology that
is constantly arising.”
The inclusion of alternative feminist principles fostering images of modern women and
186  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 208 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 187
Page 187
marriage as equal partnership further legitimize the commodi ﬁcation of Pilipina women. While
the Asian Romance  catalog fuses the images of the smart, independent, ambitious working
woman and the beautiful, sexy, exotic, and pleasing object, these women ’s apparent willingness
to conform to such images justi ﬁes their commodi ﬁcation and warrants Anglo male power.
Thus, instead of displaying “feminism,” the ideological function of these oppositional discourses
signiﬁes the notion of subordination of Pilipina femininity (Golden, Heath, & Smith, 1991).
Euphemization
The catalog ’s inoculation of oppositional discourses and their attendant feminist principles
merges with an ideological model Thompson (1990, p. 62) calls “euphemization,” or a process
by which “actions, institutions, or social relations are described or redescribed in terms of which
elicit a positive valuation. ” Asian Romance  attempts to distance itself from the “degrading,
archaic mail-order bride services ” by rede ﬁning itself euphemistically as a “romance manu-
facturer” and “a business to ﬁnd lifetime partners. ” Relabeling hegemonically obscures the
activity of advertising women of sale, and at the same time, substitutes mystical images of love,
romance, and intrigue in order to continue the patriarchal signi ﬁcation of women and extend
Anglo male superiority.
Racist ideology
While Asian Romance  highlights gendered and capitalist codes, a related aspect of the com-
modiﬁcation of Pilipina women is a racist ideology which propagates an unequal power rela-
tionship between Pilipina women and white American men that generalizes to relations between
Paciﬁc Asia and America. Serita (1984) argues that since the 19th century the United States ’
domination of the Philippines entails an arrogance and self-acclaimed superiority over people
considered to be “forever foreign” and “unassimilable”; who represent the “Ye l l ow  Pe r i l” (Lai,
1985). More speciﬁcally, Matsui (1987) and Villapando (1989) indict American imperialism for
oppression both racially and sexually. Asian Romance  continues the tradition by reinforcing
images of Suzie Wong and exotic, obedient Asian women.
The racist discourse evident in Asian Romance is articulated in “images, concepts, and prem-
ises which provide the frameworks through which we represent, interpret, understand, and
‘make sense’ of some aspects of social existence ” (Hall, 1981, p. 8). These discursive structures
operate unconsciously to help racist ideologies and ethnocentric ideas become “naturalized” as
social constructions. Three themes of what Hall (1985, p. 15) terms “a grammar of race ”
advance this ideology of racism: themes of domination and subordination, stereotypes, and the
language of nature. Through them, Asian Romance functions to establish a social relation of
Anglo male domination and Pilipina female subordination.
Themes of Domination and Subordination . One “naturalized” media construction of the
“white eye” position privileges perceptions of the Anglo race. This gaze is “always outside the
frame” but it sees and positions “everything within it ” (Hall, 1981, p. 14). Michael Donahue ’s
“white eye” position shapes the Asian Romance text by recreating the age-old image of Asian
Paciﬁc women as “Oriental Butter ﬂies.” She is a woman with “extraordinary sexual power ”
but also is a “quiet, unassuming, and non-threatening doll ” (Lai, 1988, p. 167; Serrati, 1984;
Villapando, 1989). Clearly misconceptions, nevertheless Asian women ’s “exotic and erotic but
. . . passive and submissive” persona constitutes the marketing image of today’s mail-order bride
services (JACL, 1985; Joseph, 1984; Lai, 1988; Serrati, 1984; Villapando, 1989). The “Oriental
Butterﬂy” image emerges from the larger imperialist discourse of Orientalism, or the “Western
style for dominating, restricting, and having authority over the Orient. ” Borne of the 19th
century involvement in the East, the discourse of Orientalism invented an ideal vision of the
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  187


--- PAGE 209 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 188
Page 188
West as superior ruler and the East as submissive servant (Said, 1978, p. 3). In the context of the
Asian Romance catalog, this Orientalist vision transforms the Pilipina woman into an Oriental
“other.”
The Asian Romance grammar positions the Pilipina women as the “Oriental Butterﬂy” with
its description of “devoted, faithful, beautiful women,” and numbered photo entries with match-
ing order forms. As shelf products, Pilipina women exist solely for the white male consumer ’s
use. By contrast, the white male surfaces as an elite social member with the power to exert
economic, social, and sexual control over these Pilipina products. For instance, the text addresses
customers as “Dear Sir” or “suitable American gentlemen, ” and portrays white males showing
oﬀ their Pilipina products to other white men. Moreover, relations of “white male consumer ”
domination and “Pilipina product” subordination become ﬁxed with order forms and lists of
prices.
The Oriental Butterﬂy image constitutes a form of inferential racism, or a set of ethnocentric
beliefs that re ﬂect no overt evidence of racism (Hall, 1981). The catalog naturalizes Pilipina
women through depicting them as obedient passive wives and uninhibited sex goddesses
“enthusiastically devoted to pleasing.” These “faithful” wives are attractive and curvaceous, ready
and willing to be sold. The unequal power relationship of the white male over the Pilipina woman,
then, is constructed so as to make Pilipina slavery appear characteristic of the social world.
Stereotypes. Ideological discourse also operates through stereotypes and erroneous yet
carefully constructed images privileging Anglo superiority. Once again, the texts embrace one
positive stereotype for white men: the socially elite, ﬁnancially secure white customer in control.
His conﬁdence soars as he scans hundreds of photos of prospective brides and orders the best
value. The Asian woman stereotype, however, is markedly more negative. She is a sexually
available girl who is also exotic and eager to please. Attractive, educated, and virginal, she is
simultaneously erotic and submissive. Thus, Pilipina women are generalized into a subordinate
Oriental Other through which Western men can colonize and control.
Language of Nature . Reproducing racism occurs in physical signs and racial characteristics
comprising the language of nature. Asian Romance portrays the Pilipina bride as a curvy yet
petite woman with long black hair and almond shaped eyes. In contrast, the white customer is a
blond, older male whose conservative attire includes a bow tie. Such caricatures are symbols of
diﬀerence, markers of subordination and domination respectively.
Asian Romance’s discourse grammar is also overtly racist because it includes the open and
mass publication of racist thoughts and images (Hall, 1981). Because the Asian Romance catalog
and its services are accessible by phone or mail request, this public catalog pushes acceptance of
the “sexploitation” of Pilipina women and the stereotypes attending Paciﬁc Asian females. Asian
Romance constructs a seemingly “natural order of rank” which is actually an ethnocentric hold
over the Pilipina women (Hall, 1981, p. 14). The catalog ’s ideological underpinnings portray
Asian women in “servant-like” images.
Conclusions
The Pilipina “Oriental Butterﬂy” doll symbolizes the economic, sexual, and racial convergence
of Asian Romance’s varied forms of hegemony. This “doll” represents the commodiﬁed form of a
capitalistic social system as well as the sexualized signiﬁcation of “woman” as objective product.
The Pilipina doll ’s shading symbolizes the racial otherness attached to the product while the
“Oriental Butterﬂy” mystique reﬂects the intersection of the colonization of gender and race in
the shadow of the Western male dominator (Said, 1978). The Pilipina mail-order bride image,
then, functions hegemonically to celebrate superior Anglo-American male ideology. Visually
and textually transformed into the Pilipina “Oriental Butterﬂy” doll, the Pilipina woman ceases
to exist.
188  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 210 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 189
Page 189
The Asian Romance catalog therefore can be read as reinforcing a central Anglo patriarchal
voice. But while this analysis concludes that Asian Romance sustains “white, bourgeois, western
values” in a variety of hegemonic ways, the study does not stop here (Serrati, 1984, p, 41). In the
name of feminist cultural studies, another discourse must be examined: The voice of Pilipina
brides. Numerous possible sources of resistance may exist in discourses if viewed from Pilipina
women’s perspectives. For instance, many Pilipina mail-order brides are motivated to escape
their country’s poverty and to send money back to their families at home (JACL, 1985; Serrati,
1984; Villapando, 1989). In addition to this, marrying an American citizen a ﬀords many
Pilipinas an expedient way to enter the United States and become naturalized citizens (JACL,
1985; Villapando, 1989). Consequently, Pilipina brides may well participate in an active process
of “bargaining with [Anglo] patriarchy ” to “negotiate and adapt to the set of rules that guide
and constrain gender relations . . . in order to maximize power and options within a patriarchal
structure” (Kibria, 1990, p. 9; Kadiyoti, 1988). If brides use Asian Romance and other such ﬁrms
for their own purposes, and therefore participate willingly in their own commodi ﬁcation, then
their choices ultimately prevent Anglo patriarchal hegemonic ideology from taking hold of
Pilipina subjective identity. Only through examination of bride services from the perspective of
both groom and bride can the complexities and implications of hegemony and patriarchal
signiﬁcation be understood.
Note
1. “Pilipina” identities women from the Philippines. The term “Filipino” is not used for it is an anglicized
form. According to Lai (1988), in Tagalog, the national language of the Philippines, the word is
pronounced with a “p” sound.
References
Adelman, M. B., & Ahuvia, A. C. (1991). Mediated channels for mate seeking: A solution to involuntary
singlehood? Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 8, 273–289.
Almquist, E. M. (1984). Race and ethnicity in the lives of minority women. In J. Freeman (Ed.), Women:
A feminist perspective (pp. 23–45). Palo Alto, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Althusser, L. (1971). Ideology and ideological state apparatuses. In Lenin and philosophy and other essays
(pp. 127–186). New Y ork: Monthly Review Press.
Aquino, B. A. (1979). The history of Philipino women in Hawaii. Ridge, 7, 17–21.
Baehr, H. (1981). The impact of feminism on media studies — just another commercial break? In D.
Spender (Ed.), Men’s studies modi ﬁed: The impact of feminism in the academic discipline . Oxford:
Pergamon.
Baechr, H., & Dyer, G. (1987). Boxed in: Women in television. New Y ork: Pandora.
Barthes, R. (1973). Mythologies. New Y ork: Hill & Wang.
Bowen, S. Perlmutter, & Wyatt, N. (1993). Visions of synthesis, vision of critique. In S. Bowen & N. Wyatt
(eds.), Transforming visions: Feminist critiques in communication studies. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Chia, A. Y. (1983). Toward a holistic paradigm for Asian American women ’s studies: A synthesis of feminist
scholarship and women of color ’s feminist politics . Paper presented at the Fifth Annual Conference of
the National Women’s Studies Association, Columbus, OH.
Chow, E. N. (1989). The feminist movement: Where are all the Asian American women? In Asian Women
United of California (Eds.), Making waves: An anthology of writings by and about Asian American
women (pp. 362–377). Boston: Beacon.
Chow, E. N. (1991). The development of feminist consciousness among Asian-American women. In
J. Lorber & S. A. Farrell (Eds.), The social construction of gender  (pp. 255 –268). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Dill, B. T. (1983). Race, class, and gender: Prospects for an all-inclusive sisterhood. Feminist Studies , 9,
131–150.
Dow, B. J. (1990). Hegemony, feminist criticism and the Mary Tyler Moore Show. Critical Studies in Mass
Communication, 7, 261–274.
Eitzen, D. S., & Zinn, M. B. (1989). The de-athleticization of women: The naming and gender making of
collegiate sport teams. Sociology of Sport Journal, 6, 362–370.
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  189


--- PAGE 211 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 190
Page 190
Fiske, J. (1987). British cultural studies and television. In R. C. Allen (Ed.), Channels of discourse,
reassembled (pp. 284–326). Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Fiske, J. (1987). Television culture. New Y ork: Routledge.
Friedman, M. (1985, July). T o wild guys at a party, rape isn’t a crime. It ’s a spectator sport. Mademoiselle,
pp. 104–105.
Gitlin, T. (1987). Prime time television: The hegemonic process in TV entertainment. In H. Newcomb
(Ed.), Television, the critical review (pp. 507–529). New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, R., Heath, D., & Smith, S. L. (1991). Commodity feminism. Critical Studies in Mass Communica-
tion, 8, 333–351.
Goldman, R., & Wilson, J. (1983). Appearance and essence: The commodity form revealed in perfume
advertisement. In McNall (Ed.), Current perspective in social theory  (Vol. 4, pp. 119–142). Greenwich,
CT: JAL Press.
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison notebooks  (Q. Hoare & G. Nowell-Smith, Eds. & Trans.).
New Y ork: International Publishers.
Hall, S. (1980a). Cultural Studies and the centre: Some problematics and problems. In S. Hall, D. Hobson,
A. Lowe, & P . Willis (Eds.), Culture, media, language: Working papers in cultural studies , 1972–1979
(pp. 15–47). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1980b). Encoding/Decoding. In S. Hall, D. Hobson, A. Lowe, & P . Willis (Eds.), Culture, media,
language: Working papers in cultural studies, 1972–1979 (pp. 128–139). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1981). The whites of their eyes: Racist ideologies and the media. In G. Bridges & R. Brunt (Eds.),
Silver linings: Some strategies of the eighties  (pp. 7–23). London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Hall, S. (1982). The rediscovery of “ideology”: Return of the repressed in media studies. In M. Gurevitch,
T. Bennett, J. Curran, & J. Woollacott (Eds.), Culture, society, and the media  (pp. 56 –90). London:
Methuen.
Henley, N. M. (1987). This new species that seeks a new language: On sexism in language and language
change. In J. Penﬁeld (Ed.), Women and language in transition (pp. 3–27). Albany, NY: State University
of New Y ork Press.
Hobson, D. (1982). Crossroads: The drama of a soap opera. London: Methuen.
hooks, b. (1984). Feminist theory: From margin to center . Boston: Southend.
Japanese American Citizens League (JACL). (1985, February 22). JACL report on Asian bride catalogs.
Paciﬁc Citizen, pp. 10–11.
Johnson, R. (1986). What is cultural studies anyway? Social Text, 16, 38–80.
Joseph, R. A. (1984, January 25). American men ﬁnd Asian brides ﬁll the unliberated bill. Wall Street
Journal, pp. 1, 22.
Kandiyoti, D. (1988). Bargaining with patriarchy. Gender & Society, 2, 274–291.
Kibria, N. (1990). Power, patriarchy, and gender conﬂict in the Vietnamese immigrant community. Gender
& Society, 4(1), 9–24.
Kuhn, A. (1985). The power of the image: Essays on representation and sexuality . New Y ork: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Lai, T. (1985, June). Asian women: Resisting the violence. Working Together, pp. 1–3.
Lai, T. (1988). Asian American women: Not for sale. In J. Cochran, D. Langston, & C. Woodward
(Eds.), Changing our power: An introduction to women ’s studies  (pp. 163 –171). Dubuque, IA:
Kendall-Hunt.
Lont, C. M. (1993). Feminist critique of mass communication research. In S. Bowen & N. Wyatt (Eds.),
Transforming visions: Feminist critiques in communication studies. Cresskill, NJ : Hampton.
Loo, C., & Ong, P . (1983). Slaying demons with a sewing needle: Feminist issues for Chinatown women.
Berkeley Journal of Sociology , 27, 77–88.
McRobbie, A., & Garber, J. (1975). Girls and subcultures: An exploration. Working Papers in Cultural
Studies, 7–8, 209–222.
Marchetti, G. (1993). Romance and the “yellow peril”: Race, sex, and discursive strategies in Hollywood ﬁction.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Matsui, J. (1987). Women forging a future: Emerging Asian feminist movements. In Y. Matsui (Ed.),
Women’s Asia (pp. 143–157). London: Red Books.
Modleski, T. (1982). Loving with a vengeance: Mass produced fantasies for women . Hampden, CT: Archon
Books.
Mulvey, L. (1975). Visual pleasure and narrative cinema. Screen, 16, 6–18.
Mussell, K. (1984). Fantasy and reconciliation: Contemporary formulas of women’s romance ﬁction. Westport,
CT: Greenwood.
Radway, J. A. (1984). Reading the romance: Women, patriarchy, and popular literature . Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press.
190  RONA TAMIKO HALUALANI


--- PAGE 212 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 191
Page 191
Radway, J. A. (1986). Identifying ideological seams: Mass culture, analytical method, and political practice.
Communication, 9, 93–123.
Rakow, L. F. (1986). Feminist approaches to popular culture: Giving patriarchy its due. Communication, 9,
19–41.
Richardson, L. W. (1981). The dynamics of sex and gender  (2nd ed). Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. New Y ork: Vintage Books.
Schwichtenberg, C. (1989). Feminist cultural studies. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 6, 202–208.
Serita, T. (1984). Mail order sexploitation. Bridge, pp. 39–41.
Snitow, A. B. (1979). Mass market romance: Pornography for women is di ﬀerent. Radical History Review ,
20, 141–161.
Sontag, S. (1986). The imprisoning of reality. In G. Gumpert & R. Cathcart (Eds.), Intermedia: Interpersonal
communication in a media world (pp. 391–400). New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Steeves, H. L. (1987). Feminist theories and media studies. Critical Studies in Mass Communication , 4,
95–135.
Thompson, J. (1990). Ideology and modern culture. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Treichler, P . A., & Wartella, E. (1986). Interventions: Feminist theory and communication studies. Com-
munication, 9, 1–18.
Villapando, V . (1989). The business of selling mail-order brides. In Asian Women United of California
(Eds.), Making waves: An anthology of writings by and about Asian American women  (pp. 318 –326).
Boston: Beacon.
Y amada, M. (1981). Asian Paciﬁc American women and feminism. In C. Moraga & G. Anzaldua (Eds.), This
bride called me back: Writings by radical women of color  (pp. 71–75). Watertown, MA: Persephone.
“ORIENTAL BUTTERFLY” DOLLS FOR SALE  191


--- PAGE 213 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 192
Page 192


--- PAGE 214 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 193
Page 193
13
Currents in History, Cultural
Domination, and Mass Communication
in the Caribbean
Humphrey A. Regis
One of the major turns in “international” mass communication took place in the enunciation
of the relationship between mass communication and “development.” Earlier in the history of
theory, policy, and practice in that area, the predominant framework essentially saw the com-
munication as playing missionary roles of sorts — helping the transfer of a certain character
(Lerner, 1958), certain technologies (Rogers, 1969), and certain techniques (Rogers, 1969) from
the more powerful and “developed” societies to the less powerful and “undeveloped” societies.
The ﬁrst role seemed to be captured in the idea that mass communication may serve as a
transmitter and “magic multiplier” of a certain “modernization ethic,” and the second and third
seemed to be captured in the attention that many experts gave to the role of mass communica-
tion in the adoption of certain “innovations.” At the root of these roles was the assumption that
with the help of the mass media the advances that Europeans made in the Industrial Revolution
and after World War II would be replicated in other parts of the world (see Melkote, 2002, and
Cambridge, 2002 for elaborations of these issues).
Later in the history of the enunciation of that relationship, many experts from the less
powerful societies, together with colleagues from the more powerful societies, proposed other
frameworks that saw the communication as playing responsive roles of sorts — helping people
realize their aspirations and surmount di ﬃculties they perceive or encounter in their lives
(Rogers, 1976). The ﬁrst speciﬁc role recognized that the bene ﬁciaries of development indeed
had aspirations and saw mass communication as helping them realize these aspirations. The
second saw resource or situational or contextual di ﬃculties as retarding achievement and saw
a combination that includes mass communication and the alleviation of the di ﬃculties (or
the creation of new opportunities through the introduction of facilitating resources or situations
or contexts) as helping this achievement (also see Melkote, 2002, and Cambridge, 2002 for more
substantial elaborations of these issues).
It seems that at the foundation of the second framework was the consideration of the history
of the less powerful societies. That history indicates, for example, that in such locations as the
Congo, Niger, Nile, Tigris/Euphrates, and Indus river valleys, and the Limpopo/Zambezi and
meso-America regions, many of these societies have centuries- or millennia-old records of
aspiration and achievement. It also indicates that in the lives of individual members of these
societies today, aspiration may not translate into achievement in part because of frustrating per-
sonal cirsumstances, local situations, national conditions, and/or global contexts. The framework
seems to propose, as the uses and grati ﬁcations (McGuire, 1974) and third-variable (Comstock
et al., 1978) theories seem to propose, that a combination that includes the design of appropriate
193


--- PAGE 215 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 194
Page 194
mass media messages and the creation of personal and local and national and global enablers is
one key to the type of beneﬁciary-deﬁned achievement or realization that it calls “development.”
It seems that just as the study of the history of the world from the perspectives of several
of the currently more powerful societies propelled the development of the earlier framework
for the elaboration of the relationship between mass communication and development, the
study of the history from these perspectives propelled the development of the early framework
for the elaboration of the relationship between mass communication and cultural domination.
It also seems that just as the study of the history from the perspectives of the currently less
powerful societies spawned the later framework for understanding the relationship between
mass communication and development, the study of the history from these perspectives spawns
another framework that on the one hand challenges and on the other hand complements the
established one in the elaboration of the relationship between mass communication and cultural
domination.
This chapter elaborates these issues and articulates the implications of them in the study of
Caribbean People of African Descent, but the implications are applicable in the lives of People of
the African Continent, members of the World African Community, and ultimately the peoples
of the less powerful societies in general. The chapter de ﬁnes culture and cultural domination.
It describes representative observations from recent history that may have inspired the con-
ceptualization of the earlier framework the writer calls cultural domination by importation or
exportation, as well as three perspectives for the elaboration of the relationship between mass
communication and this domination. It describes observations from the ancient, recent, and
current history of members of the Community in the Caribbean and the Continent that point to
the need for the consideration of a second framework the writer calls cultural domination by re-
importation or re-exportation, and proposes that the three perspectives apply in the elaboration
of the relationship between mass communication and this domination. Then it brings this
application to life as it proposes research programs, agendas, questions, and hypotheses that
arise from the conceptualization of the relationship and are applicable in the lives of Caribbean
People of African Descent, People of the African Continent, members of the World African
Community, and peoples of the less powerful societies. The chapter argues that just as the
responsiveness framework liberated the development of theory, policy, and practice in mass
communication and development, the re-importation or re-exportation framework liberates the
development of theory, policy, and practice with regard to the relationship between mass com-
munication and cultural de ﬁnition and continuance and change in the lives of these peoples. It
also argues that the proposed relationship between mass communication and cultural domin-
ation by re-importation or re-exportation reveals the need for the study of mass communication
to be inspired by other disciplines, especially the study of the millennia-long history of the
World African Community.
Culture
Some views of culture de ﬁne it in cognitive terms, some de ﬁne it in a ﬀective terms, and some
deﬁne it in behavioral terms. Tan (1985) integrated these emphases by de ﬁning culture as the
interrelated cognitions, aﬀects, and behaviors that members of a society share. McDonald (1986)
emphasized the normative implications of these cognitions, aﬀects, and behaviors by noting that
they provide the reference points by which members of a society give meaning and validation to
their beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors. And Benedict (1934) summarized the essence of these def-
initions by proposing that culture may be seen as personality writ large— the culture of a society
may be seen as the collective personality of its members.
The culture is expressed in domains. These are areas of existence in which individual members
of the society express themselves or the society as a whole expresses itself. From observations
194  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 216 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 195
Page 195
of members or the society in these domains, one may identify patterns that point to the charac-
teristics of the culture. The domains are in ﬁnite in number and include agriculture, politics,
religion, government, clothing, housing, recreation, grooming, trading, music, sanitation, and
reasoning.
In each domain, the culture may be described through continuums called dimensions, with
each dimension having at one end the extreme of one characteristic and at the other end the
extreme of a contrasting characteristic. As McGuire (1974) proposed, in the case of individuals,
they include the cognitive vs. a ﬀective, preservation-oriented vs. growth-oriented, internally
oriented vs. externally oriented, and active vs. passive dimensions. As Diop (1978) proposed, in
the case of societies, they include the matriarchal vs. patriarchal, individualistic vs. collectivistic,
and oriented-toward-xenophobia vs. oriented-toward-xenophilia dimensions. Of course, the
ends of a dimension are not always diametrically opposed characteristics. One end may be the
near absence and the other the extremely strong presence of a certain characteristic, such as
the belief in original sin (Diop, 1978).
Within any dimension, a society may be located at an extreme end, more toward this end
than toward a second, balanced between the two ends, more toward the second end than toward
the ﬁrst, or extremely at the second. Diop (1978) applied this idea in his attempt to describe the
traditional culture complexes of African and European peoples. He concluded that the former
have tended to be more collectivistic than individualistic and the latter more individualistic than
collectivistic, the former more matriarchal than patriarchal and the latter more patriarchal than
matriarchal, and the former more inclined toward xenophilia than toward xenophobia and the
latter more toward xenophobia than toward xenophilia. Thus along each dimension Diop was
describing the location of each culture complex, its attribute. And as Tan (1985) and McDonald
(1986) most probably would argue, each of these attributes will have cognitive, a ﬀective, and
behavioral aspects.
The totality here called the culture of a society may be seen as the sum of the attributes (or
locations on dimensions) the society displays in the sum of the domains of its existence. If each
society were seen as an island, the domains of its existence may be seen as regions that constitute
it, the dimensions of its domains may be seen as land masses that make up its regions, and its
attribute along a dimension may be seen as the elevation of a land mass. The location of a society
at an extreme end of one dimension may be seen as equivalent to the low elevation of the
corresponding land mass, and the location of the society at the other extreme end as equivalent
to the high elevation of that land mass. Thus the territory of an island may be seen as the
aggregate of the elevations (of the aggregate of land masses) in the aggregate of regions that
constitute it. And the culture of a society may be deﬁned as the aggregate of the attributes (along
the aggregate of dimensions) in the aggregate of the domains that make up its expressions of its
existence.
Cultural change in a society may be seen as change in an attribute, or in its location along any
dimension or dimensions in any domain or domains. It also may be seen as cognitive, a ﬀective,
or behavioral, but it probably will be in all of these aspects of an attribute, as Tan (1985) and
others report these aspects are interrelated. And it may be the result of experiences members
of the society have among themselves, with other societies, or in their natural environment
(Diop, 1978).
The change due to experience with other societies may be placed in three categories. The ﬁrst
is change by symmetry or balanced interaction, in which there is a balance between the ﬂow
of inﬂuence in one direction and the ﬂow in the other. The change also may be by asymmetry
or imbalanced interaction, in which there is a greater ﬂow of inﬂuence in one direction than in
the other. The second category is change by incidental domination, in which the imbalance is
not the result of the intention and/or deliberate action of either of the interacting societies
or third parties. The third is cultivated domination (often called imperialism), in which the
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  195


--- PAGE 217 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 196
Page 196
imbalance is the result of this intention and/or deliberate action. The literature of mass com-
munication and cultural domination, as represented in certain treatises (Chinweizu, 1975;
Hamelink, 1983; Schiller, 1969, 1976) and reviews (Hur, 1982; Salwen, 1991; Schiller, 1991;
Sreberny-Mohammadi, 1997; Tamborini and Choi, 1990), seems to focus to a great degree on
the relationship between mass communication and incidental domination and/or between mass
communication and cultivated domination, but there seem to be some noteworthy exceptions to
this pattern (Galtung, 1980; Mazrui, 1976).
The Established Framework
One instance of cultural change that seems to capture the essence of the established framework
for the elaboration of cultural domination seems to be as follows:
A few years ago, Ethiopian radio imported dramatic programs from the United States.
Around the time of the Christmas season, these programs promoted the European and
American tradition of Christmas trees and gift giving. Ethiopia is a Coptic Christian
country, where Christmas was strictly a religious holiday. However, the American pro-
gramming led to a demand for Christmas trees and gift giving. . . . The trees had to be
shipped in from the [United States]!
(Dennis, 1984, p. 183)
Another instance is the subject of a more recent report (Becker & Burwell, 1999) on
conceptions of ideal weight, related attitudes, and related behavior held by secondary school
girls in Fiji.
The researchers compared the views of a sample taken in 1995, one month after Fiji began
receiving Western television programs via satellite, with one taken in 1998. In a culture [in
which] slimness was deemed unattractive, there was a marked increase in the percentage
of girls who desired to lose weight and therefore dieted or engaged in bulimic behavior
to slim down. And the increased tendencies were more pronounced among those who
watched television the most. Whereas just 3% of the girls in the 1995 survey reported
inducing vomiting to lose weight, 15% of the 1998 sample did so. And the girls who
watched television the most were 50% more likely to describe themselves as too fat and
30% more likely to diet than the others. Moreover, the study found an increased incidence
of depression related to self image. The girls told the researchers they admired women
characters on Melrose Place and Beverly Hills 90210, two of their favorite programs, and
they wanted to be like those hourglass-shaped characters.
(reported in Ibelema, 2001, p. 28)
These reports capture a process that has these stages: the more powerful society develops a
cultural characteristic or attribute; the originating more powerful society exports the attribute
or characteristic (or, the less powerful society imports it); then the less powerful society adopts
it. This represents the framework one may call cultural domination by exportation from the
point of view of the more powerful or by importation from that of the less powerful (see
examples and discussions in Salwen, 1991; Schiller, 1969, 1976, 1991; Sreberny-Mohammadi,
1997).
The instances also seem to suggest three perspectives of the role and signi ﬁcance of mass
communication within the framework. One is the correlation perspective that holds that the
mass communication in which the members of a society engage will have elements that re ﬂect
the cultural attributes of the society: thus the stress on material trappings in the observance of
196  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 218 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 197
Page 197
Christmas and the emphasis on slimness of the female ﬁgure were attributes of the sending
society that were embedded in the mass media content its members prepared for their consump-
tion. One is the transmission perspective that holds that the mass media serve as conduits for
the movement of representations of cultural attributes from one culture to another: the radio
programs served such a function in the United States/Ethiopia scenario and the satellite broad-
casts did so in the United States/Fiji scenario. (The perspective also holds that the characteristics
of the message originators, mass media, or message receivers all have an e ﬀect on the degree of
ﬁdelity between the “real” attributes of the depicted society and the “impression” the receivers
develop of the attributes.) And one is the persuasion perspective that holds that the mass media
promote in the receiver not only the understanding but also the adoption of the attributes of
the originator; so the radio and satellite programs may have contributed to the adoption of the
American attributes by their respective audiences.
The Proposed Framework
A review of a number of developments in the histories of members of the World African
Community— People of the African Continent (PACs) and People of African Descent (PADs,
including those in the Caribbean)— point to the need for another framework for the study of cul-
tural deﬁnition, continuance, or change under the inﬂuence of external groups. This framework
captured in the histories of cultural attributes and related expressions that the two populations
have exchanged with each other and with other groups is called cultural in ﬂuence by re-
importation or re-exportation, and has an aspect that is called cultural domination by re-
importation or re-exportation. The correlation, transmission, and persuasion perspectives of the
relationship between mass communication and cultural domination by importation/exportation
also ﬁnd application in the elaboration of the relationship between mass communication and
this proposed cultural domination.
One of the developments actually is a progression that spans millennia. According to Jackson
(1985), a people of Central Africa (that he says we call the Pygmies today) have had a belief
system that centers on “a Father-God . . . a Virgin Mother . . . (and) a Savior-God Son” (p. 175).
The belief system holds that the Father-God impregnated the Virgin Mother, who gave birth to
the Savior-God, who “died for the salvation of his people, arose from the dead, and ﬁnally
ascended into Heaven” (p. 175). Finch (1991) reports that Massey (1883, 1970, 1992), in “36 years
of mind-bending labor ” (p. 129), has among other things traced similar ideas to Africa, and
writes that “The Christ myth, instead of being a spontaneous upsurge of a new divine dispensa-
tion (started in Palestine about 2,000 years ago), was traced back by Massey some 10,000 years
[to] Central Africa” (p. 180). This leads to the proposition that the drama of the Son of God as
an instrument for the redemption of humanity that is the cornerstone of Christianity has an
antecedent that goes to Central Africa 10,000 years ago (Finch, 1991; Jackson, 1985). It was
interpreted and localized in the lives of the Kemetu (the so-called Ancient Egyptians of the Nile
Valley) as far back as 6,000 years ago (Finch, 1991). It has since appeared in the religions of other
ancient societies (see Jackson, 1972) and was appropriated by the ancient Roman empire under
its emperor Constantine (ben Jochannan, 1991). And it has been re-exported in recent and
present times— the era of colonialism and imperialism and “globalization”— by the recent and
present western component or extension of this empire to the descendants, and cousins of the
descendants, of these ancient African peoples.
One other aspect of this progression that also spans millennia seems to be captured by ben
Jochannan thus:
The co-option of the “sacred scriptures ” (and the tenets in them) by various religious
groups was common among the ancients. This [co-option] came down through the
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  197


--- PAGE 219 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 198
Page 198
adaptation of basic tenets from indigenous Nile Valley Africans ’ “Mystery System” into
Judaism. Christendom extended [this co-option] when it made Judaism its foundation.
From this historical background [these tenets have] re-entered the various indigenous
African traditional religions through colonialism and imperialism.
(ben Jochannan, 1991, p. 167)
and, of course, “globalization.”
Indeed, perhaps on the basis of the similarities and identities between the essential idea, many
major myths, many major symbols, and many major practices in Christianity and others in
Africa, the comparison of the ages of the Christian idea and myths and symbols and practices
and those in Africa, and the relationships between early Christian peoples and ancient Africans
that seem to explain the similarities and identities between the Christian and the African, Diop
(1991, p. 3) asserts:
Insofar as [Kemet] is the distant mother of Western culture and sciences, as will emerge
from the reading of [ Civilization or Barbarism ], most of the ideas that we (Africans) call
foreign are oftentimes nothing but mixed up, reversed, modiﬁed, elaborated images of the
creations of our African ancestors, such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam. . . . One can see
how fundamentally improper is the notion, so often repeated, of the importation of
foreign ideologies into Africa. It stems from a perfect ignorance of the African past.
Liverpool (2001) appears to trace a comparable progression in the evolution of highlife music
in West Africa. He reports that People of the African Continent taken by Europeans to enslave-
ment in the Americas (including the Caribbean) brought with them a multitude of ideational,
lyrical, structural, expressional, and contextual music traditions, and People of African Descent
in the Caribbean (especially Trinidad) maintained or modi ﬁed these traditions. He proposes
that a certain inclination toward continuity in symbolism or artifact or performance explains
the maintenance, that a certain inventiveness employing local materials and cultivated by local
conditions explains the modi ﬁcations, and that one of the results of these processes is the
contemporary calypso. Then he explains how in recent years this calypso has been re-exported
by PACs and PADs to West Africa, contributing there to the development of the contemporary
music genre called highlife.
Orlean (2002) describes a perhaps similar recent process and centuries-old progression that
appear to have contributed to the development of contemporary soukous music in Central
Africa. The recent process takes o ﬀ from the fact that many Central Africans have taken their
music to performances in Europe. She indicates that the Africans also have taken their music
to European recording studios and the resulting recordings have gone back Africa. Indeed, she
wrote, “Even though there was nowhere to buy African music in France in the [mid-1970s],
much of it was actually being recorded in studios in Paris and in Brussels and shipped back to
Africa” (p. 114). She also seems to trace a comparable but centuries-old progression with regard
to the development of soukous: the carrying of music from Africa by PACs brought to enslave-
ment to the western hemisphere by Europeans, the combining of the African music with Spanish
elements in Cuba to form the rumba, the receiving and acceptance of the rumba in Central Africa
since the 1930s, and then the weaving of the rumba and “indigenous village music” (p. 115) into
the melange that is called the contemporary soukous. Then taking some liberty she concludes,
“Soukous had left home, absorbed a new culture, returned home, and was being absorbed and
reinterpreted once again” (p. 115).
Parris (2001) also traces a comparable progression in the valuation of Caribbean literary
giants by Caribbean people. Of these giants, he makes a special case of the poet Claude McKay,
who had received little praise for his talents in his native Jamaica or the wider Caribbean. He
198  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 220 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 199
Page 199
became one of the most articulate voices of the Harlem Renaissance, became very successful and
respected among PADs in the United States, and garnered additional success among other
populations in the United States and in other parts of the world. Only after that did he receive so
much recognition and even adulation in the Caribbean that he inspired a major theme in the
works of Caribbean writers —“ the return to peasant roots and the rejection of middle class
society” (p. 100).
From the Trinidad Guardian of March 8, 1970 (as reported by Lowenthal, 1972) we ﬁnd
indications of a more recent but in some ways similar progression in the following observation:
“Remember how we (Trinidadians) used to turn up (our) noses at roti? The Y ankees come and
say it too nice (it is very nice). So now roti (is to be found) in every social fete (party). Is that
kind of people we are, yes.” T o the writer of this observation, Trinidadians developed a culinary
culture in which the roti had a certain presence or valuation, they introduced Americans sta-
tioned in the island during and after World War II to the roti, the Americans seemed to elevate
it more than the Trinidadians had elevated it before, reports of this elevation reached the
Trinidadians, and ﬁnally in their culinary culture they went on to elevate the roti very much
more than they had done so before and to a degree that was consistent with the implicit or
explicit American elevation.
In each progression described above, one may identify a ﬁve-stage process that seems to start
and end at an originating society that includes members of the World African Community: the
society develops and expresses a cultural attribute (most of these reports highlight a cognitive
or aﬀective or behavioral aspect of the attribute, but each attribute would have cognitive and
aﬀective and behavioral aspects); the society exports the attribute to another society, or the other
society imports the attribute; the receiving society modi ﬁes the attribute in ways that are con-
sistent with the characteristics of its culture; the originating society re-imports, or the receiving
society re-exports, these modi ﬁcations; and ﬁnally the receiving society may adopt the modi ﬁ-
cations (to varying degrees, of course). Thus these progressions seem to illustrate a process
one may call cultural in ﬂuence by re-importation (from the perspective of the originator) or
re-exportation (from that of the modiﬁer).
Cases in Caribbean Music
Since popular music may be one of the most tra ﬃcked of human expressions, it would seem
reasonable to look for re-importation or re-exportation scenarios within this domain. And
indeed, over the last several decades, the music of Caribbean members of the World African
Community has seen modiﬁcations that appear to be the results of in ﬂuence by re-importation
or re-exportation, with such in ﬂuence ﬂowing from external and more powerful societies or
their extensions or surrogates to the region more than it ﬂows from the region to these entities.
Several of these changes, as reported by Lashley (2001), seem to have taken place in the world
of calypso in the ﬁrst half of the 1900s. He reports that early in the history of the music its
pioneers and performers and a ﬁcionados were viewed by many in the island of Trinidad as
“the scum of the earth; ” in the 1930s calypsonians went to the United States and received
a warm welcome, recording contracts, and performance engagements (including one before
President F. D. Roosevelt); and after this the earlier and rather widespread contempt turned into
“justiﬁable pride” (p. 85) in Trinidad (p. 87):
The apparent acceptance given to the calypso by musicians and audiences overseas had
created a cultural resurgence in the art form. The calypsonians and their work found more
acceptance in their homeland. . . . Ignorance had been replaced by awareness, prejudice by
pride; the scoﬀers had become devotees. There was none too aloof, vain, or arrogant as not
to honor the calypso and calypsonian alike. Trinidadians were seeing themselves anew.
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  199


--- PAGE 221 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 200
Page 200
Lashley (2001) also reports that the anticipation by Trinidadian calypsonians of what the
United States market wanted in the calypso songs it patronized led to several changes in their
performance of the music. Some calypsonians started to incorporate these changes so much that
one leader said that to him these calypsonians became less genuine representatives than they had
been before of the local calypso milieu. It seems that the use of the music in social communica-
tion among members of the originating less powerful society changed in part in compliance
with modiﬁcations desired in the music by the external more powerful society. Indeed, Lashley
(2001) notes that the trend continues, with calypsonians not just imitating American music but
electronically fusing segments from American songs into what are supposed to be their original
compositions.
One other area of change noted by Lashley (2001) was in the length of time during the year in
which Trinidadians played the calypso over the airwaves. He reports that because of the senti-
ments of Christians in the land, at ﬁrst the calypso mainly was publicly performed in the period
just before Lent. He also reports that the Americans stationed in Trinidad during and after
World War II patronized the music and played it on their radio station throughout the year.
Then he reports that two researchers have observed that after this American practice there was
an increase in the period each year during which the population played the music in public
places and on the airwaves.
In the reggae music culture, the writer has observed three changes that took place in the 1970s
and followed the exportation of the music to the United States and other more powerful
countries. In each of these changes, there seems to have been the repetition of the progression
Lashley reports to have taken place in the world of calypso.
Like other musical social commentaries, those whose writers use the reggae form describe the
world and espouse ways of correcting its problems, improving its conditions, and achieving its
ideals. In these commentaries, the writers have the option of stressing as a key to these activities a
certain symmetry perspective that sees human beings as collaborators or a certain asymmetry
perspective that sees them as adversaries. During the 1960s and early 1970s, each perspective had
its presence in the Jamaican and Caribbean reggae culture, but after the mid-1970s the asym-
metry perspective seemed to have had a greater presence than before. The songs with this latter
perspective divide the world into opposing camps, such as Rastafari vs. Baldhead or Babylon, as
well as the righteous vs. the heathen, the system vs. the su ﬀering, the good vs. the bad, or us vs.
them. They locate the writers, interpreters, or performers of works in one camp and certain others
in another. They proclaim members of the ﬁrst camp to be victims of problems and members of
the second to be causes of the problems. They even imply or declare that the solution to the
problems essentially lay in the triumph of the ﬁrst camp and the demise of the second.
African Caribbean music always has included songs with social critical content. Thus up to
the mid-1970s, music aﬁcionados of the region did not distinguish reggae from the other music
genres on the basis of the presence of this content in them. In addition, they did not describe
reggae on the basis of the presence of this content in it. They described it on the basis of the
feature that indeed distinguished it from other Jamaican or Caribbean music: its rhythm,
accents, structure, or form. This aspect of the culture is captured in the de ﬁnition of reggae
provided by two of its keenest observers (Weber & Skinner, 2001, p. 151) thirty years after the
beginning of the 1970s: “It is characterized by the foregrounding of syncopated bass and drum
rhythms, an emphasis on the down beat (beats 1 and 3) rather than the backbeat (beats 2 and 4,
which are emphasized in rock and blues), a prominent afterbeat or ‘skank’ voiced on guitars
and/or keyboards, a call-and-response vocal style, and a strong orientation toward audience
participation.” Indeed, to this de ﬁnition they add the following distinction (p. 161): “An
important diﬀerence between reggae and Euro-American pop music is the signiﬁcance in reggae
of drum-and-bass patterns or ‘riddims.’ In reggae, the riddim rather than the lyric is considered
to be the essence of the song.”
200  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 222 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 201
Page 201
After the mid-1970s, among many a ﬁcionados there was a noticeable shift in the elements
emphasized in the de ﬁnition of reggae. First, they changed from stressing form more than
content to stressing content (especially the intention or the writer or interpreter or performer
understood from an analysis of the content) more than form as the key criterion to be considered.
Second, of all the content in reggae songs, they stressed Rastafari and the dichotomization of
humanity into opposing camps more than before and more than other content. The resulting
deﬁnitions include the following: reggae is the music of Rastafari; reggae is the music of Jah (the
name for the Rastafari concept of God); reggae is the music that speaks against oppression; and
reggae is the music of revolution.
One noteworthy feature of reggae, calypso, cadence, compas direct and other African
Caribbean music cultures is that they traditionally have accorded the acclaimed musician the
status of member rather than that of idol. This is found in the status accorded the most
acclaimed calypsonian, on whom Caribbean people have been heaping accolades for many
decades because they have regarded his work as superlative, but who for almost half a century
has remained, to almost all of the Caribbean people, “one of the boys” or “one of the fellas ” or
“one of us.”
Since the mid-1970s, in Jamaican and Caribbean reggae, there has been a noticeable shift in
the range of status labels a ﬁcionados have accorded acclaimed musicians. That change is illus-
trated by the degree to which they have elevated the person and works of Robert “Bob” Marley.
Before the mid-1970s, many disregarded much of his work, called much of it typical or ordinary,
and used labels such as singer, musician, or music player to refer to him. Since the mid-1970s,
they have paid far more attention to the work, have rated it (including those works they had
ignored or dismissed) as superlatively or uniquely authentic, and even have tended to refer to
Marley as leader, visionary, prophet, and yes, indeed, messiah.
There are many reasons why these changes took place in the Jamaican and Caribbean reggae
culture, but while many explanations may clarify speci ﬁc changes, one seems to clarify all of
them. During much of the 1970s — and especially from the mid-1970s — the music was the
subject of a major exportation and promotion campaign that took it to the United States and
other more powerful countries. Audiences in these destinations — especially those in the United
States— developed their reggae culture by interpreting the original reggae culture within the
context of their historical and cultural milieu. In this reconceptualization, they changed the
presence or importance of certain elements to levels that were di ﬀerent from the presence or
importance accorded the elements in the original culture. In keeping with their greater tendency
toward individualism and the idolization of individual musicians, their reggae culture accorded
the elevation of single individuals to the status of idol a greater presence than it had in the
original culture, and they accorded the status of idol to the only systematically, continually, and
heavily promoted musician, Bob Marley. In keeping with the counterculture element in their
current milieu, their reggae culture embraced the way of life of Rastafari that represented an
alternative to the main stream far more than the original culture had done so, and claimed that
reggae was an embodiment of Rastafari (see Zaid, 2001). In addition, in keeping with their
greater emphasis on asymmetry than symmetry in relations, their reggae culture conceived of
the world in dichotomous or oppositional terms (see Bangs, 1978; Frost, 1990) far more than
the original culture had done so. Furthermore, their culture de ﬁned reggae to a greater degree
on the basis of content and a lesser degree on the basis of rhythm, in contrast to the tendency
in the originating culture to de ﬁne it on the basis of form more than on the basis of content.
The culture celebrated many songs that re ﬂected this de ﬁnition, with the best known of these
songs being “The Harder They Come, ” “I Shot the Sheri ﬀ,” and “Get Up, Stand Up. ” T o the
writer of this exposition, after these modi ﬁcations, the adulation of Marley, the presence of
Rastafari, the deﬁnition of reggae more on the basis of content than on the basis of rhythm, and
the deﬁnition of reggae on the basis of the presence in reggae songs of the idea of a fundamental
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  201


--- PAGE 223 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 202
Page 202
dichotomization and opposition in humanity, became much more pronounced than before in
the Jamaican and Caribbean reggae culture.
As was the case with the progressions described earlier, those having to do with the calypso
in the early part and reggae in the later years of the 1900s seem to include ﬁve stages: ﬁrst,
an African Caribbean music culture developed a genre that was characterized by certain attrib-
utes (origination); second, the culture exported the expressions of the attributes to the more
powerful societies (exportation); fourth, these societies carried out modi ﬁcations of the expres-
sions and hence the attributes (modi ﬁcation); third, the societies re-exported or the African
Caribbean music culture re-imported the modi ﬁcations (re-importation, or re-exportation);
and ﬁfth, the Caribbean music culture appears to have changed in ways that seem consistent
with the modiﬁcations (adoption).
Mass Communication Perspectives
As is the case with the importation/exportation framework, the re-importation or re-exportation
framework allows for consideration of the correlation, transmission, and persuasion perspec-
tives in the elaboration of the role and signi ﬁcance of mass communication in the process it
describes. Indeed, the perspectives yield a number of programs, agendas, questions, or hypoth-
eses for the study of this role and signi ﬁcance. Each of these areas of research will be described
below, and as much as possible illustrated in both the world of calypso and the world of reggae.
The correlation perspective
The correlation perspective comes to life in the description of changes in the length of the time
in the year during which Trinidadians engaged widely in the public displaying of the calypso.
It is likely that the earlier local limitation of the period corresponded with an earlier local
limitation of airplay on local radio stations, the later American extension of the period corres-
ponded with a later greater airplay by radio stations controlled by the Americans, and the even
later local extension of the period corresponded with an even later extension of the airplay
natives accorded the music.
This perspective also comes to life in research possibilities in the study of reggae. Three
observations of the writer are that the dichotomization of humanity in lyrics of reggae songs, the
deﬁnition of reggae on the basis of content, and the idolization of acclaimed musicians by reggae
aﬁcionados had a certain low presence in the Jamaican and Caribbean music culture in the early
1970s, a greater presence in the United States reggae culture in the middle-to-late 1970s, and
then a greater presence than before in the Jamaican and Caribbean reggae culture after the mid-
1970s. These may be tested through the hypothesis that text that proposed or endorsed the
dichotomization of humanity, the de ﬁnition on the basis of content, and the idolization of
acclaimed musicians had a relatively low presence in Jamaican and other Caribbean mass media
in the early 1970s, a greater presence in United States mass media in the middle-to-late 1970s,
and a greater presence than before in Jamaican and other Caribbean mass media after the
mid-1970s.
The transmission perspective
The transmission perspective has to do with the movement of cultural attributes from the origi-
nator of these attributes to the external group and the movement of modi ﬁcations in these
attributes from the external group to the originator, and so presents opportunities for the study
of players and means and methods in the exportation and re-importation or re-exportation
stages. It seems easy to focus on such obvious and superﬁcial issues as the types of media used by
202  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 224 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 203
Page 203
these players and in these processes, but perhaps a more fruitful and revealing investigation
would focus on the objectives of the players in the processes and on their use of the media to
achieve these objectives.
The need for this primary focus arises from an important report from Zaid (2001). He says
that in the early phases of the exportation of reggae from Jamaica to the more powerful societies
its exporters presented it as an embodiment of “the aesthetic form that e ﬀectively ‘directed and
organized’ the perceptions of Rastafarians ” (p. 143). This leads one to ponder the possibility
that this characterization may have been cultivated by these exporters as they sought to maxi-
mize the popularity of the music among audiences in which such characterizations would have
resonated, since these audiences mainly included critical university students and counterculture
proponents seeking alternatives to the “establishment,” and the lifestyle proposed by Rastafari
represented one such alternative. Thus one issue is what are the motivations of exporters (that
may be media services), what in ﬂuences their representations of the culture of the African
originators in the destinations of their exports, and as a result, how rooted in the originators are
their representations of the culture.
The need for this primary focus also arises from another report from Zaid (2001). He
says that early in its history, reggae had a singles-based format, but one of its major promoters
had the need to market it in ways that optimized its success in the more powerful societies and
thus convinced its originators to produce it in an album format for these societies. One possibil-
ity is that this promoter communicated to the originators an interpretation of the modiﬁcations
desired by the more powerful societies that would lead to the maximization of returns to the
promoter. Thus another major issue is what are the motivations of re-importers or re-exporters
(that may be media services), how do the motivations in ﬂuence their representations of the
modiﬁcations carried out or desired by the more powerful societies, and given these in ﬂuences,
how authentic are their representations of the responses of the more powerful societies to the
culture of the African originators.
The report on the importation of United States television programs into Fiji gives the impres-
sion that the programs provided a certain representation of the American conception of the
ideal female ﬁgure but did not deal with the issue of how much that ideal appeared on other
media importations (for example, newspapers, magazines, radio programs, and other television
programs) from the United States to Fiji. In the exportation stage of the process of cultural
domination by re-importation or re-exportation, one related issue is the pervasiveness of repre-
sentations of an attribute of the culture of the originating society of African peoples that
members of the society exchange with each other in the aggregate of media content that ﬂows
from that originating society to the more powerful society. And in the re-importation or re-
exportation stage, the comparable issue is the pervasiveness of representations of the modi ﬁca-
tions that are made by the more powerful society and that members of that society exchange
with each other within the aggregate of media content that ﬂows from the more powerful society
to the originating society of African peoples.
The report on the importation of United States television programs into Fiji also did not
cover the issue of the presence of United States media representations of the American concep-
tion of the ideal female ﬁgure in the television programming, and hence the television audience,
in Fiji. In the exportation stage, one related issue is the penetration of media content from the
originating society of African peoples in the mass media system of the more powerful society,
and in the re-importation or re-exportation stage, a comparable issue is the penetration of
media content from the more powerful society in the media system of the originating society
of African peoples.
The assumption here is that the greater the pervasiveness or penetration of media content
that comes from and describes one society within the media system and audience of a receiving
society, the greater the probability that truly accurate representations of the cultural attributes of
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  203


--- PAGE 225 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 204
Page 204
the sender will be developed by the receiver. This pervasiveness or penetration could be con-
sidered in the elaboration of the transmission of representations of cultural attributes from
originating societies of African peoples to more powerful societies, as well as the transmission of
the modiﬁcations of these attributes from the more powerful societies to the African peoples.
These issues seem important in the study of situations in which the societies may be interlocked in
the relationship this exposition calls cultural domination by re-importation or re-exportation.
One inclination would be to assume the originating society of African peoples to be the
exporter of the representations of its culture that ﬂow to the more powerful societies. But the
historical and contemporary reality is that the external, more powerful society may be the one
playing this role. This was the case in recent times, because as Martin (1983) reports, the media
that many colonizers established in their colonies served mainly to connect these colonies to the
homes of the colonizers. Thus information about a colony often ﬂowed from that colony to
the more powerful dominator and then to another colony, even though that second colony may
be close to the ﬁrst one. Indeed, Ibelema (2001) indicates that such a state of a ﬀairs obtains
today in linkages between neighboring peoples in Africa. This means that information that ﬂows
among members of a society of African peoples (or between societies of African peoples that
constitute a culture complex) about elements of their culture may be in the hands of the media
of an external and more powerful society, and so the understanding that the African peoples
develop of their supposedly common cultural attributes and related expressions may be shaped
by the media of that external and more powerful society.
The degree to which this is the case in the Caribbean cultural arena is very important, since
it is a fact that much of the de ﬁnition, description, and illustration of what many in the region
viewed as “authentic” or “roots” in reggae in the 1970s seemed to ﬂow from Jamaica through the
media of the more powerful societies and then to such other parts of the Greater Caribbean as
the Bahamas and the Eastern Caribbean. Indeed, one observer of and expert on Caribbean mass
communications (Walrond, 1991) recalled that during and after the mid-1970s Caribbean
newspapers carried many de ﬁnitions, descriptions, illustrations, critiques, and evaluations of
reggae performers, reggae works, and/or the reggae genre. But, she noted, many of these articles
were reproductions of media content that was written by observers from, primarily intended for
audiences in, and even ﬁrst published by, the print media of the United States and other more
powerful countries.
The issue here is the centrality of the media of an external and perhaps more powerful society
in the conversation that takes place among members of a society of African peoples, or among
societies of African peoples that constitute a culture complex, in the elaboration of, the evalu-
ation of, and the response to, what they see as natural, normal, representative, or authentic in
their culture. The extremely great importance of this centrality among People of African Descent
in the Caribbean lies in the observation by Alleyne (1994) that Caribbean people tend to display
“an undue reliance on Western arbiters regarding the value and representation of [Caribbean]
creativity” (p. 76).
The persuasion perspective
At the foundation of the persuasion perspective is the proposition that the mass media promote
the adoption by members of the originating society of African peoples of modi ﬁcations that
have been made of their culture in the more powerful societies. One model for the elaboration of
the role and signi ﬁcance of mass communication in the achievement of this outcome appears
to be captured in the bullet or hypodermic theses on mass media e ﬀects, and argues that the
messages in the mass media are powerful causes of e ﬀects. It seems to propose that mass media
reports on the modiﬁcations carried out in the more powerful society on elements in the culture
of the society of African peoples may instantly and even powerfully move the African peoples to
204  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 226 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 205
Page 205
adopt these modiﬁcations. Another model for this elaboration seems to be captured in the culti-
vation and social learning theses on mass media eﬀects, and argues that the messages are moder-
ately powerful promoters of e ﬀects over long periods. It seems to propose that the exposure to
and the consumption of reports on the modiﬁcations would lead over an extended period to the
adoption of them.
But a review of the histories of societies of African peoples and the more powerful societies
leads to the recognition of the need to consider as the explanation for this adoption a combin-
ation that includes mass communication, inclinations of individuals in both groups of societies
that seem to be consequences of the histories, and conditions in the contexts that a ﬀect both
groups and also appear to be consequences of the histories. The consideration of the inclinations
of the individuals is justi ﬁed by the uses and grati ﬁcations perspective of mass communication
eﬀects (see McGuire, 1974) that proposes that human beings, in response to their psychological
makeup or internal stimuli or external stimuli, develop needs they may try to satisfy through the
consumption or application of mass media messages, and the “eﬀects” of the messages indeed
may be the satisfaction of these needs. The consideration of the conditions is also justiﬁed by the
third-variable perspective of mass communication e ﬀects (Comstock et al., 1978), which pro-
poses that the conditions may impel human beings in certain directions, mass media messages
also may impel them in these directions, and the “eﬀect” of the messages may be the outcome of
the synergy in the combination that includes the conditions and the mass communication.
The history in question spans not only 400 years but almost 4,000 years. It includes the
development of the southern cradle of civilization (that includes Africa) with its greater orienta-
tion toward feminine attributes, collectivism, cooperation, interpenetration, equilibrium, sym-
biosis, and complementarity than toward their opposites. It also includes the development of the
northern cradle of civilization (that includes Europe) with its greater orientation toward mascu-
line attributes, individualism, competition, penetration of others, overwhelming of others, sub-
jugation of others, and the use of others for self interest, than toward their opposites (for an
elaboration of these observations, see Diop, 1978, 1974; Finch, 1991). One of the implications
from two of the major works of Diop (1974, 1978) is that in the study of global relations it is
extremely important to consider not only the characteristics of the southern peoples but also
those of the northern ones. Indeed, one of the major ideas of Diop, as summarized by Finch
(1991), seems to suggest that the interplay between the psychologies, related priorities, and
related activities of the two major cradles of civilization over more than 3,500 years seems to
explain the contemporary global condition (p. 60):
Summarizing Diop ’s viewpoint, we can say that the (more symmetry-oriented) matri-
archy of the southern cradle and the (more asymmetry-oriented) patriarchy of the north-
ern cradle sprang up more or less independently, but became ineluctable antagonists. The
(more symmetry-oriented) matriarchal south, which ﬁrst attained civilization, (has) suc-
cumbed (emphasis added by this writer) to the politico-military onslaughts of the (more
asymmetry-oriented) patriarchal north occurring in waves for more than 3,500 years
after 1,700 B.C. The outcome of this repeated onslaught (emphasis added by this writer)
over thousands of years is seen in the contemporary military, political, and economic
pre-eminence of the western world.
Thus the elaboration of the domination of the cultures of the mostly “southern” less power-
ful societies of African peoples by the mostly “northern” more powerful societies by re-
importation or re-exportation must include the consideration of the relationship between mass
communication and the characteristics of both groups of societies that may explain the adop-
tion by the African peoples of modi ﬁcations made in their culture by the more powerful. The
elaboration recognizes that the result of the millennia-old drama between the two “cradles”
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  205


--- PAGE 227 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 206
Page 206
includes not only the overwhelming, domination, and exploitation of the southern peoples by
the northern ones, but also the cultivation in the southerners by the northerners of a profound
and powerful orientation to the northerners as a reference group, and the cultivation by the
northerners of an international order that is marked by the centrality of the northerners and
their extensions, outposts, or surrogates in global a ﬀairs. In this orientation and centrality we
may ﬁnd keys to the roles of the mass media in the adoption in the societies of African peoples—
indeed, the southern and less powerful peoples of today in general — of modiﬁcations of their
culture that are carried out in the more powerful societies.
A reference group (see Kelley, 1968; Kemper, 1969) is one that subjects bear in mind as they
respond to stimuli, conceptualize conditions, or realize terminating conditions. This may be a
normative reference group that de ﬁnes these responses, conceptualizations, or realizations for
subjects, or a comparison reference group whose example guides the subjects. The inclination of
subjects to consider cognitions, aﬀects, and behaviors of the reference group is their orientation
toward the group (Regis, 2001d) and would seem to have three aspects. Attention valuation is
the degree to which subjects would like their cognitions, a ﬀects, and behaviors to receive the
attention of the reference group (this attention is important, since it would be followed by the
reaction of the reference group and perhaps the adjustment of the cognition, a ﬀect, or behavior
by the subject). Validation valuation is the degree to which subjects would like their cognitions,
aﬀects, or behaviors to be endorsed by the reference group (this validation is important because,
as Festinger, 1968, notes, without it the cognitions, a ﬀects, or behaviors in question may be
unstable). Imitation inclination is the degree to which subjects develop, maintain, or change
their cognitions, aﬀects, or behaviors by imitating those they perceive to be held or endorsed or
pronounced by the reference group.
In the Caribbean, one major outcome of the domination of the peoples of the “south” by
those of the “north” has been the cultivation in the descendants of the former of a very strong
orientation toward the descendants of the latter. It is a recurring subject in reports of experts
who have studied the region carefully (for example, see Brown, 2001; Ibelema, 2001; Lashley,
2001; Liverpool, 2001; Lowenthal, 1972; Parris, 2001; Regis, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c; Skinner, 2001;
Weber and Skinner, 2001). It also is captured in the important observation by Alleyne (1994)
that Caribbean people display “an undue reliance on Western arbiters regarding the value and
representation of [Caribbean] creativity” (p. 76). Given this orientation, one project could involve
the study of the degree to which there may be a certain contest or synergy between mass com-
munication and each type of orientation (attention valuation, validation valuation, imitation
inclination) toward each type of reference group (normative, comparison) in the more powerful
societies in the adoption by Caribbean People of African Descent of those modi ﬁcations that
may be made by the more powerful societies in their culture and after that re-imported by or
re-exported to the Caribbean.
This project could have at least two components. The ﬁrst springs from the inclination of
Caribbean People of African Descent, as members of the World African Community (WAC),
toward the collectivism that Diop (1978) sees as historically characteristic of African peoples. It
proposes that this inclination is expressed in their emphasis on collective participation in (or the
popularity that symbolizes collective participation in) expressions of culture, and further pro-
poses that there will be an emphasis on such participation (or the popularity that symbolizes it)
in the more powerful societies, and studies the relationship between mass communication and
the perception of this participation (or popularity) in their adoption of the modi ﬁcations. The
second springs from the recognition of the fact Caribbean PADs and other members of the WAC
have been subjected by the more powerful societies to a colonialistic socialization that cultivates
in the Caribbean PADs the idea that they are inferior and the more powerful peoples are
superior. It proposes that among Caribbean PADs there has been as a result a heightened
valuation of validation from the more powerful societies, and studies the relationship between
206  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 228 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 207
Page 207
mass communication and this valuation of validation in their adoption of the modi ﬁcations.
The third compares the mass communication, the inclination among Caribbean PADs toward
collectivism, the orientation of Caribbean PADs toward the more powerful societies, the synergy
between these factors, and the contests among these factors, in their adoption of the modi ﬁca-
tions. The foundation of the project and its components could be the uses and grati ﬁcations
perspective (see McGuire, 1974) and/or the third-variable perspective (see Comstock et al.,
1978) of mass communication eﬀects.
In the Caribbean, the orientation toward the more powerful societies seems to be comple-
mented by the structural and operational order that is the corollary of the centrality of these
societies in the recent and present global order. The centrality was in the communication domain
in the colonial era of decades or centuries ago (Martin, 1983) and continues in this domain
today (Ibelema, 2001). It comes to life in a system in which messages ﬂow from a Caribbean
island (or less powerful society) through a colonial dominator (or its extensions, outposts, or
surrogates) and to another Caribbean island (or less powerful society), and focuses on the
centrality of the more powerful societies and their agents as enablers. It was in the sugar industry
decades and centuries ago (see Augier et al., 1974) and continues in the recording industry today
(see Orlean, 2002) as part of a global order that includes the presence of “resources” in the
Caribbean (or less powerful societies), the exportation of these resources to the more powerful
societies (or their extensions, outposts, or surrogates), the processing of them in the more
powerful or their agents, the re-importation or re-exportation of the results of the processing to
the Caribbean (or less powerful), and the adoption of these results in the Caribbean (or less
powerful), and focuses on the roles of the more powerful societies or their agents as economic
patronizers, product reformulators, and marketers.
In recent years, this order has existed in the process that includes the development of pro-
posals for the addressing of local needs by technocrats in the Caribbean (and, in general, the less
powerful societies), the presentation of these proposals to international agencies under the
inﬂuence of the more powerful societies or their agents, the modiﬁcation of the proposals before
funding by the agencies, and the adoption of the modi ﬁcations by the Caribbean (or less
powerful societies), and focuses on the role of the more powerful societies and their agents as
ﬁnancers and validators of the proposals. It also has taken the form of this common occurrence
in the education systems of the smaller islands of the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean: island
governments seek foreign aid in the improvement of the systems; technocrats from the more
powerful societies serve as providers of the expertise that drives the development of ideas for the
utilization of the “aid”; local teachers provide ideas for the improvement of the systems, but the
technocrats validate, modify, and augment the ideas, and present the results as recommenda-
tions to the island governments and the providers of the aid. The technocrats operate as agents
of the more powerful societies and as intermediaries between the local teachers and their gov-
ernments, and in this role they incorporate those modi ﬁcations that represent the ideas of their
more powerful societies into ideas the local teachers could have shared directly with local
technocrats and governments. Thus ideas for the operation and improvement of the educa-
tion systems ﬂow from local teachers, through validating and/or reformulating technocrats
representing the more powerful societies, to local technocrats and governments.
These agents of the more powerful societies — the patronizers, reformulators, marketers,
ﬁnancers, and validators— may act as reference groups whose policies, actions, or reactions may
amount to the modi ﬁcation of the features of individual attributes and related expressions, or
the presence of individual attributes and related expressions, in the culture of the Caribbean
(and the less powerful societies). This leads to another subject for study: the degree to which
there is a certain synergy or contest between mass communication, the Caribbean orientation
toward these reference groups, and the centrality of these reference groups in the global order, in
the adoption by Caribbean People of African Descent of modi ﬁcations that are made by the
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  207


--- PAGE 229 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 208
Page 208
groups speciﬁcally and the more powerful societies in general in African Caribbean culture, and
re-imported by or re-exported to the region. The project could study the mass communication,
each orientation, combinations of these factors, or the synergy or contestation among these
factors or combinations, in this adoption. The conceptual foundation of this project also could
be the uses and gratiﬁcations perspective (see McGuire, 1974) and the third-variable perspective
(see Comstock et al., 1978) of mass communication eﬀects.
Conclusion
The assumption that guides this exposition is not new. It has guided the elaboration of the
relationship between mass communication and other phenomena. For example, it has guided
the elaboration of the relationship between mass communication and development and between
mass communication and cultural domination by importation or exportation. It is that mass
communication can play the part of a correlate, a transmitter, or a persuader in human conditions
and processes.
But there is one approach to the elaboration of mass communication that these expositions
have not employed very extensively but that calls for attention. This is the elaboration and
investigation of the nature of mass communication variables, and the relationships that involve
mass communication variables, under the inspiration of other disciplines. Regis (2001b), pro-
poses that among members of the World African Community the orientation toward collectivism
in life in general (an aspect of group psychology) has a parallel in the presence of call-and-
response in the composition and performance of music (an aspect of cultural expression).
Bromley and Bowles (1995), propose that the idea of relative constancy that argues that “con-
sumer spending on mass media was relative to the gross national product and was constant over
time” (p. 14) and lies in the domain of ﬁnancial management has a parallel in the idea that “the
amount of time consumers spend with mass media may be constant and ﬁnite over time” (p. 15)
that is in the domain of time management. And Frith and Wesson (1991) propose that the
greater orientation of American life than British life toward individualism (an element in group
psychology) has a parallel in the more frequent use of individuals than groups in advertisements
in American magazines (an element in mass communication) and in contrast the more frequent
use of groups than individuals in advertisements in British magazines (another element in mass
communication). In each case, the study of phenomena in one discipline seems to be inspired by
the study of those in another discipline. Thus one project among Caribbean People of African
Descent, members of the World African Community in general, and perhaps other peoples
with “southern” historical roots, could be the study of the nature and signi ﬁcance of the role of
mass communication in cultural domination by re-importation or re-exportation under the
inspiration of ideas from theoretical historical analysis, such as the two-cradle theory of Diop.
In such works as The African Origin of Civilization  (1974) and The Cultural Unity of Black
Africa (1978), Diop dwells to some degree on the historical fact of the overwhelming and
subjugation of the southern peoples of the world (represented to some degree by the less
powerful societies of today) by the northern peoples (represented to some degree by the more
powerful societies). In Africa and the Caribbean, some argue that the major outcome of this
overwhelming and subjugation has been the exploitation of the human and other resources of
the southern lands for the bene ﬁt of the northern peoples. But one also may argue that a major
outcome is the cultivation, internalization, and perpetuation in the southern peoples of a mind-
set that sees them as inferior and the northern peoples as superior and has as its corollary the
cultivation, internalization, and perpetuation in them of a substantial orientation toward the
northern peoples as reference groups. That mindset and orientation see the northern peoples as
keys to the attainment of development and civilization and salvation but serves the continuation
of the millennia-old overwhelming, subjugation, and exploitation. It appears to be captured in
208  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 230 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 209
Page 209
the sentiment, expressed repeatedly in an election season in what many may call a “post-
colonial, independent, sovereign” island in the Eastern Caribbean, that “Bon Dieu voye un nom
blanc pou sovay nous” (“God has sent a white man to save us”).
In the elaboration and investigation of cultural domination, on the one hand the importation/
exportation framework perpetuates this state of a ﬀairs by conceptualizing the domination as a
process or condition that begins with the assumption of the more powerful societies as origin-
ators of cultural attributes or expressions and ends with the assumption of the less powerful
societies as recipients and adopters of these attributes and expressions. But the re-importation or
re-exportation framework begins to make breaches in this state of a ﬀairs by conceptualizing the
domination as a process or condition that starts with the assumption that the less powerful
societies are originators of cultural attributes and expressions in a process or condition that
ultimately ends within them. It could be seen as a liberating framework, but at its foundation is
the study of the millennia-old history of Caribbean People of African Descent, People of the
African Continent, other members of the World African Community, and the other peoples with
deep roots in the “southern” cradle of civilization.
References
Alleyne, M. (1994). Positive vibration? Capitalist textual hegemony and Bob Marley. Bulletin of Eastern
Caribbean Aﬀairs, 19(3), 76–84.
Augier, F., Gordon, S., Hall, D., & Reckord, M. (1974). The making of the West Indies. Port of Spain, Trinidad,
and Kingston, Jamaica: Longman Caribbean.
Bangs, L. (1978, June 1). Bob Marley aims high, misses big: T epid cliches and tourist bait. Rolling Stone, p. 56.
Becker, A., & Burwell, R. (1999). Acculturation and disordered eating in Fiji. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC.
Benedict, R. (1934). Patterns of culture. Boston, MA: Houghton Miﬄin.
ben Jochannan, J. (1991). African origins of the major Western religions. Baltimore, MD: Black Classic Press.
Bromley, R., & Bowles, D. (1995). Impact of Internet on use of traditional news media. Newspaper Research
Journal, 16(2), 14–27.
Brown, A. (2001). Caribbean cultures, global mass communication, technology, and opportunity in the
twenty-ﬁrst century. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination,
dialogue, dispersion (pp. 169–184). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Cambridge, V . (2002). Milestones in communication and national development. In Y. Kamalipour (Ed.),
Global communication (pp. 141–160). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Chinweizu. (1975). The West and the rest of us: White predators, black slavers, and the African elite. New Y ork:
Vintage Books.
Comstock, G., Cha ﬀee, S., Katzman, N., McCombs, M., & Roberts, D. (1978). Television and human
behavior. New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
Dennis, E. (1984). The U.S. is guilty of communications imperialism. In E. Dennis & J. Merrill (Eds.), Basic
issues in mass communication (pp. 183–190). New Y ork: Macmillan.
Diop, C. (1974). The African origin of civilization: Myth or reality . Westport, CT: Lawrence Hill.
Diop, C. (1978). The cultural unity of Black Africa. Chicago, IL: Third World Press.
Diop, C. (1991). Civilization or barbarism. New Y ork: Lawrence Hill Books.
Festinger, L. (1968). A theory of social comparison processes. In H. Hyman & E. Singer (Eds.), Readings in
reference group theory and research (pp. 123–146). New Y ork: The Free Press.
Finch, C. (1991). Echoes of the Old Darkland: Themes from the African Eden . Decatur, GA: Khenti, Inc.
Frith, K., & Wesson, D. (1991). A comparison of cultural values in British and American print advertising:
A study of magazines. Journalism Quarterly, 68(1–2), 216–221.
Frost, L. (1990). DJ Reggae: Slackness becomes standard. Caribbean Review, 16(3/4), 6, 74.
Galtung, J. (1980). The true worlds: A transnational perspective . New Y ork: Free Press.
Hamelink, C. (1983). Cultural autonomy in global communications: Planning national information policy .
New Y ork: Longman.
Hur, K. (1982). International mass communication research: A critical review of theory and methods. In
M. Burgoon (Ed.), Communication yearbook, 6, (pp. 531–554). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Ibelema, M. (2001). Perspectives on mass communication and cultural domination. In H. Regis (Ed.),
Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion  (pp. 15 –36).
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN  209


--- PAGE 231 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 210
Page 210
Jackson, J. (1972). Man, God, and civilization. New Y ork: Citadel Press.
Jackson, J. (1985). Christianity before Christ. Austin, TX: American Atheist Press.
Kelley, H. (1968). Two functions of reference groups. In H. Hyman & E. Singer (Eds.), Readings in reference
group theory and research (pp. 77–83). New Y ork: The Free Press.
Kemper. T. (1969). Reference groups, socialization, and achievement. In E. Borgatta (Ed.), Social psychology:
Readings and perspectives (pp. 297–312). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Lashley, L. (2001). Decades of change in Calypso culture. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communica-
tion in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion (pp. 83–93). Gainesville, FL: University Press of
Florida.
Lerner, D. (1958). The passing of traditional society: Modernizing the Middle East . New Y ork: The Free
Press.
Liverpool, H. (2001). Re-exportation and musical traditions surrounding the African Masquerade. In
H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion
(pp. 63–82). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Lowenthal, D. (1972). West Indian societies. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
McDonald, H. (1986). The normative basis of culture . Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University
Press.
McGuire, W. (1974). Psychological motives and communication grati ﬁcation. In J. Blumler & E. Katz
(Eds.), The uses of mass communications: Current perspectives on grati ﬁcations research (pp. 167–196).
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Martin, L. (1983). Africa. In J. C. Merrill (Ed.), Global journalism: A survey of the world ’s mass media
(pp. 190–248). New Y ork: Longman.
Massey, G. (1883). Natural Genesis, Vol. 2. London: Williams & Norgate.
Massey, G. (1970). Ancient Egypt, Vol. 2. New Y ork: Weiser.
Massey, G. (1992). The historical (Jewish) Jesus and the mythical (Egyptian) Christ. In G. Massey (Ed.),
Gerald Massey’s lectures (pp. 1–25). Brooklyn, NY: A&S Books.
Mazrui, A. (1976). A world federation of cultures: An African perspective . New Y ork: Free Press.
Melkote, S. (2002). Theories of development communication. In W. Gudykunst & B. Mody (Eds.), Hand-
book of international and intercultural communication (pp. 419–436). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Orlean, S. (2002, October 14 & 21). The Congo sound: How a record store in Paris became a center of
African music. The New Yorker, pp. 114–120.
Parris, E. (2001). The re-exportation of the Caribbean literary artist. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and
mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion  (pp. 95–119). Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida.
Regis, H. (2001a). Introduction. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean:
Domination, dialogue, dispersion (pp. 3–14). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Regis, H. (2001b). Caribbean desire for popularity for the works of Caribbean musicians. In H. Regis (Ed.),
Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion  (pp. 185 –197).
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Regis, H. (2001c). Mass communication, orientation, and connection of Eastern Caribbean people to
reference groups. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination,
dialogue, dispersion (pp. 199–212). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Regis, H. (2001d). An integrative framework for study and elaboration of culture and mass communication
in the Caribbean. In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination,
dialogue, dispersion (pp. 215–239). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Rogers, E. (1969). Modernization among peasants. New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Rogers, E. (1976). Communication and development: The passing of the dominant paradigm. In E. Rogers
(Ed.), Communication and development: Critical perspectives  (pp. 121–148). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Salwen, M. (1991). Cultural imperialism: A media e ﬀects approach. Critical Studies in Mass Communica-
tion, 8, 29–38.
Schiller, H. (1969). Mass communication and American Empire. New Y ork: Augustus M. Kelly.
Schiller, H. (1976). Communications and cultural domination . White Plains, NY: International Arts and
Sciences Press.
Schiller, H. (1991). Not yet the post-imperialist era. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 8, 13–28.
Skinner, E. (2001). Empirical research on mass communication and cultural domination in the Caribbean.
In H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion
(pp. 37–62). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Sreberny-Mohammadi, A. (1997). The many cultural faces of imperialism. In P . Golding & P . Harris
(Eds.), Beyond cultural imperialism: Globalization, communication, and the New International Order
(pp. 49–68). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
210  HUMPHREY A. REGIS


--- PAGE 232 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 211
Page 211
Tamborini, R., & Choi, J. (1990). The role of cultural diversity in cultivation research. In N. Signorielli
and M. Morgan (Eds.), Cultivation analysis: New directions in media e ﬀects research  (pp. 157 –180).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Tan, A. (1985). Mass communication theories and research. New Y ork: John Wiley and Sons.
Walrond, L. (1991). Personal interview with writer, Ideas Management, St. Michael, Barbados.
Weber, T., & Skinner, E. (2001). Theorizing Reggae and small media: Social movements in globalization. In
H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion
(pp. 149–163). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Zaid, B. (2001). Bakhtin’s dialogic model and popular music: Bob Marley and the Wailers as a case study. In
H. Regis (Ed.), Culture and mass communication in the Caribbean: Domination, dialogue, dispersion
(pp. 139–148). Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
COMMUNICATION IN THE CARIBBEAN 
211


--- PAGE 233 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 212
Page 212


--- PAGE 234 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 213
Page 213
Part V
Identity and Intercultural
Communication Competence


--- PAGE 235 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 214
Page 214


--- PAGE 236 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 215
Page 215
14
Intercultural Communication
Competence
A Synthesis
Guo-Ming Chen & William J. Starosta
As we grow increasingly aware of the global interdependence of people and cultures, we confront
ever shifting cultural, ecological, economic, and technological realities that de ﬁne the shrinking
world of the twenty-ﬁrst century. The development of new ways of living in the world together is
pivotal to further human progress; we must learn how to see things through the eyes of others
and add their knowledge to our personal repertories. Such a global mind-set can result only
from competent communication among peoples from diverse cultures.
Intercultural Communication Competence: Why?
The citizens of the twenty-ﬁrst century must learn to see through the eyes, hearts, and minds of
people from cultures other than their own. Several important trends of the late twentieth
century have transformed the world into a global village: technology development, globalization
of the economy, widespread population migrations, the development of multiculturalism, and
the demise of the nation-state in favor of sub- and supranational identi ﬁcations. In order to
live meaningfully and productively in this world, individuals must develop their intercultural
communication competence.
Technology development
The development of communication and transportation technology linking every part of the
world has served to interconnect almost every aspect of life at the onset of the twenty-ﬁrst century
(Frederick, 1003; Porter & Samovar, 1994). T oday the ﬂow of ideas and information increasingly
transcends national boundaries. People can also travel to anywhere in the world much more
quickly than ever before. The faster travel speeds wrought by transportation technology have
introduced increasing face-to-face communication among people from diﬀerent cultures.
Globalization and economy
The progress of communication and transportation technology has rendered global markets
more accessible and the business world more interrelated and international than in the
past. Regional trade alliances have become the “new world order. ” The trend toward a global
economy is bringing people from di ﬀerent cultures together. It requires representatives from
multinational corporations to communicate with those in other parts of the world to retain a
215


--- PAGE 237 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 216
Page 216
competitive space in the global economic arena. The interdependence among international
economies reﬂects the important role that intercultural communication plays now and will play
increasingly in the next century. The development of greater intercultural understanding has
become an essential element of global business (Adler, 1991; Mead, 1990).
Widespread population migrations
As cultural interconnectedness has increased as a result of technology advancement, we have also
witnessed remarkable population migrations across national borders. The United States espe-
cially has felt the impacts of this trend. In 1990, the U.S. Census revealed that the ﬁrst generation
foreign-born population in the United Sates had reached almost 20 million. About 8.7 million
immigrants entered the United States between 1980 and 1990. At least 32 million persons
residing in the United State speak a ﬁrst language other than English, and 14 million of these do
not speak English ﬂuently. These ﬁgures indicate that the increasing numbers of immigrants
have restructured the fabric of American society. The United States has become much more
culturally diverse than it has been in the past.
This multiethnic structure makes intercultural contact among co-cultures inevitable. Mem-
bers of the various co-cultures and ethic groups residing in the United States must learn to
adjust to one another’s identities. This trend demands that individuals learn to communicate in
ways that are eﬀective in such a diversifying society (Nieto, 1992).
The development of multiculturalism
The changing demographics described above stand to a ﬀect every aspect of life in the United
States. Johnston and Packer (1987), for example, predict that the increasing diversity of work-
place and social life in the United States will dramatically aﬀect organizational life in the twenty-
ﬁrst century. The new workforce will comprise persons who are diverse in race, culture, age,
gender, and language. Cultural diversity, or multiculturalism, will become the norm rather the
exception in American life. Thus, intercultural communication scholars need to address those
issues that will help people learn to work and live together without being deterred by the
diﬀerences they may bring to their encounters. The development of greater intercultural under-
standing and intercultural communication competence is an essential part of human life in the
contemporary age.
De-Emphasis on the nation-state
As new immigrants arrive and co-cultures make headway in achieving fuller participation in
U.S. society, the very idea of national identity will surely change. Increasingly, the United States is
pulled into regional alliances, such as NATO or NAFTA, that are larger than the nation. In
addition, we see the reassertion of ethnic and gender di ﬀerences within the nation; for instance,
women have begun to talk as women, African Americans as African Americans, and Native
Americans as Native Americans. The ability to negotiate the meanings and priorities of diverse
identities has become a prerequisite of attaining interpersonal competence in modern society
(Collier & Thomas, 1988).
The ﬁve trends described above combine to provide a foundation for the indispensability of
intercultural communication competence in our increasingly global society. The world has
become more interdependent and interconnected, and the nation-state has become more cul-
turally heterogeneous. These developments foster within individuals multiple, simultaneous
identities in terms of culture, ethnicity, race, religion, nationality, and gender (Belay, 1993).
Intercultural communication competence therefore functions to nourish a human personality in
216  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 238 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 217
Page 217
which people are aware of their multiple identities and are able to maintain a multicultural
coexistence in order to develop a “global civic culture” (Boulding, 1988). In other words, inter-
cultural communication competence transforms a monocultural person into a multicultural
person. This transformation is achieved through symmetrical interdependence that enables
persons to demonstrate “tolerance for diﬀerences and mutual respect among cultures as a mark
of enlightened national and global citizenship ” in individual, social, business, and political
institutions levels (Belay, 1993).
Based on this theoretical foundation, the following discussion of intercultural communication
competence is divided into ﬁve sections. These address, in turn, the nature of communication
competence, approaches to the study of intercultural communication competence, a model of
intercultural communication competence, a critique and directions for future research, and a
summary and conclusion.
The Nature of Communication Competence
Although 50 years of conceptualizing have provided a theoretical and practical foundation for
intercultural communication, it remains a fresh ﬁeld. The study of intercultural communication
dates back to the works of political scientists and anthropologists in the 1940s and 1950s.
Whereas linguist Edward Sapir wrote about this topic in the 1920s, it took Benjamin Whorf to
frame his work more fully as a communication question. As sociologists, linguists, and com-
munication scholars have developed an interest in intercultural communication, two separate
schools of thought— cultural dialogue and cultural criticism — now inform research in intercul-
tural communication (Asante, Newmark, & Blake, 1979). Both schools have spawned signiﬁcant
research in intercultural communication. One of the main topics studied by the two groups
is intercultural communication competence, or the e ﬀective means whereby individuals can
understand cultural commonalities and move beyond cultural di ﬀerences in order to reach
the ideal goals advocated by cultural dialogists and cultural critics. But, we ask, What is com-
munication competence?
Deﬁnition of communication competence
Two concepts have long been applied in discussions of communication competence: e ﬀective-
ness and appropriateness. Eﬀectiveness refers to an individual ’s ability to produce intended
eﬀects through interaction with the environment. This ability is treated either as a basic human
skill that is obtained through learning and socializing processes (Weinstein, 1969; White, 1959)
or as an acquired ability that is related neither to personal intellect nor to education (Foote &
Cottrell, 1955; Holland & Baird, 1968). In either case, the ability is understood to increase as the
individual’s awareness of relevant factors increases (Argyris, 1965a, 1965b). In addition, ideally,
competent communicators should be able to control and manipulate their environments to
attain personal goals. In order to maximize such goals, individuals must be able to identify them,
get relevant information about them, accurately predict others’ responses, select communication
strategies, implement those communication strategies, and accurately access the interaction
results (Parks, 1985, 1994).
A more systematic view of e ﬀectiveness in communication relates the concept to both inter-
actants. T o be competent in communication, a person must not only feel competent, but his or
her ability should be observed and con ﬁrmed by the people with whom he or she interacts.
Thus, communication competence should be judged based on individuals’ abilities to formulate
and achieve objectives, to collaborate eﬀectively with others, and to adapt to situational variations
(Bochner & Kelly, 1974). Rubin (1983) has further considered communication competence to be
a kind of impression based on the individual’s perception, an impression the individual forms of
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  217


--- PAGE 239 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 218
Page 218
both his and her own and others ’ behaviors. Through this impression, a person makes guesses
about the internal states of those with whom he or she is interacting.
Finally, Wiemann (1977) synthesizes the concept of communication competence from the
perspective of eﬀectiveness. He conceptualizes communication competence as “the ability of an
interactant to choose among available communicative behaviors in order that he may success-
fully accomplish his own interpersonal goals during an encounter while maintaining the
face and line of his fellow interactants within the constraints of the situation ” (p. 198). This
deﬁnition argues simultaneously that competent communication is other oriented and that
communicators have to accomplish their own goals.
Whereas some scholars conceive of communication competence as a function of perceived
eﬀectiveness, others look at it from the viewpoint of appropriateness. Wiemann and Backlund
(1980) explain appropriateness in the communication process as follows:
Appropriateness generally refers to the ability of an interactant to meet the basic con-
textual requirements of the situation — to be e ﬀe c t i v e  i n  g e n e r a l  s e n s e ....  These con-
textual requirements include: (1) The verbal context, that is, making sense in terms of
wording, of statement, and of topic; (2) the relationship context, that is, the structuring,
type and style of messages so that they are consonant with the particular relationship at
hand; and (3) the environmental context, that is, the consideration of constraints imposed
on message making by the symbolic and physical environments.
(p. 191)
The “appropriateness of behavior” thus implicates three kinds of ability. First is the ability to
recognize how context constrains communication, so that one acts and speaks appropriately by
combining capabilities and social knowledge to recognize that di ﬀerent situations give rise to
diﬀerent sets of rules (Lee, 1979; Trenholm & Rose, 1981). Second is the ability to avoid
inappropriate responses. An inappropriate response is deﬁned as “one which unnecessarily abra-
sive, intense, or bizarre. It is also likely to result in negative consequences that could have been
averted, without sacriﬁce of the goal, by the more appropriate actions” (Getter & Nowinski, 1981,
p. 303). Third is the ability to fulﬁll appropriately such communication functions as controlling,
sharing feelings, informing, ritualizing, and imagining (Allen & Wood, 1978). We extend Grice’s
(1975) recommendations concerning appropriateness in interaction to include the following:
1. Say just enough — not too little or too much.
2. Do not say something that is false — or speak about something for which you lack
evidence.
3. Relate your contribution to the topic and situation.
4. Be clear about what you are saying, and say it with dispatch.
These guidelines specify the four elements of appropriate communication: quantity, quality,
relevance, and manner of message sending.
T o summarize, communication competences requires appropriateness, and “the fundamental
criteria of appropriateness are that the interactants perceive that they understand the content of
the encounter and have not had their norms and rules violated too extensively ” (Spitzberg &
Cupach, 1984, p. 101).
Deﬁnition of intercultural communication competence
The literature treats intercultural communication competence in much the same way as it does
communication competence in general (Hammer, 1988; Lustig & Koester, 1993; Martin, 1989;
218  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 240 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 219
Page 219
Ruben, 1989; Spitzberg, 1988, 1989; Wiseman & Koester, 1993). The only di ﬀerence is, in add-
ition to looking at communication competence as eﬀective and appropriate interaction, intercul-
tural communication scholars place more emphasis on contextual factors. They conceive of
communication competence not only as e ﬀective and appropriate interaction between people,
but as eﬀective and appropriate interaction between people who identify with particular physical
and symbolic environments. This orientation resembles that of communication scholars who
emphasize competence as a context-speciﬁc behavior (Spitzberg & Cupach, 1984).
Although researchers conceive of communication competence as the ability to interact eﬀect-
ively and appropriately with others, their deﬁnitions betray greater or lesser degrees of ambigu-
ity, confusion, and imprecision. For example, from Wiemann’s (1977) synthesized deﬁnition, the
question arises, What constitute “available communicative behaviors ” and “constraints of
the situation ”? These concepts are not clear, and require de ﬁnition. T o alleviate the problem
in de ﬁning communication competence and to apply the concept to intercultural settings,
intercultural communication competence can be conceived of as the ability to negotiate cultural
meanings and to execute appropriately e ﬀective communication behaviors that recognize the
interactants’ multiple identities in a speciﬁc environment. This deﬁnition emphasizes that com-
petent persons must know not only how to interact e ﬀectively and appropriately with people
and environment, but also how to ful ﬁll their own communication goals by respecting and
aﬃrming the multilevel cultural identities of those with whom they interact.
Types of competence
How do individuals interact across multiple cultural identities? Spitzberg and Cupach (1984)
propose seven generic types of competence: fundamental competence, social competence,
social skills, interpersonal competence, linguistic competence, communicative competence, and
relational competence. Fundamental competence involves the general ability to adapt e ﬀectively
to a new environment in order to achieve goals. In this sense, fundamental competence com-
prises the cognitive capacities that individual communicators need to be e ﬀective cross-
situationally. Social competence  involves speci ﬁc, rather than general, abilities. Spitzberg and
Cupach include within social competence the skills of empathy, role taking, cognitive complex-
ity, and interaction management. Interpersonal competence is the ability to accomplish tasks and
achieve goals through successful communication. Even though interpersonal competence is part
of both fundamental competence and social competence, it is especially related to how indi-
viduals execute certain skills to control their environments in order to achieve goals in particular
communication situations. Linguistic competence and communicative competence both relate
to language and messages in the interaction process. Linguistic competence  (a concept that
stems from the work of Chomsky, 1965) is speci ﬁcally the ability to use language properly.
Communicative competence  entails not only the knowledge of how to use language, but also
knowledge about how to execute one ’s language knowledge appropriately. T o be communi-
catively competent, a person must be able to convey messages appropriately in a given context of
interaction. Finally, relational competence comprises many of the other six kinds of competence,
but independent and reciprocal processes of interactions are among its most important aspects.
An individual must establish certain degrees of relationships with others before he or she can
interact e ﬀectively with them and achieve his or her goals. Such relationships cross multiple
dimensions of language, profession, ethnicity, and nation.
Spitzberg and Cupach ’s view of competence suggests that individuals have unitary and
unchanging cultural identities. By contrast, we view cultures as a set of preferences and possi-
bilities that inform, rather than determine, given interactions. Communicators both shape and
are shaped by these familiar meanings. Especially as individuals draw from multiple identities,
interactions may not perfectly resemble any one cultural expectation.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  219


--- PAGE 241 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 220
Page 220
Approaches to the Study of Intercultural Communication Competence
T o understand the mutual negotiation of cultural meanings in intercultural communication,
Dinges (1983) and Collier (1989) have classi ﬁed the study of intercultural communication
competence into di ﬀerent approaches. Dinges (1983) identi ﬁes six approaches to the study of
intercultural communication competence: “overseasmanship,” subjective culture, multicultural
person, social behaviorism, topology, and intercultural communicator. The overseasmanship
approach, ﬁrst presented by Cleveland, Mangone, and Adams (1960), identiﬁes common factors
in eﬀective performances among sojourners, or individuals on extended, nonpermanent stays in
cultures other than their own. T o be considered competent according to this approach, a
sojourner must show the ability to convert lessons from a variety of foreign experiences into
eﬀective job-related skills.
The subjective culture (isomorphic attribution) approach requires individuals to have the
ability to understand the causes of interactants’ behaviors and reward them appropriately, and to
modify their own behaviors suitably according to the demands of the setting (Triandis, 1976,
1977). This ability to understand the reasons that members of other cultures give for their
behaviors must be based on accurate cognition of the di ﬀerences in cognitive structure between
cultures.
The multicultural person approach emphasizes that a competence person must be able to
adapt to exceedingly di ﬃcult circumstances by transcending his or her usual adaptive limits
(Alder, 1975, 1982). The individual must learn to move in and out of di ﬀerent contexts, to
maintain coherence in diﬀerent situations, and to be dynamic.
The social behaviorism (culture learning) approach emphasizes that successful intercultural
coping strategies depend more on the individual ’s predeparture experiences, such as training
and sojourning in another country, than on inherent characteristics or personality (Guthrie,
1975). That is, to be competent in intercultural interaction, a person must learn discriminative
stimuli to obtain social rewards and to avoid punishments that will create hardship (David, 1972).
The typology approach develops di ﬀerent models of intercultural communication com-
petence. Most of the models place sojourners ’ behavioral styles on a continuum from most to
least e ﬀective. For example, Brislin (1981) proposes that a successful intercultural interaction
must be based on the sojourner’s attitudes, traits, and social skills. He asserts that nonethnocen-
trism and nonprejudicial judgments are the most valuable attitudes for e ﬀective intercultural
interaction. Ethnocentrism is the judgment of an unfamiliar practice by the standards and
norms familiar to one ’s own group or culture. The major adaptive personal traits Brislin men-
tions include personality strength, intelligence, tolerance, social relations skills, recognition of
the potential for bene ﬁt, and task orientation. Important social skills are knowledge of subject
and language, positive orientation to opportunities, e ﬀective communication skills, and the
ability to use personal traits to complete tasks.
Finally, the intercultural communicator approach emphasizes that successful intercultural
interaction centers on communication processes among people from diﬀerent cultures. In other
words, to be interculturally competent, an individual must be able to establish interpersonal
relationships by understanding others through the e ﬀective exchange of verbal and nonverbal
behaviors (Hall, 1959, 1966, 1976).
Collier (1989) identiﬁes four categories of approaches to intercultural communication com-
petence: ethnography of speaking, cross-cultural attitude, behavioral skills, and cultural identity.
The ethnography of speaking approach assumes that meaning, conduct, and cultural member-
ship are interdependent, thus, competence must be contextually de ﬁned (Geertz, 1973; Hymes,
1971, 1972). In order to achieve communication goals, an individual must correctly perceive,
select, and interpret the speciﬁc features of the code in interaction and integrate these with other
cultural knowledge and communication skills (Saville-Troike, 1982). The cross-cultural attitude
220  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 242 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 221
Page 221
approach assumes that understanding the culture of those with whom one is communicating
and developing a positive attitude toward that culture are the keys to attaining communication
competence across cultures. Studies by Chen (1989), Abe and Wiseman (1983), Gudykunst,
Wiseman, and Hammer (1977), and Wiseman and Abe (1984) have examined the concept from
this perspective. The behavioral skills approach assumes that “humans are goal directed and
choice making beings, and that humans can distinguish between skills which will be eﬀective and
skills which will not be eﬀective” in interaction (Collier, 1989, p. 294). Thus, competent persons
are able to identify and adopt those e ﬀective skills in intercultural interaction (Chen, 1992;
Hammer, 1989; Ruben, 1976, 1977; Ruben & Kealey, 1979). Finally, the cultural identity approach
assumes that communication competence is a dynamic and emergent process in which interact-
ants are able to improve the quality of their experience by recognizing the existence of each
other’s cultural identities (Collier, 1989, 1994; Cupach & Imahori, 1993). Thus, interculturally
competent persons must know how to negotiate and respect meanings of cultural symbols and
norms that are changing during their interactions (Collier & Thomas, 1988; Y. Y. Kim, 1994a).
In addition, Ward and Searle (1991) have found that cultural identity signi ﬁcantly a ﬀects
adaptation to a new culture.
Although the approaches described above provide useful perspectives from which to study
intercultural communication competence, they fail to give a holistic picture that can re ﬂect
the global civic culture in which people can mutually negotiate their multiple identities. In
the following section we attempt to synthesize these approaches into a model of intercultural
communication competence.
A Model of Intercultural Communication Competence
After scrutinizing the existing approaches to the study of intercultural communication com-
petence, we can synthesize them into a model of “interactive-multiculture building” (Belay, 1993).
The model aims at promoting interactants ’ ability to acknowledge, respect, tolerate, and inte-
grate cultural diﬀerences, so that they can qualify for enlightened global citizenship. The model
represents a transformational process of symmetrical interdependence that can be explained
from three perspectives: (a) a ﬀective, or intercultural sensitivity; (b) cognitive, or intercultural
awareness, and (c) behavioral, or intercultural adroitness.
The aﬀective process: intercultural sensitivity
The aﬀective perspective of intercultural communication competence focuses on personal emo-
tions or the changes in feelings that are caused by particular situations, people, and environ-
ments (Triandis, 1977). The a ﬀective process especially carries a notion that interculturally
competent persons are able to project and receive positive responses before, during, and after
intercultural interactions. These positive emotional responses will in turn lead to acknowledge-
ment of and respect for cultural di ﬀerences. This process is the development of intercultural
sensitivity (Bennett, 1986; Bhawuk & Brislin, 1992; Chen & Tan, 1995; Gudykunst, Ting-T oomey,
& Wiseman, 1991).
Four personal attitudes form the foundation of the a ﬀective perspective on intercultural
communication competence: self-concept, open-mindedness, nonjudgmental attitudes, and
social relaxation. Self-concept refers to the way in which a person sees him- or herself. An
individual’s self-concept not only serves as his or her key to communication, but it mediates how
the person relates to the world. One of the most important elements of the self-concept is self-
esteem. Adler and T owne (1993) have summarized research in this area, and they note that the
communication behaviors of high self-esteem individuals and low self-esteem individuals di ﬀer
signiﬁcantly. Persons with high self-esteem, compared with persons with low self-esteem, are
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  221


--- PAGE 243 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 222
Page 222
more likely to think well of others, are more accepted by others, perform well when being
watched, feel more comfortable when working with superiors, and can defend themselves
against the negative comments of others. Persons with high self-esteem also tend to feel more
positively toward out-group members. In intercultural encounters, which often involve
psychological stresses associated with the need to complete a task and establish relationships
with others, self-esteem helps individuals to calculate whether or not they can ful ﬁll particular
needs (Brislin, 1981; Ehrlich, 1973; Ting-T oomey, 1993).
Other aspects of self-concept can also a ﬀect intercultural communication. For instance, an
interculturally competent person must have a good, optimistic outlook that inspires con ﬁdence
in his or her interactions with others (Foote & Cottrell, 1995; Hawes & Kealey, 1979, 1981); must
show a stable and extroverted personality (Gardner, 1962); and must show self-reliance, per-
severance, and reliability (Harris, 1973; Smith, 1966). All these personality traits combine to
cultivate a positive self-concept that can lead to intercultural communication competence
(Chen, 1995b; Scollon & Scollon, 1995).
Open-mindedness refers to individuals ’ willingness to express themselves openly when it is
appropriate and to accept others ’ explanations. This positive trait is parallel to one of the
characteristics of a multicultural person, who is willing to accept diﬀerent patterns of life and to
accept, psychologically and socially, a multipilicity of realities (Alder, 1977). In other words,
open-minded persons possess an internalized broadened concept of the world that enables them
to understand that an idea can be rendered in many diﬀerent ways (Bennett, 1986; Hart & Burks,
1972). Open-mindedness entails a willingness to recognize, appreciate, and accept di ﬀerent
views and ideas in intercultural interaction. It allows people to understand and acknowledge
other people’s needs and, further, can transform such understanding to actions (Smith, 1966;
Yum, 1989). It is a process of mutual validation and con ﬁrmation of cultural identities that
fosters a favorable impression in intercultural communication (Ting-T oomey, 1989).
Being nonjudgmental means holding no prejudices that will prevent one from listening sin-
cerely to others during intercultural communication. At the same time, being nonjudgmental
allows others to be psychologically satis ﬁed and happy that they have been listened to actively.
Mutual satisfaction of interactants is a measure of intercultural communication competence
(Hammer, 1989; Ruben, 1988).
Nonjudgmental and open-minded attitudes nurture a feeling of enjoyment of cultural
diﬀerences in intercultural interactions. Interculturally competent persons not only need to
acknowledge and accept cultural di ﬀerences, but should establish a sentiment of enjoyment,
which usually leads to a satisfactory feeling toward intercultural encounters (Chen & Tan, 1995).
Researchers have identiﬁed three kinds of enjoyment in intercultural interactions that are neces-
sary for intercultural communication competence: (a) the enjoyment of interacting with people
from di ﬀerent cultures (Randolph, Landis, & Tzeng, 1977), (b) the enjoyment of improving
working relations with others from di ﬀerent cultures (Fiedler, Mitchell, & Triandis, 1971), and
(c) the enjoyment of carrying out one ’s own duties in another culture (Gudykunst, Hammer, &
Wiseman, 1977).
Finally, social relaxation  refers to the ability to reveal little anxious emotion in intercultural
communication. It is assumed that a series of crises usually occur in the initial experiences of
sojourners, and feelings of anxiety usually originate from the psychological lack of security that
individuals feel when entering new situations (Gudykunst & Hammer, 1988; Herman & Schield,
1961; Sanders & Wiseman, 1993; Stephan & Stephan, 1992). The symptoms of social anxiety
include excessive perspiration, rocking movements, rigidity of posture, speech disturbances,
hesitations, and lowered response tendencies (Spitzberg & Cupach, 1984; Wiemann, 1977). T o
be competent in intercultural communication, an individual must overcome such stumbling
blocks, which can include feelings of anxiety when communication with those from di ﬀerent
cultures (Barna, 1994).
222  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 244 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 223
Page 223
The four personal attributes described above form the a ﬀective basis of intercultural com-
munication competence. They enable an individual to be sensitive enough during intercultural
interactions to acknowledge and respect cultural di ﬀerences. They increase the level of a per-
son’s compatibility with a new cultural environment, and thus help alleviate the impact of
cultural shock (Kim, 1988, 1991; Kim & Gudykunst, 1988; Oberg, 1960; Smalley, 1963). In other
words, they expedite the process of psychological adaptation by increasing a person ’s general
psychological well-being, self-satisfaction, and contentment within a new environment.
In general, psychological adaptation in intercultural interaction is associated with the ability
to cope in situations where social di ﬃculties cause frustrations, stress, and alienation due to
cultural diﬀerences (Furnham & Bochner, 1982; Rogers & Ward, 1993). A great deal of research
based on the a ﬀective perspective of intercultural communication competence has addressed
individuals’ abilities to handle psychological stress in new environments (Hammer, 1987;
Hammer, Gudykunst, & Wiseman, 1978; Searle & Ward, 1990; Ward & Searle, 1991; Wiseman
& Abe, 1984). However, this line of research needs to be extended to examine how people
can identify their own multiple identities in the process of psychological adaptation during
intercultural encounters.
T o summarize, aﬀectively, intercultural communication competence demands positive emo-
tion that enables individuals to be sensitive enough to acknowledge and respect cultural di ﬀer-
ences. The aﬀective process of intercultural communication is built on four personal attributes:
self-concept, open-mindedness, nonjudgmental attitudes, and social relaxation.
The cognitive process: intercultural awareness
The cognitive perspective of intercultural communication competence emphasizes the changing
of personal thinking about the environment through the understanding of the distinct charac-
teristics of one ’s own and others ’ cultures (Triandis, 1977). It is the process of reducing
the level of situational ambiguity and uncertainty in intercultural interactions. With little
visible discomfort, confusion, or nervousness, an individual can adapt to situational demands
in a new environment with no noticeable personal, interpersonal, or group consequences, and
can cope with the changing environment rapidly and comfortably (Ruben, 1976; Ruben &
Kealey, 1979).
The cognitive process of intercultural communication competence, then, provides an
opportunity for the individual to develop an awareness of cultural dynamics and to discern
multiple identities in order to maintain a state of multicultural coexistence. This is the ability
of intercultural awareness, which comprises two aspects of understanding: self-awareness
and cultural awareness (Brislin, Landis, & Brandt, 1983; Gudykunst et al., 1991; Pruegger &
Rogers, 1993).
The implementation of conversationally competent behaviors in interaction requires self-
awareness, the individual ’s ability to monitor or be aware of him- or herself (Spitzberg &
Cupach, 1984). Self-awareness facilitates competent intercultural communication and helps a
person to adjust to cultures other than his or her own (Brislin, 1981; Gudykunst, 1993; Triandis,
1977). A person who is high in self-awareness or self-monitoring is likely to be sensitive to the
expressions and self-presentation of his or her counterparts in intercultural communication,
and knows how to use these behavioral cues to guide his or her own self-presentation (Berger &
Douglas, 1982; Chen, 1995b; Gudykunst, Y ang, & Nishida, 1987; Hammer, 1989).
The factors that account for self-awareness or self-monitoring include (a) concern with the
social appropriateness of one’s self-presentation, (b) attention to social comparison information
as cues to situationally appropriate expressive self-presentation, (c) the ability to control and
modify one ’s self-presentation, (d) the use of this ability in particular situations, and (e) the
modiﬁcation of one ’s expressive behavior to meet the requirements of particular situations
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  223


--- PAGE 245 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 224
Page 224
(Snyder, 1974, 1979, 1987). These factors play important roles in the process of intercultural
communication (Gudykunst & Ting-T oomey, 1988; Trubisky, Ting-T oomey, & Lin, 1991).
Cultural awareness refers to an understanding of the conventions of one ’s own and others ’
cultures that a ﬀect how people think and behave. This includes understanding the common-
alities of human behavior and di ﬀerences in cultural patterns. Based on some of the universal
commonalities of human behavior, such as eye contact, turn talking, gesturing, and the use of
politeness norms, an individual can begin to understand how people from diverse cultures adapt
such universal behaviors to the unique expectations of intercultural communication settings
(Bond, 1988; Brown, 1991; Fiske, 1992; John, 1990; Kiesler, 1983; Schwartz, 1990; Schwartz &
Bilsky, 1987; Schwartz & Sagiv, 1995; Strack & Lorr, 1990; White, 1980). The process of becoming
culturally aware promotes not only the understanding of cultural variability but also positive
feelings toward the search for a common ground of multicultural coexistence. Cross-cultural
understanding alerts individuals as to those points where di ﬀerences come into play.
Thus, understanding the dimensions of cultural variability provides ways of identifying how
communication di ﬀers across cultures. In important studies on the dimensions of cultural
variability, Parsons (1951) has identi ﬁed ﬁve pattern variables, Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck
(1960) have identi ﬁed ﬁve cultural value orientations, Hall (1976) has labeled culture as high-
context or low-context, and Hofstede (1980) has named four dimensions of cultural variability.
Because all cultures tend to favor particular ways of processing the data around us, misunder-
standings concerning these di ﬀering thought patterns often lead to problems in intercultural
communication. Therefore, to be e ﬀective in intercultural interaction, an individual must ﬁrst
learn how arguments are supported and knowledge is determined in the culture in which he or
she will be interacting (Glenn & Glenn, 1981; Harris & Moran, 1987; Oliver, 1962). In other
words, before a person can modify his or her communication patterns to be congruent with the
cues given by unfamiliar interactants, he or she must understand any cultural di ﬀerences that
exist (Hall, 1959; Hall & Whyte, 1963). If interactants change their behaviors to be congruent
with those of their culturally diﬀerent counterparts, they may improve their chances of reaching
mutual understanding and of maintaining a fruitful multicultural coexistence. Many studies
have tried to identify the myriad ways in which cultures di ﬀer (Althen, 1992; Barnlund &
Y oshioka, 1990; Chang & Holt, 1991; Chen & Chung, 1994; L. Chen, 1993; Cocroft & Ting-
T oomey, 1994; Fitch, 1994; Goldman, 1994; Hecht, Sedano, & Ribeau, 1993; Ishii, 1992; Ishii &
Bruneau, 1994; Kim & Wilson, 1994; Klopf, 1992; H. Ma, 1990; R. Ma, 1992; Marriott, 1993;
Martin, Hecht, & Larkey, 1994; Stewart & Bennett, 1991; Suzuki & Rancer, 1994; Ting-T oomey,
1991; White & Barnet, 1995).
The development of cultural awareness resembles the idea of making a “cultural map ” or
“cultural theme ”; the emphasis is on the importance of cultural knowledge for competent
intercultural communication. Kluckhohn (1948) asserts that cultural awareness requires an
understanding of a “cultural map”: “If a map is accurate, and you can read it, you won’t get lost;
if you know a culture, you will know your way around in the life of a society ” (p. 28). Turner
(1968) indicates that to be aware of a culture means that one understands the “cultural
theme”— the thread that goes through a culture and organizes it as a recognizable system. The
theme acts as a guide for people ’s thinking and behavior, and appears repeatedly in daily life.
The key components of a cultural map or theme that a ﬀect intercultural communication
competence include social values, social customs, social norms, and social systems. Studies by
Abe and Wiseman (1983), Chen (1989), Hammer et al. (1978), Jain and Kussman (1994), Lustig
and Koester (1993), Martin (1987, 1989), and Yum (1988) have shown that intercultural com-
munication competence requires an understanding of these cultural components. As more than
one cultural identity comes into play, maps are overlaid on other maps, and themes upon
themes.
T o summarize, individuals tend to be more competent in intercultural communication as
224  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 246 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 225
Page 225
they acquire greater degrees of cultural awareness and self-awareness. Self-awareness involves
knowledge of one’s own personal identity; cultural awareness involves understanding how cul-
tures vary. Both combine to provide a framework for communication competence in a global
society (Barnlund, 1994).
The behavioral process: intercultural adroitness
The behavioral perspective of intercultural communication competence stresses how to act
eﬀectively in intercultural interactions. Intercultural adroitness, the ability to get the job done
and attain communication goals in intercultural interactions, comes into play. Intercultural
adroitness corresponds to communication skills. It consists of those verbal and nonverbal
behaviors that enable us to be e ﬀective in interactions. Such behaviors in intercultural com-
munication include message skills, appropriate self-disclosure, behavioral ﬂexibility, interaction
management, and social skills.
Message skills, in the context of intercultural communication, refers to the ability to use the
language of a culture other than one ’s own. Intercultural communication competence begins
with message skills, which include the following: linguistic competence, or the knowledge of the
rules underlying the use of language (Chomsky, 1965); the ability to code skillfully and to create
recognizable messages in the process of communication (M. Kim, 1994; Y. Y. Kim, 1994b;
Milhouse, 1993; Parks, 1976; Weber, 1994); the ability to understand one ’s counterpart ’s lan-
guage; and the ability to recognize the meanings of nonverbal behaviors (Anderson, 1994; Barna,
1994; Dolphin, 1994). Many studies have shown that ﬂuency in the other culture ’s language is
the key element in eﬀective intercultural interaction (Deutsch & Won, 1963; Giles, 1977; Martin
& Hammer, 1989; Morris, 1960; Selltiz, Christ, Havel, & Cook, 1963; Sewell & Davidsen, 1956;
Ting-T oomey & Korzenny, 1989).
Besides language itself, message skills include the ability to use descriptive and supportive
messages in the process of interaction. The use of descriptive messages entails the use of concrete
and speciﬁc feedback as opposed to judgment of anther ’s behaviors. Nonjudgmental attitudes
help interactants to avoid defensive reactions from their counterparts (Bochner & Kelly, 1974;
Gibb, 1961; Hammer, 1989). Supportiveness is the sine qua non for eﬀective communication. It
is important for communicators to know how to support others e ﬀectively and to reward them
in communication with cues such as head nods, eye contact, facial expressions, and physical
proximity (Olebe & Koester, 1989; Parks, 1985; 1994; Ruben, 1976, 1977, 1988; Spitzberg, 1991;
Wiemann, 1977).
Message skills are tempered by self-disclosure, or the willingness to reveal information about
oneself openly and appropriately to one’s counterparts during intercultural interactions. What is
considered appropriate self-disclosure varies among cultures, as do appropriate topics of conver-
sation and appropriate forms of address for persons at varying levels of intimacy and at given
levels of social hierarchy (Chen, 1995a; Nakanishi, 1987; Nakanishi & Johnson, 1993). In add-
ition, to be classiﬁed as self-discourse, messages must be intentional and the information revealed
to others must be signi ﬁcant and previously unknown to them (Adler & T owne, 1993).
Appropriate self-disclosure is one of the main elements of individual competence in communi-
cation, and can lead to achievement of personal communication goals (Bochner & Kelly, 1974;
Spitzberg, 1991).
The contextual ambiguity common in interactions between people from di ﬀerent cultures
produces a predictably high level of uncertainty (Gudykunst, 1985). Reduction of this uncertainty
level can often be achieved through mutual self-disclosure. Studies have demonstrated appropri-
ate self-disclosure to be one of the components of intercultural communication competence,
especially regarding depth and breadth of self-disclosure (Chen, 1989, 1990, 1993b). This ﬁnding
helps to illustrate the social penetration model, wherein relationships develop from super ﬁcial
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  225


--- PAGE 247 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 226
Page 226
to more personal levels through the depth and breadth of information individuals disclose
(Altman & Taylor, 1973; Gudykunst & Nishida, 1983, 1986; Knapp, 1978).
Behavioral ﬂexibility is the ability to select appropriate behaviors in di ﬀerent contexts and
situations (Bochner & Kelly, 1974). This concept makes up the creativity or ﬂexibility dimension
of intercultural communication competence. Behaviorally ﬂexible persons are accurate and
adaptable when attending to information, and are able to perform diﬀerent behavioral strategies
in order to achieve communication goals (Parks, 1985). Behavioral ﬂexibility is considered
a dimension of intercultural communication competence (Chen, 1992; Imahori & Lanigan,
1989; Martin, 1987; Martin & Hammer, 1989; Ruben, 1977; Spitzberg, 1994; Wiemann, 1977).
It is expressed through verbal immediacy cues; behaviorally ﬂexible individuals know how
to use di ﬀerent kinds of intimate verbal behaviors to establish interpersonal relationships.
Moreover, behaviorally ﬂexible persons must be good at “the alternation and co-occurrence
of speci ﬁc speech choices which mark the status and a ﬃliative relationships of interactants
(Wiemann, 1977, p. 199).
Interaction management is the ability to speak in turn in conversation and to initiate and
terminate conversation appropriately. This encompasses also the ability to structure and main-
tain the procedure of a conversation (Spitzberg & Cupach, 1984), or the ability to develop a topic
smoothly in interaction. Individuals with good interaction management skills allow all partici-
pants in a discussion the chance to contribute. Interaction management is one of the major
dimensions of intercultural communication competence (Chen, 1989; Olebe & Koester, 1989;
Ruben & Kealey, 1979; Spitzberg, 1994). Guidelines for eﬀective management of interactions in
U.S. culture include the following, summarized by Wiemann (1977): (a) Interruptions are not
permitted, (b) only one person may talk at a time, (c) speakers ’ turns should be appropriately
interchanged, and (d) speakers should pay full attention to their counterparts. These standards
do not apply to all cultures, clearly; for instance, African and African American interaction rules
allow two speakers to talk at one time, at least brie ﬂy, during shifts between speakers (Sanders,
1995). Moreover, the African American tradition of “call and response” may be falsely interpreted
by European Americans as “interruption”; rather, it represents the cocreation of messages.
Communication skills also include such social skills as empathy and identity maintenance.
Empathy, or the ability to feel the same emotions as another person (Alder & T owne, 1993), has
been long recognized as a central element of eﬀective interpersonal communication. This ability
has also been called “aﬀective sensitivity” (Campbell, Kagan, & Krathwohl, 1971), “telepathic or
intuition sensitivity” (Gardner, 1962), and “perspective taking” (Parks, 1976). Empathic persons
are able to judge accurately their communication counterparts ’ behavior or internal states
(Parks, 1994). Empathic individuals are usually able to respond accurately to the feelings and
thoughts of those with whom they are interacting, and so this trait is highly valuable in inter-
cultural communication (Chen, 1992; Chen & Tan, 1995; Ruben, 1976, 1977). In interaction,
empathic persons generally demonstrate reciprocity of a ﬀect displays, verbal responses that
show understanding, and active listening. Empathy is viewed as one of the elements of inter-
cultural communication competence (Bennett, 1979, 1986; Gudykunst, 1993; Hwang, Chase, &
Kelly, 1980; Yum, 1988).
Identity maintenance  refers to the ability to maintain one ’s counterpart ’s identity in inter-
action. Because the need to learn who we are is one of the reasons we communicate with others,
communicatively competent persons not only understand themselves in interaction but also
inform their counterparts about who they are. Thus, in order to achieve smooth interaction, a
communicatively competent person maintains his or her counterpart ’s identity. The skill of
identity maintenance is learned through experience, and the use of identity maintenance
skills varies with di ﬀerent situations and di ﬀerent personal goals (Collier, 1989; Parks, 1976;
Ting-T oomey, 1989, 1993) and with movement from one salient identity to another.
T o summarize, individuals become more competent in intercultural communication as they
226  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 248 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 227
Page 227
improve their degree of intercultural adroitness, which involves message skills, knowledge
regarding appropriate self-disclosure, behavioral ﬂexibility, interaction management, and social
skills. The behavioral perspective of intercultural communication competence emphasizes the
ability to act e ﬀectively to achieve the goal of multicultural interdependence and intercon-
nectedness in the global village.
The three perspectives of the intercultural communication competence model described
above form the three sides of an equilateral triangle. All are equally important, and all are
inseparable, forming a holistic picture of intercultural communication competence. The model
integrates diﬀerent approaches to the study of intercultural communication competence speci-
ﬁed by scholars (Collier, 1989; Dinges, 1983). It provides a guideline for future research in
this area.
Critique and Directions for Future Research
Since the germination of the ﬁeld of intercultural communication in the early 1950s, communi-
cation scholars have continued to search for better models to explain the concept of intercultural
communication competence. After more than four decades, communication scholars have pro-
duced an abundance of literature in this line of research. Unfortunately, however, this literature
is fragmentary and lacks a holistic view. Consequently, scholars in the area of intercultural
communication competence have been unable to provide a consistent framework for an under-
standing of the notion of interdependence and interconnectedness of the complex multicultural
dynamics in the contemporary age. Operationally, they have failed to provide a clear direction
for the development of a valid and reliable intercultural communication competence instrument
that is appropriate to our current global society.
The problem originates in the lack of a proper interpretation of global interaction processes.
The trends of technology development, globalization of the economy, widespread population
migration, development of multiculturalism, and the demise of the nation-state in favor of
sub- and supranational identi ﬁcations have shrunk and multiculturalized the world, and
traditional perceptions of self and other must be rede ﬁned. The global context of human com-
munication and the need to pursue a state of multicultural coexistence require that we abolish
the boundaries separating me and you, us and them, and develop a theory of communication
competence that takes into account individuals ’ multiple identities. Although a few researchers
have shown interest in this line of research (Casmir, 1993; Collier, 1989; Collier & Thomas, 1988;
Hecht & Ribeau, 1991; Starosta & Olorunnisola, 1995), the study of intercultural communica-
tion must take it one step further.
In addition to this philosophical issue, the study of intercultural communication competence
has other problems. We describe below some of the speci ﬁc areas scholars should address in
future research.
At the conceptual level, intercultural communication competence scholars face ﬁve chal-
lenges. First, as the concept of intercultural communication competence grows more sophisti-
cated, it becomes confused with the deﬁnition of the term competence. Argument continues as to
whether competence is an inherent ability (trait) or a learned ability (state). Although we
understand competence to refer to personal attributes and to communication skills, future
research needs to ﬁgure out whether trait competence and state competence can be treated
separately or must be considered together.
The second challenge for the study of communication competence centers on whether com-
petence refers to knowledge or performance. Chomsky (1965) considers competence to be sim-
ply the knowledge of the speaker-hearer ’s language, and Phillips (1983) considers Chomsky ’s
competence to be merely the ﬁrst step toward communication competence. He conceives of
competence as the understanding of a new situation and its requirements. Chomsky and
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  227


--- PAGE 249 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 228
Page 228
Phillips treat competence as an individual ’s knowledge. Although McCroskey (1982) and
Spitzberg (1983) further identify distinctions among motivation, knowledge, and skills for the
conceptualization of communication competence, the existing de ﬁnitions suﬀer from a degree
of incompleteness, especially when we apply the concept to intercultural settings, in which we
have to consider that the process of communication demands not only situational knowledge
but behavioral skills as well. Future research ought to include both knowledge and performance
as elements of intercultural communication competence.
Third, the confusion between the term eﬀectiveness and competence must be resolved if we are
to arrive at a clear conception of communication competence. Many scholars use the word
eﬀectiveness instead of competence (e.g., Hammer et al., 1978; Ruben, 1988). Others use eﬀective-
ness and competence interchangeably (e.g., Ruben, 1976, 1977; Ruben & Kealey, 1979). Usage of
these terms should be standardized in future studies. We believe that competence is the preferable
word, especially in intercultural communication settings. As we have indicated, e ﬀectiveness is
only one of two elements in a conceptualization of competence. The second, appropriateness,
plays a role of equal signi ﬁcance. In other words, to be competent in intercultural interaction,
individuals must communicate both eﬀectively and appropriately.
Fourth, culture-general versus culture-speciﬁc approaches to the study of intercultural com-
munication competence continue to be a problem. Most of the existing research on intercultural
communication competence has taken a culture-general approach. The current trend in this line
of research strongly demands balance between the two approaches. Recent studies, for instance,
have begun to examine communication competence from Chinese, Indian, Japanese, and Korean
perspectives (Chen, 1993a; Hedge, 1993; Miyahara, 1993; Yum, 1993). A coherent theme around
which these researchers conceptualize communication competence is “harmony,” which appears
to be an element of most Asian cultures. Studying intercultural communication competence
from a culture-speci ﬁc perspective in order to ﬁnd common themes within cultures may shed
new light on the ﬁeld.
Finally, the application of studies in intercultural communication competence has been con-
ﬁned mainly to the intercultural adaptation process of sojourning in a new culture. We suggest
that the scope of intercultural communication cannot be divorced from the full scope of the
communication environment of the global civic culture, which can be conceptualized as having
interpersonal, group, organizational, national, and supranational levels.
On the operational level, we face three challenges. First, we have to clarify where intercultural
communication competence resides. Ruben (1989) proposes three alternatives:
1. The message sender alternative claims that competence is what an individual displays or
possesses.
2. The message receiver alternative claims that competence is based on the evaluation of the
message receiver, no matter what the sender possesses.
3. The dyadic, or systemic, or culture-based alternative claims that competence is based on
relational, social, or cultural rules instead of on an individual such as the sender and the
receiver.
The Western cultural orientation to the study of intercultural communication competence
tends to focus on the ﬁrst two of these alternatives. Other cultures, such as Asian cultures, seem
to focus more on the third alternative. For instance, the measurement of communication com-
petence from the Japanese cultural perspective seems to focus on the concept of “group” as a unit
of analysis (Miyahara, 1994); from the Korean cultural perspective, communication competence
tends to be observed from an interpersonal rather than an individual point of view (Yum, 1994).
Second, we must decide how intercultural communication competence should be assessed.
Use of self-report scales, other-report scales, or the two together remains possible. If intercultural
228  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 250 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 229
Page 229
communication competence is a product of personal attributes and behavioral skills, then both
self- and other-report methods should be used. Y et, although the use of both methods in
combination assures the external validity of the data, it becomes di ﬃcult to bridge any discrep-
ancy between the self- and other-report measures unless a more acceptable scale is created. This
problem becomes critical in an intercultural communication setting. For example, people from
diﬀerent cultures may have di ﬀerent perceptions of or attitudes toward the processes and
instruments used in the study, including scale items and how to use particular scales (Campbell,
1969; Klopf & Cambra, 1983; Martin, 1993).
Third, and ﬁnally, how should we measure intercultural communication competence?
Although we have proposed three perspectives from which to view the measurement of intercul-
tural communication competence, we can clearly see that the existing literature in this area
strongly re ﬂects a Eurocentric point of view. This Western bias has caused a reliance on the
positivism tradition, which in turn identi ﬁes a set of Western-oriented elements as the com-
ponents of intercultural communication competence. We urge future researchers to try to dis-
cover more and di ﬀerent elements to account for intercultural communication competence
from non-Western cultural perspectives. For instance, instead of following the above com-
ponents of intercultural communication competence, Chen (1994) notes that the four elements
of communication competence from the Chinese cultural perspective are the ability to control
emotion, the ability to express feelings indirectly, the ability to save another’s face, and the ability
to recognize distinctions in relations with in-group members versus relations with out-group
members. Similarly, Yum (1994) identiﬁes ﬁve elements that can be used to measure communi-
cation competence from the Korean cultural perspective: empathy, sensitivity, indirectness,
being reserved, and transcendentality. Thus, an instrument that is su ﬃcient for the measure-
ment of intercultural communication competence may have to account for multiple voices,
multiple competencies, and multiple identities.
Summary and Conclusion
As we encounter ever greater cultural and co-cultural diversity, the careful study of intercultural
communication competence becomes increasing important. Only through competent intercul-
tural communication can persons from di ﬀerent cultures understand each other. Sitaram and
Cogdell (1976) proclaim, “All people of the world should study intercultural communication. ”
This broad dictum emphasizes the necessity for all of us to learn more about ourselves and
members of cultures other than our own.
Communication competence has been studied for many years, but its application to intercul-
tural interaction continues to evolve. In this chapter we have extracted three perspectives on
intercultural communication competence from the existing literature. We have considered how
the competence relates to the intercultural setting. The six types of competence discussed in this
chapter— fundamental, social, interpersonal, linguistic, communicative, and relational — can be
treated as interdependent dimensions of communication competence. We have also argued that
culture and communication competence are inseparable.
The approaches to the study of intercultural communication competence discussed above
lead to a three-perspective model: (a) The aﬀective perspective represents intercultural sensitiv-
ity, promoted through positive self-concept, open-mindedness, nonjudgmental attitudes, and
social relaxation; (b) the cognitive perspective represents cultural awareness, which includes self-
awareness and the understanding of one ’s own and others ’ cultures; and (c) the behavioral
perspective represents intercultural adroitness based on message skills, appropriate self-
disclosure, behavioral ﬂexibility, interaction management, and social skills. We have proposed
directions for future research along these lines, focusing on the conceptual and operational
problems that scholars face.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  229


--- PAGE 251 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 230
Page 230
The indispensability of intercultural communication competence in our increasingly global
society demands that communication scholars enhance the functions of the concept and expand
the scope of research in this area. The study of intercultural communication competence should
be extended to include research concerning the multiple identities that individuals maintain in
our interdependent and interconnected global society. The scope of intercultural communica-
tion competence should penetrate diﬀerent levels of intercultural communication to ensure the
integration of various communication demands in terms of culture, ethnicity, race, gender, and
religion. These processes will require a functional and theoretical reorientation for the study of
intercultural communication competence (Taylor, 1994).
References
Abe, H., & Wiseman, R. L. (1983). A cross-cultural con ﬁrmation of the dimensions of intercultural
eﬀectiveness. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 7, 53–67.
Adler, N. J. (1991). International dimensions of organizational behavior . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Adler, P . (1975). The transnational experience: An alternative view of culture shock. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 15, 13–23.
Adler, P . (1977). Beyond cultural identity: Reﬂections upon cultural and multicultural man. In R. Brislin
(Ed.), Cultural learning: Concepts, applications, and research . Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.
Adler, P . (1982). Beyond cultural identity: Reﬂections upon cultural and multicultural man. In L. A. Samovar
& R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 389–405). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Adler, R. B., & T owne, N. (1993). Looking out/looking in. New Y ork: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Allen, R. R., & Wood, B. S. (1978). Beyond reading and writing to communication competence. Communi-
cation Education, 27, 286–292.
Althen, G. (1992). The Americans have to say everything. Communication Quarterly, 40, 413–421.
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. (1973). Social penetration: The development of interpersonal relationships. New Y ork:
Holt, Rinehart & Wilson.
Anderson, J. W. (1994). A comparison of Arab and American conceptions of “eﬀective” persuasion. In
L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader  (pp. 104 –113). Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth.
Argyris, C. (1956a). Explorations in interpersonal competence, I. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 1,
58–83.
Argyris, C. (1956b). Explorations in interpersonal competence, II. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 1,
255–269.
Asante, M. K., Newmark, E., & Blake, C. A. (1979). Handbook of intercultural communication. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Barna, L. M. (1994). Intercultural communication stumbling blocks. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter
(Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 337–346). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Barnlund, D. C. (1994). Communication in a global village. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.),
Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 95–103). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Barnlund, D. C., & Y oshioka, M. (1990). Apologies: Japanese and American styles. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 14, 193–206.
Belay, G. (1993). T oward a paradigm shift for intercultural and international communication: New
research directions. In S. A. Deetz (Ed.), Communication yearbook 16  (pp. 437–457). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Bennett, M. J. (1979). Overcoming the golden rule: Sympathy and empathy. In D. Nimmo (Ed.), Communi-
cation yearbook 3 (pp. 407–433). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Berger, C. R., & Douglas, W. (1982). Thought and talk: Excuse me, “but have I been talking to myself? ” In
F. E. X. Dance (Ed.), Human communication theory: Comparative essays (pp. 42–60). New Y ork: Harper
& Row.
Bhawuk, D. P . S., & Brislin, R. (1992). The measurement of intercultural sensitivity using the concepts of
individualism and collectivism. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 16, 413–436.
Bochner, A. P ., & Kelly, C. W. (1974). Interpersonal competence: Rationale, philosophy, and implementa-
tion of a conceptual framework. Speech Teacher, 23, 279–301.
Bond, M. H. (1988). Finding universal dimensions of individual variation in multicultural studies
of values: The Rokeach and Chinese value surveys. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 55,
1009–1015.
230  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 252 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 231
Page 231
Boulding, E. (1988). Building a global civic culture: Education for an interdependent world . New Y ork:
Columbia University Press.
Brislin, R. W. (1981). Cross-cultural encounters: Face-to-face interaction. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Brislin, R. W., Landis, D., & Brandt, M. E. (1983). Conceptualizations of intercultural behavior and train-
ing. In D. Landis & R. W. Brislin (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural training; Vol. 1. Issues in theory and
design (pp. 1–35). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Campbell, D. T. (1969). Reforms as experiment. American Psychology, 24, 409–429.
Campbell, R. J., Kagan, N., & Krathwohl, D. R. (1971). The development and validation of a scale to
measure aﬀective sensitivity (empathy). Journal of Counseling Psychology, 18, 407–412.
Casmir, F. L. (1993). Third-culture building: A paradigm shift for international and intercultural
communication. In S. A. Deetz (Ed.), Communication yearbook 16 (pp. 407–428). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Chang, H. C., & Holt, G. R. (1991). More than relationship: Chinese interaction and the principle of
kuan-hsi. Communication Quarterly, 39, 251–271.
Chen. G.-M. (1989). Relationships of the dimensions of intercultural communication competence. Com-
munication Quarterly, 37, 118–133.
Chen, G.-M. (1990). Intercultural communication competence: Some perspectives of research. Howard
Journal of Communications, 2, 243–261.
Chen, G.-M. (1992). A test of intercultural communication competence. Intercultural Communication
Studies, 2, 63–82.
Chen, G.-M. (1993a, November). Communication competence: A Chinese perspective . Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Chen, G.-M. (1993b). Self-disclosure and Asian students ’ abilities to cope with social di ﬃculties in the
United States. Journal of Psychology, 127, 603–610.
Chen, G.-M. (1994, November). A conceptualization and measurement of communication competence: A
Chinese perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association,
New Orleans, LA.
Chen, G.-M. (1995a). Diﬀerences in self-disclosure patterns among Americans versus Chinese: A compara-
tive study. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 26, 84–91.
Chen, G.-M. (1995b). A model of intercultural communication competence: Mass Communication
Research, 50, 81–95.
Chen, G.-M., & Chung, J. (1994). The impact of Confucianism on organizational communication. Com-
munication Quarterly, 42, 93–105.
Chen, G.-M., & Tan, L. (1995, April). A theory of intercultural sensitivity . Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Eastern Communication Association, Pittsburgh, PA.
Chen, L. (1993). Chinese and North Americans: An epistemological exploration of intercultural communi-
cation. Howard Journal of Communications, 4, 342–357.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cleveland, H., Mangone, G. J., & Adams, J. C. (1960). The overseas Americans. New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Cocroft, B. K., & Ting-T oomey, S. (1994). Facework in Japan and the United States. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 18, 469–506.
Collier, M. J. (1989). Cultural and intercultural communication competence: Current approaches and
directions for future research. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 287–302.
Collier, M. J. (1994). Cultural identity and intercultural communication. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter
(Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 36–44). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Collier, M. J., & Thomas, M. (1988). Cultural identity: An interpretive perspectives. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B.
Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication (pp. 99–120). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cupach, W. R., & Imahori, T. T. (1993). Identity management theory: Communication competence in
intercultural episodes and relationships. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural communi-
cation competence (pp. 112–131). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
David, K. (1972). Intercultural adjustment and applications of reinforcement theory to problems of culture
shock. Trends, 4, 1–64.
Deutsch, S. E., & Won, G. Y. M. (1963). Some factors in the adjustment of foreign nationals in the United
States. Journal of Social Issues, 19, 115–122.
Dinges, N. (1983). Intercultural competence. In D. Landis & R. W. Brislin (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural
training: Vol. I. Issues in theory and design (pp. 176–202). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Dolphin, C. Z. (1994). Variables in the use of personal space in intercultural transactions. In L. A. Samovar
& R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 252–263). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Ehrlich, H. (1973). The social psychology of prejudice . New Y ork: John Wiley.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  231


--- PAGE 253 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 232
Page 232
Fiedler, F., Mitchell, T., & Triandis, H. (1971). The culture assimilator: An approach to cross-cultural
training. Journal of Applied Psychology, 55, 95–102.
Fiske, A. P . (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for a uni ﬁed theory of social
relations. Psychological Review, 99, 689–723.
Fitch, K. L. (1994). A cross-cultural study of directive sequences and some implications for compliance-
gaining research. Communication Monographs, 61, 185–210.
Foote, N. N., & Cottrell, L. S. (1955). Identity and interpersonal competence . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Frederick, H. H. (1993). Global communication and international relations . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Furnham, A., & Bochner, S. (1982). Social di ﬃculty in foreign cultures: An empirical analysis of culture
shock. In S. Bochner (Ed.), Cultures in contact: Studies in cross-cultural interaction . Elmsford, NY:
Pergamon.
Gardner, G. H. (1962). Cross-cultural communication. Journal of Social Psychology, 58, 241–256.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. New Y ork: Basic Books.
Getter, H., & Nowinski, J. K. (1981). A free response test of interpersonal eﬀectiveness. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 45, 301–308.
Gibb, J. (1961). Defensive communication. Journal of Communication, 11, 141–148.
Giles, H. (Ed.). (1977). Language, ethnicity, and intergroup. London: Academic Press.
Glenn, E. S., & Glenn, C. G. (1981). Man and mankind: Con ﬂict and communication between cultures .
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Goldman, A. (1994). The centrality of “ningensei” to Japanese negotiation and interpersonal relationships:
Implications for U.S. –Japanese communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 18,
29–54.
Grice, H. P . (1975). Logic and conversation. In P . Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech
acts (pp. 107–142). New Y ork: Academic Press.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1985). A model of uncertainty reduction in intercultural encounters. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, 4, 79–98.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1993). T oward a theory of e ﬀective interpersonal and intergroup communication:
An anxiety/uncertainty management (AUM) perspective. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.),
Intercultural communication competence (pp. 33–71). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst. W. B., & Hammer, M. R. (1988). Strangers and hosts: An uncertainty reduction based theory of
intercultural adaptation. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Cross-cultural adaptation: Current
approaches (pp. 106–139). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst. W. B., Hammer, M. R., & Wiseman, R. (1977). An analysis of an integrated approach to
cross-cultural training. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 2, 99–110.
Gudykunst. W. B., & Nishida, T. (1983). Social penetration in Japanese and American close friendships. In
R. Bostrom (Ed.), Communication yearbook 7 (pp. 592–610). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst. W. B., & Nishida, T. (1986). The inﬂuence of cultural variability on perceptions of communica-
tion behavior associated with relationship terms. Human Communication Research, 13, 147–166.
Gudykunst. W. B., & Ting-T oomey, S. (1988). A ﬀective communication across cultures. American
Behavioral Scientist, 31, 384–400.
Gudykunst. W. B., Ting-T oomey, S., & Wiseman, R. (1991). Taming the beast: Designing a course in
intercultural communication. Communication Education, 40, 272–286.
Gudykunst. W. B., Wiseman, R., & Hammer, M. R. (1977). Determinants of a sojourner ’s attitudinal
satisfaction: A path model. In B. D. Ruben (Ed.), Communication yearbook 1  (pp. 415 –425). New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Gudykunst. W. B., Y ang, S. M., & Nishida, T. (1987). Cultural diﬀerences in self-consciousness and unself-
consciousness. Communication Research, 14, 7–36.
Guthrie, G. (1975). A behavioral analysis of culture learning. In R. W. Brislin, S. Bochner, & W. J. Lonner
(Eds.), Cross-cultural perspectives on learning. New Y ork: John Wiley.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: Anchor.
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond Cultures. Garden City, NY: Anchor.
Hall. E. T., & Whyte, W. F. (1963). Intercultural communication; A guide to men of action. Practical
Anthropology, 9, 83–108.
Hammer, M. R. (1987). Behavioral dimensions of intercultural e ﬀectiveness: A replication and extension.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 11, 65–88.
Hammer, M. R. (1988, November). Communication skills and intercultural communication competence: A
review and research agenda . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication
Association, New Orleans, LA.
232  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 254 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 233
Page 233
Hammer, M. R. (1989). Intercultural communication competence. In M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst
(Eds.), Handbook of international and intercultural communication (pp. 247–260). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Hammer, M. R., Gudykunst, W. B., & Wiseman, R. (1978). Dimensions of intercultural e ﬀectiveness.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 2, 382–393.
Harris, J. G. (1973). A science of the South Paciﬁc: An analysis of the character structure of the Peace Corp
volunteer. American Psychologist, 28, 232–247.
Harris, P . R., & Moran, R. T. (1987). Managing cultural diﬀerences. Houston, TX: Gulf.
Hart, R. P ., & Burks, D. M. (1972). Rhetorical sensitivity and social interaction. Speech Monographs, 39,
75–91.
Hawes, F., & Kealey, D. J. (1979). Canadians in development: An empirical study of adaptation and e ﬀective-
ness on overseas assignment (T echnical report). Ottawa: Canadian International Development Agency.
Hawes, F., & Kealey, D. J. (1981). An empirical study of Canadian technical assistance. International Journal
of Intercultural Relations, 5, 239–258.
Hecht, M. L., & Ribeau, S. (1991). Sociocultural roots of ethnic identity: A look at black America. Journal of
Black Studies, 21, 501–513.
Hecht, M. L., Sedano, M. V ., & Ribeau, S. R. (1993). Understanding culture, communication, and research:
Applications to Chicanos and Mexican American. International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 17,
157–166.
Hedge, R. (1993, November). Communication competence: An Indian perspective . Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Herman, S., & Schield, E. (1961). The stranger group in cross-cultural situations. Sociometry, 24,
165–176.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International di ﬀerences in work-related values . Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Holland, J. L., & Baird, L. L. (1968). An interpersonal competence scale. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 28, 503–510.
Hwang, J. C., Chase, L. J., & Kelly, C. W. (1980). An intercultural examination of communication com-
petence. Communication, 9, 70–79.
Hymes, D. (1971). Competence and performance in linguistic theory. In R. Huxley & E. Ingram (Eds.),
Language acquisition: Models and methods (pp. 3–26). New Y ork: Academic Press.
Hymes, D. (1972). Models of the interaction of language and social life. In J. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.),
Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication  (pp. 1–71). New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Imahori, T. T., & Lanigan, M. L. (1989). Relational models of intercultural communication competence.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 269–286.
Ishii, S. (1992). Buddhist preaching: The persistent main undercurrent of Japanese traditional rhetorical
communication. Communication Quarterly, 40, 391–397.
Ishii, S., & Bruneau, T. (1994). Silence and silences in cross-cultural perspective: Japan and the United
States. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader  (pp. 246 –251).
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Jain, N. C., & Kussman, E. D. (1994). Dominant cultural patterns of Hindus in India. In L. A. Samovar &
R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 95–103). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
John, O. P . (1990). The “big ﬁve” factor taxonomy: Dimensions of personality in the natural language and
in questionnaires. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research  (pp. 66 –100).
New Y ork: Guilford.
Johnston, W. B., & Packer, A. H. (1987). Workforce 2000: Work and workers for the 21st century. Indianapolis:
Hudson Institute.
Kiesler, D. J. (1983). The 1982 interpersonal circle: A taxonomy for complementary in human transactions.
Psychological Review, 90, 185–214.
Kim, M. (1994). Cross-cultural comparisons of the perceived importance of conversational constraints.
Human Communication Research, 21, 128–151.
Kim, M., & Wilson, S. R. (1994). A cross-cultural comparison of implicit theories of requesting. Communi-
cation Monographs, 61, 210–235.
Kim, Y. Y. (1988). Communication and cross-cultural adaptation. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Kim, Y. Y. (1991). Communication and cross-cultural adaptation. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.),
Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 383–391). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Kim, Y. Y. (1994a). Beyond cultural identity. Intercultural Communication Studies, 4, 1–24.
Kim, Y. Y. (1994b). Interethnic communication: The context and the behavior. In S. A. Deetz (Ed.),
Communication yearbook 17 (pp. 511–538). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  233


--- PAGE 255 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 234
Page 234
Kim, Y. Y., & Gudykunst, W. B. (Eds.). (1988). Cross-cultural adaptation: Current approaches. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Klopf, D. W. (Ed.). (1992). Communication practices in the Paciﬁc basin [Special section]. Communication
Quarterly, 40, 368–428.
Klopf, D. W., & Cambra, R. E. (1983). Communication apprehension in foreign settings: The results of
exploratory research. Communication, 12, 37–51.
Kluckhohn, C. (1948). Mirror of man. New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Kluckhohn, C., & Strodtbeck. F. (1960). Variations in value orientations. New Y ork: Row, Peterson.
Knapp, M. (1978). Social intercourse: From greetings to goodbye . Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Lee, L. (1979). Is social competence independent of cultural context? American Psychologist, 34, 795–796.
Lustig, M. W., & Koester, J. (1993). Intercultural competence: Interpersonal communication across cultures .
New Y ork: HarperCollins.
Ma, H. K. (1990). The Chinese Taoist perspective on human development. International Journal of Intercul-
tural Relations, 14, 235–250.
Ma, R. (1992). The role of uno ﬃcial intermediaries in interpersonal con ﬂicts in the Chinese culture.
Communication Quarterly, 40, 269–278.
Marriott, H. (1993). Politeness phenomena in Japanese intercultural business communication. Intercultural
Communication Studies, 3, 15–38.
Martin, J. N. (1987). The relationships between student sojourner perceptions of intercultural competence
and previous sojourn experience. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 11, 337–355.
Martin, J. N. (Ed.). (1989). Intercultural communication competence [Special issue]. International Journal
of Intercultural Relations, 13(3).
Martin, J. N. (1993). Intercultural communication competence: A review. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester
(Eds.), Intercultural communication competence (pp. 16–32). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Martin, J. N., & Hammer, M. R. (1989). Behavioral categories of intercultural communication competence:
Everyday communicators’ perceptions. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 303–332.
Martin, J. N, Hecht, M. L., & Larkey, L. K. (1994). Conversational improvement strategies for interethnic
communication: African American and European American perspectives. Communication Mono-
graphs, 61, 236–255.
McCroskey, J. C. (1982). Communication competence and performance: A research and pedagogical
perspective. Communication Education, 31, 1–7.
Mead, R. (1990). Cross-cultural management of communication. New Y ork: John Wiley.
Mihouse, V . H. (1993). The applicability of interpersonal communication competence to the intercultural
communication context. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural communication competence
(pp. 184–203). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Miyahara, A. (1993, November). Communication competence: A Japanese perspective. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Miyahara, A. (1994, November). A conceptualization and measurement of communication competence: A
Japanese perspective . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Associ-
ation, New Orleans, LA.
Morris, R. T. (1960). The two-way mirror: National status of foreign students ’ adjustment . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Nakanishi, M. (1987). Perceptions of self-disclosure in initial interaction: A Japanese sample. Human
Communication Research, 13, 167–190.
Nakanishi, M., & Johnson, K. M. (1993). Implications of self-disclosure on conversational logics, perceived
communication competence, and social attraction. In R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural
communication competence (pp. 168–183). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Nieto, S. (1992). Aﬃrming diversity. New Y ork: Longman.
Oberg, K. (1960). Culture shock: Adjustment to new cultural environments. Practical Anthropology , 7,
177–182.
Olebe, M., & Koester, J. (1989). Exploring the cross-cultural equivalence of the Behavioral Assessment Scale
for intercultural communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 333–347.
Oliver, R. T. (1962). Culture and communication: The problem of penetrating national and cultural bound-
aries. Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Parks, M. R. (1976, December). Communication competence. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Speech Communication Association, San Francisco, CA.
Parks, M. R. (1985). Interpersonal communication and the quest for personal competence. In M. L. Knapp
& G. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication  (pp. 171 –201). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Parks, M. R. (1994). Communication competence and interpersonal control. In M. L. Knapp & G. R. Miller
234  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 256 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 235
Page 235
(Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication  (2nd ed., pp. 589 –618). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Phillips, G. M. (1983). A competent view of “competence.” Communication Education, 33, 25–36.
Porter, R. E., & Samovar, L. A. (1994). An introduction to intercultural communication. In L. A. Samovar &
R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 4–25). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Pruegger, V . J., & Rogers, T. B. (1993). Development of a scale to measure cross-cultural sensitivity in the
Canadian context. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 25, 615–621.
Randolph, G., Landis, D., & Tzeng, O. (1977). The e ﬀects of time and practice upon culture assimilator
training. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 1, 105–119.
Rogers, J., & Ward, C. (1993). Expectation-experience discrepancies and psychological adjustment during
cross-cultural reentry. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 17, 185–196.
Ruben, B. D. (1976). Assessing communication competency for intercultural adaptation. Group and
Organization Studies, 1, 334–354.
Ruben, B. D. (1977) Guidelines for cross-cultural communication e ﬀectiveness. Group and Organization
Studies, 2, 470–479.
Ruben, B. D. (1988). Human communication and cross-cultural eﬀectiveness. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter
(Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 331–338). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Ruben, B. D. (1989). The study of cross-cultural competence: Traditions and contemporary issues.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 229–240.
Ruben, B. D., & Kealey, D. J. (1979). Behavioral assessment of communication competency and the predic-
tion of cross-cultural adaptation. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 3, 15–47.
Rubin, R. B. (1983, November). Conceptualizing communication competence: Directions for research
and instruction . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association,
Washington, DC.
Sanders, J. A., & Wiseman, R. L. (1993). Uncertainty reduction among ethnicities in the United States.
Intercultural Communication Studies, 3, 1–14.
Sanders, O. (1995). A multi-phase analysis of African American women ’s communication at a public transit
setting. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Howard University, Washington, DC.
Saville-Troike, M. (1982). The ethnography of communication: An introduction . Baltimore, MD: University
Park Press.
Schwartz, S. (1990). Individualism-collectivism. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 139–157.
Schwartz, S., & Bilsky, W. (1987). T oward a psychological structure of human values. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 58, 878–891.
Schwartz, S., & Sagiv, L. (1995). Identifying culture-speciﬁcs in the content and structure of values. Journal
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 26, 92–116.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (1995). Intercultural communication: A discursive approach . Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Searle, W., & Ward, C. (1990). The prediction of psychological and sociocultural adjustment during
cross-cultural transitions. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 14, 449–464.
Selltiz, C., Christ, J. R., Havel, J., & Cook, S. (1963). Attitudes and social relations of foreign students in the
United States. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Sewell, W. H., & Davidsen, O. M. (1956). The adjustment of Scandinavian students. Journal of Social Issues,
12, 9–19.
Sitaram, K. S., & Cogdell, R. T. (1976). Foundations of intercultural communication. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Smalley, W. A. (1963). Culture shock, language shock, and the shock of self-discovery. Practical Anthropology,
10, 49–56.
Smith, M. B. (1966). Explorations in competence: A study of Peace Corps teachers in Ghana. American
Psychologist, 21, 555–556.
Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 30,
526–537.
Snyder, M. (1979). Cognitive, behavioral, and interpersonal consequences of self-monitoring. In P . Pliner,
K. R. Blankenstein, I. M. Spigel, T. Alloway, & L. Krames (Eds.), Advances in the study of communication
and aﬀect: Perception of emotion in self and others  (pp. 181–201). New Y ork: Plenum.
Snyder, M. (1987). Public appearances, private realities. New Y ork: Friedman.
Spitzberg, B. H. (1983). Communication competence as knowledge, skill, and impression. Communication
Education, 32, 323–329.
Spitzberg, B. H. (1988, November). Progress and pitfalls in conceptualizing and researching intercultural
communication competence . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication
Association, New Orleans, LA.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  235


--- PAGE 257 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 236
Page 236
Spitzberg, B. H. (1989). Issues in the development of a theory of interpersonal competence in the intercul-
tural context. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 13, 241–268.
Spitzberg, B. H. (1991). Intercultural communication competence. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.),
Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 353–365). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Spitzberg, B. H. (1994). A model of intercultural communication competence. In L. A. Samovar & R. E.
Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 347–359). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Spitzberg, B. H., & Cupach, W. R. (1984). Interpersonal communication competence . Beverly Hill, CA:
Sage.
Starosta, W. J., & Olorunnisola, A. A. (1995, April). A meta-model for third culture development . Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Eastern Communication Association, Pittsburgh, PA.
Stephan, C. W., & Stephan, W. G. (1992). Reducing intercultural anxiety through intercultural contact.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 16, 89–106.
Stewart, E. C., & Bennett, M. J. (1991). American cultural patterns: A cross-cultural perspective . Y armouth,
ME: Intercultural Press.
Strack, S., & Lorr, M. (1990). Three approaches to interpersonal behavior and their common factors.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 54, 782–790.
Suzuki, S., & Rancer, A. S. (1994). Argumentativeness and verbal aggressiveness: T esting for conceptual and
measurement equivalence across cultures. Communication Monographs, 61, 256–279.
Taylor, E. W. (1994). A learning model for becoming interculturally competent. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 18, 389–408.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1989). Identity and interpersonal bond. In M. K. Asante & W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.),
Handbook of international and intercultural communication  (pp. 351 –373). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1991). Intimacy expressions in three cultures: France, Japan, and the United States.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 29–46.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1993). Communication resourcefulness: An identity negotiation perspective. In R. L.
Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural communication competence  (pp. 72 –111). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Ting-T oomey, S., & Korzenny, F. (Eds.). (1989). Language, communication, and culture: Current directions .
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Trenholm, S., & Ross, T. (1981). The compliant communicator: T eacher perceptions of classroom behavior.
Western Journal of Speech Communication, 45, 13–26.
Triandis, H. C. (1976). Interpersonal behavior. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Triandis, H. C. (1977). Subjective culture and interpersonal relations across cultures. In L. Loeb-Adler
(Ed.), Issues in cross-cultural research [Special issue]. Annual of the New York Academy of Sciences, 285,
418–434.
Trubisky, P ., Ting-T oomey, S., & Lin, S. (1991). The in ﬂuence of individualism-collectivism and self-
monitoring on conﬂict styles. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 65–84.
Turner, C. V . (1968). The Sinasina “big man” complex: A central culture theme. Practical Anthropology, 15,
16–23.
Ward, C., & Searle, W. (1991). The impact of value discrepancy and cultural identity on psychological and
sociocultural adjustment of sojourners. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 209–226.
Weber, S. N. (1994). The need to be: The socio-cultural signiﬁcance of black language. In L. A. Samovar &
R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 221–226). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Weinstein, E. A. (1969). The development of interpersonal competence. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of
socialization theory and research (pp. 753–775). Chicago: Rand McNally.
White, G. M. (1980). Conceptual universals in interpersonal language. American Anthropologist , 82,
759–781.
White, M. I., & Barnet, S. (Eds.). (1995). Comparing cultures: Readings on contemporary Japan for American
writers. Boston: Bedford.
White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psychological Review , 66,
297–333.
Wiemann, J. M. (1977). Explication and test of a model of communicative competence. Human Communi-
cation Research, 3, 195–213.
Wiemann, J. M., & Backlund, P . (1980). Current theory and research in communicative competence. Review
of Educational Research, 50, 185–199.
Wiseman, R. L., & Abe, H. (1984). Finding and explaining diﬀerences: A reply to Gudykunst and Hammer.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 8, 11–16.
Wiseman, R. L., & Koester, J. (Eds.). (1993). Intercultural communication competence . Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
236  GUO-MING CHEN & WILLIAM J. STAROSTA


--- PAGE 258 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 237
Page 237
Yum, J. O. (1988). The impact of Confucianism on interpersonal relationships and communication pat-
terns in East Asia. Communication Monographs, 55, 374–388.
Yum, J. O. (1989, November). Communication sensitivity and empathy in culturally diverse organizations .
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, San Francisco, CA.
Yum, J. O. (1993, November). Communication competence: A Korean perspective . Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Miami Beach, FL.
Yum, J. O. (1994, November). A conceptualization and measurement of communication competence: A Korean
perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, New
Orleans, LA.
INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE  237


--- PAGE 259 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 238
Page 238


--- PAGE 260 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 239
Page 239
15
Beyond Multicultural Man
Complexities of Identity
Lise M. Sparrow
In 1976, Peter Adler characterized the experience of what he called “multicultural man ”. His
article was an important think-piece for the ﬁeld of intercultural communication. His articulate
description of a “new kind of man ”, who might “embody the attributes and characteristics
that prepare him to serve as a facilitator and catalyst for contacts between cultures” (Adler, 1977,
p. 38), provided for the basis for considerable discussion about the types of persons best suited
for working across cultures and was included in a primary text used in intercultural communica-
tion courses (Samovar and Porter, 1985) and in many compilations of intercultural training
materials.
In his article “Beyond Cultural Identity: Re ﬂections on Cultural and Multicultural Man ”
(1977), Adler suggested that the conditions of contemporary history may be creating “a new
kind of man” whose identity is based: not on a “belongingness” which implies either owning or
being owned by culture, but on a style of self-consciousness that is capable of negotiating ever
new formations of reality. This person, he said, “lives on the boundary ”, is “ﬂuid and mobile ”,
and committed to people’s essential similarities as well as their di ﬀerences. “What is new about
this type of person and unique to our time is a fundamental change in the structure and process
of identity” (Adler, 1977, p. 26).
More recently, Janet Bennett ’s work (1993a) on “cultural marginality ” cites the story of
Barack Obama, the ﬁrst black elected president of the Harvard Law Review. She says he seems to
claim for himself “an identity that is beyond any single cultural perspective ” and posits that he
and other “constructive marginals . . . are coming to terms with the reality that all knowledge
is constructed and that what they will ultimately value and believe is what they choose . . . ”
(Bennett, 1993a, p. 128).
Milton Bennett (1993b) similarly argues that these marginals, who have reached the ﬁnal
stage of development with respect to his model of intercultural sensitivity, are “outside all cultural
frames of reference by virtue of their ability to consciously raise any assumption to a meta level
(level of self-reference) ”. Adler and the Bennetts represent important current thinking about
what it is to be multicultural and of the constructivist view of identity development.
As an instructor of intercultural communication, I initially found these articles to be
exceptionally useful with the students in our master ’s degree programs at the School for Inter-
national Training, most of whom had lived overseas extensively and spoke many languages other
than English. More than 20% of the student body comes each year from outside the United States,
and of the Americans, the ethnic and racial diversity has increased markedly over the past decade.
Diﬀerences in gender, age, sexual orientation, and religious aﬃliation have also become a much
239


--- PAGE 261 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 240
Page 240
more explicit part of informal conversation as well as of the curriculum. Managing these per-
sonal and cultural di ﬀerences has become a central challenge for participants in our programs
and has inevitably forced students to become more self-aware and to make conscious choices
about their interactions with others.
As such, in the context of our courses, Adler ’s view of what it means to be a multicultural
person faced considerable scrutiny. Students in our programs questioned the article both because
it was based solely on the experiences of men and because many of Adler ’s assumptions about
what it takes to work e ﬀectively in intercultural settings did not match their own experiences
overseas. Though the Bennetts’ more recent work on marginality explicitly addresses the inherent
challenges to identity of extended multicultural experience, students often questioned whether
one could really choose to act on one’s values if those values were not recognized in the contexts
in which they lived as professionals.
One Taiwanese woman, for example, in a ﬁnal paper for a course entitled Culture, Identity
and Ethnic Diversity, reﬂected on her dependence on men for her identity:
It was necessary in the high-context Chinese culture . . . for a man to designate my status
identity.
Students of color similarly claim that the opportunity to construct an individual identity is a
luxury available only to those in dominant social categories. A Somali woman interviewed as
part of the study described in the latter part of this paper, talked about cultures in a similar way,
as limiting her interactions:
In order for me to function I have to be able to do what these people do while I still feel
comfortable . . . I always have to check and when I check I think, did I say or do that right?
International students add that the very concept of an individual identity is Euro-centric. A
woman from Hong Kong wrote in her ﬁnal paper:
Unlike American culture which recognizes individual identity as rooted in personal
accomplishment . . . (in my) society one’s identity is rooted in groups . . . my identity was
not my own to establish and/or earn.
As those with unclear membership in any one culture have talked about the importance of
connection, rather than marginality. One man wrote:
I have found that even as I seem to free myself from the particulars of my life, the
particulars always remain in my life and nurture it much like a plowing of weeds nurture a
garden. My particulars are always part of my life . . . the ultimate protection from the
insuﬀerable hubris of “terminal uniqueness”.
The fact that Anglo-American men in our program have tended to identify strongly with Adler’s
description of a multicultural person has also been of great interest to me, especially given
that women, people of color and international students generally state that individuality and
self-constructed identity are neither possible nor desirable from their points of view.
In response to these diverse critiques, I eventually stopped including the Adler article in the
students’ core curriculum. Nonetheless, students in our program have continued to express a
compelling desire to de ﬁne what it means to be a multicultural person and to discuss to what
extent the solutions posed by the Bennetts ’ “constructive marginality” are valid for women and
ethnic minorities. It is the purpose of this paper to consider these di ﬀerences in the experiences
240  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 262 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 241
Page 241
of multicultural identity, both through a review of literature related to the de ﬁnition of self and
the development of identity, and through the results of a small research project. Inasmuch as Adler
states that his multicultural man’s disembodied mind may very well represent “an aﬃrmation of
individual identity at a higher level of social, psychological and cultural integration ” (Adler,
1977, p. 38), it would seem important to continue to explore his as well as alternative views of
identity and to explore the intrapsychic dilemmas of such people. Questions which I hope to
address in this paper are ﬁrst, whether the ideal of a free-acting individual is in itself a western or
male viewpoint and second, whether it is an optimal view at all. In his paper Adler enjoins others
to further research and exploration. That was the essential purpose of the study which is the
subject of this paper.
1. Review of Literature
As stated above, Adler’s description of the multicultural person has been paralleled in the recent
description by Janet Bennett of “cultural marginality ” (1993a), and in the ﬁnal “integration
stage” (Bennett, 1993a, p. 59) of the “Developmental Model of Intercultural Sensitivity” (1993b)
described by Milton Bennett. In discussing the last stage of his model, Bennett states that
“people can function in relationship to cultures while staying outside the constraints of any
particular one” (Bennett, 1993b, p. 60). Tillich (1966) also suggested that the future will demand
that one live with tension and movement:
It is in truth not standing still, but rather a crossing and return, a repetition of return and
crossing, back and forth — the aim of which is to create a third area beyond the bounded
territories, an area where one can stand for a time without being enclosed in something
tightly bounded.
(Tillich, 1966, p. 111)
Y oshikawa (1987), similarly posits an integration of eastern and western perspectives in which
the communicator “is not limited by given social and cultural realities ” but operates in “the
sphere of ‘between’ where the limitation and possibility of man and culture unfold . . . (and) one
has a transcending experience” (Y oshikawa, 1987, p. 328).
These theories are based in the “radical constructivist” view (von Glaserfeld, 1984) of com-
munication which suggests that it is, in fact, possible to escape the inﬂuence of one’s own reality.
Bennett (1993a) describes the optimal stage of identity as that in which people:
are outside all frames of reference by virtue of their ability to consciously raise assumption
to a meta-level level of self-reference. In other words, there is no natural cultural identity
for a marginal person.
(Bennett, 1993a, p. 63)
The assumption of these theories is that marginality and the experience of transcendence are not
only possible but that they are “the most powerful position from which to exercise intercultural
sensitivity” (Bennett, 1993a, p. 65).
This Cartesian concept of a mind, detached from experience, capable of determining an
objective reality, while still the ideal model of many intellectual and ethical theories based on
work with white western male respondents (Kohlberg, 1976; Levinson, 1978; Murray, 1938; Perry,
1970; Rogers, 1956; Spence, 1985), has, however, been brought into question recently by femin-
ists (Benack, 1982; Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger & Tarule, 1986; Gilligan, 1982; Josselson, 1987;
Loevinger, 1962; Marcia, 1980). The importance of a sense of belonging and relationship, both
to one’s own background and ultimately to that of others, is highlighted as optimal in many
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  241


--- PAGE 263 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 242
Page 242
current racial and ethnic identity development theories (Myers et al., 1991; Hecht, Collier &
Ribeau, 1993). Cross-cultural research (Geertz 1984; Kakar, 1989, 1991; Sampson, 1985;
Schweder, 1991; Schweder & Bourne, 1982), and post-modern educators also suggest that cul-
tural and sociopolitical factors inﬂuence identity development (Freire, 1985; Giroux, 1983; Katz,
1985; Leung, 1990; Nieto, 1992). Similarly, within the ﬁeld of communication as well, the “social
constructionist” view (Gergen & Davis, 1985; Hoﬀman, 1993; Schweder, 1991) suggests that the
very frames of reference we use to construct our identities are rooted in our social experiences.
Research in bilingual and feminist education, psychology and intercultural competence have,
in fact, consistently shown that it is in “connection” (Belenky et al., 1986), interaction (Bateson,
1972; Hoﬀman, 1993) and “sharing meaning” (Collier & Thomas, 1988) that growth, mediation
and communication occur.
1.1. Cross-cultural di ﬀerences in the concept of self
The idea that a mind can isolate itself from its experience has also been problematized frequently
by those outside western cultural paradigms. Balagangadara (1991) suggests, in stark contrast to
this concept, that while:
the Western man feels the presence of “something deep inside himself” even if he is unable
to say what it is [and] builds an identity for such a self [which] is what makes such an
endowed organism unique . . . By contrast, the Easterner would experience nothing, or
some kind of hollowness, the psychological identity of such a self is a construction of
the “other”, an agent is constituted by the actions which an organism performs, or . . . is
the actions performed and nothing more.
(Balagangadara, 1991, p. 103)
Further, he states, those actions are without meaning unless construed or “ascribed” in some
way by another.
Similarly, in his paper contrasting concepts of self in China and the United States, Pratt (1991,
p. 302) states:
The Chinese construction of the self and location of personality appears to be derived
primarily from the cultural, social, and political spheres of in ﬂuence with an emphasis
on continuity of family, societal roles, the supremacy of hierarchical relationships, compli-
ance with authority, and the maintenance of stability. The resulting self ﬁnds an identity
that is externally ascribed, subordinated to the collective, seeks ful ﬁllment through the
performance of duty, and would have little meaningful existence apart from ordained roles
and patterns of aﬃliation. If this is true, the Chinese self is, largely, an externally ascribed,
highly malleable, and socially constructed entity— part of an intricate composite that, like
a hologram, is representative of the whole, even when removed from it.
In contrast, he says the individual in the United States:
is recognized as the starting point for construing the social order, and the self is considered
a psychological construct as much as an artifact of cultural, social and political in ﬂuences.
The intricate holographic conception of self within China poses a stark contrast to the psycho-
logically constructed conception within the United States.
Rosaldo (1982, p. 228) also contrasts the Ilongot concept of the self to the traditional western
model:
242  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 264 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 243
Page 243
What Ilongots lack from a perspective such as ours is something like our notion of an
inner self continuous through time, a self whose actions can be judged in terms of sincer-
ity, integrity, and commitment . . . Ilongots do not see their inmost hearts as constant
causes, independent of their acts . . . what matters is the act itself and not the personal
statement it purportedly involves.
Finally, Geertz (1976, p. 225) makes a similar contrast with the Javanese, Balinese and Moroccan
concepts of self:
The Western conception of the person as a bounded, unique, more or less integrated
motivational and cognitive universe, a dynamic center of awareness, emotion, judgment
and action organized into a distinctive whole and set contrastively both against other such
wholes and against its social and natural background, is, however incorrigible it may seem
to us, a rather peculiar idea within the context of the world ’s cultures.
These examples provide the basis for questioning whether the concept of an individuated self,
capable of free choice and action is not a construct of western languages and cultures.
1.2. African American views of the self
Looking at this same issue within the American context, one ﬁnds that African-Americans, as
one example, also cite contrasts with the dominant western view of the self. Hecht et al. (1993)
posit that African-Americans by and large identify themselves not so much as individuals, but as
linked across time and space, and as altering self-concept in relation to the situation and in
“relationship to other members of the group and to members of other groups ” (Hecht et al.,
1993, p. 40). Asante (1987) extends this by emphasizing the contextually determined inter-
relationship of feeling, knowing and acting and posits that, in contrast to Bennett ’s (1993b)
position that we are best served by a meta-stance outside our experience, “in Afrology [sic] the
study of an object is best performed when all three components are interrelated”. Asante further
states: “One becomes human only in the midst of others ” (p. 79). bell hooks similarly contrasts
Adler’s emphasis on marginality with her African-American community growing up, and with
her need as she grew up to understand both the dominant white culture and her own African-
American culture, and to see both as part of a whole:
We looked both from the outside in and the inside out. We focused our attention on the
center as well as on the margin. We understood both. This mode of seeing reminded us of
the existence of a whole universe, a main body made up of both margin and center.
(hooks, 1990, p. 149)
1.3. Gender di ﬀerences in the concept of self
Current research into western female identity also contrasts that of western men. Relating
directly to the issue of marginality, Chodorow (1976) asserts that boys have the early challenge of
disconnecting themselves from an identi ﬁcation with their mothers while girls are encouraged
to “maintain more connected, ﬂuid relationships” (Enns, 1991, p. 212). Miller (1986) extends this
to say that, in contrast to men, women are:
trained to be involved with emotions, to sense physical, emotional and mental growth and
ultimately have a greater recognition of the essential cooperative nature of human existence
(Miller, 1986, p. 38)
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  243


--- PAGE 265 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 244
Page 244
Belenky et al. (1986) put forth a view of female identity, much like that of hooks, that is situated
in and develops through relationship: “Y ou let the inside out and the outside in”. In women they
say, “there is an impetus to try to deal with life, internal and external, in all its complexity ”
(Belenky et al., 1986, p. 128). In emphasizing the di ﬀerences between men and women ’s moral
development, Gilligan (1982) has been perhaps most successful in pointing out both the
impetus for men to develop a sense of individual self-identity and for women to emphasize
contextual and relational aspects of experience and ultimately, of choice:
For Stephen leaving childhood means renouncing relationships in order to protect his
freedom of self-expression. For Mary, “farewell to childhood” means renouncing freedom
of self-expression in order to protect others and preserve relationships.
(Gilligan, 1982, p. 157)
She notes that for women:
The standard of judgment that informs their assessment of self is a standard of relation-
ship, an ethic of nurturance, responsibility, and care.
(Gilligan, 1982, p. 159)
Recent research in intercultural adjustment (Mendenhall & Oddou, 1985; Parker & McEvoy,
1993) also supports the view that marginality is a trait more typical of men and that, in fact,
the relational and communication skills associated more often with women are the most
appropriate precursors to adjustment and interaction with host country nationals. Parallel to
gender-related research in psychology (Gilligan, 1982; Miller, 1986), Kealey ’s (1990) study in
cross-cultural eﬀectiveness reported that:
women are more highly rated than men on many of the skills and attitudes associated with
women than men overseas; relation-building, ﬂexibility and appreciation for contextual
variation were attributes cited both as present to a greater extent in women than in men
and as contributing signiﬁcantly to overseas eﬀectiveness.
(Kealey, 1990, p. 29)
1.4. Postmodern views of identity
Parallel to these gender-related distinctions one ﬁnds that models of psychological development
(Erikson, 1964; Kegan, 1982) based on research with white men, have consistently emphasized the
development of an individuated self, one optimally capable of making increasingly abstract moral
decisions (Kohlberg, 1976). Similarly, radical constructivists (von Glasersfeld, 1984; Watzlawick,
1984) describe a self which constructs its own unique meaning from experience and then is
responsible for the implications of that meaning. However, for social constructionists (Gergen,
1982; Hoﬀman, 1993), who claim to oﬀer a post-modern view of identity:
the line between individual and social becomes tenuous . . . an idea is constructed together
with others; then is internalized in the private mind; then rejoins the common mind; and
so forth.
(Hoﬀman, 1993a, p. 204)
Social psychologists (Hecht et al., 1993) have also proposed an “interpenetration” model of
development and say that “the self and society cannot be de ﬁned apart from each other”. These
latter theorists focus on ethnic and racial identities and highlight the distinction between
244  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 266 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 245
Page 245
identities that are “internally deﬁned (subjective, perceived, or private identity) and those that
are externally imposed (objective, actual, or public identity)”. These views:
allow[s] for both the individual and the social perspectives, the dialectic between the levels
and the interpenetration of each level as well as structural properties of interactional and
societal systems.
(Hecht et al., 1993, pp. 42–43)
Similarly, critical theory (Poster, 1989), which is concerned with the sociopolitical dimensions
of identity, suggests that human beings “participate willingly at the level of everyday life in the
reproduction of their own dehumanization and exploitation ” (Giroux, 1983, p. 157) and that
society deﬁnes and limits self-deﬁnition as a means of maintaining dominant cultural paradigms.
What they term post-modern “subjectivity”:
relates to issues of identity, intentionality and desire (and) is a deeply political issue that
is inextricably related to social and cultural forces that extend far beyond the self-
consciousness of the so-called humanist.
(Giroux, 1991, p. 30)
Through the lens of these theories one might say that only members of dominant paradigms can
have the luxurious illusion of objectivity or of a self which is free of social realities.
1.5. Complexities of identity
As a ﬁnal contrast, Myers et al. (1991) examine the “complexity” of the impact of race, gender
and ethnicity on identity and suggest that “the optimal conceptual system ” is seen as multi-
dimensional: “encompassing ancestors, those yet unborn, nature, and community” (Myers et al.,
1991, p. 55) and that it is in connection with the spiritual, rather than individual awareness, that
one transcends culture. Social identity theories (Brown & Levinson, 1978; Hardiman & Jackson,
1992; Hecht et al., 1993; Hoare, 1991; Kim, 1981; Phinney, 1990) however, point to the impact of
these physiological and social realities on one’s capacity to self-deﬁne and negotiate identity, and
that even spiritual beliefs are socially constructed.
Perhaps appropriately, Gergen (1982) states:
it is becoming increasingly apparent to investigators in this domain that developmental
trajectories over the lifespan are highly variable; neither with respect to psychological
functioning nor overt conduct does there appear to be transhistorical generality in lifespan
trajectory . . . A virtual in ﬁnity of developmental forms seems possible, and which form
emerges may depend on conﬂuence of particulars, the existence of which is fundamentally
unsystematic.
(Gergen, 1982, p. 161)
Identity development theory, for example, suggests, that White and Black identity development
diﬀer (Hardiman, 1982; Hardiman & Jackson, 1992; Tatum, 1992), as do male and female
identity development (Chodorow, 1976; Enns, 1991; Gilligan, 1982), and further that ethnic
identity and multiple minority identities create complex variations and alternatives to standard
developmental models (Martinez, 1994; Reynolds & Pope, 1991; Root, 1992). Ivey, Ivey and
Simek-Morgan (1993) have, in fact, developed a “multicultural cube” in which some 19 factors:
ﬁve contextual variables, nine multicultural issues and four developmental stages interact in
determining the identity of one individual. Ultimate stages in these various trajectories tend to
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  245


--- PAGE 267 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 246
Page 246
point to the capacity to integrate cultural identities within oneself, rather than to transcend
them as constructivists suggest is possible.
In summary, it appears that to speak of multicultural identity apart from social realities is
increasingly diﬃcult once one focuses on non-western, non-dominant experiences of identity.
“Interpenetration” (Asante, 1987) and “interaction” (Hecht et al., 1993, p. 46) tend to bespeak
these identity processes.
2. Interviews with Multicultural People
2.1. Research methodology
The small study discussed here was a further investigation and documentation of the experiences
of women and people of color with respect to the experience of multicultural identity. Initial
data which contributed to this investigation were approximately 300 essays written for a course
mentioned previously entitled “Culture, Identity, and Ethnic Diversity”, taught by the author. In
these essays students were to de ﬁne culture, its in ﬂuence in their lives and to describe ways
culture aﬀected choices they could see themselves making in the future. Having compiled and
examined these essays, all written by students with at least 2 years of intercultural experience and
having determined that women and people of color articulated experiences at greatest variance
from the Adler article, and from the experiences of Anglo-American men, a series of interviews
was carried out. While Adler had focused on the experiences of four men, 20 in-depth interviews
totalling up to 6 h for each person were the ﬁnal source of data for this study.
In addition to interviews with four men who were of western backgrounds similar to those
described by Adler, six other men from more varied ethnic and cultural backgrounds, and 10
women were interviewed. Some were from biracial families, and some were bicultural. All had
lived extensively (deﬁned as 2 years minimum) in at least three cultures and were at least bilingual,
the criteria used in the initial identi ﬁcation of multicultural people for the study. Respondents
came originally from Australia, Canada, China, Colombia, India, Iran, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Malaysia, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Uganda, the United States, Viet Nam, Zaire, Saudi Arabia,
and South Africa. Adler speaks of his individuals having “embraced only to let go [of] one frame
of reference in favor of yet another”. The premise of this study was that the challenges posed by
life in three cultures, complemented by those of operating e ﬀectively in at least two languages
assured the same kind of shift and the development of a multicultural identity.
Rather than pre-dispose the interviewees to a particular way of describing their experiences, a
methodology called “in-depth interviewing”, developed by Irving Seidman (1991) was selected.
He notes:
At the root of in-depth interviewing is an interest in understanding the experience of
other people and the meaning they make of that experience.
(Seidman, 1991, p. 8)
The three-part interviews, each part up to 2 h in length, were intended speci ﬁcally to help
portray a social constructionist view of reality. The interviewer encouraged narrative description
to highlight how respondents remember and make meaning of their experiences. In this study,
for example, the interviewer began with the query “what is it like to be a multicultural person ”,
and followed in later interviews with questions relating to their sense of “self”. Seidman insists
that only by engaging deeply with a person and by recording and studying the way they construct
and explain their experiences can we come to a deeper understanding of human experience and
of how meaning is made of human dilemmas.
While he suggests an open-ended form of questioning which “reﬂectively” (Rogers, 1980)
246  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 268 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 247
Page 247
follows the thoughts of the interviewee in exploring a particular issue, the technique of “circular
questioning” (T omm, 1985) was also used. This form of questioning is based on the idea that
selves are created in interaction and is intended to highlight contextual and relational aspects of
human experience. Rather than suppose that there is one answer to any question the interviewer
follows the themes of the interviewee while seeking constantly to contextualize answers. Sample
questions in response to the recounting of a particular event might be: did you respond the same
way to members of your family when you were in Africa, when you were a student, etc.? The
interviewer consistently clariﬁes the contexts and asks for descriptions of interlocutors, and for
the degree of which an interviewee would make choices or behave according to consistent values
or in relation to contextual variation. While the methodology allowed for the social construc-
tionist view of identity to be expressed, the range of possible answers allowed for the construc-
tivist model of identity to emerge as well, which it did in some instances. In fact, those with views
similar to Adler were still able to describe their experiences in ways which denied the impact
of context or relationship, while others for who these factors played important roles were
allowed to ﬂesh out intricacies of their experiences in ways which more quantitative interview
methodologies may not have allowed.
It needs to be noted, however, that there are signiﬁcant limitations to the study. It was a small,
though in-depth study into the lives of only 20 people. More often than not interviewees were
not being interviewed in their native languages, and in the majority of the interviews, the
interviewer was not of the same race or ethnic background of the interviewee. These factors can
be seen to have limited the comfort of the interviewees in describing their life experiences and
the reliability of the results. While involvement in some form of intercultural work was a criteria
for identifying skilled interculturalists in the selection of the interviewees and they varied widely
in terms of their backgrounds, all are or were students, teachers, trainers or managers in one of
three contrasting (one urban, one suburban and one rural) college communities. This was
signiﬁcant in that it may also have limited the types of responses received.
There are also limitations to this paper inasmuch as it is di ﬃcult in other than thematic and
anecdotal ways to describe the human experience described in a qualitative study of this kind.
While di ﬀerences in age, gender, race and class of the respondents in this study provide a
contrast to Adler’s work, this paper cannot adequately address the complexity of multicultural
experience nor can the conclusions be seen as anything more than suggestions of what it means
to be, as were Adler ’s men, multicultural within the United States context, or of directions for
further study.
2.2. Four women
In his article, Adler described four men, two of whom he had interviewed, and two of con-
temporary signiﬁcance, Norman O. Brown and Carlos Castaneda. In further describing the results
of this study, representative case studies of four women will be provided. This will be followed by
a summary of themes which were highlighted in both the students ’ essays and in the interviews
conducted.
2.2.1. Case study 1
Marhaba is a Somali woman in her early twenties. She was born in the United States when her
parents were students and was taken with her younger sister, at the age of three, to live with her
father’s parents in Tanzania. Her parents ﬁnished their studies in the US and later divorced. Five
years later she moved with her grandparents to Somalia. Her mother then returned to Somalia
and lived both with her own parents and in the house of her ex-husband ’s parents with her two
daughters. At that point, Marhaba spent time in the homes of both her grandparents. She
ﬁnished high school at a French lisee, ﬂuent in French, the Swahili of her paternal grandparents,
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  247


--- PAGE 269 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 248
Page 248
and Somali, and was somewhat familiar with English. As her father had remained in the United
States she was able, at the age of sixteen to join him and his new family, to attend a well-known
US university and to pursue a Master’s Degree and teaching credential.
At the time she was interviewed she was working supervising teachers and student-teaching.
She was proud of her background and yet clearly sensitive to ethnic and cultural di ﬀerences in
the classroom she taught. She expressed anger at her college advisor who seemed racially biased
and judgmental towards international students. She was articulate about the experience of
change. She spoke of life as “a lottery, like gambling ”, because people went from positions of
power to jail, from riches to poverty “like a roller coaster ” in Somalia. As such she talks about
always learning: “there’s always something to learn from here and there ’s always something to
learn from home . . . I am always here learning ”.
2.2.2. Case study 2
T o Duc Hanh is a Vietnamese woman, 63 years old at the time of the interview. She was schooled
in a French Catholic boarding school in Viet Nam and later attended university at the Sorbonne.
In France she married a Vietnamese man and returned to Viet Nam to raise a family. She later
divorced and in 1975 escaped Viet Nam and has lived for the past 18 years in California. She has
received a doctoral degree in education from the University of California at Berkeley and cur-
rently teaches multicultural education to teachers of LEP (Limited English Proﬁciency) students.
Holding herself graciously and speaking in an educated English, she refers often in conversation
to French philosophers and American psychologists, and speaks enthusiastically of Vietnamese
poetry and music
there is no such thing as “I” in Vietnamese . . . we de ﬁne ourselves in relationship . . . if I
talk to my mother, the “I” for me is “daughter”, the you is for mother, it’s in a relationship
always. If I talk to my children the mother would be me and the daughter or son would
be them.
As she speaks of her present life in the United States, however, she notes a change:
Since the elements and the needs of my family are changing then my responsibilities
and duties are changing and so I change: I perceive myself as creating my own identity . . .
and a person who is choosing and creating my own self.
2.2.3. Case study 3
Ayse is an ethnic East Indian woman who was raised in Uganda and was forced, as a teenager,
to leave in 1972. As a refugee, she worked initially in a chicken factory in England and later
attended secondary school there. In 1975, she was able to join her family in Canada where she
attended University. Having received her Master ’s Degree in the US, she is in her early forties
and teaches English as a Second Language in Canada. She speaks articulately about the place
of language in her identity. At home, she says she spoke Kachi, bastardized with Swahili. Though
she rarely uses them now, she grew up speaking Hindi and Gujarati as well. At her father ’s
garage in Uganda she spoke Swahili and in school and all during her studies she has used
English.
Though her accent in recognizably East Indian she notes that, never having been to India, she
feels far closer to Africa, though it is her Muslim faith which she refers to as home. She has
married a man of her same faith who similarly escaped from Uganda to England and ﬁnally,
Canada. In their shared faith and relationship she notes, she is most herself. She grants her faith
credit for the strength needed to endure her painful life as refugee, and for the opportunity to
earn a Master’s Degree now to be a teacher of Afghani refugees.
248  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 270 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 249
Page 249
2.2.4. Case study 4
Susanna Harrington was born in South America and lived and travelled with her family
throughout the continent as the child of a diplomat. As a teenager she travelled frequently
between counties after her parents ’ divorce. More recently, she has married an American man,
received her Master’s Degree in the US and works as a teacher of English as a Second Language
in an American high school. Many of her students are Hispanic, mainly Puerto Ricans. She
speaks compellingly of her shock at the ignorance of her ﬁrst American students who assumed
all Hispanics were servants or laborers and with sadness at the e ﬀects of her parents ’ divorce.
Now in her thirties, she is enthusiastic about her young daughter, takes great solace in her
relationship to her husband and his family, and is inspired by the commitment to humanity she
shares with them:
I have learned to deal better with issues of power. I am aware that I have been the
oppressor and the oppressed in diﬀerent instances in my life. It is my intention to strive for
equality in the classroom and to avoid imposing my agenda or power on students.
3. Analysis of Interviews and Essays
These women re ﬂect the numerous factors and complexities involved in multicultural experi-
ence. Education, divorce, political turmoil and diplomacy along with economic ﬂuctuations,
intermarriage, business and tourism combine in in ﬁnite ways to provide the impetus for indi-
viduals to take on multicultural lives. The very fact that this study included the experiences of
women and people of color meant also that the sociopolitical dimensions of identity came to
light in most interviews. A woman of nobility and prestige in her home country had to struggle
with visa problems and racism as an instructor at a Southern university. Another woman from a
comfortable middle class family su ﬀered the degradation of a grueling factory job as a refugee.
Similarly, women in intercultural partnerships found themselves without the familiar support of
customs to support their expectations of their partners.
Nonetheless, it was obvious, both from the students’ essays and from the interviews with men
that Adler ’s portrait of multicultural men was in many ways accurate. All the western men
expressly articulated an aspect of the experience of marginality, especially as a sense of detach-
ment. While women spoke of reconnecting with the religions, languages and ethnic traditions
they had grown up with, the men interviewed tended, like Adler ’s men, to ﬁnd connection and
integration through the kinds of mental exercises described by Bennett (1979) and George Kelly
(1955):
the creative capacity of the living thing to represent the environment, not merely to
respond [author’s italics] to it . . . [to] do something about it if it doesn ’t suit him.
(Kelly, 1955, p. 15)
One man, of Caribbean origin found his belonging in an Eastern religious practice, a Saudi man
in Hindu poetry, a Japanese man in western philosophy. Similar to Adler ’s four men, the four
western men interviewed had each chosen lives apart from their native cultures yet linked to
some form of intercultural communication. In reviewing both the essays and the other experi-
ences described for this study, however, signi ﬁcant diﬀerences began to emerge and transcripts
were culled for themes common to all or most of the respondents.
There were diﬀerences in the ways marginality was described as well as in the ways individuals
managed entry into new situations. The “marginality” mentioned by non-dominant respond-
ents came more often in relation to lack of privilege within particular social contexts than to an
abiding sense of “marginal” identity, per se. Similarly, while they articulately spoke of their
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  249


--- PAGE 271 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 250
Page 250
learned abilities to shift in relation to their surroundings, most all deﬁned themselves in terms of
their genders, families, their languages and religions and, often, in relation to the expectations of
diﬀerent contexts. While able to transcend cultural viewpoints and adjust to cultural diﬀerences,
they viewed themselves as signiﬁcantly rooted in the customs and values of certain communities
and as committed using their global contacts to improve those same communities. Ayse, for
example, maintained her commitment to the Muslim community even while living in Canada,
Hanh to Vietnamese refugees while living in California.
3.1. Experiences with sexism, racism, prejudice and stereotyping
Some people patronize you, some want to protect you, some want to ignore you or ignore
part of you . . . and I am aware of their attitude and say that ’s the way they are and that is
where they are at this moment in their life.
(Hahn, see Section 2.2.2.)
Bennett’s work (Bennett, M. J., 1993, p. 65) suggests that this experience of not being accepted is
a type of marginality which can be transcended by the development of intercultural sensitivity
which, in turn, helps them “construe the experience of personal ‘diﬀerentness’ as a natural
outgrowth of highly developed sensitivity to cultural relativity ” and that:
if there is to be a “meta-ethic” (Barnlund, 1979) that can restrain . . . cultural-value
conﬂict and guide respectful dialogue, it must come from those whose allegiance is only to
life itself.
Women, in particular, however, in spite of their commitments to intercultural communication
spoke consistently of their identities in relation to contexts of being excluded or included on the
basis of their race, religion, ethnicity and gender. A biracial woman wrote in her essay:
I ponder if others see me ﬁrst as a black woman and then as a person who eats, drinks,
breathes, etc.
Regardless of their self-perceptions both men and women of color inevitably mentioned having
had to struggle in the United States with the focus on race and ethnicity. Often having originated
in cultures where they were members of the majority, and in some cases of the elite, this shift to
minority status had often been unanticipated. For Susanna, for example, whose life within a
diplomatic family had taught and allowed her the vantage point of the type of intermediary
described by Adler and Bennett, it was a painful realization that her role as a teacher was limited
by her students ’ assumptions that she was a Hispanic immigrant and by their prejudices
associated with this stereotype.
Another example of this forced awareness came to light in interviews with three black Africans.
For all three, coming to the United States was disturbing as they were unaccustomed to a culture
adapted so much to whiteness. Not only did they struggle in mundane ways, e.g. ﬁnding cosmetics
and hair products to ﬁt their needs but they described the stereotyping of African-Americans in
our society as more exaggerated than in their countries. Having come from post-colonial coun-
tries where blacks are dominant, two were able to keep perspective on their experiences and
maintain a sense of self-esteem. For one Zairean woman who comes from nobility in her native
culture and who lives and teaches in a large urban setting, the issue of maintaining self-esteem in
the face of constant oppression is an abiding issue. She sees her and her husband’s struggles with
lawyers and employment as at least partially caused by racism. Similarly, a Kenyan woman con-
sciously made choices to choose relationships with Africans and European-Americans before
250  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 272 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 251
Page 251
struggling with the dilemmas raised as they confronted the experiences of African-Americans in
the US. A third, a South African man, who had grown up under apartheid, who had developed a
sense of self-esteem in the anti-apartheid movement, had the capacity to maintain a very strong
commitment to South African nationalism and still work with European Americans doing anti-
oppression and literacy work in the US.
Similarly, three others of international backgrounds, who had grown up with privilege, were
initially shocked by the prejudice and racism they encountered because of their lack of linguistic
competence and ethnic backgrounds. Hanh still reports frustration at the attitudes of people she
meets:
I have been here 18 years and if somebody had been to Viet Nam and spoke the language
they would think they knew that country very well. Americans are still WHITE AMER-
ICA. Anglo-America. Americans still think of me as a foreigner. Y ou see even though I’m a
citizen and I ’ve been here some are still very surprised that I know English, use funny
words and joke in English. They say how did you do it. Eighteen years and they can ’t
believe I know all of that?
Many of the women also spoke of having been abused, others of having been denied privileges
both in their native cultures and in North America because of their gender. Their multicultural
perspectives did not exempt them from the perceptions of women and people of color held by
their various host cultures. Hanh reported:
I was married to a man who was extremely traditional. Coming back from France, he was
for the ﬁrst 3 years the perfect French gentleman, then he became again the master of the
house and wanted me to obey him.
The woman from Zaire commented on her experience as a professional in a way that was
reﬂective of some of the other women’s experiences as well:
I had a job at the university teaching men. Women would see me as smart and send me to
sit with the men and superior. So I needed to sit with the men and discuss with them. So I
would discuss with them and they would tell me I ’m still a woman. So I didn ’t have any
place where I could identify myself.
Struggles with prejudice were reported again and again as women accustomed to privilege
and status confronted oppressive sociopolitical realities. These realities and the experiences of
marginality they caused posed a harsh contrast to the privileged men in the Adler article, whose
multicultural experiences were a result of choice and education, and whose marginality was a
“style of self- consciousness” (Adler, 1977, p. 26).
Ayse, having lived through many diﬃcult experiences, stated ﬁrmly:
I may behave diﬀerently, I may try to ﬁt into the mold but . . . over the years I have come to
know that I will not be pushed down, I will not be trampled . . . you respect who I am and
I will respect you.
While this ﬁrmness of stance reﬂects the type of self-reﬂectiveness encouraged by M. J. Bennett it
also reﬂects the constant social pressures on those with non-dominant status. It also suggests
that while “mediation . . . [is] accomplished best by someone not enmeshed in any reference
group” (Bennett, 1993, p. 65) we must also consider the extent to which social realities
limit the choice and options of mediators and examine critically the fact that most successful
international mediators are currently male.
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  251


--- PAGE 273 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 252
Page 252
3.2. Shifting identities according to context
The multicultural style of identity is premised on a ﬂuid, dynamic movement of the self,
an ability to move in and out of contexts, and an ability to maintain some inner coherence
through varieties of situations.
(Adler, 1976, p. 37)
Respondents, both in essays and interviews within this study, also spoke of their experiences of
constructing new identities, but always within existing cultural de ﬁnitions. While many spoke
speciﬁcally of the in ﬂuence of language pro ﬁciency on their adjustment and comfort in new
cultures, there was also frequent mention of the concept of an almost chameleon-like capacity to
blend in and become harmonious with di ﬀerent settings. Susanna describes this well:
I think of myself not as a uni ﬁed cultural being but as a communion of di ﬀerent cultural
beings. Due to the fact that I have spent time in di ﬀerent cultural environments I have
developed several cultural identities that diverge and converge according to the need of the
moment.
Shifts in identity seemed to happen intuitively and many seemed to take this capacity for
granted. Another woman, for example, involved in a bicultural marriage entitled her essay: “The
phone is ringing, who will I be? ”, indicating the extent to which the person with whom she was
about to communicate determined a temporary identity. Other women asked such questions to
help them respond, as “in what setting”, “give me an example of a situation”. For the women in
this study their concepts of identity were statements of relationship. In contrast to Adler ’s men
who saw themselves as somewhat empowered to choose which milieus would a ﬀect them, these
women saw themselves as choosing who and how to be in whatever relationship and often con-
sidered others as holding or wielding power from which they might be excluded. This adjust-
ment was sometimes described as painful. One Anglo-American student gave her essay the title
“Where can I really be me?”, as she felt her marriage to a man from another culture asked to give
up aspects of self which had had importance. Marhaba states fatalistically:
I don’t think people change who they are. Y ou can try to change but I think I am still the
same person . . . but I ’m aware. I can never change who I am but I can change my
awareness. I’m with this person now and I’m going to be careful how I handle this because
I don’t know how I’m going to handle it but I am aware.
A question the interviewer asked of all the interviewees was whether or where there was a place
where they felt they were completely themselves. One woman ﬂipped the response in a way that
was reﬂective of many others, responding that she would more accurately respond to a question
phrased: “With whom or where do you like best, the person who you ﬁnd yourself being?” For
most respondents, in fact, responses a ﬃrmed a recognition that who they were was a re ﬂection
of the situation in which they found themselves. For many, for example, it was “at home”, for
others it was a place where there were other interculturalists, for others it was a place or relation-
ship which allowed them to express more fully all the parts of themselves. In some accounts
there was a sense of satisfaction that they had “become a better person ” in new contexts but,
concomitantly, that that identity could exist only in the new context. An example of this was
clear in the accounts of a Malaysian woman who had been increasingly abused by her husband
and abandoned by her parents as she achieved success as a professor in Malaysia and yet was
dismayed by the extent to which these same achievements were taken for granted in an American
university setting.
252  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 274 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 253
Page 253
For the multicultural women in this study, context, at least as much, if not more than any
cognitive capacity for self reﬂection, aﬀected their social identity, self-esteem, and experiences of
marginality as well. Overall these responses re ﬂect views of identity which are interactive with
and responsive to context, in which the construction of identity is less conscious than it is
intuitive, and wherein self-awareness comes after the fact as reﬂection, rather than as a “choice”
in immediate response to a new context.
3.3. Having deep roots
Adler ends his article with a quote from Harold Taylor (1969) which states that:
There is a new kind of man in the world, conscious of the age that is past and aware of the
one now in being, aware of the radical diﬀerences between the two...
(Taylor, 1969, p. 39)
Implicit in this statement is the “willingness to accept the lack of precedent” or as von Glasersfeld
proposes, the existence of “cognitive organisms that are capable of constructing for themselves,
on the basis of their own experience, a more or less reliable world” (von Glasersfeld, 1984, p. 38).
Similar to Adler and Bennett these authors propose the existence of a mental, imaginative
capacity to transcend reality and construct new possibilities.
While every woman interviewed was committed to some form of global transformation, they
also spoke of the importance of family, relationships, and community. Mostly women of color,
they saw themselves as socially marginal to dominant cultures in many instances but rather than
valuing that marginality as a form of freedom or opportunity for detachment, they worked to
redeﬁne their lives, relationships, and communities to create and foster a sense of belonging.
Marhaba speaks of her race:
For a person who ’s black . . . it ’s very important for someone not to disregard it. [it ’s
ridiculous to] say we are human beings and the other things [just] come with it.
and a Latin American woman of her gender, “I guess, at core, I am a mother, a daughter and
ultimately, a woman”.
All female respondents, in fact, used concepts such as “rootedness” or “belonging” to describe
themselves and talked, without exception of the challenges of connecting with others and of not
judging others who failed to treat them with respect. The respondents had all demonstrated
competence through their professions and had worked eﬀectively in intercultural settings. Many
spoke of grounding their lives in meaningful relationships. One woman spoke at length of her
ethnicity and religion as central to her life, as a focus from which she could embrace others.
Another spoke of the importance of settling down, having a family and living in community as
essential for her as she continued her work in intercultural settings. Ayse notes:
As a result of all these di ﬀerences and having been forced to adapt to this new culture, I
have developed another cultural identity which is capable of surviving in this new
environment but that has its roots in the past. This identity functions like a second
personality that appears when it is necessary to adopt a culturally appropriate behavior in
the new culture.
Two women who had been refugees spoke of parts of themselves which were developed in their
native cultures and which they had found ways of nurturing in their new environments, largely
through associating with members of their native cultures. The Zairean woman said clearly:
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  253


--- PAGE 275 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 254
Page 254
That’s my roots, that’s where I come from, that speaks to me, that is home, although I feel
very much a citizen of the world.
When asked if she ever feels marginal or disconnected, Ayse notes that she doesn ’t think of
connection abstractly as much as in terms of groups or individuals:
I can always connect with some people. I start with one or two rather than with groups.
Adler described multicultural man as “a person who is always in the process of becoming a part
of and apart from a given cultural context” (Adler, 1977, p. 31). The women in this study, on the
other hand, clearly strive to root themselves in aspects of their identity which give them a sense
of power and possibility. For some women it was their relationships to their families that
provided a “sense of home ”; for many women of color it was a commitment and bond with
others of their race or ethnic background; for others, it was their religion; for others, their work.
Ayse remarks:
While I am aware that I am visibly di ﬀerent from others I have found many things in
others which are the same.
3.4. Commitment to others
A strength of multicultural women is their capacity to re ﬂect on and work with sociopolitical
realities. By virtue of their life experiences the women in the study had become aware of
themselves and their capacities as well as of the extent to which sociopolitical realities aﬀect their
lives. The receptivity and support of their host communities, or, alternatively, the prejudice or
hostility found in di ﬀerent contexts and relationships shaped aspects of their identities and
served to either foster or prevent growth in certain areas. T o some extent each one had found an
identity through teaching which allowed them to relate to others and serve as guides in the
multicultural realities of their students. Having successfully negotiated the storms of cultural
adjustment and language acquisition, these women had discovered a variety of ways to help
others with the same challenges. While some were motivated by a certain degree of anger, others
by a need for self-su ﬃciency, all spoke of a compelling desire and commitment to make their
experiences of use to others.
3.5. An alternative image
While a clear-cut graphic design was chosen by Adler to portray the solitary concept of identity
described by Adler, deﬁnitions of self of the women interviewed suggest a more organic image,
perhaps a plant or tree rooted and grounded in aspects of self which connect them to others and
to community. The image in Fig. 1 was created life-size by a female student depicting her identity
for an intercultural communications course. Just as Adler’s men claim multifaceted and evolving
identities, women tend to move from their grounding in gender, ethnicity, religion and race into
the multiple and dynamic circumstances which serve to further aﬀect and shape their identities.
The women interviewed in this small study spoke repeatedly in metaphors reminiscent of roots
which grow deeper and deeper as allowed by the receptiveness, or “soil” of a situation. One older
woman found she worked more and more to develop connections to her native culture as she
grew older, realizing that the strength she gained allowed her to grow and to reach more deeply
into and appreciate aspects of American culture as well.
The image of a tree to depict multicultural women ’s identity, whose commitments are
strengthened as they deepen their connections and roots in community also suggests a contrast
254  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 276 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 255
Page 255
to the marginal men of Adler ’s article who stand outside relationship to maintain their senses
of self. Much like biological trees, the length of whose roots into the earth and height above the
earth are often equivalent in, these multicultural women re ﬂect uniquely adapted identities and
commitments to global interaction. Just as trees adjust their growth to climate and season,
women’s ways of expressing themselves grow in relation to their experiences of relationship and
community. Similarly, the intricate root and branch systems which grow in relationship to the
soil and elements, reﬂect the dynamic complexity and individuality of organisms whose develop-
ment happens in relationship to context, a concept essential to biological models of development
(Maturana & Varela, 1987) as well and suggestive of the more chaotic view of communication.
According to Barnlund ’s ecological approach to communication (1981) “the environmental
dimension deserves far more attention than it receives ”. This is echoed in the interviews which
embody identities profoundly a ﬀected by their relations to interpersonal experiences and
sociopolitical realities.
4. Further Considerations
For interculturalists, maintaining a positive self concept is an essential challenge. While this
small study oﬀers some insights into the relation of sociopolitical realities to the self-de ﬁnitions
of multicultural persons, four issues present themselves for further consideration. “Marginality”,
“in-betweenness”, and “uniqueness” are terms used by Adler, Bennett, and radical constructiv-
ists to highlight a de ﬁnition of a highly individuated and optimal human capable of mediating
eﬀectively between cultures. “Commitment” is similarly used in reference to human unity, rather
than to speci ﬁc communities. These terms take on new meaning in the lives of women and
people of color and are deserving of further research, as will be brie ﬂy discussed below.
Fig. 1. An alternative view of multicultural identity.
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  255


--- PAGE 277 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 256
Page 256
4.1. Marginality
Marginality, the concept that “in each human being there obtains a core which is separable and
diﬀerent from everything else ” and its concomitant “reﬂexivity; the self is aware of itself as a
self” (Balagangadara, 1991) is central to the work of interculturalists (Adler, 1977; Bennett,
1993a, 1993b) and is fundamental to constructivism (Watzlawick, 1984), upon which so much
of intercultural communication theory is based. This small study would suggest that men are
more likely to have that sense of separateness and that that is in part a result of their dominant
status in western societies.
As such, deﬁnitions of self are inextricably linked to the cultures and languages as they describe
the self, and within those cultures and languages, the freedom to de ﬁne oneself is dependent on
relationships of power:
Our beliefs and values are inextricably caught up in networks of power and desire, and
resistance to power and desire.
(Gee, 1990, p. iii)
For the women in this study, context, these “networks of power and desire ”, aﬀect their social
identity, self-esteem and experiences of marginality at least as much, if not more than, any
cognitive capacity for self-reﬂection.
4.2. In-betweenness
This brief study also suggests that most multicultural people will inevitably experience minority
status in the course of their lives, and will be a ﬀected, as were the women in this study, by
the rocky soils of human interaction. While the work of Adler states that the experience
of multiculturalism as such results in “in-between attitudes ” (Dawson, 1969) or “dynamic
in-betweenness” (Y oshikawa, 1987), the experiences of the respondents in this study suggest
otherwise. Social identity theories (Banks, 1988; Hardiman & Jackson, 1992; Myers et al., 1991)
also suggest that the ﬁnal stages of identity development are instead integrative, and that the
“in-betweenness” is a stage preceding the optimal, similar to that of Janet Bennett ’s “encapsu-
lated marginality” (Bennett, 1993a). This suggests that the re-connection to one ’s social iden-
tities from a vantage point of appreciation and belonging is necessary both for self-esteem and
for professional work with and beyond issues of prejudice and exclusion.
Furthermore, “empathy” (Bennett, 1979; Fantini, 1991; Kealey 1990) is often on the list of
characteristics of e ﬀective interculturalists. While Bennett (1979) has suggested this “empathy”
can be learned as an intuitive imaginative skill, respondents in this study suggest that women
with multicultural backgrounds are most e ﬀective in communities of belonging to which they
have personal connection and experience. Similarly Parker and McEvoy (1993) found that “prior
international experience and the amount of time spent with host country nationals ” (Parker &
McEvoy, 1993, p. 374) facilitate both cultural adjustment and work e ﬀectiveness. This research
highlights that true empathy and interpersonal skills rise naturally and organically from healthy
relationships with one ’s own family and communities of origin and from a commitment to
signiﬁcant interaction with others.
4.3. Uniqueness
The results of this study suggest that multicultural identity as a “sense of uniqueness” can have
as much to do with the contextual variations in which humans ﬁnd themselves, and with the
linguistic competency and strategies for appropriate interaction which they have learned, as with
an unusual capacity for cognitive or emotional detachment.
256  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 278 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 257
Page 257
An interesting variation on the experience of uniqueness was articulated in the interview with
a Russian woman, who was later in life identiﬁed as “gifted”, as she described her struggles as an
adolescent within a restrictive educational system. As two of Adler ’s men might be classi ﬁed as
“geniuses” within our culture ’s de ﬁnitions, and gifted in the “psychophilosophical” domain
described by Adler (1977, p. 29), other research (Csikszentmihaly, Rathunde & Whalen, 1993)
might consider giftedness in relationship to experience of uniqueness. The “very gifted” often
interact in rare ﬁed margins of society and typically struggle with issues of belonging. Whether
this capacity for complex cognitive creativity is the same as a multicultural perspective deserves
further investigation.
Furthermore, it became clear in this study that individuals develop in a variety of ways,
depending on almost in ﬁnite variables, and that their ways of understanding and describing
their development can vary signiﬁcantly. Gender, religion, racial and ethnic backgrounds, socio-
economic status and language competence all interact within speci ﬁc contextual realities to
conﬁgure personal and social identities. We might then expect that the de ﬁnitions of self will
be as varied as the cultures and subcultures whose languages describe them, and that there will
be increasing variations on the experience of multiculturalism and perhaps a need for a “chaos
theory” of identity. Jenkins suggested, in fact, that there is no one analysis, no ﬁnal set of units,
no one set of relations, no claim to reducibility, in short no uniﬁed account of anything (Jenkins,
1974, p. 787), and Barnlund proposed that:
The study of human communication concerns the process by which meanings are
formed within and among people and the conditions that determine their character and
consequences.
He further urges:
Two caveats are in order: One is that ﬁgure and ground are essential to each other: without
ﬁgure there is no ground and without ground no ﬁgure is discernible.
Similarly the experiences of the people in this study would suggest that uniqueness exists only in
relation to something recognized as familiar. For most people in this study their capacity to work
eﬀectively depended on their relationship to their context and host culture, and in turn that the
more clearly they could deﬁne who they were in terms of social variables and context, the more
clearly they were able to deﬁne and articulate universal values which they hoped to embody and
promote.
4.4. Commitment to community action
Although Bennett’s statement that “cultural mediation . . . be accomplished best by someone . . .
not enmeshed in any reference group ” (Bennett, M. J., 1993, p. 65) and Adler ’s (1977, p. 38)
that “these ‘mediating’ individuals incorporate the essential characteristics of multicultural
man” may be seen as an ideal; members of non-dominant groups may, nonetheless, be unable to
fulﬁll them because of the identities ascribed to them in speci ﬁc contexts. Janet Bennett ’s
portrayal of Barack Obama e ﬀectively portrays the former characteristics, yet he is beset by
conﬂict within his circumstances:
European-American students complain that too much attention is paid to his race: African
American students are angered that he failed to select more African-Americans for posi-
tions at the Review. Some question his motives . . . some point to his record of social
responsibility and apparent commitment to community work and political a ﬀairs.
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  257


--- PAGE 279 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 258
Page 258
Nonetheless, respondents in this study portray another form of e ﬀective intercultural endeavor,
one highly referenced to community yet holding the vision of enhanced possibilities gained
from broader social experience. Nancy Adler ’s work (1997) researching global women leaders
also suggests that women leaders often, in fact, symbolize unity and connection within their own
countries while also demonstrating the capacity to work e ﬀectively internationally:
Chamorro’s ability to bring all the members of her family together for Sunday dinner each
week achieved near legendary status in Nicaragua (Saint-Germain, 1993, p. 80) . . . [and]
Aquino, and widow of the slain opposition leader was seen as the only person who could
credibly unify the people of the Phillipines following Benigno Aquino ’s death.
(Adler, 1997, p. 23–24)
The lives of Waangari Maatai in Kenya and V ezna T erselic in Croatia provide a similar contrast.
Having started the “Green Belt Movement” in Africa, a widespread movement of women plant-
ing trees to re-engender the wildlife and lifestyle of Kenyans, Maatai has now gone on to become
a global leader in environmental circles and thus, a prominent Kenyan political ﬁgure. Similarly,
T erselic, who is coordinator of the Anti-War Campaign in Croatia, an organization whose
purpose is the mediating of grievances incurred during the recent war, has been nominated for
the Nobel Peace Prize and has gained global stature for her commitment to the peaceful reso-
lution of global con ﬂict. The people in this study point also to the importance of balancing
“dynamic in-betweenness ” (Y oshikawa, 1987) with the motivation and commitment to work
with one’s local communities for positive social change.
The second purpose of this study was the identiﬁcation of characteristics essential to working
eﬀectively within international and multicultural communities and a deeply rooted understand-
ing of the uniqueness and potentials of individual communities becomes immediately evident in
the successful commitments of the respondents in this study. Community development theory
also points inevitably to issues of appropriateness and sustainability, both logical extensions of
these attributes. In concert with an appreciation for other realities, and an experienced view of
the global condition, this sense of belonging and commitment might ultimately provide the type
of integrative action and commitment needed in the current complex global environment.
5. Conclusion
This paper began with the articulation of the concerns voiced by students in a course on cultural
identity, who claimed that the 1977 article by Peter Adler on multicultural identity did not
adequately address the complexities of this experience. Similarly, the review of related literature
called for deeper exploration into the factors that in ﬂuence multicultural identity development.
Analysis of the contents of student essays and interviews with multicultural people highlighted
gender di ﬀerences and the ways in which multicultural people de ﬁne marginality, shift their
identities, deﬁne their roots and ultimately commit to lives of service to others. Ultimately, the
terms marginality, in-betweenness and uniqueness as they relate to multicultural identity are in
need of further consideration. There must also be a broader investigation of the nature and value
of multicultural experience and identity than that described in Adler ’s 1977 article, one more in
line with post-modern views of chaos, relativity and social constructionism. While the Cartesian
capacities for objectivity, detachment, and cognitive sophistication which he described are valu-
able attributes in an interculturalist, the results of this study and its brief investigation of research
into non-western and multicultural identity development theories suggest that the capacity for
subjectivity, connection and commitment to speci ﬁc communities provide an important com-
plement to Adler ’s ideas. It is hoped that this study will suggest the importance of ongoing
exploration of multiculturalism and its relationship to positive social change.
258  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 280 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 259
Page 259
References
Adler, P . (1977). Beyond cultural identity: reﬂections on cultural and multicultural man. In R. W. Brislin
(Ed.), Culture learning: Concepts, application and research  (pp. 24 –41). Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawaii Press.
Asante, M. (1987). The Afrocentric idea. Philadelphia, PA: T emple Press.
Balagangadara, S. N. (1991). Comparative anthropology and moral domains: an essay on sel ﬂess morality
and the moral self. Cultural Dynamics, 1, 1.
Banks, J. (1988). Multiethnic education. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon Inc.
Barnlund, D. C. (1981). T oward an ecology of communication. In C. Wilder-Mott & J. H. Weakland (Eds.),
Rigor and imagination. New York: Praeger.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind . New Y ork: Ballantine.
Benack, S. (1982). The coding of dimensions of epistemological thought in young men and women. Moral
Education Forum, 7, 3–24.
Belenky, M. J., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., & Tarule, J. M. (1986). Women’s ways of knowing . New
Y ork: Basic Books.
Bennett, J. (1993). Cultural marginality: identity issues in intercultural training. In R. M. Paige (Ed.),
Education for the intercultural experience. Y armouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
Bennett, M. J. (1979). Overcoming the golden rule: sympathy and empathy. In D. Nimmo (Ed.), Communi-
cation yearbook 3. Washington DC: International Communication Association.
Bennett, M. J. (1993). T owards ethnorelativism: a developmental model of intercultural sensitivity.
In R. M. Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience. Y armouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
Brown, P ., & Levinson, S. (1978). Universals in language usage: politeness phenomena. In E. Goody (Ed.),
Questions and politeness (pp. 56–289). London: Cambridge University Press.
Chodorow, N. (1976). The reproduction of mothering. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Collier, M. J., & Thomas, M. (1988). Cultural identity: an interpretive perspective. In Y. Y. Kim &
W. B. Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communication. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Csikszentmihaly, M., Rathunde, K., & Whalen, S. (1993). T alented teenagers: Roots of success and failure.
New Y ork: Cambridge University Press.
Dawson, J. L. M. (1969). Attitude change and conﬂict. Australian Journal of Psychology, 21, 101–116.
Enns, C. Z. (1991). The “new” relationship models of women ’s identity: a review and critique for coun-
selors. Journal of Counseling and Development, 69 January/February.
Erikson, E. H. (1964). Insight and responsibility. New Y ork: WW Norton and Co.
Fantini, A. (1991). Becoming better global citizens: the promise of intercultural competence. In Intercul-
tural education.
Freire, P . (1985). The politics of education. New Y ork: Bergin and Garvey.
Gee, J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses . Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Geertz, C. (1984). From the native ’s point of view. In R. Schweder & R. Levine (Eds.), Culture theory
(pp. 123–136). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gergen, K. (1982). Towards transformation in social knowledge. New Y ork: Springer-V erlag.
Gergen, K., & Davis, K. (1985). The social construction of the person . New Y ork: Springer-V erlag.
Gilligan, C. (1982). A diﬀerent voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Giroux, H. (1983). Theory and resistance in education: A pedagogy for the opposition . New Y ork: Bergin and
Garvey.
Giroux, H. (1991). Postmodernism, feminism, and cultural politics: Redrawing educational boundaries .
Albany, NY: State University of New Y ork Press.
Hardiman, R. (1982). White identity development: a process oriented model for describing the racial con-
sciousness of white Americans. Unpublished dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA.
Hardiman, R., & Jackson, B. W. (1992). Racial identity development: understanding racial dynamics in
college classrooms and on campus. In M. Adams (Ed.), Promoting diversity in college classrooms:
Innovative responses for the curriculum, faculty, and institutions  New Directions for T eaching and
learning, no. 52. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Hecht, M., Collier, M., & Ribeau, S. (1993). African American communication: Ethnic identity and cultural
interpretation. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Hoare, C. (1991). Psychological identity development and cultural others. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 70, 45–53.
Hoﬀman, L. (1993). Exchanging voices: a collaborative approach to family therapy. London: Karnac Books.
hooks, b. (1990). Yearning: race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South End Press.
Ivey, A., Ivey, M. B., & Simek-Morgan, L. (1993). Counseling and psychotherapy: A multicultural perspective .
Needham Heights, MA: Simon and Schuster.
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  259


--- PAGE 281 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 260
Page 260
Jenkins, J. (1974). Remember that old theory of memory, well, forget it? American Psychologist, 785–795.
Josselson, R. (1987). Finding herself: Pathways to identity development in women. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kakar, S. (1989). Intimate relations. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Kakar, S. (1991). Western science, eastern minds. The Wilson Quarterly, 15(1), 109–116.
Katz, J. H. (1985). The sociopolitical nature of counseling. The Counseling Psychologist, 13(4), 615–624.
Kealey, D. J. (1990). Cross-cultural eﬀectiveness: A study of Canadian technical advisors overseas . Quebec:
Canadian International Development Agency.
Kegan, R. (1982). Problem and process in human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kim, J. (1981). Process of Asian American identity development: A study of Japanese American women ’s
perception of their struggle to achieve positive identities as Americans of Asian Ancestry. Cambridge, MA:
University of Massachusetts Graduate School.
Kohlberg, L. (1976). Moral stages and moralization: the cognitive-developmental approach. In T. Lickona
(Ed.), Moral development and behavior: Theory, research and social issues . New Y ork: Rinehart and
Winston.
Leung, E. K. (1990). Early risks: transition from culturally/linguistically diverse homes to formal schooling.
Journal of Educational Issues of Language Minority Students , Volume 7 Special issue, Summer. Boise,
ID: Boise State University.
Levinson, D. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New Y ork: Knopf.
Loevinger, J. (1962). Ego development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Marcia, J. F. (1980). Development and validation of ego identity status. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 3.
Martinez, I. (1994). Quien soy? Who am I? Identity issues for Puerto Rican adolescents. In P . E. Salett &
D. R. Koslow (Eds.), Race, ethnicity and self. Washington, DC: NMCI Publications.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1987). The tree of knowledge. Boston: Shambala.
Mendenhall, M., & Oddou, G. (1985). The dimensions of expatriate acculturation: a review. Academy of
Management Review, 10, 39–47.
Miller, J. B. (1986). Toward a new psychology of women (2nd ed.). Boston: Beacon.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Myers, L., Speight, S., Highlen, P ., Cox, C., Reynolds, A., Adams, E., & Hanley, C. (1991). Identity develop-
ment and worldview: toward an optimal conceptualization Special issue: Multiculturalism as a fourth
force in counseling No. 1. Journal of Counseling and Development, 70, September/October, pp. 53–55.
Nieto, S. (1992). Aﬃrming diversity. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Parker, B., & McEvoy, G. (1993). Model of intercultural adjustment. International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, 17(3), 355–380.
Perry, W. G. (1970). Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years.  New Y ork: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.
Phinney, J. (1990). Ethnic identity in adolescents and adults: review of research. Psychological Bulletin ,
108(3), 499–514.
Poster, M. (1989). Critical theory and poststructuralism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Pratt, D. D. (1991). Conceptions of self within China and the United States: contrasting foundations for
adult education. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 3.
Reynolds, A., & Pope, R. (1991). The complexities of diversity: exploring multiple oppressions. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 70.
Rogers, C. R. (1956). What it means to become a person. In C. E. Moustakas (Ed.), The self (pp. 195–211).
New Y ork: Harper Colophon.
Rogers, C. R. (1980). A way of being. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Root, M. (1992). Racially mixed people in America. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications Inc.
Rosaldo, M. (1982). The things we do with words: Ilongot speech acts and speech act theory in philosophy.
Language in Society, 11.
Samovar, L., & Porter, R. (1985). Intercultural communication: A reader (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Publishers.
Sampson, E. E. (1985). The decentralization of identity. American Psychologist, 40(11), 1203–1211.
Spence, J. T. (1985). Achievement American style: the rewards and costs of individualism. American
Psychologist, 40, 1285–1295.
Schweder, R. (1991). The social construction of the person. In R. Schweder (Ed.), Thinking through cultures.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schweder, R., & Bourne, E. (1982). Does the concept of the person vary cross-culturally? In A. J. Marsella &
G. White (Eds.), Cultural concepts of mental health and therapy. Boston: Reidel and Company.
Seidman, I. E. (1991). Interviewing as qualitative research: a guide for research in education and social
sciences. New Y ork: T eacher’s College Press.
260  LISE M. SPARROW


--- PAGE 282 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 261
Page 261
Tatum, B. (1992). Talking about race, learning about racism: the application of racial identity development
theory in the classroom. Harvard Educational Review, 62(1), 1–24.
Taylor, H. (1969). T oward a world university. Saturday Review, 24, 52.
Tillich, P . (1966). The future of religions. New Y ork: Harper & Row.
T omm, K. (1985). Circular questioning: a multifaceted clinical tool. In Applications of systemic family
therapy. New Y ork: Grune and Stratton.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1984). An introduction to radical constructivism. In P . Watzlawick (Ed.), The invented
reality. New Y ork: WW Norton & Co.
Watzlawick, P . (1984). The invented reality. New Y ork: WW Norton & Co.
Y oshikawa, M. J. (1987). The double swing model of intercultural communication between the East and the
West. In D. L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western perspectives . San Diego:
Academic Press.
COMPLEXITIES OF IDENTITY  261


--- PAGE 283 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 262
Page 262


--- PAGE 284 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 263
Page 263
16
Applying a Critical Metatheoretical
Approach to Intercultural Relations
The Case of U.S.–Japanese Communication
William Kelly
U.S. Americans scholars initially researched U.S.–Japanese communication in the 1970s (Condon
& Saito, 1974, 1976; Barnlund, 1975). They emphasized diﬀerences in patterns of self-disclosure
and in values between members of the two cultures. Since that time, the research approach
to U.S.–Japanese communication has hardly changed. Intercultural scholars still focus on cul-
tural diﬀerences between the two nations along dimensions such as individualism/collectivism
(Y amaguchi, 1994).
What is striking is that intercultural researchers have largely ignored the larger political and
economic context and the ways in which this context in ﬂuences interpersonal communication
between U.S. Americans and Japanese. They also have failed to systematically address issues of
history and power. It is as if Perry ’s forcible opening of Japan in 1853, World War II, the
U.S. Occupation of Japan, and the long-standing trade disputes had never occurred.
A new research direction is needed based on a critical metatheoretical perspective. A critical
approach brings to light the ways in which both U.S. Americans and Japanese have been in ﬂu-
enced by power dynamics related to Japan ’s defeat in the Second World War, its political sub-
ordination the United States, and its rise to economic superpower status. A critical approach
emphasizes that relations between U.S. Americans and Japanese have never been equal due to
structural factors within the world political economy. Until the in ﬂuence of structural forces
on U.S.–Japan communication is recognized, the applicability of intercultural communication
concepts to actual communication between members of these two cultures will remain partial
and limited.
Critical approaches have emphasized the importance of structural factors, power relations,
and historical context, but they have tended to focus only on mass media discourse, thereby
neglecting interpersonal communication across cultures (Martin & Nakayama, 1999). The value
of the present article is that it attempts to compensate for such neglect by focusing on inter-
personal communication between U.S. Americans and Japanese. By utilizing a critical approach,
I connect communication at the interpersonal level with the larger international context.
I will ﬁrst compare diﬀerence-based and critical metatheoretical approaches to intercultural
communication. Second, I will present my personal experience as a case study of U.S. –Japanese
communication. Third, I will analyze this personal experience to demonstrate the ability of a crit-
ical metatheoretical approach to deal with interpersonal communication across cultures. Finally,
I will summarize the advantages of a critical metatheoretical approach to intercultural com-
munication and suggest some new directions for future theorizing concerning U.S. –Japanese
relations.
263


--- PAGE 285 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 264
Page 264
Comparing CD and Critical Approaches to Intercultural Communication
I will use the abbreviation “CD” to refer to the traditional social scienti ﬁc approaches based on
the analysis of cultural diﬀerences that have made up the mainstream of the intercultural commu-
nication ﬁeld since the early 1980s. A classic statement of the di ﬀerence-based approach to
intercultural communication was made by Barnlund (1998). He stated the requirements for
human survival in the global village with its diverse cultures in the following terms. “What seems
most critical is to ﬁnd ways of gaining entrance into the assumptive worlds of another culture, to
identify the norms that govern face-to-face relations, and to equip people to function within a
social system that is foreign but no longer incomprehensible” (p. 37). Thus the task of the inter-
culturalist is to discover the ways in which cultures can be distinguished by studying di ﬀerences
in cultural meaning. There have been many studies of U.S. –Japanese communication that have
almost exclusively focused on the study of cultural diﬀerences (e.g., Condon & Saito, 1974, 1976;
Barnlund, 1975, 1989; Okabe, 1983; Ishii, 1985; Hall & Hall, 1987; Gudykunst, 1993).
The CD approach will be contrasted with a critical metatheoretical approach. I deﬁne a critical
approach as similar to what Martin and Nakayama (1999) call a critical humanist perspective,
incorporating critical theory deriving from the Frankfurt school, cultural studies, and postcolo-
nial perspectives. The central tenet of such a critical approach is an emphasis on relations of
power between di ﬀerent cultural groups. There is also a concomitant rejection of the funda-
mental premise of the CD approach that the study of cultural di ﬀerence provides the key to
intercultural understanding.
Critical metatheoretical approaches have only recently begun to have an impact within the
ﬁeld of intercultural communication, and this newer trend within the intercultural communica-
tion ﬁeld has recently blossomed (Martin & Nakayama, 2000; Martin, Nakayama, & Flores, 1998;
Nakayama & Martin, 1999; Gonzalez, Houston, & Chen, 2000; Orbe, 1998; Gonzalez & Tanno
1997; Tanno & Gonzalez 1998; Gonzalez & Tanno 2000). Outside the intercultural communica-
tion ﬁeld, Y oung (1996), an Australian social theorist, has written an impressive philosophical
critique of theoretical perspectives on intercultural relations from a Habermasian perspective.
Another noteworthy eﬀort has been made by Dahlen (1997), a Swedish anthropologist, who has
critiqued the training aspect of the intercultural communication ﬁeld for its dependence on
outdated anthropological models. Nevertheless, with regard to the speciﬁc area of U.S.–Japanese
interpersonal communication, few critical studies have been carried out.
I will now present CD and critical perspectives formulated in highly general terms. By
presenting them in such generic terms, the ways in which CD and critical approaches deal with
the various dimensions of intercultural communication can come more clearly into focus,
thereby highlighting their diﬀerences. I will distinguish between a diﬀerence-based and a critical
approach to intercultural communication in ﬁve areas: (1) notion of culture, (2) similarity/
diﬀerence, (3) relations of power, (4) importance of history, and (5) communication competence.
Notion of culture
Two well-known theorists who have studied the in ﬂuence of culture on communication are
E. Hall (1959) and Hofstede (1991). E. Hall (1959) posits a cultural unconscious that in ﬂuences
people to communicate in certain fashions beneath their conscious awareness. For Hofstede
(1991), culture is the programming of the mind that operates like computer software. These
theorists share a belief that the understanding of social structural and economic inﬂuences upon
culture does not make a major contribution to the theory and practice of intercultural
communication.
In S. Hall ’s (1986) reinterpretation of Marxism, however, culture is the realm in which a
contest of ideas takes place. These ideas are themselves in ﬂuenced by the positioning of their
264  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 286 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 265
Page 265
proponents within the social structure. Therefore, culture cannot be understood without refer-
ence to the social context within which ideas are formulated. Such material factors such as
people’s class, race, and gender do not determine the content of ideas, but they do have a
considerable inﬂuence upon people’s thinking.
As a contested site, culture cannot simply be viewed as an arena of shared meanings and
values in the manner of CD theorists (Moon, 1996; Ono, 1998). Hegemonic concepts of culture
are subject to challenge by those whose voices have not been represented in the present construc-
tion of that culture. The culture that re ﬂects the interests of more powerful groups may be
resisted directly or indirectly by members of subordinated groups.
Similarity/diﬀerence
Bennett (1998) writes that “the topic of diﬀerence— understanding it, appreciating it, respecting
it— is central to all practical treatments of intercultural communication ” (p. 2). From his CD
stance, all universalist perspectives are ways of minimizing diﬀerence. Bennett believes that those
who claim that recognition of human similarity is a positive factor in promoting e ﬀective
intercultural communication are guilty of trying to impose their cultural beliefs on the other.
They are denying diﬀerence in order to preserve an attachment to their own cultural beliefs and
values while avoiding the need to accept and appreciate other ways of life.
Y oung’s (1996) work illustrates a critical metatheoretical perspective on similarity/diﬀerence.
His aim is to provide a theoretical approach that is capable of dealing with the remnants of
imperialism and colonialism. Such an approach must be capable of allowing us to celebrate
diﬀerences but not at the expense of denying our common humanity. His plea is for a middle
path between the universalism that was used to justify European conquest and rule over weaker
nations and the relativism that often leads to separatism and ethnic con ﬂict.
Critical anthropologists and postcolonial theorists have also argued against the tendency to
emphasize cultural diﬀerences in research. They have seen the emphasis on diﬀerence as a way of
“making other.” In their view, this celebration of diﬀerence stems from an absolute division that
has been constructed between West and non-West. As Said (1987) points, out, such a division,
historically, has been used to justify the power exercised by the West over others. By viewing
cultures as separate and bounded entities existing in isolation, the Orient appears as radically
other. The West is constructed as masculine, democratic, progressive, dynamic, rational, and
moral; the Orient as feminine, sensual, backward, and duplicitous.
Relations of power
The main premises of the CD standpoint on power and the reasons for rejecting a critical
approach to power have been expressed by Bennett (1998). Bennett does not deny the existence of
power diﬀerentials that have an impact on communication. Y et he believes that the examination
of power relations leads into politically charged discussion that is beyond the province of the
intercultural communication ﬁeld. Discussions of ideological discourse should be avoided since
they create much heat and little light. “When communication behavior is labeled as ‘Marxist,’
or ‘imperialist,’ or ‘racist,’ or ‘sexist,’ the human aspects of that behavior are overshadowed
by the rei ﬁcations of principle. Polarization usually supplants any hope of inclusivity, and
further exploration of communication di ﬀerences is drowned out by the political commotion ”
(pp. 10–11).
From the CD perspective, the research focus should be on communication di ﬃculties
between members of diﬀerent cultures that are “well-meaning clashes” (Ting-T oomey, 1999). A
well-meaning clash occurs when all parties in an intercultural encounter follow their own
cultural script and behave in accordance with their own cultural norms, rules and values.
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  265


--- PAGE 287 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 266
Page 266
A critical approach to the role of power relations in communication recognizes the nega-
tive role of ideology whereby meaning is constructed and conveyed in the service of power
(Thompson, 1990). Systematically asymmetrical relations of power are structures of domination
within which members of less powerful groups are expected to act in accordance with particular
scripts and social roles. As Y oung notes (1996), such a pattern of behavior is inimical to the
dignity and self-respect of subordinated groups, prevents them from pursuing their own inter-
ests and needs in an unhindered fashion, and maintains social inequality and their own sub-
ordination. Under such conditions, members of dominant groups will tend to enforce social
expectations that reinforce their own dominant position and power, whereas members of
subordinate groups may resist them.
Critical interculturalists, therefore, do not focus only on miscommunication due to cultural
diﬀerences. There are also important occasions when the structure of people ’s roles, tasks, and
situation does not allow the basic needs of subordinated group members to be realized. In
addition, the meanings that may be employed are often limited by distorted communica-
tive frameworks and by ideological practices. When there are relationships of domination and
subordination, members of dominant groups will tend to impose their reality on members of
subordinated groups. As a result, members of oppressed groups who question or reject the
existential claims of members of the dominant group violate the socially and politically con-
structed interaction norms of that speech context (Y oung, 1996).
Historical context
Among CD theorists, Bennett (1998) has explicitly rejected the notion that historical under-
standing should play a major part in intercultural communication. History should be down-
played, he believes, because it usually has little connection with current behavior. He does
recognize that an understanding of history may help us to interpret present behavior that is a
response to past mistreatment by another group. Nevertheless, his overall view is that a focus
on historical context is a distraction from analyzing the in ﬂuence of culture on face-to-face
interaction in the present.
Postcolonial theorists as far back as Fanon and Memmi have pointed to the need for historical
reconstruction of the colonial period in order to uncover the ambivalent and symbiotic relation-
ship between colonizer and colonized whose e ﬀects have continued to the present time. The
colonized may have identi ﬁed with the colonizer, and the colonizer may have applied great
violence against the colonized (Gandhi, 1998). Bhabha (1994) sees the task of the theorist as
bringing back to consciousness the memories of events that the colonized person ’s mind could
not accept. In this way, the blocked memories can be released and their in ﬂuence upon present
behavior can be neutralized.
There tend to be two phases of identity construction that occur once the colonized has thrown
oﬀ identiﬁcation with the colonizer (S. Hall, 1996). The ﬁrst is when colonized peoples try to
decolonize their minds by making e ﬀorts to recover a pure culture that existed before the
colonial intrusion. The second phase may follow after cultural integrity has been regained. In
this phase, the in ﬂuence of the colonizer is admitted, and a new hybrid culture is created that
faces toward the future rather than the past.
Communication competence
The CD view of communication competence is that it has three major dimensions: a ﬀective,
cognitive, and behavioral (Chen & Starosta, 1996). The aﬀective domain centers on intercultural
sensitivity; the cognitive dimension includes self-awareness, cultural self-awareness, and know-
ledge of other cultures; and the focus of the behavioral realm is on skill development. Intercultural
266  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 288 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 267
Page 267
sensitivity is de ﬁned as acceptance of another culture, but the issue of whether members of
the dominant culture have su ﬃcient motivation to give up their power and privilege is not
addressed. The CD theorist views the cognitive dimension in terms of thought patterns and
social values, norms, customs, and systems, but no mention is made of the historical relations
between nations and their present relations of power.
From a critical metatheoretical perspective, Y oung (1996) claims that traditional intercultur-
alists fail to provide an adequate theory of context and circumstances because their treatments
do not address the realities of political economy and human emotions such as pride. The
communication ideal that Y oung proposes is based on Habermas ’s notion of open speech and
unconstrained communication. He maintains that all communicators regardless of cultural
background have some notion of communication that is free from external intervention and
oriented toward what is true, what is right, and what is sincere. In the process of communicating,
people can choose whether or not to follow this ideal, and he views such choices as a continuum
with rationality at one pole and power/knowledge or ideology at the other. From this standpoint,
communicative competence means speaking authentically, accurately, and appropriately with
regard to the social relationship, as well as a willingness on the part of those in positions of
power to cooperate with those who resist domination.
Personal Experience as Evidence
In this article, I will share my own personal experience as evidence to support the usefulness of a
critical approach to intercultural communication. This experience involves living in Japan for
nineteen years and considerable familiarity with Japanese life, including marriage to a Japanese
woman and the raising of two children. I have used published accounts to add credibility to
my reports, but my own experience provides the primary evidence for the value of a critical
approach in understanding U.S.–Japanese intercultural communication.
Was my experience representative? Countercultural and mainstream U.S. Americans were
living in Japan as well as those who were sent by their company or by the U.S. government.
Despite the diﬀerent backgrounds and circumstances, I found that we all tended to share certain
attitudes and behavior toward Japanese people. We generally felt superior to Japanese people and
played the role of a teacher, since we consciously or unconsciously understood ourselves to be
members of the leading nation in the world and expected others to communicate on our terms.
I am not claiming that all U.S. Americans had this type of attitude, but in my observation, a large
majority of the Americans that I encountered in Japan did have such an attitude.
There are several advantages of relying on personal experience. One is that there is an active
personal involvement that provides the ﬂavor of what it felt like for a white American male to be
interacting with Japanese people in Japan. Another advantage is that we have a chance to listen
to a distinctive voce, that of a white American male trying to unlearn privilege. In addition, there
is the close connection between experience and theorizing that Kondo (1990) addresses. It is our
participation and immersion in events that enables us to create order and meaning. Living in
Japan led me to perceive power as an issue for intercultural communication and to take an
interest in critical approaches.
Using personal experience as data, I will argue that a critical metatheroetical perspective can
be applied to the understanding of interpersonal communication across cultures. I will examine
my personal experience and show how these experiences can be interpreted on the basis of a
critical approach with regard to notions of culture, similarity/di ﬀerence, relations of power,
historical context, and communication competence. My argument is that the application of
critical concepts enables us to understand my communication as a white American male with
Japanese people in Japan in useful and valuable ways that a CD approach cannot match. The
personal experience that I will analyze in terms of critical concepts includes the ways in which
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  267


--- PAGE 289 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 268
Page 268
I ﬁrst bene ﬁted from privilege as a white American in Japan, the changes in outlook that I
underwent while living in Japan, and the reasons for my letting go of my colonial attitude
towards Japanese people.
T aking up the White Man’s Burden
As an English teacher and sympathizer with Western countercultural trends, I entered a milieu
of like-minded people who seemed interested in making su ﬃcient money either to resume
traveling, to accumulate savings, or to enable them to go out and enjoy themselves. Not unlike
the adventurers and misﬁts who partially made up European colonial society, many of us did not
experience comfort or success in our own country. Consequently, it was pleasant to have status,
money, and popularity merely on the basis of being white. As Iyer (1991) points out, there was a
comfortable groove for U.S. Americans in Japan: “being taken as an exotic, or a demigod, was
one of the hardest states to abandon” (p. 190).
For Western men, the availability of Japanese women has been a big attraction. Especially
when I ﬁrst lived in Japan, the romantic image of the Western male was very strong. There was
never a shortage of Japanese women in T okyo who could be met at discos, parties, English
classes, or through friends. Some Japanese women accepted the image that Western men were
more kind and less sexist as well as more romantic than Japanese men. Western men, including
myself, often took Japanese women lightly and enjoyed the psychologically secure relationship
that we had with them. For example, I felt more con ﬁdent and secure being with Japanese
women inasmuch as their standards seemed lower. At a time of rapid gender role changes in the
United States, Japanese women tended to follow traditional gender roles and were pleased to
have a white partner. The ability to enjoy such status and privilege was rooted in a colonial-type
relationship between the United States and Japan. In Ma ’s (1996) words, “If America’s position
as Japan’s conqueror and savior helped to reinforce a general sense of awe and respect toward
Westerners, then it also produced a colonial attitude among Western men . . . who believe they
can easily ‘lord it over’ the Japanese” (pp. 107–108).
Not long after I arrived in T okyo, I went on a television program with a large international
audience and made up stories about my unusual sexual experiences in Japan and then came back
the next week and did a commentary on a ﬁlm about streaking in California. For that ﬁrst show,
I dressed in ﬁve-color Balinese pants, wore a batik shirt, and was somewhat drunk. During my
ﬁrst year in T okyo, I was a movie extra, a secretary at an international health conference, lectured
and taught at well-known Japanese companies on American thinking and values, and made
much money teaching English at prestigious Japanese companies.
My way of life with its freedom and excitement seemed much better than that of the typical
Japanese salaried workers I taught. I looked down on them and frequently told them that I did
not want to settle down and live a regular life. In a condescending way, I implied that they were
stuck in their routine lives, while I was not. I preferred not to recognize that it was my white
privilege that allowed me to be accepted and to get jobs in foreign countries. Japanese people, for
example, did not have the same opportunities to get well-paying jobs teaching the Japanese
language or doing Japanese-language rewriting and editing in other countries.
As part of my exciting life, I hitchhiked all over Japan during the 1970s and early 1980s. White
people could easily get rides from Japanese drivers, although Japanese people themselves gener-
ally could not, and sometimes we were brought to where we wanted to go, even if it was far from
the driver’s actual destination. Kerr (1996) talked about hitchhiking in the Japanese countryside
in the early 1970s as a wonderful experience during which he was treated “extremely well. ”
Japanese people showed tremendous curiosity and kindness to him, and it was an easy time for
foreigners.
Discussions with other European Americans about Japan usually led to sharing of complaints
268  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 290 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 269
Page 269
about Japan or, at best, predictions that Japan was in for deep trouble due to its stubborn
unwillingness to internationalize. One U.S. friend who had studied philosophy at Columbia
University said that Japanese people have no morality, power always prevails in Japan, and
weaker groups are mercilessly exploited. He refused to believe that the income inequality was far
greater in the United States than in Japan during the 1980s.
There was a certain predictability in the interactions between white Americans and Japanese
throughout the 1970s and early 1980s. Japanese were almost always expected to speak English,
show interest in the United States, compliment and ﬂatter white Americans, and do what was
possible to make white Americans feel good. When white Americans said something, Japanese
were not supposed to contradict it. At the same time, though, we would criticize Japanese for
being so reserved and unable to express themselves.
White American arrogance was greatly in evidence at that time, a phenomenon that CD
approaches cannot account for. When I taught at Mitsui & Co., one of the leading trading
companies in Japan, in 1974, a student asked me to go with him to Kamakura. I replied that I
had already been to Kamakura and wanted to go somewhere new. My casual dismissal of this
invitation could be interpreted as unawareness of the importance of face saving in Japan, that is,
in terms of cultural ignorance. But my behavior could also be interpreted as the kind of arro-
gance often displayed by those occupying dominant positions within a colonial-type relation-
ship. It could be interpreted in terms of my enjoying power and privilege rather than as a failure
to acknowledge cultural diﬀerences. Since I felt that I was a kind of minor star in Japan as a white
American and that Japanese were interchangeable as acquaintances, I think that arrogance of
power is a more accurate explanation for my behavior.
White Americans had reality-de ﬁning power in most circumstances where they came
together with Japanese people. As critical theorists have noted, the form of domination that
tends to prevail in today ’s world is the power to de ﬁne reality. In the case of white Americans
in Japan, we often took advantage of U.S. cultural hegemony in our attempts to impose our
ways of thinking on Japanese people. It was not until the early 1980s and the sudden popular-
ity of Japanese-style management in the West, that the idea of learning from Japan ﬁrst
surfaced. Before that time, it was always tacitly understood that when Japanese and Americans
came together in Japan, the Americans taught and the Japanese learned. Until intercultural
scholars recognize these contextual factors, they will not be able to account for the distorted
patterns of communication that have had such a strong impact upon U.S.–Japanese intercultural
relations.
The issue of communication competence is related to that of power. In the CD account of
communication competence, neither recognition of power diﬀerences between the communica-
tors nor a willingness to give up one ’s privileges is a precondition for communication com-
petence. The idea that the politics of communication can prevent eﬀective communication is not
entertained. Since the CD approach ignores the political dimension, it creates the impression
that knowledge, a ﬀect, and skills are su ﬃcient conditions for the presence of communication
competence.
My experience shows that until I admitted that I was taking advantage of my skin color,
nationality, and culture, I did not seriously consider developing the knowledge of Japanese
culture and language, the feeling toward Japanese people, and the communication skills that
would enable me to relate to Japanese people beyond a very super ﬁcial level. Much personal
development and reﬂection had to take place before I was willing to leave the world of English
conversation and segregated foreign ghettos. A critical metatheoretical approach emphasizes
the importance of the politics of communication, and in my case the political choice was
whether to continue accepting the U.S–Japanese communication hierarchy. This political decision
determined the very possibility of my achieving communication competence.
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  269


--- PAGE 291 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 270
Page 270
The W ell-W orn Paths of “English Conversation”
As an English teacher in the world of “English conversation,” I experienced the situation that
Lummis (1977) described in his critique of that world. Over the years, the situation became less
extreme, but I believe Lummis’s description is accurate for the period covered before Japan’s rise
to economic eminence. In those days, in order to teach English in Japan, it was not necessary to
be qualiﬁed as a language teacher or to speak Japanese or know anything about Japanese culture
and society. It was enough to give Japanese people a chance to meet a foreigner and to be
entertained. Consequently, a teacher could talk about anything during the class and preparation
was hardly necessary. Our salaries were also higher than those of Japanese teachers of English
who were qualiﬁed and experienced.
When teaching at Mitsubishi Corporation, the leading trading company in Japan in 1974, I
remember doing some teaching for one hour and entertaining and exchanging ideas with stu-
dents for the other hour of the class. Once I even arm-wrestled the ten male students in the class.
It was also generally understood that English teachers would be white, even if not native
speakers, and that native speakers of other colors would usually not be hired under “normal”
circumstances.
In those days when I walked around T okyo, I had experiences of being stopped by young
Japanese who asked me in a fawning manner if they could practice their English. Lummis (1977)
describes how Japanese learn English conversation from whites in an extremely alienating
manner and then speak to white people in the same depersonalized way. “Typically ‘English
conversation’ is characterized by an attitude of obsequiousness, banality, a peculiar ﬂatness or
monotone, and practically no hint as to the identity or personality of the speaker ” (p. 21).
I looked down on these speakers of English conversation as having a slave mentality and tried
to avoid them.
At the ﬁrst meeting of the Society for Intercultural Education, Training and Research
(SIETAR) Japan that I attended in the late 1980s, I noticed that U.S. Americans who had recently
arrived in Japan would discuss Japanese culture and communication while Japanese remained
silent. All meetings were held in English at that time, and native speakers had a tremendous
linguistic advantage that enabled them to dominate discussions at these meetings. The pur-
pose of the organization was to promote intercultural communication, but it seemed that U.S.
ethnocentrism was being promoted instead.
The English language also played a part in the way Japanese were often treated at public
meetings by U.S. native speakers of English. Tsuda (1999) notes that native speakers often take
advantage of their English pro ﬁciency and push non-native speakers aside during discussions
by stepping up their speaking speed, using much jargon and idiomatic expressions, or making
grammatically complex statements. Thus some Japanese and other non-native speakers feel
inhibited when speaking English. “I have constantly observed that non-native speakers of English
apologize for their inability to speak English correctly, make excuses for their poor English, and
ask for the native English speaker’s indulgence and forgiveness” (Trifonovitch, 1981, p. 213).
My experience of communication between U.S. Americans and Japanese points to some well-
worn tracks along which conversations have tended to travel. There is already a deep groove in
the world of “English conversation ” that is di ﬃcult to avoid for both European American
teachers and Japanese students. It is a groove that was formed as a result of unequal power
relations between the two groups in which white Americans in Japan play the role of teacher,
whether working as an English teacher or not, and Japanese are the students, despite the fact that
the setting is Japan. A personal example of this phenomenon was telling one of my students
about the advantages of living a free and adventurous life beyond social obligations and ties. My
eﬀorts went as far as trying to convince him that my way of life was better than his cramped and
restrained existence as a salaried worker at a Japanese company.
270  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 292 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 271
Page 271
In this arti ﬁcial world, not only are the conversations often boring, trivial, and shallow, but
white Americans never learn much about Japan or expand their identity. They do not have to go
through a di ﬃcult struggle of adaptation to the various aspects of Japanese culture because
the Japanese people are expected to do all the adapting. European Americans just have to “be
themselves” and let Japanese help them whenever they have to deal with anything new or
unusual that they are not used to.
As part of the norms of English conversation, I expected Japanese to assimilate to my culture.
I also felt superior to them. Due to their culture, I believed that Japanese would never reach
the goals of individual freedom, rational thinking in daily life, and speaking English like a
U.S. American. Therefore, they would always remain aspiring U.S. Americans, not capable of
achieving equality. During my ﬁrst stay in Japan, I gave up any attempt to study Japanese and
concentrated mostly on making and saving money.
Like many other Western English teachers in Japan, I scathingly criticized the Japanese educa-
tional system for the inability of Japanese people to speak English. By emphasizing only reading
and writing, by forcing students to pass diﬃcult school entrance exams in English grammar, and
by allowing Japanese English teachers who could not speak English themselves to teach, the
Japanese Ministry of Education ensured that Japanese people would not learn how to speak
English in school. Reischauer (1988) intimated that an important reason for this deliberate policy
was that the Japanese government was afraid Japanese people would lose their Japaneseness
through exposure to Western people. What I failed to recognize until much later was that this
fear of the Japanese government was not unfounded.
When I came to Japan, the easiest path for me to take was to enter the domain of English
conversation. Consciously, I was not a cultural imperialist but it felt comfortable and reassuring
to enter a world where I could make money, be looked up to, and not have to adapt to a new
language and culture. This world was built upon structurally distorted communication in which
the English language, U.S. culture, and white Americans were assumed to be superior within a
colonial relationship. This example reveals the importance of the material as well as the symbolic
realm for the understanding of culture. It was the material conditions of white U.S. power and
privilege that led me to assume a stance of superiority in relation to the Japanese people I
encountered. The communication grooves that I unthinkingly entered when I began living in
Japan were the outcome of a colonial relationship between the United States and Japan.
Role Models and Catalysts
A U.S. American I met, whose behavior contrasted in many ways with those of the other whites
that I knew, really opened my eyes. He did not teach English and had little money, his friends
were mostly Japanese intellectuals and artists, and he spoke almost perfect Japanese while acting
in a manner that was nearly indistinguishable from that of most Japanese people.
I learned about another side of Japanese life from him as I heard about Japanese people who
had self-respect and communicated with foreign people on their own terms in Japanese about
things that mattered. These Japanese had no desire to imitate white Americans and to learn
English because it was fashionable. His knowledge and understanding of Japanese society and
culture seemed enviable, and through him I came to know what more equal and meaningful
communication with Japanese was like, what it would require of me, and what the rewards
might be.
A critical metatheoretical analysis of the behavior of the Japanese people with whom my
American friend associated, would emphasize that they were resisting the unequal world of
English conversation by refusing to enter it. They were also contesting the third culture that had
been created by U.S. Americans and Japanese during and after the U.S. Occupation of Japan. By
using the Japanese language and style of communication, these Japanese people were rejecting
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  271


--- PAGE 293 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 272
Page 272
the role of student and setting up new norms for relations between white Americans and
Japanese.
This example also illustrates the contested nature of the relationship between U.S. and
Japanese. In creating a third culture, U.S. Americans and Japanese can choose to relate largely on
U.S. terms, on Japanese terms in opposition to the prevailing norms, or create their own hybrid-
ized third culture. Japanese people who resist U.S. cultural hegemony may contest English-
language dominance and Western communication norms. Their desire is to overcome the legacy
of a Japanese colonial mentality. On the other hand, Western people who are anti-colonial may
also contest these same norms when interacting with Japanese.
When I left Japan for the ﬁrst time, I exited through Okinawa. There I met a man from west-
ern Japan with whom I went around the island for a few days. Even though I could only speak a
little Japanese, and he could speak no English, we somehow communicated in a very natural and
warm way. I appreciated so much that I was not treated as an English speaker and felt free of all
stereotyped roles. His humanity deeply impressed me in a way that I could not easily explain.
Although I did not keep in contact with him, I knew that if I returned to Japan, I would learn the
Japanese language and would try to meet more people like him. Through meeting this person,
I began to understand at a deep level that Japanese also had a desire for self-expression, for
personal integrity, for equal relations with others. Eventually, I was able to reach a level of
understanding that accepted both the common humanity of U.S. Americans and Japanese and
our diﬀerences in cultural background.
I came to realize that my attempt to teach Japanese people and carry the white man ’s burden
enmeshed me in contradictions. I looked down on Japanese because they imitated the United
States, yet I taught them to become more like white Americans and received grati ﬁcation
through their acknowledgement of my cultural superiority in the world of English conversation.
I felt negatively about Japanese people because I maintained a belief in their diﬀerence, yet I was
holding out to them the promise of erasing that di ﬀerence by teaching them English.
As long as I believed in a racial/cultural hierarchy, I could not accept Japanese people ’s
humanity. And it was by accepting their humanity that I also accepted their uniqueness and
allowed them to choose their own way of life. Thus both similarity and di ﬀerence need to be
recognized (Hirai, 1987), and as critical theorists have pointed out, an emphasis on di ﬀerence
alone can lead to greater objectiﬁcation of the Other (Dahlen, 1997).
On Being a Racial Minority in Japan: Lessons from History
The other area of experience which greatly aﬀected my perception of Japan and Japanese people
was that of racial discrimination. In the early 1970s, I lived in a block of apartments in T okyo
where only foreigners lived. After I married a Japanese woman, I thought I would be able to live
anywhere, but that was not always the case. There was a house my wife really wanted to rent, but
the landlady said that no foreigners were allowed. My wife got the real estate person to intercede
and ﬁnally the landlady relented on condition that I prove that I was not black by showing my
face at the real estate oﬃce.
Later, in the early 1990s, I tried to help U.S. friends who could not speak Japanese to rent an
apartment in T okyo. One agent of a small real estate went into a panic when I entered. She said
that no Japanese would rent to a foreigner in that area. The larger real estate agents were helpful,
but they had to mention that a foreigner wanted to rent whenever they called the owner by
phone. The refusal rate for whites was about 50% in the areas of T okyo that I visited, and
landlords and landladies asked no questions about where the person worked, whether the per-
son could speak Japanese, had a guarantor, or had been in Japan long enough to understand
Japanese customs.
For whites, not to mention people of darker skin, marrying a Japanese could cause huge
272  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 294 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 273
Page 273
family problems. Moreover, foreigners could not get loans, enter certain establishments, or have
the same jobs as Japanese. In these cases, appeals could not be made since there were few laws
that could deter racial discrimination, and it was customary for such discrimination to exist.
For many white Americans, racial discrimination is a new and very unwelcome experience
that leads them to complain bitterly about Japan and the Japanese. But such conditions are not
like racial discrimination in the United States where the darker “races” are treated as inferior in
most respects. In Japan, whites are treated better than Japanese as long as they stay in their
circumscribed area and remain honored guests. The consequence of this type of treatment is
that a white cannot forget his or her di ﬀerence. I had many experiences where I would speak
ﬂuent Japanese and the person I was speaking to would reply in broken English. The message I
received in those situations was that it did not matter how long I lived in Japan— I would always
be treated as a foreigner.
How can this situation be explained? Does my experience show that Japanese are typically
racist like most people in the world, including U.S. Americans? Ivan Hall (1998), who has lived
in Japan over thirty years, views the Japanese concept of internationalization as openness to
foreign things but not to foreign people. “Japan’s concept of ‘internationalization’ as a con-
trolled ingestion of foreign civilization while keeping foreigners themselves at bay, rests on a
perception of racial and cultural homogeneity as something that is both dynamically creative
and easily destroyed ” (p. 175). He goes on to say that “the Japanese simply do not want non-
Japanese physically present among them for any length of time, embedded as individuals in the
working institutions of their society. As short-term feted guests or curiosities, yes; but not as
ﬁxed human furniture” (p. 178).
My own explanation of Japanese discrimination was similar to Hall’s during my early years in
Japan. I felt the same outrage at Japanese insularity and the same frustration about being kept at
arms length by many Japanese. But reading about Japanese history really helped me to see racial
discrimination against white people with new eyes. No longer could I simply agree with the
statement that Japanese are the world ’s most racist people put forward by Crichton (1992) in
Rising Sun.
The history of postwar U.S. –Japanese relations made it apparent to me that Japanese racial
discrimination against whites has often been a defensive measure to keep members of a powerful
nation within well-de ﬁned spheres. The goal has been to maintain a private area for Japanese
people where the overbearing Western presence and gaze were absent and where Japanese could
be “themselves.” Dealing with Western people on Western terms within relations of unequal
power has been a tiring and strenuous experience for many Japanese people, and there has been
a desire to make certain areas of Japanese life o ﬀ-limits to Westerners. Although racism is also
involved, it is hardly of a simple and unambiguous type. It is far too simple to dismiss people
who have experienced a series of wrenching identity crises lasting through nearly a century and a
half of contact with the West as mere racists.
My reading of hooks (1995) on black separatist thought conﬁrmed my early recognition that
an oppressed group needs to have a space of its own. The Japanese experience in communicating
with white Americans resembles what blacks experience when communicating with whites in
the United States. African Americans are expected to communicate like European Americans
and have to endure a lack of respect and sensitivity on the part of whites. Similarly, Japanese are
often stereotyped by Westerners as little men who are ine ﬀective and inconsequential or else as
samurais in suits who are bent on economic conquest of the world (Littlewood, 1996). Thus
Japanese who have to frequently deal with Western people need the same kind of respite and
space of their own as black Americans, and that is one reason why white people are sometimes
excluded.
The ways in which the United States has treated Japan since Japan ﬁrst became its economic
competitor at the end of the nineteenth century also made a deep impression on me. I read
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  273


--- PAGE 295 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 274
Page 274
about the Y ellow Peril threat that was spread after the Japanese victory over Russia in 1904, the
segregation of East Asian pupils in San Francisco in 1906, the refusal of the Allied powers to
enact the racial equality clause at the V ersailles Peace Conference after World War I, and the
exclusion of Japanese and Chinese immigrants from entering the United States in 1924 which
Nitobe, Japan’s most famous internationalist, described as a slap on the cheek from a best friend
that occurred suddenly and without provocation (Iriye, 1972; Schodt, 1994).
My study of Japanese history helped me to fathom why Japanese had a pronounced complex
toward whites and behaved in such a stilted manner toward them. The Western intrusion into
Japan and the other areas of Asia, in Van der Post ’s (1977) view, had produced intolerable
frustration due to Western people ’s arrogant belief in their own superiority and their forcible
transformation of Asian ways of life. The frustration that Asian peoples experienced was the
result of not being able to remain “their own special selves. ” In communicating with Western
people, the various Asian peoples were required to step out of themselves and become someone
other to themselves. Van der Post (1977) wrote that “it was almost as if the peoples of Asia had
only to come into the presence of a European to be hypnotized out of being themselves, and
forced to live a kind of tranced life in his presence that was not their own ” (p. 36).
Later I realized that the U.S. anger toward Japan at the time of Japan ’s economic rise and
the ensuing Japanese resentment against the United States was a partial reenactment of a tragic
drama that had already been staged during World War II. I concluded that many U.S. Americans
were being high-handed and arrogant in their criticisms of Japan in the late 1980s, just as they
had been since the time of Perry ’s intrusion into Japan in 1853. When the United States heavily
criticized Japan for its unfair trade and refusal to adopt laissez-faire capitalism, I thought that a
strange reversal was taking place. Japanese people who had suﬀered a severe identity crisis due to
Western intrusion were now being blamed for trying to preserve their present way of life and
their agency.
Instead of complaining about Japanese racism, I began to focus on the long history of white
racism against Japanese people and the various ways that such racism was resurfacing in a
particularly severe manner due to Japan ’s increasing economic strength in the 1980s. I also
needed to recognize the colonial context of U.S. –Japanese relations since the middle of the
nineteenth century. The result of the “opening” of Japan through Perry ’s gunboat diplomacy
was that “Japanese experienced feelings of helplessness, and it left a psychologically critical and
traumatic wound upon the Japanese psyche ” (Tsuda, 1993, p. 73). Through this understanding
of Japan’s predicament, I was able to resist the often intense pressure from U.S. American people
and media to view Japan negatively in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The value of a critical understanding of history was that I recognized that Japanese reluctance
to allow Western people a ﬁrm footing in Japan has been largely a defensive measure for
protecting Japanese cultural space. It can be traced to the historical experience of Western
attempts to impose their values on Japan in the name of the white man ’s burden, Christianity,
and civilization. Viewed in this manner, the Japanese tendency to adopt an exclusive identity is
part of the historical process of moving from a colonized identity to one based on the recovery
of a cultural heritage that had existed before the Western intrusion. Therefore, I cannot agree
with CD theorists who believe that historical concerns distance one from present issues. Rather,
historical consciousness can make the present comprehensible in all its complexity for the ﬁrst
time.
A Power Shift in U.S.–Japanese Relations
My eﬀorts to communicate with Japanese people in a truly respectful manner were assisted by
the diminishing of the unequal power relations between the United States and Japan. I noticed
that by the 1990s, there were more Japanese with experience of the West that were no longer so
274  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 296 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 275
Page 275
positive about Westerners, and especially Americans. They expected white people to learn the
Japanese language and communicate in a more Japanese way. In the intercultural communica-
tion ﬁeld, too, during the 1990s, one Japanese pioneer said that there was no connection between
English-language teaching and the teaching of intercultural communication. Another well-
known interculturalist made a video for studying intercultural communication in the Japanese
language, implying that Japanese, not English, should be the bridge language in Japan.
At this time, it seemed that U.S. whites, at least in T okyo, did not stand out as much as before
and they could blend in more easily with Japanese people. There had been a large increase in the
number of whites living in T okyo over the years, many Japanese had gone overseas to work or
study, and there was less of an inferiority complex among Japanese towards white Americans.
The result is that European Americans have been very gradually losing their place of privilege.
And as a beneﬁcial side-eﬀect of this process, they ﬁnd it a little easier to enter the inside world
of Japanese people.
A critical approach is valuable for understanding this gradual process of change in Japanese
communication behavior toward white Americans, because it points to the e ﬀect of power on
hierarchical relations of communication. Power does not determine communication patterns in
any simple causal sense, but it does have a major impact on the direction that communication
takes within intercultural relations. Although U.S. –Japanese communication is still a ﬀected in
numerous ways by the legacy of the U.S. Occupation of Japan, Japan’s economic power has given
Japanese people a new pride that has lessened their inferiority feelings toward white Americans.
They are less willing to automatically defer to white Americans.
Former Prime Minister Hosokawa ’s open disagreement with President Clinton on trade
issues and his refusal to accede to U.S. wishes in 1994 was a highly symbolic event in the bilateral
relationship. It signaled the growth of Japanese pride, a large step toward an independent
Japanese foreign policy, and an important move toward equal relations between Japanese and
U.S. Americans. It was also an act of resistance, in the same manner as the refusals of Japanese
interculturalists to automatically give the English language priority over Japanese in intercultural
relations taking place in Japan.
Conclusion: Intercultural Communication in a Postcolonial W orld
My analysis of my personal experience in Japan indicates the many ways in which a critical
approach illuminates important dimensions of interpersonal relations across cultures. Through
a critical metatheoretical perspective, we come to understand that U.S. –Japanese communica-
tion has been a ﬀected by material factors and that its third-culture communication has been
contested. This third culture or in-between space cannot be viewed in an abstract manner, as
if the larger context of preponderant U.S. military power and cultural hegemony has had no
impact on U.S.–Japanese communication.
There is also a need to emphasize both the similarities and diﬀerences between U.S. Americans
and Japanese, since a single-minded focus on diﬀerence may obscure the humanity of members
of the other cultural group. In my case, I had to recognize the humanity of Japanese people
before I was able to progress toward accepting them as equals. The CD approach may lead to an
overemphasis on di ﬀerence that reinforces the tendency of members of dominant cultures to
view members of less powerful cultures as opposite and inferior to themselves.
A critical metatheoretical approach sheds light on the world of English conversation by
focusing on power relations and structural factors that lead to patterns of distorted communica-
tion. T eachers of English de ﬁne reality for their Japanese students in an institutional setting
according to whose norms white people are superior. The result is that Japanese are taught to
acknowledge the superiority of U.S. culture and its communication patterns in comparison
to their own cultural and communication norms.
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  275


--- PAGE 297 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 276
Page 276
Another value of such a critical approach is that it enables us to understand the ways in which
the past has in ﬂuenced the present and how identity has developed over time. My study of the
history of relations between Japan and the West played a large role in my letting go of colonial
attitudes toward Japanese people.
In addition, I have described the advantages of a critical metatheoretical approach for com-
munication competence. For me, communication competence de ﬁned in CD terms was not
even conceivable until I decided to give up my white privilege and to make the initial e ﬀorts to
study the Japanese language, learn about Japanese culture and communication, and begin to
communicate on Japanese terms as well as those of my own culture.
There are many connections that can be made between my analysis of U.S. –Japanese com-
munication based on a critical metatheoretical approach and the concerns of speci ﬁc critical
approaches such as those of postcolonial theory and feminism. Since my personal experience is
taken from white American–Japanese encounters, it may seem that this setting is not connected
with colonial politics. In the examination of my experience, however, I have shown that the
context was, and to a lesser degree still is, a colonial-type setting. Although Japan lost its political
self-determination for only seven years from 1945 to 1951, it has nevertheless experienced
U.S. cultural hegemony and a considerable degree of political subordination throughout the
entire postwar period, only moving toward a more independent foreign policy in recent years.
This asymmetry of power in the international sphere has been carried over into interpersonal
communication between European Americans and Japanese.
The U.S.–Japanese relationship has been a postcolonial one of a special type. Japan ’s eco-
nomic strength makes this relationship more equal than any other relationship between the
United States and nonwhite nations. A more equal relationship between nations makes it easier
for less distorted communication between members of the two nations to occur. Y et this is also
an unstable situation because white Americans whose dominance is endangered may react with
outrage at the prospect of more equal communication and take steps to defend their privilege.
Such a state of aﬀairs existed in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Equal relations between white Americans and Japanese is an ideal case that the CD approach
is better equipped to deal with, since present power relations would not play a role in communi-
cation. However, existing relations between the United States and Japan are still unequal, and the
shortcomings of the CD approach become apparent under these circumstances. Unlike the CD
approach, a critical metatheoretical perspective directs our attention to the stance of the mem-
bers of the dominant culture within the unequal relationship. A focus on the standpoint of
dominant white Americans enables us to focus on the main reason for communication prob-
lems within the U.S. –Japanese relationship: the asymmetrical distribution of power and the
communication behavior of white Americans that reproduces the present structure. Japanese
complicity may also contribute to the reproduction of the unequal relationship, but the onus is
on the members of the dominant group to make the ﬁrst step toward dissolving unequal
relations at both structural and individual levels.
In shifting our focus from cultural di ﬀerences to the attitudes and behavior of white
Americans, we move into the terrain of research on whiteness. So far, this research has mostly
examined the power and privilege of members of the dominant white group in the United States
(Nakayama & Krizek, 1995; Fine et al., 1997; Lipsitz, 1998). An exception to this research trend is
Shome (1999) who has written on the power and privilege of whiteness within India. I believe
that similar examinations of white power and privilege in Japan are warranted. Such research
would complement intercultural research on cultural di ﬀerences and provide a sense of the
larger context that has tended to be lacking until now in the intercultural communication ﬁeld.
The experiences that I have presented can also be analyzed from a feminist point of view, and
feminist postcolonial theoretical analysis has already appeared within the communication dis-
cipline (Hedge, 1998). In the case of U.S. –Japanese relations, the “Madame Butter ﬂy” image
276  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 298 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 277
Page 277
analyzed by Ma (1996) is a fruitful place to pursue such a feminist inquiry, and Kondo (1997)
has exposed the connection between gender, Orientalism, and essentialism in the construction
and maintenance of this image. The critical metatheoretical approach that I have outlined also
can be supplemented by postmodernist approaches (Mumby, 1997; Chen, 1996; Spivak, 1999)
that retain a critical dimension and focus on issues of power and the larger historical and
political context.
In the early 21st century, non-Western peoples are proceeding with their e ﬀorts to mentally
decolonize. With the increasing power of non-Western nations, particularly those in East Asia,
the key issue is whether U.S. Americans and other Western people are willing to communicate in
a way that facilitates relations of equality. For intercultural communication scholars, it is neces-
sary to craft an approach that will aid in our understanding of the present world context. When
dealing with U.S.–Japan communication, the prevailing emphasis on cultural di ﬀerences limits
the ability of practitioners to cope with issues of history, power, and privilege. My presentation
of a critical metatheoretical approach to U.S. –Japanese communication based on personal
experience is a contribution toward overcoming such limits. It also provides an example of
how context aﬀects interpersonal communication that can be of value when studying relations
between members of any nations whose power is asymmetrical.
References
Barnlund, D. C. (1975). The public and private self in Japan and the United States . T okyo: Simul Press.
Barnlund, D. C. (1989). Communication styles of Japanese and Americans: Images and realities. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Barnlund, D. C. (1998). Communication in a global village. In M. J. Bennett (Ed.), Basic concepts of
intercultural communication: Selected readings (pp. 35–51). Y armouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
Bennett, M. J. (1998). Intercultural communication: A current perspective. In M. J. Bennett (Ed.), Basic
concepts of intercultural communication: Selected readings  (pp. 1 –34). Y armouth, ME: Intercultural
Press.
Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Chen, G. M., & Starosta, W. J. (1996). Intercultural communication competence: A synthesis. Communica-
tion Yearbook, 19, 353–384.
Chen, K. H. (1996). Post-marxism: Between/beyond critical postmodernism and cultural studies. In
D. Morley & K. H. Chen (Eds.), Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies  (pp. 309 –325).
London: Routledge.
Condon, J. C., & Saito, M. (Eds.). (1974). Intercultural encounters with Japan. T okyo: Simul Press.
Condon, J. C., & Saito, M. (Eds.). (1976). Communication across cultures for what? T okyo: Simul Press.
Crichton, M. (1992). Rising sun. New Y ork: Knopf.
Dahlen, T. (1997). Among the interculturalists: An emergent profession and its packaging of knowledge .
Stockholm, Sweden: Stockholm University, Department of Social Anthropology.
Fine, M., Weis, L., Powell, L. C., & Wong, L. M. (Eds.). (1997). Oﬀ white: Readings on race, power, and society.
New Y ork: Routledge.
Gandhi, L. (1998). Postcolonial theory: A critical introduction . New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
Gonzalez, A., Houston, M., & Chen, V . (Eds.). (2000). Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communi-
cation (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Gonzalez, A., & Tanno, D. V . (Eds.). (1997). Politics, communication, and culture . Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Gonzalez, A., & Tanno, D. V . (Eds.). (2000). Rhetoric in intercultural contexts. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. (Ed.). (1993). Communication in Japan and the United States. Albany, NY: State University of
New Y ork Press.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. New Y ork: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T., & Hall, M. R. (1987). Hidden diﬀerences: Doing business with the Japanese. New Y ork: Doubleday.
Hall, I. (1998). Cartels of the mind: Japan’s intellectual closed shop. New Y ork: Norton.
Hall, S. (1986). The problem of ideology: Marxism without guarantees. In D. Morley & K. H. Chen (Eds.),
Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies  (pp. 25–46). London: Routledge.
Hedge, R. (1998). A view from elsewhere: Locating di ﬀerence and the politics of representation from a
transnational feminist perspective. Communication Theory, 8, 271–297.
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  277


--- PAGE 299 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 278
Page 278
Hirai, K. (1987). Conceptualizing a similarity-oriented framework for intercultural communication study.
Journal of the College of Arts and Sciences, Showa University, 18, 1–19.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations. London: McGraw-Hill.
hooks, b. (1995). Killing rage: Ending racism. New Y ork: Henry Holt.
Iriye, A. (1972). Paciﬁc estrangement: Japanese and American expansion, 1897–1911. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Ishii, S. (1985). Thought patterns as modes of rhetoric: The United States and Japan. In L. A. Samovar
& R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader  (4th ed., pp. 97 –102). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Iyer, P . (1991). The lady and the monk. New Y ork: Knopf.
Kerr, A. (1996). Lost Japan. Oakland, CA: Lonely Planet.
Kondo, D. (1990). Crafting selves: Power, gender, and discourses in a Japanese workplace . Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Kondo, D. (1997). About face: Performing race in fashion and theater. New Y ork: Routledge.
Lipsitz, G. (1998). The possessive investment in whiteness: How white people pro ﬁt from identity politics .
Philadelphia, PA: T emple University Press.
Littlewood, I. (1996). The idea of Japan: Western images, Western myths. London: Secker & Warburg.
Lummis, C. D. (1977). English conversation as ideology. In Y. Kurokawa (Ed.), Essays on language
(pp. 1–26). T okyo: Kirihara Shoten.
Ma, K. (1996). The modern Madame Butter ﬂy: Fantasy and reality in Japanese cross-cultural relationships .
T okyo: Tuttle.
Martin, J. N., & Nakayama, T. K. (1999). Thinking dialectically about culture and communication.
Communication Theory, 9, 1–25.
Martin, J. N., & Nakayama, T. K. (Eds.). (2000). Intercultural communication in contexts (2nd ed.). Mountain
View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Martin, J. N., Nakayama, T. K., & Flores, L. A. (Eds.). (1998). Readings in cultural contexts. Mountain View,
CA: Mayﬁeld.
Moon, D. (1997). Concepts of “culture”: Implications for intercultural communication research. Com-
munication Quarterly, 44, 70–84.
Mumby, D. (1997). Modernism, postmodernism, and communication studies. Communication Theory, 7,
1–28.
Nakayama, T. K., & Martin, J. N. (Eds.). (1999). Whiteness: The communication of social identity . Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nakayama, T. K., & Krizek, R. L. (1995). Whiteness: A strategic rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 81,
291–309.
Ono, K. (1998). Problematizing “nation” in intercultural communication research. In D. V . Tanno &
A. Gonzalez (Eds.), Communication and identity across cultures  (pp. 193 –202). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Okabe, R. (1983). Cultural assumptions of East and West: Japan and the United States. In W. B. Gudykunst
(Ed.), Intercultural communication theory: Current perspectives  (pp. 21 –44). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Orbe, M. (1998). Constructing co-cultural theory: An explication of culture, power, and communication .
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reischauer, E. O. (1988). The Japanese today: Change and continuity . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. New Y ork: Pantheon.
Schodt, F. (1994). American and the four Japans. Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press.
Shome, R. (1999). Whiteness and the politics of location: Postcolonial re ﬂections. In T. K. Nakayama &
J. N. Martin (Eds.), Whiteness: The communication of social identity  (pp. 107 –128). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Spivak, G. (1990). The post-colonial critic: Interviews, strategies, dialogues . New Y ork: Routledge.
Spivak, G. (1999). The critique of postcolonial reason. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tanno, D. V ., & Gonzalez, A. (Eds.). (1998). Communication and identity across cultures . Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Thompson, J. (1990). Ideology and modern culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ting-T oomey, S. (1999). Communicating across cultures. New Y ork: Guilford Press.
Trifonovitch, G. (1981). English as an international language: An attitudinal approach. In L. E. Smith (Ed.),
English for cross-cultural communication (pp. 211–215). London: Macmillan.
Tsuda, Y. (1993). Communication in English: Is it anti-cultural? Journal of Development Communication ,
4, 69–78.
278  WILLIAM KELLY


--- PAGE 300 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 279
Page 279
Tsuda, Y. (1999). The hegemony of English and strategies for linguistic pluralism: Proposing the Ecology
of Language Paradigm. In M. T ehranian (Ed.), Worlds apart: Human security and global governance
(pp. 153–167). London: I. B. Tauris.
Van der Post, L. (1977). The night of the new moon. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Y amaguchi, S. (1994). Collectivism among the Japanese: A perspective from the self. In U. Kim et al. (Eds.),
Individualism and collectivism: Theory, method, and applications  (pp. 175–188). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Y oung, R. E. (1996). Intercultural communication: Pragmatics, genealogy, deconstruction . Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
U.S.–JAPANESE COMMUNICATION  279


--- PAGE 301 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 280
Page 280


--- PAGE 302 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 281
Page 281
Part VI
Ethical Considerations in
Intercultural Communication


--- PAGE 303 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 282
Page 282


--- PAGE 304 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 283
Page 283
17
Theoretical Perspectives on Islam
and Communication
Hamid Mowlana
Introduction
A number of studies on international communication over the last several decades reveal two
essential characteristics. One is the ethnocentric orientation of mass communication systems of
the highly developed and industrialized nations, and the second is the “asymmetric” circulation
of information in the world. These two characteristics dominate the world mass media system
and indeed are responsible for uneven treatment of events, imbalances in news and information,
and also the unequal distribution of power in the world system.
It is precisely here that a need for professional code of ethics among Muslim journalists
around the world seems imperative and their creation of a network of professional world
associations both timely and inevitable. The fact that until now there have been almost no such
associations at the international level illustrates the low priority given to information and news
among and between the Islamic countries. It also indicates a century-long inattention to the lack
of growth in media organizations which is, in part, a consequence of decades of repression,
colonialism, and government control.
From the Islamic Revolution in Iran to the occupation of Afghanistan by the former Soviet
Union, from the Persian Gulf War to the American invasion of Iraq, the last two decades have
witnessed profound and worldwide revolutionary movements of an Islamic nature as well as
systematic and continuous con ﬂicts which have embraced Muslim lands. The developments in
the Islamic world not only have been reported during this period with a good deal of bias,
distortion, and ethnocentricism by non-Muslim media but also the great portion of what has
been reported has been provided mainly by the Western media and journalists.
Research shows that 99 percent of world events do not come to the attention of readers
simply because they are eliminated and considered as unimportant or irrelevant by the media.
The Islamic world, in particular, has been on the receiving end of a good share of this modus
operandi. For example, consider six levels of the so called common selections of news in mass
communication: (1) sources of production of information and news; (2) journalists and cor-
respondents; (3) central o ﬃces of news agencies; (4) local newspapers and editorial o ﬃces;
(5) mass media editors, and ﬁnally (6) recipients, meaning readers or viewers. It has been
reported empirically that 98 percent of news and information is eliminated in the second
through the sixth levels with 92 percent elimination from the second through the ﬁfth, not
to mention the elimination resulting from the process of selectivity on the part of readers
and viewers. This Darwinian law of selectivity, once translated and applied to events and
283


--- PAGE 305 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 284
Page 284
developments in the Islamic world (which constitutes one-fourth of the world’s population) can
indeed have enormous impact on individual and collective perceptions about Islam and its
followers. The crucial question is not how strongly the control is exercised but instead by whom,
under what conditions, and for what purpose.
A Call for a W orld Organization of Muslim Journalists
A cursory look at the list of existing media and journalist associations around the world quickly
shows how the media are organized and mobilized on the basis of nationality, regionalism,
ethnicity, and even religious premises and are among the most active nongovernmental organ-
izations around the world. Y et, remarkably, today, there are no professional associations of
Islamic journalists which can set professional and ethical criteria for news reporting, protect the
rights of individual Muslim journalists, and promote education and training of young men and
women who represent a major source of human resources for Islamic culture and civilization.
Why is it important for Islamic journalists to have a network of associations binding their
professional mission? The answer lies in the very core of Islamic political culture for Islam is not
only a religion but also a total way of life for millions of people around the world. Unlike other
major cultural systems, Islam transcends geographical as well as racial and ethnic boundaries
and strives for universality of human kind. In short, the socio-cultural elements inherent in and
among the Islamic community, ummah, provide a common ground and outline a necessity for
the type of news reporting that is vital to understanding events in the world community. Such a
network of Muslim journalist and media associations and professional organizations also can
play an important role as vanguards and promoters of professional aims within the existing
systems of international organizations. A network of professional associations, thus, not only
can enhance the exchange of information among and between various geographical areas
known as the Islamic world but also can stimulate the ongoing mobilization of journalists and
their common interests.
What should be the tenets underlying the formation and the mobilization of such networks of
associations? It must be recalled that news values in the Islamic world diﬀer considerably from the
general news values in the non-Islamic world and, more speciﬁcally, the West. For example, take
the concept of so called “hard news” common in the Western media with its “ﬁve Ws” syndrome
of “what, when, where, why, and who” which is promoted as universal. The real problem is that
the recipient of such ﬁve Ws news never is allowed to conceive of news as a whole but only
in fragments because the structure of the whole is at odds with what is considered “hard facts.”
The priorities given to news values in the West, such as human interests, proximity, novelty,
consequence, and prominence, are totally diﬀerent from those valued in Islamic contexts.
For example, the notion of proximity in the Western media primarily is a geographical as well
as spatial concept. T o apply this concept, in its orthodox sense, to the Islamic world would
eliminate news coming from distant places such as Indonesia, China, Africa, or Latin America
when the media and its audiences are located somewhere in the United States or the Middle East.
Proximity in an Islamic context is neither geographical nor spatial but rather cultural— that is to
say, events of the Islamic community of ummah are and must be relevant to the entire Muslim
world regardless of nationalities and countries. The factors of human interest or prominence are
by themselves not adequate justiﬁcation for reporting of news in the Islamic context. News and
information for the ummah are social commodities and not cultural industries.
One of the disadvantages arising from Western reporting of the contemporary Islamic world
is that news of both cooperative and con ﬂict-ﬁlled natures are treated not in an Islamic context
but in the generic journalistic culture over decades in Europe and the United States. Thus, a
major result is incomplete presentation, if not actual and chronic misrepresentation, of events in
the Islamic world as they occur. This reductive re ﬁnement of the concept of information and
284  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 306 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 285
Page 285
news has been a gradual process extending over several decades and, indeed, has been respon-
sible for a good deal of misperceptions and even bias. This, in itself, has provided a kind of
journalistic “fundamentalism,” which claims universalism, under which such issues as “Islamic
fundamentalism” are unfairly lumped.
In a changing and volatile world — where values and ideas are constantly in transition and
where internal and external events of nations are becoming more unpredictable leading to
profound political, economic, and cultural transformation — Muslim journalists around the
globe must de ﬁne their own informational and cultural territories as well as their own profes-
sional and ethical standards. One of the weaknesses in the world of Islamic media is the fact that
there is a low level of participation of either individuals or associations in regional and inter-
national gatherings and conferences. Correspondingly, the power of the West— that is to say, the
European and American journalists and media — resides in the fact that they are systematic and
constant participants in a variety of international conferences, symposia, seminars, as well
as international and regional organizations. It is through this process of participation as well as
professional acculturation that individuals can hope to contribute to the process of decision
making as well as learn how to in ﬂuence the agenda of international organizations.
This is well illustrated by an example from the Persian Gulf War of 1990 –91. During this
international political crises, journalists and correspondents from the major Islamic countries
opposing the intervention of the United States and the coalition forces not only were not allowed
to be part of the news pool or to cover the countries involved in the war but also the stream of
information coming from the war front was controlled and manipulated either by the govern-
ments involved or the Western news sources. The existence of a strong professional association
of Muslim journalists would have made a de ﬁnite di ﬀerence in that it could have exerted
pressure collectively to obtain at least part of the privileges extended to other groups and have
voiced their grievances on professional and institutional levels for all the world to hear. Add-
itionally, on the “home front,” the existence of such Islamic professional journalistic associations
could give proper recognition to the coverage of such events as the annual hajj (pilgrimage) as a
major religio-political and socio-cultural occurrence to counteract its trivialization through
non-Muslim media channels.
An underlying premise of such a network of professional associations is the Islamic world
view which considers news and information as a process of distribution of knowledge. In short,
from the Islamic perspective, mass media organizations as well as their personnel are engaged in
a delicate stage centering around both the production and distribution of knowledge. This is
because facts by themselves do not have meaning in Islam but, once placed in a proper Islamic
social structure, constitute information leading to knowledge.
A number of concepts comprising the world view of Islam could be the information and
social basis of such a network of journalists. They include among others the concept of tawhid
(unity of God), the concept of ilm (knowledge), the meaning of taqwa (fear of God), the process
of adl (justice), the notion of ijma (consensus), shura (consultation), the doctrine of amanat
(public interest), and last but not least the ummah (the larger Islamic community).
Deﬁnition of T erms
A social system is a process of interaction of individuals within a larger unit called society, which
exhibits the property that Ibn Khaldun, an Islamic thinker, called solidarity ( assabieh), a term
also employed later by Durkheim in his works. A social system is not the value itself, but a system
of values and actions of individuals which are associated in terms of symbolic meaning. On the
other hand, values are instruments of maintaining the cultural integrity and cohesion of society,
serving to legitimize the modes of more concrete actions (Kroeber & Parsons, 1958). Here, we
are concerned with the question of cultural systems and how they interact with problems of
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  285


--- PAGE 307 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 286
Page 286
conceptualization, theorization, and practices of information and communication. What impact
do cultural settings have on the studies of communication? What communication theories and
practices do they foster?
The Islamic world consists of a vast and diverse geo-political area stretching from Indonesia
and the Paciﬁc Ocean in the east to Morocco and the Atlantic coast in the west, from central Asia
and the Himalayas in the north to the southern African nations and the Indian Ocean. As one of
the major religions of the world, Islam encompasses one quarter of the world ’s population—
over a billion people. From the death of the Prophet (SAAS) (572 –632 a.d.) and the period of
the ﬁrst four Caliphs (632–661 a.d.), to the end of World War I and the demise of the Ottoman
Empire, the Islamic community has been a major world power. In the context of decolonization
and increasing numbers of sovereign nation-states, the Islamic world politically, economically,
and often culturally began to integrate into the existing sphere of the Western-dominated
modern world system. The contacts between the Islamic world and the West in the 19th and
20th centuries increased the absorption of many Islamic countries into quasi-secular political
entities ranging from hereditary monarchies to modern Western and/or military style republics.
This also resulted in pronounced conﬂicts between modern secularism and the Islamic tradition
of al shari’a, the canonical law of Islam.
In order to understand the current journalism practices in the Islamic world and to assess its
future directions, it is necessary to examine a number of the fundamental principles upon which
the Islamic communication framework has been built, and how the Islamic societies have come
under constraints as a result of global political, economic, and cultural developments over the
last century. The central foci of analysis will be on the fundamental principles of Islamic ethical
methods in communication and on the objectives and aims of social communication. I use the
term social communication here in its broader sense to include all kinds of communication,
including journalism and mass communication, in an Islamic context. This understanding
should help clarify the function of some of the modern institutions of communication in
contemporary Islamic societies.
A distinction should be made between the Islamic term of social communication or tabligh
(propagation) and the general concepts of communication, journalism, propaganda, and agita-
tion commonly used in contemporary literature. The word “communication” comes from the
Latin communico, meaning “share,” and it is essentially a social process referring to the act of
imparting, conveying, or exchanging ideas, knowledge, or information. It is a process of access or
means of access between two or more persons or places. Also implicit and explicit in this
deﬁnition is a notion of some degree of trust without which communication cannot take place.
In its reductive approach (mathematical, technical, and some scientiﬁc analysis) communication
is associated with the concept of information linking the process with chance events and various
possible outcomes. This “atomic” view gives emphasis to quantitative and linear aspects of the
process and not to its cultural and cognitive meanings (e.g., Cherry, 1961; Kirschenmann, 1970;
Shannon & Weaver, 1961; Wiener, 1961, 1967). Journalism, as deﬁned in the West, is the collec-
tion, writing, editing, and publishing of news or news articles, opinions, and commentaries
through newspapers, magazines, broadcasting, and other modern media.
The term “propaganda” is a Western concept and was used for the ﬁrst time by a committee
of Cardinals (founded in 1622 by Pope Gregory) of the Roman Catholic Church having the care
and oversight of foreign missions. Propaganda comes from the Latin word propagare and origin-
ally meant propagating the gospel and establishing the Church in non-Christian countries. The
contemporary usage of the term propaganda in its political, sociological, and commercial con-
texts, however, dates back to the beginning of the 20th century. Since World War I, its deﬁnition
has evolved to connote an instrument of persuasion and manipulation of individuals and
collective behavior in national and international scenes (e.g., Lasswell, Lerner & Speier, 1980).
1
Thus, according to French sociologist Jacques Ellul (1965), “propaganda is a set of methods
286  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 308 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 287
Page 287
employed by an organized group that wants to bring about the active or passive participation in
its action of a mass of individuals psychologically uni ﬁed through psychological manipulations
and incorporated in an organization” (p. 61). In a somewhat similar fashion, Harold D. Lasswell
(1942) has de ﬁned propaganda as “the manipulation of symbols as a means of in ﬂuencing
attitudes on controversial matters” (p. 106). This follows the common deﬁnition of propaganda
as spreading ideology, doctrine, or ideas, and of agitation as an instrument for arousing people
to spontaneous action. The Communist position on propaganda and agitation di ﬀers method-
ologically from that of Lasswell. As de ﬁned by Vladimir I. Lenin (1935 –1939), “A propagandist
presents many ideas to one or a few persons; an agitator presents only one or a few ideas, but he
presents them to a mass of people” (p. 85).
Note that contemporary propagandists, therefore, do not need to be believers in an ideology
or a doctrine. Here propagandists are people in the service of the State, the party, the political
or commercial campaign, or any other organization that is ready to use their expertise.
Propagandists are technicians, bureaucrats, and specialists who may eventually come to despise
the ideology itself.
Propagation, on the other hand, is dissemination and di ﬀusion of some principle, belief, or
practice. The Islamic word for propagation, tabligh, means the increase or spread of a belief by
natural reproduction; it is an extension in space and time. It is the action of branching out.
Social communication, journalism, and tabligh in an Islamic context have an ethical boundary
and a set of guiding principles. In a broader sense, tabligh is a theory of communication and
ethics. This theory of communication and global community integration is well stated by Ibn
Khaldun (1967) in The Muqaddimah  ( An Introduction to History ). Here he cites “truthful
propagation” (tabligh) and group cohesion ( assabieh) as two fundamental factors in the rise of
world powers as States and large communities (Ibn Khaldun, 1336/1957, pp. 301 –316, 1967,
pp. 123–127). Thus journalism as a production, gathering, and dissemination of information,
news, and opinion is an extension of tabligh in its broadest sense.
Communication and Ethics: Their Boundaries and Frontiers
A study of social communication in Islamic society in the early days and certainly before the rise
of the modern nation-state system has a unique element to it (Mutahhari, 1361/1982, 1977).
This was because it was rooted in oral and social traditions and the notion of ummah or greater
Islamic community. Also the geographical entities now called Islamic countries were not heavily
inﬂuenced by Western methods, conducts, and regimes in con ﬂict with the major tenets of
Islam. With the exception of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which is founded on the Islamic
notion of the state, the remaining Islamic countries have state systems which are a mixture of the
modern and traditional monarchial or republican systems. Thus their legal and ethical codes are
heavily inﬂuenced by non-Islamic frames of reference. In many current analyses, great confusion
arises from the failure to make a distinction between a nation-state and an Islamic state. It should
be emphasized that while the nation-state is a political state, the Islamic state is a muttagi or
religio-political and “God fearing ” community or state. The ecological terrain of social com-
munication in an Islamic community emphasizes intra personal/interpersonal communication
over impersonal types, social communication over atomistic communication, and intercultural
communication over nationalism.
Moving from the process of social communication to the de ﬁnition of ethics, it must be
emphasized that the boundaries of the study called “ethics” vary from culture to culture. For the
purpose of the present study a method of ethics is de ﬁned to mean any rational procedure by
which we determine what an individual human being as a person and as a member of a
community ought to do as a “right” action by voluntary means. By using the word “individual”
as a member of community this de ﬁnition does not make a distinction between ethics and
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  287


--- PAGE 309 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 288
Page 288
politics. From an Islamic perspective, the study and conduct of politics cannot be separated from
the methods of ethics; the need is to determine what ought to be and not to analyze what merely
is. Consequently, the conception of ethics here essentially deals with the Islamic perceptions of
conduct as an inquiry into the nature the unity of God, humankind, and nature, and the method
of attaining it (Mutahhari, 1985).
Since the Enlightenment, the West gradually divorced religion from secular life. Ethical con-
duct of the everyday life was left to an individual ’s conscience as long as such actions did not
conﬂict with the perceived public morality. In Islam, this separation of the religious from the
secular sphere did not materialize, and if attempts were made by the late modernizers to do this
the process was never completed. Thus, throughout the Islamic societies not only did religion
encompass a person wholly but also it shaped the conduct of the individuals in general through
application of Islamic socio-religious ethics. In short, whereas modern ethics in the West became
predominately social in nature, in Islamic societies that power remained social as well as
religious. As the Quran says: “The noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the best of you in
conduct” (49:13). In the Islamic tradition, the word adab means discipline of the mind or every
praiseworthy conduct by which a person is excelled.
Until the 19th century Islamic canonical law, al shari’a, provided the main if not the complete
legal underpinnings of social and economic conduct in Muslim societies. The intimate contact
between Islam and modern Western industrial countries, coupled with the process of coloniza-
tion of substantial parts of Asia and Africa, introduced a number of Western standards and values
to these societies. Thus at the beginning of the 20th century and with the introduction of modern
means of communication, transportation, and technologies, the ﬁelds of civil and commercial
transactions proved particularly prominent for change and new methods of conduct.
The ﬁrst foothold of European law, criminal and commercial, in the Islamic countries (par-
ticularly in the Ottoman empire) was advanced as a result of the systems of Capitulations, which
ensured that the European citizens residing in the Middle East and a large part of Africa would
not be governed by the Islamic laws and conduct of ethics but by their own laws and traditions.
Furthermore, the reform movements such as the Tanzimat in the Ottoman (1839–1876) and the
Constitutional reform in Iran (1906 –1911) were indeed direct translations of French and other
European codes which tended to establish secularism and injected the kinds of rules of conduct
that were particularly European. In Egypt that process, from 1875 onward, went even further in
the adaptation of European laws in such ﬁelds as commerce and maritime and included the
enactment of civil codes which were basically modeled on French laws and contained only a few
provisions drawn from shari’a.
For example, in the ﬁelds of journalism and media practices many Islamic countries adopted
the concepts, norms, and legal codes of the West without considering the broader notion of laws
and ethics in Islam. It should be remembered that the body of Islamic laws and ethics are
classiﬁed according to a scale of values: obligatory (vajeb), recommended (mostahab), permitted
(mobah), disapproved (makroh), and prohibited (haram). There is unanimity among the various
schools of Islamic jurisprudence in such matters as prohibited and obligatory categories and the
diﬀerences are usually regarding the disapproved or undesirable and recommended categories.
This is the di ﬀerence of degree which is called ikhtlaf and not the di ﬀerence of categories or
extremes which are referred to as iftragh. The existence of a unanimous standard is unique to
Islamic jurisprudence. The Western study of law and ethics does not fulﬁll these conditions.
Communication and Ethical Thinking and Practices in Islamic Societies
The current ethical thinking and practices in Islamic societies, especially as they might relate to
community, communication, and social interactions, are usually based on two di ﬀerent but
important dimensions:
288  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 310 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 289
Page 289
1. Normative religious ethics as explained in the primary source of Islam, the Quran and the
traditions (al-sunna) of the Prophet and the Imams.
2. Normative secular ethics ranging from Greek tradition of popular Platoism, to the Persian
tradition of giving advice to sultans and wazirs about government and politics, to the
more contemporary ethical frameworks introduced by the West through “moderniza-
tion,” “development,” “industrialization,” and “secular humanism.”
In the ﬁrst category, the study of ethical principles in the religious tradition dates back to
the eighth and ninth centuries during which two lines of argument were developed: the rational-
ist, those who subscribed to rational opinion, ra’y, argued that where there is no clear guidance
from the Quran or tradition, the Islamic judges and lawyers might make their own rational
judgments on moral and ethical questions. The traditionalist insisted that ethical and moral
judgments can be based only on the Quran and tradition. This led to major debates among
the various groups which are well-known in the study of the Mu ’tazilites, the Asharis, the
Shaﬁ’is, and the Hanbalis, who took di ﬀerent positions on the questions of ethics in classical
Islam.
In addition to these varied schools of thought, there is also a strong tradition in the main-
stream of Islamic philosophy. This is seen mainly as the contribution of Islamic philosophers on
akhlag (character) in the works of such philosophers as Farabi (870 –950), Ibn Sina or Avicenna
(980–1037), and Ibn Rushd or Averroes (1126–98), all of whom have contributed signiﬁcantly to
our knowledge about the sources of mystical as well as Su ﬁ and Hellenic traditions in the
classical Islamic system of ethics.
It was Ibn Khaldun, the father of sociology, however, who theorized about communication as
a social institution which grew according to the need of the community. Social communication
in terms of tabligh provided for a vast number of people from diverse races, languages, and
histories a common forum for participation in a shared culture which was Islam. According to
Ibn Khaldun, the states, governments and political systems of wide power and large authority
have their origin in religious principles based either on prophethood and propagation or on
a truthful tabligh carried out by khatibis (orators/communicators) (Ibn Khaldun, 1336/1957,
pp. 310–316, 1967, pp. 125 –127). Ibn Khaldun was one of the ﬁrst thinkers to point out that
communication based on ethics is the web of human society and that the ﬂow of such com-
munication determines the direction and the pace of dynamic social development. T o him,
combinations of the assabieh feelings and social communication approach provided a more
dynamic view of organizational behavior than can be readily derived from the more con-
ventional concepts of states, of hierarchical position, and of role which usually had been used in
the discussion of politics, government, and large social organization. He thus concluded that
propagation cannot materialize without group feeling. The relationship of social communica-
tion and Islam, therefore, emerges from the very nature of these two institutions. One is the
source of society’s values; the other propagates, disseminates, and maintains the value system of
society, the ummah or community.
In the Islamic tradition of epistemology, the sustained discussion on ethics in Islam has been
discussed in the kalam literature, the theologian’s discussion and debate on the sources of right.
Following is an outline of a number of fundamental Islamic concepts that have been the basis of
Islamic communication ethics, and sense of community and should be at the heart of any
journalistic ethics and duties of Muslim journalists. These concepts are the sources of much of
the contemporary social, political, and economic debates in the Muslim world, especially in
regard to normative secular ethics and in relation to the in ﬂuences and values coming from the
West and the non-Islamic traditions.
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  289


--- PAGE 311 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 290
Page 290
The Theory of T awhid
The ﬁrst and most fundamental outlook regarding man and universe in Islam is the theory of
tawhid, which implies the unity, coherence, and harmony between all parts of the universe. Thus
one of the most basic ethical pillars of the Islamic world is born: the existence of purpose in the
creation and the liberation and freedom of humankind from bondage and servitude to multiple
varieties of non-Gods. It stands for the necessity of exclusive servitude to God, and it negates any
communication and messages, intellectual, cultural, economic, or political, that subjugates
humankind to creatures. The principle of tawhid also negates any right of sovereignty and
guardianship of anyone over human society except God. Society can be expected to be free
from all deviations and excesses only when the a ﬀairs of society are delegated by a Power
Transcendental to an individual or a council of rulers, with a power commensurate with
responsibilities within the Islamic legal framework.
Thus, all man-made laws and ethical codes that arrogate judgment to themselves, or to any
authority or institution other than in obedience or enforcement of “Allah’s Own Judgment,” are
void. Therefore, all man-made laws, communication contents, mass media, and public forums
that attempt to put restraints upon Allah ’s sovereignty must be void. The concept of tawhid, if
exercised, provides the principal guide in drawing the boundaries of political, social, and cul-
tural legitimation by a given communication system. The content of tabligh must not be in the
direction to create and perpetuate political, social, economic, and cultural idols; nor are they
allowed under this principle to promote the cult of personality.
Under the principle of tawhid another fundamental ethical consideration in tabligh becomes
clear: the destruction of thought structures based on dualism, racialism, tribalism, and familial
superiority. The function of communication order in Islamic society, according to the principle,
is to break idols, to break the dependence on the outsiders, and to set the ummah or community
in motion toward the future. Thus, one of the important functions of tabligh is to destroy myths.
In our contemporary world these myths may include “power,” “progress,” and “moderniza-
tion.” Personalities as they represent these must not be superhumanized and superde ﬁned. One
of these dualism, according to this principle, is the secular notion of the separation of religion
and politics.
The principle of tawhid also requires the absence of any economic, political, intellectual,
or other centers, including the media, in which power can be amassed. The freedom of expres-
sion, assembly, and that of the media of communication do not have meaning when there is
no social accountability on the part of the individual and institutions. The ﬁght against the cult
of personality and that of any social institutions associated with it is the ﬁght against the
communication system which attempts to propagate it.
Additional consideration under the ethical framework of tawhid is to campaign against the
material foundations of dualism. Since among the characteristics of dualism is a desire for
superiority through wealth, the content of journalism and social communication must not stress
the value of wealth over spiritual growth and elimination of dividing lines and forms.
The doctrine of Responsibility, Guidance, and Action
A second principle guiding the ethical boundaries of tabligh in Islam is the doctrine of amr bi al-
ma’ruf wa nahy ’an al munkar  or “commanding to the right and prohibiting from the wrong. ”
Implicit and explicit in this principle is the notion of individual and group responsibility for
preparing the succeeding generation to accept the Islamic precepts and make use of them.
Muslims have the responsibility of guiding one another, and each generation has the responsibil-
ity of guiding the next. The Quranic verse explains this: “Call people to the path of your Lord
with wisdom and mild exhortation. Reason with them in the most courteous manner. Y our
290  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 312 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 291
Page 291
Lord best knows those who stray from His path and best knows those who are rightly guided ”
(16:125). This points out the responsibilities of Muslims in guiding each other, especially those
individuals and institutions who are charged with the responsibilities of leadership and propaga-
tion of Islamic ideals. This includes all the institutions of social communication such as the
press, radio, television, and cinema, as well as the individual citizens of each community.
Thus, a special concept of social responsibility theory is designed around the ethical doctrine
of “commanding to the right and prohibiting from the wrong. ” This concept has taken on an
extra dimension of its own in the Islamic communities and societies through history since Islam
as an all-inclusive systematic religion is an interrelated set of ideas and realities covering the
entire area of human notion and action, beliefs and practices, thought, word, and deed. This is
particularly important in light of the fact that Islam is not only a set of theological propositions,
as are many other religions, but is also a set of comprehensive legal frameworks that govern
every action of the individual in society and in the world at large.
For example, on the social and collective level the doctrine has been practiced systematically
in the mosque in the Islamic societies. The mosque as a major channel of social and public
communication has always been a pivot of spiritual and cultural movements since the days of
the Prophet. It has fulﬁlled not only the role of puri ﬁcation of the soul, but also the acquisition
of knowledge and public aﬀairs information. Mosques and major universities existed side by side
or within one another for many years in Egypt, Iran, Spain, and many parts of central Asia and
other Islamic areas. In fact, many mosques were the centers of higher education in the Islamic
tradition. T oday in a number of Islamic societies the systems of “mass communication” have
been well integrated within the classical and traditional systems of social communication of the
mosque, especially the Friday prayers (Mowlana, 1979, 1985).
2 The result has been a high level of
organization and mobilization, making the process of political, cultural, economic, and military
participation extremely eﬀective.
It is here that the concept of martyrdom (shahadat) in Islam and the concept of Holy Struggle
( jihad ) may only be understood if the doctrine of enjoying good and forbidding evil outlined
here is properly appreciated. The term Islam is derived from the Arabic root salama, meaning
surrender and peace or peaceful submission to the Will of Allah. Thus the concept of martyr-
dom, like all other Islamic concepts, is fully related to the concept of tawhid, or the absolute
unity of God, humankind, and universe. In this sense, under the social responsibility theory of
“commanding to the right and prohibiting from the wrong, ” the concept of jihad is no excep-
tion. Thus, from an Islamic perspective and ethical framework, martyrdom and struggle cannot
be explained purely in terms of intercession and mediation; they should be understood within
the framework of the principle of causality and not solely as spiritual mediation. In short,
according to Islam, there is no martyrdom without struggle and tabligh in the course of Allah.
The Concept of Community
A third fundamental concept in determining the nature and boundaries of tabligh and that of
social ethics, particularly as it might relate to the political life of the individual and Islamic
society, is ummah or community. The concept of ummah transcends national borders and
political boundaries. Islamic community transcends the notion of the modern nation-state
system: an Islamic community is a religio-economic concept and is only present when it is
nourished and governed by Islam. The notion of community in Islam makes no sharp distinc-
tion between public and private; therefore, what is required of the community at large is likewise
required of every individual member. Accordingly, the ummah must be exemplary, setting
the highest standards of performance and the reference point for others. It must avoid excesses
and extravagances, be steadfast and consistent, know what to accept and what to reject, have
principles and at the same time remain adaptable to the changing aspect of human life.
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  291


--- PAGE 313 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 292
Page 292
Under the concept of ummah, race is not accepted as a foundation of the state. Values follow
piety and the social system of Islam is based on equity, justice, and ownership of the people.
There is no individual or class of individuals to dominate, exploit, or corrupt the state. Intercul-
tural and international communication (the emphasis here is on nationality and not the nation-
state) are the necessary ingredients of Islamic ummah. The Quran says: “. . . We created you from
a single (pair) of a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know
each other (not that you may despise each other). V erily the most honored of you in the sight of
God is (he who is) the most righteous of you ” (Sura 49, 13).
In the Islamic ummah the sovereignty of the “state” belongs to God, and not to the ruler nor
even to the people themselves. The ruler or leaders are only acting executives chosen by the
people to serve them according to the Law of Islam and the concept of tawhid. Every citizen in
the Islamic “state” is required to oﬀer his best advice on common matters and must be entitled
to do so. Thus consultative methods in politics are not only recognized but are a moral
and ethical duty of the people and the ruler. Furthermore, man, according to Islam, possesses
liberty and free will, so that by intervening in the operation of the norms of society, and by
manipulating them creatively in accordance with the Quran and tradition, he may plan and lay
foundations for a better future for both the individual and society.
Under the ummah, Islam has a new concept of community. One of the most important
aspects of ummah is that Islam does not di ﬀerentiate between the individuals as members of
its community. Race, ethnicity, tribalism, nationalism, have no place to distinguish one member
of the community from the rest. Nationalities, cultural di ﬀerences, geographical factors are
recognized but domination based on nationality is rejected. It is the individual and its relations
to the community that is valued; however, this relationship alone is not the sole purpose in
itself, both the individual and society must make their relationship clear to God: Are the indi-
viduals in society against God or under God? Ummah, as a social organization, emphasizes
communality and collectivity based on Islamic tenets and not inter-individualism. The social
contract which becomes the basis of ummah is not based on free will of unde ﬁned choice but
subject to higher norms: the will of Allah. Communal cohesion is based on divine rights and not
on natural rights. The term theocracy, often cited in the West, thus, cannot apply to the Islamic
community since the notion of church as an institution is foreign to Islam, which as a religion
combines both spiritual and temporal powers. It is an ideology possessing no centralized body
yet its monotheism implies a single global order advocating the universality of moral principles.
The ummah is beyond the nation-state in that the notion of community in Islam cannot be
compared to the stage series of societal development found in Western community histories —
principally that of an independent and an incorporated “political community ” or “military
community” (19).
Modernization movements in Islamic societies over the last 100 years failed in part because
they were unable to elaborate a coherent doctrine based on the unity of spiritual and temporal
powers, the interconnection of what is known as civil society and the state. Islamic “reformism,”
despite its idealistic unity, failed to take into account the multidimensional aspects of the society
which was the ummah. Instead, its political culture, its mode of mobilization, and its administra-
tive framework became ingrained in the concept of the modern nation-state system and its
bureaucracy. Attempts were made to shift the models but not the dominant paradigm which
stood in contrast to the meaning of the ummah (Chay, 1990; Mattelart, 1990; Mowlana &
Wilson, 1990; Said, 1978; Schiller, 1990; Shari-ati, 1980; Smythe, 1981; Tran, 1987; Walker, 1984).
It is in this political, spiritual, and ethical framework that journalism must play a pervasive
role in preservation and maintenance of the unity of the Islamic community. Thus, communica-
tion on both interpersonal and social levels becomes both basic and vital to the functioning of
the ummah, for it sustains and encourages the integral and harmonious relationship between
God, the individual, and society.
292  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 314 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 293
Page 293
The Principle of T aqwa
A fourth principle outlined here to explain the ethical framework of journalism in Islamic
societies is the concept of taqwa or, roughly translated, piety. In Islamic societies taqwa is
commonly used in reference to individual “fear of God” and the ability to guard oneself against
the unethical forces which might surrender the environment; however, the concept of taqwa
goes beyond this common notion of piety. It is the individual, spiritual, moral, ethical, and
psychological capacity to raise oneself to that higher level which makes a person almost immune
from the excessive material desires of the world, elevating the individual to a higher level of
prophetic self-consciousness.
The assumption is that human beings possess in their nature a set of divine elements which
are other than the material constituents that exist in animals, plants, and inanimate objects.
Human beings are endowed with innate greatness and dignity. Recognizing that freedom of
choice is a condition for the ful ﬁllment of obligation, the person is held responsible to perform
his or her obligations within the Islamic framework of ethics. In short, it is recognized that
human beings perform some of their actions only under the in ﬂuence of a series of ethical
emotions rather than with an intention of gaining a bene ﬁt or of repelling a harm. Thus, as a
virtue and as an important element in the ethical framework of Islamic communication both on
the individual and community levels, taqwa should be the underpinning ingredient in almost
every action of a Muslim.
For example, fasting is an institution which has been practiced by di ﬀerent peoples in diﬀer-
ent times and places. In modern times, fasting has taken the two extreme forms of either
ritualism and hunger strikes or dieting. Islamic fasting, however, is diﬀerent in the sense that if it
does not emanate from and lead to taqwa, it cannot be regarded as fasting. The Quran says: “O,
you believers and faithful, fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you
in order that you may develop taqwa (piety)” (2:183). On the leadership level of the ummah and
community, it is the high level of taqwa that must be valued and counted the most. T echnical
knowledge, managerial ability, scientiﬁc know-how, communication skills, etc., if not associated
with taqwa, cannot and should not be the sole criteria for promotion in an Islamic context. In
the Islamic tradition, the conduct of politics and journalism is associated with taqwa and those
who do not possess a degree of taqwa have faced the crisis of legitimacy.
The Meaning of Amanat
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal principle outlined in this paper is the concept of Amanat. The term Amanat
signiﬁes great responsibility which the Almighty God has imposed on the human being for his
or her deeds in this world. The most relevant view of this concept as it may apply to the conduct
of the press and the media is that Amanat refers to Divine Vicegerency for which human beings
alone are ﬁt and none else can share this honor with him. The Holy Quran says: Surely, we
oﬀered the Amanat into the heavens and the earth and the hills, but they refused to hear it
and were afraid of it, and man took it up. V erily, he (human beings) was unjust, and ignorant
(xxxiii: 72).
Thus, human beings ﬁtness for Divine Vicegerange is lower, conditioned by the fact that he or
she must practice the lofty code morality which brings him or her to the supreme being. O ﬀ all
the created beings human beings are certainly the best and noblest (Ashraf-ul-makhlughat).
Here it may be noted that rights and obligations are interdependent. Serving the public interest,
therefore, becomes one of the principal ethical duties of the media.
Amanat means obligatory duties (faraiz). One aspect of amanat is that is can only be given
to one who has the capability and power to shoulder the burden of its responsibilities and ful ﬁll
the commandments of Allah. Thus in Islam real progress of moral and not just material, for the
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  293


--- PAGE 315 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 294
Page 294
latter refers to the transitory things of life. The liberty in Islam has quite a di ﬀerent meaning
from that understood in the West. It is neither a prerogative nor an absolute right of the
individual.
Conclusion
An attempt to evaluate the Islamic implications of our knowledge of the dynamics of communi-
cation ecology has been made here. A number of concepts have been introduced and examined
in order to understand the phenomenon of communication and ethics in an Islamic context. It
was shown that Muslim thinkers and philosophers throughout history not only recognized the
importance of communication and ethics in determining the cultural pro ﬁle of the Islamic
civilization but also regarded the propitious equilibrium of spatial and temporal biases in Islam
as an established fact. Over the last century, however, and especially during the last four decades,
a dualism and contradiction have been created within the Islamic countries as a result of the
introduction of the secular nationalist framework and the accompanying new concepts and
methods of communication and ethics. A crisis of legitimacy has been created as a result of a
conﬂict between the “oﬃcial culture” of the ruling elites, which in many cases now represents
and promotes Western inﬂuence, and the “traditional Islamic culture ” of the masses rooted in
centuries of religio-political and socio-ethical experience.
Nowhere is this communication and ethical con ﬂict better illustrated than in the structure
and use of the means of communication at the disposal of both cultures. The overwhelming
evidence suggests that Muslim societies have, by and large, not responded positively to modern
communication ethics coming from outside their own culture; nor in the post-colonial Muslim
world has the political and communication system acquired from the West gained a broad
popular base. On the contrary, such political and communication systems have become increas-
ingly authoritarian, dictatorial, and military. Thus, as stated earlier, in Muslim societies today
there exist two competing and mutually exclusive ethical methods and frameworks: the
imported political culture of the ruling classes, and the indigenous political culture of the
Muslim masses.
A look at the pre-modernist reform movements of the 18th and 19th centuries which swept
over a large part of the Muslim world might o ﬀer some lessons. These movements were gener-
ated from the heart of the Islamic world itself and were directed toward correcting social evils
and raising the moral standards of the community. Such movements appealed to the Muslims to
awaken and liberate themselves from Western economic, political, military, and cultural domin-
ation, and to carry out the necessary internal reforms that would make for ethical and moral
regeneration and strength. It would be a mistake to consider these movements as being primarily
the result of Western inﬂuence on the Muslim world. All of these movements, without exception,
emphasized a return to the tradition and ethics of Islam.
3 The current movements in the
Islamic world are simply a continuation of the pre-modernist movements which tried to resolve
contradictions created by exogenous forces.
Here, the central question is not one of economics but of culture, ethics, and tabligh. It is in
this context that contemporary movements in the Islamic lands must be studied and under-
stood. The question which Muslims have to answer, therefore, is how best to devise structural
changes and institutional setups that would help to maintain the precious communication and
ethical balance which has been traditionally part of the Islamic civilization.
As I have outlined elsewhere, the crucial question for the Islamic societies is whether the
emerging global information communication community is a moral and ethical community or
just another stage in the unfolding pictures of the transformation in which the West is the center
and the Islamic world the periphery. Throughout Islamic history, especially in the early cen-
turies, information was not a commodity but a moral and ethical imperative. Thus, through an
294  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 316 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 295
Page 295
Islamic perspective, it seems that linguistic and political vocabularies and concepts, now at the
center of global politics, both celebrate the arrival of a new communication age and hold the key
to ultimate information control.
Notes
1. See Harold D. Lasswell, Daniel Lerner, and Hans Speier (1980) edited Propaganda and Communication
in World History, Three volumes published by University of Hawaii Press. The ﬁrst volume deals with
“The Symbolic Instrument in Early Times, ” while the second volume concerns the “Emergence of
Public Opinion in the West.” The third volume deals with the contemporary world situation.
2. For a review of global information and international communication, see Mowlana (1986, 1988).
3. See Sahifeh Noor: Majmoe Rahnemood ha’i Imam Khomeini, 18 Volumes (1361–1365). For a comparative
view of journalism and media ethics see Cooper, with Christians, Plude, & White (1989); Philip
Schlesinger & Hamid Mowlana (1993), Mowlana (1994, 1996); Christians, Ferre, & Fackler (1993);
Merrill (1997).
References
Cherry, C. (1961). On human communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chay, J. (Ed.). (1990). Culture and international relations. New York: Praeger.
Christians, C., Ferre, J., & Fackler, M. (1993). Good news: Social ethics and the press . New Y ork: Oxford
University Press.
Cooper, T. W., Christians, C. G., Plude, F. F., & White, R. A. (Eds.). (1989). Communication ethics and global
change. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Ellul, J. (1965). Propaganda: The formation of men’s attitudes. New Y ork: Vintage.
Ibn Khaldun, (1336/1957). Muqaddimah (Vol. 1) (M. P . Gonabadi, Trans into Persian). T ehran: Bongahe
Tarjumeh va Nashreh Ketab.
Ibn Khaldun, (1967). The Introduction to History: The Mugaddimah  (F. Rosenthal, Trans from Arabic,
N.J. Dowood, Abridged and Eds). London: Routledge and Kegan, Paul.
Kirschenmann, P . P . (1970). Information and reﬂection: On some problems of cybernetics and how contempor-
ary dialectical materialism copes with them . Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.
Kroeber, A. L., & Parsons, T. (1958). The concepts of culture and of social systems. American Sociological
Review, 23, 582–583.
Lasswell, H. D. (1942). Communication research and politics. In D. Waples (Ed.), Print, radio, and ﬁlm in a
democracy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lasswell, H. D., Lerner, D. & Speier, H. (Eds). (1980). Propaganda and communication in world history .
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press.
Lenin, V . I. (1935–1939). Selected works II (J. Fineberg, Ed.). New Y ork: Macmillan.
Mattelart, A. (1990). Communication and class struggle: Vol. 3 New historical subjects . New Y ork: Inter-
national General.
Merrill, J. C. (1997). Philosophical foundations for news media. New Y ork: St. Martin.
Mowlana, H. (1979). T echnology versus tradition: Communication in the Iranian revolution. Journal of
Communication, 29(3), 107–112.
Mowlana, H. (1985). Communication for political change: The Iranian revolution. In G. Gerbner &
M. Siefert (Eds.), World communication: A handbook. New Y ork: Longman.
Mowlana, H. (1986). Global information and world communication: New frontiers in international relations .
White Plains, NY: Longman.
Mowlana, H. (1988). Mass media systems and communication. In M. Adams (Ed.), The Middle East: A
handbook. London: Muller, Blond and White.
Mowlana, H. (1994). Civil society, information society, and Islamic society. In S. Splichal, A. Calabrese,
C. Sparks, W. Lafayette (Eds.), Information society and civil society: Contemporary perspectives on the
changing world order (pp. 208–232). West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.
Mowlana, H. (1996). Global communication in transition: The end of diversity . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mowlana, H., & Wilson, L. J. (1990). The passing of modernity: Communication and the transformation of
society. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Mutahhari, M. (1977). Nahjul balagha: Sermons, letters and sayings of Hazrat Ali  (S. M. Ashari Jafery,
Trans.). Elmhurst, New Y ork: Tahrike Tarsile Quran.
Mutahhari, M. (1361/1982). Majmoe Ghoftarha (Collection of speeches). T eheran: Sadra.
Mutahhari, M. (1985). Fundamentals of Islamic thought: God, man, and universe. Berkeley, CA: Mizan.
PERSPECTIVES ON ISLAM AND COMMUNICATION  295


--- PAGE 317 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 296
Page 296
Nahjul, B. (1977). Sermons, letters, and saying of Hazrat Ali . (S. M. Ashari Jafery, Trans.). Elmhurst, NY:
Tahrike Tarsile Quran.
Sahifeh Noor: Majmoe Rahnemood ha’i Imam Khomeini, 18 Volumes (1361–1365). T ehran: V ezarate Ershad
Islami.
Said, E. W. (1978). Orientalism. New Y ork: Vintage.
Schiller, H. I. (1990). Culture, Inc. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Schlesinger, P ., & Mowlana, H. (Eds.). (1993). Islam and communication [Special Issue]. Media Culture and
Society, 15(1).
Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1961). The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Shari-ati, A. (1980). Marxism and other Western fallacies  (R. Campbell, Trans from Persian). Berkeley, CA:
Mizan.
Smythe, D. W. (1981). Dependency road: Communications, capitalism, consciousness, and Canada. NJ: Ablex.
Tran, V . D. (1987). Independence, liberation, revolution: An approach to the understanding of the Third World.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Walker, R. B. J. (Ed). (1984). Culture, ideology, and world order. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics, or control and communication in animal and the machine  (new ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiener, N. (1967). The human use of human beings: Cybernetics and society . New Y ork: Avon.
296  HAMID MOWLANA


--- PAGE 318 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 297
Page 297
18
Ethics and the Discourse on Ethics in
Post-Colonial India
Anantha Sudhaker Babbili
My language is aphoristic; it lacks precision. It is, therefore, open to several
interpretations.
(Lord Krishna’s conversation with Dharmadev, The Collected Works
of Mahatma Gandhi, Government of India, 1958, p. 485)
If we de ﬁne ethics as involving intention, will, freedom, the relation of one
individual to another, we are imposing a western concept on India. Admittedly,
Hinduism has little or no ethics in this sense. But if ethics involves a set of
standard behavior based on duty, social custom, religious faith in karma, then
Hinduism puts a high premium on moral conduct. Hinduism has no concern
for others as others, as individuals deserving separate treatment, but it does
have concern for others as members of the group or as part of Universal Reality.
(Father Raymond Panikkar as quoted in Lacy, 1965, p. 27)
The chapter deals with Indian ethics in its cultural context and with the intellectual challenge
that the discourse on ethics in a post-colonial situation oﬀers. It begins with the latter to arrive at
the former. In doing so, the chapter explores the perplexing morass of ethical reasoning that
dictates Indian daily life. The discursive analysis hopes to sketch a normative vision and describe
an encompassing theory of discourse on ethics.
The intent here is to introduce the student of ethics to the ethical schemata of India. And this
task is not easy. The journey into Indian ethics is essentially an excursion into the contestable
terrain of con ﬂicting cultural narratives — native and those imposed from the outside. Thus,
any narrative on Indian ethics must ﬁrst wrestle with the di ﬃculty of dealing with ethics in its
post-colonial condition.
1 It must provide a descriptive in the context of contemporary India ’s
geography, society, culture, and politics. Also, to imagine the particular location of ethics, one
must understand the history of the culture and society. The philosophical basis for the speci ﬁc
principles governing Indian life can then be discussed meaningfully from an indigenous “ethical
systems” perspective.
The study of Indian ethics calls for eschewing the traditional dualisms that exist in Western
thought. The typical dichotomies of subject –object, fact –value, individual –society, material–
spiritual, good –evil, and so forth are inconsequential for understanding Indian society and
ethics. The Western need to understand is basically puzzling to Indians. One seeks the experience
of the Self [Atman] to ﬁnd one’s dharma [duty and righteousness] — not to explain away but to
297


--- PAGE 319 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 298
Page 298
accept, not to articulate but to experience. T elling a story is as important as speaking the truth,
but most often, it is telling the story that indicates profound insight not preaching truth as
one sees it.
In India, everything important is told in paradoxes. Oliver (1971) writes that subtlety is the
hallmark of the Indian mind. The rhetorical milieu includes the manner of talk, how people
address each other on what topics, styles of conversation, non-verbal cues, and intended e ﬀects
between senders and receivers. Nothing is as it ﬁrst appears. What is said must be understood in
terms of what has been left unsaid. “Opposites are coordinates; contradictions are illusionary.
The world is a dramatic portrayal of God playing hide and seek with Himself — trying to
reassemble all the divergent parts into their original unity ” (Oliver, 1971, pp. 15 –16). Death is
life; continuity is change.
The potent force of such Indian ethical paradoxes and conduct can be seen in Mahatma
Gandhi’s twin battle (Gandhi, 1948; Misra & Gangal, 1981) against British colonial rule in India
based on dharma and ahimsa [nonviolence]— destined to permanently change the colonizer as
well as the colonized (Nandy, 1983). Gandhi’s ability to translate social ethics and ethical ideals
into political action laid the foundations for achieving social justice for millions for the ﬁrst time
in world history through nonviolence. With a clever use of nonverbal methods evoking the
cultural ethics laden in the texts and epics of nationhood, he struck a chord of unity among its
diverse people and eﬀectively disarmed a colonial military machine.
Geography and the Cultural Ethos
Understanding the land— the geography of modern India and its geographical formulations— is
critical to comprehending Indian ethics.2 Major battles between good and evil have been fought
in mythology that carry insight into ethics. The Mahabharata and Ramayana point into wars
and warriors, virtuous and treacherous gods, benevolent and punishing gods, and to goddesses
and androgynous gods. They describe gods who provoked warfare, gods who switched sides,
gods that are human, partly human, partly non-human, partly from the rest of the animal
kingdom, half-god, half-human, half-animal, perfect, and imperfect gods. Three million of
them— each re ﬂecting virtues and antivirtues — reside in one of the oldest civilizations that
extends from the Indus River to the Himalaya mountains, from the genesis of the sacred rivers
Brahmaputra and Ganga to the Vindhya mountains, and from central plains to the lush greenery
of Kanyakumari at the tip of south India. The sage then shows, following di ﬀerent ways of
enumerating them, how each of these views could make sense (Davis as cited in Lopez, 1995,
p. 3). The narratives that have sprung from this land domiciled between the Indus and Ganges
rivers are indeed peculiar to India and Indians, though their imprint can be seen in the Greek
and Roman, Chinese and European civilizations (Halbfass, 1988).
Contemporary studies of Indian ethics cannot be understood without coming to terms with
its post-independent (after 1947) political, cultural, social, and religious fragments. Located in
southern Asia between the Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, and Indian Ocean, between Bangladesh
and Pakistan (both creations from the former “India” of the colonial era), India experienced
Islamic colonialism for nearly three centuries until the arrival of the British in the 1600s.
Ethnically, 72% of the nearly 950 million Indians are Indo-Aryans and 25% are Dravidians of
the south. Indians, however, never really identify themselves along ethnic lines as Aryan or
Dravidian. India harbors many religions, including the Hindu majority (80%), Muslim (14%),
Christian (2.4%), Sikh (2%), Buddhist (0.7%), Jains (0.5%), and other faiths. Religious plural-
ity— including Zoroastrianism with origins in Persia and in Judaism — is a historical reality,
although the fundamentalist backlash from the Hindu Right against two colonialisms— Christian
and Islamic — is presently a feature of Indian politics. Linguistically, India has had a burst of
creative languages over the past 5,000 years. There are 18 major languages with their own unique
298  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 320 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 299
Page 299
alphabet and script, which formed the basis of statehoods; yet there are 25 languages spoken by
1 million or more Indians and more than 1,100 dialects — some with written scripts and others
strictly oral. Literacy rates in 1991 were estimated as 63.86% for males and 39.42% for females.
Agriculture and village-cottage industries take the lion ’s share of the labor force. Politically, the
colonial imprint can be seen on India ’s political structure (federal republic) and on its legal
system (based on English common law), although compromises with Islamic law to appease the
Muslim minority are often allowed.
India is the world’s largest and most populous democracy, with 950 million people. Govern-
ance of India is virtually unimaginable with such a multitude of classes, castes, subcastes,
religions, regionalisms, linguistic divisions, and a population nearing 1 billion. Y et su ﬀrage is
extended universally to citizens 18 years and older, and they have exhibited in India ’s post-
independent history a vibrant propensity for democratic institutions and a disdain for dictator-
ships. The Indian constitution embraces a social activism that encourages equality for caste and
religion. Reservations in employment and in higher education akin to a ﬃrmative action in the
United States have been in place since 1947, and accommodations to the lower castes have
gradually increased— much to the chagrin of the upper castes. However, as governmental meas-
ures to eradicate caste discrimination take root, discrimination based on economic status has
begun to emerge as even more important than the traditional caste distinctions. The gap
between the rich and poor is wide and gets wider every year.
Communication in culturally diverse environment is a given in India. The India model of
communication can be called at best a “mixed system, ” with a blend of written and oral
traditions. Print media include 30,000 newspapers with a combined circulation of 60 million.
Government ownership of newspapers is disallowed. Daily newspapers 3,000 strong — although
relying heavily on government-approved newsprint — provide the most vocal criticism of
political and social institutions. The broadcasting system, however, is under the government ’s
control, ensuring public interest with a balance of regional, linguistic, and religious representa-
tions on radio and television. Radio, with its appeal for nonliterate audiences reaches about 94%
of India, and television has a nearly 84% reach, the latter con ﬁned to India’s middle class. India
boasts the world’s largest ﬁlm industry with about 900 full-length feature ﬁlms produced every
year. Bombay, India’s Hollywood, produces the largest number of ﬁlms in the Hindi language,
spoken by about 30% of Indians. Films are seen by 100 million people every week in 13,000
cinema halls. Often, the largest buildings in small villages are the temple and the cinema hall.
Although most ﬁlms ape Western story-telling, violence, and escapism, many do construct
narratives of caste injustice, marriages based on love (as opposed to forced or arranged mar-
riages), the triumph of the lower and poorer castes of people over the upper caste and the
arrogant elite, the triumph of the gentler and the androgynous over the powerful and hypermas-
culine (Nandy, 1995). Films and government-sponsored television productions aim to propagate
religious tolerance, national unity, and environmental protection. Radio shows promote devel-
opment programs and cultural cohesion. The broadcast media deal with subject matter that
relates to tradition and the family as a unit. Films, in particular, critically examine the cultural
consequences of Westernization even as they follow the cinematic logic established by the West.
Cable TV and imported programming are on the rise.
When partitioned from British Indian, Pakistan chose to become an Islamic Republic,
whereas India made secularism as inherent part of its plurality (Sen, 1993) by choosing a secular
constitution for its Hindus and Muslims. Although diversity and tolerance within Hinduism did
not come with Western secularism, they have become a political necessity. It was a moral and
ethical choice that neutralized temporarily sectarian nationalism, ultra-right Hindu funda-
mentalism, and militant obscurantism until India gained the strength to stand on its own feet in
the wake of independence from the British.
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  299


--- PAGE 321 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 300
Page 300
Ethics and Religion in India
India’s social ethics cannot be understood without locating them in a broad de ﬁnition of
religion. The caution here is that Hinduism must be understood in pre-colonial terms to extract
the nation’s ethical underpinnings. Hinduism is a collection of a broad group of south Asian
religions. It has been challenged by other religions that came to exist in the region — Buddhism,
Islam, and Christianity — but it remains the most prevalent. Hinduism is one of the world ’s
oldest continuously recorded religions dating from 4500 to 1200 b.c.e. A text was already edited
and put into ﬁnal shape by about 1200 b.c.e. (Davis, cited in Lopez, 1995, p. 3). Both terms,
Hinduism and India, were framed by outsiders — the former an invention of the last century by
the British and the latter the coinage by the Greeks and Persians referring to a geographical
location rather than a collection of beliefs and peoples (Lopez, 1995; Sen, 1993). The word
“Hindu” was coined by the Arab colonizers referring to people who lived near the Sindhu river.
It was later incorporated into the Indian lexicon by Indians eager to construct for themselves a
counterpart to the seemingly monolithic Christianity of the colonizers (Lopez, 1995, p. 6).
Because ethics is derived from Hinduism as a whole, it is pertinent to discuss the term
Hinduism. It remains useful for describing and categorizing the various schools of thought and
practice that have sprung up within a shared Indian society and have employed a common
religious vocabulary. However, applying this single term to a wide array of Indian religious
phenomena across a historical continuity raises some obvious questions (Lopez, 1995, p. 6).
What is the center of Hinduism? And who determines this center, if any? Scholars and Indians
have largely adopted two contrasting views on this matter that have a bearing on ethics — one
centralist and the other pluralist. Centralists identify a pan-Indian hegemonic, orthodox trad-
ition transmitted primarily through the Sanskrit language, chieﬂy by the Brahmanic upper caste.
Davis contends that the tradition centers around a V edic lineage of texts that includes the
V edas themselves but also the Mimamsa, Dharmasastra, and Vedanta corpuses (Lopez, 1995).
3
V ernacular challenges to Sanskrit questioning the caste order and rejecting the authority of
the V edas may periodically show up as a rebellion against the center, but the orthodox, through
the adept use of inclusion and repressive tolerance, have managed to prevail in authority. The
pluralists envision a decentered profusion of ideas and practices all tolerated and incorporated
under Hinduism (Lopez, 1995).
The textual history of Hinduism and of Indian religions begins in 4000 b.c.e. and since then
has encouraged its own versions of dissent, lively religious interaction, and criticism through
satire and polemic. Various contending religious narratives have vied to each present a view of
divinity, human society, human purposes, and social ethics as more compelling than the others.
As quoted in Lopez (1995), Davis writes,
One ﬁnds such all-encompassing visions presented in many Hindu texts or group of texts
at diﬀerent periods of history: the V edas, the Epics, the puranic theologies of Vishnu and
Siva, the medieval texts of the bhakti movements, and the formulations of synthetic
Hinduism by modern reformers.
(p. 7)
The theoretical exegesis of Indian ethics ﬂows from such a synthesis of Indian thought. T o
speak of Hinduism as a “religion” in India is not to say much of anything at all theoretically or
analytically. Hinduism deﬁes a Western category of religions, encompassing actually “a diversity
of gods, texts, and social practice, and a variety of ontologies and epistemologies. Without an
organized church, it is innocent of orthodoxy, heterodoxy and heresy” (quoted by Larson, 1995,
p. 279). Religion— a fundamental anthropological notion on analogy with culture, language, and
society— goes beyond the theoretical categories of European history of religions, theology, and
300  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 322 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 301
Page 301
Western social science (Larson, 1995, pp. 280 –281). Uniquely, “India has been instructive in
exhibiting forms of religion in which determinate cognitive formulation regarding ultimate
truth is neither essential nor possible” (Larson, 1995, p. 281).
The anthologies that hold the treasures of Indian thought, Indian morality, and human virtue
are the Rg Veda (the V edic period of Indian history stretches roughly from 2500 to 500 b.c.e.),
the collection of hymns that form the bedrock of the Hindu tradition; the Upanishads (700 to
300 b.c.e.), the story of creation and classic discourses that form the foundation for Hindu
religious and philosophical speculation; the Bhagavad Gita (400 b.c.e. to 400 a.d.), the basic
text of religious and philosophical synthesis and basic scripture of Hindu devotionalism; the
Mahabharata (400 b.c.e. to 400 a.d.), the political history of humankind with contending
moralities and nondualistic thought; and the Ramayana (200 b.c.e.), the second of the great
epics that exempliﬁes the fundamental values and tensions in the classical tradition.
No one text represents a complete statement of Buddhism, but the Dhammapada comes
closest to the basic discourse, which teaches that the greatest sin is ignorance or thoughtlessness
and that the holy life begins with, and is founded upon, moral earnestness and the spirit of inquiry
and self-examination. India ethical extrapolations can also be found in the fables of Panchatantra,
which uses classic Indian humor to spell out ﬁve doctrines of conduct or modes of action,
namely, conﬁdence or ﬁrmness of mind, creation of prosperity or a ﬄuence, earnest endeavor,
friendship, and knowledge. Panchatantra reveals the ancient Indian aﬃnity towards non-human
beings and the sanctity of nature by evoking the imagery of animals when discussing the
doctrines of conduct — especially for children. The basic authority for India ’s legal and moral
philosophy today seems to be the Code of Manu, a text written between 600 b.c.e. and 300 a.d.
that contains a mythological rationalization for the caste system and family ethics (Doniger &
Smith, 1991). Thus, ethics in India stems from those basic Hindu religious texts that are often
considered cultural and philosophical texts.
Hindu philosophy teaches that the metaphysical ideal is higher than the ethical ideal (Brown,
1970; Crawford, 1974, p. 229); nevertheless, both are synthetically related. Those who have
achieved the mystical state of moksa [liberation] does not consciously follow the ethical path
but neither can they deviate from it. The path of an enlightened person is paved with virtue
(Crawford, 1974, p. 230). Love and compassion to all creatures are the spontaneous products of
wisdom. This thought, for example, is relevant to an ecologically conscious world. Ecology
presupposes ethics. T o attain a right relationship with nature, modern human beings must
assume vital obligations for the web of life in which their own life is wonderfully woven. Material
investments do not recover and preserve nature. The obligation to life forms is a matter of con-
science— an individual ’s ecological conscience. The ecological conscience views the human
being as a spectator and participant in nature.
This means, if we are going to be scienti ﬁc in our approach, we cannot speak of man and
nature, but of man in nature. The ﬁrst view is anthropocentric; the second is biocentric.
The ﬁrst view has characterized Western man ’s approach to nature; the second has been
more characteristic of the Hindu perspective.
(Crawford, 1995, p. 177)
The outlook on life underlying the summum bonum of Hindu ethics is fundamentally cosmic.
The essential self is not only identi ﬁed with the group or society or nation or even with the
whole human race, but it is inclusive of these and much more. The nature of the self in
Hinduism includes all lesser forms of existence, and therefore, it also has an ecological con-
science. Crawford (1974) cites this passage from the Upanishads: “The essential self or the vital
essence of man is the same as that in a gnat, the same as that in an elephant, the same as that in
these three worlds, indeed the same as that in the whole universe ” (p. 232).
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  301


--- PAGE 323 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 302
Page 302
The Nature of Ethics and Continuity in India
Hindus call their religion Sanatana Dharma, which literally means “Eternal Law.” The term does
not imply that the ethical ideals connected with religion are eternal in the sense of being ﬁxed,
static, and unchanging. T o the contrary, Hindu ethics
like the river Ganges, has been in a state of ceaseless ﬂow during the ages, constantly
changing its course and currents relative to the hard, intervening realities of Indian his-
tory. Under the rubric of eternal law and universal law, Hindu ethics combines continuity
with dynamic diversity.
(Crawford, 1974, p. i)
Hinduism does not have a science of morals fashioned after some Aristotelian or Thomistic
model (Crawford, 1974, p. xiv). However, it does have a moral philosophy that postulates a
summun bonum and speci ﬁes the proper means to achieve it. This highest ideal is the state of
moksa or liberation where one ﬁnds self-ful ﬁllment and deepest bliss. Moksa serves as the
ultimate standard of right conduct; it measures the value of an act by the extent to which it
either helps or hinders the attainment of freedom. Actions most distinctly oriented to moksa
are those characterized by truth, non-violence, sacri ﬁce, and renunciation (Crawford, 1974,
p. xiv).
In the ancient texts, the earliest India scribe, Sage Narada, was charged with the responsibility
of mediating messages between the mighty deities and their earthly subjects. Narada was given
the basic objective of establishing lokakalyan [universal peace and prosperity]. In his role, he
depicts himself as the master oral communicator who sought liaison between the rulers and the
ruled and as one who kept an empathetic discourse between the people and the various king-
doms of the gods. It is essential to notice the fact that sages, when narrating each other ’s
intentions and motives in the interest of maintaining peace and tranquility, would deliberately
slant the truth. Even when the clever role of Narada was to be found out, he would still be
revered for his intent to keep peace between people over truth-telling. Similarly, the two great
epics Mahabharata and Ramayana are wrought with such paradoxes in human action. The
former text includes Bhagavad Gita— the conversation between Lord Krishna the chariot driver
and Arjuna the ultimate warrior on one ’s dharma and ethics of being. Bhagavad Gita  is the
famous philosophical dialogue that lays foundation for Indian ethical conduct in the present life.
Nondualisms and contradictions prevail in which the choice between good and evil is never
clear-cut.
Indian ethics appear most often as subtle manifestations of human conduct in the narratives
of prominent cultural and religious texts, traditions, and customs. These narratives carry diverse
interpretations (Richman, 1991), multiple and authoritative translations into other Indian
languages, dialects, and semantics within oral traditions, vernacular expression and ahistorical
arrangements. In addition, Buddhist doctrines espoused in Dhammapada shed light on prob-
lems of human existence, goals of Buddhism (King, 1946), Buddhist ethics, the problem of evil,
and ethics for laypersons. The dominant Hindu ethics revolve around the issues of moral
obligation. Indian texts point to minute details of Indian life that expound on the ethics of
environmental protection, universal morality, and the ideal of human perfection, knowledge as
virtue, the parallelism of thought and action, and intersections of theory and practice.
The original texts of Hinduism re ﬂect throughout a continuity of ethical discourse in the
midst of paradoxes and contradictions (Govinda Das, 1947; Herman, 1991). The V edic period
produced the oldest known book in human civilization, the Rg Veda, which contains no evidence
of caste, child marriage, prohibition of widow remarriage, or other such antisocial practices.
“Women wore the sacred thread of Brahminism, participated in metaphysical discourse, and
302  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 324 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 303
Page 303
enjoyed a moral and intellectual status never achieved since then ” (Lacy, 1965, p. 14). Ethics
during the V edic period espoused obedience to divine law. “Rta, the law or order of the world . . .
provides the standard of morality....  V i r t u e  was conformity to the cosmic law” (Gandhi, 1948;
quoted by Lacy, 1965). Rta contains discourses on love and fear, kindness and benevolence, order
and duty. Out of rta comes the central ethical concept of dharma in subsequent moral phil-
osophy. During the V edic age, life was viewed in an aﬃrmative sense rather than according to the
later ideal of renunciation. Only after did the ideal of high ethnicity become withdrawal rather
than service, spiritual achievement not abasement (Lacy, 1965, p. 15).
Upanishads essentially nulliﬁes ethics as commonly deﬁned. Under the Upanishads, a person’s
highest spiritual aim is to blend the individual soul (Atman) with the Universal-Ultimate Reality,
the Brahman (not to be confused with the upper caste Hindu Brahmin) creating Brahman-
Atman, a supramoral Soul. Because the spiritual goal processes no moral characteristics, the
process of salvation includes no moral challenge. The Upanishads contain various instructions:
to speak the truth, respect gods and ancestors, honor parents and guests, and control desires.
Another reason for the nulli ﬁcation of ethics in the Upanishads is the denial of the material
world because the only reality is represented in the Brahman-Atman’s impersonal and
supramoral Soul. The physical universe and human existence are maya [illusion], and lila [play].
In such a society, one may have prescribed duties, but any free, spontaneous, creative relation-
ship to other beings becomes imaginary and meaningless. The attainment of nirvana, a Hindu-
Buddhist term for the extinction of desire and attachment, is a transcendence of all relativity and
relationships. A devout Hindu or Buddhist would ﬁnd supreme union with the Brahman as the
ultimate, positive, and ecstatic experience (Lacy, 1965, p. 16). But, clearly, in the arena of human
ethics and in a traditional epistemological view, this concept of salvation oﬀers neither guidance
nor incentive.
Another reason for the de-emphasis of ethics in the Upanishads is the emphasis on two
doctrines crucial to all subsequent Hinduism: karma and samsara. Ethically speaking, the law of
karma simply recognizes that a person reaps what a person sows— if not in this life, then in a life
to come. According to samsara, all those who die without achieving nirvana will reappear in
another and yet another birth, either higher or lower in the orders of creation and social scale
(Herman, 1991). Many Indians and some Westerners today, without justifying caste discrimin-
ations in any sense, uphold the doctrine of karma on various grounds. Metaphorically speaking,
it provides a consistent theory of evil and su ﬀering.
No theistic system, including Christianity, has been able to reconcile the goodness and
omnipotence of God with a world of pain and sin ....  T h e  H i n d u  a d v o c a t e  o f  karma may
be quite right that such a belief provides a powerful incentive for personal ethics . . .
At best, therefore, these basic Hindu beliefs inspire a self-centered morality (and social
ethics), whose sole criterion for ethical behavior is the merit being stored up by karma.
(Lacy, 1965, p. 17)
By the time the Code of Manu (Doniger & Smith, 1991) makes an appearance in the continuum
of Indian philosophical thought, it is obvious that neither lawmakers nor philosophers of
ancient India sought to construct a systematic ethical theory. Morality consisted of obedience to
the divine law, expressed less in legal commandments than in social custom and religious
sanction. Not unlike Rg Veda, the Code of Manu oﬀers a mythological rationalization of ethical
behavior through the caste system: that the Brahmins must be priests wielding verbal authority,
the Kshatriyas must be the warriors to defend the raj, the Vaisyas craftsmen, traders and farmers
are to be used for manual skills, the Shudras servants for performing menial tasks, and India ’s
outcasts (the harijans) are the untouchables. Many enlightened Hindus have discarded all justiﬁ-
cations of the caste system, and the brutal exploitation of caste stands universally condemned.
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  303


--- PAGE 325 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 304
Page 304
Although many Indians, including Mahatma Gandhi and Rabindranath Tagore, believed in the
varna-dharma (caste obligations) for di ﬀerent reasons, Gandhi, particularly became an active
crusader against caste with the profound belief that caste was alien to Hinduism having found
no support in the Vedas (Crawford, 1974, p. 220).
Every social, economic, and cultural justiﬁcation of the caste system was purchased at a great
price— the loss of freedom and the sacri ﬁce of social progress. Freedom was lost because the
individual was required to submit totally to the system; social progress was sacriﬁced because the
principle of heredity was the sole determinant of a person ’s role in life (Crawford, 1974, p. 219).
The doctrine of karma could explain one ’s present position in relation to the past and even
provide incentive to perform good deeds with a view to meriting a higher caste in the future
existence, but too often this doctrine was only a moral rationalization of social inequalities
(Crawford, 1974, p. 219).
However, the inherent quality of Hinduism — the many voices of dissent against the hier-
archical order of caste — had always been vibrant. It should not be assumed that the Hindu
embarrassment over the caste system developed only from the contact with Western ideals of
liberty, equality, and fraternity. “Actually there has always been a counter movement, question-
ing and controverting the rigidity and inviolability of the principle of heredity” (Crawford, 1974,
p. 219). Regardless of the assigned caste, one reaches the state of the Brahman if one observes
“truth, charity, fortitude, good conduct, gentleness, austerity, and compassion,” says Yudhisthira
in Mahabharata. The actual attainment of the Ultimate Soul — the Atman, the Brahman— is
contingent on one ’s ability to denounce the social status and caste a ﬃliation and embrace
nothingness. Unlike earlier texts, the Code of Manu codiﬁed family ethics and a lower status for
women. Pre-puberty marriage, polygamy, divorce, voluntary sati [widow cremation] and bans
against widow remarriage— all found acceptance in this book of Hindu law.
The epic Mahabharata anchored the major problem of Hindu social ethics. This text repre-
sents the sublime pinnacle of morality even as it describes an impersonal superdeity who
deprives his followers of the involvement essential to genuine ethical choice. Compassion, for-
giveness, devotion, life without love or desire or goodness are cast in genuinely problematical
terms. Because Hinduism encompasses a wide variety of beliefs and interpretations with no
oﬃcial orthodoxy or hierarchy, the philosophy of India that is captured in this epic demands no
logical consistency or precision. Completely contradictory conclusions may be drawn by equally
competent scholars and devotees; any objective appraisal leads to the generalization of ethical
theory and to observations of moral practice (Lacy, 1965, p. 14).
The centripetal ethical arguments of Mahabharata ﬁnd their home in the Bhagavad Gita, the
song of the celestial Lord. Millions of Hindus turn to it for daily inspiration and guidance; many
can recite the entire text. The central theme of Gita is this: Perform your duty with detachment.
The most dominant school of Hindu philosophy has emphasized detachment — the freedom
from emotional involvement and from concern for consequences. The other school gaining
inﬂuence in modern India today puts stress on action and on courageously making decisions.
The result is the classic collision between “world-and-life negation ” and “world-and-life-
aﬃrmation” in Indian ethics (Lacy, 1965, p. 20). Consequently, Hinduism does not deny
dilemmas. The epics and other cultural texts are not just works of antiquity but embody the
social sinews that connect past with present and make the epics timeless treasuries of true
dilemmas.
Dharma, Ahimsa, and Ethical V alues
Although the earlier texts based morality on law and ritual, Gita gives new weight to the personal
conscience. Though the union with the Supreme Soul is based on spiritual terms, it calls for
benevolence toward others. “Morality, which is eternal . . . consists of universal friendliness
304  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 326 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 305
Page 305
(and) is fraught with bene ﬁcence to all creatures ” ( Santiparva 262: 5; quoted by Lacy, 1965,
p. 20). True detachment is problematic when one considers this passage from Gita:
Neither with eye, nor with mind, nor with voice should one injure another....  H e  i n d e e d
is exalted in heaven who looks on all other beings with an eye of a ﬀection, who comforts
them in aﬄiction, gives them (food) and speaks kindly to them becoming one (with them)
in their grief and joy.
(Lacy, 1965, p. 20)
It is in the Bhagavad Gita that the inner tension of Hindu ethics pulls at one ’s soul. What is
unmistakably clear is the ﬁnal message of the Gita: “Perform thou right action (regulated,
prescribed duty) for action is superior to inaction....  T h e r e f o r e ,  without attachment, constantly
perform action which is duty, for and by performing action without attachment, (a person) verily
reacheth the supreme” (III: 8, 19; quoted by Lacy, 1965, p. 21). Both action and escape may lead to
salvation, but the former is the nobler choice. One of the lessons of Gita is that all persons should
do their own duty, ful ﬁll their own karma, and accept their lot in life. “Better one’s own duty,
though destitute of merit, than the duty [dharma] of another, well discharged” (III: 35, cf. XVII:
47; quoted by Lacy, 1965, p. 22). It is better to be a good slave than an immoral master. Here a
moral standard is implied, though it is no more than a ful ﬁllment of duty.
Equality is also emphasized in the Gita. Some scholars contend that if the basic element of
Hindu ethics can be examined apart from the caste system, or even within the framework of a
single caste or community, it would have many advantages (Creel, 1977; Lacy, 1965, pp. 22–23).
Lord Krishna insists in his discourse with Arjuna that detachment leads to the virtues of
impartiality, fairness, and justice— at least within the group. The equality of dharma (meaning
here that each has his or her ordained duty) to many Hindus represents an excuse for non-
involvement and a lack of concern for others. One of the Hindu arguments in defense of karma is
that it puts ethical responsibility where it belongs, on persons themselves leaving them depend-
ent neither on other people nor on the whim of God. Such a view, admittedly and without
apology, leaves no room for vicarious su ﬀering by the innocent nor for atonement by an
incarnate deity (Lacy, 1965, pp. 20–25).
The major element of Hindu ethics developed in the Gita is the concept of dharma. Whereas
in ancient V edic times, dharma meant the whole body of truth, the cosmic law, Buddhism
narrowed it to a particular set of teachings, to the creed and the doctrines. Hinduism, on the
other hand, gradually expanded the idea until dharma came to mean the all-inclusive focus of
ethics. Dharma, in the text of the Gita, can be translated as duty, righteousness, customs,
traditions, law, nature, justice, virtue, merit, and morality (Khan, 1965; Noble, 1915).
The unattached individual lives the life of virtue. Dharma or virtue has three forms: virtues of
the body — charity, helping the needy, social service; virtues of speech — truthfulness, benevo-
lence, gentleness; and virtues of the mind — kindness, unworldliness, and piety. Gita, India ’s
sermon on the mount several centuries before Christ, makes dharma the pillar of all virtues.
Dharma is the cosmic process, the Kantian moral law, the Quaker Inner Light, the Com-
munist dialectic. It is the Decalogue, the Mosaic Covenant, and the “righteousness” of
prophecy. For the Hindu it is what he does and why he does it.
(Lacy, 1965, p. 23)
Lord Krishna, towards the end of Gita, spells out the attributes of the righteous person:
Fearlessness, cleanness of life, steadfastness in the Y oga of wisdom, alms-giving, self-
restraint and sacri ﬁce and study of the Scriptures, austerity and straightforwardness,
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  305


--- PAGE 327 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 306
Page 306
harmlessness, truth, absence of wrath, renunciation, peacefulness, absence of crookedness,
compassion to living beings, uncovetousness, mildness, absence of ﬁckleness, vigor,
forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of envy and pride — these are his who is born with
the divine properties.
(XVI: 1–3)
The ﬁnal phrase tosses responsibility to one’s karma, denying the freedom essential for moral
action. However, the signiﬁcance of Gita for Hindu ethics lies in the dialogue Indians have with
Lord Krishna, ﬁnding him a god concerned with human problems, human temptations, and
human values. Lacy (1965, p. 24) maintains that the faith Krishna o ﬀers and rewards is more
tolerant and more universalistic. Therein lies Hinduism ’s chief claim to superiority. Whatever
the weakness of nonattachment, duty, and eclecticism in formulating ethics, the freedom and
open-mindedness of Hinduism provide a strong appeal.
The true nature of moral character espoused by the Gita depends on the faithful performance
of duty without regard to consequences: “Thy business is with action only, never with its fruits;
so let not the fruit of action be thy motive, not be thou to inaction attached ” (II: 47; Lacy, 1965,
p. 25). One follows without question the universal law of dharma and the particular law of
karma.
4 Whereas Hinduism draws a sharp distinction between the spiritual and material, the
eternal and temporal, these dimensions of existence are polarized but correlated within the
concept of dharma. Dharma, writes R. N. Dandekar, is a “unique joint product of the speculative
and practical wisdom of the Hindus ” (quoted by Crawford, 1974, p. 202). Dharma describes
many modes of conduct, including speak the truth, do not be negligent of truth; do not be
negligent of virtue; do not be negligent of welfare, of prosperity, of study and teaching, of duties
to the gods and to the fathers; live as one to whom a mother is a god and to whom a father is a
god and to whom a teacher is a god; those things that are irreproachable should be practiced and
no others; only good deeds should be revered, not others; one should give with faith, one should
give plenty, with modesty, with fear, and with sympathy (Crawford, 1974, pp. 211–212)
What are the universal duties of human beings? One sacri ﬁces because of debt to the
community, because one is culturally and experientially indebted to humanity and must,
therefore, serve the universal good. The 10 laws of Manu also operate on those premises of
virtuous conduct in dharma: steadfastness, forgiveness, application, nonappropriation, cleanli-
ness, repression of the sensuous appetites, wisdom, learning, veracity, and restraint of anger.
Also, although speaking truth is customarily good, if telling the truth will result in the death of
an innocent, it is prudentially expedient to tell lies. In such cases, the end justi ﬁes the means.
Here, one can see that Hindu ethics is not absolutist and unbending, but is re ﬂective and
contextual in its approach to ethical problems. However, to safeguard this situationalism from
degenerating into privatism, the dharma sastras make it clear that exceptions are only to be made
for the sake of others, not for one’s own private advantage (Crawford, 1974, p. 223).
Dharma must be understood in relation to other values in society (Radhakrishnan, 1989).
The traditional categories of kama, artha, moksa , and dharma are used to express an inclusive
recognition of temporal values of which moksa is on the highest of the hierarchy. Kama refers to
artistic or emotional or sensual experience or a combination of them; artha refers to economic
and material interests; dharma comprises duties in the world or the requirements of the social
order; and moksa is supreme freedom or realization or highest intuitive knowledge of reality.
5
When dharma is interpreted as the capstone of earthly value, the major contrast is between the
transcendental realm of moksa and the empirical, limited, and relative realm of dharma, kama,
and artha. The great Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo spoke of the Indian social system as an
attempt to achieve the harmony of the complex factors of these values, in which dharma is the
guiding principle of the social order founded on an innate law of individuals and of societies.
Dharma stands as a contrast to moksa’s spiritual freedom (Creel, 1977, pp. 45–57).
6
306  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 328 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 307
Page 307
Dharma represents the moral order of the universe that ensures the victory of righteousness
over evil, so that a weak person can hope to defeat the strong through righteousness (Jhingran,
1989, p. 167). The na ïve belief that dharma [righteousness] or satya [truth] always wins in the
end so characterizes the Indian ethos that the Indian government has accepted the phrase,
satyameva jayate [truth alone triumphs], as the motif on the national emblem. Dharma, in all of
its ethical tentacles, embraces both virtue and duty. Certain moral terms like nonviolence,
truthfulness, and forgiveness denote both virtues and duties.
A human being of dharma demonstrates the ethical behavior in several ways: kindness
towards all, forbearance, nonhostility, cleanliness, quietude, doing good acts, freedom from
avarice, and freedom from convetedness. Unless accompanied by the practice of these universal
virtues, fulﬁllment of religious duties is considered useless. Throughout Sanskrit literature, there
are many more listings of moral virtues, including purity, charity, mercy, self-restraint, control of
the senses, patience, absence of pride and anger, intelligence, modesty, spiritual knowledge,
helping the distressed, serving the elderly, speaking the truth [ satya], agreeableness of speech,
indiﬀerence to material well-being, and piety.
Gita teaches fearlessness, purity of heart, nonviolence, truth, serenity, absence of enmity,
compassion for creatures, absence of hatred, whereas Mahabharata enumerates forgiveness,
patience, nonviolence, equality towards all creatures, truthfulness, simplicity, magnanimity, non-
greed, compassion, and speaking gently and pleasantly. According to the scriptures, if dharma is
conceived in terms of nonviolence and compassion, it presents a universal morality in that,
“those who follow the principle of universal love and are adorned with mercy towards all living
creatures are called Godly” (Jhingran, 1989, pp. 173–179).
Paradoxically, truth is perhaps the most important cardinal virtue of Hindu dharma. It is
unanimously recognized and cherished in all the traditions of Hinduism. Truth is the highest
dharma and the source of all other virtues. Manu’s law says being guided by truth in one’s action
is the greatest virtue, whereas acting in disregard to it is the greatest sin (Jhingran, 1989, p. 170).
T o be truthful means never to indulge in any kind of lies or slanderous and malicious talk and to
adhere to the highest measure of rectitude in one ’s conduct. It also means knowing the meta-
physical nature of reality [satya] and acting in harmony with it. However, as noted earlier, Hindu
texts also make allowances for untruthful representations to protect the innocent. As Krishna
argues, a promise-keeping and truth-telling cannot be unconditional obligations when they
conﬂict with the avoidance of grossly unjust and criminal acts such as patricide or fratricide
(Jhingran, 1989).
The cardinal virtue of Hinduism that equals dharma in importance is ahimsa (nonviolence).
Nonviolence along with truth in dharma forms the basis of the entire superstructure of
Hindu religio-culture. The ethical principle of nonviolence introduced into Hinduism through
the direct in ﬂuence of Buddhism and Jainism, eventually came to be accepted as the guiding
principle of life. Ahimsa is the all-encompassing ideal both in its concept and scope. The con-
temporary example in Indian history is Mahatma Gandhi, who used ahimsa as a potent
weapon in India ’s independence movement against the British Empire. Gandhi literally inter-
preted the term as never hurting another in any way and harboring positive feelings of
friendship and goodwill towards all — including one ’s own enemies. The ideal of ahimsa
means that a human being must never hurt others physically or mentally or cause fear in them
or in any creature. Absolute harmlessness and friendliness towards all beings are expected in
ahimsa. The Mahabharata contends that a human being who causes no harm to others through
body, mind, and speech, and who never thinks ill of others, reaches the stage of supreme
Brahman (Jhingran, 1989, p. 191).
The real worth of ahimsa lies in its exceptionally broad application — expanding from indi-
viduals, their group, community, nation, world, nature and all the living things therein, and
eventually to the cosmos. All living beings from gods and humans to smallest creatures are jivas.
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  307


--- PAGE 329 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 308
Page 308
(The term jiva is used for the individual soul basically referring to one who has life breath.)
Ahimsa is applicable to all and in all circumstances of life. Nowhere in the history of human
thought have the animal kingdom and the plant kingdom been treated as deserving equal
consideration and kindness as human beings as in the concept of nonviolence. Millions of
Indians reject meat eating on the sole consideration that animals are killed for meat have the
same jiva as humans. Animals cannot be killed, beaten, or treated cruelly.
Closely associated with ahimsa, then, is the virtue of compassion or universal kindness to all
beings. The puritan Jain concept of ahimsa allows taking the life of a plant if and only it helps in
the survival of another living being. V egetarians who rely on plants do so with extreme apology
and for frugal subsistence. Kindness, compassion, and nonviolence are to be nurtured and
practiced by all in day-to-day life. Other branches of Hinduism a ﬃrm that kindness toward
others or magnanimity toward other living creatures motivates great souls to work for the
good of su ﬀering human beings. Jhingran admits that it is always di ﬃcult to say what exactly
Hinduism means by doing good to others (paropakara). “It deﬁnitely includes magnanimity and
philanthropic works, as digging wells, planting trees, etc., though perhaps active physical service
is not included ” (Jhingran, 1989, pp. 190 –191). Prominent Hindu philosophers come down
squarely on each end of the spectrum of compassion. Some contend that a human being must
not merely provide physical service but ought to help follow humans obtain freedom from
transmigratory existence. Others emphasize the need to provide for the physical needs of the
masses before o ﬀering them spiritual guidance. Universal love and compassion are integral to
the concept of ahimsa. Truth is an end to which ahimsa is the means.
Ethics in Contemporary India
India’s hybrid discourse of modernity and of progress involves a search for a new beginning. All
the ethical ideals discussed here— dharma and ahimsa, in particular— have to be recast in terms
of a modern and post-colonial India. This task is essentially an urban phenomenon, though the
outcome will have a drastic impact on India’s rural life.
Modern India now confronts the compelling challenges paramount to the survival of her
civilization: the secular as religion, the community as a citizen, caste politics and economic
inequality, Hindu–Muslim discord, regionalism, linguistic divisions and the burden of English,
social harmony and welfare, status of women, unity and plurality, individuals and the social
order, cultural integration, protection of environment and wildlife, population control and
family planning, abortion and the dilemmas of life and death, and the challenges brought forth
by Western dominance in culture, education, urban values, and ways of thinking. India’s success
in confronting these challenges depends on her ability to harness the resources of her philosophy
and ethical ideals to bring them to bear on her native solutions.
The public rhetoric of the government and the constitution of India is built on the concept of
a secular state in a country that is overwhelmingly Hindu. India is indeed a secular state, but it is
also much more than that (Larson, 1995, p. 284). It combines a Gandhian–Nehruvian model of a
Neo-Hindu civilization-state. Its Gandhian nationalist ideology has a Nehruvian variant in
terms of socialism, with nonalignment existing alongside the liberal democratic traditions of the
Indian National Congress. The reformist impulses of Hindu religious movements have a quasi-
protestant veneer of individualism and the privatization of religious belief. India ’s multilayered
cultural heritage of the Indic, the Indo-Brahmanical, and Indo-Anglian, however, re ﬂects the
conventional mind-set of India ’s high-caste ruling elite. It is a breathtaking exercise in the
“solution of synthesis” (Larson, 1995, p. 285) and what John F. Kennedy called an “experiment
in democracy.” Gerald Larson (1995) writes,
It is also useful to see the Neo-Hindu “secular state” . . . as a Gandhian-Nehruvian Indic
308  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 330 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 309
Page 309
civil religion that exists alongside the many other religious traditions in modern India, a
civil religion mainly of high caste, English-educated and English-speaking elites in gov-
ernment, the modern industrialized economy, the professions, communications and the
academy.
(p. 285)
India’s hybrid discourse of modernity includes the pervasive use of the terms “secular” and
“secular state” whereas some Indian leaders refer to India as a “nation of Hindu chauvinism, ”
“upper caste Hindu raj,” and so forth. The Kashmiri Muslims see it as a repressive, totalitarian
Hindu regime that rules by the barrel of the gun (Larson, 1995, p. 285).
Given the contentious environment between dominant religions ranging from Hinduism to
Islam, from Jainism to Sikhism, and all faiths that lie in between, the secularist ideology bor-
rowed from the West and later codi ﬁed in the constitution of India raises a nebulous specter
of Hinduism ’s ability to embrace tolerance. However, post-colonial critics such as Nandy
(as quoted by Larson, 1995) are skeptical about secularism:
T o build a more tolerant society we shall have to defy the imperialism of categories of our
times which allows the concept of secularism . . . to hegemonize the idea of tolerance, so
that any one who is not secular becomes de ﬁnitionally intolerant.
(Larson, 1995, p. 290)
The notion that tolerance came to India through Western secularism is what Nandy
appropriately resists. The prevailing models of dissent, diversity, and tolerance in early and
modern Hinduism continue to elude the post-colonial, urban, English-educated Indian. T o
build a tolerant India, one has to retrieve the modern-day dharma from the cultural narrative of
authentic and tolerant India rather than depend on the disarming and yet alien ideologies
associated with Western secularism.
It would be a mistake to trace the . . . religious formulation of the “secular state” solely to
the Western and largely Protestant notions of secularization, individualism and the privat-
ization of religious belief, although it certainly is the case that these Protestant notions
appear to be dominant in modern Indian discourse.
(Larson, 1995, p. 291)
As Larson notes, India ’s communities within communities within communities represent
fundamental and major features of social reality in terms of the traditional or premodern caste
system with its religio-hierarchical ranking based on ritual purity. These multiple layers of
communities are the fundamental structure of modern, secular India with its caste, tribes,
backward classes, caste associations, sectarian movements, extended families with carefully
arranged marriages, and any number of other minority communities based on language, religion,
or regional culture. For India, it has become the ultimate challenge to make relevant the concept
of dharma to retrieve unity and harmony within India ’s 4,599 or more distinct communities in
the midst of hundreds of languages and dialects. In this cultural milieu, the notion of com-
munity becomes central to the understanding of what India has been and continues to be.
Political scientists have coined the term “community-ship” to parallel the notion of “citizen-
ship” as one way of capturing this dimension of India ’s hybrid discourse of modernity. In
modern India, the claims of community-ship are at least as strong and maybe much stronger
than the claims of citizenship. This notion of community-ship takes the place of communalism,
nationalism, secularism, sectarianism, and other inaccurate and divisive notions in Indian
society (Larson, 1995).
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  309


--- PAGE 331 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 310
Page 310
Two major social explosions in the early 1990s occurred in the area of caste politics and
Hindu–Muslim relations. The ﬁrst was associated with the government-initiated Mandal
Commission, which studied the status of lower caste Indians and proposed higher quotas
for their employment and educational access and privileges. When the commission released
its report late in 1990, members of di ﬀerent castes pitted against each other in a manner that
was never before seen in India’s history. The backlash in the guise of student protests and upper-
caste reaction resulted in urban violence and self-immolations. The government ’s quest to
balance tradition with equality and fairness in the face of injustice exempli ﬁes how India is
confronting the challenges posed by caste politics and modernity. Questions of entitlement,
the search for alternative political and cultural traditions, human rights and economic rights
for lower caste and untouchable populations, the classi ﬁcation and politics of community in
today’s India are all best seen in the contemporary formation of narratives on caste. The fact
remains, however, that the lower-caste people— particularly in the villages— live under a hegem-
ony of the Brahmanic and other upper castes and subcastes that is oppressive and often cruelly
inhumane.
The second incident was associated with the holy city of Ayodhya that pitted Hindus and
Muslims against each other over the control of a sacred site (cf. Breckenridge & Van Der V eer,
1994, pp. 314–315).
7 In a dramatic entry into the arena of conﬂict, Hindus wanted to demolish a
mosque supposedly built on the site of the birthplace of Lord Rama. Fundamentalist religious
groups and political parties turned this confrontation into a national settling-of-scores between
Hindus and Muslims. India witnessed perhaps its most serious Hindu –Muslim rioting since
the partition of 1947. The number of dead ran into thousands across the country and the
mosque was demolished by Hindu militants to “recapture injured Hindu pride ” (Hardgrave &
Kochanek, 1993, p. 182). The Muslims in India, although a minority of less than 15%, number
more than 100 million — making India the fourth most populous Muslim nation in the world,
after Indonesia, Bangladesh, and Pakistan. India’s Muslims, however, are heterogeneous.
They are not only culturally varied (distinguished, for example, by language and custom
among the Urdu-speaking Muslims of North India and Andhra Pradesh, the Malayalee-
speaking Mappillas of Kerala, and the Tamil-speaking Labbais of Tamil Nadu), they are
also divided on religion and politics. They range from Islamic fundamentalists to secular
Communists.
(Hardgrave & Kochanek, 1993, p. 183)
Many Indian Muslims today feel threatened and look to the government as their protector.
They have traditionally supported the Indian Congress Party for its commitment to secular
ideology. Although the vast majority of Muslims remain depressed in rural areas, there is a rising
urban middle class, many of whom have ties to the economic pipeline in the Middle East. India’s
ethical balance has consistently strived to accommodate Islam’s Shariat law and India’s uniform
civil code— a dual legal system that accommodates Muslim injunctions of faith. This does not
always come without acrimony. Urban communal riots are regular and constant because most
rural Muslims are too weak to o ﬀer resistance or pose a threat. Hindu chauvinism and the
militant Islamic factions are fortunately considered as extremes politically moderate India as a
whole, but the continued Hindu hegemony will pose problems for Indian morality in the
coming decades (Hardgrave & Kochanek, 1993, pp. 175 –205). Even though the constitution of
India has abolished untouchablity and discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex,
or birthplace, tension between religions will remain a challenge to the formation of a permanent
reconciliatory ethics in Indian society.
Regional cultures and linguistic groups have also asserted their right to dominance in post-
independent India. The divisions between the North and the South, between the Hindi-speaking
310  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 332 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 311
Page 311
northerners and the southerners who speak Tamil, Kannada, Malayalum, and T elugu have
become pronounced. The South with its longer traditions in art, music, dance, drama, and
literature perceives the North as politically dominant and culturally bullish. Similar situations
exist between Northeast and West. Regional con ﬂicts and politics based on language are
common and pose a constant threat to India’s unity and harmony.
English that forms the “link language ” extends its hegemony and control over other lan-
guages, and yet it is the lingua franca  that has continued to serve the nation in the post-
independent era. Critics have argued that colonialism manifests its power and entangles the
colonized people “in webs of cohesion and domination; the most insidious — because not often
perceived as a tool of conquest — is the superimposition of the colonial language over the
languages of the subject people ” (Niranjana, Sudhir, & Dhareshwar, 1993, p. 334). Conquest of
the language was a necessary adjunct of economic and political conquest (Suleri, 1992). None-
theless, the demands for regional autonomy are tied to questions of dominance among Indian
languages.
The concept of dharma and ahimsa, which provides the rationale for Indian ethics, speci ﬁc-
ally promotes unity of existence, the oneness of all, social harmony, social welfare, and plurality.
The struggle for social harmony, the growth of the women’s movement for equal status in India,
and cultural-social integration have gathered increased momentum during the last two decades.
Dharma with its established kinship among fellow human beings runs into its toughest con-
temporary test in these areas of social upheaval. Noted Indian philosopher Radhakrishnan,
as quoted by Creel (1977), says that it is dharma that must be evoked to keep society together
and nurture “national solidarity, cultural and social integration, equality of women ” (p. 86).
Women’s struggle
8 involves increased political participation, access to higher education, liber-
ation from social practices that have historically been oppressive — that is, the dowry system,
nonmarriage of the widow, the rare but alarming practice of sati (self-immolation of the
widow),9 and a revolt against the oppressive ideology of the masculine at the societal level
(Niranjana et al., 1993).
It is interesting and instructive to juxtapose the advocacy of social integration with that of
individual ethics. The individual and the social order remain suspended in an enigmatic rela-
tionship in India. Individuals determine dharma in the process of reaching moksa [liberation].
Gandhi stressed discipline, self-control, and individual purity as necessary foundations of social
righteousness. Social justice is deemed a spontaneous re ﬂection of justice in individual life, and
the moral discipline of individuals is considered the key to social reconstruction. If individual
perfection is emphasized, social welfare will follow automatically (as cited by Creel, 1986,
p. 101). The closest Hindu ethical tenet associated with individual discipline is the idea of
sva-dharma [service to humanity], which is re ﬂected in Gandhi ’s view of swadeshi [respect for
the indigenous]. Gandhi wished to preserve the ancient village structure with its reciprocal
patterns of duty and inward-looking solutions to native problems. Gandhi defended this pos-
ition with the argument that only traditional villages will resist Western materialism and permit
a modest social development that leaves people time to pursue spiritual growth. The other
reason for his position was that there is an innate law that arranges people in the social order
determining their stations and roles in society. Swaraj [home rule] and swadeshi [preference for
things native] became hallmarks in Gandhi’s struggle for independence; modern India strives to
anchor these terms in dharma and ahimsa as the country comes to terms with her hybrid
discourse of modernity.
Typical of Gita’s moral dilemmas tugging at the heart and mind is the modern Indian’s quest
for tranquility in the midst of chaos. As Crawford (1974) notes,
Hindu ethics is a moral system which acknowledges genuine moral dilemmas. We
encounter a dilemma when values to which we are equally committed are brought into
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  311


--- PAGE 333 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 312
Page 312
conﬂict, so that the honoring of one value necessitates the violation of the other. The
Hindu position is to be distinguished both from the religious fundamentalist, who views
dilemmas in the light of revelation, and the secular rationalist, who views them as prob-
lems to be solved by the use of reason. For the one, the problem is the need for better faith;
for the other, it is the need for superior knowledge. In either case, there are no genuine
dilemmas.
(p. 6)
What, then, is the applicability of ahimsa to India and to the Indians? Perhaps the question
ought to be: What is the relevance of ahimsa to the world at large (Tahtinen, 1976; Walli, 1974)?
The dilemmas of life and death are continuous. The view that life in the womb is not tissue of
the mother’s body but a separate life bearing the essential marks of humanity before the time of
conception is ahimsa. “In the Indian view, perhaps the greatest hiatus in Western religions is the
failure to explain birth” (Oliver, 1971). Ahimsa is also present in the rules of hospitality; gentle-
ness; care for the young and aged; kindness to the land, birds, insects, animals, and the child in
the womb. One can locate the concept of ahimsa (and dharma) in India’s politics of population
control and family planning. How India will reconcile a burgeoning population with voluntary
family planning strategies remains to be seen. India will reach the 1 billion mark in population
by the year 2000. Hindu philosophy equates death with life and life with death. Life exists before
one is conceived and life exists even after cremation. Samsara, the eternal cycle of life, is a
metaphysical reality until one reaches moksa through one ’s doing of dharma to perfection.
The contemporary Indian struggles to ﬁnd a compromise in the paradoxes that are o ﬀered in
today’s world.
One of the most pertinent principles of early Hindu ethics concerns the sanctity of the natural
environment. Hindu philosophy is a rich repository of ideas, attitudes, ethics, and values that
can furnish the necessary principles for a proper management of the physical environment
(Crawford, 1995, p. 169). Indian environmental thinking dates back to the earliest of the pre-
Aryan religions and cultures around 4500 to 3000 b.c.e. Rituals that emphasized the ﬁgurines of
mother goddesses and representations of other gods were accompanied by animals and plants. A
great deal of the imagery of poetry and religion reveal to the human imagination a nature that
seemed living and animate. Lord Krishna rides on a cow, Lord Brahma ’s main transportation is
the gentle bull, Goddess Lakshmi sits on a lotus ﬂower, Lord Ganesha is half god and half
elephant. Lord Vishnu is protected by a cobra that is coiled around his neck. The universe itself
at the time of creation was supported by a serpent that eventually became the pillar on which life
itself rested. Hindus have reﬂected long and hard on the relationship God has with humans and
physical nature of the world. The principles of unity, of interconnectedness, of interdependence
and of restraint are reﬂected not only in the evolving governmental policies in India but more so
in the village life.
The struggle to bring economic development into rural India is the largest battle between
the Western model of technology-driven social progress and Gandhi ’s swadeshi principle
empowering villagers to attain self-suﬃciency through cottage industries. The next two decades
will determine what direction India will pursue. The speculative wisdom of India is essentially
intuitive and cosmic. It purports the view of a deep ecology that places people in nature, as
opposed to a shallow ecology that is anthropocentric and that ascribes to Homo sapiens a
position of dominance and superiority over nature (Crawford, 1995, p. 177). Issues in bio-
diversity are related to Hinduism ’s nondiscriminatory embrace of all life forms, including the
lowliest plants and insects. It is interesting that Hindu ethics is sensitive to the moral and
practical di ﬃculties of its post-colonial condition. The destruction caused by poverty and
population, the struggle to feed their burgeoning members have not diminished the people ’s
worship of nature — more so in the nonurban Indian milieu. The ﬂexibility of Indian ethics
312  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 334 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 313
Page 313
makes accommodation and relevance possible to contemporary situations. For example, the
concept of dharma, is essentially a dynamic notion open to processes of change as di ﬀerent
situations arise. The general idea behind Hinduism’s environmental ethics is that the individual
Atman is one with the universal Brahman. This Brahman force is manifest uniformly in the
divinity of human, animal, and plant life on earth. All these entities live an apparently independ-
ent existence, but they all emanate from Brahman— oneness in all, which transcends the natural
divisions between people and people and between humankind and nature. “Its ecumenism is
existential and environmental. It sees humanity in nature and nature in humanity ” (Crawford,
1995, p. 200).
India’s opposition to the signing of the Comprehensive T est Ban Treaty (CTBT) to ban
nuclear testing is based on India ’s global consciousness in which all humans are viewed as
members of a single family; that solidarity is seen as extending beyond human welfare to include
all creation. India ’s sole condition to signing of the CTBT is that every nuclear weapon must
be destroyed before the CTBT must go into e ﬀect. India’s view on this treaty is a rare display
of a developing country standing up to the global powers. The conquest of nature is unreal
and people ’s sense of separateness is the product of ignorance. Referring to Hinduism ’s
environmental ethics, Crawford (1995) writes,
This calls for self-knowledge. Humans cannot act ethically toward nature as long as they
are ignorant of themselves. Lacking a sense of universal identity, people cannot identify
with the trees and the mountains, nor can we feel empathy for the beasts of the ﬁelds.
Nature is perceived as mechanical because people have become mechanical. Nature is
perceived as empty because we have become empty. We manipulate nature because we
manipulate ourselves. The loss of our relation to nature is the corollary of the loss of our
own lives.
(pp. 168–202)
Conclusion
This chapter has attempted to glean a vast array of cultural sources and interpretations in India
to highlight her ethical orientation in the context of her post-colonial condition. Ethics in India
is beset by the challenges of continuity and change both in its ethical ideals and normative
orientation.
On this journey, readers may discover for themselves what traits of the ancient philosophical
and religious traditions of India can invigorate an ethics of communication and contribute to the
universal ethical project so badly needed for the 21st century. Perhaps the most practical insight
from this tradition is its emphasis of virtue ethics. The moral person is indispensable. People
who are truthful, forthright, gentle, and compassionate are able to perform their duties— also as
communicators— without analytical recourse to ethics codes or so called standards. This point
can be of great signi ﬁcance for media professionals having to make complicated decisions
against immediate deadlines. There are no shortcuts in ethics: being is prior to acting, and
nothing can substitute the ongoing struggle of becoming moral persons.
Morality, however, is not acquired in isolation. Moral practice usually, if not always, relates to
others. The curious meshing of individual and social ethics derives from the notion of related-
ness. If individuals are truthful to others, acting justly toward them, charitable and helpful to
them, they will be able to attain (as it were) self-ful ﬁllment and freedom (moksa). The principle
of relatedness is even more evident in the radical demand of universal kindness to all beings,
better known as nonviolence.
The basis of this relatedness is a cosmic order, embracing both the local and global. Only its
awareness and contemplation can ultimately make humans genuinely human and, thus, moral
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  313


--- PAGE 335 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 314
Page 314
beings. As Crawford (1995, p. 202) points out, the basic message of Hindu ethics in the ancient
idea of Rta is that harmony is already here. We do not have to create it, only discover it.
Notes
1. Any normative discourse on Indian ethics must necessarily take into consideration the hermeneutic
situation of the 20th century, the Orientalist constructions (Said, 1978, 1993) in Western epistemologies,
and the problem of authenticity (Halfbass, 1988, 1991). For three centuries, the construction of non-
Western ethics, particularly those of India, was mainly the project of the Anglo-Saxon curiosity. With its
bias rooted in the Euro-Enlightenment, the Anglo-Saxon project initiated and appropriated the dis-
course on philosophy and ethics. Halfbass (1988) and Nandy (1983) contend that a degree of intellectual
honesty in the East–West conversation and the balance between the colonized and the colonizer must be
restored for an authentic understanding of the ethics of “the Other.” Most discourses were founded on
the European understanding of Indian ethics, which later became the staple of higher education and
pedagogy of the Indian elite. The latter, although claiming their Indianness with authority, legitimated
European thought as more authentic and “objective.” Consequently, any discourse on non-Western
ethos begins as a response to that which has been already erected. However, it is beyond the scope of
this chapter to demonstrate the di ﬃculties in scholarship relating to ethics when one attempts to look
for native sources of ethics, its rhetorical composition, its terms, its categories, its meanings and its
dogma— in the midst of the 20th-century hermeneutics of suspicion.
This dilemma gives the reader a sense of the challenge facing colonial scholarship. It must at the same
time not romanticize one ’s civilization and attempt to restore a native hermeneutics in the quest for
authenticity. Rhetorical continuity, evaluation of communicative acts, the undecidability of truth, the
nonfoundational aspects of ethics, the multiplicity of meanings, the multitude of discourses within
one tradition, such competing narratives as strong versus the meek and dominant versus the subservi-
ent, the lack of acceptable grounds for ethical values, the categories of ethics, and the understanding of
Self— all present the self-aware Indian a genuine problematic in conversing with a non-Indian about
ethics. Colonial societies were not simply colonized politically and economically; more importantly,
they were colonized culturally and intellectually. One needs to be mindful of the intellectual colonialism
(Oommen, 1995) in which the present-day discourses between societies take place. This is particularly
critical for the understanding of the ethics of India.
2. In this chapter, I have used Hindu –India interchangeably. I have chosen to use the word Hindu faute
de mieux  for India. Hindu is any native-born inhabitant of India, whatever his or her ancestry
or faith. But in the article, such “Hindus” as Mohammedans and Parsis have been excluded (see
Hopkins, 1924).
3. I have avoided the diacritical signs, the visargas, thus minimizing the use of Sanskrit words.
4. This type of determinism explains not only the lack of missionary outreach in Hinduism (because a
faith is bestowed on us at birth) but also the resistance to religious conversion or cultural change (Lacy,
1965, p. 25). It also explains why even the Gita has not inspired many Hindus to creative social and
ethical reforms.
5. Because these values are prevalent in all of the epics and  sastras, any attempt to simply or venture into
deductivist analysis will prove to be diﬃcult due to the sheer ambiguity of the concepts.
6. Questions of dharma and the regulations of social life were not the province of the Indian philosopher.
As Rangaswami Aiyangar (as quoted by Creel, 1977) says, “Writers on philosophy . . . take for granted a
life lived according to the dictates of dharma, and do not, therefore, expatiate on them. Ethics do not
accordingly form a separate branch of Indian philosophy” (p. 21).
7. The Hindu –Muslim communal strife in the city of Ayodhya is a classic study of political rhetoric and
public action in post-colonial India. Soon after India gained freedom from Britain in 1947, the ultra-
right Hindus rekindled an old controversy over the site of the Islamic mosque, Babri Masjid. They
contested the same site as the Ramajanmabhoomi— the birthplace of Lord Rama. The secular interven-
tions from the government and courts temporarily restrained the attempt of Hindu fundamentalist
political parties’ to take over the sacred site. Neither the Muslims nor the Hindus could legitimately claim
the site as their own for four decades. In February 1986, the district court decision to unlock the doors
of the Babri Masjid assuring unhindered access for Hindu worship ignited the communal tension once
again. It was destined to explode 6 years later. In 1992, the climax came in the wake of the call by the
Hindu-revivalist organization, Vishwa Hindu Parishad, “to liberate Lord Rama from the Muslim jail. ”
On December 6, the Hindu mob demolished and razed the mosque to the ground stunning predomin-
antly moderate Hindu India. The national news media agonized over the onslaught of secularism in
India.
314  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 336 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 315
Page 315
8. For Indian feminism and women ’s movement for social and economic equality, see Niranjana et al.
(1993); Kishwa and Ruth (1984); and Jeﬀrey (1979).
9. Sati, the idea of compulsory suicide on the funeral pyre of one ’s husband, has been an ancient rite,
though not widespread, in northern India. Strangely, the texts of earlier Hinduism do not carry refer-
ences to this practice. In modern India over the last 50 years, sporadic cases of sati have been con ﬁned
mainly to one state in northern India and, within that state, to one region (Nandy, 1995, p. 34). The
British construction of Indian history emphasized such generalizations of sati as a widespread practice
to justify its own oppression of the heathens. The Rg Veda, Ramayana, Mahabharata and other Hindu
scriptures, on the contrary, carry directives to honor and respect widows, who were allowed to marry
anyone without restrictions.
References
Breckenridge, C. A., & Van Der V eer, P . (1994). Orientalism and the postcolonial predicament. Delphi, India:
Oxford University Press.
Brown, N. W. (1970). Man in universe: Some continuities in Indian thought . Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Coward, H. G., Lipner, J. J., & Y oung, K. K. (1989). Hindu ethics. Albany, NY: State University of New Y ork
Press.
Crawford, C. S. (1974). The evolution of Hindu ethical ideals . Calcutta, India: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.
Crawford, C. S. (1995). Dilemmas of life and death: Hindu ethics in a North American context . Albany, NY:
State University of New Y ork Press.
Creel, A. B. (1977). Dharma in Hindu ethics. Columbia, MO: South Asia books.
Doniger, W., & Smith, B. K. (Eds.). (1991). Laws of Manu. New Delhi, India: Penguin.
Gandhi, M. C. (1948). The story of my experiments with truth . New Y ork: Public Aﬀairs Press.
Government of India (1958). The collected works of Mahatma Gandhi (Vol. 53, Appendix III). Delhi, India:
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Publications Division.
Govinda Das, B. (1947). Hindu ethics: Principles of Hindu religio-social regeneration. Madras: G. A. Natesan.
Halfbass, W. (1988). India and Europe: An essay in understanding. Albany, NY: State University of New Y ork
Press.
Halfbass, W. (1991). Tradition and reﬂection: Explorations in Indian thought. Albany, NY: State University of
New Y ork Press.
Hardgrave, R. Jr., & Kochanek, S. A. (1993). India government and politics in a developing nation . Orlando,
FL: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Herman, A. L. (1991). A brief introduction to Hinduism: Religion, philosophy, and ways of liberation. Boulder,
CO: Westview.
Hopkins, W. E. (1924). Ethics in India. New Haven, CT: Y ale University Press.
Jeﬀrey, P . (1979). Indian women in Purdah. London: Zed.
Jhingran, S. (1989). Aspects of Hindu morality. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Khan, B. (1965). The concept of dharma in Valmiki Ramayana . New Delhi, India: Munshi Ram Manohar
Lal.
King, W. L. (1946). Buddhism and Christianity: Some bridges of understanding . Philadelphia, PA:
Westminster.
Krishna, D. (1991). India philosophy: A counter perspective. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Kishwar, M., & Ruth, V . (1984). In search of answers: Indian women’s voices form Manushi. London: Zed.
Lacy, C. (1965). The conscience of India. San Francisco, CA: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Larson. G. J. (1995). India’s agony over religion. Albany, NY: State University of New Y ork Press.
Larson, G., & Deutsch, E. (Eds.) (1988). Interpreting across boundaries: New essays in comparative phil-
osophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lopez, D. S. (Ed.). (1995). Religions of India in practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Misra, K. P ., & Gangal, S. C. (1981). Gandhi and the contemporary world. Delhi, India: Chanakya.
Nandy, A. (1983). The intimate enemy: loss and recovery of self under colonialism . New Y ork: Oxford
University Press.
Nandy, A. (1995). The savage Freud and other essays. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Niranjana, T., Sudhir, P ., & Dhareshwar, V . (1993). Interrogating modernity: Culture and colonialism in India.
Calcutta: Seagull.
Noble, M. E. (1915). Religion and dharma. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Oliver, R. T. (1971). Communication and culture in ancient India and China . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press.
Oommen, T. K. (1995). Alien concepts and South Asian reality. New Delhi, India: Sage.
ETHICS IN POST-COLONIAL INDIA  315


--- PAGE 337 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 316
Page 316
Radhakrishnan, S. (1989). Indian philosophy. New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Richman, P . (1991). Many Ramayanas: The diversity of a narrative tradition in South Asia . Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Said, E. W. (1978). Orientalism. New Y ork: Vintage.
Said, E. W. (1993). Culture and imperialism. New Y ork: Knopf.
Sen, A. (1993, April 8). The threats to secular India. New York Times Review, pp. 26–32.
Suleri, S. (1982). The rhetoric of English India. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Tahtinen, U. (1976). Ahimsa: Non-violence in Indian tradition. London: Rider.
Walli, K. (1974). The conception of ahimsa in Indian thought . Varanasi, India: Bharata Manisha.
316  ANANTHA SUDHAKER BABBILI


--- PAGE 338 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 317
Page 317
19
Peace and the Middle East
Edward W. Said
I’m going to talk about peace in the Middle East, in the context of the continuing Persian Gulf
War, since it isn’t really over as you know, but also in the context of the question of Palestine that
is most important to me and to I suppose many people in this room and elsewhere in the
country. The immediate situation at present is rather dramatic. There is a persisting con ﬂict
between the United States and Iraq. There is also, rather dramatically, not only the peace process
which was begun in 1991 by the Secretary of State acting on the instructions of the President,
but also, for the ﬁrst time, a rather dramatic con ﬂict between the United States and Israel over
the question of $10 billion loan guarantees to Israel.
But both of these questions need to be looked at in their historical and above all in their
moral context. The ﬁrst point is one that has to do with the war the United States fought against
Iraq in January through March of 1991. My own position on the war is a simple one. I was
against and remain against the invasion and annexation of Kuwait by Iraq. The arguments given
were spurious. The notion of invading, in a Bismarckian fashion, a neighboring Arab country
and claiming to unify it on the basis of principles of Arab unity, is an outrageous breach of
international law and is intolerable and unacceptable. But I also was against and remain against
the United States-inspired war against Iraq because although principles were solicited and men-
tioned many times by the President, in actuality principles were not at stake. There was a rather
showy recourse to the United Nations. The President persists to this say in talking about the
United Nations as if it was acting on its own and not, in fact, spurred on by the United States to
take the positions that it did. The falseness of the position taken by the United States, which
claimed to be acting on principles against aggression and so on, was made more manifest when
at the same time massive abuses of human rights, massive abuses of international law, massive
abuses of the rights of an entire people, namely the Palestinian people, were being committed
barely a thousand miles away in Palestine by the Israelis with the support and subsidy of the
United States.
So it really wasn ’t a war fought on principles, or if they were principles they were very
lackadaisically applied. Since 1974, Turkey has been in occupation of half of Cyprus, and there
have been numerous U.N. resolutions suggesting that Turkey should withdraw. The United
States didn ’t go to war against Turkey. Similarly, there have been numerous U.N. resolutions
against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, against the occupation of South
Lebanon, against the occupation and annexation of the Golan Heights and Jerusalem. But the
United States has not gone to war against Israel. Far from that, it has continued to supply Israel
with military and economic support.
317


--- PAGE 339 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 318
Page 318
No, the issue in the case of the invasion of Iraq by Kuwait was oil and remains oil and the
strategic importance of the Gulf region to the United States for its own purposes. The war has
now been fought, and there were a lot of parades in June. But it ’s important and sobering to
survey the results of the war, not from the point of view of rhetoric and high sounding
principles, but rather from what in fact is taking place on the ground in the region in which the
war was fought.
One of the ﬁrst results of the war was a huge number of Iraqi deaths. The United States and
its allies only lost a few hundred men. Iraq by conservative estimates lost 100,000 people, prob-
ably more. This amounts to about one-half of one percent of the total 1990 Iraqi population of
18.8 million people. We ’re talking about an equivalent loss of life in U.S. terms of 1,257,000
people. This is approximately equal to the combined total of U.S. deaths in the Civil War, World
War I, World War II, the Korean War and The Vietnam War. [Figures based on 1991 Almanac.]
The war also accomplished the massive destruction of Baghdad, which to most Americans is just
a spot on the map. But in the eyes of the Arab world, Baghdad is one of the greatest cities in the
Islamic and Arab world. Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Empire for hundreds of years. It
was destroyed by the Mongols in the thirteenth century, and then by the United States in the
twentieth century. But more important than that, Baghdad is the city which in the twentieth
century was and is the most renowned for the richness of its culture. Most of the great poets,
writers, painters and architects of the contemporary Arab world come from Baghdad. So I think
it’s important to understand the horrendous meaning to Arabs and Muslims of the destruction
of Baghdad by a Western power acting in an imperialist way. The bombing of Baghdad was
roughly equivalent, in Western European terms, to the destruction of both Rome and Athens,
and has instilled in the inhabitants of the region fear and hatred of the United States. Saddam
Hussein is a tyrant, he is an unattractive, horrendously bloody human being whose regime is
a repressive one. There ’s no use lying about that. That ’s a fact. But despite that, the massive
destruction of a city like Baghdad has meant in the Arab and Islamic world a great deal of
resentment against the United States and an even deeper resentment of so many of the rulers of
the Arab world who, like those of Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia, were allied with the United
States in this war.
The economic, social and political problems of the Arab world after the war remain grave and
in fact are aggravated. There is still a tremendous disparity between the wealth of the Gulf states,
which produce a vast amount of oil with a very tiny population and invest most of the money
abroad, and the rest of the Arab world — countries, for example, like Egypt or the Sudan. It is
estimated that eight million people will die of famine in the Sudan, where the average per capita
income is about $200, compared with $15,000 in the Gulf, where most of the oil is found. The
war contributed absolutely nothing to the problem of the distribution of wealth and resources in
the Arab world. As another result of the war, there has been an increase in hostility toward the
United States. Paradoxically, one of the aims of the war, to unseat Saddam Hussein— not only to
get him out of Kuwait but to destroy his power — has been a total failure. Saddam Hussein
remains in power, and ironically enough, just as he was supported by many of the rulers of the
area and by the United States before the war, he is similarly supported now, after the war, by
many of the rulers in the area. He remains in power and is able to continue to repress his pop-
ulation. Except for the starvation, various forms of disease due to malnutrition, and unsanitary
conditions that the war has brought its people, there has been no change in Iraq.
Most celebrations of the war tended to focus on the amazing technological superiority of the
United States, on the fact that George Bush now feels good that he ’s won a war, that Collin
Powell is an exceptional general, General Schwarzkopf has gotten $5 million contract to write his
memoirs, and so on. All of these results of the war, that everybody felt that the United States was
opposing aggression, that we have to police the world, all of that stuﬀ I don’t want to go into. It’s
been brooded about but not suﬃciently analyzed. The most important negative result of the war
318  EDWARD W. SAID


--- PAGE 340 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 319
Page 319
is not the destruction, not the horrendous toll wreaked upon the Iraqi people nor upon the
many hundreds of thousands, probably millions of refugees created by the war, nor the tremen-
dous ecological and environmental damage done by the war. That was done jointly. I think you’d
be wrong if you were to say it was just Saddam Hussein. The United States contributed its fair
share to the pollution of the atmosphere, the blowing up of wells, burying people alive and all
kinds of other things.
Although we in the U.S. are not often prone to think in these ways, the most grievous negative
result of the war was that even though the United States is the most signiﬁcant outside force, the
battle for democracy in the Middle East has not been helped by the U.S. at all. People in the
Middle East, whether they are Arabs or Jews or others are also interested in democracy, and
improving their lot. Through arm sales, support to governments, and economic, social, political
and cultural missions in the Arab world, the United States has been the most signi ﬁcant outside
power in the Middle East, much more so than Britain, France or the Soviet Union. Given this
exorbitant in ﬂuence, it is shameful that the U.S. has remained committed to the support of
various unpopular dictatorships, whether they happen to be Arab or, in the case of Israel for the
Palestinians, the Israeli government. It is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd one struggle for human rights, for
women’s rights, for minority rights in the Arab or the Islamic world or generally speaking the
Middle East that the U.S. has supported or enhanced.
We really need to re-examine the pieties, exuberance and triumphalism of the war and try
to remember that although we sit many thousands of miles away, the ongoing struggle against
misery, oppression, persecution, which we have opposed, still continues. People still want a
change in their status. They still want an enhanced and empowered life for themselves. But in all
of this I’m very sorry to say that the United States has not helped that struggle at all.
The most important question for most Arabs and certainly for Palestinians is “linkage.”
Remember in the months leading up to the war how the Secretary of State and the President
would say, “There is no linkage.” As a professor of literature and somebody who spends a lot of
his time dealing with language, linkage is a very ugly word. It ’s aesthetically unpleasant. “Con-
nection” is a much better word. “Linkage” sounds like a technological neologism of some sort.
But the idea is that, “No, we are entitled by an act of Olympian indi ﬀerence and Archimedean
withdrawal to pick whatever struggle we want to focus on for our own purposes. There is no
connection between this question and any other question. ” Whereas “linkage” most accurately
descried U.S. policy itself. It was the United States that not only originally supported Saddam
Hussein but during the Iran –Iraq war was to support both sides, the Iranians and the Iraqis so
that in the words of one policy maker they would “bleed each other to death.” The U.S. has been
involved. That is the connection. The United States has been involved not only in the emergence
of Saddam and the war against him but also in other big question, the question of Palestine.
Whether policy makers like it or not, there is a connection, and the connection is — in both
instances— dispossession, invasion, annexation and the massive abuse of human rights, for which
the word Palestine has become the symbol. It ’s important to remember that the President and
others in the international community of “white men,” including France, Britain, and Germany
and so forth, constitute all the people who had colonized the Third World and now stand in
judgment over all of these little “colored people” who are running around. There ’s a great deal
of racism involved here. It would be di ﬃcult to imagine that the kinds of epithets hurled at
Arabs and non-Europeans generally could be, with equal impunity, hurled against other white
people. We have listened to everyone who had an opinion about international law including the
President, the Secretary of State, the British Foreign Minister, Douglas Hurd, and the French
President. But is was very di ﬃcult not to remember that since 1967, when Israel occupied the
West Bank and Gaza and the Golan Heights and Sinai, there have been 64— not 12, as in the case
of Iraq — U.N. resolutions condemning the illegal Israeli occupation of territories. Israel had
annexed territories against the will of the international community, and there were 29 more
PEACE AND THE MIDDLE EAST  319


--- PAGE 341 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 320
Page 320
resolutions that would have been passed had the U.S. not vetoed them. It’s horriﬁc to think that
the United States would mobilize an army, navy and air force over 600,000 men and women to
ﬁght to liberate Kuwait, and, yet, would do nothing when a scant eight years before the Israeli
army had occupied Lebanon and laid siege to the city of Beirut. I speak with some passion on the
subject because my family was besieged by the Israelis at the time. They were all in West Beirut.
The Israelis had not only laid siege to the city; they had cut o ﬀ water and electricity, and had
forbidden the ﬂow of medicines and food across the siege lines. A city that numbered about
750,000 people. And this in full view of the world! The proclaimed purpose of this was to
destroy the PLO which, General Sharon said at the time, was threatening Israel. At the time the
PLO ﬁghters barely numbered 10 or 12 thousand men and women, armed with ri ﬂes and a few
artillery pieces. No air force, no navy. The Israeli army, navy and air force conducted continuous
bombardments of the city, on some days over 150 sorties. At that point I was at the United
Nations, anxiously following the debate in the Security Council. A resolution was put forward, in
which the Security Council urged Israel to open the siege lines to permit, for humanitarian
purposes, the passage of medicines and other essential things for the besieged inhabitants of
Beirut.
What was the fate of that resolution? It was vetoed by the United States. On what grounds,
you might well ask? Why would anybody want to veto a resolution that spoke of medicines going
across a line? The argument presented then was that the resolution was not “even-handed.”
It requires the imagination and the anger of a Jonathan Swift. It ’s like Gulliver’s Travels. But of
course there was no Palestinian army besieging T el Aviv at the time. So the phrase “even-
handedness” had the same kind of cruel irony to it as the U.S. bombing of Baghdad and claiming
that it was doing so because of U.N. resolutions, principles and international law. What about the
64 U.N. resolutions that have gone unheeded against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank?
This brings us ﬁnally to the major question: As the United States was conducting a war that
was destructive, wasteful, and mostly negative in its consequences for the people who have to live
their lives in the Middle East, what was happening about a thousand miles to the west? As you
know, in 1967 Israel occupied the West Bank and Gaza, the last remaining parts of Palestine.
In 1948 when Israel was created, approximately 800,000 Palestinians were driven out. They
have become the exiled population to which I belong, this is to say, a population today of about
3.5 million people who are scattered throughout the Arab world in places like Lebanon, in
Jordan, Syria, partly in the Gulf, in Egypt, in parts of North Africa, Europe and North and South
America. There were two Palestinian populations left behind. One accounted for about 120,000
people who did not leave and became Palestinian citizens of Israel in 1948. They number today
about 800,000. Many of them live in their original places of residence, as second-class citizens of
Israel. The second Palestinian population remains on the West Bank and Gaza, and their number
today is approximately 2 million. They live under a military occupation in modern history. Here
is where a little attention to facts and realities needs our scrupulous and fair scrutiny.
I think it’s important ﬁrst of all to understand that since 1967 those people on the West Bank
and Gaza have had no political rights whatsoever. This means quite literally that they are entitled
to no representation at all . They’re not allowed to vote. They ’re not allowed to send representa-
tives, whether to their own or Israeli institutions. They are taxed well beyond and above what
most Israeli citizens are taxed. They are forbidden a huge number of things that in most other
parts of the world are taken for granted, and certainly taken for granted by Israeli Jews. It ’s very
important to understand who is doing the persecuting, the oppressing, and who is the oppressed.
Much of the rhetoric of the Middle East in this country is so skewed as to cause the “average
American”— the person who watches Peter Jennings, the MacNeil-Lehrer report, or Nightline, or
reads the newspapers — to forget that it isn ’t Palestinians versus Israelis, two equals locked in
what is sometimes referred to as an “ancient contest.” The fact is that ﬁrst of all this is not an
ancient contest. It is a very modern contest that has to do with the appearance on the land in
320  EDWARD W. SAID


--- PAGE 342 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 321
Page 321
which I and many hundreds of thousands of Palestinians grew up, and of a wave of immigrants,
largely from Europe and the United States, who displaced many of us in the process of establish-
ing a Jewish national home in Palestine. In the past the Jews were the classical victims of per-
secution. They were the people who su ﬀered the Holocaust. They were the people who su ﬀered
the ravages for centuries, for millennia, of anti-Semitism and persecution, largely in Europe at
Christian hands. The Jews came to Palestine and one of the slogans they used at the time was
“this is a land without people for a people without land. ” These people who came to Palestine
and established Israel in 1948 did two things. One is they shattered and destroyed the largely
Arab existing society that was there in 1948. Second, they became the oppressors of the Palestin-
ians. This is the important point. We’re not talking about a pre-historic or ancient con ﬂict, nor
are we talking about a perfectly symmetrical one. We ’re talking about a con ﬂict in which one
community, which was the community of victims in Europe and other parts of the world, came
to Palestine and created another community of victims, who are the Palestinians. So it is impor-
tant to understand the Palestinians today are the victims of the victims, which is a very di ﬃcult
position for Palestinians to occupy, because the Israeli Jews who oppress them today are no
ordinary people. They ’re not white settlers in South Africa. They ’re not French settlers in
Algeria. They are a people who have a history of su ﬀering behind them which gives them a
moral stature that is quite unique in modern history. And it is a suﬀering that has been imposed
upon them that has made them a very remarkable and unusual people. But so far as Palestinians
are concerned, we have never seen that side. What we saw was the side of the people who came
and took our land from us, dispossessed us, took our homes from us and threw us out and
supplanted our state and our society with theirs.
But, you might say, this is ancient history. It happened in 1948. Israel is a state, recognized.
What about the present? This is what I ’m talking about now. I ’m simply talking about the
history as a background to the present, because history never ends very simply. There isn’t a clear
line that cuts histories o ﬀ. History continues. In 1967 Israel occupied the west of Palestine, so
that all of historical Palestine is now controlled by Israel. And I return now to the question of
Palestine under military occupation since 1967. We’re not talking about a matter of two weeks,
which is as long as the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait lasted before the United States marshalled the
United Nations and started sending troops and six months later conducted a war against Iraq.
We’re talking about 24 years of military occupation, during which time there have been numer-
ous U.N. resolutions saying that Israel has to give up the land. But it ’s much more important to
understand what is happening on the land for the almost two million Palestinians who live in
Gaza and the West Bank. First of all, they have no political rights. What does this mean? It means
that they have to pay taxes at a higher rate than paid by average Israeli citizens. More to the
point: for those taxes Israel has never published a budget of what it spends on the West Bank and
Gaza. So they pay taxes and don ’t know where the money goes because they are not entitled to
ask. Taxes simply go in a sense to maintain the occupation, perhaps paying for the Israeli army to
occupy the West Bank and Gaza. But the citizens of the West Bank and Gaza continue to pay
taxes at astronomical levels, sometimes three times higher than those paid for by Israeli citizens,
who by the way get free schools and health care and so on.
Israel has forbidden these Palestinians — and this is a crucial point not often recognized
and known — to conduct themselves as if they belonged to a national community. All of us
Palestinians consider ourselves to be Palestinians. But on the West Bank and Gaza the word
“Palestine” is forbidden by military law. It’s against the law to pronounce the word “Palestine.” It
is even against the law to use the colors of the Palestinian ﬂag or to show the Palestinian ﬂag.
Yo u’ve seen pictures during the intifada of young kids waving the ﬂag around. That is a capital
oﬀense in Israel. The colors of the Palestinian ﬂag, for example, once used on a birthday cake in
Gaza, earned the users of those colors a term in jail. An artist, also in Gaza, using the colors of
the Palestinian ﬂag— black, white, red and green— in painting was sent to jail for six months. So
PEACE AND THE MIDDLE EAST  321


--- PAGE 343 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 322
Page 322
there is, in addition to the taxation and the absence of political rights, also a programmatic war
against the very concept of Palestine, as if what Israel has in mind is the extermination of
Palestinian national identity.
A third connected measure is that Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza under Israeli
military occupation are subject to the closure of schools and universities. I speak now of the
period in particular after the beginning of the intifada, from December 1987 until the present.
What is astonishing to me is that beginning in February 1988 Israel closed all seven universities
on the West Bank and Gaza, and for many, many months at a time closed the schools and high
schools and vocational schools there, all as punitive measures, using the excuse that they were
doing this to prevent terrorism. We’re not talking about one school. We’re not talking about one
university. We’re talking about all the schools and universities, with the result that Israel had in
fact denied an entire generation of Palestinian children their education. So that today seven,
eight and nine year-old children are illiterate because they haven ’t been able to attend school.
And Israel has made alternative education illegal, so that if you try to educate your children in
little groups, you ﬁnd out that too is against the law. There is a code against these attempts by
Palestinians to lead their own lives, a code of military law now numbering over a thousand.
They’re done by edict, and there’s no appeal against them. So schools and universities, including
Bir Zeit, the leading university on the West Bank and Gaza, are still closed. It is a scandal. A
scandal, ladies and gentlemen, that Israel, which is the state of the Jewish people, the people of
The Book, the people who are above all others committed to learning, to humane values, to moral
values inscribed in the Old T estament, should be in the position of persecuting another people
not only in general but in speci ﬁc on matters to do with education. There are over a thousand
books banned on the West Bank and Gaza today. I supported the movement to prevent Salman
Rushdie from being censored by the Iranian government or possibly being killed. I believe
absolutely in the right to freedom of speech and opinion. The moral hypocrisy is that at the
same time that we were demonstrating for Salman Rushdie ’s rights, The Merchant of Venice ,
Plato’s Republic, and Hamlet were forbidden on the West Bank by the Israeli government. T o this
day the leading university is closed. In all of the expressions about the need for freedom of
opinion and democracy that we hear from the President and every elected o ﬃcial in this
country, where is the discussion about opening the universities in Palestine? That entire institu-
tions of learning should be closed by the Israeli government on the grounds that they are
incitements to terrorism, these are colossal, outrageous breaches of moral law.
But that’s not all. Since after the ﬁrst year of the occupation, the Israeli government has been
programmatically conﬁscating land, so that today we are talking about 55 percent of the West
Bank and Gaza that has been stolen from the native inhabitants. Because the President has
decided that the settlements are an obstacle to peace you are ﬁnally beginning to hear about it.
During the period of the Carter presidency and even a little bit in the early years of the Reagan
presidency, Israelis would bring in bulldozers at the behest of the government and drive people
oﬀ the land and implant houses on them and say, “There are Jewish settlements.” In the middle
of what in fact is Arab territory, the current administration calls them “an obstacle to peace. ”
The number of settlements is now over 150. They have of course been condemned internation-
ally across the board. In addition to which Israel has taken most of the water of the West Bank
and Gaza for itself. I cite some ﬁgures, just to give you an idea of what we’re referring to. It’s truly
astonishing. If you compare the amount of water used by the Israelis versus the amount of water
used by Palestinians, you ’ll notice an astonishing discrepancy. Eighty-six percent of the water
is consumed by Israel versus eight-to-twelve percent by Palestinians and another two-to- ﬁve
percent for Israeli settlers. In other words, what you have is an absolutely crucial resource, water,
which has very steadily been taken away from Palestinians who cannot get enough water to
irrigate their crops and instead used for such things as swimming pools on the West Bank and
Gaza and in Israel. We’re talking about a stunning discrepancy here.
322  EDWARD W. SAID


--- PAGE 344 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 323
Page 323
In addition to the water and the land, Israel has another policy which is particularly eﬀective;
they uproot trees. These are punitive measures conducted against Palestinians by the Israeli
occupation army that were never done in South Africa. That is to say, in cruelty and sadism
apartheid has a few lessons to learn from the Israeli occupation. Since the beginning of the
intifada, they have uproot 112,000 trees. For example, a 14 year-old kid is caught throwing a
stone at a jeep or an Israeli tank. An unarmed kid. This can earn the village not only the loss of
some more land, but it can also result in the uprooting of fruits and vegetables which requires a
permit from the military government to be replanted. Y ou cannot plant anything on the West
Bank and Gaza, nor build anything, without a permit. There was an article some years ago by an
Israeli lawyer named Avigdor Feldman called “The Israeli Government V ersus the Eggplant.” He
was talking about a particular law, in which the Israeli military governor said, “No fruit tree can
be planted on the West Bank or Gaza, or vegetable, without express permission. If it was planted
it would be destroyed and the person who did it would be put in jail for six months. ”
The second unique contribution of Israel to the annuals of persecution is the punitive
demolition of a house, which means that if you are suspected of, or have in fact committed an
oﬀense against the Israeli military, whether it be a child or an adult, you are marched back to
your house by the soldiers, given a few hours to pack your belongings, and the entire house is
blown up. There have been over two-thousand houses blown up in the last four years.
Finally we come to two very grave measures which have to do with political prisoners and
deaths. Since the intifada began, there have been over 100,000, some say close to 200,000
prisoners put in Israeli jails. By put in jails I don ’t mean as a result of a trial. The Israeli military
occupation is entitled to bring in anyone that it wishes without charge, without trial, without
lawyer and incarcerate that person for six months and then renew the incarceration for another
six months. There are approximately 15,000 prisoners in Israeli jails on those grounds, and the
only grounds usually given are security o ﬀenses. If you want to compare this with South Africa,
you would have to say that during the years of the state of emergency in South Africa this would
have meant that 234,000 prisoners would have been incarcerated. This is three times more than
actually were. Israel has established a record, and it is in fact the highest number of prisoners
per thousand population of any place on earth.
Then we come to the deaths. Since the intifada began there have been over 1,000 Palestinian
killed by Israeli bullets. I ’m not talking about accidents, I ’m talking about the practice of the
Israeli army killing Palestinian men, women and children who demonstrate, who try to circum-
vent the strictures of the occupation. And add to that the various days, months, weeks of curfew.
The Gulf war, for example, serves as an interesting statistic that you might want to ponder.
For the ﬁrst three weeks, the entire West Bank and Gaza, two million people, were kept under
24 hour curfew. For 40 days they were not allowed to leave their houses at all. The number of
people who died as a result of that was more than twice the number of Israelis who were killed
during the Scud attacks; it was actually three times the number.
I’m sorry to have to recount all these ﬁgures to you, but I come to the most important ﬁgure
of all: The United States, we the taxpayers, have in fact been paying for this. On Sept. 24, 1991,
for the ﬁrst time in a clear and consistent way, an article in the New York Times gave background
to the discussion of the loan guarantees which Israel is requiring from the United States. The
amount of money since 1967 that the United States has given to Israel is $77 billion. In 1990
alone the United States gave Israel $4 billion, and you ’ll recall recently in a speech the President
said this amounts to $1,000 per man, woman, and Israeli child. We ’re talking about the largest
single handout in the history of U.S. aid, relative to the population and in absolute terms. How
is it that we have done this, in light of the colossal amount of violations of human rights to
Palestinians that have occurred during that period? It is an irony that I ﬁnd so scandalous as to
be unable to understand it, that the United States every year for the last ﬁve or six years, in its
own State Department annual survey of human rights, has condemned Israel for all the abuses
PEACE AND THE MIDDLE EAST  323


--- PAGE 345 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 324
Page 324
I’ve been referring to and then some; and at the same time continues to pour money into Israel,
without regard for the rights of the Palestinians. There isn ’t a body in the world which hasn ’t
condemned it, whether it ’s Amnesty International or the Red Cross or the Save the Children
Fund or the Human Rights Watch, which has just published an extraordinary report on condi-
tions in Israeli prisons. In most prisons Palestinians are crowded in the desert at the rate of
something like 30 to 40 per tent in tents, without beds, without cover, without clothes, without
food, without books, and without regular family visits. These are all people who have not been
charged but are simply held there. We can read the ample reports. We saw them on television.
And yet, the part that I cannot understand, is that until recently nobody makes the connection
between the tremendous amount of support that the United States gives to Israel, the deteriorat-
ing human rights situation on the West Bank and Gaza, and the continuing oppression of
Palestinians by Israel. I don’t think it’s enough to say Palestinians are suﬀering. It is not suﬀering
made in heaven, something that takes place spontaneously. It is the result of a deliberate pro-
gram in which Israeli leaders have said publicly that Palestinians, according to Rafael Eitan,
who was the Israeli Chief of Sta ﬀ and is now a member of the Knesset, should be turned into
“drugged roaches” in a bottle. The Prime Minister of Israel, Shamir, has referred to Palestinians
as “grasshoppers.” Begin, the Prime Minister in 1982, when he was invading Lebanon, said
Palestinians are nothing but “two-legged vermin.” These are phrases that the entire world has
condemned in South Africa. Why hasn’t the connection been made to Palestine? Y ou cannot say
a good word about apartheid. It is impossible to say anything about South Africa without
connecting South Africa to apartheid. The fact is that the same thing must be done with Israel. It
has to be connected with what it is in fact doing to the Palestinians on the West Bank and has
historically done to them.
When we hear that the Palestinians are bloody and violent Arabs and that they love dictator-
ships, and that they don ’t have the same attitude toward human life that we do, we should
remember we used to hear the same things about the Vietnamese. We seem to be very able
to talk about self-determination for the Yugoslavs, Kuwaitis, Russians, Azerbaijanis, Georgians,
Lithuanians, and for the Estonians. Everybody should have self-determination. The question
that I ask is why is it that it ’s always an exception for the Palestinians? Well, an answer might be
that the Jews of Israel have suﬀered the Holocaust, these are the survivors of the Holocaust, and
how are we to be sure that Palestinians will not wreak upon them a horrible fate? I don ’t accept
the argument that Palestinians are inherently anti-Semitic. They’re not. But it also raises the ques-
tion of what it is politically that the Palestinians have put forward as an answer to that question.
Now I’m not speaking as myself, not as someone who talks about the Palestinian question and
gives lectures about it. I ’m talking now as a student of international politics, as somebody who
has something to do with the reading and writing of texts and understands political processes
and of course understands recent history. The Palestinian position was put forward by the
Palestine National Council, the legislative body of the Palestinian people, in 1988 (Algiers). It
states: We have said that we recognize Israel. We accept the principal two U.N. Security Council
resolutions 242 and 338, whose fundamental principle is that Israel has to leave the occupied
territories, in return for which there will be declared secure and recognized international
boundaries, and a state of peace and security will be obtained for everyone. We recognize those.
We also say that we wish to end our con ﬂict with Israel. We are the aggrieved people. We are
willing to accept a political, not a military settlement with Israel and we want to negotiate an end
to the con ﬂict face to face, directly. That is the current Palestinian position. What has been
the Israeli response to it? I hope you understand that in the condition of Palestinians and the
historical background of Palestine since 1948, to have made those concessions, to have said all
these things, certainly constitutes for people of my generation, even for people younger than I, a
major compromise, an acceptance of a diﬃcult, for many of us an awful reality, but one that we
have to live with. We have accepted not only the idea of recognizing Israel but accepted a tiny
324  EDWARD W. SAID


--- PAGE 346 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 325
Page 325
state, even less than 25 percent of the land of Palestine, the West Bank and Gaza, in other
words, as the territory for an independent Palestine state, so that we can live free of occupation
alongside of Israel in a mutually agreed upon modality of peace and security.
This is not only my position as individual Palestinian. This is the position of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), which is the representative of the Palestinians, the political
authority, just as the ANC is the political representative of the black South Africans. This is the
position formulated by the PNC, the Palestine National Council, and has become the policy of
the PLO. T o which the Israeli response is, “We don’t recognize anything called Palestine. We will
not deal with PLO. It ’s just a terrorist organization. We will not withdraw. This is the land of
Israel.” Recently, Mr. Shamir made a speech, not reported in this country, but in the British
press. I was there. The speech was given on the 50th anniversary of the Stern gang, which was a
terrorist group to which he belonged — yes, he, too, was a terrorist. Somebody said, what about
the Palestinians. Y ou always accuse them of terrorism. He said, their cause is not just. “They ﬁght
for land that is not theirs. ” This gives you an absolutely fantastic insight into the mentality of
this gentleman from Poland who came to Palestine. He says that it ’s his land that was given to
him 2,000 years ago, whereas the people who live there just don’t count, it’s not their land. They
just happen to have been there. They must all go. That ’s his view. In that perspective, whatever
the Palestinians say about peace, justice, reconciliation and recognition falls on totally deaf ears.
Shamir’s position is not only that he will not recognize the PLO, he won ’t deal with them. He
will say no to a Palestinian state, no to withdrawal, and no to any kind of change in the status
quo.
Enter now the peace process. In the aftermath of the Gulf War it was clear in a speech the
President gave to the two Houses of Congress on March 6, 1991, that the President decided to
cap oﬀ the adventure in the Persian Gulf. It was necessary to move on peace in Palestine, the
Arab–Israeli struggle. The American position there has been more or less to go along with most
of the Israeli conditions. We, the Palestinians, have been told that we ’re not allowed to be
represented by our own representatives. As Abba Eban has said, Israel’s positions in all of this is
that is has to approve the Palestinian negotiators, which is really unique in the history of conﬂict.
Never before has one party tried to pick the representatives of the other side. But this is going
forward. The Israelis have reserved for themselves the right to veto anybody they don ’t want to
appear. The United States position is that it’s very important that Palestinians enter the process,
that we have a peace conference. As the victims of the victims, the Palestinians will come forward
with the enlightened, rational, humane position in which Palestinians will accept that the PLO
should not participate, that only people who are not from East Jerusalem, who live only on the
West Bank and Gaza will enter the process. That was our position in Madrid. We will go into
a negotiating process with the Israelis and the other Arabs with I must say very little hope of
anything happening.
Unless there is a determination on the part of the United States to make sure that some move-
ment towards justice and peace be imposed upon Israel, there is no other way. The Palestinians
have taken all the steps, and are already at the starting gate. The Israelis aren’t even on the course
yet. But the Israeli lobby has been so powerful in this country supplying Israel with 77 billion
dollars over the last 20 years that very few politicians, very few elected o ﬃcials, very few indi-
viduals will budge. I ’m not even talking about people who have to run for o ﬃce. I’m talking
about people who are up front when it comes to South Africa, Vietnam, Nicaragua, and all the
diﬃculties of Central America. Y ou ask them about Palestine: “Well, it’s a bit tricky. I’m not sure
about that.” That’s the problem. The reason I’m making the point as strongly as I am is that it is
the United States, whether we like it or not, that holds the key to the future. When we talk about
the U.S., we’re not talking about something out there, we’re talking about our tax dollars. In the
end Israel relies on the U.S. for everything. It is totally dependent upon the U.S. and has no
outside support except from the U.S., to the tune of over $4 billion per year. We’re talking about
PEACE AND THE MIDDLE EAST  325


--- PAGE 347 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 326
Page 326
$10 billon of loan guarantees. For the last several years, Israel has never repaid its loans. Some of
its spokesmen on television say Israel has never defaulted on its loans. Y ou know why it ’s never
defaulted on its loans? Because the United States paid them. That ’s why. Y ou would have a very
good credit rating if your loans, your outstanding debts, were paid by the U.S. government.
What Israel has been getting from the U.S. is not only current grants paid up front. Egypt gets
about $2 billion a year, but Egypt gets it quarterly. Every quarter it has to certify that it ’s been a
“good boy” and then they give them another $500 million. Egypt is approximately 20 times the
size in population of Israel. Israel gets its entire grant up front, at the beginning of the ﬁscal year,
and it can take the money, bank it and get the interest on it, which is exactly what it does. The
U.S. has to borrow the money in order to make the grant to Israel, so we lose the interest and
Israel earns it. And we pay the debts. Senators are very easy to forgive Israel debts and will say, as
did President Bush recently, we ’re not going to give you the loans right away, but whatever it
costs you in the delay, we will oﬀset that too.
So the question is whether we as Americans, as concerned people who have demonstrated our
concern, who have sent our children, brothers and sisters, our husbands and wives to ﬁght in the
Middle East as recently as a year ago, whether our interest is going to be commensurate with our
moral sense. Whether the continued violation of the rights of an entire people will be addressed.
The Palestinians are not just a miscellaneous bunch of terrorists, as they ’re often portrayed by
the Israelis. They constitute a nation in exile, a totally dispossessed people without land and
without sovereignty. Will the United States continue to collude in this and to support the
continued brutalization of the population of Palestine by Israel?
I want to make two ﬁnal points. One is that there can be no peace in the Middle East without
settling the question of Palestine, which lies at the very core of all Middle Eastern problems,
including the invasion and annexation of Kuwait by Saddam Hussein. Remember in the fall of
1990 Saddam Hussein tried to justify the annexation of Kuwait as part of the liberation of
Palestine. So powerful is the symbolism of Palestine in the Arab world. But it’s not only the Arab
world, because Palestine is not an ordinary place. It ’s the most saturated— politically, culturally,
historically— of any place on earth, and of great relevance to us as a people and as a culture. So
the essence of peace in the Middle East is the question of Palestine, and the essence of the
question of Palestine is not a political, economic, or strategic question. It is a moral question. Is
there a right for a people to suﬀer as the Jews have suﬀered? Do they have a right to exact as high
a price as they are exacting from the Palestinians today or not? And if not, that has to be settled.
Along with that are all of the infringements on the rights to read, assemble, to political represen-
tation and self-determination, along with all the other things that are denied Palestinians. We are
complicit in this as Americans, because we supply the money and we have the power. This is
point number one. The essence of peace in the Middle East is the question of Palestine. T o it are
linked all of the other questions in the area: The cultural question, the great con ﬂict with the
West and the United States are all connected with the question of Palestine. The question of
relationship between the religions of Islam and Christianity and Judaism is also connected to the
question of Palestine.
A second point I want to make is that for Palestinians and for Israeli Jews there is no military
option. They cannot defeat each other. There is no possibility for Palestinians to ﬁght a war of
any size or scope against Israel. Israel is capable of ﬁghting a war, with one of the largest and
most powerful armies in the world, much of it supplied by the United States. They can ﬁght a
war against Palestinians, but it is impossible to do. Y ou could ﬁght and defeat people, but you
cannot exterminate them all. So I say that Palestinians and Israelis have no military option
against each other. I think it ’s important to realize that as Palestinians, and I speak here as a
Palestinian but also as an individual who ﬁrmly believes this, the answer is not exclusivism and
hostility unending. It is rather reconciliation, sharing, community. We ’re talking about two
people urgently connected to a small land in many, many ways. I say that the Palestinian vision,
326  EDWARD W. SAID


--- PAGE 348 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 327
Page 327
which is to try to accommodate, is the one in the end that ’s going to win. The question is how
many people we can persuade of this before there is another holocaust, and it ’s a Palestinian
holocaust that I’m talking about now. What is left to Palestinians today is the moral force of the
argument that says a) there is no military option, and b) you have to live with us, we have to live
together as Israelis and as Palestinians, and we have to discover modes of sharing. It ’s in that
perspective that citizens such as ourselves, academics, people who are concerned with questions
of politics and culture and history, can begin to ask questions, to say “What is this all about? Is it
just a matter of giving $10 billion? Is it just a matter of sending ﬁghter pilots and battle ships and
cruisers and aircraft carriers? Or is there something simpler? Is there a moral choice here? ” I
think there is. I think the choice is really between life and death. The Palestinians have said, “We
want to live.” I think it’s very important for all of us to make that choice together.
Editor’s Note: This is a slightly edited transcription of a lecture given by Said at the University of
Iowa on September 25, 1991.
PEACE AND THE MIDDLE EAST  327


--- PAGE 349 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 328
Page 328


--- PAGE 350 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 329
Page 329
20
Mutual Learning as an Agenda for
Social Development
Tu Weiming
As we are confronted with a new world order, the exclusive dichotomy of capitalism and socialism
imposed by the Cold War super powers is woefully inadequate for understanding the rich texture
of the emerging global community. Intent on o ﬀering an alternative global paradigm, Francis
Fukuyama and Samuel Huntington pro ﬀer two facile generalizations: “the end of history ” and
“the clash of civilizations. ” The two positions are seemingly contradictory readings of the
human condition: an optimistic assertion that fundamental ideological divides no longer exist
and a cautionary note that cultural, especially religious, di ﬀerences are the major sources of
international conﬂict.
It seems evident that the liberal democratic countries (Western Europe and North America),
fueled by the market economy, have now set the stage for a radically new global transformation.
It also seems plausible that challenges from, for example, the Confucian and the Islamic cultural
zones may impede this process. Y et, should we take the trajectory of Western culture’s impact as
a sort of historical inevitability? Both positions evoked above are predicated on the assumption
that the current working dichotomy is still “the West and the rest.” Is this conceptual framework
adequate for enhancing social development as an international joint venture?
If social development is seen as an aspiration and a promise for human ﬂourishing, we need
to address the fundamental ethical and spiritual issues confronting the global community. The
old triumphant or confrontational Western mindset is counterproductive. The United States
in particular, can take the lead in transforming itself from primarily a teaching civilization —
especially in reference to East Asia since World War II — into a learning culture by considering
some critical questions:
Which way is more congenial to social integration, viewing ourselves as isolated individuals
or as centers of interpersonal relationships?
Even if we use quantiﬁable material conditions to deﬁne and measure our well-being, can we
aﬀord to cut oﬀ ourselves from the spiritual moorings of our cultures?
If success is solely measured as wealth and power to the exclusion of other goods, such as
social capital, moral in ﬂuence and exemplary teaching, how can we transmit cherished
values to the next generation?
How can we expect others to respect our way of life, if we disregard what they themselves
regard as meaningful and worthwhile?
Can our society prosper without inculcating in individuals a basic sense of duty and
responsibility in addition to rights-consciousness?
329


--- PAGE 351 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 330
Page 330
Can we aﬀord to focus our attention on the rule of law without emphasizing civility and trust
in ordinary daily social intercourse?
Can liberty as an intrinsic value generate a humane society without distributive justice?
Can instrumental rationality alone right inequality without sympathy and compassion?
Should our culturally pluralistic world deliberately cultivate shared values as a common
ground for organic social solidarity?
As we become more keenly aware of our earth ’s vulnerability and the depletion of natural
resources, what steps must we take to preserve her?
Such questions suggest a much needed communal critical self-consciousness among the
reﬂective minds of the world. We may be witnessing the very beginning of global history rather
than the end of history. And, as we approach 2001, the United Nations-designated year of
Dialogue Among Civilizations, this new beginning must take the desire for mutual reference as
its point of departure. Our awareness of the danger of civilizational conﬂicts rooted in ethnicity,
gender, language, land, class, age, and religion, makes the necessity of dialogue particularly
compelling. If we envision development in social as well as economic terms, we recognize that
globalization is not homogenization. Rather, it both intensiﬁes and undermines various forms of
localization. We should accept a plurality of models of sustainable development and emphasize
the ethical and spiritual dimensions of human ﬂourishing as integral parts of our development
strategy.
A perception of development shaped by modernization as a unilinear progression and
deﬁned exclusively by quantiﬁable material gains is too simplistic to re ﬂect the complexity and
diversity of human ﬂourishing. Surely, eradicating absolute poverty is one of the highest priori-
ties of any global approach to social development, but even here, the enabling factors are
political, social, cultural and legal as well as economic. This requires a more sophisticated vision
of how diﬀerent spheres of interests are interconnected nationally, regionally and globally.
Just as no local interests, no matter how compelling, should override national interests,
regional and global interests must not be subsumed under national interests. Even if we assume
that the United States alone can exert hegemonic in ﬂuence in the global community, the really
enduring American strength lies in “soft power”— moral persuasion— as well as military might.
Social capital, the cultivation of cultural competence and the enhancement of spiritual values, is
as important as economic capital, the cultivation of technical competence and the enhancement
of material conditions.
The politics of domination is being replaced by the politics of communication, networking,
negotiation, interaction, interfacing, and collaboration. The strong 1960’s belief that “moderniza-
tion would wipe out cultural, institutional, structural and mental diﬀerences and, if unimpeded,
would lead to a uniform modern world ” is no longer tenable. Since globalization engenders
localization and indigenization as well as homogenization, cultural, institutional, structural and
cognitive diﬀerences actually shape the contours of the modernizing processes. In consequence,
traditions are constituent parts of modernity and modernization can assume di ﬀerent cultural,
institutional, structural and mental forms. The thesis of convergence, meaning that the rest of
the world will inevitably converge with the modern West, has been modiﬁed.
In the eighties, the thesis of reverse convergence was strongly implied, if not clearly articu-
lated, by new modernization theorists as the result of East Asian economic dynamism. The ideas
of “Asian values,” “network capitalism,” and “the Asia-Paciﬁc century ” were advocated as an
alternative to modern Westernism. However, the observation that the engine of development
had shifted from the Atlantic to the Paciﬁc was premature. The 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis forced
a new interpretation. Authoritarianism and crony capitalism were identi ﬁed as the cultural,
institutional, structural and mental causes: Asian ﬁnancial institutions had suﬀered from lack of
transparency, public accountability and fair competitiveness. As the economies of the Asia-Paciﬁc
330  TU WEIMING


--- PAGE 352 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 331
Page 331
region begin to recover, East Asia will likely reemerge as the single most important reference and
perhaps as a counterpoint for Western Europe and North America again.
If, instead of reverse convergence, “multiple modernities” had been presented as an explana-
tory model, the implications of East Asian modernity would have been far-reaching. East Asia
has been deeply inﬂuenced by Western Europe and North America and its accelerating modern-
ity is mainly the result of the Western impact. Y et, the shape of life of East Asian peoples is
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of Westerners. The possibility of being modern without being
Western suggests that, under the inﬂuence of East Asia as well as West Europe and North America,
Southeast Asian societies, notably Malaysia and Indonesia, may become modern without neces-
sarily being European, American or East Asian. By implication, Latin American, South Asian and
African forms of modernity are, in principle, realizable.
Is the vision of multiple modernities merely wishful thinking or practicable guide for social
development? The Copenhagen Social Summit was committed to support full employment,
promote social integration, achieve gender equality and equity, and attain universal and equit-
able access to education and primary care. If these are realizable aspirations for the global
community, rather than privileges and entitlements of the First World, every country is, in both
theory and practice, capable of human ﬂourishing according to its own speciﬁc conditions. The
mobilization of indigenous cultural recourses for capacity building is a precondition for such an
endeavor.
East Asia is a case in point. Can East Asian political and cultural leaders be inspired by the
Confucian spirit of self-cultivation, family cohesiveness, social solidarity, benevolent governance,
and universal peace to practice responsibility in their domestic aﬀairs? This question concerns us
all. As Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and Vietnamese emigrate to other parts of the world, can they
share their rich cultural heritage? This question is important not only for East Asia, but for the
United States, Canada, Australia, and the European Union.
The commitment to “accelerate the development of Africa and the least developed countries”
is predicated on a holistic vision of human ﬂourishing and a realistic model of interdependency.
If we consider ethnic, cultural, linguistic, and religious diversity as a global asset, Africa should
not be characterized by the HIV epidemic, poverty, unemployment and social disintegration
alone. It should also be recognized as a rich reservoir for human spirituality and the wisdom of
elders. The African Renaissance, symbolized by the geological and biological diversity of the tiny
area around Capetown (said to be comparable in richness to the vast area of Canada) ought to
be a source of inspiration for a changed mindset that addresses social development as a global
joint venture.
The development of Africa is important for us because, without a holistic sense of human
ﬂourishing, we cannot properly anchor our sense of security, let alone well-being in the global
community as a whole. The acknowledgment that there is a “multiplicity of modern societies
around the globe” and that it is arrogant to proclaim our own cultural supremacy is a signiﬁcant
step toward mutual referencing among societies. We cannot help African societies to accelerate
their development if we prematurely conclude that they have nothing to teach us. Indeed,
the celebration of cultural diversity, without falling into the trap of pernicious relativism, is
profoundly meaningful for global stewardship.
As the rise of Confucian East Asia suggests, traditions are present as active agents in moder-
nity; in fact, the modernizing process has assumed a variety of cultural forms. Modernization
originating in Western Europe has powerfully transformed the world in one dominant direction.
In its inception, however, it was already a mixture of con ﬂictual and even contradictory trajec-
tories. Even if we overcome the conceptual diﬃculty of generalizing European cases as paradig-
matic manifestations of modernity, we must sill treat North American modernity as a separate
case. The story of modernization as a master narrative contains several versions of globally
signiﬁcant local knowledge. Now that East Asia’s local knowledge is added to the story, it seems
MUTUAL LEARNING FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  331


--- PAGE 353 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 332
Page 332
reasonable to anticipate an increasing number of normal or even exemplary modernities from
other parts of the world. Fruitful comparisons across geographic, linguistic, ethnic, cultural, and
religious boundaries will enrich our understanding of social development as a holistic program
for human ﬂourishing.
The common practice of “learning from the West,” deemed absolutely necessary for survival
by East Asian intellectuals and political leaders, will certainly continue but the need to broaden
the horizons of reference cultures is obvious. As “mutual referencing” progresses, East Asia can
beneﬁt from civilizational dialogues with Latin America, South Asia, the Islamic world, and
Africa. I have been advocating in Beijing and throughout Cultural China that it is in China ’s
best interest to take India seriously as a reference society. This will signi ﬁcantly broaden
China’s symbolic resources in understanding her own indigenous traditions, such as Mahayana
Buddhism and religious Daoism and help her better appreciate the modern relevance of religion.
If China can recognize Tibet as an enduring spiritual tradition and a venerable cultural heritage,
not only will her international reputation signi ﬁcantly improve but also her domestic ability to
promote social integration.
In the United States and, by implication, the modern West, the need to transform America ’s
arrogance as a teaching civilization into the humility of a learning culture is predicated on a
global vision of social development. We should accept the dictum that the more powerful,
wealthy and inﬂuential nations are, the more obligated they are to enlarge the well-being of the
global community. Strong and rich nations, as bene ﬁciaries of the international system, are
obligated to see to it that the least developed countries bene ﬁt from their international policies.
The isolationist mentality that advocates national interests as an ultimate justiﬁcation for global
action is, in the long run, detrimental to domestic social solidarity. The protectionist approach is
self-defeating because it eventually undermines the very system that has generated and sustained
its prosperity.
East Asian intellectuals have been devoted students of Western learning. In Japan, European
and American tutelage has played an important role in modernization. Japan ’s ability to learn
from the West without abandoning indigenous resources for national and cultural identity,
helped this country to become one of the most developed in the world. The West, on the other
hand, has not felt compelled to learn from the rest of the global community. This asymmetrical
situation is particularly pronounced in United States ’ relationships with East Asian, notably
China. T o remain a strong international leader the United States needs an elite educated to be
well-informed global citizens.
The time is long over due for American educators and politicians to rekindle a cosmopolitan
spirit. The United States’ assumption of the role of a tutor for democracy, market economy, civil
society, and human rights in East Asia since World War II has been instrumental in developing
an international vision. Although an implicit hegemonic mentality in this vision was unhealthy,
it had the potential of evolving into true internationalism. However, as the anti-Communist
ideology fades and East Asia assumes a greater role in global business and politics, a more
wholesome American presence in East Asia is partnership. Implicit in partnership are recogni-
tion, understanding and appreciation. Although the obligation to address this asymmetry is
mutual, the United States, as the stronger and wealthier partner has greater resources to improve
the situation eﬀectively and equitably.
America’s current isolationist and protectionist mentality, a reﬂection of the politics of dom-
ination, cannot be transformed by top-down political will. Change can only occur through
mobilization of social forces, including non-governmental organizations. Public intellectuals in
government, media, business, the professions, labor, religion, and advocacy movements — for
example, environmental protection, gender equality, racial harmony, or human rights — as well
as the academic community should take responsibility for facilitating a new agenda to discuss
the American vision of and contribution to the global community. Given America’s habits of the
332  TU WEIMING


--- PAGE 354 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 333
Page 333
heart and fragmented political prospects for increasing American internationalism, debates are
not particularly encouraging in the short run.
At the Copenhagen Social Summit in 1995, heads of State or Government from 117 countries
pledged to implement 10 commitments to alleviate poverty, promote employment and ensure
social integration. This obviously newsworthy item received scant attention and was substan-
tially overwhelmed by trivia from Los Angeles during the O. J. Simpson murder trial even in
some of the nation ’s leading international journals. This fact alone clearly cautions against any
naive optimism. Nevertheless, pragmatic idealism and a cosmopolitan spirit are also de ﬁning
characteristics of the American mind. American o ﬃcials as well as scholars and experts have
been at the forefront in ensuring that structural adjustment programs include social develop-
ment and increasing resources allocated to social development. The possibility of an authentic
American internationalism is still there.
The emergence of a new communal critical self-consciousness among public intellectuals will
better facilitate American participation in strengthening cooperation for social development
through the UN and help realize inspiring leadership on the global scene. In the eyes of East
Asian intellectuals, the strength of the United States as a model of modernity lies in vibrant
market economy, functioning democratic polity, dynamic civil society, and culture of freedom.
The Enlightenment values, such as liberty, rights consciousness, due process of law, and dignity
of the individual, are evident in American economy, polity, society, and culture. Y et, unfortu-
nately, American life is also plagued by inequality, litigiousness, con ﬂict, and violence. The
American people could beneﬁt from a spirit of distributive justice in economy, an ethic of respon-
sibility in politics, a sense of trust in society, and, above all, a culture of peace. Among the
developed countries, the United States is noted for openness to change, willingness to experiment
and ﬂexibility. Somewhat liberal immigration policies, admittedly often dictated by economic
need and political expediency, are clear indication of the evolution of the United States into a
microcosmic “united nations. ” Multiculturalism and ethnic diversity are integral parts of the
American way of life. The best of America is seen in a spirit of tolerance, co-existence, dialogical
interaction, and mutual learning across race, gender, age, class, and religion. If the American
mindset evolves to encompass responsibility, civility and compassion as well as freedom and
rights and take a global perspective in de ﬁning her national interests, the United States can
signiﬁcantly enhance the UN agenda for social development.
MUTUAL LEARNING FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  333


--- PAGE 355 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 334
Page 334


--- PAGE 356 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 335
Page 335
Permissions
Part I Perspectives on Culture in Theory and Research
Chapter 1 was originally published in Communication Quarterly, 1996, Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 70–84.
Reprinted by permission of Routledge.
Chapter 2 was originally published in Josina M. Makau & Ronald C. Arnett (Eds.). (1997).
Communication ethics in an age of diversity  (pp. 73–88). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Reprinted by permission of University of Illinois Press.
Chapter 3 was originally published in Robert Shuter (Ed.), Patterns of intracultural communica-
tion [Special issue]. Southern Communication Journal , 1990, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 237 –249, with
revision for the new conclusion. Reprinted by permission of Routledge.
Part II Metatheoretical Frameworks for Future Directions
Chapter 4 was originally published in Journal of Black Studies , 1983, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 3 –19.
Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications.
Chapter 5 was originally published in Guo-Ming Chen & Y oshitaka Miike (Eds.), Asian approaches
to human communication  [Special issue]. Intercultural Communication Studies , 2003, Vol. 12,
No. 4, pp. 39 –63. Reprinted by permission of the International Association for Intercultural
Communication Studies (IAICS).
Chapter 6 was originally published in Communication Theory , 1999, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 1 –25.
Reprinted by permission of Blackwell.
Part III Contextual Approaches to Culture and Communication
Chapter 7 was originally published in Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 1997, Vol. 16,
No. 2, pp. 107–131. Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications.
Chapter 8 was originally published in Critical Arts: A South–North Journal of Cultural and Media
Studies, 1999, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 24–42. Reprinted by permission of Routledge.
335


--- PAGE 357 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 336
Page 336
Chapter 9 was originally published in Howard Journal of Communications, 2005, Vol. 16, No. 3,
pp. 149–175. Reprinted by permission of Routledge.
Chapter 10 was originally published in Judith N. Martin & Olga I. Davis (Eds.), Ethnicity and
Methodology [special issue]. International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 2000, Vol. 24, No. 5,
pp. 623–650. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier Science Ltd.
Part IV Impact of Globalization on Intercultural Communication
Chapter 11 was originally published in Majid T ehranian (Ed.). (1999). Worlds apart: Human
security and global governance  (pp. 153–167). London: I. B. Tauris. Reprinted by permission of
I. B. Tauris.
Chapter 12 was originally published in Women’s Studies in Communication, 1995, Vol. 18, No. 1,
pp. 45–64. Reprinted by permission of Women’s Studies in Communication.
Chapter 13 is published by permission of the author.
Part V Identity and Intercultural Communication Competence
Chapter 14 was originally published in Brant B. Burleson (Ed.). (1996). Communication year-
book (Vol. 19, pp. 353 –383). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Reprinted by permission of Sage
Publications.
Chapter 15 was originally published in International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 2000,
Vol. 24, No. 2, pp.173–201. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier Science Ltd.
Chapter 16 was originally published in China Media Research , 2006, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 9 –21.
Reprinted by permission of China Media Research.
Part VI Ethical Considerations in Intercultural Communication
Chapter 17 was originally published in Y oshitaka Miik & Guo-Ming (Eds.), Asian contributions
to communication theory [special issue]. China Media Research, 2007, Vol. 3, No. 4. Reprinted by
permission of China Media Research.
Chapter 18 was originally published in Cli ﬀord Christians & Michael Traber (Eds.). (1997).
Communication ethics and universal values  (pp. 128–158). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Reprinted
by permission of Sage Publications.
Chapter 19 was originally published in Journal of Communication Inquiry , 1992, Vol. 16, No. 1,
pp. 5–19. Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications.
Chapter 20 was originally published in Jacques Baudot (Ed.). (2001). Building a world com-
munity: Globalization and the common good (pp. 253–260). Copenhagen, Demark: Royal Danish
Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs and the University of Washington Press. Reprinted by permission of
the University of Washington Press.
336  PERMISSIONS


--- PAGE 358 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 337
Page 337
Index
actions, 101–3, 108, 242
Adelman, M. B., 184
Adler, Nancy, 258
Adler, Peter, 5, 239–41, 246–7, 249, 251–2, 254–8
Adler, R. B., 221
Adonisi, M., 115, 118
Africa, 3, 4–5, 47–55, 195, 331; culture, 40; interaction
rules, 226; lack of research, 38, 39; mass
communication, 203–6; music, 198; religion, 197–8;
ubuntu, 5, 113–22
African Americans, 14, 52, 54n3, 216, 250–1, 273; concept
of the self, 243; ethnicity studies, 30; interaction rules,
226; interpretive research, 77
Afrocentricity, 47–55, 59, 70n1, 144; criticism and
knowledge, 51–2; Eurocentric aggression, 50–1;
ideology and economics, 48–50; politics and symbols,
50; power, 48
ahimsa, 298, 307–8, 311, 312
Ahuvia, A. C., 184
Aiyangar, Rangaswami, 314n6
Alcoﬀ, L., 17
Allen, William, 28
Alleyne, M., 204, 206
Altheide, D. L., 146
Althusser, Louis, 78, 125
Amanat, 293–4
Americanization, 170–2, 173
Analects (Confucius), 95, 97–108, 110n1, 110n2, 110n6
Anglo-Americanization, 171–2
anthropology, 51, 265
Anyanwu, K. C., 47
apartheid, 113, 117, 119, 121
appropriateness, 218, 219, 228
Aristotle, 81
Arnett, R., 32–3, 34
articulation, 125, 126–7, 128, 130, 137
Asante, Moleﬁ Kete, 1–8, 143, 243; Afrocentricity, 4–5,
47–55, 59, 70n1, 144; metatheory, 57; minority group
values, 138
Asia, 47, 228, 274; ﬁnancial crisis, 330; historical struggles,
64–5; religious-philosophical traditions, 63–4, 67, 69;
see also Confucianism; East Asia
Asia-Paciﬁc, 330–1
Asiacentricity, 5, 47, 57–72; content dimensions, 62–5;
methodological considerations, 65–9; research
objectives, 58–61
Asian Americans, 30, 123–38
Asian mail-order brides, 5, 179–91
Assimilationism, 124, 130, 137
Asuncion-Lande, N. C., 15
atomic bombing of Japan, 65, 168
attribution, 133, 135
Aurobindo, Sri, 306
Babbili, Anantha Sudhaker, 5, 297–316
Backlund, P ., 218
Balagangadara, S. N., 242, 256
Barnlund, D. C., 76, 77, 255, 257, 264
Barthes, R., 185
Bazerman, C., 27, 28
behavioral ﬂexibility, 226, 229
behavioral skills approach, 221
Belenky, M. J., 244
beliefs, 18, 67, 117
Bellah, Robert, 32
ben Jochannan, J., 197–8
Benedict, Ruth, 41, 194
Bennett, Janet, 239, 241, 250, 251, 256, 257–8
Bennett, Milton J., 239, 241, 243, 249, 255, 256, 265–6
Berry, T., 145, 147
337


--- PAGE 359 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 338
Page 338
Bhabha, H., 266
Bhagavad Gita, 301, 302, 304–6, 307, 311
Bhengu, M. J., 116, 117
Black, Edwin, 31
Bond, M. H., 96
Book of Odes, 101
Bourdieu, Pierre, 77
Bowles, D., 208
Bradley, Michael, 47, 48, 50, 51
Braithwaite, C. A., 76
Brislin, R. W., 220
Bromley, R., 208
Broodryk, J., 119, 120
Bruneau, T., 63
Buddhism, 63–4, 67, 298, 300, 301, 302, 332
Buescher, D. T., 135
Burrell, G., 73, 74, 77, 78
business sector, 118–19
calypso music, 198, 199, 201, 202
capitalism, 49, 50, 171, 173, 174; commodiﬁcation, 182,
188; feminist cultural studies, 180; “network”, 330
Capra, F., 144–5
Carbaugh, Donal, 76, 83
Caribbean, 5, 194, 198–209
Carlyle, Thomas, 29
Casmir, F. I., 15
caste system, 299, 302, 303–4, 305, 310
CD approach see cultural diﬀerences approach
censorship, 322
Central America, 38, 39, 40
ceremonies, 153–5, 156
Chang, Hui-Ching, 5, 95–112
Chen, Guo-Ming, 1, 5, 59, 68, 70n2, 110n4, 215–37
chih, 100
China, 5, 52, 107, 332; collectivism, 96; communication
competence, 229; concept of the self, 242
Chodorow, N., 243
Chomsky, N., 227–8
Chow, E. N., 180
Christianity, 197, 198, 298, 300, 326
Chu, G. C., 61
Chung, J., 59, 63, 110n4
Clarke, John Henrik, 52
“clash of civilizations”, 329
Code of Manu, 301, 304
Cogdell, R. T., 229
collectivism, 58, 75, 130, 205; African societies, 195, 206,
208; Confucianism, 95, 96–7, 106, 109, 110n11; see also
communalism
Collier, M. J., 76, 80, 84, 220–1
Collins, Patricia Hill, 17, 18
colonialism, 49–50, 197, 198, 204, 265; Caribbean, 207;
India, 298, 314n1; language superimposition, 311;
U.S.–Japanese communication, 276
colonization of the consciousness, 169–70, 175
“colonizer” discourse, 17
Colquit, J. L., 16
commercialization, 172–3
commitment, 254, 255, 257–8
commodiﬁcation, 182–5, 187, 188
communalism, 114, 115–16; see also collectivism
communication: Asiacentric studies, 57–72;
Confucianism, 95, 96–7, 105–6, 107, 108, 109; costs and
compensations, 59; critical paradigms, 77, 78, 79;
culture relationship, 73, 75, 76, 81; de-
contextualization, 132; “development” issues, 193, 194;
dialectical perspective, 82, 83, 84, 85; ecological
approach to, 255; Ecology of Language Paradigm, 173,
174, 175, 176; English language, 167, 168–9, 177;
ethical, 27–8; Eurocentric aggression, 50–1; European
intellectual imperialism, 57; functionalist paradigm,
74–6; harmonious, 6; India, 299; interpretive paradigm,
76–7; Islam, 283–96; liberal pluralism, 79–80; mass
communication perspectives, 202–8; multicultural
communication studies, 27–36; temporary
communication estrangement, 52–3; U.S.–Japanese,
263–79; Western ﬁeld of inquiry, 48; see also
intercultural communication; language
communication accommodation theory, 75
community, 291–2
community action, 257–8
“community-ship”, 309
comparative knowledge, 28, 29, 31–2, 35
competence, 16, 215–37, 242, 266–7; aﬀective perspective,
221–3, 229; approaches, 220–1; assessment of, 228–9;
behavioral process, 225–7, 229; class and race bias, 14;
cognitive process, 223–5, 229; critical metatheoretical
approach, 276; deﬁnitions of, 217–19; Eurocentric bias,
61; power relations, 269; types of, 219
Comte, Auguste, 74
conﬂict, 74, 107, 330; Four Seasons of Ethnography, 158;
Israel–Palestine, 317, 319–27
Confucianism, 5, 58, 59, 67, 95–112, 331; collectivism,
96–7; moral development, 97–9, 107; problems of
current interpretation, 106–8; role hierarchy, 109; rules
of propriety, 103–5; words/action relationship, 101–3,
108; words lacking in substance, 99–101, 108
constructivism, 151, 153, 241; marginality, 256; radical,
239, 244, 255
consumerism, 173
Coon, C. S., 29
Copenhagen Social Summit (1995), 331, 333
Cornyetz, N., 83
Cortese, Anthony, 29
Coryate, Thomas, 29
338  INDEX


--- PAGE 360 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 339
Page 339
Coughlin, W. J., 168
Crawford, C. S., 301–2, 304, 311–14
creation-based cultures, 144, 145, 152, 153, 159, 160
Creel, H. G., 99, 110n2
Creel, Herrlee, 95
Crichton, M., 273
critical perspectives, 16–18, 80, 82, 83, 125, 269; critical
humanist paradigm, 74, 75, 77, 78, 81, 264; critical
structuralist paradigm, 74, 75, 77, 78–9, 81; discourse
analysis, 126; U.S.–Japanese communication, 263,
264–7, 275–6, 277
critical theory, 77, 81, 147, 245, 272
cross-cultural attitude approach, 220–1
cultural awareness, 223, 224, 225, 229, 266
cultural communication, 76, 83, 86n1
cultural diﬀerences (CD) approach, 264–7, 274, 275, 276
cultural diversity, 34, 69, 216, 229, 239–40, 331
cultural identity approach, 221
cultural studies, 18, 125; critical humanism, 77, 78, 264;
feminist, 180–1, 189
culture, 15–16, 37, 39–40, 194–6, 264–5; academic
socialization, 162n4; African, 50, 53; American, 128–30,
131, 133–4, 136, 173, 175; Asian, 59, 62; Chinese, 128,
129, 130–7; colonization of the consciousness, 169–70;
communication relationship, 73, 76, 81; critical
perspectives, 16–17, 78, 79; cross-cultural attitude
approach, 220–1; deﬁnitions of, 138n3; dialectical
perspective, 81, 82–3, 85; Ecology of Language
Paradigm, 174; etic research, 38; export and re-import
of, 194, 196, 197–9, 202–8, 209; Foreign Service
Institute, 12, 13; Four Seasons of Ethnography, 156,
157, 158, 159, 160; functionalist paradigm, 75–6;
intercultural communication competence, 228, 230;
interpretive paradigm, 76–7; intracultural
communication, 40, 41; journal articles, 13–14, 19;
liberal pluralism, 79–80; material realm, 271;
methodological issues, 143–4; multicultural
communication studies, 31–2; multicultural identity,
246, 253–4; rational explanations, 149; researcher
independence, 148; teacher-student metaphor, 3;
ubuntu, 117–18
Cupach, W. R., 218, 219
Dahlen, T., 264
Dalai Lama, 65
Dandekar, R. N., 306
data, 65–6, 148, 150, 152, 158
Davenport, Charles, 29
Davis, -, 300
De la Garza, Amira, 5, 143–63
De Lauretis, T., 126
Deetz, S., 73, 80, 81
Dennis, E., 196
Derrida, Jacques, 77
development, 193, 194, 330
Dhammapada, 301, 302
dharma, 297, 298, 302–3, 305–8, 309, 311, 313
dialectic perspective, 81–5
dialogue, 32–3, 34, 35
diﬀerence, 31, 83, 217, 265, 272, 275; see also cultural
diversity
Diﬀusion of English Paradigm, 173, 174
diﬀusion studies, 15, 16
dignity, 113, 114, 120
Dinges, N., 220
Diop, Cheikh Anta, 47, 50, 53, 195, 198, 205–6, 208
Dirks, N. B., 16, 17
disadvantage, 84, 85
discourse, 11, 28, 32, 126, 180; “colonizer”, 17; mail-order
brides, 181, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189; moral, 33
discrimination, 168, 169, 173, 272–4, 299
Dissanayake, W., 60
documentaries, 33
domination, 4, 126, 144, 173, 195–6, 266; linguistic, 170;
mail-order brides, 182, 185, 187–8; mass
communication relationship, 194, 196–7, 202–8, 209;
politics of, 332; symbolic forms, 180; Two Cradle
theory, 205–6; see also power
dualisms, 82, 290, 297
DuBois, W. E. B., 53
Durkheim, Emile, 74, 116, 285
duty, 304, 305, 306, 307
East Asia, 38, 39–40, 96, 330–2, 333
Eastern Europe, 39, 40
Ebert, Roger, 123
ecological conscience, 301
Ecology of Language Paradigm, 173–6, 177
economic development, 49, 312
education: Caribbean, 207; higher education, 32–3;
Japanese educational system, 271; mail-order brides,
186; Palestine, 322
eﬀectiveness, 217–18, 219, 228
Egypt, 115, 288, 318, 326
Eley, G., 16
elites, 17
Ellul, Jacques, 286–7
emic research, 38, 76, 77
emotions, 103, 105, 108, 109, 221–3, 229
empathy, 226, 229, 256
empiricism, 66–7, 68
“end of history”, 329
English language, 167–77, 270–1, 275, 311
Enlightenment, 29, 288, 333
entitlement, 148–9
environmental issues, 301, 312–13
INDEX  339


--- PAGE 361 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 340
Page 340
equality, 3–4; East–West cultural, 69; Ecology of
Language Paradigm, 173, 174, 175, 176; U.S.–Japanese
communication, 277
ethical issues, 5–6, 29; Asiacentric research, 61; Confucian
ethics, 106; Indian ethics, 297–314; Islam, 284, 285,
287–94; multicultural communication studies, 27–8,
33–4, 35; see also morality
Ethiopia, 196, 197
“ethnic texts”, 27, 28, 32
ethnicity, 28–31, 35, 245; civilizational conﬂicts, 330;
communication competence, 230; labeling, 31–2;
see also African Americans; Asian Americans; race
ethnocentrism, 14, 63, 220, 283
ethnography, 18, 58, 86n4, 143–63
ethnography of speaking approach, 220
etic research, 38, 75
etiquette, 97, 104
eugenics, 29
euphemization, 187
Eurocentrism, 2, 4, 47, 50–1, 52, 240; Asiacentric critique
of, 58, 64, 65; communication competence, 61, 229;
materialism, 59, 60, 67–8; methodological issues,
65–8
Europe, 38, 39, 40, 47, 49, 195; aggression, 50–1; American
movie imports, 171; colonialism, 49, 50; intellectual
imperialism, 2, 48, 57; nuclearism, 53; secularism, 288
Fairclough, N., 126
Fanon, Frantz, 54n3, 266
femininity, 180, 181, 182–3, 187
feminism, 16–17, 125, 126, 276–7; cultural studies, 18,
180–1, 189; identity, 241, 242; mail-order brides,
179–80, 186, 187; see also gender; women
Fiji, 196, 197, 203
Finch, C., 197, 205
Fisher, Walter, 32, 129
Fiske, John, 138n2, 182
Fitch, K. L., 76
Flores, L., 78
Foreign Service Institute (FSI), 11, 12–13
Foucault, Michel, 11, 12, 15, 32, 77
Four Seasons of Ethnography, 143–63; autumn, 154–5,
158–9; guiding ideals, 149–53; spring, 153–7; summer,
154, 157–8; winter, 155, 159–61
Fowler, R., 126
frames of reference, 31, 32
Frank, D. A., 34
Frankfurt School, 78, 264
Frederic, H., 79
Frith, K., 208
FSI see Foreign Service Institute
Fukuyama, Francis, 329
Funabashi, Y., 64
functionalist paradigm, 74–6, 77, 79–80, 82, 83, 84, 174
Fung, Y.-L., 103, 104
Gandhi, Mahatma, 298, 304, 307, 311, 312
Garvey, Marcus, 52, 53
gaze, 126
Gearing, Fred, 143
Geertz, C., 32, 33, 243
gender, 17, 251, 265, 330; commodiﬁcation, 182;
communication competence, 230; feminist cultural
studies, 180; identity, 243–4, 245; The Joy Luck Club,
135–6; see also feminism; women
Gergen, K., 245
Giles, H., 107
Gilligan, C., 244
Giroux, H. A., 125–6, 245
Gitlin, T., 185, 186
Glaser, B., 162n5
Glazer, N., 28
globalism, 170–1, 176
globalization, 5, 6, 198, 215–16, 227, 330; English
language, 171–3, 175; intensiﬁcation of, 1
Gobineau, Arthur de, 29
Goldman, A., 97
Goldman, R., 182
Gramsci, Antonio, 78
Great Britain, 15, 38, 79, 208
Grice, H. P ., 218
Griswold, W., 116, 117
Guba, E., 144, 147, 151
Gudykunst, William B., 2, 14–15, 74, 75, 96
Gyekye, Kwame, 114, 115, 116
Habermas, Jürgen, 77, 175, 267
Haddon, A. C., 30
Halfbass, W., 314n1
Hall, Edward T., 11, 12–15, 17, 19, 37, 41, 80, 224, 264
Hall, Ivan, 273
Hall, Stuart, 18, 77, 78, 125, 126, 137, 187, 264–5
Halualani, Rona Tamiko, 5, 179–91
Hariman, -, 28
harmony, 6, 151, 161, 228, 290; Asiacentricity, 58, 60–1,
63, 64–5; Confucianism, 95, 96, 106, 107, 108, 109;
Indian ethics, 309, 311, 314
Harré, R., 106–7
Hebdige, Dick, 77
Hecht, M. L., 76, 243, 244–5
Hedge, R., 78
hegemony, 136, 185, 188; American, 52, 269, 272, 275,
276; linguistic, 167, 173, 176, 177; romance, 179–80,
181–2
Hegemony of English Paradigm, 174
high-context cultures, 97, 116–17, 119, 224
340  INDEX


--- PAGE 362 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 341
Page 341
Hinduism, 58, 63, 67, 297–314
Hinkel, E., 117
history, 266, 274
Hobbes, Thomas, 28
Hofstede, G., 96, 224, 264
holographic paradigm, 151, 152, 153, 156, 159
hooks, bell, 17, 243, 273
hope, 132–3
Houston, Marsha, 17, 18
Howell, W. S., 68
human rights, 173, 174, 323–4, 332
humanism, 120, 121, 245
humanness, 114, 119–20
humility, 99
Huntington, Samuel, 329
Hur, K. K., 30
Huxley, Julian, 30
Hwang, K.-K., 96
Hyde, M., 117–18
Hymes, Dell, 76
Ibelema, M., 204
Ibn Khaldun, 285, 287, 289
ideal speech situation, 175
identity, 1, 5, 125, 239–61; Asian Americans, 124; context,
252–3; critical perspectives, 17, 78; cultural identity
approach, 221; decolonization, 266; ethnic, 144;
ideology, 125; Japanese, 274; maintenance, 226;
“multicultural man” model, 239; multiple identities,
216–17, 219, 223, 227, 229, 230, 245; postmodern
views, 244–5; see also multicultural identity; self
identity development theory, 245, 256
ideology, 125, 266, 267, 287; Afrocentricity, 48–50, 52;
dominant, 126, 179, 185; patriarchal, 5, 136, 179–80,
181–2, 186, 189; racist, 187–8; White middle-class
American, 132
Ifa, 53
immigrants, 30, 216
imperialism, 3, 195–6, 197, 198; American, 187;
cultural/media, 170, 173; Eurocentric intellectual, 2, 57;
linguistic, 170, 173, 175
in-betweenness, 255, 256, 258
India, 5, 297–316, 332; contemporary, 308–13; continuity
of ethical discourse, 302–4; geography and cultural
ethos, 298–9; religion, 298, 300–1
individualism, 58, 75, 96, 106, 205; American values, 129;
communalism contrast with, 115, 116; destructive, 119;
European cultures, 195; India, 308, 309; U.S./Britain
contrast, 208
inequality, 32, 172; Ecology of Language Paradigm, 174;
linguistic and communicative, 167, 168–9, 173, 175
information ﬂows, 172, 215, 283
inoculation, 185, 186
interaction management, 226, 229
intercultural communication, 1–7, 18; Afrocentricity,
47–55; Asiacentricity, 58, 61; clash of cultures, 116;
competence, 215–37; critical perspectives, 16–18, 77,
79, 80; cultural imperative, 39–40; deﬁnition of, 86n1;
dialectical perspective, 81–5; discursive formation, 11;
English language, 168, 170–1; functionalist paradigm,
75–6; genealogy of, 12–16; interpretive paradigm, 76,
77; Islam, 292; journal articles, 13–14, 19, 20–6, 37–9;
marginality, 256; multicultural communication
studies, 27–36; multicultural identity, 239, 249; power
relations, 48; U.S.–Japanese, 263–79; see also
communication
intercultural communicator approach, 220
intercultural sensitivity, 221–3, 229, 239, 266–7
interdependence, 116–17, 150, 217
internationalization, 273
Internet, 172
interparadigmatic borrowing, 80
interpretive paradigm, 74, 75, 76–7, 79–80, 83, 84
intracultural communication, 15, 18, 19, 37, 39;
critical/feminist perspectives, 17; deﬁnition of, 86n1;
Europe, 40; research agenda, 40–1
Iran, 38, 283, 287, 288, 319
Iraq, 283, 317–18, 319
Ishii, S., 60–1, 63, 64
Islam, 5, 283–96, 326; Amanat, 293–4; community, 291–2;
deﬁnition of terms, 285–7; India, 298, 299, 300, 310,
314n7; Muslim journalists, 284–5; responsibility,
290–1; taqwa, 293; tawhid, 290, 291, 292
Isonghee, 53
Israel, 38, 317, 319–27
Ivey, A., 245
Ivey, M. B., 245
Iyer, P ., 268
Jackson, J., 197
Jameson, Fredric, 81, 85
Jandt, F. E., 137–8, 149
Janism, 298, 307–8, 309
Japan, 16, 38, 39, 66, 332; American movie imports, 171;
atomic bombing, 65, 168; collectivism, 96;
“communication archetypes”, 64; communication
competence, 228; U.S.–Japanese communication,
263–79
Jeﬀries, L. W., 30
jen, 99, 103, 104
Jenkins, J., 257
Jensen, J. V ., 34
Jerusalem, 6, 83
Jews, 29, 30, 321, 324, 326
Jhingran, S., 307, 308
jihad, 291
INDEX  341


--- PAGE 363 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 342
Page 342
Johnson, F. L., 17
Johnson, J. M., 146
Johnston, W. B., 216
journal articles, 13–14, 19, 20–6, 37–9, 50; see also
research
journalism, 283–5, 286, 287, 288, 290, 292–3
The Joy Luck Club, 5, 123–41
Kamwangamalu, Nkonko M., 5, 113–22
Karenga, M., 53
Kariamu, 53
karma, 303, 304, 305, 306
Katriel, T., 76, 80
Kauﬀman, B. J., 18
Kawaida, 53, 54n5
Kealey, D. J., 244
Kelly, George, 249
Kelly, William, 5, 263–79
Kenyatta, Jomo, 115
Kerr, -, 268
Khoza, R., 119
Kim, Min-Sun, 75–6
Kim, Y. Y., 30–1, 76
Kincaid, D. L., 40, 59–60, 63
King, A. Y. C., 99, 106, 107, 110n13
King, Martin Luther, 52, 53
Kluckhohn, C., 224
knowledge, 34, 54n7, 67, 145; Asiacentric communication
scholarship, 62; communication competence, 227–8;
comparative, 28, 29, 31–2, 35; dialectical perspective,
81; English language dominance, 176; non-traditional
sources, 150; paradoxical tentativeness, 151; tentative
certainty, 159
Koh, T., 59
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 29–30
Kojima, Kazuo, 169
Kondo, D., 267, 277
Korea, 39, 228, 229
Krippendorf, K., 34
Krizek, R. L., 78
Kuhn, A., 182–3, 185
labeling, 31–2, 33–4
Laclau, Ernesto, 125
Lacy, C., 306
Laden, Sonja, 121
language, 28, 117–18, 126, 128; Asiacentricity, 62–3;
civilizational conﬂicts, 330; Confucianism, 95–109;
Ecology of Language Paradigm, 173–6, 177; English,
167–77, 270–1, 275, 311; India, 298–9, 310–11;
linguistic competence, 219, 225; multicultural
communication studies, 30, 31, 33, 34; right to, 174,
176; Taoism, 110n9; ubuntu, 113; see also words
Larson, G. J., 300, 301, 308–9
Lashley, L., 199–200
Lasswell, Harold D., 287
Latinos, 30, 31–2
Lee, O.-Y., 64, 69
Lee, W. S., 78
Lee Yuan Y ew, 59
Leeds-Hurwitz, W., 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19
Leeper, Mark R., 133
Legge, J., 102, 105
Lenin, Vladimir I., 287
Lessem, R., 118
li, 103
liberal pluralism, 79–80
Limary, Britta H., 70n3
Lincoln, Y., 144, 151
listening, 63
Liu, S.-H., 110n13
Liverpool, H., 198
localism, 175, 176
localization, 1, 330
Longfellow, H. W., 29
Lu, X., 34
Lummis, C. D., 270
Ma, K., 268, 276–7
Maatai, Waangari, 258
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 33
Mahabharata, 298, 301, 302, 304, 307
mail-order brides, 5, 179–91; commodiﬁcation, 182–5,
187; euphemization, 187; opposition and inoculation,
185–7; racist ideology, 187–8
Makhudu, N., 119–20
Mao, T.-S., 99, 105, 110n6
Marchetti, G., 179
Marcuse, Herbert, 48
Maree, J., 116
marginality, 239–41, 243–4, 249, 251, 253, 255–6, 258
marginalization, 31, 32
Marley, Bob, 201
marriage, 186–7, 252; see also mail-order brides
Martin, Judith N., 5, 73–91, 264
Martin, L., 204
martyrdom, 291
Marxism, 49, 50, 79, 125, 180, 264
Massey, G., 197
materialism, 59, 60, 67–8
Matlon Index, 13, 19
matriarchy, 195, 205
Matsui, J., 187
Mbigi, L., 116
McAlister, Linda Lopez, 123
McAlister, M., 124
342  INDEX


--- PAGE 364 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 343
Page 343
McCroskey, J. C., 228
McDonald, H., 194, 195
McEvoy, G., 256
McGuire, W., 195
McKay, Claude, 198–9
McWorter, G., 50
media, 18, 124, 196–7, 202–8; Anglo-Americanization,
171–2; Asian Americans, 138n6; commodiﬁcation, 182;
“development” issues, 193, 194; feminist cultural
studies, 180; India, 299; Islam, 283, 284–5, 290, 293
message skills, 225, 229
metaphorical models, 68–9
metaphors, 109
metatheory, 57, 58, 69
methodological issues, 1, 15, 41, 143–4; Asiacentric
research, 65–9; Four Seasons of Ethnography, 146–7,
151, 153; interviews, 246–7; Western science, 145
Mexico, 143, 145–6
Middle East, 38, 39, 40, 288, 317–27
migration, 216, 227
Miike, Y oshitaka, 1–8, 57–72
Miller, J. B., 243
Miller, S. M., 30
modernity, 309, 311, 330, 331, 333
modesty, 58, 99, 102
moksa, 301, 302, 306, 311, 312, 313
Moon, Dreama G., 4, 11–26
moral development, 97–9, 103, 104, 107
morality, 29–30, 97–9, 105, 109; see also ethical issues
Morgan, G., 73, 74, 77, 78
Morgan, J., 28–9
Morris, R., 78
mosques, 291
movies, 124–5, 171, 299
Mowlana, Hamid, 5, 283–96
Moynihan, D. P ., 28
Muhammad, Elija, 53
multicultural communication studies, 27–36
multicultural identity, 239–61; alternative image of,
254–5; case studies, 247–9; commitment to others, 254;
context, 252–3; deep roots, 253–4; interview
methodology, 246–7; racism, 250–1; review of
literature, 241–6
“multicultural man” model, 5, 239, 240–1, 254,
257
multicultural person approach, 217, 220, 222
multiculturalism, 174, 175–6, 216–17, 227, 257, 333
multilingualism, 173, 174, 175–6
multiparadigmatic collaboration, 80–1
music, 69, 198, 199–202, 203, 204, 208
muti, 120, 121
mutual learning, 329–33
Myers, L., 245
Nakayama, Thomas K., 5, 17–18, 73–91, 264
Namibia, 50
Nandy, A., 309, 314n1
Napoli, N. R., 31
nation-state, 216, 227, 287, 291, 292
Native Americans, 30, 144, 145, 146, 150–1, 216
natural cycles, 149–50, 151, 152
naturalist paradigm, 144, 147, 151, 153
neocolonialism, 167–70
neutralingual communication, 175
Ngugi wa Thiong’o, 169, 170
Nishida, T., 15, 74
nonjudgmental attitudes, 222, 225, 229
nonverbal communication, 14, 17, 225
nonviolence, 298, 307–8; see also ahimsa
norms, 18, 117, 221, 272, 275
nuclearism, 53, 313
Obama, Barack, 239, 257
objectivity, 66, 68, 74, 151–2, 161
Oliver, R. T., 96, 97, 100, 298, 312
Ono, K. A., 135
ontology, 144, 146–7, 148, 152
open-mindedness, 222, 229
opportunism, 148
Orbe, M. P ., 77
“Oriental Butterﬂy”, 179, 187, 188
Orientalism, 124, 130, 137, 187–8, 277
Orlean, S., 198
Ortner, S. B., 16
Osagie, E., 49
Other, 17–18, 137–8, 149, 272, 314n1; Chinese culture,
124, 128–30, 131–3, 135, 136, 137; idealized, 144;
Pilipina women, 188
“overseasmanship”, 220
Packer, A. H., 216
PACs see People of the African Continent
PADs see People of African Descent
Pakistan, 298, 299
Palestine, 5–6, 317, 319–27
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 325
Panchatantra, 301
Panikkar, Raymond, 297
paradoxical tentativeness, 151–2, 153, 157
Parker, B., 256
Parris, E., 198–9
Parsons, T., 224
patriarchy, 5, 136, 179; European cultures, 195; mail-
order brides, 181–2, 186, 189; Two Cradle theory, 205
peace, 65
Peck, J., 78
Pennycook, A., 171
INDEX  343


--- PAGE 365 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 344
Page 344
People of the African Continent (PACs), 194, 197, 198,
209
People of African Descent (PADs), 194, 197, 198–9, 204,
206–9
people of color, 30–1, 33, 240, 250, 253; see also ethnicity;
race
Persian Gulf War (1990–91), 283, 285, 317–19, 323
Philipsen, Gerry, 76, 132
Phillips, G. M., 227–8
Phillipson, Robert, 174
piety, 293
Pike, John, 38
Pilipina women, 5, 179, 180, 181–9
PLO see Palestine Liberation Organization
pluralism: liberal, 79–80; linguistic and cultural, 167, 175,
176; methodological, 1
political economy, 49
politics, 50, 269, 330; Confucianism, 100, 102; ethics
relationship, 287–8; India, 299; Islam, 292, 293, 294
popular culture, 18, 79, 137, 138, 179
positionality, 17, 18, 146, 153
positivism, 14, 15, 48, 74; ethnography, 145, 147, 151,
152–3; intercultural communication competence, 229
postcolonialism, 78, 264, 265, 276
postmodernism, 79, 244–5, 277
power, 3–4, 16, 47–8, 50, 265–6, 267; critical perspectives,
79, 83, 269; cultural, 52; English language, 168, 171,
270; gaze, 126; globalization, 172; mail-order brides,
184–5, 187; networks, 256; patriarchal, 179;
postmodernist approaches, 277; privilege and
disadvantage, 84; research paradigms, 77; textual, 125;
U.S.–Japanese communication, 263, 274–5, 276; see also
domination; hegemony
Pratt, D. D., 242
preparedness, 150–1
Prinsloo, E., 120
prisoners, 323, 324
privilege, 84, 85
propaganda, 286–7
propagation, 287, 289, 291
propriety, 103–5
proverbs, 115–16, 117
Quran, 288, 289, 290–1, 292, 293
race, 13, 29, 245, 265; communication competence, 14, 16,
230; critical perspectives, 17, 78; feminist cultural
studies, 180; Islam, 292; The Joy Luck Club, 124, 135–6;
mail-order brides, 182; see also African Americans;
Asian Americans; ethnicity
racism, 51, 52, 249, 250–1; colonial Africa, 50; Japan,
272–4; The Joy Luck Club, 134, 135; mail-order brides,
187–8; Middle East, 319
Radway, J. A., 137, 179
Ramayana, 298, 301, 302
Rastafarianism, 200, 201, 203
rationality, 149, 267
reference groups, 206, 207, 208, 257
reggae music, 200–2, 203, 204
Regis, Humphrey A., 5, 193–211
reiﬁcation, 184–5
Reischauer, E. O., 271
relativism, 67, 146, 265
religion, 34, 230, 330; African origins, 197–8; Asia, 63–4,
67, 69; India, 298, 300–1, 308–9, 310; see also
Buddhism; Christianity; Hinduism; Islam
research, 1–4, 15–16; Afrocentric, 51–2; Asiacentric,
58–61, 65–9; dialectical perspective, 81–5; as dialogue,
32–3, 34, 35; intercultural communication competence,
227–9, 230; interparadigmatic borrowing, 80;
intracultural, 40–1; journal articles, 13–14, 19, 20–6,
37–9, 50; labeling, 31–2; liberal pluralism, 79–80;
multiparadigmatic collaboration, 80–1; paradigms, 73,
74–81; positionality, 17, 18; qualitative, 143, 146, 151;
researcher independence, 148; see also ethnography;
methodological issues
responsibility, 290–1
Rg Veda, 301, 302–3
Richards, D., 48
Riesman, David, 28
right to language, 174, 176
rites of passage, 53
rituals, 30, 53
Robertson, Roland, 171
Robinson, W. P ., 107
Rodney, Walter, 49
Rogers, Everett M., 3
role hierarchy, 109
romance, 179–80, 181–2
Rosaldo, M., 242–3
Rosenberg, Charles, 29
Ross, Edward Alsworth, 29
Ruben, B. D., 228
Rubin, R. B., 217–18
Ruby, J., 33
Ruch, E. A., 47
Rushdie, Salman, 322
Saddam Hussein, 318, 319, 326
Said, Edward W., 2, 5, 265, 317–27
samsara, 303, 312
Sapir, Edward, 217
Sayer, J. E., 16
Schiller, H., 50, 173
Schön, D. A., 109
Schwichtenberg, C., 180
344  INDEX


--- PAGE 366 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 345
Page 345
science, 145
secularism, 286, 288, 294, 299, 308–9, 310
Seidman, Irving, 246
selective presentation, 130–3
self: African Americans, 243; Asiacentric spiritual
enlightenment, 60; cross-cultural diﬀerences in
concept, 242–3; deﬁnition of, 257; dichotomy with
Asian Other, 128–9, 130, 131–3, 134, 136, 137;
ethnographic ideals, 148, 149; gender diﬀerences,
243–4; Indian ethics, 297–8, 301; networks of power,
256; positive self concept, 255; see also identity
self-awareness, 223–4, 225, 229, 266
self-concept, 221–2, 229, 255
self-determination, 324, 326
self-disclosure, 225–6, 229, 263
self-esteem, 221–2, 250, 251, 253, 256
Semaj, Leachim, 54n3
Serita, T., 187
sexism, 135, 136, 180
sexuality, 182
Shamir, Yitzhak, 324, 325
al shari’a, 286, 288
Shintoism, 67
Shohat, E., 124
Shome, R., 276
Shuter, Robert, 4, 14, 15, 17, 19, 37–43
Sienaert, Edgard, 120
SIETAR see Society for Intercultural Education, Training
and Research
signiﬁers, 182
Sikhism, 298, 309
silence, 63, 65
Simek-Morgan, L., 245
similarity, 83, 265, 272
sincerity, 100, 101, 102, 104, 105, 107
Sitaram, K. S., 64, 229
Skutnabb-Kangas, T ove, 174
Smith, A. G., 86n2
social behaviorism, 220
social class, 14, 17, 125, 265; civilizational conﬂicts, 330;
feminist cultural studies, 180; The Joy Luck Club, 135–6
social constructionism, 242, 244, 246, 247, 258
social identity theories, 245, 256
social penetration model, 225–6
social psychology, 244–5
social relationships, 96, 103–4, 105–6, 219
social relaxation, 222, 229
social science, 48, 73–4, 75, 146
social skills, 226, 229
social structure, 101, 103, 106, 107, 180, 264–5
society, 74, 106–7
Society for Intercultural Education, Training and
Research (SIETAR), 270
sociolinguistics, 126, 168, 170
“soku”, 82
solidarity, 114, 115, 116, 285
Sollors, Werner, 28
Sontag, S., 185
Soothill, W. E., 98–9, 101, 102, 103, 105
South Africa, 113, 115, 117–19, 120–1, 251, 323, 324
South America, 40
South Asia, 38, 39, 40, 331; see also India
Southeast Asia, 38, 39, 169, 331
Sparrow, Lise M., 5, 239–61
speaking, 103–5
Speech Communication Association, 19n1
Spencer, Herbert, 74
spirituality, 152, 160; African, 331; Asian, 58, 59–60, 63,
64, 68; Native American, 144, 145, 146, 150–1
Spitzberg, B. H., 218, 219, 228
Srole, L., 30
“standard reference frame”, 31
Starosta, William J., 1, 5, 32, 67, 68, 215–37
Steindl-Rast, D., 144–5
Stephan, C. W., 84
Stephan, W. G., 84
stereotypes, 124, 136, 169, 188, 250, 273
Sterling, John, 29
Stone, Oliver, 84
Strauss, A., 162n5
Strodtbeck, F., 224
structuralism, 77, 78–9
subjective culture approach, 220
subjectivity, 66, 74, 147, 151–2, 156, 245, 258
Sudan, 318
Sun, C. F., 138n6
Swift, Jonathan, 69
Swimme, B., 145, 147
symbols, 50, 52, 117; Asian religious-philosophical
traditions, 69; cultural identity approach, 221;
European, 48
tabligh, 287, 289, 290, 291, 294
Tafoya, D. W., 32
Tagore, Rabindranath, 304
Takahashi, J., 168
Tan, Alexis S., 194, 195
Tan, Amy, 123, 124, 126
Tanno, Dolores Valencia, 4, 27–36, 137–8, 149
Taoism (Daoism), 67, 110n9, 332
taqwa, 285, 293
tawhid, 285, 290, 291, 292
Taylor, Harold, 253
TCE see temporary communication estrangement
technology development, 215, 227
T ehranian, Majid, 176
INDEX  345


--- PAGE 367 ---
09:08:12:09:07
Page 346
Page 346
temporary communication estrangement (TCE),
52–3
tentative certainty, 147, 159
T erselic, V ezna, 258
texts, 31, 33, 180; “ethnic”, 27, 28, 32; media, 124–6, 130,
137; patriarchal, 179
T ezuka, C., 65
theory validation studies, 37–8, 39, 67
third-variable perspective, 205, 207, 208
Thompson, J., 187
Tillich, P ., 241
Ting-T oomey, Stella, 75, 96
T oure, Sekou, 115
T owne, N., 221
T oyama, J., 64
Traditional African Worldview, 14
transnational corporations, 49, 171, 173, 215–16
transnationalization, 172, 173
Triandis, H. C., 106
Trinidad, 199–200, 202
trust, 100–1
truth, 11, 51, 67, 307, 308
Tsuda, Yukio, 5, 167–77, 270
Tsujimura, A., 60, 66
Tubman, Harriet, 53
Turner, C. V ., 224
Two Cradle theory of civilization, 47, 205–6, 208
typology approach, 220
ubuntu, 5, 113–22; business sector, 118–19; as
communalism, 115–16; culture, 117–18; as
interdependence, 116–17; as pan-African concept, 114
ummah, 284, 285, 287, 289, 290, 291–2
uncertainty reduction theory, 14, 18, 75
uniqueness, 255, 256–7
United States, 15, 16, 19, 329, 332–3; aﬃrmative action,
83; Americanization, 170–2; atomic bombing of Japan,
65, 168; Caribbean music in, 199–200, 201, 202;
concept of the self, 242; cultural domination, 173, 175,
196, 197; cultural tensions, 40; Eurocentric research
methods, 66; hegemonic inﬂuence, 330; immigrants to,
30, 216; individualism, 208; The Joy Luck Club, 127,
128, 130, 131–7; Middle East issues, 317–26;
multicultural identity, 247–9, 250; U.S.–Japanese
communication, 263–79
universality, 34, 123–4, 265, 284
Upanishads, 301, 303
uses and gratiﬁcations model, 205, 207, 208
Vachon, L. A., 79
validity, 66–7
values, 3, 18, 117, 285, 333; African, 52; Anglo-
Americanization, 172; Asian, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 124,
330; Chinese, 126, 128, 129, 130, 133; Confucian, 96,
106, 107, 108, 110n13; frames of reference, 31, 32;
Islam, 288, 289, 292; minority groups, 138; ubuntu,
114, 115–17, 120
Van der Post, L., 274
van Dijk, T. A., 17, 18, 126
Villapando, V ., 187
virtue, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103, 108, 307, 313
visibility, 67–8
visual communication, 33
Volosinov, V . N., 138n2
von Glasersfeld, E., 253
WAC see World African Community
Wang, Wayne, 126
Warner, W. Lloyd, 28, 30
Weiming, Tu, 6, 329–33
Wesson, D., 208
Wey, S. O., 49
whiteness, 78, 80, 81, 276
Whorf, Benjamin, 217
Wiemann, J. M., 218, 219, 226
Williams, Raymond, 138n3
Wilson, J., 182
Winterowd, W. R., 27–8
witchcraft, 120–1
Woelfel, J., 31
Wolfe, A. S., 130
women, 123, 124, 136–7, 216, 243–4; India, 302–3, 311;
Japanese, 268; leaders, 258; multicultural identity, 240,
247–55; see also feminism; gender
Wong, Al, 124
Wong (Lau), Kathleen, 124
Wood, J. T., 17
words, 62, 95, 97–103, 104, 105–6, 108; action
relationship, 101–3, 108; creation-centered traditions,
160; lacking in substance, 99–101, 108; moral
development, 97–9, 103
World African Community (WAC), 194, 197, 199, 206,
208, 209
xenophobia, 50, 195
Y amada, M., 180
Y anga, Tshimpaka, 113, 114
Yin, Jing, 1–8, 123–41
Y oshikawa, M. J., 68, 82, 241
Y oung, R. E., 264, 265, 266, 267
Y ousef, F. S., 116, 118
Yum, J. O., 60, 61, 63, 96–7, 229
Zaid, B., 203
Zaire, 53
346  INDEX

