=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Myths and Legends of the Congo.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 181
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:25:57.377882
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Printed from African Writers Series, http://collections.chadwyck.com
Saturday, July 09, 2011
 
Bibliographic details for the Electronic File
Knappert, Jan  Myths and Legends of the Congo
Cambridge 2006
ProQuest LLC
African Writers Series
Copyright © 2006 ProQuest LLC. All Rights Reserved. Do not export or print from this
database without checking the Copyright Conditions to see what is permitted.
Bibliographic details for the Source Text
Knappert, Jan (1927-)
Myths and Legends of the Congo
London
Heinemann Educational Books 1971
xiv, 218 p.
© Jan Knappert 1971
Prose Fiction
Preliminaries omitted.
AWS series numbe r: 83
First published: London
First published by: Heinemann
First published: 1971
Language of original publication: English
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
1 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 3 ---
First published in the African Writers Series in: 1971
ISBN: 0435900757
[Page ]
Front matter
[Page xi ]
Introduction
[Page xii ]
Very little is known about the mythology of the many peoples of the Congo. As far as I know
there is no comprehensive survey in English. The most authoritative works in this field have
been written by missionaries who spent twenty to forty years among the people in the
villages and learned to speak several dialects. The great majority of their works are written in
flowery Flemish. The present book presents a choice from this treasure-trove of stories, to
which I have added a number of tales from my own research collection. The reader will soon
find that Congolese legends are different from many other tales. There is a mystery at the
bottom of each story that leaves us puzzled: the inexpressible secret of the human spirit. We
are frequently struck by the profound wisdom that is hidden in a simple story.
The Congo, that immense land, was carved out of Central Africa by King Leopold of the
Belgians a century ago. Now a republic, it is inhabited by fifteen million people, speaking
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
2 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
more than three hundred languages. Each language is spoken by a separate people with an
identity of its own.
Every people has its own manners and customs, its own way of dressing and hut-building, its
own proverbs and riddles, its own jokes and songs, its own folk-tales. In every language there
is a way to say 'Once upon a time there was a king', and the stories are all different. Every
people has dozens of stories, which are told at night when the fires flame up and the owls
hoot in the trees: stories of spirits and witches, of serpents and monsters.
Of the thousands of stories that are told in the Congo, only a
[Page xiii ]
few have been selected. Some come from the open savannah, some from the forest and some
from the river banks.
Of course, no printed version of any tale can rival the Congolese story-tellers themselves.
Whoever has heard an African narrator tell a story to his family and friends in his own
inimitable way, will agree that much that he communicates to his audience cannot be caught
and confined in a book. All the characters of the drama are introduced with their own voices:
the wild pig's snorting, the snake's hissing, the birds' fluting, the lion's lazy yawn. Alas, the
Roman alphabet has no letters with which these languages could be printed.
There are many ways of telling stories in the Congo. Usually it is after nightfall that the call
can be heard: 'Tell a story, story- teller!' There must be a fire to sit round, and the story-teller
is mostly an elderly person who 'has forgotten more than you have seen in your life'. There
are special expressions in use for begging a story-teller to begin his story and, once he has
started, to make him go on. In the middle of the story the narrator will stop and refuse to go
on unless more tobacco is provided, for without a smoking pipe the ideas will not come.
The nights in Africa are an exciting background to thrilling tales. There is always a concert of
crickets and cicadas, and the frogs are croaking in their pools. The bats are fluttering
overhead and the owls are hooting plaintively. In the distance a hyena's howl may be heard, or
a jackal's laughter. In addition, there are a thousand noises in the savannah and in the forest,
that cannot be identified, hence the proverb: 'The wilderness never sleeps', meaning that one
can expect to be attacked at any time. Proverbs are an integral part of all traditional stories,
and I have done my best to render them as closely to the original as possible without leaving
the Western reader completely puzzled, although in some cases the proverb is intended to be
mysterious, as when the diviner Bongenge is anxious to conceal the real intention of his
revelations. 'Many proverbs tire even the elders.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
3 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 5 ---
[Page xiv ]
Some of my friends complain that the stories I tell them from Africa are weird and often
shocking, much different from good old Grimm's tales. To this I can only answer: 'Don't
expect a fresh guinea fowl to taste like your own old chicken.'
The reader is invited to join us on a criss-cross journey through the Congo, listening to one or
two tales here, a long linked narrative there, a large collection elsewhere. There are tales for
every taste: history and oral traditions as well as tales of mystery, magic and miracles. Each
chapter is devoted to the tales of a different people.
A straight translation of any of these tales, either from the original language, or from the
Flemish (or occasionally French) as given in a journal or learned work, has not been possible.
The missionaries wrote for one another, for their learned friends, and fellow anthropologists
and linguists. A great deal of local knowledge, and familiarity with the Congolese languages,
was simply taken for granted. Whoever has had the privilege of attending conferences with
these scholarly fathers will agree that only those who had, like them, devoted more than
twenty years of study to the subject could follow their discussions.
It has therefore been thought that readers who are interested in folk-lore and mythology but
have no time for detailed study would appreciate the material better if it were rearranged to
some extent. What was implied in the narrative has been made explicit, what was taken for
granted has been explained. Obscure passages have been interpreted.
Several years of preparatory study in the anthropology of the Congo were necessary before
the rewriting in English of the first story could even be started. This study, however, has been
a pleasure. I hope the English-reading public will enjoy these myths and legends as much as I
did when I first met them.
JAN KNAPPERT
[Page [1] ]
Main text
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
4 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 6 ---
I The Nilotic Alur of Lake Albert
[Page [2] ]
The Alur live in the extreme north-east of the country, on the shore of Lake Albert; the
opposite Ugandan shore is the home of the Acholi, who are related to them. Their culture is
dominated by kings, and by the priests who possess the secret of rain-making. That is to say,
they understand an art which the backward Europeans have not yet learned: rain comes at
their command after they have performed the correct ritual and pronounced the secret
formula. He who possesses the pouch that contains the mysterious rain-stones has a right to
the throne.
1. THE UNDERWORLD
In the days of this story, Anguza was still a young man. One day he went out on the lake in
his boat to catch fish. He rowed and rowed until he was far away from the shore, for he had
been told that the fish were bigger there and more numerous. Suddenly he saw that the
water-drops on his oar had changed into pearls. Each time he swung the blade out of the
water there was a spray of shining pearls. He baled some of the lake water into his boat and
pure pearls rattled over the bottom. He looked with attention at the water of the lake and saw
big white fish swimming below the surface. He saw that the fish were as big as goats; in fact,
they looked in every way like goats.
He jumped out of the boat and into the lake. Lower, lower, lower he sank. Then he stood on
the bottom and saw lush green grass everywhere. And there were the goats---hundreds of
them.
[Page [3] ]
They belonged to the Lake God, Jokinam, who came forward to welcome the young
earthling. He made him his shepherd, and so Anguza tended the goats of the lake-bottom and
lived a good life, with plenty of meat to eat and milk to drink.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
5 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 7 ---
One day he said to the Lake God: 'I want to go home to my people.'
The Lake God said: 'As you wish, but on one condition: if you tell the people on earth what
you have seen here you will die at once.'
Then the Lake God took him back to the surface, up, up, until he saw his boat. He was put
down in it and rowed back to the shore. He hid the pearls in a cave and told nobody what he
had seen. From time to time he travelled to the city to sell some of his pearls to the jewellers.
He became a rich man with many cows. He married and had many children.
But one day, at a beer party, he forgot himself, and began to boast: 'I have lived on the bottom
of the lake. I have been the herdsman of the Lake God's goats ...' At once he fell down, as
dead as a stone. The elders of the village consulted the diviner regarding Anguza's sudden
death.
The Lake God spoke through the mouth of the diviner: 'Whoever divulges the secrets of the
lake, will die. Anguza did not keep his promise, and he died.'
2. THE KING OF THE COUNTRY BENEATH THE EARTH
A man went to his brother to borrow an axe. His brother said: 'Do not break it or lose it!'
The man promised he would not, and went to the forest to cut a tree. He hit the tree three
times with his brother's axe; then the blade broke and fell into a hole in the ground. The
young man knelt down and peeped into the hole, but saw nothing.
[Page [4] ]
He put in his foot but felt no bottom. He put in his whole leg, and suddenly he sank down and
vanished into the bowels of the earth.
There he found himself on a high-road. He travelled along it until he arrived at a town. In the
town was the palace of the country's king. When the young man called at the gate of the king's
enclosure, he was met by the vizier. The vizier asked him his business, and he answered that
he had lost the blade of his brother's axe. The vizier said: 'Wait here.' He went and told the
king that a visitor from the country above had called. The king decided that he would see his
guest the next morning. The vizier came back and led the young man to the guest-house,
where he was given an excellent meal and a bed.
The next day he was taken before the king, who was sitting on his throne. He ordered a stool
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
6 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
for the guest, which was a great honour. The young man saw that the eyes of the King beneath
the Earth were like stars, sparkling fire. He was frightened but the vizier told him: 'Do not
fear. Tomorrow you will go home with your brother's axe.'
The next morning he was given a cow and four goats, and his brother's axe-blade, which had
been found by the people of the country beneath the earth. The vizier said to him:
'Remember that you must never tell anybody what you have seen here. If you do, you will die
at once.'
The young man was shown the road out of the earth-country; it led to a cave in a rock.
Suddenly he knew that he was near his village. He drove the cow and the goats home and
returned the axe to his brother. From that time they lived in peace.
3. THE ROCK SPIRIT
There was a beautiful rock standing in the middle of the land. A woman went there to sit
down in its shade and eat her pot of
[Page [5] ]
porridge with fish and meat. Although the woman knew that there was a spirit there, who
lived in the rock, she did not offer any of her food to the spirit, not even one little fish. Of
course, the spirit was annoyed by the woman's selfishness and decided to punish her.
The woman had her baby with her in a carry-cloth, and a basket of millet. She had put both
down on the stone before she started her meal. When she had finished, she took up her
basket but could not lift her child. She put the basket down again so that she could lift her
baby. But then she found that the basket was stuck to the rock and she could not get it off the
ground. She decided that she would rather have the basket of millet than her baby, so she put
her baby back on the stone, and was now able to take away her basket. With that she went
home, leaving the baby lying there on the rock.
Some time later people passed by that place and to their surprise heard a child's voice crying
from the rock. They went and looked but 
saw nothing . They went to the village and told the
people there what they had heard. The father of the child heard the story and became
suspicious that this might be his own child, which had been missing for some time. He
consulted a diviner who said: 'Go to the rock and take an offering of porridge, meat, and fish.
Put it on the rock and invoke the spirit who lives in the rock, Jokichana.'
So the man went to the rock, together with his mother, taking his offerings. When they came
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
7 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
near the rock, they heard the voice of the child singing: ' Wuye, wuye , the spirit has taken
me, the spirit has kept me, and I did not even eat a thing.'
The father put a pot of porridge on the rock, and a dish of fish, and one of meat. Then the
people began to dance while the drummers drummed away. The diviner invoked the spirit of
the rock. After a time the rock began to tremble. Suddenly it split open and the child
appeared from inside. The grandmother took him in her arms and comforted him. The people
were overjoyed,
[Page [6] ]
saying: 'Thank the great spirit of the rock, praise the great god of the rock!'
This story does not tell us what happened to the mother in the end. It is clear that she ran
away, for it was her husband's mother who comforted the baby. Obviously she was a witch,
for only witches neglect their children. All good women would rather have their babies than
their baskets. To leave a child exposed to the sun and the hyenas is worse than killing it.
4. THE BIRD SPIRIT
A man set a bird-snare and the same night a bird got trapped in it. The next morning the man
sent his eldest boy to see if a bird had been caught, and, if so, to bring it home. The boy went
out and found the bird. It was singing to him in human language: 'Little boy, little boy, kiri
kija kija , what have you come here for? What are you going to do?'
The boy replied with the same tune: 'I have come to see the snare, to see Daddy's snare. If a
bird is in it, I must bring it home. Daddy wants to eat it!'
Having sung a song with the bird, the boy could not bring himself to take it home with him;
he was afraid. He ran home and told his father: 'Daddy, Daddy, I saw a bird in your snare, and
the bird could sing in the Alur language!'
His father said: 'Impossible, birds do not sing words, they just twitter. You, second son, go
and take that bird out, and bring it here.'
His second boy went out, but when he arrived near the snare, the bird was singing to him:
'Little boy, Little boy ...', exactly the same words as it had used to his brother.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
8 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 10 ---
The boy ran home and said: 'It is true, Father, the bird sings like a human being. It sang a
song for me!'
[Page [7] ]
'Impossible!' said the father, and decided to go and see for himself. He found the bird singing
to him: 'Man, man! Kiri, kiri, kija! What have you come to do?'
'I have come to see my snare; I have come to catch you, to kill you, to eat you!'
The father found himself answering with the same tune---he could not help it. Nevertheless,
he took the bird from his snare and brought it home with him. He ordered his daughter to
make porridge, and his wife to cook the bird. Then he invited all the elders of the village to
come and eat the bird near the village sanctuary. He carried the dish with the well-prepared
bird on it to the ancestor-shrine. The elders began to eat the porridge.
Suddenly the cooked bird on the dish lifted its head, opened its eyes, rose up, grew feathers,
opened its wings, and flew up to the sky. They could not eat the bird; it was the spirit of one
of their fathers.
5. THE SNAKE GOD
A king was sitting on his throne surrounded by his councillors. Suddenly they saw a huge
mamba snake descending from the mountain---down, down, down, closer and closer. The tail
of the snake stayed on the mountain, the body uncoiled and extended down the slope, and the
head soon reached the village. It entered the king's enclosure, it circled round the king's
throne, round and round, until the king was entirely entwined. He was powerless and could
not move.
A young man said: 'We must catch mice and frogs and offer them to the snake.'
The king called out: 'A good counsel! Go and do so, all of you!'
The men went in all directions to catch mice and frogs. They
[Page [8] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
9 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
collected hundreds of them, which they brought to the snake. The snake ate them all, until at
last it was satisfied and withdrew to the mountain.
The king called the young man and said: 'Where did you learn that good counsel?'
The youth said: 'From my father's brother.'
The king said: 'Bring your uncle here; I will make him my vizier. He shall be in charge of all
the cattle in my kraal. And to you too, my son, I am very grateful, for thanks to you the snake
released me. Without you, who knows what might have happened? Now that we have given
our sacrifice to the snake, it is content.'
This story is told to warn children that they must always remember what their elders tell
them. So the people say today. The original meaning, however, may have been very different.
The king says: 'We have paid the snake for what we have received.' So it was the snake who
gave the people food. The wealth of the earth, on which people live, is symbolized by the
snake.
6. THE PRINCESS FROM HEA VEN
In the country of Pwalo there lived a young king whose name was Mblukwa. One evening, as
he was walking on earth, he was seen by a princess in heaven who was called Niachero,
'Daughter of the star'. She fell in love with the handsome young king and decided to travel to
earth and marry him. She called her servants and descended to the land of Pwalo. When she
arrived in the town of King Mblukwa, the radiant princess announced: 'I have come to marry
the king.'
The king was quickly informed that the star-princess had arrived from the skies in order to
become his wife. The councillors advised him that it would be a good thing to marry her,
indeed it would be inauspicious, or even dangerous, to refuse. No persuasion was
[Page [9] ]
needed, however. The king said he was delighted to hear the words of the celestial princess.
'I will marry her! Minister! Call the elders and tell them to put on their ceremonial garments.
Everything must be arranged for the celebration! Tell the women of the town to prepare their
best dishes for the great party!'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
10 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
The people said: 'We are glad to hear these words from Your Majesty! For us, your people,
hearing is obeying.'
The bride, Princess Niachero, requested all the people to wash and bathe before coming to
the feast, and to put on spotless clothes. No black vegetables were allowed, and only meat
was to be prepared as relish with the porridge. All the people agreed and promised to arrive
clean and scrubbed.
A huge meal was prepared, with lots of meat, and the drums sounded for the dance. The
celebrations lasted three days, after which all the people were tired and slept.
The princess stayed three months with the king as his wife. Then she said: 'Now you must tie
the animals together for my bride-price. I want to go and visit the people in my home
country.'
The king agreed and gave her twenty-five goats. He also ordered six strong men to
accompany her, as her bodyguard. He added two more goats, one for provisions, and one as a
parting gift of his own to his celestial bride.
The party set out and travelled for two days until they reached a high mountain. Suddenly, a
thick cloud was swept down by a strong wind. The cloud enveloped all the seven people and
the twenty-seven goats, and rose up with them into the sky. When they reached the
sky-country, they heard drumming and singing in the distance.
They came to a house, and the princess said to the men. 'You must stay here in this house.
Remember that you are not allowed to lift the lid of any of the pots. I will first go and join my
people in the dance.'
When she arrived at the place where they were dancing, she
[Page [10] ]
was welcomed with shouts of joy. 'Our daughter has come back!' The celestials embraced her,
gave her food, and invited her to join the dancing.
Suddenly, all the people looked up, for they sensed something ominous. Sure enough, there it
was: a cloud of locusts had risen up like dust in the desert. The celestials wondered if there
was anyone in their town; anyone in the house-with-the-pots? Someone must have lifted the
lid of the locust-jar!
They hurried to the house-with-the-pots, and found the six servants with locusts all over
them, like flies crawling on carrion. The servants were almost dead: the sky-people had
arrived just in time. They collected all the locusts together and put them back in their jar.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
11 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
They said to the servants: 'Do you see now why you were told not to lift the lid of any of
these pots? Will you now stop bringing misfortune on your own heads?'
The Daughter of the Star stayed with her parents for a month. She then bid farewell to them
and called her husband's servants. The cloud arrived and enveloped them again. It conveyed
them back to earth and put them gently on the field near the foot of the mountain.
The Princess from Heaven had come back to her beloved husband.
7. THE FROG BLOWS THE TRUMPET
In ancient times there was a king who had two sons, the Frog and the Lizard. One day the
king fell ill with a fatal disease, and he realized that he had not long to live. The king decided
to name his successor. He sent word to his sons that the one who was the first to arrive at his
court would become king after him. When they heard this message, the two princes at once
ground corn for the journey and set out on their way---the Frog from the
[Page [11] ]
water in which he lived, the Lizard from the rock on which he basked.
The Lizard was the first to start. He did not wait to start at the same time as the Frog, to see
who could run the fastest. He thought: 'I am better than that fat Frog. He is terribly ugly, and
what's worse, he travels on his anus.'
The Frog perceived what the Lizard thought, and saw that he had started ahead of him. He
took a yatkot , which is the branch of a certain tree known only to professional rain-makers.
He pounded it to powder and strewed it in the water. At once black clouds appeared on the
horizon and obscured the sun. A fierce wind began to blow, shaking the trees. Soon the first
drops of rain dug holes in the dust, then a cascade of water tumbled down. The Frog was
content. He travelled briskly in this nice wet weather: jump, jump, jump.
The Lizard had, up till then, been far ahead, racing along. Suddenly he felt cold: the sun
disappeared, clouds collected. The Lizard looked for a place to shelter, for he did not like
rain. He found a hole in a tree and hid in it. There he waited for the rain to stop.
At last, the Frog arrived at the king's court. He told his heralds to blow their trumpets. The
guardsmen at the king's gate ran to the king and announced: 'His Highness the Frog has
arrived. We have heard his trumpeters!' The king ordered all his men to be assembled in the
hall. When the Frog entered, the king made it known that the Frog would inherit the kingdom
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
12 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
and all that was in it.
When the sun began to shine again, the Lizard emerged from under the tree and finally
arrived at court. He came just in time to hear the Frog's trumpeters announce that he would
become king. The Frog said to the Lizard: 'You have a skin of beautiful colours, but I have
won.'
Whenever frogs begin to croak, people say: 'The frogs blow the trumpets of royal dignity. It
will soon begin to rain.'
[Page [12] ]
8. WHY BATS HANG FACE-DOWN
The Bat was a king in his country. He had many many sons and daughters. Cows, goats and
chickens he possessed in great numbers. He ate only meat, which is a luxury only wealthy
men in Africa can afford.
One day Lightning arrived. He too was a king, and he wanted to conclude a treaty of blood-
brotherhood with Bat.
King Bat rejoiced when King Lightning arrived. He treated him regally. He ordered his
servants to slaughter a cow. Even in times of famine cows are seldom slaughtered. The food
was well cooked and Lightning ate ravenously. There were many meat dishes, as befitted
royalty.
King Bat possessed a platter of a type used only by kings. As soon as Lightning saw it, he
coveted it and said: 'My friend, give me that platter. I want nothing else. I will be eternally
grateful to you.'
King Bat declined politely: 'Other things I will give you, anything you want you may ask for,
but this platter is an inheritance. It belongs to the kingship.'
King Lightning's blood began to boil, and he spoke menacing words: 'Do you not prefer to
live in peace? Give that platter to me!' King Bat refused again.
Lightning flashed with anger. He ran up into the clouds, raging. From there, he struck down
on all the possessions of King Bat: his houses and his kraals, his cattle, his goats and
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
13 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
chickens, and all his food baskets were destroyed.
Grief gripped King Bat when he saw fire destroy all his wealth. 'Henceforth I will look down
towards the earth. I will never see the sky again. My children will have to live under the
leaves of the trees and under the roofs of caves. From now on, we bats will turn our backs to
heaven, in deep contempt for its greed.'
[Page [13] ]
Since that day, bats can be seen hanging upside down, with their numerous children.
9. WHOSE IS THE CHILD?
The hawk and the robin laid an egg, each in her own nest. The eggs hatched; the hawk had a
black chick, the robin a white one. The robin went out to catch insects for her baby. When
she came back she found a black chick in her nest. During her absence, the hawk had changed
the chicks and taken the nice white chick for herself, giving the ugly black one to the robin.
The robin claimed her child but the hawk would not give it up. They quarrelled, and at last
they decided to bring their case before the king.
The king gave each of the two mothers a cup, and said: 'I am now going to kill the white
chick. The mother whose cup is full of tears is the true mother of the white chick.'
The king slowly raised his knife. The hawk cried out loud. The robin shed tears in silence.
The king inspected the two cups. He found the hawk's cup entirely dry, but the robin's cup
brimmed over with tears.
The king said: 'You hawk, your crying is only noise-making. It is not a sign of true sorrow.
The robin is the mother of the white chick. Tears are the sign of real love.'
The king had only pretended that he was killing the chick. Then he gave it to the robin, who
took it to her nest and was very happy. Since that day, robins can be seen in great numbers,
but only occasionally does one see a hawk, high in the sky.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
14 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
10. THE TWO BIRD-CATCHERS
Two boys went to the bush and set their snares. One caught a pigeon. The other one was less
fortunate. He caught nothing but
[Page [14] ]
a spider, which he let free. The next day the first boy was again lucky. He caught a fat
guinea-fowl, whereas the other one caught some lightning which had become entangled in the
string. The boy set the lightning free to go back to the sky, for human beings cannot eat
lightning.
The next day, the king called the two boys and told them to cut some grinding stones out of
the rock for him. This is a difficult job which only professional stone-knappers can do. The
grinding stone had to be hewn out of the rock in the proper shape. The boy who had always
been unlucky now called the lightning and asked if it would cut some grinding stones for him
out of the rock. The lightning came and flashed repeatedly until the whole rock was split into
grinding stones. All the people heard it thundering.
Next, the king desired a star from the sky. The boys did not know how to climb up there, but
the unlucky boy asked the spider. The spider had made a huge net that reached from the earth
up to the sky. It climbed up, plucked a star from the night- sky and brought it down for the
boy, who gave it to the king.
The king was delighted with his new star, and he gave the boy many cows and baskets full of
food. So the unlucky boy was now very happy, for he was a rich man. With all those cows he
could obtain a wife, and with the baskets full of millet he could give a party, as the women
could brew beer from it.
So now he had become a man of standing, whereas the lucky hunter had eaten his birds, so he
had nothing. It is a good thing to be generous.
11. THE GIRL WHO W ANTED DA WN'S DRESS
A girl lived in a certain town with her father's sister. She was so beautiful that many young
men came to ask for her hand in marriage, but she answered each of them that she wanted the
red
[Page [15] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
15 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
dress of Dawn as her bride-price. So they all went away disappointed, until one young man
decided to consult the girl's aunt. That of course was a very wise decision.
The aunt, however, was an even queerer character than the girl, because instead of good solid
food she ate only dung. All the other young men had made caustic remarks about the pieces
of dirt that were lying there in the mud in front of the old lady's hut. But this young man was
polite and greeted her according to the rules.
She greeted him and said: 'I must go to the field now to pick some fruits. I will come back
presently. Will you guard my food?'
At that she pointed at the heaps of dung lying in her courtyard. The young man said he would,
and sat down to wait for her return. He found the stench repulsive but he reflected that during
his hunting adventures he had survived more dangerous hazards, and after all he was there for
a purpose. Suddenly it started raining. As the courtyard sloped down towards the gate, the
dung would soon be washed away. He remembered having promised that he would look after
it, so he realized he had to take it to safety.
He looked around for something to put it on but saw nothing, and there was no time to
search: it was pouring with rain. So he had to carry all the pieces inside with his bare hands,
as he considered that the broom would damage them. He reflected it would be rude to wash
his hands after his work. After all, it was the lady's food.
When she came back she was most grateful to the young man for having saved her precious
dung from being washed away by the rain. She said: 'Good, now you may go and wash your
hands, and I will prepare you something you like.'
And so she did: it was a dish of millet with ants, which the people there consider a great
delicacy. Then she told the young man to state his business, and when he said he wanted her
advice on how to go about wooing her niece she explained:
'You are a considerate young man, therefore I will help you. Go and tell the girl that she must
sleep with you. But remember: she
[Page [16] ]
must sleep near your feet and you must sleep near her feet. I will give her unground millet.
As soon as the cock crows you must tell her that you want her to cook porridge of it. She will
not refuse.'
The young man was overjoyed at these words, and that night the girl consented to sleep with
him. They lay down in the manner indicated by the old lady. The next morning, when the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
16 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---
cock crew, the young man said to the girl: 'Now I want you to make my morning porridge, for
I have to go out on a journey.'
She asked: 'Where is the flour I can make porridge with?'
He said: 'I brought you some unground millet. In our country the women can make porridge
of unground millet.'
She said: 'But it must be ground!'
He replied: 'Clever women can do it!'
She actually tried to make porridge. She put the millet in water and cooked it, but of course it
never became porridge. The young man pretended impatience. The sun rose. The girl said:
'How do the women in your country do it? I can't.'
The man replied: 'And you wanted a husband who could bring you Dawn's red garment? Who
has ever heard of that? Of course the women in my country grind their millet properly. Who
has ever heard of porridge made of unground grains? I only told you that to show you how
conceited you are, because you insist on having the dress of Dawn.'
The girl replied: 'I have nothing to say; all my words are finished. I promise to go with you.
Your wise words have conquered me.'
The young man said: 'Humility wins.'
12. DO NOT ASK FOR SUFFERING
An Alur went to pay a visit to his friend, a Gungu; he found him smoking a pipe. Now it is
believed that pipe-smoking gives great wisdom---perhaps because in the winding wisps of
smoke spirits
[Page [17] ]
can be seen, who give fresh ideas to the smokers. The Alur asked: 'Why do you smoke
pipes?'
The Gungu said: 'My friend, you are asking me what suffering is! The thing which makes me
smoke this pipe is the multitude of my worries!'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
17 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
The Alur was greatly impressed. He said: 'My friend, I want you to give me some of your
suffering. And a few worries as well!'
The Gungu answered: 'My friend, if you really want some of my suffering, it is very easy to
get. Just send your children along tomorrow to collect it here.'
The next morning the Alur sent four of his children to the house of the Gungu, saying: 'Go to
my friend near the lake and fetch me some suffering.'
The Gungu asked them, when they arrived, what they had come for, and they replied: 'Our
father said you have some misery for him.'
The Gungu went inside, took a blackbird, put it in a box and said: 'Here, take this to your
father.'
The children went home with the box, but on the way they said: 'We want to see our father's
misery!'
They opened the box and at once the blackbird flew out and was gone. One of the boys
accused the others: 'You wanted to see your father's misery, now you have let it escape.' They
started a terrific fight, and in a few hours they were dead, all four of them.
The father waited and waited. At last he set out on the road, and soon he found his four
children, all lying dead along the roadside. His grief was great. The Gungu came along the
road to see his Alur friend. He found him in deep distress.
The Gungu asked: 'Why do you have sorrow?'
The Alur answered: 'The children I sent to you came along this road; they threw away my
misery. They must have started quarrelling, and they have killed each other; none remain.'
The Gungu man said: 'My friend, one does not ask for suffering.
[Page [18] ]
You asked for suffering, and look at you now: it has totally overwhelmed you.'
This is what the elders tell their children these days: 'Remember, fear those who smoke
pipes, for their brains are big, they have much cunning. The pipes they smoke bring sad
circumstances back to their memories.'
Even more can be learned from this beautiful story, my children: do not ask for something
you do not know about. Do not think it must be wonderful if you do not know it. And do not
open any box unless your father gives you permission.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
18 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 20 ---
13. THE HORNBILL AND THE LARK
Arum, the hornbill, and Ulando, the lark, were disputing with each other as to who was the
best singer in the kingdom. They decided to go to the Court together and let the king decide.
The hornbill said: 'You are an insignificant little bird; of course you will lose not only the
contest, but your wives as well. They will all come to me.'
They arrived before the king and stated their business. The king agreed to be adjudicator in
their song-contest. He told the hornbill to begin. The hornbill sang:
When I am all dressed up in pearls,
Do I not equal kings and earls?
The king said: Enough! Now I want to hear the lark.
The lark sang thus:
If only I could drink the royal water,
In which the king has washed his shining body!
If only I could lick the skins of leopards,
With which the king has girt his shining body!
The king was well pleased with this song of praise and concluded
[Page [19] ]
that the lark had easily won the contest. A goat was slaughtered for the lark, but for the
hornbill it was only a castrated dog. For the hornbill, the king ordered his Lendu slave-girls to
cook sorghum porridge; for the lark, the king's own daughters cooked porridge of good clean
millet. As a good-bye present, the hornbill received twenty dogs; the lark was given ten
goats, ten sheep and ten cows.
On their way back they had to cross the river, which had swollen dangerously.
The hornbill said: 'You, my friend lark, are small, and evidently incapable of guiding all your
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
19 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
thirty animals across. Leave them to me, I will take them across first, then come back for
you.'
So the hornbill took the cattle across, leaving the dogs with the lark, but he never came back.
He went straight to his house and told all the villagers that he had won the contest against the
lark, so that he was now a wealthy man. His wives welcomed him as a great hero. When the
wives of the lark heard this they decided to join them. They hastily packed their belongings
and moved to the compound of Mr Hornbill, because, they said: 'A man with many cattle and
sheep is rich and we want to live with a rich man, not with a poor man.'
The lark was still waiting on the bank of the river when a messenger of the king arrived there,
and helped him across. They came to the village of the hornbill, and the king's messenger
told the people that the lark, not the hornbill, had found favour with the king. The lark
handed the dogs over to the hornbill and drove his cattle, his sheep, and his goats to his own
kraal. Of course his wives went with him.
The hornbill was left behind, with no beasts in his kraal except dogs. His own wives then
deserted him and went over to the lark's compound because, they said: 'We do not want to
live with a pauper, we want to eat meat with our porridge.'
The women all went to live with the lark, who was now a wealthy man with influence
because of his many relatives.
[Page [20] ]
This story contains many lessons. The first is that a small person may have a good brain: it
may not be sensible to dispute with him. Secondly, a king, or a chief dislikes rivals or men
who think they are equals. It is with sweet words of praise that a man catches favours.
Thirdly, you can learn from this story that women are fickle and not loyal to their husbands.
They want a comfortable life, and so they go where the wealth is.
14. THE ELDEST SISTER OF THE GIRAFFES
In the old days, all the women wore 'tails', 
Upocho , made of bark-cloth, reeds, or unworked
cotton lint. A wino , a real tail of an elephant, buffalo, or giraffe, was a priceless ornament for
a girl. It showed not only that she had mighty hunters in the family , but it was also highly
prized as a charm which gave the wearer the power of the elephant, the energy of the buffalo,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
20 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
or the speed and elegance of the giraffe---the latter qualities being especially appreciated by
girls who wanted to excel at dancing. Decorated with coloured beads, the tail was a symbol of
fertility. Swishing to and fro over their buttocks, it was a maddening sight for all eager young
men.
The giraffe is the ideal metaphor for the girl: soft-skinned and long-necked, it strides over the
savannah as if on a dance floor. Giraffes can easily keep up with a car driving as fast as the
uneven savannah allows. Which man would not be proud of conquering such an elegant
animal and offering its tail to the 'fastest' girl?
Okiro had a sister, whose prospective husband had paid the whole bride-price for her. So,
Okiro told his sister: 'I want you to go and join your husband. From now on you belong to
him.'
The girl said she would go only if he gave her a present.
'Do you want a brass bracelet?'
'No!'
'Do you want a goat?'
'No!'
[Page [21] ]
'Do you want a loin-skirt, ornamented with strings of beads? Do you realize that such an
apaya is worth a cow?'
'I do not want one.'
'Then what do you want?'
'I want the tail of a giraffe. I do not wish to go to my husband without a wino , the brush of a
giraffe-tail.'
Okiro went to consult the diviner, who gave his advice: 'When you arrive in the village of the
giraffes, remain behind their house, let them sleep till midnight. Open the door and blow the
fire so that you may see the big sister of the giraffes. Cut off her tail, then run away.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
21 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
Okiro set out for the village of the giraffes and waited till dark behind the house. The female
giraffes (in this language giraffes are always feminine) went to bed and soon they were
snoring. He blew into the fire so that it sparkled and he could see the biggest girl-giraffe. He
quickly cut off her tail and ran for his life. It was still dark when he arrived in the hut of his
own sister. He gave her the tail-trophy and told her to go and sleep with her husband at once.
She did.
The next morning, the giraffe girls rose early and went out to sweep the yard, singing a song
of their own:
Who has to sweep the yard and make it all tidy?
The robin's tail must sweep the yard and make it tidy.
The turtle-dove's tail must sweep the yard and tidy it.
Suddenly the eldest sister noticed that her tail was missing. She began to cry: 'They have
stolen my tail! Where shall we find the man who cut it off?'
The other long-necked girls saw the stump and were very cross. 'Don't cry, we will go and
find out!'
They went out on the road and met some cowherds, and asked to hear their songs of triumph.
The cowherds shouted: 'Hit! We are the sons of Ogwaro, the killer of buffalo bulls.'
The giraffes knew that these were not the men they wanted
[Page [22] ]
They walked on for a long time until they saw some men cultivating. The men's cry was:
'Stand fast! We are the sons of Ulango, the strong Tree!'
The giraffes travelled on until they met some men who were playing undilo , which is a kind
of golf. Their cry of triumph, however, was: 'We are the men of Okiro!'
Okiro himself, who was in their midst, could not help shouting excitedly: 'Okiro the strong
man, who cut the tail off the biggest giraffe!'
When the giraffes heard that, they knew they had found the man they were looking for. They
all surrounded Okiro and shouted joyfully: 'Here is our man, here is the bridegroom!'
And to Okiro: 'You cut our sister's tail, now we want you to become her husband.' Okiro
agreed, not knowing that the giraffes hid their real intentions in the inside of their livers.
They said: 'Okiro, we want you to accompany us. We want someone to help us find some
firewood.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
22 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
Okiro said: 'I will send one of my men with you who knows the place.'
They said: 'We refuse, we wish to go with you and no one else.'
It was then that Okiro realized that he was in danger of his life. He possessed twenty dogs,
nineteen big ones and a small one. He told his mother: 'When I am out with the giraffes, if
you see a leaf falling into your flour, then kill a cow for the dogs, tell them to eat their fill,
then send them out to find me.'
Okiro set out with the giraffe-girls. They found a tree. Okiro said: 'Why don't you chop this
one down?'
They refused, saying they wanted only the best wood. The truth was, they wanted to get him
as far away from home as possible. Therefore they refused another tree, and another. Finally,
they saw a very tall tree called tido , which has a very slender and smooth stem.
The giraffes said to Okiro: 'Go and climb that tree, we want some of the top branches of it.'
[Page [23] ]
Okiro said: 'Give me my axe!'
They said: 'You climb up there first, then we will give you the axe.'
When he was high up, they began to cut the tree, singing:
Chop, dear little axe, chop!
Hit the tree that we may eat!
Chop, dear little adze, chop!
Fell it so that we may be satisfied!
As soon as the tree began to stagger, a lark flew out of its foliage, singing: ' 
Rititi! My dear
tree! Do not let my children die! Stand back where you were!'
The tree regained its composure and steadied itself. Okiro saw that nevertheless its end was
near, so he sent off a leaf. The leaf fell far away, and right in the flour his mother was
grinding. When she saw it, she slaughtered a cow and let the dogs eat it. Then she told them:
'Go and find out what is happening to the master!'
The dogs ran. As soon as Okiro saw his dogs approaching, he began to sing:
Bay ones, bay ones!
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
23 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
Save me from the buff ones!
By the buff ones he meant, of course, the giraffes. He set the dogs on the giraffes, who were
all killed in a few minutes. Okiro climbed down from the tree.
The dogs asked him: 'We saved you, what will you give us?'
Okiro said: 'What do you mean? You are all my own dogs.'
They replied: 'Without a reward we cannot save you!'
Okiro promised them a goat, then a cow, but they refused. He offered them all his
possessions, but they still refused. They said: 'We just want to devour you yourself.'
Okiro replied: 'So be it. Go on, eat me!'
So Okiro was devoured by his own dogs. The corpses of the giraffes were left lying on the
ground. The dogs returned home by
[Page [24] ]
themselves. When they were asked by Okiro's men what had happened to their master, they
answered simply: 'We saved him, then we ate him.'
At once the dogs were locked up in a pen by Okiro's relatives, who gave them a good hiding,
saying: 'We will give you no more food and plenty of beating until you throw up all that you
have eaten. We will kill you dogs if you don't return Okiro.'
So the dogs said: 'We will vomit our master.'
The dogs went behind the house and began to vomit out Okiro. One surrendered an arm, his
fellow another arm. Two others threw up his legs, one a whole head. The parts of the body
reassembled themselves. But they could not come to life or move, for his liver was still
absent, which one small dog had gobbled up. The others said to him: 'We want you to vomit
out the liver, just as we have returned the other parts.' So the small dog gave up the liver. It
returned to its place. The body was whole. Okiro stirred, then rose to his feet.
The lesson of this story? Never give in to women or dogs, for that will mean your end. They
must never be allowed to be self- willed.
15. ALA AND THE OLD HAG
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
24 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
A man's strength is of vital importance to him. He can lose it if someone bewitches him, like
the old hag in this story. He has to incorporate the meat, that is the vital forces, of six oxen,
before his strength is restored.
Two young men were on their way to a dancing party. They were singing and full of good
cheer. Suddenly there appeared an old woman who begged them: 'Please take me on your
backs!'
One of the men said: 'I won't, you smell and you have dirty wounds!' The other one, his name
was Ala, had pity on her, and took her on his back. As soon as the old witch had settled down
on his back, she began to pinch him and to push her dirty feet into
[Page [25] ]
his sides. His whole body ached and he wandered about aimlessly, for she was beginning to
get him in her power. After several hours, hunger gnawed his stomach and he lamented his
fate. Thirst, too, visited him; it settled in his throat and made it ache.
At last they came to a river. Ala said: 'Old woman, climb down, let us drink!' But she said:
'You can drink with me on your back.' So he had to keep her on his back all the time.
After many hours, he found a dead buffalo, lying in the grass. Ala said: 'Woman, come down,
let us skin this animal. Let me make a fire so we can cook the meat and eat it.' She said: 'Go
on, skin it with me on your back!' At last he asked: 'Don't you want to eat?' She replied: 'Yes,
and you will put some good strips of meat for me on your shoulders.'
Ala went on wandering about in the savannah with the woman on his back for three months.
Finally he fell down and lay on the ground. The old hag stepped off his back and looked at
him closely, for a long time. When she was at last satisfied that he was dead, she went away.
Ala got up and ran, ran for his life and freedom. She turned and saw him go, but it was too
late, she could not overtake him. She took off her legs and arms and rolled behind him, like a
boulder rolling down a river-bed, when the rains have come.
Ala arrived home. His sister saw him and called out: 'Mother, Ala has come back!' Their
mother said: 'Do not joke with a mourning mother.' It was Ala himself, only he was very
weak. They killed an ox which he ate, then another, then another, six in all, until finally his
strength had returned.
Suddenly the old hag appeared and claimed her mount. They treated her politely, and gave
her a stool, asking her to wait until her steed would be ready. In the meantime they quickly
dug a pit, and covered it with grass. Then they put a cauldron of water to heat over the fire.
When all was ready, they said: 'Wouldn't you like to have a wash?' The old woman went
across the patch where fresh grass had been put out---to dry, apparently, for thatching. A
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
25 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
[Page [26] ]
well-mannered person would not have walked across it. However, she did, and as the pit lay
beneath it, she fell down into it. Quickly they poured the hot water over her so that she died.
Then they filled in the earth on top of her.
Ala's body regained its strength gradually. Everyone agreed that the old woman had been a
dangerous witch who had sucked out his strength. Ala had been lucky to escape.
16. ROM
A man's vital power is in his genitals, and by embracing a woman he plants the seed of a
future generation. He who embraces his own mother loses his power by sending it back to
where it came from.
The young man Rom has to die as a man, to be reborn as a plant, to be uprooted and to be
preserved in a preserving jar, before he can be born again as a man. He is then a new person,
the son of the jar that gave birth to him, and the plant that was pushed into the mouth of the
jar, and which transformed itself into a new man.
A young man called Rom was at a dance, where the boys and the girls dance opposite one
another in two rows. The girl opposite Rom tapped him on the head with her hand, as a sign
that she wanted him. The next evening, Rom sat down near the door of his hut, with his
adungu guitar, to sing a song of invitation. It was a song full of longing, which, Rom hoped,
would inspire the girl with equal longing for him, so that she would come to his hut that night
and give herself to him. After all, she had started the affair already.
In the darkness, he saw a female figure approach, all dressed up as a girl would be when
going out to meet her lover. She went into his hut with him, and that night they slept together
in his bed. The next morning, when dawn entered the hut, Rom saw that the woman he had
slept with was his mother. She had heard his
[Page [27] ]
melancholy songs, and she knew the girl was not coming. Longing to make love with her own
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
26 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
son had overcome her, and she had dressed herself like a young girl going out to meet her
lover.
Rom was horrified. He could not reproach his own mother: does the chick rebuke the hen?
So he took his adungu and composed a little song:
I entered the lap I came out of,
My strength went back where it came from.
He took ten hunting spears from his hut and went out into the bush. He found a tall tree and
planted his ten spears in the ground, bunched together, with the blades pointing upwards.
Then he climbed the tree, and from the highest branch threw himself down on to the blades.
He died at once. There his body hung, on his own spears. He had atoned for his sin of incest
by killing his body.
The rains came. Sheets of rain poured down, the earth was washed away , the spears fell over,
the body was washed down into a hole and covered with mud. The green season came, when
ten thousand plants grow up. Out of the muddy hole grew an evergreen tree. An old woman
passed by and wanted to pick the leaves for her vegetable soup, but the tree cried: 'Do not
dismember me! Pull me out whole and take me with you, please!'
Surprised and frightened that a tree could talk, the old woman obeyed. She wanted to lay the
tree in the sunshine in her yard, so that she would have dried leaves for vegetables for many
days. But the tree cried: 'Please do not dry me out, I shall die of thirst. Rather put me in a jar
and shut it!'
The old woman thought this a good idea, as it is customary in that region to pickle vegetables
in a jar. So she crammed the tree into her largest jar, added water and pickle, and put a flat
stone on the top, to seal it. Inside the jar, the vegetable tree began to ferment, and was
transformed into the old Rom.
One morning, when the old woman was just entering her
[Page [28] ]
store-hut, she was struck by an unexpected sight: the flat stone lifted itself from the jar, and
there appeared the face of a handsome young man. The woman was speechless, but the young
man stepped out of the jar, smiled, and said: 'Good morning.' He looked strong and healthy,
but he was naked, so the woman went out and found a piece of cloth for him to cover his
loins with.
Soon the whole district had heard the news that in the old lady's store-hut a vegetable jar had
borne a very handsome young man, who had been a tree in a previous existence. They all
came to see him and brought him presents, hoping to propitiate him, for it is evident that only
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
27 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
a powerful spirit can be born as the son of a tree and a jar. When all the people were together
they decided unanimously to acclaim him as king of their country. His arrival in their midst
had been a miraculous one; it showed that he possessed the secret of victory over death,
which is the greatest power a man can have. It made him fit to be a king.
17. MOLA
The underworld, the land under the earth where the dead people go, has a mysterious
fascination for all the peoples on earth. There are various ways of entering it: by jumping into
a lake, or by straying into a cave. The dead enter it when they are interred, the souls of the
deceased live there a life similar to that on earth. A great chief on earth may look forward to a
life as chief in the land below. He will have cattle, servants and wives. If he so wishes, he
may appear as a lion, visible to terrestrials, and help his children's children with sudden
problems and emergencies. People are both terrified when they meet him and grateful to him,
just as a little child is awed and thrilled on hearing father's voice. The lion frightens us but he
is also a member of the family.
Jealousy among co-wives is one of the commonest themes for story-tellers in Africa, since
polygamy is dominant everywhere. The wife who feels neglected by the shared husband may
begin to nurse
[Page [29] ]
a grudge against the other women in the household. She may in her despair, turn to
witchcraft.
Witchcraft can be performed by means of magical objects, or by the power of words. 'Singing'
is sometimes used in African languages as a euphemistic term for 'bewitching'. The absent-
minded humming of old women may be in reality the casting of a spell on an unsuspecting
victim. And also the envious wife sings her husband into the earth, in other words, she sends
him to the land of the dead. But witchcraft has its limits; it is not easy to kill a good chief.
Chief Mola finds himself in the illusive land of the spirits, where nothing keeps its form. His
father rules there in the shape of a lion. The one thing which the dead desire most, in their
shivery abode of dripping forest and toadstools, is fire. Fire warms chilly spirits: as we know
from Greek mythology, Ulysses lit a fire in the underworld and saw the ghosts crouch around
it, hankering for warmth.
Many beautiful features in these stories and songs result from word-play. The word 
Mola
means 'copper bracelet' as well as 'Lord,' so that when the third wife sings: 'I am my Mola's
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
28 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
mola,' she is really saying: 'I am my Lord's bracelet.' The implication is, of course, erotic.
Similarly the word for 'game' also means 'meat' and 'animals', so when the guards accuse Mola
of stealing the king's (mushroom-) meat, they are using the word that also means 'animals'.
Mola's father, the lion, who rules the underworld, gives his son 'animals' to keep in the world
of mortals. It also means he gives him 'flesh', i.e. a human body , which we all need in this
world. He thus receives life from his father for the second time. In the third wife's final song,
all three motifs return: the husband's resurrection, the fire in the family hearth, and the
awakening lion.
Mola had two wives. The first wife was faithful and had borne him children. The second was
a fickle woman, greedy and jealous. Now Mola had taken a third wife, who admired him as a
great chief. She was so devoted to him that she praised him even while she worked.
Whatever she was doing, grinding, pounding, or harvesting, she would praise his name in
songs like this one:
[Page [30] ]
Mola my husband is great like my father.
Mola my master, a lion in the hills.
When he is away, I scan the hill slopes.
His strength crushes me like the eagle crushing a buck's shoulder- blade.
I am the field for his hoe, the soil waiting for the first rains.
I hang like a liana from the mighty branches of a forest-giant.
I find shelter in his presence like the velvet monkey in the thick foliage of the mahogany
tree.
I am my Mola's 
mola , I fit round his strong arm.
I am like the bats hanging from the ceiling of the caves in the rocks.
He is the rock that no spear can kill ...
The second wife was annoyed with these praises for a husband who did not, she felt, give her
enough presents. What was worse, the singing pleased her husband so much that he lavished
most of his attentions on the third wife. So the second wife decided to sing him a song of her
own.
Mola, my brother, be silent in the mountain ...
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
29 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
It contained many more lines that no one could understand. Mola began to sink into the
ground, like a tree in a flood. At last he disappeared altogether, and earth covered his head.
The first and third wives began to wail loudly.
Mola found himself in the land below. He travelled along a path until he came to a copse. He
decided to build a house there, but as soon as he started cutting a tree, all the trees began to
cry for help. So he walked on.
Then he came to a forest where he found hundreds of mushrooms. He collected a large
number until he was suddenly surrounded by the king's soldiers, who accused him of stealing
the royal herd. He said: 'I was only collecting mushrooms.' He opened his bag and found
animals. He emptied his bag and the animals turned into mushrooms again. He looked at the
soldiers but he saw only trees.
[Page [31] ]
He went on and met an old woman. She said: 'Guard my millet field while I am away. But do
not try to catch the birds, just chase them by shouting.' She vanished, and at once a flock of
orange birds descended and began to eat the millet. He tried to catch one, but as soon as he
touched it all the birds turned into flames that consumed the millet. He burnt his fingers and
went away. Behind a bush he met a great lion who told him: 'You are trespassing in my
kingdom, but if you bring me the fire, I will give you half of my cattle.' Mola went on and
found Lightning, who was sitting in an old tree. He concluded a pact of friendship with
Lightning, who gave him a flaming torch. Mola brought the torch to King Lion, who was so
pleased that he gave him many cows.
Suddenly, he heard the voice of his mother crying and complaining: 'Oh my son, who always
worked for me, he used to hoe my fields! Alas for his mother! Who will now harvest my
millet for me? I am old and weak!'
When Mola heard this he asked permission of the lion to return to his own country, because
his old mother urgently needed help with the crops. The lion agreed that this was a valid
reason and called his guards to guide Mola to the door. The guards showed him a cave and
Mola drove his cattle through the narrow opening. He found himself in the bushes at the foot
of the hill not far from his own village. He drove the cows to his own kraal.
There was great rejoicing in his compound; when the children saw him they raced out to
meet him. The hunting dogs yelped around him. The news soon spread: Mola has come back
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
30 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
from the underworld a rich man. His mother said: 'Chase away that evil woman who
bewitched you.' The villagers stoned the second wife. The third wife took her nanga , a
stringed instrument, and sang:
My husband has come back from the land of graves.
He lives again like fire in the morning,
The fire that is lit when dawn is grey,
When all the people shiver in the dew,
[Page [32] ]
The flames spring up among the smouldering logs,
The family feels warm and comforted,
The brilliant sparks will cause the pot to sing,
So that the water bubbles like a brook,
And soon the meal is ready for the men.
My husband brought home the cattle of his father
The lion king who rules the land of manes.
Now will the babies drink the lukewarm milk
And run along the paths with shining skins.
My husband is the tree whom lightning struck,
But soon the shoots and saplings reappeared,
And fresh green leaves adorned the supple twigs,
The power to live still lingers in the trunk,
Invincible, it reaches for the sky,
The rising stem with new and shining bark,
The heavy branches spreading like a roof,
An awning where the women sit and sing
While making baskets, sheltered from the sun.
My husband had a-risen from his sleep,
The lion wakes, stretching his lazy claws,
With their well-whetted nails like millet-knives.
He has been dozing on a hot afternoon,
When only sparrows twitter in the bush,
Now he is yawning so that the branches shake,
Now he is roaring and the far hills answer.
18. ZANGU AND THE LION
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
31 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
In the story of Zangu the lion appears again as the principal agent of death and resurrection.
The saviour, the character who rescues others from death, becomes their owner. They were
dead; now in their new lives they have nowhere to go, they stay with their rescuer and make
him their king. A man who has killed a lion is as desirable as a wealthy man to have as
brother-in-law. And a good hunter's wife is never without meat.
[Page [33] ]
Ajulu ('Crown Crane') was the name of a lovely girl. Her brother told her: 'Go and guard the
millet!' She said: 'What do I do if the lion appears?' He said: 'I will build you a platform to sit
on.' There she sat all day, shouting at the birds who came in flocks to eat the millet. At last
the lion appeared and attacked her. He was an enormous animal. He rose on his hind legs and
reached across the platform with his front claws. The girl shrieked and cried for help, but her
brother was nowhere to be seen.
In the bush there was a small hut in which Zangu lived with his old mother. They had no
cattle, so that he could not get a bride. When he heard Ajulu crying he came running. Though
he ran faster than the redbuck, the lion could eat faster still. When Zangu arrived, the lion had
gone, with Ajulu in his stomach.
Zangu took his spear and his matchet, and started out in search of the lion. He found him
asleep lying on a rock. He took his spear and slit the lion's throat. He opened the lion's
stomach carefully with his hunter's knife, and out stepped Ajulu, breathing the fresh evening
breeze. And out came also many other people, women and children, whom the lion had
devoured during his life.
They all praised Zangu as a hero and acclaimed him as their chief. They decided to settle
there and they built their village near the rock. Ajulu's brother agreed that Zangu should
marry her, for he had saved her from death.
19. NYARUPOKO
The more one learns about African languages and African ways of thinking, the more one
realizes how well each language fits the culture to which it belongs. What seems to be a mere
pun when one first learns the double meaning of a word, later acquires a new dimension,
when one learns the deeper implications of these meanings in the culture of the people.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
32 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
The knife, as in other cultures, is a symbol of marriage. It is
[Page [34] ]
composed of two parts: the male part is the iron blade which fits with a pin in the wooden
shaft. 1
The pot is also a symbol, more particularly a symbol of woman. When the pot is being used
to fetch water for the young man, it is doing wifely duty, for that is what a woman does for
her husband. Pots are kept on shelves under the roofs of the huts. Stores of meat and millet
are also kept there, as well as all the secrets of the family, such as heirlooms, treasures and
charms. Most pots are made of calabashes or gourds, and it is supposed by some that these
fruits retain their magical power to produce life. Like Rom, Nyarupoko lives in a pot in
vegetative condition, but with the possibility of one day regaining her original human form,
when she is loved.
The lark 
Ulando is the messenger of Alur mythology because it can sing so deceptively that
its tones resemble those of African languages which are all tonal.
Ten girls set out on a trip round several villages to see if they could find themselves suitable
husbands. They arrived in the first village and were greeted by the boys, who said: ' Morembe
(peace and prosperity) to all of you, but most of all to that beautiful girl who walks behind!'
The nine girls who walked in front were angry and decided to punish that one girl for her
beauty, and so changed her into a knife.
The girl who usually walked in front put the new knife in her girdle, and after that they
marched on in single file to the next village. There, the boys greeted them: ' 
Morembe to all
nine of you and also to that beautiful shining knife you have!' The girls marched on and in the
bush they changed the knife into an upoko . An upoko is a round calabash used for milk or
water.
[Page [35] ]
In the next village the girls found nine bridegrooms willing to marry them. The boys' mothers
took the girls home. There was a tenth woman who found only a calabash. She took it home
with her for her son to drink water from.
The next morning everyone went out to work in the fields. Only a little girl stayed in the hut.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
33 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
Suddenly she saw a maiden come out of the calabash, and jump down from the shelf on
which the pots were placed. She began to grind corn, singing a song:
I am Nyar-upoko, the daughter of the calabash,
go---go---grind flour;
I am Nyar-upoko, the girl of the gourd,
come---come---cook porridge.
I am Nyar-upoko, the woman in the water-fruit
I was thrown away.
She made the porridge, called the little girl, and together they ate their midday meal.
That night, when the people came back, the little girl told her mother and elder brother what
she had seen: 'There is a maiden in the house who lives in that calabash, and her name is
Nyarupoko!'
When her brother heard this he decided to hide and see for himself. The next morning he
pretended to prepare for a day in the fields, but he returned stealthily and hid himself near the
door. He saw a beautiful girl emerge from the calabash on the shelf, jump down and start to
sweep the floor. Then she took a jar, went out to the well to fetch water, and came back,
walking gracefully with the jar on her head. She put water on the fire, ground the millet and
cooked porridge. Then she sat down with the boy's little sister and together they ate their
midday meal, chattering cheerfully.
After the meal, Nyarupoko put away the remainder for the boy's mother. She was on the point
of jumping back into her calabash when the young man sprang up from his hiding-place
[Page [36] ]
and embraced her. She wanted to slide out of his arms and escape but he held her tightly and
whispered: 'I want you to be my wife!' So she stayed in her human shape.
When the other people in the village heard about this, the young men reproached their
mothers: 'Why did you not take the calabash rather than the bickering bride you took for me?'
The nine young women, on hearing this, decided to dispose of the beautiful girl again, this
time once and for all. They persuaded her to go to the woods with them, saying they wanted
her to help them collect firewood. When they came to a marsh, they suddenly seized her and
dumped her amidst the bulrushes, pushing her deep down, covering her with mud and thick
swamp-grass. No one had seen them, except the grey lark, 
Ulando . He flew to the village
and perched on a rooftop while everyone was in the village square. He sang so that all could
hear:
Young man take your fishing rod,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
34 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
Take your friends with nets and dip-nets,
Follow Ulando to the marshes,
I will show a place for fishing,
You will catch a lovely treasure.
The young men of the village listened to the bird who sang the tones of their language so that
they could understand him. They began at once to prepare for a fishing expedition. They
followed the bird to the marshlands. There the bird perched on a bulrush stalk and sang:
Nyarupoko, the calabash's daughter
Nine girls threw her here into the water.
The men started searching for the girl, but her bridegroom waded to the bulrush where the
bird was sitting, and groped around its roots. There he felt a breast, an arm, he pulled and
lugged until the girl emerged, alive and healthy. Nyarupoko and the young man were very
happy, but the nine wicked girls were chased away from the village for ever.
[Page [37] ]
20. AJULU AND THE WICKED LEPER
Since Biblical times leprosy has been regarded as a punishment from the gods. Lepers are
therefore to be feared, for they are evil-minded. Especially, they can harm people with their
evil eyes. People's physical forms may disappear, but often their voices are permitted to
linger on; babies can be heard crying, and women singing, who were drowned a long time
ago.
The cows that the bridegroom has to pay to his father-in-law retain a mysterious relationship
with the young wife. Beef is eaten only in times of extreme famine, and at solemn
ceremonies, so that one could say that cows are sacred among the Nilotes. One of the cows is
formally presented by the bridegroom at the ceremony at which he receives his bride from
the hands of her father. It is this cow, usually a nice fat one, that is in a mystic way identified
with the bride. It made marriage possible and legal for her; it now pulls the young wife back
to life out of the river.
Once upon a time there were two sisters. Their names were Akuru (Turtle-dove) and Ajulu
(Crown Crane). Once they were pounding the millet together, when the king happened to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
35 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
pass by. He heard them singing in unison, and felt pleased in his heart. He went to see their
father to arrange for a marriage, but as the two girls did not like the prospect of being
separated, he agreed to marry them both. After all, kings are never short of cattle. He sent
some of his men to drive a herd of cows to his father-in-law. After the customary exchange of
presents and the festive meal, the two sisters followed their royal husband to his kraal.
Within a year, both girls presented the king with a son. Soon, the babies were big enough to
be carried in the ubendo , the baby basket in which women carry their babies on their backs.
It is customary at about that time for young mothers to go back to their parents to show off
their new babies to the people at home. They took a pot of porridge each, as provision for the
journey. Then they set out on the path to their village, Akuru in front and Ajulu
[Page [38] ]
behind. Near the river they saw a leprous beggar who begged some food from them. They
gave him a few lumps of their porridge, then went on.
The beggar followed silently. Suddenly he seized Ajulu and threw her in the river. He took
her porridge and ate it all. The next day the king's cowboys, who were watering their cattle,
heard a baby crying but they could not see it. That night they came back. They heard the child
again and they decided to search for it. When they came close to the river-bank, it had gone
completely dark, and the moon was rising. Suddenly they heard a soft voice singing a lullaby,
close by, but no one could be seen:
Dry your tender tears my baby,
I am coming in the moonshine,
When the moon-beams pierce the water,
See your mother is a-waking,
Baby in the tall grass crying,
Wait, your mother's milk is coming,
It is eager to be given.
Suddenly they saw, very hazily, a young woman rise out of the river and walk in the direction
of the crying. There, she lay down and suckled her baby.
The boys hurried to drive the cattle home. The king was on the point of punishing them, for it
is dangerous to bring the cows home after sunset. But when they told him what they had
seen, he was deeply worried. He sent his guards to protect the baby against the wild beasts,
but when they arrived at the river-crossing there was no trace of the baby or of his mother.
The king sent a messenger to the girls' father, who devised a plan. At dawn, he drove the
cows which he had received from the king as the bride-price for Ajulu to the river crossing.
When the cows stood in the river, the father called his daughter: 'Ajulu, Ajulu, if you are truly
Ajulu, let your cows pull you out of the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
36 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
[Page [39] ]
water!' And lo! A hand emerged from the water and seized the tail of the biggest cow. The
father drove the cow back on to the bank and so he won his daughter back. She went at once
and found her baby in the tall grass, for which mother cannot find her baby?
The king had the beggar arrested and executed.
21. SHE W ANTED TO MARRY ONLY A KING
The elephant and the leopard are both 'royal' animals, but in a different sense. The elephant is
the biggest, strongest and wisest of the animals and so symbolizes the wise and unperturbed
king. The leopard symbolizes the more flashy type of princeling. As a chief--- and there are
many of that type---he is greedy, ruthless and cruel. The type of ruler who thinks he owns his
people and can do what he likes with them is never loved. The ant-eater will turn up again in
other parts of the Congo. He is the underground ally of man. His capacity to dig tunnels
through the earth shows that he has mysterious powers, which he no doubt obtained in the
land below, the land of death and resurrection.
Awara was a very beautiful girl; she was so famous that many important men came to ask for
her hand in marriage. The Buffalo arrived first. Her father received the mighty visitor with
courtesy, and sent Awara's younger sister, Yenge, to find the girl. Awara sent back word that
she was not interested in marrying Mr Buffalo. 'Let him go. I am not coming!'
The next suitor to arrive was the Elephant. A wara's father received the dignified guest with
the utmost politeness. Yenge was sent to fetch Awara, but she came back saying: 'Awara does
not feel that she wants to see Mr Elephant.' So the Elephant left the house, most indignant.
The next suitor was no lesser personality than His Highness,
[Page [40] ]
Prince Leopard. This time the girl was eager to marry. Arrangements were made, and soon
Awara followed Prince Leopard to his royal kraal. Yenge was allowed to go with her, to keep
her company. Listen to what follows!
Awara did not know that leopards are mean and cruel. As soon as they arrived at the leopards'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
37 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
kraal, the leopards secretly prepared two cauldrons to cook the girls in and have a good meal
of feminine flesh. Yenge, however, was clever enough to see through their plans. She called
the Ant-eater, who was an old friend of her father. The Ant-eater emerged from the floor of
the hut in which the two girls were locked up, waiting until the fires were hot enough to cook
them on. Yenge pleaded: 'Please, Mr Ant-eater, dig a hole to our father's kraal.'
The Ant-eater promised he would. He was a blood-brother of their father and digging tunnels
was his daily work. So he dug a tunnel under the ground and guided the girls back to their
home. They were saved. Girls, remember! Rich young men are cruel. Do not turn down a
good man.
22. THE BAMBOO TOWER
This story is an old Congolese version of the tale of the tower of Babel. The same story is
found among the Bakongo and the Baluba.
The Lendu are very stupid people, say the Alur. One night as they gazed at the stars, they
suddenly arrived at a very important conclusion, so they ran and communicated it to their
king: 'We have realized that all those lights up there must prove that it is a prosperous
country , in which many people can afford to keep their fires burning all night. We would
therefore advise Your Majesty to build a tower up to the sky so that we can go and learn from
those people.'
The king ordered that thousands of bamboo poles be cut, and
[Page [41] ]
hauled up to the highest hill in his realm. The first poles were dug into the ground, and
cross-beams were tied to them with lianas. On top of this structure further storeys were
erected, with diagonal poles and transverse beams for reinforcement. The king kept control of
progress on top so that he rose up with every new storey. He wanted to be the first to set foot
on the sky.
The chief minister, Ledza, was in charge at the bottom end. He directed the transportation of
supplies. After nine months he noticed that the bamboo poles at the bottom were beginning
to rot. The whole structure was beginning to sway unsteadily. With great courage and
perseverance, minister Ledza climbed up all the stairs and ladders that had been constructed
in those nine months, to see the king and warn him that his tower was tottering. The king
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
38 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
merely said: 'Ledza, you are a liar, go back!' He could not be convinced that something had to
be done, as he was constantly looking up at the sky, expecting all the time to reach it with the
next storey. 'Go back to your duties, don't bother me with the problems of the earth, don't you
see I am trying to meet God?'
The minister Ledza gave up, climbed down and ran away just in time. The whole tower
tottered and collapsed in one terrifying crash, 
ndundu! All the builders perished and only the
minister Ledza escaped.
Today there is still a lake on Mount Ju, surrounded by bamboo. It bears witness to the lack of
intelligence of the Lendu people, according to the Alur.
23. THE SON OF GOD
Why do white people succeed? They must surely have a spirit or a divine power to help
them.
The phrase 'son of God' could also be translated 'a child of the Spirit'. Mondo , the white man,
includes the Arabs.
[Page [42] ]
The ancestor of the Alur was travelling along one day, when he found the son of God lying
dead near the road. He turned his head away and passed by, without so much as covering the
body with some leaves.
The ancestor of the white men came along the same path a little later. He stopped and started
collecting 
akila leaves, which have a very pleasant smell and are placed on the bodies of the
dead to honour them. He covered the body entirely with the leaves, as a respectful son would
do with his father's body.
God saw it all. He called the black man and the white man together and gave each of them a
weapon for hunting. The black man received the bow and arrows; the white man received the
gun and the lightning-powder, so that he could conquer all the other peoples.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
39 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
24. THE BROTHERS' FEUD
Stories 24-28 are narrated as true history.
The brothers' feud is the foundation myth of the Alur people; it belongs to the secret history
known only to the elders.
The right-bank corner of the Nile is still called 'Wath-Ley', 'Beach of the Axe'. It appears on
maps as 'Wadeley'. And the fishermen, when passing this cape in their boats, still sacrifice
food and tobacco by throwing it in the river, believing that if they did not make this offering
they would drown in the river.
The Alur and the Kamulega are the descendants of Nyivongo. The Alur settled in the country
to the west, the Kamulega set themselves up as the rulers of the Nyoro in the south. As the
Kamulega are the descendants of the first-born, the others have to go and acquire the royal
dignity from them. The Nyoro now speak a Bantu language.
Rubanga had a son named Kyabambi. Kyabambi in turn had four sons: Nyipir, Nyivongo,
Tiful, and Upodho.
One day Nyipir took Nyivongo's spear and started out to hunt
[Page [43] ]
elephants. He hunted for many days until he spotted an elephant. He pursued it until he
managed to throw his brother's spear into its belly, but the elephant ran away with the spear
sticking out of its body. Nyipir came home and told his story. Nyivongo insisted that he
wanted his spear back. Nyipir offered his brother ten good spears as compensation for the lost
one, but Nyivongo refused: he wanted his own spear back.
Now it was a matter of honour for Nyipir to go back to the bush, spot the same elephant and
recover the spear. He took some tobacco and travelled for many days. At last he met an old
woman to whom he gave some tobacco. She told him that she knew who had his brother's
spear. Some men (probably pygmies) had traced the wounded elephant and killed it. The old
woman told Nyipir where he could find them. He did find them, and demanded to see their
collection of spears. His brother's favourite spear was among them. He bought it back and
brought it home.
Later, the children of the two brothers were playing together in Nyipir's hut. They found a
cowskin pouch which contained one priceless pearl. One of Nyivongo's children took the
pearl, put it in his mouth and swallowed it. When this came to light, Nyipir demanded that
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
40 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---
Nyivongo return that pearl to him. Nyivongo offered him a hundred pearls and precious
stones, a herd of goats and his pedigree cows. Nyipir refused.
Now it was a matter of honour for Nyivongo to return the property of his brother. He ordered
his servants to take his son and open the boy's belly. They cut the child open and searched the
bowels. Finally they found the pearl and returned it to its owner.
Nyivongo buried his son and said: 'I will no longer live in the same country as Nyipir.' He
ordered his wives to pack all their belongings, and his slaves to load them into boats. The two
brothers, each with their seconds, strode solemnly to the Nile bank to perform the ceremony
of separation. There, on the land-corner, the Nile leaves Lake Albert, flowing northward. On
that cape, Nyipir went and stood facing east, looking towards the land of the
[Page [44] ]
Acholi. Nyivongo faced west, looking across the Nile to the new lands he would settle.
Together they planted a tobacco plant, and struck the ground with an axe: 'May this axe be the
sign that our lands will be from now on divided.'
The elders say that the axe is still there, and also the tobacco tree.
25. THE HEAVENLY TWINS
The Heavenly Twins in Roman mythology were the sons of Jupiter, the god of
thunderstorms. The earthly twins were Romulus and Remus, the sons of Mars, who
descended from the sky. They were reared by a wolf, the animal that is related to the land of
death.
In this story the son of the rain-god turns into a swamp. The little fingers of his twin sons
(probably a euphemism for their genitals) are later found as the main ingredient of the
rain-making charm: the twin-finger amulet ( ngisa ) used by the Alur kings.
The name of the rain-god's son is Ujok, 'son of God', or sometimes Uchak, 'Milk-Drinker',
which can also mean 'the Beginner, the Initiator'. The name of the son born from the second
union of Uchak and the princess is given as Kyabambi, but this does not seem to be his true
name, which ought to be Ukelo, 'The child one keeps to oneself'---the normal name for a boy
born after twins.
Today the birth of twins is an occasion of great rejoicing and celebration with the Alur.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
41 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---
King Ulezu had an only daughter who disdained all mortal men who came to ask her hand in
marriage. As the king's only child it was her duty to herd the royal cattle. One day as she was
in the pastures, she saw a cloud descend from the sky. In the cloud there was the son of God.
He took off his cloud and showed himself to her in his human shape as the son of Rubanga
the Rain-god. The cattle-herdress, the king's daughter, fell in love with him and agreed to
celebrate their union that very moment right there in the pastures.
[Page [45] ]
Before he left her he said: 'You will bear twins, but your people will be angered by your
having children out of wedlock, and they will kill the twins. Remember to keep the little
fingers as an amulet.' He stepped back into his cloud and rose up to heaven. It all happened as
he had predicted: she gave birth to twins, who were killed by her brothers because she had
not been able to give the name of their father.
The son of God visited the princess a second time. The son who was born from this union
was called Kyambambi.
The father was later ambushed and killed, and eventually turned into a swamp: returning to
the water that was his natural element.
26. THE ABIRA
The Abira are cave-dwelling pygmies, and are among the oldest inhabitants of the Congo.
The Alur cannot settle the land unless they conclude a treaty with these 'people of the earth'
and become their sons-in-law.
Before the Alur people arrived in the land which they now inhabit, the Abira, who were a
very primitive people, lived there. They had tails with switches at the end, like cow tails,
which may seem as if they were ape-like trolls: but perhaps this is only an Alur story. The
Abira lived in the caves in the hills west of the lake; they had no cattle and ate only pumpkins
and wild cucumbers. They were light-shy people who never came out in the open daylight,
but always rooted in the earth like ant-eaters.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
42 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---
One day the first Alur king arrived from across the water. He was Ojanga-Mbele, and he
brought cattle, millet and sorghum, and the famous amulet that makes rain. He wanted to lure
the Abira out of their holes in the ground but they refused. Then he devised a stratagem. His
men put pieces of beef on their spears and dangled them at the entrances of the caves. Others
had spears
[Page [46] ]
with broad blades on which they offered the Abira salt, which was a commodity totally
unknown to such a backward people. As soon as the Abira had tasted the beef with the salt,
they licked their lips, and wanted more. So they had to come out of their caves and beg King
Ojanga for more beef and salt.
They had to pay a heavy price for it: they were given the option of either leaving the land to
the Alur and migrating, or staying and becoming their servants. They chose to stay, and have
salt with their vegetables. They bought cattle by exchanging their daughters and sisters, and
so they became the fathers-in-law and brothers- in-law of the Alur, who taught them to plant
sorghum and to make gain.
27. THE COW-SACRIFICE
The sacred cow represents the Rain-god Rubanga, who signifies his approval of the new king
through its agency. The name Rubanga also means 'ibis'. It is tempting to compare Rubanga to
Thoth, the Egyptian moon-god, who was always pictured in the form of an ibis. Like
Rubanga, Thoth was the creator and the god of the seasons, who was born from the
primordial waters; his home was the Nile marshes.
Ojanga-Mbele founded the kingdom of the Alur in the hills across the water, but as soon as it
was founded, other factions within the royal family started plotting against him. For a time
they succeeded in gaining power by putting on the throne their own candidate, Udok, son of
Nyimur. Nyimur, Ojanga-Mbele's elder brother, had died young. A third brother, Alal, was
made king by the Abira because he brought them chickens, the meat of which they had never
tasted.
Later, Alal was killed and for a time a woman, Anyumba, was made queen. When she
appeared to be pregnant because she had permitted a slave of the household, Anduka, to
sleep with her, she
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
43 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---
[Page [47] ]
was bitterly reproached. She replied: 'Do you think a queen is different from other women?' It
was during her reign that the Abira realized they could run through the grass like the
waterbucks in the savannah.
When Ojanga-Mbele brought them millet they at first refused to eat it because they were
afraid it was poison. Finally, an old woman said: 'I will eat it, I am worn out anyway, it does
not matter if I die, and then you will know. Moreover, I am hungry.' She ate it and it tasted
good. Then the timorous Abira took courage, ate the millet-porridge, and liked it.
This won the Abira over to Ojanga-Mbele once again, but his own nobles would not back
him wholeheartedly until he could prove himself to be the rightful king of the Alur at the
annual ceremony of the sacrifice of a cow for Rubanga, the Rain-god. Every year, the king of
the Alur has to perform the ritual of the cow-sacrifice, which can only be performed by the
man whom Rubanga has predestined to be the true king.
Udok presided over the ritual, when Ojanga-Mbele challenged him, saying: 'If you are truly
king, order the cow to kneel for you and pay you homage!' A murmur went up among the
nobles and priests who were present. They had to admit that it was the ancient sign among
the Alur of the legitimacy of a man's claims to the throne. It was God's judgement! Udok
threatened and cajoled the cow, but it would not move. It just stood there in the middle of the
sacrificial place, ruminating and gazing into space.
Then Ojanga-Mbele came forward and spoke out in loud and solemn words, praying to the
Creator: 'Oh Rubanga, if I am the true king of the Alur, if these lands belong to me, if it is my
hand which must slaughter the royal cow in Thy honour, oh Rubanga, if the royal dignity
belongs to me, if I own the throne of Alurland, show Thy sign, may this cow bow down for
me!' Silence fell on the elders, the priests and the noblemen. Slowly, the cow bent both its
front legs and knelt down for Ojanga-Mbele, laying its head on the ground before him. A
whisper went through the
[Page [48] ]
ranks: 'God has spoken.' Ojanga-Mbele was the true king of Alurland.
28. THE SPIRIT OF KING KENO'S DRUM
The kings of Alurland must possess four sacred objects, without which their royal power has
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
44 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---
no validity: the pouch with the rain- stones, the flaming spear, the royal stool, and the drum,
the king's voice.
Keno was originally king of Ukoro. His eldest son Awinga rebelled against him when Keno
complained that he did not fulfil his filial duties. A winga won the ensuing battle and drove
Keno out of his own kingdom. Keno cursed his son Awinga: 'You have called me a sorcerer,
God will make you a slave!' Keno travelled with his wife to the homestead of his second son,
Umier. Umier received his father with full honour and paid him the respect he owed him, his
king and father.
Since Awinga had substituted might for right in the making of kings, he was now himself
open to being overthrown. Umier marched against him and won: in the ensuing battle,
Awinga was taken prisoner and became his brother's slave. The Angal people too made
Umier their king, and he was also recognized by the Abar, the Pangere, the Parombo whose
sign or totem is the lamb ( 
rombo =sheep) and the Dolo, whose totem is the dolo , the
mantle monkey (hamadryad); its skin is a symbol of royal dignity.
The Acher people, too, came to King Keno and requested him to become their king, and
promised him they would build his royal compound for him. They did, but unfortunately they
built it in an enclave which was surrounded by Lendu territory. The Lendu refused to
recognize Keno as their king. They said they wanted no king, least of all the king of the
Acher.
They brought spears to the land, waged war, and killed King
[Page [49] ]
Keno in battle. When a king dies, his drum may never again be used, for the drum is the
king's voice. That day at sunset, the people of the king's court heard the royal drum coming
home, rolling up-hill and down-hill. All by itself, without human hands, it drummed the
dreadful news: 'King Keno killed, King Keno killed!'
29. WHY PEOPLE DIE
The snake plays a vital role in Congolese mythology, as we shall see farther on. It is clearly a
female spirit. Just as women have the power to bear children, so the snake can creep out of
its own skin, new and fresh.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
45 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Alur tell the story as follows: Once upon a time there was an old woman, and her
grandchild lived with her. She gave the little girl beans and millet, telling her to cook these.
Then she said: 'My grandchild, I am going to slough my skin behind the house. Remember
that I must not be disturbed.' The girl said yes, but followed her grandmother with her eyes
all the time.
First, the grandmother stripped off her skin from the legs, then the belly. When she had
reached her breast, the little girl came running: 'Grandma, grandma, the porridge is beginning
to boil! Please come and stir it!' When the grandmother heard this, her old skin went back
over her whole body. The whole process of rejuvenating her skin was spoilt.
The old woman said: 'You granddaughter, now you have spoilt my sloughing. Now you will
die with all your children and grandchildren. Not one of your family will ever escape death.
Your food will henceforth be acquired only by hard work. Previously, a little millet was
enough for a big meal. Now you will need a lot of grains for a small meal. Previously, the
birds were your friends, they would come to you and sit with you. From now on they will flee
you and you will be hungry and want to eat them.
[Page [50] ]
Be unhappy! Stay alone! If you had not called me, I could have shown you the secret of
renewing the skin.' The old woman died, and left death behind for all her descendants.
30. THE FAMINE
'Famine makes the Lendu obtain noble wives.' This proverb reminds the Alur people of the
great famine, when the despised Lendu people, the aborigines, could buy the daughters of the
Alur notables for food because they knew where to find wild fruits and how to catch the timid
forest animals. In English we say 'need knows no law'. In Alur: 'Famine makes the slave
king.' The clever slave lays in stock for the future, so he has food in times of famine. He who
feeds the hungry will be called king.
Many years ago there was a great famine in Alurland. The people died like chickens and no
one was left to bury them. No one felt strong enough to perform the ceremonies. Many
people left the country and trekked away to the east across the lake and to the west into the
forest. Many people sold their children to get food; only those who loved their children very
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
46 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---
much preferred to starve together with them. Even the daughters of the chiefs were married
off to obtain food, for even the rulers were hungry. Men of lowly birth married princesses if
they had food. Even Lendu men acquired wives of noble Alur birth.
People would eat anything. If they found things that only looked like potatoes they ate them,
not waiting to inspect them and see if they were poisonous or taboo. Many people died of
eating the wrong thing, which is, of course, worse than not eating at all.
Men and boys banded together into gangs of thugs and would roam the countryside. The
villagers would meet them, spear in hand, and many were killed. Both sides knew that they
would be killed if they did not kill the other first. If the villagers won, all the
[Page [51] ]
robbers would be slaughtered; if the robbers won, they would take the girls and the children
to sell for food, and raid the whole village so that nothing was left. It was in those days that
the proverb arose: If your son is a lazy fighter, your village is doomed.
The dead bodies were just left to decay, there were so many of them. Even if your brother
were to drop dead near you, your arm would be too weak to lift him up, and there would be
no time to cover his body with sand as you would be hurrying to the place where people had
told you food was available.
The feeling of hunger was stronger than all other feelings. You would say to yourself: 'My
brother is no longer hungry, he needs no more food; I do.' So you would travel on, and the
wild animals would eat your brother's body. Even if your brother had been killed by someone,
and he would offer you food, you would eat with your brother's murderer.
In that time, the slave became king, if he was clever. If he had collected food previously, and
stored it up, the people would make him their ruler. The people would think only of their
empty food baskets, and so if anyone's baskets were filled, they would say: 'Order, we obey!
We will work for you, Oh King! Send us out and feed us, that we may be saved!' Hunger
made them work hard. Hunger made people meek and tame. Even the son of a king would
bow and pay homage to a slave, if the slave had food. The owner of food became the ruler of
men. Not only the ruler of men but often the owner of men, and of women. Daughters were
exchanged for a basket of millet, sons for a goat. A father might sell his family into slavery if
he knew that their new master could give them food, and seeds to plant and cattle to herd,
and if he himself did not have these things.
[Page [53] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
47 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
2 The Bakongo
[Page [54] ]
On the other side of the Congo, in the extreme west, along the lower reaches of the Congo
river, there live the Bakongo, the people who gave their name to the country and to the river.
The powerful Congo moves fifteen times faster than the Rhine. Thundering loudly, it comes
crashing down the rocks, shooting through the gorges between high granite walls, foaming
and spraying in many colours. The river turns many sharp corners, butting against mountains,
tumbling down broad slopes strewn with colossal boulders. For two hundred miles, along its
rocky edges, there is the silent forest, evergreen and mysterious. In this vast forest, small
patches have been carved out where the Bakongo have their vegetable gardens. Just before
Matadi the landscape suddenly changes. The grim rocks disappear and give way to rolling
hills; the river widens and opens up into a spacious deep bed. Huge ocean steamers call at
Matadi to load the riches of the Congo. Farther down, there is the delta, lush green islands
and endless reed marshes, widening out towards the soft beaches of the Atlantic. This is the
country of the Bakongo: wild and beautiful.
1. THE JEALOUS WIFE
This story is from an unwritten handbook for chieflings. The moral of the sad tale is: painful
justice is imperative; never favour anyone above another. The story contains nothing magic or
miraculous; on the contrary, it is tragically human. It shows that though conditions may differ,
people differ very little in different cultures.
It is quite normal for a woman in a polygamous household to have
[Page [55] ]
a lover; usually a young man who does not have the wherewithal to buy a wife for himself.
It is the custom of palm-owners, before they climb their trees, to beat a rattle on the tree to
announce their intention. From high up in the tops of their trees they have a free view into
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
48 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
everybody's garden, but they must not be known as spies, as this would arouse the hatred of
the villagers. They want to work openly and give everyone time to withdraw, or stop
whatever they are doing that cannot bear the eye of publicity .
Once upon a time there was a chief who had two wives, both of whom he loved, and they
each gave birth to a daughter, one called Pemba and the other Tsonda; the two daughters of
Chief Manza Pungu resembled each other very closely.
The father showed a great love for Pemba, and gave her special favours. He gave Pemba
food, clothes, and ornaments. Masekidi, Tsonda's mother, had to buy ornaments and clothes
for her daughter herself. She asked her husband once why he gave so many beads and yards
of cotton to Pemba and never any to her own daughter, but Chief Manza said: 'Oh well, first
let your daughter grow up a little, then I will give her all the ornaments and clothes she
needs.'
They grew up quickly, and their breasts soon filled out. Father Manza gave new clothes to
Pemba but none to Tsonda. Tsonda's mother thought to herself: 'Perhaps he thinks that
Tsonda is not his daughter but some other man's. If that other girl ever comes into my hut, I
will kill her!'
One day Pemba, who loved her half-sister, said to her: 'Tonight I will come and sleep with
you in your mother's hut, and you may wear all my bracelets and necklaces.' In day-time she
would not have dared to lend them to her sister because of her father. That night, Tsonda's
mother went to her lover and asked him for the ramrod of his gun. She would never have
dared ask her husband for it, for she was not supposed even to enter the chief's hut, where the
arms were kept, without being invited.
[Page [56] ]
She took the ramrod to her hut and laid it with its point in the fire. When it was red-hot she
took it out and walked over to the part of the floor where the two girls were sleeping side by
side on their mats. Blind with anger, she killed the girl with the ornaments on, the girl who
was sleeping farthest from the fire. She could not see very clearly, as she was standing
between the fire and the girls, and she did not look closely, for angry people are usually in a
hurry. She stabbed the glowing ramrod into one of the girl's nostrils and pushed on up until
the girl was dead. This is the surest way of killing a person without leaving a mark, a bruise,
or a wound.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
49 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
At daybreak Tsonda's mother rose and looked at the two girls who were lying there in the
pale morning light. Then imagine her horror. The girl with the ornaments on was her own
daughter! She had killed her own dear Tsonda! It could not be true. As Pemba was still
asleep, the mother hoped that Tsonda was too. A vain hope after what she had done the night
before! She touched the girl, but sleeping bodies are often chilly in the early morning, there
in the hills. She shook her daughter, but she did not move, let alone wake up.
The mother now faced the facts. She decided she had to remove the body before the other
girl woke up, lest she be discovered as a murderess. She lifted the body up and put it in a
large basket of the type the women use for harvesting. She removed all the ornaments and put
them on the other girl's sleeping-mat. Then she put some leaves in the basket and carried it
out to the fields. Like every woman she had a plot on which she cultivated groundnuts, and
there she hid her daughter's body under a heap of weeds and grass.
She went back to her hut and found Pemba still asleep. She woke her up and said: 'Now you
had better go home, for Tsonda has already left; she has gone to her grandmother's.' Pemba
was, of course, surprised, the more so since she always gave her half- sister some ornaments
to wear when she went away anywhere out of sight of their father.
[Page [57] ]
That same morning, for the first time, their father took it into his head to call both girls.
Pemba appeared, but Tsonda did not. He called Tsonda's mother, who appeared obediently
before him and apologized for not informing him earlier that Tsonda would be going to her
maternal grandmother's that morning. The chief was surprised that she had started out so
early, but he gave the matter no further thought. The woman remarked bitterly: 'You never
think of her at all, but the one day she goes out you have to call her.'
Having said that, she went back to her hut, took a hoe and went out again to her groundnut
plot. The heap of weeds was already surrounded with buzzing flies. She lifted the body of her
beautiful dead daughter up, laid it in her lap, caressed it and started a song:
Malemba Tsonda, dear Tsonda, my child,
My beauty, I will buy you sweets and food,
Come back please, wake up, you my darling.
Suddenly she heard someone beat a rattle, and she hastily hid the body under the weeds. It
was her daughter's lover, who owned some oil-palms in the plot next to her own, which
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
50 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---
afforded a splendid opportunity to have secret encounters with his sweetheart.
The suitor put on his foot-slings and climbed up into the tree. Looking down he saw only the
mother, not his sweetheart, as he had expected, so he called down 'Mother-of-Tsonda, where
is the girl? She told me she would wait for me here, for she wanted some palm-wine.'
The woman said: 'She has gone to her grandmother's this morning.'
The young man said: 'Why did you not allow her to wait for me? I have some palm-wine here
for her.'
'Leave it with me; she told me she wanted to drink it tonight.'
The suitor, having cut the oil-nuts, climbed down, handed a
[Page [58] ]
jug of palm-wine to his prospective mother-in-law, and went away to his oil-pits, where his
nuts were fermenting.
The woman lifted her daughter's body again from the heap of weeds, put it on her lap, poured
some of the palm-wine into the dead mouth, and of course it was spilt. Can a dead girl
swallow? Then she sang again:
My little daughter, my good child,
Drink some of this delicious wine,
Which your lover brought for you,
Don't you want to see him soon?
Don't you want to come back to him?
Don't you want to exchange sweet words?
Why did you put on those beads?
Why the bracelets and the skirt?
Then I thought it was that girl.
And I stabbed my own dear child.
As soon as she had calmed down a little, she hid the body again under the heap of weeds, and
went back to the village. It was well past midday. When her husband saw her he called her
and asked her where their daughter was. He was secretly afraid that his in- laws would keep
her with them, because he had constantly neglected her.
Tsonda's mother said: 'Chief Manza, this is the first day since my daughter was born that you
have ever asked for her. Why are you so anxious to see her? You never wanted to see her
until now. Is it perhaps to give her something? You have never done so yet! And today you
want to see her twice! Perhaps you want her to work for you? Perhaps Pemba refused, or is
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
51 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---
she too good to work? I told you she is with her grandmother.'
This was the first time in over twelve years of marriage that she had dared speak to her
husband like this. But she had already lost all that she really cared for, and she knew that one
day soon it was bound to come out anyway. What did she have to lose? So she said: 'Her
lover sent her some palm-wine, which she has tasted. I am
[Page [59] ]
sure she is still asleep, for it was very heady. Perhaps if you could send her a jug of gin, and a
skirt with fringes, and a squirrel, she might come back.'
'All right,' said the chief, 'I will give them to her tomorrow.'
'I would prefer to have all these things now, for I shall go to my mother's house at dawn.'
She received her bottle of gin, the best skirt in the house, and a squirrel, all at once. It was
more than she expected, and more than she had ever been given by her husband. She went
and fetched water and cooked the squirrel.
At daybreak, as soon as the cock had shaken the night from his feathers, she rose and went to
her groundnut garden. She took the dead body from the weeds and dead leaves and began
another song:
Malemba Tsonda, dear child,
Your father has given you some gin,
A lovely skirt and even food,
The meat of a delicious squirrel,
He gave all this the day before
The day I have to die for you.
All morning she stayed like this, crying and singing. Towards noon, the owner of the oil-palm
trees, her daughter's lover, came back to pick the ripe nuts. He beat his usual rattle before
starting to climb up the trees. Sadly, he began a song, while making ready:
I am alone, my love has gone afar,
She drinks my wine, she never shows her face.
The girl's mother, who had had time to hide the dead body, told him: 'If you bring some more
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
52 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---
palm-wine, I will take it to her and I am sure she will soon come back to you.'
So he left another jug of palm-wine with his sweetheart's mother, and went back to his trees.
The woman thought that he had gone away to his oil-pits, so she started singing again:
[Page [60] ]
I lament my little darling,
Look, I changed you, lovely girl.
The young man, who had remained behind the hedge, heard this and was deeply puzzled. It
sounded to him like a song of mourning. He decided to climb up into one of his palms, from
which he had an easy view into the groundnut-garden. He was aghast when he saw his own
sweetheart, lying dead, on her mother's lap, with the flies buzzing round her. He climbed
down and ran to Chief Manza Pungu, and told him: 'Sir, please come and look at your wife
Masekidi. I won't say anything now, just come and see.'
He led the chief to a place where they could see through the shrubs, and when the chief
looked, his heart grew heavy at what he saw in his wife's lap. Chief Manza was furious and
cried out: 'Woman, why did you do this?' His wife's voice failed her, and she started to
tremble. Chief Manza and the young lover lifted the dead body and carried it together to the
village, where it was laid in state.
The chief sent a messenger to his wife's father and her uncles. All the elders arrived quickly.
The suitor did not accuse the chief's wife directly; he wanted the chief to see for himself and
to act as necessary. The chief does not have the right to sit in judgement over his own wife;
only her paternal uncles have that prerogative. The woman seemed to be out of her mind. She
just went on singing:
My little girl, why did you,
why did you put on those lovely beads?
You are so naughty, why don't you come back?
The men tied a liana round her neck and dragged her away. In the village, in front of the
chief's hut, lay the corpse, tied to a pole, and there sat the woman, a rope round her neck,
resigned and waiting for the end. The people were standing round the village square. They
did not dare to talk, but they slapped themselves on the buttocks in terror, for they all feared
that the woman was a
[Page [61] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
53 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---
dangerous witch, because only witches kill their own children. As the girl was killed with a
ramrod rammed into her nose, no mark could be seen, so they thought that she must have
been killed by witchcraft.
Accordingly, the uncles prepared 
kasa , poison for the divine judgement. She was forced to
drink it, and soon she felt she was dying. Her last words were: 'He, my husband, wanted it
this way, he never gave anything to the child.' Therefore, young men, remember: always be
just and fair to all your wives and children.
2. MY SWEET WITCH
Witchcraft occupies the minds of many people in Africa more than any other single subject.
What would you do, young man, if you found out that your fiancée and her parents were
witches---murderers who ate their victims?
You have the choice between eating human meat together with them and thus becoming a
cannibal, or, if you refuse, becoming a victim, and so being eaten by your own girl-friend.
The remedy against witches is a secret potion. Innocent people will vomit it out, but it burns
the bowels of witches so that they die. Witches can leave their human bodies behind and fly
through the night.
A young man, Matsona, loved a girl whose name was Kitsumuna, and every night he brought
her palm-wine. One day she told him: 'Tomorrow you may not come, come the night after.'
The young man thought that strange, but he did not suspect the real reason, which was much
worse than he thought: she was a witch! However, the young man decided to go and visit his
sweetheart anyway, but just as a precaution he took some palm-nuts and put them in his
loincloth.
He then went out and knocked at her door. She appeared very embarrassed at seeing him, but
she could not refuse to let him in.
[Page [62] ]
So he made love to her; but suddenly, in the middle of the night, he heard the voice of her
father, the village chief, calling from above. It was in reality the chief's spirit, perched on top
of the hut-roof.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
54 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---
The chief entered the hut the way a bat would fly down from the roof; her mother followed
and several other villagers came flying in, all bodiless. When the spirits were all present, the
chief ordered his daughter Kitsumuna to come and sit with them. She was embarrassed
because she knew that her lover could hear every word, although no one would be able to see
in the dark night, not even witches.
Her father, the chief, gave her a piece of meat and told her to eat it. She dropped it clumsily,
and the other witches too dropped their witches' meat. Therefore the chief witchmaster
decided that not everyone in the village was asleep, and that someone must be overhearing
them. So he flew up, out of the hut and over the village, and sprinkled sleeping water over
the huts to make quite sure that all the innocent people would be soundly asleep.
After his return to the witches' coven, it appeared that the magic water had still not worked on
everyone, for when he tried to pour the sauce made with human blood, he spilt it. This
proved that the sleepless person must be hiding in the girl's own hut. They searched it and
finally found Kitsumuna's suitor Matsona.
He was invited by the chief to join the coven, and at once received a piece of meat. He knew
very well what that meant: he had to contribute a human body at some future coven: the price
for joining was to become a murderer. Since, however, the price for not joining was to
become a victim, he had very little option.
He found a shrewd way out of this dilemma: seeing that his girl-friend's mother was one of
the coven he said, like a well- brought-up young man: 'Of course I accept the meat with
pleasure, but I really could not eat in the presence of my mother-in-law.'
They all agreed that this was impolite, even among witches, so he
[Page [63] ]
was allowed to eat sitting in a corner behind the bed, with his back turned to the others. In
this manner he was able to take the palm- nuts from his pocket and eat them instead so that
everyone could hear him chew. His girl-friend was of course very happy that her lover had
joined the coven. She did not know that he had buried the food she had given him in the mud
floor of the hut. After the meal the chief said: 'Now you must let us have one of your
relatives, your mother for instance, or your grandmother.' The young Matsona said he agreed
because he knew that that was expected of him.
Shortly afterwards the girl's grandmother died. The villagers suspected that she had not died
of old age and urged the chief to send for a diviner. Matsona was the person sent to find a
diviner, and on his way he passed through a near-by village where his future brother-in-law,
Katsumuna's brother, lived. Matsona told him what his errand was, that he had been sent to
find a diviner to investigate the mysterious death of Katsumuna's grandmother.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
55 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---
Her brother said: 'She is my own grandmother too. If her death has been caused by witchcraft,
I must come and smell out the evil-doers. As you know, I am myself a diviner. I am grateful
to you for telling me all this. I will come with you now, and on my arrival in the village, I will
stay with you to begin with, merely as a future relative, so that I have time to sound the
situation out without arousing suspicion.'
When the appointed day for the divining ritual arrived, the chief assembled all the inhabitants
in the village square. The diviner then asked them to go and stand in groups, dividing free
men from slaves, descendants from in-laws, and so on. The chief was beginning to feel
uneasy, for he sensed that the wise diviner had perceived where the root of the trouble lay, so
the chief's heart was burning with anxiety. Finally, the diviner had narrowed down his
suspects to a single family, all the time singing:
[Page [64] ]
Bapfumu wau ntanda
Baana wau ntanda ...
Free men their rank,
slaves their rank ...
In this manner he singled out the family of the chief, and dismissed all the others as
acquitted. The chief, his wife, and the members of the coven had to drink poison as a divine
judgement, and they all died, including Katsumuna.
3. A MALE WITCH
What would you do, young woman, if you found out not only that your fiancé was a cannibal,
but also that he had decided that you yourself would be on the menu for his next dinner? In
this story you will learn what a fetish is and how it works for its owners. Witches kill their
victims by means of the spirit; in this story they do not even have to touch the girl---she
simply dies of terror. But in spite of their spiritual substance, her father can see them, and
identifies them later in the daytime.
A girl named Malemba had a suitor who was a witch, or should one say he was a male
member of a witches' coven, and communicated with evil spirits. His girl-friend knew
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
56 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---
nothing about this.
One day the coven prepared a meal of human meat while the young man was away on a
journey. After the meal there was only one human finger left and the coven decided that this
would have to be sufficient for him. So they put it in a basket, added some bananas by way of
garnish, and placed this in his hut on a shelf.
As it happened, that same day Malemba decided to go and visit her lover. She cooked some
meat and vegetables for him and packed them nicely in a basket. When she arrived in his
village darkness had just fallen, so that she could slip into his hut without anyone seeing her.
When she found that he was not at home she
[Page [65] ]
decided to wait for him, and sat down patiently on his bed without preparing a light to see by.
Shortly after, her lover arrived and entered his hut without noticing her because she was
quiet, and said nothing, and there was no light. He did notice, however, the basket of food
which the coven members had placed on his shelf. He took it down and opened it. He found
the bananas and ate them. Then he found the one finger and burst out loudly: 'Those misers!
They left only a finger for me! All right, when I kill my girl-friend Malemba, they will have
nothing but one of her fingers!'
Malemba sat there, petrified. She knew that being there meant certain death, but what could
she do? He had not yet seen her, but as soon as he did he would kill her! But her lover did not
go out; on the contrary, he lit a torch and saw her there on the bed. He said: 'Malemba! Did
you hear what I said?'
She said: 'No! Not a word! I swear!' He took his fetish and made her swear on this sacred
object. She did and, on his insistence, afterwards licked it, so that its substance would kill her
if she lied. Yet her suitor still did not believe her, so he decided it would be better to eat her
at once.
He went out to assemble his fellows. As soon as he had left, the girl slid out of the hut and
ran like a shadow along the path to her own village. Alas! How could she outrun black magic?
The members soon assembled. When they found the hut empty, they decided to pursue the
girl and kill her at once, for no risk should be taken by letting her live.
They took a fetish from its pole in the village, and ordered it to find the direction the girl had
taken. The fetish turned towards the mountains but found no trail, then towards the valley
and there it smelled the girl. The spirit hidden in the statue was called Ngodo-mvindi. As
soon as it smelled its prey, the wooden body of the spirit began to tremble and the men
followed it along the path.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
57 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
Before she had reached her village, the girl, Malemba, heard the
[Page [66] ]
voices of the men shouting behind her, so she decided to turn left towards her mother's
garden. There she hid under a pile of weeds and rubble. As soon as the fetish reached that
path it stopped and turned in the direction where the girl had fled. Suddenly a kubu antelope
leapt up from the fields and started running across the gardens, jumping over fences and
shrubs. The fetish-spirit was misled, and followed the antelope, and so did the men. Perhaps
the 
kubu was a good spirit who wished to help the girl. Who knows? It took the wicked men
hours to pursue the running antelope in the darkness.
At last the fetish-spirit perceived it was mistaken and turned back. By the time the witches
reached the garden of Malemba's mother, the cocks were beginning to crow. Suddenly the
coven turned round and made hastily for their own village. There they put the fetish back on
its pole and sneaked into their huts, just before the ordinary people of the village began to
stir.
The girl, Malemba, lay there under the weeds her mother had gathered into a heap. Before
noon her mother arrived in her garden to gather some groundnuts. There she found her
daughter, more dead than alive, lying gasping as if she were seriously ill. 'Oh, my daughter!'
she cried, picked up her girl and carried her home. In the security of her mother's hut,
Malemba told the story.
That evening her father came home and asked her every detail. She confessed: 'I had gone to
my lover's hut because I wanted his love. I never told you, please forgive me!' As soon as
darkness fell the coven of evil man-eaters was on its way again. This time they made no
mistake, and quickly reached the hut of Malemba's mother. When she saw her 'lover' enter,
the girl could not utter another word. Six wicked young men stood there, and she fell dead on
the floor. The father looked each of them in the face so that he would recognize them later
before the village council.
'You killed her. Wait till we have buried her. Then I will ask your reckoning.'
[Page [67] ]
After the funeral of Malemba, her father accused the six men before the chief's council. They
were summoned and had to drink the poison of divine judgement. They all died miserably.
There are many lessons in this story. Never help anyone to do evil, for you will be killed
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
58 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
yourself. If you are a girl and you want to visit your lover, go to his mother's hut first and stay
with her, so that everybody may know that you are there, and that you are his girl. His mother,
if she had only known of it, would certainly have prevented him from killing his girl. Now
she can only mourn her son.
4. FATHER-IN-LA W BELOW THE EARTH
The people who live in the world below the pond can exist only in the rainy season; they are
like the frogs who sleep in the mud until the rains begin, and then come out and croak
cheerfully.
A man had big plantations in which he grew bananas. Early one morning, he found that the
bush-pigs had helped themselves to the ripe fruits. He pursued them and wounded one in the
tail. He decided to find their owner and to claim damages. He collected his bananas, fresh
ones and damaged ones, and set out on the trail. This ended in a pond, so the man jumped
into the water. Below there, he found a large village and demanded to see the chief.
'Are you the master of the wild pigs? They ate my fruits and I want compensation. I wounded
one in the tail.'
The chief inspected his pigs and found the one with the wounded tail. Then he wanted to see
the fruits, the damaged ones and the fresh ones. He ate some of the fruit and was so pleased
with it that he gave his daughter in marriage to the owner of the banana plantation.
He said: 'Now you will go back to the land above. Remember that you may visit us only in
the rainy season.'
[Page [68] ]
The man took his young wife with him up through the pond to his own country, where he
built her a nice hut and they lived together. After a year she gave birth to a son, who grew up
prosperously, until one day he fell ill. She wanted to go to her father, for she said: 'My father
is a great magical expert, so he will cure our son.'
Alas, it was the dry season, so her husband said: 'We cannot go, for your father forbade us to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
59 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
visit him during the dry season.'
His wife pleaded and pleaded until he gave in and went with her. They arrived at the pond,
and went through it. It was the end of their many happy days together. As soon as they arrived
in the great chief's village, they saw the palm-trees dying, and the women dying while
pounding cassava. The chief died in his house, together with all his wives. Even the chief's
daughter and her baby died as soon as they entered the village. Only the banana- planter, the
pig-hunter, stayed alive. He fled, but wherever he looked he could not find the exit from that
land to the pond in his own world. He sat down disconsolately.
The next day he heard thunder and rain. With the very first drops all the villagers rose up,
alive again.
5. THE BEWITCHED GARDEN
Spirits often appear in the form of birds or bats, or with imperfect human bodies. Greed is
characteristic of evil spirits. Singing is a perfect means of bewitching other creatures, even
spirits. The word 
kinuni means 'little bird'.
A woman chose a plot to cultivate and started weeding. At nightfall she left the field
well-cleared and tidy. But lo! A little bird arrived and began to sing:
Women weeding well, kinuni, kinuni!
A bird breeds weeds, kinuni, kinuni!
[Page [69] ]
The next morning the woman came back with her seedlings, and found to her dismay that the
whole garden was again full of high grass. She ran to her husband and told him what had
happened. He refused to believe her and thought she was trying to cover up her laziness.
However, she was so certain of her case that he decided to help her for just one day.
They went out together and weeded all day until the field was again clear and tidy. Just to
make sure, before nightfall the man put a few snares ready, and sure enough, the next
morning they found the little bird caught in a snare. The man was just on the point of
breaking its legs and wings like twigs, when it began to sing:
I am the little partridge, I protect against misfortune.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
60 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---
Let me live and do not harm me, that I may protect you.
The woman was anxious that the dangerous bird should be killed: she was thinking of her
fields. The man, however, thought it more prudent not to harm what was evidently a powerful
spirit, and let it fly away.
Many weeks later, the woman went to her parents' home to give birth to her first-born, as was
the custom. When it was time to fetch her back, the man tapped a jarful of palm-wine and
went to his in-laws. On the way he met a spirit in the form of a truncated body: no arms, no
legs, no head. The Trunk asked him politely where he was going and the man answered him.
The Trunk begged his permission to accompany him, and offered to carry the wine- jar.
The man replied, surprised: 'But you have nothing to carry it with.' The Trunk, however,
insisted, and so the man put the jar on top of the Trunk, who carried it all the way.
When they arrived at the in-laws' compound, a hut was assigned to them and they were
brought a lavish meal. The man ate until he was satisfied; the Trunk ate the spoons and
knives too.
The next day they had a goat for breakfast; the man ate his fill,
[Page [70] ]
but the Trunk ate the bones, the horns, the skin, and the pots as well. After this they went
home, the man with his wife carrying her new baby, accompanied by the greedy Trunk.
When they reached the spot where the Trunk had crept out of the earth, it stopped and
demanded:
Now share with me your wife, be generous!
Now share with me your child, be generous!
As soon as his fellows heard that the Trunk was singing for his prey they too crept out of the
earth, one or two first, then a dozen, then a hundred, all writhing bodies. All demanded to eat
live human flesh. The man despaired! At that moment the magic partridge arrived and
demanded to know what was going on. At once it called its fellow birds and told them to start
singing. As soon as they heard the lovely songs the trunks started dancing--- they could not
help it!
The partridge told the man and his family: 'Now go home quickly! Do you see now that the
partridge is your protector?'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
61 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---
6. EXCHANGED NOSES
Magic can do in Africa what surgery does in Europe: it can give a man a handsome face. Ugly
little girls may possess greater powers than clever men. This story has a stern moral.
A father prepared a wooing hut for his daughter Ngombe. This meant that he considered her
marriageable: suitors were invited to come along and try their success. Many tried but they all
failed. The girl told them: 'I am waiting for the man who is worthy of me.'
In a far land there was a cunning young man who had a big defect: his nose was one bloody
sore. So he went to a handsome friend and begged him to lend him his appearance. The
friend was finally persuaded to part with his beauty and wear the ugly
[Page [71] ]
appearance of the lovesick young man. The man went to the girl in her hut, and at once she
saw that he was the right husband for her and agreed to marry him. She could not know that
he was walking about with a borrowed face!
The father consented to the match and the matter was concluded. The young man went back
to his village to prepare the nuptial hut for his young wife. She was due to arrive the next day.
Her parents sent her little sister with her, lest she feel lonely in the foreign land.
The little sister's body was covered with sores, so her big sister usually kept her in a basket so
that no one would see her. The cunning man was a good hunter and trapper, and there was
always plenty of meat and palm-wine for both his wife and her little sister, whose presence
he did not even suspect. He also had to keep in with his creditor, who was obliged to walk
about with his sore nose. He, the clever man, kept him plentifully supplied with palm-wine,
but one day they met face-to-face in the forest, and the creditor demanded his property back.
Mr Clever begged and implored, but the owner of the nice nose insisted on his rights, so they
exchanged noses again.
That night, Mr Clever did not come home before the night had become pitch-dark, for he did
not want anyone to see his ugliness. Before he entered Ngombe's hut he ordered her to
extinguish the fire and to lie down.
When he was sure that she was sleeping he came in, pulled the ramrod out of his gun and
muttered: 'If I am ugly, you shall be ugly too, for I cannot bear you to be as beautiful as you
are.'
He relit the fire and heated his sharp weapon. But the little girl in the basket was not asleep,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
62 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 64 ---
and what was more, she perceived his evil intentions, and her magic was stronger. She began
to sing a song:
Eh, Ngombe, muana mama!
Oh Ngombe, child of my mother,
Eh, kulala, Ngombe?
Are you sleeping Ngombe?
[Page [72] ]
She went on and on singing it, and her sister's husband could not help dancing. While he was
dancing his garment slid to the floor. He sang a song to make it cling to his limbs and prevent
him from dancing, but this failed: he had to dance until the cock crowed.
Hastily, he took his gun and left before dawn, lest his wife see his ugliness. His little sister-
in-law, however, had seen everything in the light of the fire. She told Ngombe that her
husband had wanted to brand her to make her ugly. Quickly the two girls fled back to their
own parents.
Girls! Always take a husband from your own district, and do not judge by appearances!
7. THE TWO SUITORS
Mbumba's story is a sad one; she has to suffer after her death, and it is not even clear that she
is guilty. Her foolishness causes her to be punished in the shadowy existence after this life.
A girl called Mbumba was friendly to two suitors at the same time. When her father built a
wooing hut for her, both suitors brought her palm-wine, indicating that they both wanted to
spend the night with her. Since she accepted both gifts, it seems that she also accepted both
young men as lovers. When it came to the question of marriage, however, they were both
rejected by her. Both swore revenge.
She did not know that the two young men were members of the witches' guild. They had a
meeting and agreed to abduct the girl to the village of the spirits to punish her for her pride.
In the middle of the night they performed their secret rituals of black magic, and stole the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
63 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---
girl's true body for ever. This means that they obtained control over the essence-of-health
which must dwell inside a person's body to keep him healthy. If it is not there, what is
[Page [73] ]
left is only the outward shell, the appearance of the body , but its strength is gone.
So the girl fell ill, and became sicker every day; that at least was what the parents saw,
whatever they suspected. Finally she died, in the prime of youth, and now witchcraft was
suspected. But who had done it? The two suitors were there, weeping excessively, to show to
all the people how great their sorrow was.
The next day the girl was interred, and that night the two male witches went to tell the spirits
that they must not give this young soul palm-wine or cooked food. She must eat nothing but
groundnuts and raw palm-juice.
The next night the two young men came back to the graveyard with bananas and pawpaws for
their girl. They told her that she would be killed if she tried to escape. This, one would
suppose, was only intended to frighten her, for she was already dead. Yet it appears that even
the souls of the dead can be punished bodily.
As soon as they had turned their backs she followed them, and near the village she began to
sing:
I am Mbumba Lendo,
You have stolen my body,
You bring only pawpaws,
Cold uncooked bananas,
Stale and tasteless palm-wine,
I will go to mother,
Ask for peppered porridge,
I will go to father,
Ask for salted goat-meat.
The two young men, on hearing this, knew how to deal with it. They cut some twigs,
ambushed the girl's ghost on the road, and beat her savagely so that her body was covered
with bloody stripes and bruises.
'Now go back to the village of the spirits and stay there until we call you. From now on you
belong in Dead Town!'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
64 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---
[Page [74] ]
The next night they went back to the graveyard with a basket of fruits and again told the ghost
that she must stay there. This time she waited a little longer before she disobeyed. They were
already close to the village when they heard her singing behind them. They were afraid that
the villagers would hear her, and what was worse, dawn was not far away and they would
have to be back in their beds and fast asleep before sunrise, or else the people would suspect
them. No one wanders about at night except on some nefarious business.
They waylaid her and gave her a sound thrashing, hoping to scare her away:
'You must stay out there in dead town, you fool! You eat our food, so you must obey us! Why
did you not choose one of us!'
She complained: 'I could not, for the other one would have taken his revenge anyway!'
Finally, she fled, but hid a bit farther up the road. The two young men hurried home, sneaked
into their beds and pretended to be asleep. Mbumba followed them, although dawn was
rising. She was singing all the way, singing out her sorrow, singing of her suffering, of all that
she had been through: all the grief, all the love, all the foolishness of her life. The people in
the village heard her, and recognized her voice. They all knew that the soul of a dead girl was
coming back, hungering to speak to her parents. The ghost entered her father's house and her
mother woke him up:
'Look, my husband, our daughter, whom we buried, is standing there and wants to speak to
you.'
Then the ghost of poor Mbumba told her father of the many ordeals she had suffered, and
showed him the red bruises on her body. He aroused the villagers and accused the villains.
The council ordered them to drink poison. They did not vomit it out, but died, so they were
guilty.
Girls! Do not love a boy without your father knowing him, and never try to please two men!
[Page [75] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
65 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---
3 The Nkundo
[Page [76] ]
The Nkundo belong to a large group of peoples called the Mongo- Nkundo, after the two
main dialects of the group. They live in the central Congo Basin, in the 'armpit' of the Congo
River, east of Cocquilhatville. It is a vast woody region through which many rivers cut their
way, all flowing from east to west. They give their country the appropriate name
Middle-Land (Ngimôkili), for it is situated in the middle of the Congo Basin, which is the
very heart of Central Africa.
1. LONKUNDO'S FAME
The ancestor of the Nkundo is Lo-Nkundo, whose father, a spirit, taught him the secret of
trapping animals. This makes Nkundo into what mythologists call a 'culture hero'.
Another much more sophisticated invention is taken for granted right from the beginning of
the story: the talking drum. It is a wooden drum with a slit in the middle. The left side is
thick, and gives a high-pitched sound; the right side is thinner and gives a lower sound when
struck with the drumstick. These two tones (or notes) correspond with the two basic tones of
the Lo-Nkundo language. Like all great chiefs, Lonkundo has his court-drummer, just as
sea-captains have their telegraphists. These signal drummers, like telegraphists, have
developed a professional system of codes, which only they understand and which can be
operated for only one dialect. Those who live in the frontier districts are often not only
bilingual but bi-codal, again like some telegraphists who can handle the Russian as well as
the English system of codes. The
[Page [77] ]
drum-codes of some languages have been deciphered by a few Western scholars, and it has
been shown that these coding systems are as ingenious as they are complicated.
A great chief must have many wives. The time-honoured way for a man to amass wealth in
Africa is to marry and have more offspring, which means more hands for work, more warriors
to conquer more land, and more daughters who will bring in more bride-prices. Since the first
wife has the right to command the junior wives, it gives her prestige, too, if her husband is a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
66 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---
polygynist. This is why senior wives, far from demanding that their husbands be
monogamous, will encourage them to marry other wives and so acquire relations and respect
in society: a tree with more branches gives more shade.
The fire-basket is one of the many motifs in this myth that is not explained further. All we
learn is that fire sparks out of it, and that it produces any number of blades: knife-blades,
axe-blades, arrowheads, spear-blades, hoe-blades, etc. These products of the Smithy are in
such high demand in the Congo that they are used as currency, and for the acquisition of
brides. Any man who can produce them in large numbers will be affluent.
Every married woman in equatorial Africa wants her own 
shamba or plantation, where she
can grow exactly what she likes. Land is still available in Africa for anyone who can buy it or
conquer it. On their fields the women grow bananas, groundnuts, cassava, beans, peppers and
other vegetables, all for their own kitchens, and to have a little pocket money.
Many years ago there lived a man called Lonkundo, who was superior to all men. He lived in
a region called Middleland. His wife's name was Nsombe, and they had a son called Yonjwa.
One night, Lonkundo dreamed a dream in which his father, Elombo, appeared to him, to give
him instructions:
'Go to the well, early in the morning and examine the ground. There you will find the track of
an animal. You will not miss it, for I shall be with you. Cut raffia-fibres and a springy twig,
and make a trap.'
[Page [78] ]
The next morning, Lonkundo did everything his father's ghost had told him. In those days,
snares and traps were unknown in Middleland. That evening, the women coming back from
the well with their jars on their heads, reported that an unknown animal was caught in a
contraption they had never seen before. Lonkundo said that he had made it himself. He
sounded the signal drum to call the men from the other villages, telling them they must help
him. All the men arrived and took the animal to the village square. It was a weasel: they
called it 
olia and made a song about it.
From then on, Lonkundo went to the forest every day, setting his traps and catching many
animals, so that he became a wealthy man, and was highly respected.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
67 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
One night he dreamed that he caught the sun in one of his traps. For days afterwards he was
puzzled, wondering what the dream meant, until one day he found the answer. In the middle
of the forest, he saw a light shining between the trees. When he came nearer, he saw that one
of his traps had caught a beautiful woman, bright as fire!
The woman said: 'Come close to me, do not fear me. I am the eldest daughter of a king. I
refused every man. My father did not want me to marry anyone. Put away your weapons, and
come closer, Lonkundo!'
Lonkundo approached her, admiring her fiery beauty. Meanwhile, she told him her history.
'I met a man who persuaded me to go with him. We walked and walked through the forest
until he vanished. I think he was a spirit. I lost my way and was caught in this trap. Please
release me! We will go to my father, who will reward you richly.'
Lonkundo, still admiring her flaming features, released her from his snare, saying: 'No, I want
no reward, I only want you for my wife.'
She did not resist, she did not disagree with him. She told him: 'My name is Ilánkaka,
daughter of Esombyankaka. Remember
[Page [79] ]
that you must never tell anyone how you caught me in your trap. Never mention it, or we
shall have trouble.'
They went home together to Lonkundo's village, where he built a big hut for her. They lived
in peace for a time until Ilánkaka said: 'You are an important man, you must have more
wives.'
Lonkundo replied: 'I have no possessions that are suitable to pay for brides with.'
Ilánkaka answered: 'Don't worry, I will find you as many bride-prices as you want. Now go to
the villages and find some wives for yourself.'
Lonkundo set out. After a long while he returned.
'How many wives have you got?'
'I have four.'
'That's not enough; you will want at least a hundred brides. Remember that you are a man of
substance.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
68 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
Lonkundo set out again, journeying from village to village. His fame ran ahead of him and the
drum was beaten before he arrived.
'Lonkundo is planning to play it big, he is collecting a big troupe of dancing girls!' So the
fathers kept their daughters away from him.
Lonkundo went home and told Ilánkaka what happened. She said: 'Tomorrow I will go with
you. Let us go to that big village.'
She took her little basket with the fire-sticks. Lonkundo ordered his drummer to announce
his arrival, and the next day, when they arrived on the market square, they found all the
fathers of nubile daughters sitting there. They said: 'So, Lonkundo, you do want to marry after
all, do you? But do you have enough bride-wealth?'
Lonkundo turned to Ilánkaka, who took from her basket several dozen blades of knives and
spears and axes. One father after another was satisfied that Lonkundo was a man of unlimited
affluence and therefore a worthy son-in-law.
[Page [80] ]
Having bought all the daughters of that big village, Lonkundo wanted to take them home, but
the elders said: 'No, do not go home yet, that would not be proper. Spend the night here, and
permit us to entertain you. We need time to collect and prepare the wedding presents for you,
and the parents' gifts that brides are given on their departure from home.'
Lonkundo agreed, and spent the night in the village with one of his new wives. He told the
people that Ilánkaka was not his wife but his mother. It was right for him to say so, for in the
absence of a father it is the mother who provides the bride-price for her son to marry.
The next morning the wedding presents were brought for the bridegroom. Two slaves for
each bride, and innumerable goats and chickens. The brides said good-bye to all their
relatives. After that, Lonkundo set off on his homeward journey with his long retinue, the
slaves carrying the chickens in baskets, and pulling along the tethered goats.
When they arrived in Lonkundo's village they were welcomed in festive fashion. Lonkundo
ordered his many slaves to build huts. They all received axes and went into the forest to cut
poles. Quickly huts were built for the wives and pens for the goats. Lonkundo indicated to
each wife where she might live. Each wife had her own hut; all were provided for.
The next morning, Lonkundo showed each of his wives where she could make her plantation
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
69 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
and cultivate her cassava. So they all settled down together in their new village. Lonkundo
became a patriarch, for his wives bore him many, many children.
Alas, a rich man will always be envied. The people of Lonkundo's village began to feel
jealousy for their wealthy and prosperous countryman. Lonkundo heard how people talked
about him with hatred in their voices. He decided to move house and build a new village
elsewhere. He told his wives:
'Tomorrow we will leave this place and never come back. Remember that no one is allowed
to take anything---all possessions
[Page [81] ]
must be left behind. Only Ilánkaka will take her little basket with the fire-sticks. The people
of my village do not love me any more, so I have decided to leave them alone. They may
have all my possessions to satisfy their greed. We will start out early in the morning, and
Ilánkaka will find an auspicious place where we shall build a new village.'
The next morning all the wives rose early, put on their few clothes and made the children
ready for departure. They heard Lonkundo give the signal and they all began their migration
behind their mighty husband. Ilánkaka led them into the forest, along the paths of the wild
pigs into the vast jungle of the Congo Basin. In the afternoon, many of the pregnant women
began to show signs of fatigue, so Ilánkaka and Lonkundo decided to call a halt there and
make a provisional camp.
While the others were preparing for the night, Lonkundo took his bow and arrows, hoping to
shoot some game. There, in the middle of the forest, he suddenly heard his own name
repeated over and over again. He stole up to the place where the voice came from, and saw a
big man standing there, apparently looking for him. Lonkundo took an arrow, shot it, and hit
the man in the leg; with the next arrow he hit his arm. Then he came out of his hiding-place
and tied up his writhing victim with a piece of liana.
He brought him to the camp, but when Ilánkaka saw him she cried out: 'That is the man who
vanished in the forest, leaving me a prey to the wild beasts!'
Lonkundo said: 'Good, I give him to you as your slave; he will serve you for the rest of his
life.'
The next morning they went on until Ilánkaka heard chattering voices in the trees. They
belonged to the parrots, and this was the omen she had been expecting. It was around those
trees that they would be building their new village. It was too late to start building then, so
they spent that night in the open air.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
70 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---
[Page [82] ]
2. THE NEW VILLAGE
A human sacrifice is necessary before a clan can begin building a village. The spirits of the
locality have to be reconciled with the disturbance of the peace, and especially with the
felling of the trees in which most of them dwell. In this part of Africa all human habitation is
carved out of the forest.
It is the first duty of every woman in Africa to bear her husband children. Even though
Ilánkaka is a fire-princess who has made her husband rich and powerful, she has no children,
and that annoys her husband more than anything else.
Before they could build their new village, they had to sacrifice a human being and bury the
body in the ground, to propitiate the spirits of the forest. Lonkundo suggested to Ilánkaka that
they take the man who deserted her in the forest for their human sacrifice. Ilánkaka agreed, so
Lonkundo killed the new slave and performed the necessary ritual. Then he ordered the
slaves to cut poles for new huts. Some of the women started pounding the floors of their
future houses, others went out fishing in the nearby river.
That night the floors were beautifully level, and there was more fish than they could eat.
They also had 
lifambu fruits in plenty. Soon the huts were going up, and Lonkundo assigned
a hut to each of his wives. All were satisfied except Bonduwa, Lonkundo's first wife, who felt
that her hut was an ugly one. She complained and Lonkundo, annoyed, told her that if she did
not care to accept it he would take it away from her. Yonjwa, her son, who was beginning to
grow up, promised his mother that he would build a hut for her himself, far away in the
forest, and that she should not wish to have any more to do with his father.
When Lonkundo came back to Ilánkaka and told her what had happened, she was delighted.
She took out of her basket a nut which, she said, her father had given her as a special present.
[Page [83] ]
'This nut,' he had said, 'is very strongly loaded with magic. You may plant it as soon as you
feel that your husband really loves you.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
71 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---
'Today,' Ilánkaka added, 'I am quite sure that you love me more than anyone else, so I have
decided to plant this nut.'
The nut grew into a tall palm. The palm grew many branches. On the branches there grew big
nuts. Ilánkaka picked some nuts and shared them with her husband. They were delicious. He
asked for more.
Then he wanted to give them to his other wives and their children, but Ilánkaka refused,
saying that those nuts were meant for herself and her husband only. Lonkundo was annoyed
with her pride.
'I am not allowed to give the nuts of a tree in my own garden to my own children? Is that
because you have none of your own? Have you forgotten that I caught you in my trap?'
It was said! He had uttered it! Ilánkaka collected her belongings and went away. She never
came back and no one knew where she had gone.
Lonkundo felt ashamed for the many things he had done wrong in his life. He thought for a
long time. Then he went personally to the hut of his first wife, deep in the forest. He stood in
front of the hut and called out:
'Mother of Yonjwa, mother of my eldest son.' They both emerged from the hut and greeted
him.
Lonkundo went on: 'I want a reconciliation. I did no justice to you. I want you to come back
and occupy the best hut in my village. You are my first wife. And you, Yonjwa, you are the
eldest son of my homestead. The others are children. You are a man, I see. Go out to the
other villages and find yourself a wife. Lonkundo is rich. Your father can pay a king's
bride-price for you.'
[Page [84] ]
3. YONJW A'S WEDDING
In this chapter, the narrative moves on to the eldest son of Lonkundo, the second hero in the
dynasty. Yonjwa conquers a bride. In some countries men like their women supple and
slender, but African men like big women, strong and with abundant flesh. Eyonga is the
Congolese ideal of a bride: muscular and motherly. Once conquered, she remains loyal to her
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
72 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 74 ---
husband.
Yonjwa set out and travelled through many villages and districts, and saw hundreds of girls.
But the son of Lonkundo was not satisfied with an ordinary girl: he wanted a real heroine, a
mighty woman.
One day on the road, he met a man who was covered with oil. His whole body was greasy and
smudged. Yonjwa persuaded him to tell his history, and the man began:
'I was foolish enough to go and woo a woman called Eyonga, who was so famous for her
strength and her fighting spirit that the people called her Ondéfetana, 'the Champion'. She has
a peculiar way of finding out whether a prospective bridegroom is worthy of marriage. She
wrestles with him, and if she throws him down, he has lost. But that is not all. She insists that
the tournament should take place in a basin filled with oil. Yes, sir, her father possesses many
plantations of oil-palms, and each time a suitor arrives, she orders her father's slaves to fill a
pit in the garden as wide as a pond with pure palm-oil, and she wants to fight her suitors in
that. So far, they have all lost. I am the last one. It is a miracle that men can still be found to
court her. I really was stupid!'
When Yonjwa heard this story an inexorable desire seized him to woo this girl, and to
measure his strength against hers. Of course, he knew his own strength. He knew that he was
the son of Lonkundo, the great huntsman, the father of a tribe. Yonjwa's veins carried the
blood of heroes.
Yonjwa travelled to the homestead of Kungoelo, father of
[Page [85] ]
Eyonga. He expressed a wish to see her. He met a group of girls, who were quarrelling
together. One of them was Eyonga the Champion. She did not hide herself---she was big and
beautiful. Yonjwa told her he wanted her as his bride. She said: 'Tomorrow.' He said: 'Today.'
They went to the village. The elders said: 'Tomorrow.' Yonjwa said: 'Today .' They said: 'Her
father is not here.' Yonjwa said: 'Fetch him.'
They went out and found Kungoelo far away in the fields. They told him: 'Here is a man
wishing to marry your daughter, the Champion.'
'Can he not wait till tomorrow? Tell him I am busy.'
'He says he cannot wait. He wants Eyonga today. He looks like a great man. He is the son of
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
73 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---
Lonkundo.'
'In that case, I will come. Tell the men to make the oil-pond ready. We shall want many
barrels of oil from the plantations.'
The slaves carried out Kungoelo's orders. The elders arrived, the slaves carried the barrels,
the pit was filled with oil. Eyonga went and stood in it, with the oil up to her navel. She was
a colossal woman. Yonjwa, too, jumped into it. He was no smaller. They began to fight,
gripping one another like gorillas. Eyonga lifted Yonjwa up above her head and threw him
down. But the agile man landed on his feet, like a bush-cat, like his father's wild weasel.
Again and again she lifted him above her head. The last time she could not throw him
down---he stayed on top of her, and they both went down in the oil. They re-emerged and
again the angry woman wanted to lift him up. She seized him, and he held her, he held her
close to him. Whatever she tried, he clung to her like a liana to a tree, like the African
fig-tree clinging to the tree stem on which it lives until the stem dies and withers away. She
tried to lift him, when she felt his grip like the grip of the blacksmith's tongs on a piece of
glowing iron, she tried to fight him off, but could not. His grip was like iron, like the heavy
liana rope that holds the foot of the elephant. Very slowly he pressed her down in
[Page [86] ]
the oil. Down, down, down---and she loved him. She knew her master and admired him. He
helped her up and she declared herself vanquished.
All the spectators cheered and clapped at the great hero. Yonjwa, son of Lonkundo, said to
the bride's father: 'Kungoelo, master of oil-palms, I sought your daughter today, and I have
conquered her.'
Kungoelo declared them husband and wife. 'But,' he said, 'there is one one more thing to do,
that is, cutting oil-nuts from the giant tree.'
That night, Yonjwa and Eyonga slept together as husband and wife. Eyonga told her husband
that he must go out early and fix some branches of the oil-palm to the giant tree before her
father was up. He did so, and when Kungoelo arrived and told his son-in-law to find a giant
tree on which there grew oil-nuts, or forfeit his bride, Yonjwa soon found the giant tree, and
cut the oil-nut branches, which he had fixed there himself. So Yonjwa had done the
impossible. He kept his wife, who had found her master.
4. YONJW A GOES HOME WITH HIS WIFE
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
74 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---
Eyonga indeed becomes the mother of the Nkundo people, because she possesses the magic
Pouch of Life that is here mentioned for the first time. It will remain the chief source of life
for the dynasty in the generations to come. We never learn the nature of the mysterious
powder in it. In some ways it acts like a frog, and it may have been made of frogskin. It has
the power to rescue the family from any emergency, even from the jaws of death. It is a
protective spirit, for it can fly over the forest with all the members of the household in its
belly, and spew them out at their destination.
That night, Eyonga had a dream. A voice warned her: 'You must
[Page [87] ]
tell your husband that if anybody asks him his name he should not reply, but ask that man's
name.' She told her husband as soon as they woke up.
The next morning they set out on their way to Lonkundo's village. Kungoelo said: 'I will give
you eight slaves who will carry the bride-price back to me.'
Yonjwa said: 'Rather give me eighty.' Kungoelo gave him forty slaves and forty slave-girls to
accompany him.
In the forest they met someone who said to Yonjwa: 'Who are you?'
'I am Yonjwa!' said the son of Lonkundo proudly. And the man pierced Yonjwa with his
spear, so that he died.
Eyonga the Champion cried bitterly for her husband, lying there in the forest. Then she
remembered the magic pouch her father had given her, took some balm out of it, rubbed it
into her dead husband's nose, and at once he was revived, and rose up.
She reminded him of her dream, and he promised to remember it. The next person who
asked his name was a dark figure. Yonjwa asked him who he was.
He said: 'I am the ghost-bat: now you see me, now you don't.' And gone he was.
When they were in the middle of the forest, Yonjwa told the slaves to cut an esio -tree and
make him a slit-drum. On it, he drummed a message to his father: 'Coming home soon. Your
son brings his bride. I married the daughter of a leopard.'
Then they realized they had lost their way. Eyonga took out her father's pouch and sang a
song for it. It began to jump in front of them, and so guided them home.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
75 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---
All the time Eyonga sang:
My father's bag,
Guide me to my husband's home.
The others joined in, but no one was allowed to speak while the magic pouch bounced. It did
its guiding work perfectly, for soon
[Page [88] ]
they were home. Old Lonkundo was delighted to see that his son had found a worthy bride,
and ordered a few dozen goats to be slaughtered for a big feast. Dancing lasted all night.
The next morning, the headman of the slaves asked for the bride-price, following the
instructions of his master, Kungoelo. Lonkundo told the slaves to take their digging sticks to
a place in the forest which he pointed out to them. They started digging, and found
treasure---more than they had ever seen. They filled their bags and carried them to
Lonkundo's village. Lonkundo asked the headman if that would satisfy Kungoelo as a bride-
price. The headman said it was too much, to which Lonkundo replied: 'From Lonkundo one
can expect only a royal bride-price.'
Eyonga and Yonjwa prepared for the journey to accompany the slaves back to her father's
homestead. When they were in the middle of the forest, they lost their way again, so Eyonga
took out her father's pouch and sang a little song for it:
Open, open, little pouch,
Swallow all my father's men.
Then she invited all the slaves with their loads to step inside it, and finally Yonjwa and she
herself jumped in. There was room enough for everyone to sit comfortably. Eyonga sang:
Fly, my father's bulgy bag,
Carry us all to my father's farm!
The bag with its living contents took off and landed in the twinkling of an eye. Eyonga
opened the bag and lo! they were at her father's village.
5. THE BIRTH OF ITONDE
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
76 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---
A pregnant woman has a whimsical appetite, and it is considered mauspicious if the husband
does not succeed in obtaining whatever she desires. It is believed that it is the spirit of the
embryo that wants
[Page [89] ]
the strange dishes, as an offering. This spirit may be an ancestor who has decided to return to
earth. If he does not get what he wishes he may be annoyed and destroy the embryo.
Rats are eaten in many parts of Africa, certain sub-species are considered a delicacy, if well
fried. The rats are the animals that are in some way related to death and decay. Itonde is the
god of death. Death is born one generation after the first man is born. He is the spirit of
darkness and fear.
Yonjwa and Eyonga travelled back through the forest. They came to a place they liked and
decided to settle there for a time. Eyonga found she was pregnant, and lost all appetite. The
only thing she wanted to eat was fried rats. So Yonjwa went and set traps for rats. He caught a
dozen, half of which he fried, the other half he dried. The next morning the dried rats were
gone. The same happened the following morning. They did not know that their son, Itonde,
emerged from his mother's womb while she was asleep, and devoured the rats. Before
daybreak he plunged back into the womb. After three days he wanted to stay outside, so he
created darkness. His element was darkness, for he was the god of death. He it is who likes to
eat rats.
Yonjwa heard the cocks crow in the middle of the night. Later, he heard the drums sound in
the distance. This is usually done at nightfall in Nkundo villages. Yonjwa realized that a day
had passed without dawn and without sunset: no light had been visible at all. All this time
Yonjwa and Eyonga were lying in bed together in the darkness, for they felt drowsy and slept
continually.
When he heard the cocks crow again in the surrounding villages, Yonjwa woke up his wife,
saying: 'This place is cursed, the sun will not shine here. We must get out of it before we start
sleeping for ever and never wake up.'
As he touched his wife's belly, he noticed that it was flat---the swelling had gone. He asked
her: 'Where is your child? Are you no longer with child?' She said she did not know. This was
a sure sign that the place was cursed. They rose and ran.
[Page [90] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
77 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
After a long walk they saw the sun shining. They left the darkness behind like a dense forest,
and saw that it was broad daylight. They passed through the villages and the people
confirmed that dawn and dusk came and went all the time as usual. They concluded that
Eyonga had had a miscarriage, and that her baby was dead. Indeed, it was Death.
Yonjwa told all the people of the villages, that if they saw a stranger coming, he would be the
powerful sorcerer whom he suspected was wandering around.
'Treat him politely, but if you can, poison him, for he is dangerous.'
The villagers answered: 'Yes, son of Lonkundo,' and the two went on.
6. ITONDE FINDS HIS FATHER
The 
elefó is a spherical dancing bell, probably imported into the Congo from the Arabian
countries. The magical characters on it are the signs of the zodiac and other astrological
ciphers. This motif is almost certainly borrowed from Islamic mythology. The peoples of the
Congo were not literate in pre-colonial days: it is the Muslims who have this strong awe for
the power of letters.
The 'divine judgement' ceremony is very common in many parts of Africa. In it, the accused
drinks a cup of venom. If it kills him he was a liar; if he lives, he spoke the truth.
Itonde, the young god of death, dispelled the darkness, took a few palm-nuts and waited for
game. He saw a dwarf antelope and threw a palm-nut at it. It hit the animal on the shin. It
died at once. Itonde roasted it and ate it. He went back to his waiting- place, saw a big
antelope, hit it with his palm-pit, roasted it and ate it. Then he hit many other animals---
except the snake and the elephant. He roasted them all and ate them. Each time he sang his
song:
[Page [91] ]
Itonde the killer, kill it.
Itonde devourer, devour it.
Finally, he saw a humming-bird. He was going to hit it, when the humming-bird sang to him:
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
78 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
'Why would you kill me? If the big antelopes did not satisfy you, do you think my little body
will? Listen, I will tell you something you did not know. You have parents who are expecting
you. If you wait here, I will send the caterpillar-bird to you, and he will explain the road to
you.'
The humming-bird disappeared and a moment later the caterpillar-bird arrived. Itonde asked:
'Are you the caterpillar-bird? Give me what I was promised.'
The caterpillar-bird produced an 
elefó , a small dancing-bell. 'The name of this bell is World.
Inside it you will find peace and war, wealth and poverty, strength and weakness, rain and
drought, all the animals and birds, and all the languages of the world. You will see that on it
are written the signs of all plants and snakes, of winds and storms, yes, of all things on earth.'
Itonde saw it and was satisfied. At once he began to dance, and sang:
Sign of the path, show me the road, Ching, ching!
Sign of the path, the straight high-road, Ching, ching!
Itonde travelled along the road and met a man called Lomanga. Lomanga saw a young man
with fiery eyes, walking along stark naked. He knew this must be the sorcerer of whom
Lonkundo's son had spoken, so he threw his spear at him. Lomanga's spear missed, for who
can kill death? Itonde took the spear and threw it. It pierced Lomanga. Lomanga died. Does
death ever miss?
Itonde took Lomanga's clothes and put them on. Thus properly dressed, he arrived at the
nearest village. The elders received him with great courtesy, for they feared him as they
feared the cobra. They ordered their wives to prepare a meal in secret and put
[Page [92] ]
poison in it. When the meal was served, Itonde asked the elders if they would join him, but
they declined politely, saying that the food would be just enough for him; they had eaten
already.
Itonde said: 'Even a liana has eyes.' He took his magic bell and danced round with it, saying
that such was the custom in his birthplace. He sang a song to it:
My little bell, can I eat this?
My little jingle, is it good food?
The bell answered:
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
79 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
Itonde, spirit of death, it is poison,
It is poison, do not eat.
No one dared to speak. They were all stupefied by this magic bell that could reveal the truth.
They put their fists in their mouths, as a sign of utter embarrassment. Itonde took up his
belongings and rose to go. The people followed him like a swarm of bees. He raised his spear
and turned towards them, whereupon they all fled.
Finally, Itonde arrived where he wanted to be: in the village of Yonjwa, his father. The drums
had caused his fame to fly ahead of him, so that before he arrived on the village square, the
people had all fled into their huts and were peering at him through the cracks. Itonde sat
down near Yonjwa's royal drum and took the drumsticks. This was a dangerous breach of the
tradition: only the king himself and his eldest son were allowed to sound that big drum, and
no one knew who Itonde really was.
The elders ran out to warn Itonde that disease would strike him if he sounded Yonjwa's royal
drum, but he did not listen. He drummed the signal that called all men together to the royal
compound. Yonjwa himself was away at the time, and the local people asked him why he had
sounded the great drum, well knowing that no one else would ever have the evil courage to
touch it. Yonjwa said he had not. He hurried home and found Itonde sitting there and
drumming his own royal signal. Yonjwa was
[Page [93] ]
furious---all the more so when Itonde said: 'I have beaten the drum to announce that I have
come home to you, my father.'
When he was questioned by Yonjwa he said: 'Do you not remember that someone stole the
rats? Do you not remember the darkness? Where is the child of which your wife was
pregnant? Finally, do you not see that my toes are the same as yours?'
Yonjwa was still not satisfied and it was decided that Itonde would 'drink divine judgement'.
The experts of the villages cooked the poison together. It became the most potent venom
they had ever brewed. When it was ready it was poured into a pot called Evil Smell; gaseous
vapours rose up from it which made people cough and their eyes water. If a mortal would
have drunk it he would have died like a moth in the flame. But what can kill the spirit of
death? Itonde raised the pot to his lips and swallowed its contents, gulping it down like sweet
beer. To show that the poison had no effect on him whatsoever, Itonde took his magic bell
and started a round dance. The bell rang the dancing tune:
Itonde is the killing spirit,
The poison is not killing him.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
80 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---
Itonde was now recognized as Yonjwa's son, and he demanded a big human sacrifice to
celebrate his inauguration as the crown prince, Yonjwa decreed that the Batswa or Balumbe
(the pygmies) should be killed. It was indeed a hecatomb: the Nkundo drove their spears into
the poor pygmies and massacred them. Some pygmies succeeded in escaping into the forest,
and have lived there ever since.
7. ITONDE AND THE COPPERSMITH
Itonde has many aspects: some pertain to death, such as sacrifice, poison, hunting and
darkness; some are ambivalent, such as the fire
[Page [94] ]
and forgery; some definitely belong to the symbols of life, such as the banana.
Itonde wanted to wear copper rings on his ankles, like all the other young men. He went to
the smith and ordered them. The smith tried to operate his bellows but the fire would not
flare up. Itonde pushed him away and took over, singing his magic song to the spirits of
twilight:
Big-ears bat and crest-nose bat,
Flying dog and flying squirrel,
Come and help me.
When the song was finished, the copper was white-hot. Itonde invited the smith to fix the
copper rings on his legs, but the smith failed again in his own craft. Itonde took the copper
from the moulds and fixed the rings, still red-hot on his own legs.
Then he wanted to go, but the smith claimed his fee. 'A fee for failing?' jeered Itonde. Soon
the rings broke and Itonde went back to the smith, claiming that the copper was of inferior
quality. The smith took him to court, and the elders ruled that the smith had to deliver the
rings the next day, this time without being helped by Itonde.
Itonde went to the forest and found a banana, a fruit which in those days was unknown to the
Nkundo. He came home and planted the banana in his own garden. The next morning it had
grown into an enormous tree, with hundreds of ripe bananas hanging from it. Itonde picked
the bananas and cooked a huge pot of banana-mash to which he invited the whole village.
When they had all eaten their fill they felt so heavy that they all fell asleep, including the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
81 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---
smith.
Itonde went to the smithy and fixed his rings. As soon as he woke up the smith claimed his
payment. Itonde took him to court, saying: 'This time he did nothing at all, and as payment
for his copper I let him eat until he burst out of his clothes.'
[Page [95] ]
The council of elders ruled that the smith must pay Itonde a slave for failing to keep his
promise and for not doing his work. The smith refused, but Itonde grabbed him, saying: 'You
are going to be that slave.' The smith struggled to free himself but Itonde beat him with sticks
and tied a liana round his neck.
The poor man lamented his lot: 'I was a smith and now I am a slave.' He had to work in his
own smithy as a slave. Itonde took his house and his wives became Itonde's wives.
Who will not forfeit all to the spirit of dying?
8. INDOMBE THE DRAGON
The story of Indombe, the giant copper snake, contains several mysterious motifs. Its origin
must be Semitic, for only in Semitic languages is the word for 'copper' and 'snake' the same.
The fiery-red glow of the serpent is somehow related to the sunset. Only when Itonde has
trapped the sun can he overcome the serpent. Itonde is also 'related' to the liana which people
use for rope-making.
Of the many magic beings in the Lonkundo sagas, Indombe is one of the most mysterious.
She is a feminine snake, a goddess of fire and life, and as such even she is vanquished by
death. 
En passant , the discovery of the sugar-cane by Itonde is here mentioned: another
aspect of him as a culture hero, a giver of life as well as death.
More wives were acquired by Itonde in a simple manner: When he saw one he liked he just
took her. If her husband or father had the courage to protest at all, a fight would invariably
settle the argument in Itonde's favour. But none of his wives bore him children.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
82 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---
Itonde's brother Lofale married Wangala, who soon became pregnant. Pregnant women have
odd desires. Wangala had a craving for nothing but snakes, and so the two brothers set out
into the forest in search of snakes. Suddenly they saw a bright
[Page [96] ]
light shining in one of the trees, as fiery as the sun. Lofale ran away but he had to stop before
a river, which had not been there when they came. Itonde approached the sun-in-the-tree
although even he trembled with fear. The brilliant phenomenon turned out to be the giant
serpent Indombe, all made of shining copper, curled up and coiled around the gigantic lileko
-tree. It was more than three foot thick and several miles long. Itonde sat down under the
palaver-tree and began a conversation with the serpent:
'Great Indombe, do descend from your tree that we may talk together.'
Indombe replied: 'If you want to talk to me, come back at sunset. Wait for my friends to talk
to you.'
'No, it is you I want to converse with.' After some more fruitless discussion, Itonde intoned a
song:
Indombe of the Bakongo,
Come down that I may carry you!
Indombe was furious: 'You worm, are you trying to bewitch me? You baby! Go back to your
father! Do you think you can carry me? What will you carry me on?'
Indombe was so enraged that hot flames flared up, raging and roaring. The whole forest lit up
and the faces of the people on the river bank shone red as if it were sunset. Then Indombe
uncoiled a little and put her head on Itonde's shoulder. The shoulder was badly burnt and
Itonde fell down, fainting. When he came to, he rang his magic bell and immediately he felt
better. He looked up and saw that Indombe was back in her tree, all coiled up again. He also
saw that the sun was setting, and he feared that Indombe would kill him in the darkness, so
he decided he must catch the sun. He ran to the western horizon, cut down a number of trees
and made a gigantic bird-trap. The sun, in descending, was caught in the noose and fell into
the trap. Itonde had caught the sun.
He wanted to take the sun out of his trap, but when he touched
[Page [97] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
83 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---
it, it burnt him badly all over his body. He fell down dead, except for the hand which held the
magic bell. The hand stirred, the bell rang, Itonde sneezed and came back to life. He rose to
his feet and went back to Indombe. Indombe put coil after coil round his neck and shoulders.
Itonde kept ringing his bell, so that he grew taller and stronger all the time, while the strength
of the serpent diminished.
Itonde's feet sank down into the ground, so heavy was the snake. He waded through the
swamps with Indombe on his shoulders until they reached the river. There, he told the
serpent to uncoil from his shoulders on to the ground so that he could find a way to cross the
river. Indombe refused and suffocated Itonde, but one of its coils accidentally touched the
bell, so that Itonde revived, and put Indombe on the ground with tremendous effort, coil after
coil. As soon as he was rid of the giant serpent, he took a liana and studied it for a long time.
Then he bewitched it with a song:
Little liana, help me, my brother-in-law,
Little liana, help me to cross the river.
The liana began to sprout a branch that grew longer and longer and thicker and thicker and
broader, until it reached the other bank. Itonde set it down, and the liana branch had become a
wide bridge. They crossed the bridge, whereupon Itonde ordered it to resume its original
shape. The bridge became a liana again.
Lofale ran to the village and called to the inhabitants to fly, 'for Itonde is coming with death'.
All the people fled except Yonjwa and his wives, and Itonde's wives, who wanted to see what
Itonde would bring. Itonde put the giant snake down at the entrance to the village. At once it
uncoiled itself and quickly encircled the village, so that no one could escape. It caught every
living being in the village and swallowed all the people. Gone!
Itonde was furious: 'You monster! You have eaten my parents, my wives, my brothers and
sisters! I am going to kill you, cut you in slices and eat you up!'
[Page [98] ]
Indombe mocked him: 'You baby with your face still full of milk, you misshapen worm, I
have lived many times longer than you, how will you kill me?'
Itonde, however, went to his store-hut and took out his magic matchet, armed with which he
approached the dragon's head, all the time singing a magic song. Indombe felt that Itonde was
stronger, became despondent, and said:
'If you have to kill me, eat me all today.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
84 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---
If you leave one little piece, you will not survive.'
Itonde laid a spell in his knife and suddenly slashed through Indombe's neck. The colossal
head fell on the ground, boom! The giant body uncoiled and died. Itonde cut it in slices, put
these in pots and fried them in oil. Then he ate the lot, including all the juices, licking the
pots out. All the time he sang his little song:
Itonde, devour it, eat it all!
Only the head could not be eaten, not even by Itonde. He put it under his bed and went to
sleep.
In the middle of the night he woke up, feeling that he was rising up, with bed and all; soon he
was being pressed against the ceiling. He rang his bell, and at once whatever pressed him up
was deflated and Itonde could continue his sleep.
The next morning he saw to his terror that the dragon Indombe was back in all her
ugliness---but now it was only a ghost, who said: 'I told you that you must eat me whole; now
I have come back as a spirit. Now I will help you, for you are my master. Call your family, I
will show you a good place to live.'
They travelled along the river together until they arrived in Indombe's village, which was
very beautifully built and free of diseases.
On the road, Itonde learned that his brother Lofale had been killed by Indombe. He could not
take revenge on the serpent, who
[Page [99] ]
was already a dead spirit. So Itonde pursued a man in the forest, who tried to escape by
turning into a sugar-cane. Itonde seized him and changed him back into a man, with his feet
firmly rooted in the ground. He then killed him and buried him, as a sacrifice for the dead
Lofale.
Indombe called Itombe and said: 'Henceforth you will be called Ilelangonda. I give you this
village because you are a strong fighter. Now, good-bye to you all.' At that, Indombe coiled
up, jumped in the river and vanished.
9. THE DEA TH OF ITONDE-ILELE
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
85 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---
It is the privilege of great heroes to know the signs that forebode death. Itonde-Ilele knows
that he must go and search for the fruit and that that will mean his end.
There are numerous stories in Central and East Africa about men who meet disaster while
devoutly trying to satisfy the foolish cravings of whimsical wives.
The leprous beggar at the foot of the tree is, as we have seen before, an evil spirit. The birds
too, are spirits. The god of Life and Death, Itonde-Ilele, walks to the scene of his death, and
knows it. He has no option: it is better for him to die than for his child to be still-born. A wife
has the power of life and death over her husband, for she carries his child, which is his own
life in the next generation. Nature mourns Itonde.
Ilelangonda, or Ilele, as Itonde is now called for short, lived happily with his wives in
Indombe's village. One day they saw a long-boat full of fishermen rowing past on the river.
Ilele called them, but they shouted back insults. Ilele seized the boat and tied the men up,
until they begged him to let them free, and apologized saying: 'We did not know the great
Ilele lived here, it will not happen again.'
They bartered their fish and Mbombe, Ilele's favourite wife,
[Page [100] ]
bought a likoko -fish, which she roasted and ate. The bone stuck in her throat and was
removed with great difficulty. From that day Mbombe was pregnant, and like all pregnant
women, she had her whims.
One evening Ilele told his wives: 'This night my death will come flying over the house, it
will be dropped in the yard. Nobody is allowed out at any time.'
They all obeyed except the pregnant Mbombe, who got it into her head that she 
must have
some fresh air, so she went out of her hut and walked about in the yard in the middle of the
night. At that moment a horn-bill came flying over with a sau -fruit in his bill. Mbombe fell
in love with the bird and called it. The hornbill dropped the sau , which fell on the yard.
Mbombe picked it up and tasted it. It was delicious---sour-sweet---and she ate it all. From
that moment she craved sau -fruits and refused any other food. She cried day and night until
Ilele gave in and started out in search of the sau -tree.
Ilele took his bell, raised it towards the east and towards the west. When it was pointed at the
western sky the bell began to ring. Ilele started out in a westerly direction until he found the
sau -tree. At its foot he found a beggar sitting, with scabby sores all over his body; his name
was Fetefete. The beggar refused to go away unless Ilele promised to throw him a fruit. Ilele
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
86 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---
climbed the tree and threw a fruit down which hit Fetefete on his sores. Fetefete was angry
and began to yell:
'Master of the fruits, someone is stealing, Sausau, someone knocked my sores open.'
Sausau, the owner of the tree, heard it, and sent his servants, who were all birds, to go and
chase the thief away. They arrived near the tree in great swarms and attacked Ilele, but he
succeeded in hitting each of them with a 
sau -fruit. He jumped out of the tree with two
baskets full of fruit, which he brought to his wife. He gave her one of the baskets, and she ate
all the fruit at one go.
[Page [101] ]
Then she started crying until he gave her the other basket. When that was finished they went
to bed.
The next morning she began again, crying on and on. Ilele told his wife: 'Do you realize that
if I go in search of those fruits today, I shall die there and never come back?'
She retorted: 'And if I do not get more of those fruits, I will have a miscarriage!' Ilele gave in,
for she had his first-born in her womb. He told her: 'When my horn that hangs on the wall
there begins to bleed, I shall be dead. My snare-string will turn into a snake, the monkeys
will come and cry in the yard, the elephants will come out of the forest into the open, and the
sky will rain.'
Ilele left his house knowing he would never come back. He arrived at the tree, climbed it,
and threw down the fruit which the beggar demanded. Fetefete yelled when it hit his sores
and began singing his magic evocation of the Master of the fruits. Sausau called together all
his birds and asked them if anyone knew a device to catch Ilele.
The humming-bird said: 'What will you give me if I tell you?' It got three rings as a present
and said: 'Ask the caterpillar-bird.'
The caterpillar-bird was called, received a thousand rings and said: 'If Ilele loses his magic
bell he will die.'
The birds flew together to the 
sau -tree, with their nets. The pheasant climbed the tree,
slowly, slowly. Suddenly it struck Ilele in the eyes with its wings. Ilele dropped his bell and
fell out of the tree. The tortoise caught him in his net. All the birds beat Ilele until he died.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
87 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
In his hut, blood leaked from his horn. Monkeys appeared in the trees and cried loudly.
Elephants emerged from the forest and walked up to the village. Many wild animals called at
the house of the deceased king and wailed loudly. The sky started pouring sheets of rain and
it grew pitch-dark. The women understood, unbound their hair and began to lament.
Mbombe, alone of all living creatures, refused to cry, for at that moment her labour began.
[Page [102] ]
10. THE BIRTH OF LIANJA
The body of the god of death is full of the creatures of death: worms, maggots, flies and ants.
When he dies the birds peck holes in his body and insects swarm out of it: that is the origin
of vermin. Itonde's horn, like Roland's, announces the disaster.
Like Ichakejana, the Zulu hero, Lianja is born through his mother's shin. Lianja is in
possession of his father's bell, the secret of Itonde's life. Lianja is born at the moment of his
father's death: the father is reborn in the son. At once he wants to know why his father died,
and the mother is afraid, for her own foolish wish caused her husband's death.
There lay the body of Ilele the great chief, caught in the net of the Tortoise. The birds were
crowding round it, wishing to get a portion of the meat. They pecked it open with their
bills---and it was full of worms. Maggots swarmed, ants crept in and out, and flies buzzed.
The body was rapidly decaying. Water oozed out of it and and collected around it, making the
ground marshy. This was how the swamps were formed. The leaking body-water of Ilele
became a stream---the origin of the marsh rivers.
In Mbombe's hut, where the horn was bleeding, Ilele's wife lay in labour. Out of her lap came
ants and flies, and insects of every type: this was how insects came into the world. After that
she gave birth to the six ancestors of the Mongo-speaking peoples: Balúmbe, Bafotó,
Bielángi, Mbóle, Nkundó and Elíngá. Thirdly, Mbombe gave birth to a girl named Nsongo,
bright and beautiful.
Finally the deep bass of a male voice was heard from Mbombe's womb: 'Along which path
shall I go out?'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
88 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
His mother answered: 'Do you not see the path along which your fellows came out?'
The son replied haughtily: 'Can the son of a king walk along the road of slaves? I want a path
of my own. Take some of my father's white clay and smear it on your shin.'
[Page [103] ]
The princeling's first order was quickly obeyed: the slave women hurried for him before he
was even born. They applied his father's white clay, used normally for festive occasions, to
his mother's shin-bone. At once it began to swell up, split open, and there appeared Lianja,
the great hero, fully armed with all his father's weapons: the chief's staff, the royal necklace,
bow and arrow, the royal spear, the magic knife, Itonde's bell and his blowing horn. Lianja
was born a grown-up man, ready for battle to avenge his father who had died that day.
At once he demanded from his mother an explanation of why his father had died. Mother
Mbombe, fearful lest her son would meet the same enemies that destroyed his formidable
father, lied and said: 'I wanted some palm-nuts, and your father fell from a palm tree when
picking them for me.'
Lianja went out at once, found a palm-nut tree, climbed it, jumped down from the top, and
landed on his feet, unhurt. He returned in his mother's hut and started a row: 'Mother, you
lied to me, you concealed the true cause of my father's death and you know I must avenge
him. Tell me the truth.'
His mother, dreading the moment that her son would encounter the terrible birds, invented a
half-lie: 'I wanted some fish, your father went to catch it for me and was drowned by the
river.'
Lianja rushed out, jumped in the river, dived to the bottom, surfaced and swam to the shore.
He rushed back to his mother's hut, shouting: 'You lied again, the river did not kill him, it did
not kill me! You are hiding the truth. Perhaps you killed him yourself. If you did I will kill
you, and if you don't tell me the truth I will kill you also, so you might as well tell me!'
He took his knife and wounded his mother. She said: 'All right, do not kill me, I will tell you
the truth, I craved the fruits of the 
sau -tree, so your father went to the land of Sausau to pick
them for me, and the Master of the fruits killed him.'
[Page [104] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
89 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
11. LIANJA A VENGES HIS FATHER
Nsongo, Lianja's twin sister, leads a mysterious double life of man and woman. She
accompanies him with whom she shared the womb, on all his expeditions. Nsongo was also
predestined to become Lianja's wife, although this is not explicitly stated by the narrators.
The idea is that: 'After all they have been sleeping together in the womb already.'
Their grandmother's magic pouch reappears in this story. It is the first time we learn that it
contains snuff. Sneezing is associated with waking up to a new life.
Lianja went out, called up all the men of the village and told them to prepare for war. When
they were ready they set out, while Nsongo sang a song:
Lianja, son of my mother, go out to battle,
If you don't fight, may your shield be torn.
The army crossed three rivers by means of plaited mats. When they arrived near the 
sau -fruit
tree they sat down and made camp there. Lianja climbed the tree and began cutting down
fruits and branches.
The little beggar ran to his father and said: 'The son of Ilele has come to take revenge!'
Sausau collected his army and rushed to the sau -tree. All his men and all Lianja's men were
killed in the ensuing battle. Finally, the two heroes approached each other and engaged in a
terrific fight. The forest echoed with the blows, until at last Lianja killed Sausau.
Then Lianja took some of his own magic snuff from his pouch. He pushed a little pinch of it
into the nostrils of each of his dead men. Every man sneezed noisily and woke up, alive.
[Page [105] ]
12. LIANJA AND THE SUN
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
90 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---
The sparrow-hawk receives the sun in heaven and fixes it in its orbit. This tale may perhaps
echo that of the Egyptian sun-god Horus, the sparrow-hawk. Yemekonji is the name for God.
Lianja gave the dead Sausau the same treatment. Sausau woke up and said: 'If you make my
people live again, I will agree to serve you, together with them.' Lianja assented, on condition
that they would become human beings. This was agreed. Lianja gave all the dead bird-spirits
his magic snuff and they all woke up as normal human men. They all acclaimed Lianja as
their king and followed him.
They marched away until they reached a village, and Lianja told Nsongo to go and ask the
villagers who they were. They answered: 'We are Balúmbe, we are King Lianja's people.'
Their men joined Lianja's army.
At the next village they received the answer: 'We are Bafotó, we are Lianja's people,' and
their men too joined the army. Nsongo accompanied her brother's army and acted as
messenger. Lianja observed that the sun neither rose nor set and this caused him worry. The
sun must be suspended somewhere, but where? Lianja decided to send the sparrow-hawk as
his messenger to Yemekonji high in heaven.
The fly volunteered to go on the same mission, but as an independent observer. The fly said
to the sparrow-hawk: 'Take no notice of me, I will go and eavesdrop on the meeting of the
celestials.'
The councillors in heaven decided: 'We will make three parcels, one containing soil, one
containing leaves, and one containing the sun, and we will make the sparrow-hawk choose.'
They made three parcels. Two of them were painted in bright colours, but the one that
contained the sun was left unpainted. They
[Page [106] ]
said: 'If he chooses the earth, he may go back to earth, but if he chooses the leaves, he will go
on wandering for ever like falling leaves.'
The fly heard all this and flew quickly to the sparrow-hawk to tell the story, urging him:
'Remember, choose the parcel with no colours at all. Those that are brightly painted contain
only worthless things. The sun is in the uncoloured parcel.'
The sparrow-hawk flew to Yemekonji. Yemekonji said:
'In the past, you people of the earth have spoilt things. Ilele sent a man who did not know
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
91 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---
what the sun was. He chose the morning star. Later a man came who left the sun lying here
and took the moon. I showed him how to place the moon in the sky. So now they have the
moon and the evening star, with their companions. Now open your wings and show me if you
have any spies there with you.'
The sparrow-hawk answered: 'Yemekonji, you who know everything, I am only a speck of
dust in your eyes, I hid nobody in my wings.'
Yemekonji, however, knew everything in advance. He knew that Lontsingo, the fly, had
eavesdropped on the deliberations. He knew that the sun would be carried away by the
mortals. Had he not revealed all this in parables?
The sparrow-hawk was then invited to make his choice. After inspecting each parcel closely
and carefully, he finally picked out the sun-parcel and bowed to Yemekonji, who told him:
'As soon as you reach the clouds, open this parcel and pull your feathers together.' The
sparrow-hawk left heaven with the sun-parcel in his claws. Down, down, down he circled,
until he reached the silver clouds. There he undid the parcel, and the golden sun rolled out
and shot its rays through the sky. The sparrow-hawk fixed the sun in its course, and its light
descended on earth. The people on earth sing hymns in praise of the sparrow-hawk:
[Page [107] ]
The sparrow-hawk flew to the limits of the sky
and brought a message from Yemekonji.
The sparrow-hawk is like a father, he gave us light.
The sparrow-hawk flew through the clouds
and unwrapped the radiant sun.
He placed the sun-disc on its path
and brought its rays to men and beasts.
When the sparrow-hawk came down to earth and perched on a branch, there were all the
creatures of the earth waiting to greet him. The wild beasts of the jungle were there, the
fishes, the birds and even the insects, to ask him the news from heaven. The sparrow-hawk
related what Yemekonji had told him:
'The sun will descend and then disappear with the number twelve. Afterwards, it will
reappear and rise again with the number twelve. Thus it will be for all time, by God's will.'
Lianja decreed that as a reward the sparrow-hawk would be allowed to eat chickens.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
92 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---
13. THE ORIGIN OF THE WHITE PEOPLE
In this story we find the first mention of the great diviner Bongenge, who is to Lianja what
Merlin was to King Arthur: a protector as well as a magician.
This notion of the origin of the white people is not uncommon in the region: i.e. that white
men are the sons of spirits, and have learned their technical tricks from ghosts in the forest.
White is the colour of apparitions. Obviously, whites are not normal people. Ordinary healthy
children are born chocolate brown and grow up to be as black as bilberries.
Yendembe, one of Lianja's daughters, appeared to be pregnant without being married. The
girl maintained and swore that she had known no man. Lianja consulted the famous diviner
Bongenge,
[Page [108] ]
who pronounced:
'Lianja's daughter is pregnant of twins, a boy and a girl. Their father is a god; therefore they
will be white-coloured children instead of black, as human babies ought to be. Because they
are not the children of a man they will want to live separately as if they were superior beings,
and they will make things we have never seen and engage in activities we have never heard
of. They will be married together.'
When Lianja's daughter's time had come, she gave birth to a boy first, and then a girl, both
quite white. The two kept apart from the black children and began to speak a different
language. At fifteen, they asked to have a separate house built for them, a sign that they
wished to sever the bonds with the clan. They began to write with pens on flat surfaces. To
the amazement of the black people they started forging iron, saying they were building a boat.
Who had ever heard of making a boat out of iron, which sinks like a stone? But the iron ship
did not sink, and when they had added a propeller they could travel together along the rivers
without engaging rowers. They built their own house downstream, with a roof made of iron,
and also with keys made of iron instead of leather thongs to fasten the doors. The white
woman became pregnant and gave birth to twins, a boy and a girl, who also married together.
14. NSONGO'S DEATH
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
93 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---
Like all the heroes of this cycle, Likinda, Lianja's son, has a magic object. Lonkundo has his
snare, Ilánkaka her fire-basket, Eyonga her pouch, Itonde has his bell, Lianja his snuff.
Likinda has a mysterious pot that predicts the future and diagnoses diseases: a divining jar.
Nsongo, Lianja's wife, gave birth to a son, Likinda. Likinda grew up quickly and became a
great warrior. After many adventures, such as the wars with the Ngombe people, he visited
the country
[Page [109] ]
of Sausau and fell in love with Boale, the daughter of Sausau. For the bride-price Lianja paid
sixty copper rings, and other valuables such as tools. Sausau gave a hundred chickens and
thirty goats to the newly-weds, to start them off.
Boale became pregnant. One day her husband went to the swamps to set fish-traps. Boale
followed her husband, suddenly she heard a fish moving in a hollow tree-stem in the swamp.
She put her hand into a hole and caught the fish but could not withdraw her hand. She called
her husband to help her, and Likinda killed it with a fish-spear. It was a tough species, a bulgy
type of fish. They went home together, and the fish was cooked and eaten by the family.
Suddenly Nsongo, Lianja's twin sister, fainted and no medicine could cure her. She was
gravely ill. Likinda consulted his magic pot and the voice of the pot answered: 'Nsongo is
going to die.'
Lianja was desolate. In deep despair he called the famous diviners of the land, Boyoyo,
Lofonde the frog who jumps and prances, and Bongenge, the greatest soothsayer of them all,
who had given so many correct predictions already. Bongenge of the Bells began to sing:
Lianja, stop consulting the diviners,
None can help your sister's ailment.
Nsongo will not recover.
Nsongo never woke up. She died the same day. Lianja cried like a small boy for his twin
sister, bright, beautiful Nsongo.
15. THE BIRTH OF LIKINDA'S FIRST CHILD
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
94 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 96 ---
Like Mbombe, her husband's grandmother, Boale, Likinda's wife, feels that weeping over a
death in the family would bring ill luck over the baby she is just giving birth to. There is a
more mysterious
[Page [110] ]
reason, one that only mothers know: the child, in the process of appearing, receives the spirit
of the person who has just died, and the old personality is born in a new body. Why should a
mother weep if the deceased is being born out of her own body? Nsongo is reborn as her dear
brother's first granddaughter. There remains a warm relationship between the old hero and
this little girl who bears his twin sister's name.
Boale was singing a monotonous song to herself, in order to overcome the pangs of labour.
The women of the household rebuked her, saying: 'You young woman from the forest, we are
all wailing, we mourn the famous Nsongo, your husband's dearest mother. And you merely
sing, on the very day of her death!'
Boale merely replied: 'I cannot mourn, I must not wail, as the spears of pain are drilling in my
belly!'
The women fell silent, and suddenly they heard the child crying inside Boale's womb. The
tiny voice called: 'Mother Boale, I am Nsongo, I am coming to my brother! Lianja, son of my
mother, come and give me the clothes of Nsongo, give them to mother Boale!'
Lianja was called at once and informed of the event: 'Lianja, grieve no longer, Nsongo is
coming today!'
The girl was born and gladly welcomed by her father and grandfather. But however much joy
she gave her grandfather Lianja, he could not forget his twin-sister, and mourned her for
seven years. One day, Lianja stooped and felt a severe pang of headache. Nsongo, who was
now a little girl of seven, cried for him, and suddenly the pain was over.
She said: 'Grandfather, I am here to care for you, always. Please do not say, as you so often
do, that you will soon have to follow your sister Nsongo.'
Lianja answered his beloved granddaughter: 'It is not I who wish to go, it is Yemekonji who
has written that I must follow Nsongo and our father Ilelangonda. Like him, I shall die in
battle.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
95 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 97 ---
[Page [111] ]
Nsongo answered: 'If you die, I will disappear too, and no one will know where I have gone.'
16. LIANJA SEES HIS WHITE GRANDCHILDREN
It is not clear why this story is out of its chronological order. It may be a modern addition,
woven into the fabric of the narrative. Lianja is the ancestor not only of the black people but
also of the white people, such seems to be the message of this episode.
Yendembe was Lianja's third daughter. He had spoilt her by announcing that no one could
give her orders, except for 'come and eat'. The little girl's maternal grandmother had once
asked her to fetch water but the child refused. When grannie asked her to pick some
peppercorns the child just started crying, and refused to eat anything. As a result she soon fell
ill and faded away. Old grandmother took her knife and made a small incision in the child's
skin, so that people would think a snake had bitten her. The child fainted and died.
Lianja was inconsolable. He invited Bongenge, the famous diviner, to come and smell out the
cause of his daughter's death. 'Is it a cobra or a viper?' Bongenge sat down with his
paraphernalia and his magic bell, and began to narrate what had happened in his own
sing-song manner. Without having consulted anyone, he knew about many things he had
never even seen.
Grandmother is the evil one, the mother's mother,
I see her looking at the child, 
ngelinge ,
I see her carving the child's skin, ngelinge ,
To make it look like snake bite, ngelinge ,
She is a dangerous witch, casting spells.
This was the origin of witchcraft. Lianja's mother-in-law was the first woman to practise it.
She was banned from the village.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
96 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 98 ---
[Page [112] ]
Lianja found his magic snuff, after threatening to kill his mother-in-law, who had hidden it.
He pushed some of the powerful powder into the little girl's nostrils. She sneezed, woke up,
and rose, hale and hearty. It was this girl, Yendembe, who later bore the white twins without
a father.
For many years, Lianja had been searching in vain to see his freak grandchildren, the
intelligent white twins. One day he started out again, leaving his big blowing-horn behind,
and told his wife Nsongo: 'If the horn leaks water, I am tired and sweating on my journey, but
if you see blood oozing from it, I am dying.'
He went on his way saying: 'No profit without journey.' After nightfall he heard a thunderous
noise like men fighting a battle. 'If only my father Ilelangonda were here,' exclaimed Lianja
aloud. Suddenly he saw a white apparition in the dark forest, speaking to him in a hollow
voice:
'Know that what you think is a war, is not. It is the ship of the children of Yendembe,
travelling along the river. If you want to meet them, go and wait on the river-bank. You will
see them when they come back.'
Lianja asked the spirit: 'Are you God?'
'I am not God.'
'Are you my sister Nsongo?'
'I am not.'
'Are you the spirit of my father?'
'I am Ilelangonda, but do not fear, I will go with you. Together we will go to the river. It is
your father who is speaking.'
After arriving on the river-bank, Lianja built a temporary hut for himself, and started hunting
pigs. When he heard the noise coming back he ran to the bank and saw the ship. He waved
and shouted, but the people could not hear him. At last they saw him and stopped their ship.
They invited him to join them on their voyage and took him to their house, where they
received him hospitably. He stayed with them for two weeks.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
97 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 99 ---
[Page [113] ]
17. THE DEA TH OF KING LIANJA I
Yendembe, Lianja's favourite daughter, the one who was embraced by a god, is the one
surviving member who has the most intimate relations with him. This means also that she
knows the language of the birds. She can force the leopards and even the spirits to pay their
respect to the great king.
One day, Lianja found a stream in which a man called Ngimokeli had made barriers, and
caught so many fish that the nets were bulging. Lianja took some of the fish for himself, since
the nets would soon be torn; also, he considered that stream as part of his property.
Ngimokeli appeared and started uttering insults against Lianja's mother. This angered Lianja,
and the two men started a fight and killed each other.
Yendembe saw the magic horn bleeding and knew her father was dead. She went out and
stood on the road to the forest. There she called a weaver-bird:
'Weaver-bird, weaver-bird, if father Lianja is dead, start weaving!' The weaver-bird began to
weave at once.
'Weaver-bird, if my father is dead, destroy your nest!' At once, the weaver-bird tore down
what it had just woven.
'Monkeys, climbers of trees, if father Lianja is dead, why are you not wailing?' At once the
monkeys started wailing loudly in their trees.
'If father Lianja is dead, may the leopard roar!' Deep in the forest the leopard roared,
mourning the dead king.
Yendembe spoke her final incantation: 'If my father Lianja died, let the dead come here!' At
once the misty spirits of the dead appeared from all sides, crowding the deceased king's
compound, to pay homage at the home of the great ruler.
Intrepid, Yendembe went on: 'Now let the dead return.' At once, the ghostly apparitions
withdrew, dispersed and vanished in the forest.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
98 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 100 ---
[Page [114] ]
Not long afterwards, the girl Nsongo disappeared and was never seen again.
18. THE BIRTH OF LIANJA II, THE SMITH
The king is dead: long live the king. The Congolese philosophy of metempsychosis creates
an atmosphere of gay expectation. When a great chief is dying there is bound to be one
woman in labour in the household. The spirit of the deceased is no sooner released from one
body than it plunges into the body of a baby who is just being born, and into a new life. As a
result, the characters of the story have an un-individualistic hazy existence, protracted over
several generations.
In the story of the birth of Lianja II, Ilánkaka has suddenly reappeared. She was the
fire-woman who got caught in Lonkundo's trap in the forest. She helped him create a nation
but she never bore him children. Now she appears as the wife of his great- grandson, Lianja,
whose other wife, who is called Nsongo like his twin sister and his granddaughter, dies in the
same episode of the narrative.
All the women were wailing and mourning, except Ilánkaka, wife of Lianja, the king who had
just died.
'Why don't you mourn?'
'I cannot mourn, for the pains of labour are drilling through my body.'
She gave birth to a daughter and the women said: 'Now, mourn and weep, for your child is
born.'
She said: 'I cannot weep, for there is still pain in my womb.'
A moment later a son was born; in a short while he grew up into a big man. The women were
terrified and stammered: 'Look this is the king! He looks like Lianja!'
His brother Likinda asked him: 'What is your name?' The boy answered: 'My sister is Nsongo
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
99 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 101 ---
and I am Lianja, the Smith. We
[Page [115] ]
both have the magic bell. Now will you tell me who killed our father Lianja?'
As soon as Likinda had told him what happened at the brook, young Lianja suggested they go
and take their revenge on the people of Ngimokeli. So the two brothers set out. Of course
they won the battle, but only after fierce fighting and with generous use of the magic snuff
that brings people back to life.
After the conquest of Ngimokeli's village they captured all the nets, hooks, lines, harpoons
and other fishing gear for which Ngimokeli's men were so famous. They decided to go on a
fishing expedition and spend the night on the river-bank. That night, young Lianja had a
dream. A voice told him: 'You are comfortable here in the wilderness, but at home there is
bitter sorrow.' When they arrived home they found that their sister Yendembe had died; she
had simply cried herself to death. They consulted Bongenge who confirmed that no witch had
killed her this time; sorrow alone had done it. It took a long time before the magic powder
made her sneeze.
When she became fully conscious she said: 'I am Yendembe, Lianja's daughter, no one could
give me orders except "come and eat". I have seen my grandfather Ilelangonda, who died
many years ago. He told me that we were sinning and that the world would therefore exist
only a few more years. Grandfather told me: "Return to life in your human body, and grieve
no more. Wait patiently until God calls you. Tell Likinda that his mother must come now; she
is expected in the world of spirits." That is what my grandfather said. I could see him as
bright as the moon at night. And now I have come back to you, happily.'
The next day Lianja II Boketsu was hunting in the forest, when he suddenly heard his magic
bell ring. He thought: Lianja my father told me that if ever I heard this bell ring some
misfortune would have fallen on the family. He went home and found Yendembe crying near
her mother Nsongo's bed. Lianja entered
[Page [116] ]
his father's widow's hut. Yendembe said: 'I am not crying, it is just the smoke that hurts my
eyes.'
Lianja Boketsu said: 'I want the magic pouch of our father, Lianja.'Likinda agreed and went to
fetch it. They applied the magic powder and sang the magic song:
Oh powder of the Sneeze of Life,
Kangili, kangili ,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
100 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 102 ---
Oh pouch of Lianja,
Oh pouch of the crying Mbeo -beast.
They repeated it many times, but Lianja's widow Nsongo did not come back to life. They
called the diviner Lofonde, the frog who jumps and plunges, but he said:
'He who knows everything does not know the tortoise yet.'
Finally Bongenge, the greatest of all diviners, began:
Do not say it was Bongenge, ngelinge ,
God Himself has called her, ngelinge ,
Her sorrow was too large for her, ngelinge ,
Crying for her lost husband, ngelinge ,
Crying was the cause of dying, ngelinge ,
Grieving gives you many children, ngelinge ,
Many cares and many worries, ngelinge ,
Worries which will wear one out, ngelinge ,
Oh Yendembe, full of pity, ngelinge ,
Did not want to admit her sorrow, ngelinge
Said 'the smoke stings in my eyes', ngelinge
But that is not why she cries, ngelinge ,
Yendembe is full of compassion, ngelinge ,
Feels the tears hang on her eyelids, ngelinge ,
When she sees such saddening sorrow, ngelinge ,
She herself has heard Ilele, ngelinge ,
Ilelangonda of the strong lianas, ngelinge ,
Told her that he called his daughter, ngelinge ,
Nsongo mother of Likinda, ngelinge ,
She must join her fathers' manes, ngelinge ,
Do not alter God's decisions, ngelinge .
[Page [117] ]
They buried Nsongo, mother of Likinda. That night when they were lying on the floor, as is
customary for mourners, they suddenly heard Ilelangonda speak, with a deep heavy voice,
although they all knew he was dead:
'Am I not master of all the villages? This I say to Likinda: I have made Yendembe my
witness. She warned him that Nsongo would die. To apply the magic powder is trying God. If
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
101 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 103 ---
Lianja touches it again he will die. Yendembe, do not grieve. I will be with you.'
19. ELOKO THE BOGYMAN
The Lianja cycle of stories is something of a novel, a family chronicle. Each chapter fits in its
proper place, though very often the student has to search in the earlier chapters to find the
first hidden roots of the drama that later develops.
Nevertheless, the myths of the Nkundo people will always remain a subject of discussion
among mythologists. There are so many mysterious characters, whose reappearance at a later
stage in the narrative makes their significance only more puzzling.
The word 
Eloko (pl. Biloko ) denotes a race of semi-real forest- dwellers, who can kill and
be killed but are not wholly human. 'Bogymen' seems the best rendering in English, although
they also resemble the Scandinavian trolls.
Yendembe is the most human of all the characters in the great Lianja romance. One of her
very human aspects is that she always seems to attract ill luck. Being spoilt by her father is
clearly considered the origin of all misfortune. Being bewitched by her grandmother is a
blemish that never wears off. Becoming an unmarried mother is a terrible disgrace in Africa.
Giving birth to a pair of albinos is even worse.
Likinda appears to be an experienced magician. He can be transformed into a delicious fruit
and let himself be eaten by his enemy, while still preserving his spiritual identity. To eat one's
enemy does not mean his end, as one might suppose. If the enemy possesses
[Page [118] ]
magical powers he will kill his eater from inside. This is why extreme precaution should be
taken by everyone not to eat dangerous fruits. A man can eat his death. To open the bowels is
one way of getting rid of the evil spirit, but a clever spirit will manage to stay inside and eat
his victim from within. Thus does Likinda, the grandson of Death.
We have already seen how Yendembe, who is born as one of the many daughters of Lianja I,
became the first human being to suffer the evil effects of witchcraft, and all because her royal
father spoilt her. Her maternal grandmother was banned from court for her sake and was
never heard of again. Later, Yendembe was mysteriously made pregnant by an unknown god
or spirit and gave birth to the first white people.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
102 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 104 ---
When this first white couple moved out of Nkundoland in their iron craft, their grandfather
Lianja went out in search of them. He did not find them that first time, for he was confused,
and wandered aimlessly in the forest. He had a vision of his father Ilelangonda, and of his
mother Mbombe (Nsombe).
He heard a voice calling him, but searched for the caller in vain. He consulted the great
war-wizard Bongenge who, as usual, knew the answer:
The one who gave you visions, ngelinge ,
Do not say it is Bongenge, ngelinge ,
It is the owner of the bedsteads, ngelinge ,
And of the hidden sleeping-places, ngelinge ,
It is Eloko and his servants, ngelinge ,
The master of voices and visions, ngelinge .
This was the first apparition of Eloko the Bogyman, and old king Lianja was the first to suffer
from his visitations. Later in the history the bogy spirits return.
After the birth of the albinos Yendembe was married off to a prince of the Ngombe, a rather
hostile people, but her father Lianja I probably considered this a wise political move. After
six
[Page [119] ]
years of life with that foreign people she returned home for good, not having borne her
husband any children, and never having seen her two albino children since they had left her.
After the death of her father, Lianja I, the elephants greatly increased in numbers and began
to destroy the fields. This was also blamed on Yendembe, because it was revealed in a dream
to the wife of one of the diviners that the elephants were bewitched and wanted to kill
Yendembe, whom no one could give orders to.
This happened in the same night in which Yendembe had died grieving for her father and was
subsequently brought back to life by the magic powder. After that time, her brothers Likinda,
Lianja II, Boketsu, Itonde II and Lontsinga 'the Fly' were increasingly engaged in hunting
elephants. One day Likinda and Itonde killed an enormous elephant. They went to find
Lianja and his men to help them carve the body up and divide it.
After Likinda and Itonde had left the body of the elephant, all the elephants of the forest
gathered on that spot in order to revive their brother with magic means: they took large
branches and beat the body with them, but without success. When Lianja's men arrived, they
simply chased away the big animals. When they had carved up the body of the dead elephant,
Lianja decided to make a thanksgiving to the forest god for this successful hunt, at the
ceremonial place where their forefathers had previously sacrificed to the god.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
103 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 105 ---
On their way back they ran into a gang of Eloko's servants, the bogymen. They started
fighting and killed all Lianja's men. Lianja, left alone, met Itoli, the grass-starling, who
helped him with useful advice. Itoli told him to collect mbole -fruits, make a mash of them
with salt, and place them in the path of the bogymen, Lianja first revived his comrades with
his magic powder, then told them to collect the mbole -fruits. As soon as the eloko - spirits
found their favourite dish waiting for them on the path, they fell on it and forgot the war with
Lianja. The latter surrounded them with his men, and killed all the bogymen---except one.
[Page [120] ]
Itoli, perched on a branch, warned Likinda: 'You did not kill all the Biloko , you omitted the
little Inkankanga, the wizard, and his wife. They ran away in time.'
Likinda asked: 'Give me a charm to have them too.'
Itoli said: 'You have it and you know it.'
Likinda went and found the well in the forest where Inkankanga, the little wizard and his
wife, usually came to drink. Likinda sat down and changed himself into a baby. The wizard's
wife arrived at the well and picked up the poor babe, but her husband, being himself familiar
with magical practices, said sharply: 'Put that back where you found it! That is not a baby at
all, but Likinda who killed our people!'
The woman said: 'Nonsense! This is not a warrior! Anybody can see that this is only a small
child! I want to keep him and bring him up as my own child!'
'Be it on your own head, you will see what happens.'
They travelled home together, and each time the wife saw a fruit-tree she said to her
husband: 'Later when our baby is a big boy, he will climb the tree for us old people and pick
the fruits, and throw them down.'
When they came to a 
senja fruit-tree, the wizard's wife began again: 'If only our boy were big
...'
Suddenly the baby (Likinda) began to talk, and said: 'Mother! Put me on a tree so that I can
climb to the top and pick you some fruits!'
She placed him with his chest against a tree and the Likinda- baby climbed up and began to
throw down senja -fruits for his foster-mother. She began to eat at once, and enjoyed the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
104 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 106 ---
fruits so much that her husband was tempted and called to the child in the tree: 'Throw one
for me too!'
That, of course, was sealing his own doom. Likinda had been waiting for just that. He
selected an extra juicy and well-rounded fruit and crept into it himself. The fruit came down,
and Inkankanga caught it. He ate it up whole and it sank down into his belly.
[Page [121] ]
When they had enough fruit, the pair called the little baby back: 'Come down from up there.'
Likinda replied gleefully from inside Inkankanga's body: 'I am already here, I am sitting in
the bogyman's belly!'
The wizard was terrified, for to eat a spirit means certain death. And Likinda, the grandson of
Ilele, was a very powerful spirit.
The wizard said to his wife: 'If I do not get rid of him, you will die. You silly old woman, I
told you it was not a baby but the mighty Likinda. Now I have eaten him! He is inside me!'
Suddenly, he jumped up and ran as quickly as he could. Then he stopped and asked: 'Mr
Likinda, did you perchance stay behind?'
But Likinda replied from the bogyman's bowels: 'Oh no! I am still with you, I want to see if
you cannot invent more clever tricks! Did you think I could not keep up with you? Come, let
us go on travelling together!'
The bogyman knew that Likinda was going to kill him, so he called his wife and stabbed her,
shouting: 'You die first! You caused my death!' She died---and he ran away.
As soon as he saw a river he threw himself into the water. He swam round, saying: 'Mr
Likinda, you stay here in the water, I will come back later and meet you here.'
Likinda replied from inside his stomach: 'Oh no! You go on and carry both of us!' The
bogyman-wizard crept back on to the shore, found a pit and began to empty his bowels into it,
hoping in this way to shed Likinda.
He said: 'Mr Likinda, why don't you stay in this pit, it's perfect for catching wild animals!'
Likinda answered: 'Not on your life! Come on, carry us along!' The bogyman walked and
walked until he was tired. He said: 'Mr Likinda, you didn't want to kill me, did you? You just
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
105 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 107 ---
want to torture me, don't you? The sun is setting, and I feel sleepy. Just let me lie down here,
and you can do as you please.'
He sat down, sadness filling his heart because he knew death was
[Page [122] ]
approaching. Likinda jeered at him: 'Have you nothing better to do than catch lice on your
empty head? Have you no more magic tricks? Do you think the fisherman who has shipped a
live crocodile can sleep? Don't you know that I am a grandson of Ilelangonda, the spirit of
death? Don't you remember that your people killed the men of Lianja, my brother? Come on,
carry me!'
But Inkankanga had given up. He decided that life was not worth suffering for in this way. He
just sat there and waited for the inevitable end. Likinda grew impatient. He crept into the
heart and tore it to pieces so that the bogyman died. Then he drew his hunting knife and
slashed through the skin of his prison. He stepped out and left the corpse lying there, after
having taken the little bag of 
yenyi -skin, the wizard's most cherished charm.
Now Likinda was lost in the dark forest, but God had pity on him and showed him the path to
his village. There, he was received with cheers of joy; the people spread out a path of mats
for him to tread on, and his brother Lianja gave a big beer party. They improvised songs:
I love my brother, the measure is full!
Likinda told them how how he prayed to God that he might become a little baby, how he had
been adopted by the bogyman's wife, and how he had travelled about in the bogyman's belly.
They all roared with laughter.
20. THE FAMINE
Manioc (or Cassava) was brought to tropical Africa by the Portuguese from South America in
the sixteenth century. It has become the staple diet of many peoples of equatorial Africa,
from the east coast to the west coast. It has saved millions from starvation and enabled many
regions of Africa to become densely populated.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
106 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 108 ---
The day arrived when it pleased Yemekonji to punish the people
[Page [123] ]
for their sins. They had feasted too much and prayed too little. Blight struck the plants, the
sugar-canes mouldered, the bananas rotted, the fish died in the ponds, no game could be
found in the forest. The people lamented:
'Oh father Lianja, successor of Ilelangonda of the lianas, we wish to go and find a better place
to live.'
Lianja answered: 'You may go; I stay. I do not want to relinquish the shrines of my ancestors.'
Bongenge stayed with Lianja. Lofonde departed with the people, saying: 'No gain without
journey.' When they had gone, the famine in Lianja's village grew worse every day.
Lianja and Nsongo wept bitterly and prayed fervently to God, and He relented. He,
Yemekonji, sent them the answer to their prayers from heaven. It was a new plant, 
toko , the
roots of which can be eaten as cassava, or manioc. God revealed the name of the new food to
Bongenge, who announced that the period of punishment was over. Yemekonji had taken pity
on the people and given them a new crop from above. From that time cassava has been their
staple food.
Lianja decided to recall the people who had emigrated. As they had now suffered enough,
there was no more reason for them to search for better land, for there was plenty at home. He
started out on his search, and in the middle of the forest he found a forked stick standing in
the ground with long white hair hanging over it. A little farther on, he found another forked
stick supporting the same long white hairs which, he decided, was a beard. Lianja followed
the beard, which was supported by a long trail of forked sticks, along the path, through the
forest, until he came out into an open village square, where the beard disappeared into a hut.
Lianja entered the hut and met its owner, old Banjolo the sage.
Lianja's people had arrived there on their search for a new homeland, and Banjolo had told
them: 'I will receive you as my people but I do not wish to live with idle men, so go and
cultivate
[Page [124] ]
my fields.' They went out with their hoes, and worked obediently. When they had produced
their crops, the sly Banjolo sent his own men to collect the harvest.
When Lianja arrived and claimed his people back, old Banjolo refused to let them go unless
Lianja would pay him all the food he had given them during the period of their stay with
them, not mentioning, of course, that they had worked for their food. Lianja refused, and
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
107 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
started calling his people together from the fields with his magic bell, which they all heard
and recognized no matter how far away they were. Banjolo, too, collected his men,
threatening to kill Lianja with all his people. A terrible battle ensued in which Lianja burned
all the houses, singing:
I lit the beard, the beard is burning,
I set the beard alight, the beard is flaming.
Banjolo and his men all perished. They had underestimated the power of Lianja, who did not
lose a single man. They returned home all together, singing happily.
The people in Likinda's village heard the bell ringing from afar, so they beat the drum and
started a dance.
21. THE ORIGIN OF JEALOUSY
A wise husband leaves the choice of a second wife to his first wife. She will usually select a
close relative, a younger sister or cousin, so that the two women may live in harmony, sharing
one husband. The senior wife then has the feeling that it was really her idea that her husband
should marry again.
The woodpecker is an important member of the bird family. He is a magician and a breaker of
rocks.
Ilelangonda-Itonde reappears to his great-granddaughter as the spirit of death, but also as a
saviour. The tortoise was the animal that caught him in its nets. It is the most intelligent of all
animals.
[Page [125] ]
Likinda's sister Botoma was married to a man named Bolonga. After some years, when it
became appropriate for Bolonga to take a second wife, Botoma decided that the best
candidate was Bolumbu, her niece, a daughter of Likinda. When Bolumbu entered Bolonga's
household, it soon became clear that he loved her much more than his first wife, her aunt.
She was an obedient wife and a good cook, so that her husband spent much more time in the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
108 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 110 ---
hut of his second wife than with her aunt Botoma.
This was the origin of envy: Botoma began to hate her young niece, and to hatch a plan to get
rid of her. The opportunity presented itself one day when they went out fishing together.
Bolonga had dammed a stream and told his wives to collect all the fish in the dry bed. There
were dozens of fish squirming in the mud. As soon as Aunt Botoma had her basket full, she
told her niece and co-wife to carry on picking up the fish; she would go home to do the
cooking, she said. Bolumbu stayed on working, stooping over the river bed under an intricate
maze of tree roots. Aunt Botoma climbed out on to the bank, went to the dam, which was
built of wooden poles, took one of the poles and used it as a lever to break the dam. The
water rushed into the empty bed and Bolumbu was washed away.
When Botoma came home her husband asked her where Bolumbu was, but she only said:
'Oh, she went by another path.' When it was found that the river dam was broken, and
Bolumbu did not come home, it was assumed that she was drowned. But she was not. God
had decided that she should not yet die and had given her strength to survive the ordeal. The
current carried her into a hollow rock where she could stand up. She could not get out, but
she could breathe and so she lived.
It was at that place that the people of Likinda's village used to fetch their water; it was a
waterfall in a rocky part of the land. One day, Lianja and Nsongo sent some children with
earthenware jars to fetch water. As soon as the children arrived near the water they heard a
voice singing:
[Page [126] ]
Kelenge, kelenge ,
Did you bring my father?
Did you bring my mother?
Do not bring the fool who broke the dam!
Terrified, the children dropped the jars so that they broke, ran home and stammered out a
story about the frightening thing they had heard. The adults decided to go and see for
themselves. When they came near the river they heard the voice singing inside the rock.
They recognized it as Bolumbu's voice and concluded that her spirit lingered there in the
rock. They went and consulted Bongenge, who was even more cautious than usual:
Do not say it was Bongenge, 
ngelinge ,
When I speak my magic words, ngelinge ,
I shall have to mention names, ngelinge ,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
109 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
You have called me for divining, ngelinge ,
For you want to know who murdered, ngelinge ,
Do not say it was Bongenge, ngelinge ,
Blame the leopard, not the monkey , ngelinge ,
Not the squirrel but the lion, ngelinge ,
Do not kill me if I mention, ngelinge ,
Names of men you want to honour, ngelinge ,
Or of women leopardesses, ngelinge .
Lianja promised him and swore that he would go unhurt. Bongenge then revealed the
treacherous murder exactly as it had happened, ending thus:
God decided her survival, ngelinge ,
And concealed her in a boulder, ngelinge ,
There she lives like normal mortals, ngelinge ,
Not a spirit but a woman, ngelinge ,
Singing all the time kelenge, ngelinge ,
With her own voice of Bolumbu, ngelinge ,
She is fed by the Creator, ngelinge ,
Kept by Yemekonji's power, ngelinge ,
She may now be liberated, ngelinge ,
[Page [127] ]
If we break the boulder open, ngelinge ,
Let us take the song-birds' counsel, ngelinge .
With characteristic resolution, Lianja took his iron tools and began to hack away at the stone,
but without success: no more than a few chips came away. The the honey-bird began to sing
from a tree:
Father Lianja, tsen tsen tsen tsen ,
Listen to the song-bird's counsel, tsen tsen tsen ,
Call the birds tsen tsen tselenge ,
Don't forget the woodpecker tsen, tselenge .
The men ignored the honey-bird, so it flew away.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
110 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
At last, when they were tired, they said to each other: 'Who said that about the birds? Wasn't
it the honeybird? Call him back!'
Lianja asked the honey-bird to go and call all the birds. When they were all assembled,
Lianja asked the honey-bird to break the rock, but it said: 'I break hives, not stones.' The
crested starling tried, but broke its bill. So did all the other birds, one after the other. Finally,
the eagle said haughtily that he of course should have been approached first about this
problem. He was invited to test his strength; he hacked away at the rock, but he too broke his
beautiful bill. At last they noticed that the woodpecker was not present at the roll-call. Lianja
sent the honey-bird to look for him, and when at last he arrived, he sang this song:
Tsa tsa tsa , I am the woodpecker,
I am the father of magicians.
He pecked away at the stone so that an opening was formed, through which a face became
visible. Lianja praised and encouraged him:
Bravo, Woodpecker,
Father of magicians,
Open the stone!
[Page [128] ]
The woodpecker, Yondoko, tapped on and on until the opening was wide enough for
Bolumbu to be pulled through. Lianja gave the woodpecker four baskets full of maize, and
ten to all the other birds for having willingly tried and broken their bills.
Bolumbu was carried to her father's house, alive but unconscious. Lianja sent for Bongenge.
The great diviner arrived and announced that he could only succeed this time if Bolumbu's
Aunt Botoma was present. But no one could find her. At last her husband saw her in the
fields and brought her to the meeting- place. There she was accused not only of attempted
murder but also of witchcraft, because it was evident to an expert like Bongenge that a curse
still weighed on the young woman. So he told her to remove the spell. She replied by
admitting the attempted murder but denying the allegations of witchcraft.
Bongenge answered enigmatically: 'He who knows everything, does not know the tortoise
yet. Take the plant of life, scrape it and put it on the young woman's head.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
111 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
Botoma, on his instructions, found the stalks of the bosaako and the bosaanga plants,
chewed them, and so made the Water of Life. But it did not work, no matter how often
Likinda called his daughter back to life. At last Lianja fetched his father's magic snuff and
blew it into her nose. Bolumbu sneezed and woke up. Then she told her story, which she
ended thus:
'The water found me on the bottom under the net of roots, and I knew I could not escape. I
thought: shall I be going to grandfather Ilelangonda without reason? Suddenly I felt as if
someone was with me, and I arrived in a place where the water stopped pushing me. At first I
could not speak, but suddenly grandfather Ilelangonda ordered me to speak to the people so
that they might hear me and know where I was. Will you now ask Aunt Botoma why I had to
die?'
Bolonga went home with his first wife, and they kept Bolumbu with them for a while.
Bolonga invited the elders of his father's village and told them the whole story. Their verdict
was: 'If a rat
[Page [129] ]
has eaten the seam, it will soon eat the whole garment,' which meant in this case that it was
too dangerous to keep a proven witch in the house, and that it would be safer to take her back
to her powerful brothers. This he did, and in this way their marriage came to an end. Botoma
stayed with her brothers, deeply ashamed. Bolumbu said she loved her husband Bolonga very
deeply , but she feared her aunt. So she stayed with Bolonga. They lived together in peace.
22. THE LAST W ARS
I. The War of the Bogymen
The tale of the end of the epic Lonkundo dynasty is told in six episodes. At first, the great
warriors are successful: Lianja, Likinda and their comrades-in-arms exterminate their
hereditary enemies the Biloko or Bogymen.
What, then, went wrong? Where lay the seed of ruin? Bongenge the seer is ageing. He eats a
fruit that is taboo for diviners. His young ambitious son dreams that he is the sole survivor of
the clan. Like Joseph's brothers, they perceive that this young dreamer is secretly proud. Like
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
112 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
Joseph, he is right. Unlike Joseph, he is dishonest. He steals the most treasured family
possession: the magic pouch. It had once belonged to Kungoelo, who gave it to his daughter,
Eyonga, who gave it to her son, Itonde, who gave it to his son, Lianja I. With the Pouch of
Life goes the good fortune of the family. Bongenge loses his power of prophecy, and dies.
The Ngombe people live to the north-west of the Nkundo, along the banks of the Congo.
They arrived in the region when the Nkundo were already settled and became their
arch-enemies. Young Bongenge walks over to them and becomes the king's son-in-law; but
blood is thicker than water---he walks back across the battle lines with the Snuff of Life.
One day Nsongo said she wanted to eat meat, and at once the brothers Likinda and Lianja
went out to hunt. On a path in the
[Page [130] ]
forest they heard voices and hid in the bushes. A long line of Biloko bogymen, went by. They
were saying to each other: 'Did you smell that human meat?' Lianja seized the hindmost
Biloko and killed him. The others fled into a hollow tree.
Lianja made a strong snare around the opening in the tree while Likinda put fire to the other
side. The first Biloko who tried to get out was caught in the snare and could not move
backwards or forwards. So they were all burnt alive. The two brothers picked up all the sau
-fruits which the Biloko had dropped in their flight, and went home. Bongenge said that there
must be many more of those elusive Biloko men, and that they should go out together and
kill the lot. 'But not now, for my wife Itutsi is about to give birth, and at such a time hunting
should be forbidden.'
When the child was born, the great diviner called him Bongenge, after himself. He, too, was
a prodigy, for he grew up in a few days and became a strong youth, able to follow his father in
the forest on a hunting expedition. They went out all together and young Bongenge sang:
If you hear 
fululu , it is the wood-pigeon.
Y eeloya , the wind is blowing.
Murmur, murmur, says the brook.
Nsongo wanted a pigeon, so they snared one for her. Then she wanted the wind, which no
one could grasp. Then she wanted to have the murmurs of the brook. Young Bongenge gave
her water to drink, and she said: 'The water of murmuring is the best there is.'
They arrived at the frontier of bogyman country. It was surrounded by water and there was no
bridge. They camped on an ant-hill and started forging. Linaja forged the knife-that-kills-
chiefs.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
113 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
The bogeymen arrived, attracted by curiosity on hearing the ke! ke! of the hammer. They
threw the spear-that-kills-chiefs at Bongenge but missed. He threw the knife-that-kills-chiefs
at them and killed two. Likinda did the same, until all the Biloko
[Page [131] ]
who attacked them were dead. Then Lianja rang his magic bell, which dried the lake that
surrounded the Island of the Bogymen. They walked to the village of the bogymen and killed
all the bogywomen and bogychildren. Finally, they sent a man called Corpse as messenger to
Likinda's village to announce their victory.
They travelled through the forest and found rubber-fruits. Old Bongenge forgot they were
taboo for diviners and ate some.
His son said: 'The diviner does not see the omens of his own misfortune.'
The old man said: 'You, child, are you trying to do your father's work?'
II. Y oung Bongenge is Banished
That night, young Bongenge dreamt that a war arose in which all the men were killed, and
that he alone stayed alive. The next morning he told this dream to the village council and
they were all annoyed. They wanted to kill him, but his mother's brother said: 'Do not kill
him, just banish him.' This was accepted unanimously. Lianja sent young Bongenge to the
Ngombe people, but he did not know that Bongenge had stolen the magic pouch kangili .
Bombuna, paramount chief of the Ngombe, had a dearly-loved wife who was one day bitten
by a viper so that she died. They called young Bongenge, who was already known as diviner.
He asked: 'Do you want me to bring her back to life?'
Bombuna said: 'If you succeed, I will make you chief.'
Bongenge took the magic pouch, pronounced all the ritual formulae:
Kangili, kangili , magic pouch,
Spirit of the shouting Mbeo !
He took some powder, put it in the dead woman's nose and--- hachoo! She woke up, talked,
and was restored to King Bombuna.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
114 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
[Page [132] ]
The king gave Bongenge his own daughter in marriage and made him chief minister.
III. Old Bongenge dies
One day, one of Likinda's children caught an eye-disease and died. Lianja went to his secret
hut to find his magic pouch, but no matter where he searched, he could not find it. Old
Bongenge was called, and sang:
Do not say it is Bongenge! ngelinge .
The magic bag has somehow vanished.
It vanished with the dying spirits.
When beauty dies, paleness is only a corpse.
Darkness descends, the eyes are failing.
The child is panting for the bird of death.
The rats sleep on the floor, I want to weep.
My magic disappeared. The Ngombe have it.
It was the first time in his long career that Bongenge had failed to find the answer to a
problem. When the young leaf grows, the old leaf dies. Old Bongenge felt ill and lay down
for the last time. He called his old friends and comrades-in-arms, Lianja and Likinda, to his
bedside and said:
'I, the diviner of war and peace, am dying. You must find my son and keep him with you. He
is a greater diviner than I ever was. I have lost my prophetic voice. After my death things will
change rapidly. Do not cut a tree if you want a mushroom.'
And then he died.
IV. 
The Great War
They all called: 'Bongenge is departing, fare thee well! Departing as a victor. Go in peace!'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
115 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
They sent a messenger to the land of the Ngombe to inform young Bongenge that his father
had died. They performed the funeral rites, after which all the men were called up. Together
they travelled to Ngombeland. Nothing can be gained without a
[Page [133] ]
journey! Lianja told King Bombuna upon arrival that he wanted Bongenge, to which the king
replied: 'A man is not a yam that can be hidden in a barn.' He refused to let Bongenge go.
Then Lianja pronounced the dreadful curse:
Oh the killing, oh the slaughter,
Between Nkundo and Ngombe!
Bombuna called his men and the war was on. Man killed man, and was killed in his turn.
Bongenge took the side of Lianja's men. The Ngombe wanted to kill him for his treachery,
but they never found him. In the end they were all killed, all the Ngombe and all the
Nkundo: only Lianja and Bongenge remained alive.
Bongenge applied the magic powder to the noses of Lianja's men so that they all woke up and
went home. The people of Lianja's village spread mats for the victors. They said: 'Rest first,
tell tales tomorrow. Too many questions kill the answers.'
Bongenge went to sleep in his father's house and the old diviner visited him in a dream,
saying: 'My son! dance for all you have lost! Sing and recover what I left behind! He who
knows everything does not know the tortoise yet! Many proverbs tire even the elders. The
forest is a snake with eggs. Do not approach the owner without oil. If the eye dies the heart is
guilty. The slave can become a chief. The king's right hand can kill him.'
V.  
Likinda's Death
One night Bongenge dreamt that Likinda would be killed in a fight in the forest. When he
told Likinda his dream, the latter replied: 'You wish me death. We shall see.'
Thirty-two days later, Likinda went out to the forest to find the sau -fruit tree of the
bogymen, near the place where they had been burnt. Suddenly the bogymen reappeared,
surrounded Likinda and killed him. There he lay, the great hero, motionless, on the path of
the pigs.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
116 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
[Page [134] ]
When he did not return, Lianja called the diviners. Lofonde, the son of old Lofonde, sang:
'We will all return to our mother.'
Bongenge divined: 'Likinda is lying on the same path where you burnt the bogymen.'
Oh Likinda, the great hunter of the striped antelopes,
Oh Likinda, the judge of his people should never sleep,
Oh Likinda, sleeping like a child where he fell on the floor.
Nsongo sang: 'I am not crying, it is the smoke that calls my tears.'
Bongenge went on:
Oh Lianja of the hanging lianas, standing upright,
You know the path of the 
sau -fruit tree,
Where you grilled the people of the clubs,
The terrors of the night-time,
The people of the feathery birds,
Hooting to frighten children at night,
They who possess the 
sau tree in the forest.
Oh Lianja, rock-breaker, liana standing straight.
Lianja called his men and they departed at once. They arrived at the sau tree where Likinda
died, but they did not find his body. The people of Sausau arrived as soon as they heard
someone picking fruits. Everyone was killed except Bongenge and Lianja. They used their
magic powder on their own men, who rose up, alive and healthy.
23. THE END
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
117 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
The tragic end of the famous family comes suddenly, as an epidemic. Only Death survives.
After this they lived in peace for many years. One night, Bongenge dreamt that Lianja,
Nsongo and he himself died. He saw and heard
[Page [135] ]
Ilelangonda, who told him: 'People die like a mockery. The world is decaying because people
do as they like. In my time, I lived in God's world, I did His bidding. Now the great tree is
falling, for the ants are eating it from within.'
That morning, when Bongenge told Lianja his dream, the great chief was so infuriated that he
threatened to kill his diviner. Bongenge fled away---but it does not help to chase away the
mosquito after it has stung you.
Twenty-seven days later a storm arose and a sudden gale blew down a tree, which crashed
down on Nsongo. Who can avert Yemekonji's decision? There she lay, the twin sister of great
Lianja the smith. He applied his magic powder but it did not work. It only worked when God
willed it. Robust Nsongo, always full of song, Lianja's life-companion, was dead.
Lianja went in search of Bongenge. He found the people dying in all the villages. He arrived
in Ngombeland, but there, too, the people lay dying in their huts. Lianja came home, lay
down on his couch and said: 'The world is decaying.' He felt ill. At last Bongenge arrived.
Lianja demanded that he should drink poison to divine judgement, for he suspected that
Bongenge was guilty of killing Likinda and Nsongo.
Bongenge drank but he did not die. He sang:
It is not me,
It is the Master.
Later that day, Lianja called his people and told them to bury all his weapons with him.
Boyoyo was appointed his successor. The same day Lianja died.
That night, Bongenge had a dream in which God spoke to him: 'For the anger of Lianja and
Likinda will I make the world die. You too will die, for you have contradicted me. All things
will be as they were before.'
After that, all the people died, even Bongenge and Boyoyo. All the villages were empty. Only
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
118 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
God remained, and Ilelangonda.
[Page [137] ]
4 The Woyo
[Page [138] ]
The mythical history of the Woyo takes us back to the lower reaches of the Congo river,
where the turbulent movements of the water betray the presence of powerful spirits who rule
fertility.
THE W ATER SPIRITS
These serpents, or water-snakes, assume every colour of the rainbow, and so it is believed
that they are identical with the rainbow, the rain-giver.
Bunzi is worshipped by the people in nocturnal dances, in which the dancers are naked.
Four spirits resided in the water beneath the rapids in the Congo River, in the form of four
serpents, Kuitikuiti the Waving one, his wife Mboze the Fertile one, and their children
Makanga and Mbatilanda. They lived in the Infernal Cauldron, as the white men call it, the
maelstrom where the powerful current of the Congo meets the rising tide at every noon. The
people say that Kuitikuiti has been seen in many other parts of the river as well.
Long ago there was only the earth with the bushes on it. Then Kuitikuiti rose out of the water
and created all the tail-less animals, and Mbatilanda created all the animals with tails. When
they came home they found that Mboze was pregnant. She had committed incest with her
son, Makanga. Furious, Kuitikuiti seized a club and beat her to death. Dying, she gave birth
to a serpent daughter, called Bunzi. Bunzi is the goddess of rain and
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
119 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
[Page [139] ]
fertility. She gave birth to another water spirit called Lusunzi, who comes to visit his mother
regularly , and whenever he does, there is kalema , springtide, in the vast estuary of the
Congo.
Kuitikuiti resuscitated his wife Mboze, but now her skin was white instead of black, so he
also exchanged his own black skin for a white one. Kuitikuiti also lay with his granddaughter,
Bunzi, and the issue of this union was a daughter, Kambizi the Storm, who floods the low
lands of the delta and drags the sailors and bathers down so that they drown. On the bottom of
the sea she makes love with them, like the princesses of the old days who had the right to
pick any man they fancied to satisfy their desires.
[Page [141] ]
5 The Makere
[Page [142] ]
The Makere live near the Bima river north of the Congo. The first narrative is an account of
oral traditions about the constant southward migrations of the Makere and the deadly pursuit
of the Azande conquerors.
1. THE MIGRATIONS OF THE MAKERE
The Makere are a branch of the Mangbetu group of peoples in the north-east Congo. Among
these peoples, the mothers wind strips of cloth around the tender heads of their newly born
daughters, so stiffly that the skull is deformed and becomes elongated in the shape that has
become typical for women in that part of Africa.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
120 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
Those among the Makere who were old men in the thirties could remember vividly how they
defended their people against the Arabs ( Tuku-Tuku ) who arrived from Kisangani and
Banalia. The Arabs had built a boma (fortress) on the left bank of the Rubi, from where they
penetrated farther, crossing the Bima, and built another fortress near Zobia. They wanted
ivory, and the easiest way to get it was simply to raid the villages, take women and children
prisoner and transport them to their fortress, where they were held as hostages. The men of
such a village knew what they had to do: they went into the bush and hunted elephants until
they could offer enough ivory to the Arabs to induce them to release their families.
The Makere elders narrate that their ancestor, Duli, who lived
[Page [143] ]
about ten generations ago, crossed the Bomokandi river from the north and settled with his
people on the banks of the Nemboma. His descendants migrated further in a south-westerly
direction, and settled between the Bima and Makongo rivers. Two clans penetrated as far as
the Rubi river: they are the Mangiri and the Baetoy.
The Makere people faced national disaster with the invasion of the Azande, a numerous and
powerful people who came from the north. They moved south along the left bank of the
Makongo river as far as the Bima. There they conquered three of the Makere clans, the
Babuy, the Babruenge and the Bapele, who are still under Azande rule. This is the story of
how it happened.
Many years before the white men arrived, long before even the Tuku-Tuku arrived in the
region, the Azande arrived from the sunless lands. They are mighty warriors, skilled at
warfare with lances; in addition, they had spinning knives with four to five cutting edges,
which they could throw with incredible dexterity. The Makere defended themselves with
bitter tenacity but they had to withdraw from village after village and watch their wives and
daughters being carried away as slaves.
Finally, after many deliberations, and after the diviners had consulted the benevolent spirits,
it was decided they would migrate to the south-west. They would search for a fertile region in
the dense forest, where they would be left in peace to build their new villages. When this was
agreed they all went home, packed their meagre belongings, what little they could take in a
hurry, and drove their goats out of their pens. With hearts full of sadness they left their once
peaceful and prosperous villages with their ancestral shrines. Even the sacred graves of the
ancestors would now be desecrated by the invaders.
Alas, their migration was blocked by a big barrier: the wide Makongo river. If only they could
reach the other bank in time, they would be safe from the raids of the Azande. They decided
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
121 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
to build a bridge, and all the men and women were called upon to
[Page [144] ]
work on this primitive device. Mats were plaited first, and these were sewn together so that a
long carpet was formed which ultimately reached the other shore.
Carefully balancing on this bridge the Makere people crossed the broad Makongo, in correct
hierarchical order: first the paramount chief with his wives, children, aunts and uncles,
cousins, grandchildren, nephews and nieces and their kin. Then the elders, the notables and
sub-chiefs. Then the Mambuli family, that is, the clan whose totem was the leopard, to which
the other families paid homage. After them came the second family, the Balasa, with their
retainers.
This first, orderly crossing took several days. In the meantime, ever more refugees arrived:
women bent under baskets of food and the few possessions they had managed to save; others
with children on the back and on the hip; men carrying poles from which hung large jars of
masanga (banana-beer), young children, some dragging heavy hunting nets, others rolling
dancing drums. The first families had already penetrated deeply into the new land, and all the
time new caravans arrived at the bridge to safety. Finally, only the Babuy, the Babruenge and
the Bapele had not arrived at the shore of liberty.
In the meantime, the waves of Azande invasions surged onwards. Village after empty village
of the Makere was occupied, and the meagre belongings which the owners had not been able
to carry away were stolen. As there was no more armed resistance, the Azande marched on
rapidly and soon overtook the refugees. One day at nightfall they were near the river.
The last village of the Makere on the 'old' side of the river Makongo was that of the Bapele.
That last and fateful night there was deadly silence. No more were heard the cheerful drums
of yore, no voices chattered or laughed, no singing was heard, nor the rapid rhythm of dancing
feet. Makereland was dead. Only the 
gudugudu  , the drum that was reserved for announcing
disasters, floods, wars or famines, could be heard above the silent forest. It
[Page [145] ]
told of the imminent approach of the Azande, whose vanguard was expected any moment. It
begged the people near the shore and those on the bridge, would they please hurry so that the
Bapele could reach the Bank of Peace in time?
They never made it. Those for whom the message was intended were camping for the night
between the Bapele village and the river. Hearing the disaster-drum's alarming message, they
panicked. They left their camp and, armed with flaming torches, squeezed their way through
the thick undergrowth of the hostile forest. On the shore there was already a great throng of
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
122 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 124 ---
people jostling one another to reach the bridge. Since many had already crossed it, the bridge
hung low in the water, waves washing over it. Women shrieked in fear and children cried
hysterically as the bridge sank deeper and deeper. At that, everybody panicked, and they all
crowded on to the bridge, terrified of the Azande.
Inevitably , the lianas that held the mats together snapped. A loud wail arose. In the glow of
the torches men, women and children could be seen struggling in the strong current. None of
the Makere could swim. They were not familiar with the water- spirit. So, the water-spirit
swallowed all the bodies, it took all the souls. Not one escaped his deadly embrace.
Those on the banks had to look on helplessly as their friends and relatives disappeared one
after another. The river flowed for ever between life and freedom on the one side, death and
slavery on the other.
The next morning, at daybreak, the first Azande warriors arrived on the north bank. All the
survivors were taken prisoner, and left the place as slaves. And so, because the water-spirit
was so greedy, the Bapele, the Babuy and the Babruenge are now the captive servants of the
Azande. They have no land, no houses, they own nothing. They are owned.
[Page [146] ]
2. THE CHIMPANZEE-ANCESTOR
The neighbours of the Makere are the Babwa, a very different race. They speak a different
language, and although the two peoples are separated from each other only by a narrow strip
of woodland, or a hill, or just a small stream, they cannot understand one another. The Babwa
are forceful characters, great hunters and proud warriors. When their turn came to be attacked
by the Azande, they took a bloody revenge for the disastrous defeat of the Makere. In one
raid, they penetrated deep into Azande territory and even destroyed Zobia. They were very
fond of Azande meat and this was an additional incentive to kill as many Azande as they
could, which they did in a long series of battles. As a result, the Azande gave up every
attempt to penetrate farther. When the white men arrived and defeated even the Arabs, the
Azande told them with awe in their voices: 'But beware of the Babwa, they are terrible
fighters.'
The Mambese are a sub-clan of the Makere who also speak Babwa: they occupy the only
bilingual village along the border. They are mainly cultivators and fishers: game is a treat for
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
123 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
them.
When the Belgians set up their administrative offices in the region, they looked for clerks
who could speak more than one language. So all the Mambese boys found employment in the
government offices and earned much money. It was evident that a benign spirit was still
guarding them. Who else but the kind Kumbusu, the chimpanzee-spirit! To this day it is
strictly forbidden for the Mambese people to hunt or eat chimpanzees.
The Mambese explain their bilingualism in the following story.
Many years ago an elephant-hunter of the Babwa lost his way in the forest. He walked for
days but found no way out. At last, in despair, he decided to climb a tree, hoping that he
would see a fire or the curling smoke of a village. He made himself a sling from lianas, of the
type used by tree-climbers. Slowly , and with a terrific effort, he managed to climb up till he
could just reach the
[Page [147] ]
lowest branch. As soon as he had grasped it, his sling slipped, and there he hung, swinging in
the evening wind. He could not pull himself up, as he was too exhausted from many days
without proper food. He uttered a cry for help, hoping that someone would rescue him before
his hand became too weak to hold the branch and he fell to his death.
No 
man heard him, but an ape did, a chimpanzee, who came at once to rescue him. He
climbed the tree, took the man by his wrist, pulled him up, and brought him gently down to
the ground. Carefully he laid him to rest at the foot of the tree, and put leaves under his head
as a pillow. Then he went and picked some sweet fruits which he squeezed into the sick
man's mouth. When the hunter had recovered a little, the chimpanzee took him in his strong
arms and carried him to the nearest village, that of the Mambese.
Their chief had no son. He ordered his only daughter to care for the hunter until he was
cured. Gratefully, he started to hunt elephants for the Mambese, and each time he killed an
elephant, he would bring the tail to the chief, as a token of homage. A whole elephant meant
weeks of food for the people, so each elephant was an occasion for a feast. The chief of the
Mambese village, realizing that the hunter who had been brought to him by the mysterious
monkey was a gift from heaven for the villagers, gave him his only daughter in marriage. The
hunter settled for good in that village, where fate had sent him.
The kind chimpanzee was never again seen in the village, although it is believed that he must
still be watching over its prosperity. No doubt he is the incarnate spirit of an ancestor, for
which creature, human or animal, would ever show so much care and solicitude for a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
124 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
stranger? Surely, the chimpanzee knew that the hunter was one of his own grandsons! May
the spirits of the ancestors watch peacefully over the welfare of their children!
The hunter and the chief's daughter lived together for many years in peace and prosperity.
They had many children, so that
[Page [148] ]
they came to be regarded as the father and mother of the village. The hunter taught all his
children the language of the Babwa. Their mother taught them the Makere language. This
explains why the Mambese people today speak two languages.
3. THE SLAVE-GIRLS OF THE SPIRITS
A young man called Madiango asked his father to buy him a wife, but the father said: 'Are
you out of your mind? Did you ever buy a wife for me? Go and find your own wives!' So the
son left his father's home in pursuit of brides. He travelled through the bush until suddenly he
arrived at a large compound. He could not know that he had hit upon the place where the
spirits kept the women they had captured from the villages of men.
As all the women were at the riverside fishing that day, young Madiango entered through the
gate unseen. He hid behind a banana tree, but he was discovered there by two slave-girls who
were sweeping the compound. They stalked up to him from behind and overpowered him,
until he promised them he would not try to escape. They took him to their hut, and there they
made love to him.
When the other women came back and found out that the slave-girls had captured a man to
make love with, they all wanted their share of him, and he had to make the round of the
whole compound, which was inhabited by hundreds of women, all prisoners of the spirits.
The spirits were male but invisible, and very wicked. They wanted the women to cook great
quantities of food to assuage their insatiable appetites, rather than to serve them as female
companions. Each of the women, the morning after she had spent the night with Madiango,
described the pleasures she had enjoyed to her best friend, who would of course claim him
for the following
[Page [149] ]
night, and so on, until he had slept with every woman, old or young, black or white.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
125 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
Then one ominous day one of the spirits arrived and challenged him to a fight. Immediately,
it grasped him and threw him high up in the air, but Madiango landed on his feet, like a wild
cat. Then it was his turn to seize the spirit. He took it by its belt, dragged it to the river and
held it down under water, until it had flown away. He later did the same with all the other
spirits, as soon as they appeared, until the women told him that every spirit had been
drowned and carried away by the river. The women rejoiced and praised Madiango as a great
hero, as the Conqueror of Evil Spirits.
When he had rested, Madiango had the drum beaten and announced that all the men who had
been robbed of their wives by the spirits could come and fetch them back. He made each of
them pay a cow to redeem his wife, which they all did without hesitation in recognition of his
heroic battles. Madiango was left with forty wives and four hundred cows. He was a rich man
now, and a famous chief.
4. MODESTY PA YS, OR NEVER INSULT YOUR MOTHER
A mother had two sons. One day the younger asked her to tell him how he could get to his
maternal uncle's homestead. She pointed out the road to her brother's compound and he set
out on his way.
His uncle embraced him affectionately and had a chicken prepared for him, as well as a dish
of millipedes, a special delicacy. At nightfall, his uncle told him to go and sleep in the
chicken-run. He did so, and the next morning, before he returned to his mother he was shown
the house in which the hens laid their eggs. His uncle told him he could select an egg for
himself. He chose a small egg. His uncle said:
[Page [150] ]
'On your way home, you will pass a place where there are the ruins of an old settlement.
There, you must throw the egg on the ground, and see what happens.'
The young man said good-bye, and when he arrived at the ruins of the old village he threw
down the egg. At once, neat new houses rose out of the earth: out of each house there
emerged a beautiful woman, and slaves came running towards him. The slaves bowed down
before him and acclaimed him as their master. Each woman approached him with a dish full
of delicious food, calling him 'my dear husband'. So the young man became a great chief.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
126 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
The elder brother was in the habit of insulting his mother. One day he came along to his
younger brother's village and asked him how he had got all his wealth. The latter pointed out
their uncle's compound to him and wished him good luck.
The good uncle received his nephew with fond embraces and had a chicken prepared for him,
as well as a delicious dish of millipedes. The elder brother ate the chicken but spurned the
millipedes. Next, the uncle told him to go and spend the night in the chicken-run, but his
nephew replied arrogantly that he was used to sleeping in a proper house and on a proper bed.
So his uncle complied with his wishes. The next morning his uncle told him that, before
leaving, he could pick an egg from the hen-house. The young man selected the biggest egg he
could find. His uncle told him to go out in the bush where no one could see him and break
the egg there. Alas! Inside the egg there were armed men. They grew up into giants in a few
moments, and killed him.
[Page [151] ]
6 The Ngbandi
[Page [152] ]
1. THE SNAKE GOD
The Ngbandi live in the northern Congo, along the banks of the Oubangui river. Myth and
history are closely interlinked in their oral tradition. Their mythology is one of the most
remarkable in all Africa.
The following amazing anecdotes, which were written down by Father Tanghe in the first
years of Christian missions in northern Congo, are all historical.
The scene is in Banziville, on the Ubangi river. Father Basil Tanghe built a hut for himself in
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
127 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
the country of the Ngbandi in 1912. As he had nowhere else to sleep he made his bed in it
the first night he spent in the village. In the middle of the night he woke up because of a
noise under his bed. He rose, lit his candle and looked---straight into the gleaming eyes of a
long snake, coiled up under the bed. He went to find his pistol, but when he came back the
snake had vanished.
The following night he was aroused by screams of terror from under his bed. He rose up, lit
his candle and found that the snake was back, eating one of the kittens. The mother cat had
defended her young, the snake had bitten her, and now she lay dying. The unperturbed
Capuchin father took his pistol, fired, but missed. The snake raised its head as if to attack
him, then slid majestically out of the room. It was five yards long. Father Tanghe fired four
times, but the snake went on coiling and recoiling.
At last the cook came in with a rifle. He was called Ginga, and
[Page [153] ]
had been newly engaged for the mission station. He finally managed to hit the snake in the
head so that it died. At that moment Ginga began to weep and cry like a wailing woman.
Father Tanghe thought the man was succumbing to a nervous breakdown, a disorder which,
he reports, is common in that part of Africa. He wanted to comfort the man as he felt that
such is the task of a priest, but one of the villagers stopped him, saying: 'Leave him, he is a
snake.'
The cook stopped crying as abruptly as he had started. When the missionary asked him why
he had made all that noise, Ginga said: 'I am one of twins and so I am a snake. I have just
killed my brother. So I have to mourn for him. If I had not wept for him, he would have made
me ill. Now I have wept, I can be quiet.'
The next morning Kumba arrived, Ginga's twin sister. She lived with her husband in a village
an hour's journey away, but she had come to purify her brother of the stain of killing his
brother. They streaked each other with a red powder made of the pounded wood of the 
mbio
tree, on the arms and shoulders. The rest of the red powder was strewn on the skin of the
snake, which was lying in the sun to dry. The skin can still be seen in the monastery of the
Capuchin fathers in Antwerp.
This was the beginning of Father Tanghe's many years of research into the myth of the Snake
God: the belief of the Ngbandi people that twins are snakes and are therefore identical with
the god of the Ngbandi people. He recorded his experiences in four books, written in his
inimitable Flemish, which make fascinating reading for anyone interested in anthropology
and mythology.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
128 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
2. THE FIRST -BORN
The toro , 'supreme god', or 'tribal spirit' of the Ngbandi is the snake, just as the neighbouring
Banziri have their hippopotamus.
[Page [154] ]
The mother of the snake is Kangalogba, the dragon-fly, probably 0because she bears a tiny
little white worm that coils like a snake. The snake is the first-born of all the animals, and as
such he has seniority even over the royal leopard. The soul of a village chief settles, after his
death, in the body of a leopard, so that no chief may eat the flesh of the leopard lest his
ancestor kill him in revenge. Yet, the snake is the first-born.
The first-born of every clan is in charge of the toro -hut or 'spirit-house'. It is his function to
pray the spirits for blessing on behalf of the clan. This priestly function is the only one of his
many tasks that he cannot delegate to a younger member. He can even sell his chieftainship,
but as founder of the clan he remains for ever the mediator between the living and the spirits
of the dead.
An exception to the rule of primogeniture is provided by the following story.
Chief Lango-Gbau had four sons. One day his eldest son was killed in a battle against the
Mbondo. Chief Lango-Gbau swore that the Mbondo would suffer for this, but he was too old
to go out to battle himself. So he called his second son Zengusi, but Zengusi said he did not
wish to go. The third son, Gaso, also refused.
Finally, the youngest son was prepared to take revenge for the death of his eldest brother. He
was already famous for his gallantry. His father promised him that he would inherit the right
of primogeniture in preference to his lazy brothers. Wando, as this youngest brother was
called, took a good spear and a 
gorombe , an oblong box made of bark, and set out in the
middle of the night, heading for the village of the Mbondo. At dawn, he came back with his
box full of heads.
Wando got his reward: he was given the right to live in his father's enclosure, and he inherited
all his dead brother's wives. It is the custom that all children born to a dead man's wives, even
a year after his death, are his.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
129 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
[Page [155] ]
3 THE LI-MEN
The Li is an evil spirit who comes to live in the stomach of certain people, and as a result
these people have an urge to wander about and create mischief wherever they go. A li -man
may knock at any door in the middle of the night and the owner of the house will wake up
with a start, feeling as if someone is trampling on his chest, as if someone is squeezing his
throat. Alas, he must call his children together, for he has only a few days left to live. Disease
will come, and slowly the victim will die.
A li -man may secure a lock of hair or a nail-paring, or a piece torn from the clothes of the
doomed man, so that by means of it he can bring about his victim's death. Some li -men steal
children and carry them away to a place deep in the forest, where they can kill their victims
and consume them undisturbed.
The li -men come together from time to time to have a feast, with drumming and dancing.
They may be near a village where ordinary people live, but no one can see them or hear
them. Li -men love to dig up corpses from the graves and eat the dead flesh. For this reason
the custom is to place guards on the cemetery when a corpse has been freshly buried.
Whenever someone dies who has been suspected of being a li -man his own relatives will
insist on an autopsy, because they wish to rid themselves of the evil reputation. The li is
hereditary and can be passed on to one's children. Whole villages are for this reason known as
li -clans. The professional 'belly-cutter' will be called in to open the body of the deceased.
The entire intestine will be taken out and carefully examined. If the belly-cutter finds a
tumour, he knows that it contains the li -spirit. He will take it to the forest and hang it in a
tree. No one will dare to come close to it. The relatives of the proven li -man are for ever
disgraced and feared. If they should hide the li , rain would pour down and never stop. The li
may also cause the failure of hunting expeditions.
[Page [156] ]
It is said that all animals have a kundu ('stomach'), which is another word for li . Some
animals, however, have a particularly powerful li : the bat, the owl and the cat, especially the
wild cat.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
130 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
If a wild cat is heard meowing in the village during the night, the next morning all the people
will be told to come out of their houses, and those who cannot eat are the li -men. The bones
of the rock 'rabbit', secretly placed near the well, are an infallible device to catch the li -men:
those who smell it have a li .
If you find bats hanging on a tree, you can bring them down by starting a fire. The smoke will
stupefy them so that they fall on the ground. Take them to a place deep in the forest and eat
them there, for if you take them to your house in the village, the li -men will smell them and
take revenge.
A li -man may carry his murderous habits too far so that one day, if there have been several
sudden deaths, the whole clan will kill him. If the li -man's identity has to be detected, sacred
ashes will be strewn on the path, or a smith's hammer will be placed there, and the li will
make itself known as a light in the distance. When the li -man comes near, a small flame will
be seen coming out of his mouth.
Diseases caused by a li -man can be cured by a kokoro -man. In Banziville a kokoro -man
cured a patient who suffered from a pain in the eye by pulling a long fishbone from the ailing
eyeball. A woman who suffered from a sore in the side was cured when the kokoro -man
pulled out the bone of a young deer which a li -man had hidden in her body.
4. THE BENDO-SPIRITS
The Bendo are a special species of spirits which tell their favourites the facts about the past,
the present and the future. Those who claim to have control over a bendo -spirit are called
diviners. They do considerable harm, because when they are called in to explain the
[Page [157] ]
cause of somebody's illness they may point at anyone and accuse him of having caused the
disease.
In many cases the spirit himself is in control and falls upon his victim unexpectedly, in the
middle of the forest. The possessed person begins to talk about unknown things such as
hidden crimes; the best remedy is to consult a fellow victim about how to appease the spirit.
A person who has a 
bendo must worship his spirit with offerings of eggs and palm-oil. He
will plant two young trees near his door and hang a pombo plant above it, to show that he is a
diviner, and wait for business.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
131 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
One morning a customer came along to a house with the pombo sign. He told his wife, who
was walking respectfully behind him, to put down his stool, which she was carrying. She did
so and he sat down on it. Soon the diviner emerged, a horn full of water in his hand. The
customer, who had been summoned by the magistrate, asked if the sentence would be severe.
Reassured on this point, he proceeded on his journey, after paying a small fee.
A man in the village of Mbondo suffered from repeated attacks of over-aggressiveness. He
himself knew he had a bendo -spirit, which he worshipped regularly. From time to time the
spirit induced him to fight, either in his own village or in other places. In the end he was
always beaten by the men he challenged, and the bendo-doctor was called. This doctor knew
the disease of this patient, and that scrapings from the bark of certain trees would cure the
attack.
He administered these powders in the form of sacred ashes; meanwhile, the drum was
beaten. The doctor threw pebbles and pips at the sick man. Finally the patient became
exhausted and was laid to rest in his own bed. The doctor called him, 'to wake him up'. He
had to pay the doctor with his last possessions.
A rich man had been ill for a long time. Finally he was placed, in his bed, near the spirit-hut,
and the bendo -man was called. He
[Page [158] ]
came and performed his magic dances, all decked out in plumes and beating the drum
ferociously, for this was an important customer. Finally, he gazed into his water-horn and saw
a face. He called a name, collected his paraphernalia and his fee, and went home. The
relatives of the ailing man were now left with the problem of dealing with the wicked
bewitcher. When they had found him, he was beaten to the ground and tied with a rope. He
must give up the thing he had captured from his enemy. In this case it was the rich man's
excrement, which the sorcerer had secured and bewitched. He handed it over, it was thrown
in the fire, and the sick man was cured.
A village headman who had nine wives was very ill. The 
bendo -man was called, who was
known to be a scourge of li -spirits. He came and performed his dances, rubbed all over with
red powder and dressed in a grass skirt. Finally, he indicated three of the man's wives as li
-women. The three women had to drink a poison which they would survive if they were
innocent. But all three of them died.
Many other diseases are in reality caused by animals or natural phenomena.
Wounds are probably spirits, eating away the patient's flesh. If someone is wounded in battle
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
132 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
or during the hunt, no one will come near him.
The heartbeat ( ndoko ) is a water-bird (a type of loon) which constantly bobs in and out of
the water. The skin of a dwarf- antelope is used to cure heart diseases, especially in children.
5. LIGHTNING AND W ATER SPIRITS
Sciatica is caused by lightning. Therefore anyone who has survived being struck by lightning
is called in to cure the disease, because he is a friend of the lightning.
Lightning is pictured as a big brown cock which swoops down
[Page [159] ]
and touches a person's head with its bill. It makes a hole there, picks up the soul or 'life
spirit', and flies away with it.
Others say that lightning is a small animal that hits you unexpectedly, then runs away and
hides in the water of a well. together with the rainbow ( kongo ).
The great water spirit is called Mbomba or Sa-ngu ('beast in the water'). He is a colossal
monster and the king of all the fish, frogs and water reptiles. He lives in the large Ubangi
river, usually near the rapids. All boatmen who pass such places will throw food in the water
and ask the protection of the Mbomba.
A man who caught a big fish heard the water bubbling and gurgling where he had just been
fishing. He realized that the water spirit was getting angry, and threw the fish back into the
river to appease it; otherwise it would have dried up---because if Sangu is annoyed it will
stop the river and the land will be thirsty. If the Sangu catches you, cry out the name of your
dead grandfather. His spirit will protect you.
A boy was playing in his uncle's village when he suddenly heard someone calling his name.
He looked up but saw no one. He heard his name again and followed the voice to where it
came from. He was later found, drowned in the river, with one earlobe bitten off. Evidently
he had been caught by Nda-Were, the spirit that rules the mouth of the Uele river.
A girl from the same village was caught in 1913 by the Sangu spirit. She disappeared in the
Ubangi river, and the whole family mourned for her. Invitations were sent to many villages in
the surrounding districts to attend the funeral meal, when suddenly word came back that she
had been found, washed ashore three days' boat-journey downstream, in the country of the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
133 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
Banziri. These people took her to their village and tried to wake her up by rubbing her with
sacred ashes, but she stayed unconscious. Finally they decided to beat the drums near her, and
at last she came to.
She told a miraculous story! The Mbomba had seized her by
[Page [160] ]
the hand and taken her deep down into the lap of the river. There she had walked over the
mountains, and she had seen the meal of the Sangu, which was nothing but fishbones. 2
The water spirit can make a person mad, but it can also show him the future. Every pool and
stream has a spirit of its own. The spirit of the Bogo river is called Bogo, and his help is
implored for abundant crops. The Limalo is a narrow stream which nevertheless does not
permit people to jump across it. The Limalo-spirit is prayed to when the people go out
fishing and wish for a good catch. A dwarf-antelope may be offered to it, or the liver of a big
animal, when the hunt has been successful.
The Bogo-spirit once killed a group of girls who were dancing in the shallows, by dropping a
broad flagstone on them from a rock on its bank. It is therefore advisable to pray to the river
regularly and to throw offerings into it.
There is a legend which tells that the god Ketua had seven children: Morning, Noon,
Evening, Night, Moon, Sun, and Water. In the season of the ants Ketua went round to visit all
his children, asking them for ants. 
3 The six eldest replied that they had none. Finally, Ketua
visited the homestead of his youngest son, Water. Water spread a mat for his father to sit on,
and told his wives to stew a good portion of ants for his father. Ketua was moved by this and
decided to make Water the chief of all his descendants, his first-born.
If anyone drowns in a river, that part of the water becomes his property and his son will
inherit it. The son will go there from time to time with an offering for his father's spirit; the
water has
[Page [161] ]
become part of his ancestor-hut or spirit-house. When the people of his village go fishing in
that part of the river, they will always take him in their boat. He does not have to work, but
his father's spirit will protect the boat.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
134 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
6. THE FOUR CHILDREN OF NZAPA
Nzapa is the Creator, the Supreme God, the Father of mankind. He has ordained the laws, the
rules of behaviour. He rules our destinies. He decides the fate of man. Whether you will die
young, or live to see your grandchildren, it is the will of Nzapa. He rules man and their
ancestors, and all the other spirits, animal and vegetable.
Seven gods are invoked every morning in a special prayer: Nzapa, Yayu (sky), Sese (earth),
Banga (white water), Mbongo (black water), Ketua (Fortune), and Lomo (peace). Mbongo is
the dark brown water along the left (southern) bank of the Ubangi river. Banga is the clear
water along the right (northern) bank; it is also the name of a powerful magic powder. Banga
is also the name of the ancestor of the light-coloured peoples of the north. The god Banga
causes a type of epilepsy for which he (in the form of magic powder) is also the medicine.
Mbongo is the ancestor of the black peoples of the south, in particular the Ngbandi.
In addition to these gods and the snake god whom we have already met, the Ngbandi also
worship the moon (Nze), the father of the stars, at the beginning of every new cycle, when
the new moon appears, preferably accompanied by his wife, the planet Venus. Every month
the moon 'cuts' a woman so that she has her menses. When a girl has her first menstruation,
people say that she has seen the moon. When the moon remains dark for a woman, she is
pregnant, or as the Ngbandi say: 'Her husband has forged a fruit with her.' The word fruit (
ngo ) also means 'pregnancy' and 'drum'; a big drum is called tá ngo 'mother-drum'. The word
for 'moon' ( nze ) also means 'food basket'. The Ngbandi language is full of such allusions.
[Page [162] ]
Palm-oil ( môn ) is used for a great variety of purposes, not only for the preparation of many
dishes but also as a medicine, against scabies. Many proverbs refer to oil, such as: 'Palm-oil
strokes the stomach', i.e. it makes all food delicious. 'The palm-nut dies, the palm-oil does
not.' This is symbolic of the continuation of life itself, for it is quoted when someone has lost
his parents or is himself dying; it is a consolation: 'Do not worry, your sons will honour your
spirit!'
Nzapa had four children, all palm-trees: 
Ndimba (Raffia-palm), Ngara (Liana), Pe
(Wine-palm) and Kpmon (Oil-palm). After many days, Nzapa grew old and felt hungry. The
wives of the three eldest sons prepared food for their husbands, who ate it and took only the
left-overs to their old father Nzapa. The wife of Kpmon, too, cooked food for her husband,
but he took the whole dish to his old father.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
135 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
One day, Nzapa called his sons together. Kpmon was late and the other three urged their
father to begin and tell them what he had to say, but he waited.
When Kpmon arrived, father Nzapa began: 'You three have given me only little bits of your
food, but Kpmon treated me as a father ought to be treated. I have therefore decided that your
fate will be as follows: You, Pe, will be cut and carved by men who want your sap. You,
Ngara, will be twisted and plaited by women, who will shape you into a basket. You,
Ndimba, will be woven and become a bed for Man. You, Kpmon, my child, will be honoured
by the people of the earth. Your oil-nuts will feed them and will be highly appreciated by
them.'
And thus it happened.
7. SOULS AND SPIRITS
The importance of water is expressed thus in the Ngbandi language: the rain is called 'Water
from Above', the river: 'Mother of Water'; ink is 'letter-water'; tears are 'face-water'; the sea is
'big water'; a
[Page [163] ]
stream is 'arm of the water'. Sap is 'tree-water'; and 'stem of the water' means 'salvation'.
'Body-water' is the word for semen. If the sky is clouded, people say: 'Water has taken away
the face of the sun.' 'Water has conquered the land,' means a flood. A proverb says: 'Death
does not thunder, it arrives imperceptibly like rain.'
A person has a soul that can be seen if you look in the mirror or in the water. This is why the
older people do not wish to be photographed: it means trapping souls, and the soul-trapper
will make you ill.
Another proof of the existence of the soul is dreaming. At night your soul may travel around
and see strange places, while your body lies visibly on your bed. Or you may receive a visit
from your husband who is far away in the army, or from your father who died years ago.
Once, in a dream, a man saw his brother, who was in the forest on a hunting expedition.
Three days later his companions returned and told the dreamer that his brother had had an
accident. That was what he had come to tell his brother in the dream.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
136 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
Animals and plants too have their souls, some weak, some strong. Roots and fruits which kill
or cure you if you eat them have in them a fragment of the powerful spirit of the tree to which
they belong. The elements, too, have their spirits, for instance the fire, which is a voracious
spirit. The water spirit makes you love it so much that you go and bathe in it; then you
become drowsy--- the water pulls you towards her bosom. If it has bewitched you, you feel a
compulsion to go to it.
8. DEATH AND THE SOUL
The Ngbandi honour the leopard as the spirit that kills. It is the spirit of the chief, and if a
leopard is killed in the forest it is brought to the chief's compound and dedicated to the
ancestors. Here it is
[Page [164] ]
flayed; the skin may only be worn by chiefs, the meat may only be eaten by foreigners.
Cases of eating human flesh were repeatedly reported in the early years of the century.
Enemies slain in battle were cooked by the women and eaten by the men. Women cooked
soup of human heads; men made necklaces of human bones. Adulterers were killed in public
and eaten by the villagers.
If a stranger appeared in a village he might be welcomed by a villager who was particularly
interested in human meat. He would say: 'Just wait here, I will bring you some food.' The
food would soon arrive, together with a group of friends of the villager, who would say:
'Sorry, I've forgotten my knife; help me to cut this food for you.' The stranger would hand
over his knife, and that was the end of him. He would be assaulted, killed with his own knife,
cooked and eaten. His skeleton would be placed near the spirit- house of the ancestors, as an
offering. Madmen were buried alive, or alternatively bound, put in an old canoe and left to
float downstream. Slaves who died were not buried---they were either thrown into the river,
or dragged into the forest and left there to be eaten by the hyenas. A sick man without either a
mother or a wife would die miserably.
Here are some Ngbandi proverbs about Death: Death has no friends. Death makes no noise.
Death never regrets having killed. There is no appeal against Death. Death cannot be bribed.
Death is never far and never tired.
Death and the Soul were enemies.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
137 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
Death said: 'I will kill you.'
The soul said: 'I will not be killed.'
Death collected his helpers: Lightning, Ulcers, Syphilis, Smallpox, Leprosy and Yaws.
The soul collected his helpers: Bat, Ant-eater, Owl, and Hog.
The soul and his helpers arrived in Death's village for a visit. Soul sent Bat out first to go and
spy. Bat went and hung in Death's hut, in a corner of the roof, and no one noticed him. Death
was just saying to his soldiers:
'I will raise a cloud in the sky; from it you, Lightning, will jump
[Page [165] ]
down on to my house, which I will give to Soul, and you will destroy it and everything in it.'
The soldiers of Death agreed, and dispersed.
Soul arrived in the village and was received with honour. Death vacated his own house to
make sure that his guest would have every comfort. But Bat kept an eye on the sky, and
suddenly he saw a cloud approaching. He shouted: 'We must go now! Run!'
Soul departed hastily, with his soldiers. They had not gone far when Lightning struck Death's
house and destroyed it totally.
Death exulted: 'I have killed the soul!' He assembled his soldiers and had the drums beaten.
'Ha! He said that he could not be killed!'
At that moment they heard the drums of triumph being beaten in the village of the Soul.
Death at once went out with his army, but Soul had ordered Hog and Ant-eater to dig deep
pits and trenches on the way. Death and his party all fell into the pits and gave up the attack.
Since that day the Soul has been immortal.
9. THE ORIGIN OF MANKIND
The name Tondo-lindo is full of double entendre , for, as Ngbandi is a tonal language, each
written word-form can be pronounced on four or five different tones. On the face of it, the
name seems to mean 'Tondo fruit of the region', but if taken as single syllables and assembled
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
138 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
with different tones, there are allusions in it to to (father), ndo (forest), toli (testicle), linda
(clitoris), li (seed, fruit, produce), and li (to enter).
It is conceivable that the Tondo-lindo legend belongs to the end of the story, and that the
moral is that men who belong to earth should find wives on earth. It is stated, though, that
before she went back to heaven, the first woman bore many children. For the Ngbandi, this
story explains the cause of the dry season: no rain falls
[Page [166] ]
because there is a total drought in heaven itself, and, like certain trees, the celestial people
are lying as if dead until the rains return.
Many years ago the elephant came down to earth from heaven, where he was born. He met
Lightning, who had also come down. They agreed to hold a competition in noise-making.
Elephant started, and he trumpeted so loud that the trees trembled: 'Haaah! Hoooh!' But
Lightning just sat there quietly. Then it was his turn. He thundered so loudly that the earth
herself shook, the trees were uprooted, their branches broken, and the rivers flooded the
country.
The elephant was so frightened that he died on the spot. His body just lay there, and his
bowels started fermenting. His stomach began to swell up until it burst, and out of it came all
the seeds of all the good plants that Elephant had been eating in Heaven. That is how the
vegetables came to earth.
A girl came along one day and found a 
tondo fruit (which is used to cure yaws). It was nicely
ripe and red. She took it home and put it in a box. Later, she opened the box again and found
a complete man inside. She asked his name, and he said it was Tondo-lindo.
The girl fell in love with him and married him. She gratified all his whims, and they lived in
peace a long time.
One day the man was in the forest and found many seeds and vegetables. It was the place of
the dead elephant. He collected them and put them in a box. He came home with it, but no
one could open the box. At last an old woman came along and opened it. Lo! Innumerable
little children emerged, who flew away in different directions, like young ants in the rainy
season.
One day the bird Gbaima made a pit in the forest, to trap animals in. He put the tortoise on
guard and said: 'If you catch an animal, you may eat of its meat, but not if it is Lightning, for
that is the meat I want to eat.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
139 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
He went away, and shortly afterwards Lightning swooped down and fell in the pit. The
tortoise could not resist the temptation to
[Page [167] ]
taste a piece of Lightning, and so he took a knife and started cutting its body. Lightning began
to thunder so terrifically that the tortoise was frightened and hid under the dry leaves.
Lightning escaped and flew back to heaven.
Gbaima returned and found Tortoise trembling under the leaves. He began to rebuke him,
saying: 'Now you have let my dinner escape, go and fetch it!'
Of course, the tortoise could not climb, so he delegated the spider to go in his stead. The
spider climbed up to heaven, but he met Lightning, who thundered so loudly that he
frightened Spider away. Spider would have crashed to his death on earth if it had not been for
his thread. He descended all the way to earth and walked away .
In another version of the story the spider is really a man, the first man to descend from
heaven. So it was that man came to earth---but his wife's parents still lived in heaven. His
father-in- law told him that he was not allowed to come and visit his in-laws in heaven during
the dry season. Of course, one day he could not resist the urge to go and visit his wife in the
middle of the dry season.
You know how he found them? They were just lying there like dead branches, lean like
sticks. Out of his wife's hair the husband pulled a hairpin, which he took with him when he
went down to earth.
When the rainy season began the wife descended to earth to rejoin her husband. They
quarrelled, and he showed her the hairpin. She was annoyed and decided to go back to
heaven. The husband followed her, but got a frosty reception from his father- in-law, who
gave him a drum and said: 'When you are almost down, beat the drum, so that we may know.'
He did so, but when the in-laws heard the drum, they cut the rope so that the man crashed
down on earth. Nzapa then decided that man should never again be allowed to climb up to
heaven.
[Page [168] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
140 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
10. MAN AND HIS DOG
A man went into the forest with his dog to look for honey. At last they found a tree, in and out
of which the bees were buzzing. The man said: 'If only I had a companion to help me!'
The dog opened his mouth and spoke in human tongue: 'I can help you, on condition that you
never mention anything I tell you to your fellow humans. If you do, you will die.'
The man agreed, and the dog taught him the language of the animals, so that he could
understand not only the dogs but also the black ants and the cockroaches.
The man took his axe and cut the tree open. The dog helped him take out the honey, which
they collected together and brought home.
On their way they passed through the village of the man's in-laws, and as it was beginning to
rain, he decided to call in. His mother-in-law wanted to fry a potful of ants for him as a
garnish for the porridge. The pot of ants was on a shelf under the roof, so the woman had to
reach above her head to get it.
At that moment the man heard a cockroach on the shelf, warning his fellows: 'Watch out, the
mistress is coming! Take care, the lady of the house is approaching!'
The man laughed at this, but his mother-in-law was furious. She cried: 'You laughed at me
because you saw my nakedness! You saw my loin-cloth slip!'
Her son-in-law denied it, but he would not say what the real reason for his laughing had been.
The whole village of his in-laws became involved in the dispute, and they all took the old
lady's part. They demanded an explanation, because they believed he had laughed at seeing
the private parts of his mother-in-law. The man said: 'If I tell you, I shall die.' But they would
not believe him. So the man secretly sent word to his father's brother, to say that his in-laws
were killing him.
Then he told his in-laws what the cockroach had been saying.
[Page [169] ]
At once he heard his dog howl in dismay, and a few moments later the animal died. Shortly
afterwards the man, too, dropped on the floor and died.
Meanwhile, his paternal uncle assembled all his friends and relatives; they came with spears,
and together they marched on the village of his nephew's in-laws, surrounded it and attacked.
It was a terrible war. Many people were killed.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
141 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
Never tell a secret to anyone.
11. HOW THE NGBANDI LEARNED TO TRA VEL ON W ATER
The sia is a striped mouse who loads all her children on to a large leaf that floats in the water,
and pushed it from behind, swimming after it.
The ndoko is a water-bird that shouts: ' Tí húruru! ' ('fall often'), and perches on a stick which
floats in the water. The bird often disappears into the water but surfaces immediately
afterwards, as if he possessed a secret medicine to keep alive. His name is also the sound of
the heart-beat: listen to it---'Ndoko, ndoko ...'
When they saw him perching on his stick, the people decided they could use a floating tree in
the same manner, while doing their fishing.
That is what gave them the idea that led to the invention of boats.
12. ANIMAL FABLES
I. The Spider and the Mason-fly
The spider and the mason-fly went to the forest to hunt. The mason-fly discovered a dead
elephant and told the spider. Spider said: 'Remember, I found it, not you, I want all that meat,
not you!'
[Page [170] ]
The mason-fly was sad and went to his uncle: 'Uncle, what shall I do to get some of that
elephant's meat?' His uncle told him, and Mason-fly went back to the elephant, crept into the
body through the hole the arrow had made, and waited.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
142 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 144 ---
Soon, Spider arrived and started carving up the elephant, wanting to carry all the meat home
that day. Then the mason-fly started making noises from inside: 'Hooo, Hooo!' Spider was
terrified, for he thought it was the spirit of the mighty elephant. So Spider shouted: 'All right,
all right, Mason-fly found it, he may have it all.' And he went away.
II. 
Spider tries his wives
Spider had two wives, Dale and Kondo. He loved Dale more than Kondo. Dale always got
what she wanted. One day Spider decided to try his wives to see who loved him most. He
pretended to be terribly ill, thrashing his hands and feet like an animal in the throes of death.
Then he lay quite still. As soon as Kondo realized that her husband was dead, she wept
bitterly. Dale, however, did not cry at all, she only wailed a little, because it was the custom,
but Spider could hear that she felt no grief. So, Spider got up, and Kondo was overjoyed:
'You are cured!' Dale was chased away for good. Spider now gave all his favours to Kondo.
III. The Dog and the Cock
Long ago, the dog and the cock lived together in the forest, for in those days they were still
wild animals, and did not belong to Man.
One day they decided to go and steal Woman, so they went and abducted her. Man went to
his uncle and asked him what to do. Uncle told him, for he was very wise. Man took four
bags of maize and pounded them. Then he went near the village of the cock and scattered the
maize on the road. Then he went to the village of the dog, took the bitch and all the puppies
and put them in a bag.
[Page [171] ]
The dog came back from hunting just at that moment, and tried to stop him, but Man
wounded him with his spear. The dog howled with pain, and the cock, on hearing this,
decided to go and help his ally. On the way from his village, however, he found the maize and
could not resist the temptation. He ate it all up, and by the time he arrived at the dog's village,
Man had gone with his bag.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
143 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 145 ---
Next day, Man went to the forest and shot a deer; then he went to the dog's village and put
the dead animal down on the road. That done, he went to the village of the cock, took the hen
and the chicks and put them all in his bag. The cock came flying home and attacked the man,
but the spear wounded him. The dog in his village heard the cock crow and came running to
help him, but on his path he found the carcass of the deer and he could not resist the
temptation, so he ate it all. By the time he arrived at the cock's village, the man was gone
with his bag. The cock and the dog then decided to go to the village of Man to beg for their
families to be returned. They understood they had to bring Woman, so they took her out of
the dog's house where they had hidden her, and went with her to the house of Man.
Having received his wife back, Man said: 'You may stay here, for I will keep your wives and
children with me, just in case you deceive me again.'
This is how the dog and the cock became domesticated.
IV. 
The Elephant and the Dudu- bird
The Elephant and the Dudu -bird decided to go on a hunting expedition together. When they
had finished hunting they wanted their wives to know they would be coming home soon, so
that their meals would be ready. The Elephant trumpeted so that the forest shook. 'Haaa,
hooo!' Then the Dudu -bird called: ' Dudu, dudu! '
Some distance away there was another dudu -bird sitting in a tree, repeating the words,
singing: ' Dudu, dudu! ' This was heard by a third dudu -bird farther away, who passed on the
word, and
[Page [172] ]
so on, until the song reached the edge of the forest where the wife of the first dudu -bird
lived.
When she heard ' dudu ', she thought: 'My husband is calling me, he must be wanting his
meal.' So she started cooking his dinner, a true dudu -dinner. When the Elephant and the
Dudu arrived, the meal was ready.
The Dudu invited his friend, but Elephant declined politely, saying that there would of course
be a real elephant-dinner waiting for him. But when he came home, there was not. His wife
had never heard his trumpeting.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
144 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 146 ---
V.  The Elephant and the Gazelle
The Gazelle was afraid that the elephant would trample on him, for Elephant was in an
aggressive mood. So, Gazelle asked Locust to go and jump on Elephant's back and gnaw
through the string of Elephant's loin-cloth, leaving only a thin thread. Locust took a big jump
and did as he was asked.
As soon as Elephant saw Gazelle he jumped forward to trample on him, but at that moment
the string of his loin-cloth broke on his back, so he had to hold it with his big hand lest his
shame be uncovered. So, Gazelle had time to escape.
VI. 
Kwan the Boa and Longo the Viper
Kwan suggested to Longo: 'Let us both cut off our tails!'
Longo agreed, but he said: 'How shall I know that you have done it?'
Kwan said: 'I will cut off my tail under water so that the coolness will relieve the pain. If the
water is coloured red, that is the sign that I have cut off my tail.'
Longo said: 'All right, as soon as I see that, I will cut off my own tail too.'
Kwan, who is a very cunning animal, went and picked a zamba - fruit, the juice of which is
blood-red. He squeezed it under water and pulled faces, as if he were feeling awful pains.
[Page [173] ]
Longo, on seeing this, took his knife and cut off his own tail. Then Kwan came out of the
water and showed his tail. Did he laugh!
Longo was furious and went for him, but without his tail he was too slow and could not
overtake Kwan. There came a bush- fire that advanced more rapidly through the dry grass
than Longo, so the viper was burnt.
Still today, if someone is trying to cheat you, you say: 'Are you trying to do a Kwan on me?'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
145 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 147 ---
VII. The Spider and the Crocodile
Spider went to visit Crocodile on the other bank of the river. Crocodile, as a good host,
offered his house to Spider. Spider said: 'For firewood, I use only koso -wood.' This wood,
contains much resin.
Crocodile obligingly went out, found some koso -wood, came back, built a fire for his guest
in his own house, and left Spider alone for the night. Spider searched in all the corners until
he found Crocodile's eggs under the bedstead. Crocodiles are very fertile. Spider took the
eggs and fried them over the fire. They spluttered and crackled, but so did the resin in the
koso -wood, so that Crocodile, who lay outside, was not perturbed by it. Spider ate all his
host's eggs.
The next morning he demanded a canoe and two rowers to take him across the river. While
the boat was being made ready , Spider locked the door of Crocodile's house with a well-tied
string.
When they were in the middle of the river, Crocodile began to shout from the bank: 'Bring
him back, he has stolen my e-e-e-e-eggs!'
The rowers asked Spider: 'What did he say?'
Spider answered: 'He says, row quickly, for a storm is gathering and this canoe capsizes
easily.'
The rowers rowed as quickly as they could, and as soon as the boat hit the sand of the bank,
Spider jumped ashore and said:
[Page [174] ]
'What Crocodile really said was that I had stolen his eggs. That is quite true. I ate them all. It
was a good meal. Good-bye!'
At that, Spider laughed heartily, and before the rowers could catch him, he had vanished into
the forest.
VIII. The Spider and the Spirit of Makune
The Kulu-ngu is a bird which calls: ' Kulu! Kulu! Ngú!' Ngú means 'rain', so that the bird
calls for rain, and if someone brings misfortune on his own head by mentioning it, it is
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
146 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 148 ---
proverbial among the Ngbandi to say: 'You are like a kulungu , now you've got what you
asked for!' As we say: 'Talk of the devil ...' The word kpman denotes a certain fruit; it also
means 'to be angered, to be furious, to sulk'. The word makune means 'climb alone'; it is also
the name of a very large variety of the kpman -fruit which, the people believe, is bewitched,
so that no one will pick it. To be alone is in itself to arouse suspicion; only greedy people sit
alone, because they do not wish to share their meals, and sorcerers, because they hatch evil
plans against their neighbours. The Ngbandi know that the Spider is a greedy egoist, as is
shown by the story of the Mason-fly, and that of the Crocodile. The kpman -fruit is sucked,
not eaten whole, and so one 'sucks anger'. The Spider in sucking the fruit, sucks in an evil
spirit called Makune which is, as follows from the above, a type of 'fury'. Ngusu means
'jiggers' or 'carrion worms, maggots'. These insects are lethal: they eat the body from the
inside. Sugar-cane ( ngan ) is used by the Ngbandi to get rid of catarrh.
Spider was walking in the forest when he saw the Kulungu -birds picking kpman -fruits. He
climbed the tree in which they were sitting, picked a makune , and ate it.
Spider said: 'I am going to the village of the Ngusu .'
The spirit Makune, sitting in Spider's stomach, echoed: 'I am going to the Ngusu!'
Spider was terrified when he heard this and ran to his wife: 'I am dying, I am practically dead!
Give me some sugar-cane!'
The Makune inside him called out loudly so that everyone could hear it: 'Did you say you
were dying! Really! You only want to
[Page [175] ]
eat sugar-cane because you want to kill me! If you do, I will stretch your intestines so that
you will scream!'
Spider said to his wife: 'Wife, leave that sugar-cane, I will not have it after all. Something is
alive in my belly, which is eating my inside.'
Makune burst out from inside Spider's body: 'Am I eating you? Really! Yo u have eaten me !'
Word spread in the village that Spider was not well, and his neighbours came to see him.
Spider told his story: 'There is an evil spirit in my bowels who is torturing me!'
The Makune shouted at the people from inside Spider's bowels: 'I was sitting peacefully in a
fruit, but he had to eat me, so I will stay here and torture him!'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
147 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 149 ---
Spider saw his wife making soup and said: 'Wife, give me some of that soup. I want to eat it
boiling hot: if I am going to die, at least that evil spirit will die with me.'
The Makune shouted: 'He is going to pour hot soup on my face! I am getting out of this
wretched place!' He left Spider's bowels from behind, and said: 'I am gone!' He sat down at
the back of the house.
Spider sighed and exclaimed angrily: 'That ugly spirit! I could not even breathe! I hope
someone cuts his eyes out with a knife! That would be a good thing!' The Makune, on hearing
this, returned and crept back into Spider's bowels. He clutched Spider's intestines and
pinched them, shaking them so that Spider cowered and screamed.
Spider's wife said: 'Why didn't you wait a little longer before cursing that spirit? Now he has
heard you and is coming back.'
Makune shouted from inside the bowels: 'I said I was gone: but you cursed me. Now I have
come back, so I will stay in your belly five full days and make you suffer: after that I will
depart.'
Spider said: 'If you wish, you may have my wife. Take her, but please leave me in peace that
I may eat and enjoy my food.'
[Page [176] ]
Makune answered from his victim's belly: 'I want to eat and enjoy you , and I will repeat
whatever you say. I am your death!'
Spider replied: 'All right, if I have to die anyway, you will die with me. I am going to pour hot
soup on your eyes. Wife! Bring me that soup when it is boiling!'
The faithful wife, whom Spider had just offered to the evil spirit in exchange for his own
health, brought the soup with which her husband was going to kill himself as well as his
torturer. But the Makune-spirit did not wait for it to fall on his head. He left Spider's body,
fled into the forest and hid himself again in a large makune .
Is it any wonder that people never touch that fruit?
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
148 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 150 ---
IX. Man and Ape
A certain man always walked naked. This was in the days when there was as yet no difference
between apes and men, except that certain people did not like wearing clothes and others did.
Of course, the well-dressed people laughed at the naked people and called them 'monkeys'.
So the naked people were ashamed and lived in the forest most of the time.
The naked man had taken a wife. Whenever he visited his in-laws he arrived only after
sunset, so that no one could see that he walked stark naked. He used to take a little boy with
him, whose job was to wake him before dawn was visible in the sky. He usually gave some of
the food he got to the little boy . But one night his brother-in-law prepared a chicken for him,
and he found this so delicious that he ate it all. The next morning the little boy had gone
without waking him. So the naked man had to go home with his wife in full daylight.
Of course all the people laughed at him on seeing his private parts. From that time he always
stayed in the forest and never showed himself in the village again. That is the origin of the
chimpanzees.
One day a man went into the forest and lost his way. He
[Page [177] ]
heard the leopards spitting, so he climbed a tree. There he sat for days on end, terrified,
getting leaner and leaner, and not knowing what to do. An ape came along who took pity on
him. He helped the man climb down and showed him the way to his village.
The man said: 'Come and visit me one day!' The ape accepted this invitation eagerly, and not
long afterwards he showed up at the man's house. He thought the man had meant it! The man
had a potful of good juicy meat simmering on the fire and was reluctant to share it with such a
primitive guest, although both gratitude and hospitality commanded it. So the man gave the
ape a basket and said:
'Will you get me some water from the well first?'
The ape went to the pond, filled the basket and walked back with it, but of course it was
empty before he reached the house. So he went back and filled it again, with the same result.
At last he came back to the man and said: 'I can't do it.'
In the meantime, the man had eaten all the meat. Aren't men clever!
Never expect gratitude from people; they are greedier than apes.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
149 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 151 ---
X. The Dog and the Leopard
One day , the Leopardess crept into the hole of Kabondo, the ant-eater. There, she gave birth
to a lovely little leopard. After that she went out hunting, for she needed strong nourishment.
Then Kabondo the ant-eater came back, and found a baby leopard in his dwelling place. Of
course he ate it up, for ant-eaters like eating lots of things, and leopards are everybody's
enemy .
When the leopardess came back she found her baby gone. The ant-eater was wisely away at
that time, so the leopardess did not know whom to accuse. So she called a meeting of all the
animals and it was agreed that all should undergo the water test. The leopardess would swim
across the river first, and all the animals would follow. The guilty one, it was believed, would
be seized by
[Page [178] ]
the River Spirit, so that on the other bank he would be shivering all over.
When the animals were all standing on the other bank, it was discovered that the dog was
shivering all over his body, for dogs always shiver when they have been swimming. The
leopardess, without further ado, killed the dog for having murdered her baby, and ate him.
When the wife of the dog heard this, she took all her puppies and went to the village of Man.
She said to Man: 'I want to come and live with you from now on. The animals have accused
my husband of eating a young leopard. But he didn't do it; someone else did. Now he has
been sentenced and executed. I will take my revenge on all the animals. I will help you to
hunt them.'
Since then, the dog helps man to hunt and kill all the other animals. It is for revenge.
Never accuse anyone falsely.
XI. 
The Leopard and the Tortoise
The leopardess was pregnant again and appointed the tortoise as nurse to look after her
babies. She gave birth to a nice big litter. Then she went out to hunt for her food, and left the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
150 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 152 ---
tortoise in charge.
The tortoise, being no friend of leopards, killed all the baby leopards and ate them up. After
that, the tortoise thought it would be sensible to disappear, and asked the bat to carry her up
to the top of a palm-tree. The bat, not being a friend of the leopard, did so.
The leopardess, on coming back, saw that all her cubs had disappeared, together with the
tortoise. Furious, she went out in search of the tortoise, and saw him at the top of the
palm-tree. Good climber that she was, she walked up the stem of the palm- tree, just like a
palm-wine tapper. When she was almost at the top the tortoise got nervous and fell out, thud!
on to the ground. The leopardess had to go all the way down again.
[Page [179] ]
In the meantime, the tortoise found shelter in the ant-eater's hole. The ant-eater, being no
friend of leopards, pretended to know nothing. The leopardess, furious, commanded the
bush- pigs to go and search for the tortoise. The bush-pigs, being no friends of the leopards,
saw no reason why they should give away the tortoise, although they knew where he was
hiding.
The leopardess started abusing the bush-pigs: 'You dirty pigs, you know very well what the
tortoise has done! You are her accomplices! She has killed all my children, and you refuse to
help me! I will never leave you in peace!'
Children! Remember this story, for it contains many lessons. Girls! Never leave your baby in
charge of someone who does not like you. If you cannot find anyone you can trust, carry your
baby on your back when you go out to the fields. Furthermore, it is useless to pursue
someone who has many friends, for he will always find someone to help him. Thirdly, take
care in life that you do not make enemies unnecessarily, for the day may come when you will
need other people's help and on that day they will all turn against you. Boys! You must not try
to order people around if you cannot be sure of their loyalty. The people will not obey you,
but make common cause against you, as soon as their hatred is greater than their fear. If you
try to eat them, they will eat your children.
XII. 
The Black Ants and the Termites
Pipi is the name of the big black ants who trek through the bush in long caravans. Their
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
151 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 153 ---
greatest enemies are the kangi , the termites, and whenever they meet any they will slaughter
them. The reason is the ferocious blood-thirst of the termites, and their aggressiveness.
Listen! One day a man had cut grass and had spread it out in the sun to dry. The next day he
came back to bind it, but a termite bit his hand, for he wanted the straw too. The man
returned home with a bleeding hand.
[Page [180] ]
A butterfly fluttered by and saw the blood. It exclaimed: 'Who has killed a man?' The snake
Longo was basking in the sun, but on hearing this it crept away into a mole-hole, for fear of
being accused of killing a man. The mole was terrified on seeing the snake enter his hole, so
he climbed a tree. In the tree there was a monkey, who now saw a thing he had never seen
before: a mole climbing a tree. The monkey fled, believing some serious thing had happened.
In his haste, the monkey broke off a dead branch, which fell heavily on the elephant.
The elephant was deeply disturbed and exclaimed: 'This has never happened before! Dead
branches falling on my back!' The elephant stampeded angrily through the forest and trampled
on a baby ant, the son of a 
pipi .
The pipi called a big meeting of all the animals, in which he accused the elephant of killing
his son. The elephant disclaimed all responsibility and accused the monkey of dropping dead
wood on his royal back. The monkey blamed the mole. The mole accused the snake Longo
of housebreaking. The snake explained that he had heard the butterfly cry murder, and that he
did not want to be accused of it, so he had hidden himself in the nearest hole he could find.
The butterfly described the man's bleeding hand.
By this time the 
kangi had realized that he would be accused of starting it all, so he said
contemptuously: 'Why does the pipi want to stir up all that old story again?'
Of course, all the animals understood that he was trying to divert attention from himself,
because he was guilty of manslaughter, or at least assault. It was the termite's aggressive
behaviour that caused the elephant to trample on the black baby ant.
This story explains why the black ants always fight the termites as soon as they see them.
Children! Always be careful what you do, for every action sets in motion a chain of
consequences that you cannot control.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
152 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 154 ---
[Page [181] ]
7 The Azande
[Page [182] ]
The Azande live along the north-eastern frontier, where the Congo borders on the Sudan and
Oubangui-Chari. The Azande are late arrivals in the Congo. They invaded and settled its
north-eastern corner during the nineteenth century (see Chapter 5).
The Azande brought with them their mysterious religion, which they may have acquired from
the peoples in the Sudan. In North Africa in the time of St Augustine there lived the
adherents of Mani, the Persian prophet of light. These Manichaeans were persecuted by both
Christians and Muslims. But the identity in name with Mani, the Rainbow-god of the
Azande, may be no more than a coincidence.
I. THE GOD MANI
Mani is one of the most mysterious gods of the Congo. Like the great god of the ancient
Persians, Ahura-Mazda-Zurvan, 
4 Mani of the Azande has a double nature, one dark and one
light. The Azande have added a sexual distinction: the light-coloured bundle on top is the
male god Yende, the dark bundle underneath is the goddess Ndasu.
Mani manifests himself in the rainbow, kelema , which is believed to be a double snake. Two
snakes, one light, one dark-coloured, are lying with one another in the sky. When they are not
visible they live in the water, and the grand masters of the secret sect of Mani
[Page [183] ]
possess the power to kill people by means of the water. If a Mani sorcerer wishes to kill a
man, that man will feel an irresistible urge to go and bathe in the river. The water will make
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
153 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 155 ---
him drowsy and drag him down to the bottom. There are many indescribable creatures living
on the bottom of the river who will kill the victim, or torture him and then push him back on
shore. Some members of the cult, it is said, control the power of lightning ( koki ), and can
direct it against those who arouse their wrath.
Those members of the sect who control the leopard ( ekopi ), can send him out to go and kill
people for them.
Those who control the boa snake ( nioka ) can call him by means of a magic whistle. The
snake arrives at once when whistled by a grand master of the order, and hurries to pay him
homage by coiling around the master's middle and caressing him with its head. The snake
will listen attentively to its master's instructions and obey him blindly. It will penetrate the
bedroom of its master's most dreaded enemy in the middle of the night, and bite or strangle
him so that he dies. It can also be employed to steal for its master. It can penetrate where
people cannot get in, it can steal a money-box and get away with it, or, more important still, it
can take a fetish so that its owner becomes vulnerable to the magic practices of the snake's
master. A fetish is worth more than gold. Part of the initiation ceremony is to make the
novice blow his new whistle and actually see the snakes slide towards him from all sides,
creep up to him and kiss him on the lips, coiling around him.
The fifth and most important power of the grand master of the Mani order is embedded in the
image of the god 
Y ende , which enables its owner to forecast the future.
If any member of the order should tell any of the Mani secrets to an uninitiated person, the
grand master will take him to the forest, whistle up the snakes, and leave him to their mercy.
The power of the Mani cult is illustrated in the following stories.
In Boma, the story was told in 1920 that a sergeant of the army went to bathe in the river and
drowned, through the infernal power of his sergeant-major, who was then grand master of the
order of Mani.
[Page [184] ]
It has been confirmed by the inhabitants of the district that in Mungwa, one of the villages
near Boma, on 18 November 1917, a man who was living near a marsh had a large wound
which would not heal. One of the masters of the Mani order caused lightning to fall on the
wound. At once the wound was cured--- fresh skin had grown over it.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
154 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 156 ---
The wives of the Congolese soldiers who fought against the German troops in Tanganyika
used to go to Nangai, grand mistress of the sect, priestess of Ndasu, Yende's wife; the women
wished to consult her regarding the fate of their husbands, to know whether they were alive
and faithful to their wives, and if they would survive. Nangai would go at dawn and stand
before the statue of Yende, kneel down and take the god up with both hands, and ask him the
question. She would convey the god's answer to her client against payment often francs. She
herself was constantly in direct contact with her own husband, himself a grand master of the
order, who was also at the front line.
2. THE GOD TULE
Tule is almost as mysterious as Mani. The name means 'spider'. We have seen that the 'spider'
can also be the name of the first man who descended from heaven (see Chapter 6).
In the same chapter we saw how the spider's body is entered by makune, the spirit associated
with diarrhoea. In this chapter it seems that the spider is himself the diarrhoea spirit, for he
causes the death of the man-eating bird in that manner, and in the previous story he appears to
be familiar with the 'path of water and what has left the belly'.
Magic plumes, a man's head-dress, in a mystic way preserve the presence of his spirit after
his death. Of course this spirit will help his son on earth to find food for himself and his
family, as a good ancestral spirit should. The son has a mystic relationship
[Page [185] ]
with his father's head-plumes, for if the ancestral spirit suffers, he suffers.
At the beginning of time there were no plants or trees, and nothing to eat; just bare earth.
Then Tule arrived, and in his hand he had the seeds of all the edible plants and all the cereals
and all the fruit trees. He sowed these seeds, scattering them over all the lands. Then he took
his drum and flew to the middle of the sky. There he began to play his drum, and all the seeds
germinated: stalks and leaves sprouted out from them.
There lived an old woman in a little hut. She planted yams which grew up abundantly. They
were so delicious that people came from far away to taste them. She would scrape them and
cook them properly, and serve her visitors one after the other. Alas, having eaten these good
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
155 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 157 ---
yams, the guest would get a throat- splitting thirst and ask for water. The old woman would
say she had no eater. The visitor would insist, upon which the woman invariably took a knife
and slit her visitor's throat.
When Tule heard about this murderous old woman, he decided to investigate the matter
personally. As a precaution, he took a calabash, filled it with water and put it in his bag. Then
he cut a reed and put it in the bag as well. He set out, and finally arrived at the old woman's
hut. He told her that he had heard about her cookery and that he would like to taste her
famous yam dish.
She went and cooked a meal for him, which he ate with relish. Having finished, he felt
thirsty, so he took out the reed, put one end in the calabash and began to suck up the water.
After that he felt hungry again, and asked the woman to cook more food. The woman did so,
but Tule was still not satisfied. The woman was annoyed, took her knife, and approached
Tule with the intention of cutting him to pieces.
Tule fled towards the gutter, but the old woman said: 'You cannot go there, it is the
dung-path.'
Tule, however, knew where he was going: he carried on and
[Page [186] ]
landed in a large jar, which was full of water. Tule plunged in and broke the jar. The water
spread out all over the earth.
This is how people came to know about water.
3. TULE AND THE MAN-EATING BIRD
A giant bird, Nzanginzanginzi, used to sit near the road, and all the people who passed there
were eaten by it. When Tule heard about this he decided to investigate the matter. He forged
a large number of small knives, and tied them on his back and round his body. Then he set
out, and spied the giant bird from behind a rock.
The bird shouted: 'Where are you going? Come here, I will devour you!'
Tule abused him with insults. Finally the bird was so vexed that he took Tule, folded him up
and swallowed him.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
156 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 158 ---
Inside the bird's stomach, Tule met all its previous victims and handed out his knives to
them, telling them to cut up the wall of the stomach. The men did so, singing merrily.
Nzanginzanginzi moaned loudly and sang: 'Having swallowed people, I swallowed Tule. But
he is evil: he is like diarrhoea, he cuts my inside out.'
The bird died, and Tule stepped out with his people.
4. TULE AND THE GUINEA-FOWL WOMAN
A bachelor was hunting guinea-fowl. He arrived at a place where there had been a plantation,
which is where guinea-fowl can be expected. He spotted one that was strutting about there.
He shot an arrow at it, but it escaped. He pursued it until he came upon
[Page [187] ]
an old woman who was hoeing her field. He asked her if she had seen his guinea-fowl: he had
hit it but it had escaped.
The old lady had indeed seen the bird, hit it with the shaft of her hoe, and hidden it in her
rubbish heap. Again the young man claimed his guinea-fowl, threatening the old woman that
she would hear more of it if she did not tell him where it was. This frightened her, and she
told him where to find his bird. He found the bird and handed it over to the old woman,
asking her to prepare it for him. In return he promised to help her with her hoeing.
The woman took the bird to her hut. First she prepared cassava porridge and vegetables. The
young man ate this without waiting for the meat, because he was very hungry. Finally she
brought the meat, but he refused it.
She told him to go and find a 
zambha lindi , a ripe red fruit, which he must throw on the
ground at the crossroads. Then he must go on, and look behind. The young man went and
found the red fruit, threw it down at the crossroads, walked on a little, and then looked
behind him. Lo! The fruit had changed into a beautiful girl dressed in red. He turned to her
and asked her: 'Where are you going?'
She answered: 'Do you not know that I am your wife?'
He said: 'Good! Let us go to my house.'
The God Tule met them on the road, and asked the young man how he had obtained such a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
157 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 159 ---
beautiful wife, whereupon the young husband told him the story.
At once Tule set out on a guinea-fowl hunt. He saw a bird, hit it with his arrow, it escaped, he
pursued it, found the old woman and demanded his bird. When she refused, he threatened
her, and when she got frightened and told him where to look he found the bird on the
dirt-heap. He told her to prepare it and promised to help her hoe the fields. Soon, she brought
him the cooked cassava, then the vegetables and the meat. Tule ate it all, leaving the woman
only some vegetables. This greed would cost him dear.
[Page [188] ]
The old woman told him to go and pick a red fruit and throw it down behind him at the
crossroads. He did so, but instead of a beautiful girl, he saw behind him an ugly woman with
a long knife, coming rapidly closer. Once again Tule was obliged to flee on account of an old
woman.
He saw a man who was busy carving a drum. Tule asked the man to hide him. The man said:
'All right, I will hide you in the midst of my people, but don't be afraid.'
He led Tule into his enclosure, which was full of lions and leopards. The woman with the
knife arrived at the place where the man was once again sitting, carving his drum. She asked
him if he had seen the man she was running after, but he said 'No'.
She said: 'If I do not find him at once, I will slash you to pieces.'
He said: 'Go and look in the enclosure.'
She opened the gate, and at once the wild beasts ran out and killed her. The drum-carver took
her body and carved it up into small pieces. He asked Tule if he wanted a piece of it, and
Tule said he wanted only the head. This was duly prepared for him: he ate all the flesh so that
only the skull was left. Tule was sucking the brains when a bone from the skull found its way
down his throat and got stuck in his bowels so that he could not empty them. The spirit of the
woman had entered him and given him constipation.
Tule assembled the people of the land and told them to pull the old woman's skull-bone out
of his bowel. They all tried hard, but failed. An orphan boy appeared and offered to try, but
Tule refused. He told the people to make another attempt, but they failed. The orphan boy
offered his help again, and this time it was accepted. He adjusted the position of the
skull-bone in the god's bowel, and then pulled it out. With it came the contents of the bowel,
which were as heavy as those of all mankind put together.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
158 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 160 ---
[Page [189] ]
5. TULE STEALS THE MAGIC PLUMES
A man called Yangaima lost his father. He took his father's ceremonial plumes, which he used
to wear when dancing, and departed. He arrived at a favourable spot and built his village
there.
One day Tule arrived at the gate, saw all the people, and decided to visit the place. He was
well received by Yangaima, who told his wives to prepare a meal. The meal was brought to
the veranda, where the men were conversing. Yangaima took his plumes, composed a song
about them, and began to dance. Soon his people gathered in a circle and joined in the
singing, clapping their hands.
Suddenly, the plumes lifted Yangaima up, and flew away with him into the sky. There he
hunted the birds so that a large number came tumbling down. His shed was full of birds when
they had all been collected and piled up in it. A large number of birds were cooked by the
women. Yangaima descended and began to eat, handing out pieces of meat to all his people
until everyone was satisfied, including the gluttonous Tule.
Tule went home, already wondering how he could get hold of those magic plumes. He waited
for two days. Then, while Yangaima was absent, he crept into his house and stole the plumes.
These were guarded by mason-flies who stung Tule brutally, making him run for his life. In
his flight, one little feather fell on the ground.
Yangaima went home and found that his father's magic plumes had disappeared. He felt as if
his heart was broken. He saw Tule's traces and found the one small feather that was left. He
tied it on to his headdress with a string. He went to Tule's house and found Tule already
dancing his magic dance, composing a song of his own in which he pretended that the plumes
were given to him. The plumes rose in the air with Tule, who began to chase the birds.
[Page [190] ]
Yangaima too performed his magic with his single feather, which contained enough power to
lift him up in the air. Soaring to where Tule was flying, Yangaima greeted him politely,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
159 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 161 ---
saying:
'My friend, let us dance together in the sky: I will dance higher, you will dance lower.'
Tule agreed. They began to dance close to each other. Suddenly Yangaima tore away the
plumes from Tule's head. Tule fell down to his death.
[Page [191] ]
8 The Mayombe
[Page [192] ]
HOW THE MA YOMBE CAME TO THEIR PRESENT HOME
The Mayombe live in the west, in that corner of the Congo which lies to the north of the
great river and borders on the Kabinda enclave.
Nzondo, a man with one limp leg, was a chief in the Bakongo country; he lived south of the
great river. One day he assembled all his people and announced that he had decided they
would all leave those lands, and go in search of a new country to settle. So they packed all
their belongings and started trekking. On the bank of the Nzadi, which is the local name of
the Congo river, 
5 he ordered a halt. He had decided to cross the river first, together with his
wife.
Near the bank there was a rock. In the middle of the river the current was much stronger, so
Nzondo told his wife to sit down on the rock for a while, so that he could explore the river
first. Suddenly, his belt was torn from his waist and changed into a tree, standing there in the
middle of the river. At the same moment, his wife began to pass blood, and her fingers and
toes grew fixed into the rock. She, too, changed into a tree, standing there in the middle of
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
160 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 162 ---
the river on top of the rock.
Nzondo realized that it was not the will of the great spirit Nkisi that he should cross the river.
So he called the chiefs of the
[Page [193] ]
nine tribes, telling them that they must cross one after the other: Makaba, Nanga, Manianga,
Pudi, Makulu, Ngimbi, Numbu, Mbenza and Mave ma Nzinga or Mboma Nakongo.
Nzondo stayed on the southern bank of the river; he had no more children.
Nzondo's tree, the Nsanda, is still there, guarding the crossing of the river. Mabaka went on
and settled in Kimongo. His magician could change his stick into a tree.
[Page [195] ]
9 The Bwaka
[Page [196] ]
THE LEGEND OF LAKE MOGALO IN UBANGI
The Bwaka live in the north, between the Loea and Oubangui rivers, near Libenge.
It is not unusual for boys to die during the circumcision operation that takes place at the time
of initiation, as no disinfectants are used.
Women are forbidden to go near the initiands, and it is forbidden to reveal the death of one of
these before the end of the year set aside for the bush school.
In this region it is quite normal for a bereaved mother to commit suicide; some have thrown
themselves on the ground, head first, hoping their necks would break. Others just let
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
161 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 163 ---
themselves die in the bush, like decaying trees, of hunger and exposure. The old woman in
this story had other plans, however.
Before the white men arrived, innumerable years ago, there lived a lonely old woman.
Incredibly, she gave birth to a son. When it was time for his circumcision, there was no
age-mate to be circumcised with him. Finally, he was taken to the forest by some men to be
initiated. During the operation he died. His mother was not informed, and she did not worry,
since the 'School of the Bush' may last a year, and the participants stay in the forest all the
time. She carried pots of porridge to the path near the forest entrance every day . The novice-
master would receive the food and say: 'He is well.'
At the end of the year, when the initiates returned from the
[Page [197] ]
forest, one of them, a friend of the dead boy, went to the old woman's hut, took a bedstead
out, put it upright against the wall, climbed on the roof, and removed the tuft of
elephant-grass from the peak of the roof: all this without a word. At that moment the dead
boy's mother understood, and burst into tears. She knew that her son had been buried in the
forest, in secret.
She decided she did not want to stay where her son's image would haunt her, so she left,
saying she was going to the forest. She went and collected poisonous leaves, of which she
knew many types. With these she concocted a gourdful of poison. Then she lay down on the
path to the dance-place, covered with dust.
All the boys and girls of the villages who had been successfully initiated went along there for
a 
dua , a mixed dance which marks the end of the initiation ceremonies. The old woman
asked each of them to clean her with an ear of millet, but they all refused. At last, a small girl
came along who had a kind heart. Actually, she had been beaten by her sister, who did not
want her to go to the dance at all. But she had gone all the same, although she was still very
young. She was the only one who stopped.
Taking water from the stream she washed the old woman's body with her own hands, because
she found the ear of millet too hard and sharp. After that, she rubbed the old woman with
perfume. The woman was grateful and told her:
'You will be dancing all night and all morning. But by noon you must be away from the
dance-floor, for there will be trouble. You may warn your parents and those of your family
you wish to, but do not tell the villagers.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
162 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 164 ---
The girl went on to the dance, and the next morning she warned her parents and her youngest
sister that they must leave, but tell nobody. So they did, saying to the other dancers that they
were going for a rest in the afternoon; this was nothing unusual.
Then the old woman rose and went round the dance-place, sprinkling her gourdful of magic
poison on the ground. The
[Page [198] ]
people thought she was doing this to prevent rain from falling, as this was the customary task
of old women. But the effect was different---and disastrous. Suddenly, the whole dance-floor
sank into the ground with all the dancers. Masses of boiling water spouted up from the
ground with thundering jets. The dancers all died and turned into fishes. The dance-place is
now a lake. The villages are now a desert.
[Page [199] ]
10 The Baluba of Kasai
[Page [200] ]
The Baluba of kasai live in the province of Kasai along the river of that name. They are one
of the prominent peoples of the Congo. Much valuable information about them has been
brought together by the Fathers of Scheut, an order of able missionaries who had competent
linguists and anthropologists among their ranks. The selection offered here is mainly culled
from the works of the Rev. R. V. Caeneghem, one of the prominent authorities on the Luba
peoples of the old days.
The stories of witches belong to the most fascinating of our present collection, especially
because for the Baluba of the not-so- very-old days these were no fairy tales, but true
accounts of real events. Even, today the majority of the people in Africa believe in spirits.
Witches are forced by the fellow-members of their covens to contribute human flesh to the
group for a common meal. They often have to kill a child of their own as no other persons are
available. Killing is done by means of a special type of secret poison. Poison is in 'reality' a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
163 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 165 ---
spirit. By swallowing it, the victim gets the spirit inside his body, where it begins to eat away
the vital powers of its host. For this reason no one can trust his own relatives, let alone his
neighbours, and no one dares to be found outside his hut during the night.
Very often the one person least likely to have wished a man evil, his own wife, is suspected
of being the cause of his death. This has been repeatedly observed by missionaries in the
Congo, and it is not a matter of the past.
Becoming a widow is the worst that can happen to a woman of the Baluba. She is shaved, and
has to pay for this in cash. Most of her
[Page [201] ]
possessions are taken away from her, often even the hut in which she has lived. She has to
undergo intolerable 'purification' ceremonies, such as being smeared with a muddy mixture of
dung and urine. She will be held liable for her husband's debts, so that often anyone can come
along and claim money from a widow. The widows themselves appear to be willing and even
eager to undergo these humiliations because this 'purifies' them from the odious but
inevitable suspicion of having killed their husbands.
Father R. V. Coppenolle reports that in 1922 an accident happened in Kinshasa. A Muluba
fell off a moving tram and was killed by one of the coaches. The same day his fellow
tribesmen arrived in great numbers at his house, where his dearly loved wife lived. She had
been informed of the accident and she was in tears. The men, insensitive to her sorrow,
accused her of having bewitched the tram so that it would 'eat' her husband. They helped
themselves to the furniture by way of 'damages' and destroyed the garden. They dragged her
to the home of one of them and made her undergo unspeakable tortures, beating her with
leather thongs and then rubbing chilli-powder into the wounds: all this because they accused
her of killing their relative, saying that she owed them damages. The missionary intervened
and gave the woman shelter in the mission, but even there they came and molested her.
Father Van Caeneghem reports 
6 that in 1934 a certain man named Nkongolo had a brother
who fell ill. Nkongolo consulted a diviner, who said: 'One of your wives is a witch and has
laid a spell on your brother.' Nkongolo went home, took a knife and killed one of his wives.
His brother's disease persisted, so Nkongolo went to another diviner, who said: 'Your second
wife does not stay in bed at night; she goes out to practise witchcraft.' Nkongolo believed
this, went home and stabbed the poor woman until she died. But his brother was not cured.
Nkongolo went to see two more diviners, and the result was that he killed his two surviving
wives. By that time he was completely out of his mind.
When his brother's illness continued, he reproached him: 'I killed all my wives to remove the
witchcraft from your body but you refuse to get better!' He dragged the poor patient from his
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
164 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 166 ---
bed
[Page [202] ]
and killed him, with the same knife that had killed all his wives. After that he just stood
there, biting his nails.
In January 1951, two brothers, whose names were Lukwanga and Buta, lived together.
Lukwanga's wife had a baby who fell ill. A diviner was consulted, who hinted that Buta's wife
was a witch; she had learned her evil craft from an old aunt. Both women were seized,
maltreated, beaten and burnt. The old woman had to be taken to hospital with very severe
burns.
Then, Lukwanga's baby died. In his despair he was convinced that the two women of his
brother's household were responsible. He took a bottle, filled it with water, and killed his
brother Buta's two young sons with it in an attack of rage.
This loss of the sense of reality is in itself a sign of witchcraft. If a witch gives you food it
may look like beef or mutton whereas in reality it is human meat. The guest who thought he
was being given a treat was in reality the victim of delusion. Once having eaten human flesh,
he is for ever in the power of the witch. He will have visions, illusions of being transported
through the air to the meetings of witches. He will be told: 'Now you must surrender one of
your relatives, your father or your brother, or your sister's eldest son. If you don't, you will
die, or else your own son will. You may choose ...'
A father was told by a diviner that his own child was a witch. He beat him until the boy
confessed. A white chaplain passed and saved the boy. In 1953 the father was still in prison.
Father Van Caeneghem was himself accused of witchcraft by one of his own pupils with
whom he had had a slight difference. For years the student kept writing and begged to be
forgiven by the powerful white priest, who had 'persecuted him with magic'.
One seminarist who was accusing three girls of witchcraft was told by his bishop that it was
all nonsense, to which he replied: 'Monseigneur, it is impossible for me not to believe in
witchcraft.'
[Page [203] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
165 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 167 ---
1. THE WOMAN WHO LOST THREE CHILDREN
In the old days, the poison test was applied whenever more than one person was accused of
witchcraft. The Belgian administration introduced severe penalties against this test, making it
equivalent to manslaughter. The poison, tshipapa , had to be drunk by each accused person.
If she refused it was a confession of witchcraft. If she drank it and it had no effect, she was
acquitted. If the accused vomited it out, there was also no case against her. But if the poison
killed the accused, this was considered as proof of guilt. The poison itself contained an evil
spirit which killed others.
A woman had three children and lived happily with her husband. One day one of the children
fell ill and died; then the second, then the third. Of course her husband accused her of being a
witch, because everybody knows that witches kill their own children. So her husband wanted
to have nothing to do with her any more. The night after her last child died, he shut her out of
his house for fear of being the next victim.
Having nowhere else to go, the woman went and sat down on the front porch of her mother-
in-law's hut. In the middle of the night she heard a noise on the roof. She looked up and heard
the voices of six witches: one of them was the mother-in-law herself. They had human meat
with them which they offered to the tutelary spirits of the house. The witches became
suspicious, saying there were 'revealers' present, by which they meant human eyes. They
looked for these eyes but could not find them. Yet the young bereaved mother was sitting
there all the time, and it was her presence that gave the tutelary spirits the power to refuse the
meat.
The mother-in-law produced the head of the last child who had died, saying to the other
witches: 'See, what a good hostess I am, providing my own flesh and blood for you to share.
What are you contributing?'
[Page [204] ]
The other witches then discussed their plans. One mentioned the 'big man who lived in her
house', meaning her husband, whom she intended to kill. Another one spoke about her
husband's brother, as she had already killed her husband.
Finally, the mother-in-law saw her invisible guests off. When she came back (this time in a
normal fashion, along the path for human beings), she found her daughter-in-law, who
pretended to be asleep. She asked her: 'Were you here while we were talking?'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
166 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 168 ---
The young woman said: 'Talking? I heard nothing. Who were you talking to?'
'Oh, just my friends!'
The young woman went home and told her husband everything. Two months later, the
husband's uncle began to languish. The woman remembered what the witches had said: 'After
two months we will kill him.' Then the husband believed his wife's story that his own mother
was a witch and had killed his children, her own grandchildren. The husband warned his
relatives, and at a meeting of the elders of the village the six witches were summoned,
because the diviner had confirmed the young wife's allegations. The poison-mixer was called
upon to provide a suitable poison for the poison test.
Tshipapa was prepared. The six witches were all killed by the poison.
After that the young woman had many more children who lived and grew up, and so did other
women in the village, so that the population began to increase again. No more lights were
seen travelling through the district during the night.
2. THE WITCH WHO LEFT HER CHILD BEHIND
In this part of Africa, husbands sleep alone in separate huts, and go to visit the huts of their
wives at night. This husband had several
[Page [205] ]
wives, each wife having a hut to herself. It is not customary for a man to sleep with his wife
as long as she is suckling her baby. So he will just call her---the thin clay walls of African
huts permit conversation ---without entering.
The elders' method of torture in cases of suspected witchcraft was to put fire near the genitals
of the woman, burning that part of the body completely. It was hoped in this way to annihilate
the evil spirit, as the genitals are supposed to give direct access to a woman's most vital parts.
A woman who had a young baby wanted to go out at night to do some bewitching. She cut off
one of her buttocks and left it in her bed, together with the baby. Whenever the baby cried,
the buttock would soothe him and comfort him.
The woman now left her hut through the roof, naked. When she came back, she would glue
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
167 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 169 ---
the buttock back on her body, on to the place where it belonged, and no one could see where
it had been severed.
Many nights passed in this manner. One night her husband called his wife through the closed
door of the hut. He was disturbed by the crying of the child, and was beginning to wonder if
his wife was there at all.
The man asked through the wall: 'Why is the child crying? Are you looking after him
properly? The noise disturbs my sleep.'
He heard his wife's voice answering from inside the hut: 'Perhaps the baby is being bitten by
the bugs that lodge in the sleeping mat.'
It was the buttock speaking, but of course the husband could not see that. His wife was such a
cunning witch that she could make part of her body speak for herself. The man went back to
his hut thinking that his wife was in hers.
The next night the child was again crying its eyes out. The father was annoyed. He went to
the hut and called the wife. The buttock answered. The man said: 'Come outside with the
baby.' No one came.
[Page [206] ]
The man got impatient and entered the hut. He lit the fire and looked on the bed. There he
saw the baby in tears, and next to him the buttock. The man was stupefied.
After some moments he recovered from the shock and devised a plan. He went and found
some salt, and pepper, and a small knife of the type that is used for tattooing. He carved
tattoo designs around the edges of the buttock and strewed salt and pepper in the wounds, in
the manner of professional tattooers. In this manner he made sure that there would be clear
evidence that the buttock had been separated from the body. Then he took the child on his
knees and sat down on the bed.
After several hours he heard something fall on the floor from the roof. It might have been a
bat---but in fact it was his wife who had come back. At once she took the buttock to re-attach
it to her body, but it would not fit.
She mumbled: 'Something is wrong with this buttock, someone has smeared dirt on it!'
The man said: 'Indeed, so you left your buttock here! Tell me, where have you been? Doesn't
this prove that you are a witch? We'll wait until the morning, and then we shall know for
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
168 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 170 ---
certain.'
Slowly the night passed; very gradually came the dawn. The man sat there with his wife.
Early in the morning he called all the villagers together and told them the whole story.
The wicked woman was called out. She limped, for she had only one leg; she had had to
leave the other one on the bed, as it could not be fitted in its place without the buttock. She
looked like a dismembered goat.
The woman was tortured and forced to speak. The elders know how to do that, with fire and
daggers. She confessed that she was a witch and that she had had meetings with other
witches. She told who they were. She confessed how she used to fly around in the middle of
the night in the shape of an owl; how she penetrated in people's huts while they were
sleeping; how she pointed a brush at an innocent sleeper whom she had selected as her
victim; how
[Page [207] ]
she cut off a tuft of hair from his forehead, over which she would pronounce secret formulae
to make him ill; how the victim would languish away and die, as his vital strength had been
robbed.
In the end, she was taken to the forest and killed. Her head was cut off lest the spirit return to
the body.
3. THE WOMAN WHO ESCAPED THE WITCHES
A woman was beaten by her husband. She was aggrieved, feeling humiliated and rebellious.
She ran away in the middle of the night. Suddenly, at the crossroads, she heard voices but she
saw nothing.
One voice said: 'Take that foot, pull it this way , so that I can cut it off. Make your light shine
more strongly so that I can see.'
There was no light visible, but the woman knew that those were the voices of witches who
were busy cutting up a human being.
Suddenly one of the voices said: 'I smell a live human, where is it?' When the woman heard
this, she closed her armpits by drawing her upper arms closer to her body, trying to put the
witches off the scent. She withdrew quietly, and returned to her husband, to whom she told
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
169 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 171 ---
everything. He said:
'It was the powerful buanga 7 I gave you that protected you from the evil power of those
witches. It made you invisible for them; but you should never have gone to the crossroads in
the middle of the night, for you know that the witches are active then. And you should never
have quarrelled with me, for that gave them some power over you so that they could at least
smell you. Next time you run away from me, you may not be so fortunate. You may get
caught in their invisible nets.'
[Page [208] ]
4. THE THIEF AND THE SORCERER
A thief and a sorcerer lived near each other. One day the sorcerer decided to bewitch the
thief's child. This was easy for him as he was a neighbour. Children are so careless. They
leave their excrement scattered all over the compound, and if the mother is not careful, the
sorcerer may come in the middle of the night with his little box and gather some of it. If he
knows the proper magic ritual, he will succeed in getting power over the person of whom that
waste matter was once a part. In this way, he will sap the life- force of the person, who will
contract an incurable disease and slowly die.
The thief would not be a thief if he were not an expert in bewitching people himself, and so
he guessed that his own neighbour was the culprit. His own magic power, however, was not
strong enough to make his neighbour's witchcraft ineffective. He went to a farmer who gave
him a buanga , which would help him to penetrate the sorcerer's house unnoticed and even
steal parts of the latter's body.
So the thief went and stole the sorcerer's eyes. Then he woke him, shouting: 'My friend
sorcerer, they have stolen your goats!'
The sorcerer answered: 'Not my goats, but my eyes have been pinched! Follow that thief, my
friend neighbour; if you get my eyes back, your child will not die!'
The thief pretended to be running away, but came back soon after. He did this three times.
Finally the sorcerer's wife said to her husband: 'If we return the child to his father first,
perhaps your eyes will be returned.' The sorcerer hesitated, but he knew very well that if he
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
170 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 172 ---
did not cure his neighbour's child he would stay blind for life. So he gave up his power over
the child.
The thief went home and inspected his child. He saw that the boy's health had returned, and
that he looked strong again. So he
[Page [209] ]
went back to his neighbours and restored his eyes by means of his buanga .
The sorcerer woke up and could see. He called out through the wall: 'Neighbour, my two
goats have come back!'
There is a proverb: 'Two leopards do not bite one another.'
The two powerful evil-doers are indeed as careful as two lions meeting. The sorcerer
confesses implicitly to his evil deed when he says: 'Get my eyes [goats] back, and your child
will be cured.' He does not think it prudent to accuse the thief outright, nor does the thief
accuse him. He merely shows that he has equal power and equal ruthlessness.
An interesting little point is that the sorcerer's wife is in her husband's plot and knows all
about his magic practices. Note that she says: 'Return the child.' The sorcerer has indeed
taken the baby, that is, he has 'eaten' the child's vital strength.
Why did the sorcerer bewitch the child of such a dangerous man? He had to. He was forced to
it by his evil nature as well as by his magical colleagues, who must have blackmailed him. He
had to contribute human meat to the coven, or else he would have been eaten himself.
Presumably there were no other children available at that time.
5. THE SORCERER WHO BEWITCHED HIMSELF
A father had three daughters: Bibombe, Kapinga and Kamuania. One day, Kamuania was
beaten by her husband. Hurt and resentful, she ran away, and went back to her parents'
compound. When she arrived near the door of their sleeping hut it was night and pitch dark.
She told herself: 'I will not disturb them now; they might say: go back at once.' While she
was standing there, hesitating, she could not help hearing what her parents were discussing.
Her mother was saying:
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
171 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 173 ---
[Page [210] ]
'If we go to the witches' meeting-place now, we shall only get a small piece of human meat
because we are not contributing anything ourselves.'
Her husband asked: 'What can we do?'
The mother had a plan: 'Go to visit one of your daughters and take a child so that we can give
it to the witches. Bibombe's children are too clever and so are Kapinga's---they will not be so
easy to bewitch. The best thing will be to get one of Kamuania's children in your power,
preferably the one with the swollen belly, or the youngest baby . They will be easy to get hold
of.'
All the time Kamuania had been standing there in the front porch near the door, horrified.
She withdrew very carefully, without making a sound. When she was far enough away, she
ran back to her husband. No one in her parents' place had seen her. She told her husband what
she had heard, that her parents were planning to bewitch their grandchildren. With death in
their hearts they discussed together what they could do to counteract the grandparents' evil
schemes.
The next morning they told their children: 'Remember that you must never accept anything
from anyone. Don't touch it, for if you eat it you will get sick and die. Even if granny comes
here or granddad, don't speak to them and don't forget that anything they give you may be
poison and give you terrible pains in your tummies!'
After the parents had told their children this, they had to go to the fields to plant their millet.
But they did not go with quiet hearts. That same day, the children's grandfather arrived. He
found the children alone in the compound and asked them: 'Where is your father?'
The children replied: 'Our parents are in the fields.'
The old man then gave a locust to the second child and said: 'Here, go and roast it and eat it.
It's good!' He took the other two children, the eldest and the youngest, and held them near
him, for he did not want them to die too. One was enough, he thought.
[Page [211] ]
The second child took the locust inside, held it over the fire for a while, then hid it in a pot
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
172 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 174 ---
and put a flat stone over the opening. He dawdled a little, and when he emerged from the hut,
his grandfather had gone.
When the parents came home that evening, they asked their eldest child: 'Has anybody been
here?'
'Yes, granddad was here.'
'Did he give something to any of you?'
'Yes, he gave a locust to my little brother, who roasted it and ate it.'
When the mother heard this, she beat her breast, crying out: 'Oh, my child is dying, he has
been hit by witchcraft!' She called the little boy and asked him: 'Did grandfather give you a
locust?'
'Yes.'
'Did you roast it?'
'Yes.'
'Then, did you eat it? Tell me!'
'No, I didn't, it's still there!'
The father took the stone off the pot the boy pointed at, and looked inside. He saw the locust
and put the stone back. The parents were jubilant: 'Our child was saved by his obedience!'
The parents now planned a counter-attack on the wicked grandfather. They killed a big capon
and cooked it. Its inside was stuffed with various delicacies, and the bewitched locust was put
inside the stuffing. The meat was to be served in one bowl together with the gravy.
That night, the grandfather was invited to dinner. He loved chicken sauce, so he took a ball of
tapioca and dipped it in the gravy; then he took a piece of the liver, and ate that too. He asked
where his grandchildren were but he was told that they had been sent away to their aunt for
the day. That, of course, had been done to prevent them from eating any of the dangerous
meal. Next, grandfather looked inside the bird and discovered the locust. He was so startled
that his belt fell off. At once he collected all his
[Page [212] ]
things, put them in his bag, and went straight home without saying good-bye.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
173 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 175 ---
His daughter said to her husband: 'Father discovered his locust and did not eat it, but its juice
has gone all through the sauce, so that he has certainly eaten some of it. Now he has eaten
himself, for the evil spirit which he had put in the locust was part of the evil spirit that rules
him too.'
She was right. A few days later her father fell ill, and he died shortly after. The spirit which
he had sent to his grandchild, so that it might kill him as soon as he had eaten it, was now
inside his own stomach. It had to have satisfaction, for spirits pine for human flesh. It ate him
from the inside: it killed its host.
When his daughter was informed of her father's death, she wailed loudly: 'Oh my father! The
strong one had destroyed himself; his own magic was too powerful for him!' The people
asked her to explain her words, and she told them the story . The bodies of sorcerers are not
buried: they are not worth any ceremony. So grandfather's corpse was thrown away in the
bush. The hyenas ate it---and you can still see the evil spirits glowing in the hyenas' eyes.
6. WHEN THE WITCH IS FOUND
This story is historical.
A woman had a miscarriage, the second one in two years. Her husband was in despair. He
threw himself on to the floor, crying and wailing:
'Why do I deserve this, why can I not have children, why may I have no young ones around
me to support me when I grow old and bent? I gave all my cattle to acquire this woman, my
goats and my spear-blades! She was not given to me free, she was not exchanged for a mere
pot of meat! She was not found on the
[Page [213] ]
roadside! I am not a thief. I have never squeezed money out of my neighbours; why am I
punished thus?'
There he lay , desperate, in the dust. Then he jumped up and ran outside to where his relatives
were standing, listening to his sad lamentations. Furious, he shouted:
'Don't just stand there, it's your own family that is dying, your own flesh that cannot come to
life! Someone is killing us and you know it, someone is sending us unhappiness for some evil
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
174 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 176 ---
reason! Go to the diviner and find out! Do you think I would want to kill an innocent person?'
The next day, the relatives went to see the woman-diviner. They brought cloth, tobacco, some
fish and a chicken as payment for the consultation. The diviner's husband received them
courteously, spreading mats and putting stools ready for the guests to sit on, saying: 'Rest a
while, the diviner is home and will be ready to hear your case in a short time.'
After a while, the diviner herself entered the reception-room and sat down solemnly.
The eldest gentleman among the relatives said: 'Mother diviner, we have come, we are your
guests.'
She said: 'Thank you for coming. My eyes see you.'
She went back into her inner room and reappeared with a bowl which was decorated with
strange figures: squares and triangles. It contained seeds, leaves, pepper, powder, the eye of a
partridge and several small figurines made of wood. She shook the bowl to and fro so that the
powder flew about in the room. The visitors coughed and sneezed, saying to each other: 'This
famous lady surely uses potent medicines!' That remark showed admiration.
Now the diviner began her inquiries. These were held in a singsong voice, as if she was
intoning a prayer:
Now, let us begin the asking,
asking why these people came here,
Did they come here for a person?
For a man or for a woman?
[Page [214] ]
For a woman? Was she healthy?
Was she pregnant with a baby?
Pregnant from her lawful husband?
Why then is the husband angry?
Was the child duly delivered?
Did the mother die in childbirth?
Did the child not see the daylight?
Has the household no survivor?
No one to inter the parents? ...
In this manner, by singing rhythmically, the diviner arrived at the correct conclusion. After
each question she watched her audience attentively, to see if anyone gave away the answer by
nodding or shaking their heads. As soon as she had a clue she would sing the next line, in this
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
175 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 177 ---
manner narrowing down the number of possibilities at each question; sometimes an
involuntary gesture would indicate such circumstances as anger, or pregnancy.
Her visitors, in the stuffy atmosphere of the hut, were duly impressed by her unexpected
knowledge, as shown by the mysterious singing. No one spoke, but eyebrows and mouths
showed admiration whenever her questions hit the mark. Having confirmed the reason for the
visit (she would probably have heard about the miscarriages already), she proceeded to
answer the terrible question: Who has bewitched the poor mother?
She indicated a lonely old woman in the same family as the witch, using no specific terms
and no names, just hinting vaguely and leaving the conclusions to her audience.
The visitors certainly did jump to conclusions. They all agreed that the witch must be aunt
So-and-so. 'She is old and she lives alone, she is an aunt of the ill-starred woman. We do not
know what she does or what she lives on, no one knows her really ...'
So the people worked themselves up into a frenzy. The husband was glad that his anger had
found an object, and so he whipped up the feelings of the relatives by saying: 'This might
have happened to any one of you! One day she will do it to you, the next day to you!'
[Page [215] ]
So he went on ranting until the decent clan had been turned into a raging mob. They surged
into the old woman's compound and destroyed everything they found. They set fire to the hut,
believing that in this way they were purifying it from all the evil powers. The poor woman
came running on her old legs when she saw her hut burning. She had been working her
cassava field, and in fact she had had nothing to do with the whole affair. She hardly knew the
people she was supposed to have bewitched.
As soon as the mob saw her they cried: 'There she is, the evil hag!' Some of the people,
wishing to be fair and just, proposed to hold the ceremony of the poison test, but the mob was
already beyond that point. They were totally blinded by their hatred of witchcraft and their
terror of sorcerers.
Crying 'Kill her! We've got the witch! Cut off her head! Who has a knife? Burn her alive!
Throw her in the fire! Hack her to pieces!' they dragged her to the village square. Someone
gouged out her eyes, someone else tied her with a rope. She was beaten with sticks, prodded
with spear-blades, and scorched with flaming torches.
At some point during this torture she died. She may have fainted with fright when she saw
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
176 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 178 ---
the mob stampeding towards her. She was probably quite dead as soon as the first heavy stick
hit her head. She was only a frail old woman, eking out a meagre existence with a little
cultivation. She did not cling to life, for she had no one to live for. And it was just that
miserable loneliness that made her suspect.
When the mob had done with her, when it had vented its anger on her emaciated body, she
was a terrible sight. Soon the dogs arrived: before long they were fighting over her body,
tearing it to pieces. There were piebald crows too, each flying away with a piece of flesh.
Finally came the vultures.
[Page [216] ]
7. THE FIRST MAN
God created the earth first; then he took two stones and made them into the sun and the
moon. He further created Rain, whose greatest desire it was to fall down and inundate the
earth, and Darkness, over whom Moon scattered a basketful of seeds: the stars.
At the time when there were still no people on earth, God sent Kiyomba to earth with two
women. According to another tradition, the first man had only one human wife, whereas the
other wife was Kizimu, the serpent.
Kizimu gave her younger co-wife two fruits, saying: 'Give one to your husband, then eat them
together. Remember that you must not open the fruit before you are with your husband.' Of
course, on the way, curiosity overcame the young woman, so she opened the fruit. Inside it
there was a magic powder which made the woman feel ashamed. She felt for the first time
that she was a woman. Kizimu now gave the man another fruit, which made him desire
women, and so he started quarrelling with his wife.
Kiyomba had one son with Kizimu, whom he loved very dearly. One day Kizimu felt old and
told her husband she wanted to live in seclusion for a period of time until she was quite well
again. So Kiyomba built a hut for her and told their son that his mother was sick and should
not be disturbed. In the hut, Kizimu underwent a process of rejuvenation. She had borrowed
a winnowing basket from her co-wife. Now she began to strip off her skin and put it in the
window. First the skin of her legs, then her arms, then her trunk, so that only her head and
neck were left to be stripped. At that moment the young co-wife arrived, and opened the
outer door, then the second, then the third.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
177 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 179 ---
Kizimu cried: 'Do not come here, do not enter! If you do, we shall all have to die!'
Of course the young woman did not know what death was, so
[Page [217] ]
she opened the innermost door, saying she wanted her winnowing basket back. Kizimu died
on the spot, and therefore mankind, not having learned the art of casting off the skin, was
doomed to die, one after the other.
Kiyomba received many different kinds of seeds from God, which he plaited into his hair.
When he arrived home, he scattered the seeds over his land and found that all sorts of
vegetables and cereals grew up from them.
According to another version of the story, man and snake were given the choice between two
baskets. Man, not knowing what he did, chose the basket that contained death; the serpent
was left with the Basket of Life, which contained the secret of casting the old slough and
growing a new skin.
Annoyed at man's failure to achieve immortality, God withdrew from earth and went up to
heaven. Kiyomba, the first man, felt an unconquerable desire to rejoin God, to be near him
again. He started out with his young wife towards the horizon, where the sky rests on copper
pillars, standing in the land of sunset. Of course he never reached the land of his desire. On
their way, they had many children who populated the earth.
God said to man: 'You will not be allowed to join me as long as you are on earth. But I have
created a new thing, 
mutima , the soul, which will be the kernel of life for you. I will also
give you the sticks with which you can rub fire, the spear to hunt with, and the hoe to
cultivate with. Finally, I give you all the fruits of the earth. You may eat them all, except one,
the banana, which men may not eat.'
Of course, woman, Kiyomba's wife, picked some bananas and ate them. Soon God discovered
that some bananas were missing. He called his four children together: Sun, Moon, Man and
Woman. He told them: 'I will bury you all. The one who has not stolen my bananas will rise
soon afterwards.' So he did.
The sun was the first to rise. After only one night, he rose again out of the earth. The moon
took four days before she reappeared
[Page [218] ]
in the sky, very thin and slender but growing steadily. Man and woman did not rise at all. So
they remained buried till the present day. Only mutima , the soul, was taken to heaven by
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
178 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 180 ---
God, because it was his youngest creation, which he loved dearly.
One young man, a cripple, succeeded in entering Heaven, because he had learned to pray.
God asked him what he wanted, and the cripple said he wanted to be a normal man like all
the others---because, he said, they all mocked him, and this he found hard to endure. God
healed him, sent him back and said:
'No one should mock his fellow, as they will all die.'
© Jan Knappert 1971
 
NOTES
^ [Footnote 1
Readers may like to be reminded of the well-known English folk-song Billy Boy :
Is she fitting for your wife Billy Boy Billy Boy
Is she fitted for your wife Billy Boy?
She's fitted to my wife
As the haft is to the knife ...
^ [Footnote 2
The Rev. Basil Tanghe reports that the girl, whose name was Nzege, which means 'banana' or
'yellow moon', was still alive at the time of writing the book in which he tells this story. It
was published in 1929 and at the beginning, Fr. Tanghe quotes from the first epistle of John:
'We have seen it with our own eyes'.
^ [Footnote 3
It should be explained here that ants are a delicacy in Ngbandiland, raw or roasted, and that
the people are so fond of them that they are reluctant to give away a dish of ant-stew even to
an honoured guest.
^ [Footnote 4
See R. C. Zaehner, Man, Myth & Magic , I, 1970, 38-40.
^ [Footnote 5
Hence the name Zaïre
^ [Footnote 6
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
179 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM


--- PAGE 181 ---
Heksery, p. 10.
^ [Footnote 7
Magic horn.
Copyright © 1996-2011 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
180 of 180 7/9/2011 1:27 PM

