=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Myths and Legends of the Swahili Jan Knappert.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 147
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:25:03.695005
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Printed from African Writers Series, http://collections.chadwyck.com
Saturday, July 09, 2011
 
Bibliographic details for the Electronic File
Knappert, Jan  Myths and Legends of the Swahili
Cambridge 2006
ProQuest LLC
African Writers Series
Copyright © 2006 ProQuest LLC. All Rights Reserved. Do not export or print from this
database without checking the Copyright Conditions to see what is permitted.
Bibliographic details for the Source Text
Knappert, Jan (1927-)
Myths and Legends of the Swahili
London
Heinemann 1970
xii, 212 p.
© Jan Knappert 1970
Prose Fiction
Preliminaries omitted.
AWS series numbe r: 75
First published: London
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
1 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 3 ---
First published by: Heinemann
First published: 1970
Language of original publication: English
First published in the African Writers Series in: 1970
ISBN: 0435900757
[Page ]
[Page [v] ]
Front matter
Preface
The present collection of Swahili Myths and Legends in English translation is intended to
make Swahili mythology and folklore better known to the English-reading public as well as
to the student of folktales and legends. It does insufficient justice to the wealth of available
material. For instance, the numerous legends surrounding the figure of the Prophet
Mohammed are represented by only three samples. The publishers felt, however, that a
volume containing too much religious material would be of less general interest than one in
which the secular type of story balanced the Islamic myths.
The majority of these religious legends have been culled from manuscripts, most of them in
Arabic script, and other unpublished material written down by Swahili scholars since the
early eighteenth century. In this field I owe a debt to Professor Dammann of Marburg
University who made his collection of Swahili manuscripts available to me.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
2 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
The more worldly folk stories are a selection from material, collected by me personally,
mainly in the years 1961-4, along the coast between Mombasa and Dar-es-Salaam, and, in
some cases, up-country.
Variants of these stories are to be found in the collections of Buettner, Lademann, Steere, and
Velten. A 'variant' may be a story which shares one fragment or even only one motif with
another, or several others. Fragments may be inserted into a story without being an essential
part of it. Conversely, an essential part of a story may be missing in one variant, so that
[Page [vi] ]
it seems pointless until one discovers another variant which supplies the missing link.
In this collection an attempt has been made in each case to tell the story in such a manner that
it is meaningful to an English-reading public, without losing in any way the typical Swahili
flavour of the narrative. To this end, references that immediately mean something to a
Swahili had to be made explicit in order to give an insight into the purport of a story.
This collection is not intended as a scientific work. Its purpose is simply to make available
material which, it is hoped, will enable readers to gain familiarity with Swahili thought as
expressed in folk literature.
Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to the publishers for their encouragement and
lively interest in this project.
[Page [1] ]
Main text
I Introduction
[Page [2] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
3 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 5 ---
1. Destiny seems to be the dominant motif running through the whole tapestry of Swahili
mythology, secular as well as religious.
Destiny: that is, what the Almighty has in store for each of us. He weaves this red thread
through the lives of all men, cutting it off wherever it pleases Him, to begin a new pattern or
end an old one. Together, all our lives form a giant carpet into which He weaves His
characters to make a harmonious design. It all hangs together, it all makes sense in some way,
because there is a conscious Mind behind the work in whose Creation all these patterns fit.
A sage is a man who can read at least part of this intricate design. For all 'characters' are in
reality 'symbols' which express or represent His ways and intentions, for those who possess
wisdom. Some have found ancient books of revelations to prophets hidden in caves or
castles. They are the ones who recognize the seal of Solomon on a bottle, or the seal of the
great prophecy between a boy's shoulders. Others have learned to read the stars like so many
letters in an open book.
We are reminded of the three wise men from the East who had read in the stars that they
would find the King of Kings straight under the star of Bethlehem. Or of Walter Scott's story
of the hermit in 
The Talisman , who reads in the stars that on a given night two kings will
sleep under his roof.
2. The scene is set with the Creation. Allah has His plan
[Page [3] ]
before He begins creating the skies and the earth. The immensely complicated system of
fixed constellations and wandering planets, the blazing sun and the changeable moon, the
coloured clouds and waving seas are each created by the order: Be! The existence of every
creature, man or woman, animal or ant, is planned centuries ahead, down to the details of
daily food, which will be sent to us by the appropriate angel, in daily rations, according to His
will. No event in our lives is fortuitous. Everything has a meaning, the name one is given, a
dream one dreams, the position of the planets at birth. Finally, death will be waiting for us at
the appointed hour, and if it is to be in a war, one speaks of 'the bullet with one's name on it'.
Allah reveals parts of His unlimited knowledge to His prophets, the first of whom was Adam,
who learned all the names of the creatures directly from Him. All the prophets were, of
course, good Muslims, including Abraham, Moses and Jesus, and if other peoples contradict
this, perhaps theirs is an incomplete or 'altered' version of the scriptures ...
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
4 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 6 ---
Iblis (Eblees), the devil and his hosts of satans, were created by Allah to test us. Their
business is to interfere with our happiness by inspiring desire, jealousy, hate, anger and
violence. Some persons whose character seems to be addicted to plotting, intrigues and
sowing discord, are believed to be satans in human disguise. All evil spirits are satans in
some form or other. Sorcerers ( 
wachawi ) who send death or disease by means of black
magic, are in 'reality' satanic spirits who fly about at night; liars who create dissent and strife
by telling their victims invented stories about friends and relatives must be supposed to be
satans covered by human flesh. These satans who corrupt morality are the refined Oriental
type. Evil spirits of the African species are more materialistic: they wander about in the shape
of ugly monsters and gobble up their victims by the dozen, together
[Page [4] ]
with their cattle. One is strongly reminded of Tutuola's monster-spirits who walk about
shouting: 'Hungry! Hungry!'
The Swahili live at the crossroads of two worlds. An unknown number of African peoples
have settled along the east coast of Africa, drifting down from the hills and arid savannahs.
An equally unknown number of Oriental peoples, sailors and traders, with or without their
families, have settled on the same coast, blown towards it from Arabia, Persia, India or
Madagascar. The result is (unexpectedly) a fairly homogeneous people, speaking a basically
African (Bantu) language, with a basically Oriental (Islamic) Culture, living along a thousand
miles of coast as well as on the adjacent islands between Mogadishu and Mozambique. Their
primary interests are trade, fishing, navigation on the Indian Ocean, travelling 'up-country' and
eating rice with curried chicken.
3. Perhaps it is their sense of travel and adventure that creates the lively interest the Swahili
have in Destiny. Possibly, this also accounts for the proliferation of stories about the prophet
Moses (Musa). Moses, says the Koran, conversed with God on the Mountain Turu Sinai, and
in the valley of Tuwa. Many are the stories in which Moses prays to Allah that He may alter a
man's destiny: but this alteration invariably ends in disaster.
The cult of spirits is still very much alive in many parts of Africa, and anyone who is able, by
means of the power of his magic, to secure the aid of a spirit is envied as well as feared. This
may account for the popularity of King Solomon, whom the Swahili call Nabii (prophet)
Sulemani. To him, Allah gave the seal with His secret name on it. It is known that Allah has
ninety-nine names which are daily recited ( 
dhikiri ) by devout Muslims with the rosary (Ar.
tasbih ). The hundredth name of Allah, however, was known only to
[Page [5] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
5 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 7 ---
Solomon and Mohammed. It denotes God's essence, and thus whoever possesses knowledge
of it, has the divine presence with him, so that no ill can befall him. Therefore, all the spirits,
good or evil, have to obey him. Mohammed preached to the spirits, converted some of the
lizards, and conversed with the snakes, wolves and birds, all creatures whose bodies are
frequently inhabited by spirits, some good, some evil. Solomon too, commanded the spirits.
The evil ones he banned to the outer confines of the earth, the good ones were employed to
carry him through the skies to wherever he wished to travel, or to dig up precious metals for
him, and build his palaces. Thus says the Koran, and who would dare contradict such an
authority?
4. Only a few of the many legends about the prophet Mohammed have been included in this
collection. The most fascinating of them all is undoubtedly his journey through the heavens
and hells, where he is shown many terrifying creatures, as well as the souls of the blessed and
the doomed, each one having attained the state for which he was destined.
5. There is no sharp distinction between the religious myths and legends and the secular. Evil
spirits as well as bawdy and satyrical characters may appear in the former, sages and holy men
in the latter. Inculcating strongly moral lessons in their audiences seems to be the object of all
story-tellers. Allah's hand can be felt everywhere, directing the destinies of mortals as well as
devils. Obedient sons who scrupulously follow the precepts of their fathers will invariably
find huge treasures or marry princesses.
6. Even the witty tricksters like Abu Nuwasi often give their jokes spiritual overtones. There
is often a 
double
[Page [6] ]
entendre in their quips which is caught only by those initiated into mysticism.
The cook who complains that a beggar inhales the delicious smell of his cakes does not
understand the implication of his own accusation; only the spirits of the dead can feed on the
smell of food sacrificed to them. The living need real substance for their sustenance. Abu
Nuwasi understands, and so his verdict is perfectly appropriate. His learning has made him a
qualified judge. It has also made him a mystic, a wise man who understands the inner aspect
of things, the aspect which normal people have no knowledge of. The mystic sometimes
cultivates an appearance of idiocy. He perpetrates howlers without batting an eyelid, so as to
destroy the pride which no holy man should possess; but at the same time he deflates the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
6 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
self-esteem of kings and ministers. In a culture based on power, the true intellectual can only
be a jester. If someone tells him: 'You will fall', and it happens, Abu Nuwasi pretends great
admiration for the speaker's competence in predicting the future, and insists on being told
when he will die. For the conceited man it is a lesson in modesty: Do not pretend you know
the future, since only Allah knows it. For Abu Nuwasi himself it becomes an exercise in
asceticism: three days without food. For all believers it is a lesson not to believe too much:
No one knows the future, or the hereafter. To the two thieves, Abu Nuwasi teaches a series of
lessons with the moral that one can find gold if one works, but that no one must expect quick
gain. Abu Nuwasi's jokes are not just about a fool making fools of his fellows; they always
carry a flavour of wonder: there is philosophy in them.
7. Swahili story-tellers, poets and scholars are unanimous on the subject of the wily
wickedness of women. There are exceptions, women of character and courage do exist, but
the
[Page [7] ]
majority use their cunning only for one purpose: to obtain a maximum of sexual satisfaction.
Some sociologists would say that this is the inevitable result of polygamy: in a monogamous
household the wife does receive sufficient attention from her husband. Others would
maintain that it is the result of the bondage in which women are kept. They are locked up in
their quarters all day and denied the freedom and the education that men enjoy . If given more
responsibility, they would decide to be more faithful. A third group argues that the opposite is
true: women in East Africa are much freer than in Arabia, they plant their own crops, market
their own wares and grant their favours to a man if they like him. And so, this group submits,
it could be precisely this independence of the women, on whom the men in turn are
dependent, that causes resentment in the men, except of course those men who themselves
have good sources of income. Most men would like to be superior but are not ...
This is not the place for scientific argument. The intention of this collection of folktales is
only to provide samples of moods and views as they seem to be present among the people.
The long series of myths depicting women as endowed with all possible vices starts with the
Bible and is continued in the Islamic tradition. So we have the disobedient Eve, the jealous
Sarah, the adulterous Zuleikha, Potiphar's wife, who tempted Joseph; in the present
collection there are stories in the cycles of Moses and Solomon about women's whims and
wiles. In the end, of course, men have only themselves to blame, if their desire makes them
fulfil a woman's foolish wishes. Instead they should beat their wives with sticks. This moral
lesson is found in almost every piece of Swahili literature: it is really hammered into the
heads of the young boys that women are unreliable and insatiable.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
7 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
Many Westerners may frown upon such an in-egalitarian
[Page [8] ]
opinion being apparently shared by all the men in Swahili Country. But even in Western
Europe, 'equality' is a very recent concept.
8. Women like handsome men, they also like rich men. Poor men do not like rich men
because the latter have a tendency to become even richer at the expense of the poor. Taxation
still takes a very direct form in many parts of Africa. Sometimes the seemingly placid peasant
gets tired of being exploited by chiefs and sultans. It should be borne in mind that the
majority of the stories in this chapter were taken down around the turn of the century, when
the chiefs were still independent and there were still quite a number of sultans in power.
9. Animal fables are probably the most typically African form of oral literature. The king of
the animals is the elephant, who has the biggest brain. It is well known that elephants have
the intelligence to find water. But the hare always outwits him. The tortoise finally outwits
even the hare, because his long life gives him shrewdness and tenacity.
The East African hare must be the ancestor of Brer Rabbit. Is it perhaps because in some way
some African peoples and their descendants feel akin to the hare and the rabbit that they have
chosen these soft-furred and rather defenceless animals to be the heroes of their folklore? He
overcomes the bigger animals with his smooth tongue: he always has a long story ready to
delude them with. He also possesses magic: his soothing words and sweet songs cause
sleepiness in his victims. Often the hare makes use of the vanity of his victims: none of them
want to admit to having been tied up by the hare, and so even the elephant falls victim to
him. Of course human characters are attributed to
[Page [9] ]
the animals, and so these fables are full of lessons for boys and girls in Africa. The hare is
hypocritically polite when he calls: ' Hodi hodi! ' which is the traditional Swahili equivalent
of knocking on a door. The hare's refusal to exchange his honey for water is brilliant. He says
he will gladly give it free to the great chief---who falls into the fatal trap. But one can imagine
how a tortoise can catch a hare ... The cunning of the slow and ugly tortoise is a reason for
great mirth among the audience, and even the narrator has to stop at the point where he is
describing 
what the tortoise caught the hare with , for he is choking with laughter. Another
source of great amusement is the story of the lion and the hare building a hut together without
knowing it. The story of the baboon and the tortoise is very widespread; it was also told to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
8 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 10 ---
the present collector in Rhodesia.
10. Travellers' tales are that part of folklore in which anyone can give his imagination free
rein. Yet it is amazing how many familiar motifs there are, although many Swahili narrators
would not admit that some are of foreign origin. When it was suggested to one of them that
Sendibada was originally the Persian Sindbad, he looked surprised. He said: 'Surely this
name is pure Swahili, it means Siendi baada : "I am not coming after", i.e. I am always there
before everybody else.'
The magic formulae which Sendibada uses against the dangerous creatures he meets are in
Arabic, the language of magic, and are quasi-quotations from the Koran, all of them referring
to the grave, Resurrection and Paradise. The story of the round mat has a double meaning, for
the word kitanga 'round mat for sitting on during prayers and meals', also denotes a certain
spirit.
Betel has an important function in the Islamic cultures around the Indian Ocean, in India and
Indonesia as well as
[Page [10] ]
on the Swahili coast. It is supposed to enhance a person's eloquence, and the faculty of
speech is very highly regarded in these countries. It is by talking nicely that one wins a girl,
or convinces her parents to give her in marriage. It is by talking glibly that a merchant
persuades his customers to buy his wares. It is by talking flatteringly that a politician climbs
up in his society. In fact it is not so much the betel itself that is important but the 'formula',
i.e. what one says during the ceremony of betel-chewing. The art of making arrowheads is an
old tradition in Africa. In some parts these first iron tools became a form of payment, e.g. for
brides.
11. Many are the stories about spirits, and some of these spirits are so real that their
domiciles are known. The people of the locality will point out a tree or a river which is
known to be inhabited by a spirit, whose name and description are sometimes familiar to the
people. Indeed, Africa is a continent full of spirits. They exist in the nebulous forms common
to many cultures, as smoke or mist. Many spirits live in the fire: one could almost say that
some spirits 
are flames. Many spirits, the same ones or different ones (Allah only knows),
appear in the shape of animals, giants, dwarfs or white men (i.e. albinos). Great kings of the
past may reappear as lions or pythons. Women seem to have a preference for the skin of a
hyena, and these are not necessarily evil spirits. Dwarfs and giants are normally spirits. Their
appearance is characterized by more than just size: they may be one-eyed, or fire may spark
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
9 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
out of their eyes, especially with the evil ones. They are often hairy all over their bodies,
which makes one suspect that they are really baboons, and in some parts it is actually
believed that baboons possess magic, e.g. that they can cause men to fall asleep, and that they
can seduce women.
In general, spirits may marry mortal women and have issue from them. Mortal men may also
marry jinnee girls
[Page [11] ]
who will assume feminine shapes to please them, at least for the moments that matter. Their
children will almost invariably show signs of their spiritual ancestry, such as high mental
capacities, swiftness of movement, weightlessness, and unattachedness to their human
appearance: in other words, transformability. Their most particular characteristic, is, of
course, their propensity to work magic and delude people. Some of them are good, some are
evil, some are better than 
most people, few are as wicked as some people. Most spirits are
more intelligent than people, certainly better informed, for they all have long-distance
knowledge; some, however, are even more stupid than people.
Frequently, spirits appear in the form of birds or bats. They may be owls or eagles, songbirds,
crows or vultures.
12. With the Just Judgements we have come full circle. 'Judgement comes at the end,' says
the proverb, referring to the last Judgement, but also to the fact that people will be judged
after their deeds, not before. Mohammedans are not the only African people to be fond of
courtroom stories. With the Luba people in the Congo, for instance, this has grown into a
'You be the Judge' game, as each story sets a problem which the audience discusses until the
wise narrator gives the solution.
For traditional Muslims the law is entirely based on the Koran, which is God's own word.
The interpretation of the legal precepts in the Koran has given rise to an elaborate literature
which contains the rules of life down to the minutest details. Law and Dogma are one. Since
the Koran is God's final message to Mankind, it contains----or so believers hold---allusions to
the future which only a profound scholar can interpret, in the same way as the astrologer
interprets the position of the planets so as to read someone's future. Thus a judge in the world
of Islam is more than a
[Page [12] ]
judge, since the law is God-given, and so its interpretation is the interpretation of God's will,
that is, human destiny . In the light of the facts that are brought to his notice, and of what he
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
10 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
knows about the lives of the persons involved, the cadi has to find a solution that seems to be
an answer to the question of destiny for each of the dramatis personae .
We all know the classic example of Solomon's judgement, by which the identity of the real
mother came to light. We know Solon's judgement on the life of King Croesus, and Jesus'
words to the woman at the well. In our present collection there is the profound judgement of
the prophet Moses with regard to the forgetful woman. In the same chapter, Allah Himself
gives judgement on several occasions.
To be judged is part of our destiny. Judgement is already given in the perpetration of the act.
The character and attitude of a man will influence the judgement that will be passed on him.
It is in a way the task of the cadi to guess Allah's intention. That is why the cadi is ideally a
theologian and a mystic as well as a lawyer.
[Page [13] ]
2 The Creation
[Page [14] ]
1. THE LIGHT AND THE SOULS
Before the beginning of time there was God. He was never born nor will He ever die. If He
wishes a thing, He merely says to it: 'Be!' and it exists.
So God said: 'There be light!' And there was light. God took a fistful of this light and it shone
in His hand. Then He said: 'I am pleased with you, my light, I will make out of you my
prophet, I will mould you into the soul of Mohammed.'
When he had created the soul of the prophet Mohammed (May God pray for him and give
him peace), He loved it so much that He decided to create mankind so that He might send
Mohammed to it as His messenger to bring His word to Earth. His word would teach the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
11 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
peoples of the earth the distinction between Good and Evil, and in the end God would judge
all the souls and reward those who had chosen to follow the Good Messenger, and reject the
others.
With his infinite knowledge God foresaw all the events that would happen in the centuries to
follow until the last day. With His unlimited power God began to create all the things He
would need for some purpose which He alone knew.
First He created the Throne and the Carpet for Himself to sit on at the Last Judgement. The
Throne has four legs supported by four strong beasts. The Carpet that covers it
[Page [15] ]
has all the lovely colours of the rainbow and stretches out along the skies as far as the borders
of space. Under the Throne there is the most delightful place in the Universe: the souls who
are allowed to dwell in the shadow of the Carpet will rejoice for ever. The brilliant light of
the Divine Presence is softly filtered by the many-coloured veils of which the Carpet is
composed.
The third thing God created was the Well-preserved Tablet. It is a board so large that it can
contain a complete and detailed description of all the events that ever take place anywhere in
past and future. The Tablet has a soul of her own and is one of God's most faithful servants.
She carries all His wisdom and all His commandments for ever and ever. She is called the
Mother of Books, because all the Sacred Books of Mankind in which God has revealed some
of His Truth contain only fragments of her contents. The secrets of the Universe, in so far as
they were ever represented by symbols, are inscribed on her surface, in characters which only
He can read.
With the Tablet He created the Pen to write His commandments. The Pen is as long as the
distance between Heaven and Earth. It has a thinking head and a personality, and as soon as it
had come into existence, God ordered it: 'Write!' The Pen asked: 'What shall I write, my
Lord?' God said: 'Destiny'. Since that moment the Pen has been busy writing on the Tablet all
the deeds of men.
Of course, if it pleases God to change His mind, He does so. If He projects a different future
than was foreseen in previous plans, the writing will disappear from the Tablet and the Pen
will record new facts.
The fifth thing God created was the Trumpet, and with it the archangel Serafili [Asrafel]. The
angel holds the Trumpet to his mouth, waiting patiently in the same position, century after
century, until it pleases God to terminate history. Then
[Page [16] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
12 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
He will give the signal, and Serafili will blow his first blast. The Trumpet has such a
powerful voice that at its first sound the mountains will collapse, the stars will come
plummeting down and Doomsday will begin.
The sixth thing which God created was the Garden of Delights which was destined for the
good souls. There they would sojourn for ever and ever, forgetting the sufferings of their lives
on earth. In it there are streams of limpid water, rivers of milk and honey, fragrant flowers
and trees whose branches bend down heavy with fruits. The fruits are soft and sweet and
juicy and as soon as one falls off, a new one grows on the same branch in no time. Who
would not give everything he possessed to be there? Who would not endure a short span of
life on earth to dwell in that garden for all eternity?
The seventh thing which God created, foreseeing in His wisdom that many souls would not
follow the good Messenger, was the Fire. Crackling, it sprang up from the deepest bottom of
shadows, in the remotest pit of space. Evil smell and smoke is its essence, roaring thunder its
voice. 'My Lord,' cried the Fire,' where are the souls of sinners, I want to see them suffer!'
Who would not pray night and day that his soul may avoid this eternal torture?
God went on and on creating, taking things out of not- being, for God requires no rest; neither
sleep nor slumber seize Him.
God now created the angels, a myriad voices who proclaim His praise. Out of pure light He
created them; their minds are lucid as the light itself, their hearts are pure as morning air. The
thought of sin never occurs to them, they never hatch evil plans in their bosoms. They are as
honest as the light that is their element and always shines through their bodies. This is why
they are devoted servants of their Lord, and the idea of disobedience cannot arise in their
hearts. Their
[Page [17] ]
wings are shining white and soft; they tremble with the fear of God.
The first of the archangels is Jiburili [Gabriel] whose task it is to carry God's Word to His
prophets. Therefore Jiburili is also called the Trustworthy Spirit.
The tradition says that Mohammed, during his life on earth, asked Jiburili: 'Show me your
true shape.' Jiburili warned him that this would be dangerous, but Mohammed insisted. Then
Jiburili showed himself, and lo! he filled the whole horizon, and his many wings rustled
through the sides from east to west. The prophet fainted with fear, and fell. Jiburili lifted him
up and said: 'Do not fear, I am your brother Jiburili'.
When God had doomed the cities of Lot, He sent Jiburili to destroy them. To this end,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
13 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
Jiburili unfolded two special black wings that spell perdition whenever they appear. With
these wings he tore the two cities out of the earth like poisonous toadstools, raised them so
high that the inhabitants of heaven could hear their cocks crowing, and then flung them down
into the Fire.
Mikaili [Michael] is the second archangel. He is in charge of the sustenance of all the
creatures of the earth. Thousands of angels serve under his command and are busy day and
night. They provide all living beings with all the things they need, according to God's decree.
Some will receive plenty , others may starve, and He alone knows the reason. No mortal being
need fear that he will not receive his due. What God has destined for him will come to him:
air to breathe, water to drink, food to eat, partners to procreate with. We do not have to look
for these things; they will be brought to us. We are all like beggars sitting at the Lord's door,
and praying that He may throw us a few coins daily.
Serafili [Asrafel], the angel of the Trumpet, has already
[Page [18] ]
been mentioned. His task is simply to wait for the signal of the end.
Zeraili [Azrael] is the angel of death, the taker of souls, who brings each creature the last
message. He obeys God alone, he commands kings and caliphs, jinns and giants, and they all
follow him humbly into the unknown.
Maliki is the guardian of the Fire in which the sinful souls, the hypocrites and heathens, are
punished. His face is terrible to see; he is created out of the glowing clouds of God's wrath.
Ridhuani is the custodian of Paradise. He opens its seven gates whenever God thus orders
him, so that a thousand pleasant smells are spread out over the earth.
Many other angels live in heaven, more than we can know. There is an angel with a thousand
heads: each head has a thousand mouths and every mouth proclaims God's glory in a different
language.
There is an angel whose left half is fire, and his right half snow; the snow does not extinguish
the fire, nor the fire melt the snow, because God wills it so. At His order two opposing
elements can exist side by side; and He can make enemies meet.
There is also a cock in heaven: its feet are on the lowest level of Paradise but its head is
above the seventh level. Its function is to crow at the precise moment God has destined for
the 
salât-asubuhi , the prayer of dawn. Every morning before sunrise it crows jubilantly ,
flapping its wings, and all the angels of heaven immediately assemble for the morning prayer.
Its joyful Kuku-likuu can be heard on earth by all the cocks, on the farms as well as in the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
14 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
bush, and they all repeat it, encouraging each other. This is a sign for men to rise from their
couches and prepare themselves for the first prayer of the day.
[Page [19] ]
2. HEA VEN AND EARTH
When God's moment had come, He began creating the world of matter. He rolled out the
day-sky and the night-sky like an immense tent, or like carpets full of mysterious signs and
symbols. In the night-sky He placed the fixed stars like lamps with motionless flames. Others
move along the sky, each following a path which only He knows. The moon too travels along
the night-sky, changing its shape as He wishes. In the radiant blue day-sky He placed the
glowing sun and ordered her to rise in the East, travel along the sky and set in the West. He
created clouds, and painted them in different colours, to sail like ships along the day-sky;
towards evening He makes them glow red. Some are dark and heavy with rain which He will
shower over the lands He wishes to bear fruit.
He constructed the Universe in seven heavens, the seventh being the lowest level of
Paradise. Each heaven has its own planet, the lowest being the moon. The second heaven is
ruled by Mercury, the third by Venus, the fourth by Mars, the fifth by Jupiter, the sixth by
Saturn and the seventh by the Sun. The guardians of these heavens are the souls of eight
prophets of God. They are Adam in the first heaven, Isa [Jesus] and his cousin Yahya [John
the Baptist], together in the second, Yusufu [Joseph] in the third, Idirisi [Enoch] in the fourth,
Haruni [Aaron] in the fifth and Musa [Moses] in the sixth. Abraham is the guardian of the
seventh heaven; his station is near the wall of the Celestial Mosque where 70,000 angels
come to pray every day---and they are never the same ones.
Opposite the high heavens, there are the deep hells, seven layers of them, each one more
terrible than the one above it, each one destined for a particular type of sinner. In the
[Page [20] ]
deepest Hell, farthest away from their Maker, will dwell the unbelievers, who will be
tortured there eternally .
Then God spread out the earth, like a carpet for men to sit on during their meal. For the Earth
is full of food for all the creatures of the Lord. And He caused some parts to be barren sands,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
15 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
but wherever He wished made grass sprout for the hooved animals, and trees for the
monkeys, and fruit-bearing vegetation with colourful products, a pleasure for the tongue.
He divided the land from the sea, creating the immeasurable ocean on one side, and the high
walls of the continents on the other. He heaped up the rocks to be menacing mountains, then
told the streams to rush down them in crystal torrents.
He sowed the islands, to be colourful bouquets growing out of the ocean, and a pleasure for
the sailing skippers. He commanded quiet pools to reflect the blue skies and the mighty
rivers to spread out over the marshes.
He gave a voice to the wind, so that it can whisper as well as roar while it travels over the
countries. It pushes the clouds in all directions and it carries the birds on its powerful back. It
blows the ships to their destination and it whips up the waves into frenzy.
Then He told the Earth to teem with insects, and lo, a hundred thousand kinds crawled
through the sand, and flew up into the air on diaphanous wings. The butterflies flutter and the
beetles creep; they all have the symbols of their Maker written on their backs. Then He
released swarms of birds who flew joyfully into the air. Some sat down on branches to praise
their Maker with songs in unknown languages. Others built their nests, and He alone was
their Teacher.
Then He told the ocean to be full of fishes of different forms, and so it happened. Only He
knows how many there
[Page [21] ]
are---and they all have different colours. Then He told the lizards to exist and they obeyed,
basking in His sunshine, and the croaking frogs who praise the Lord in their own language.
Only He knows how many there are and how many eggs they must lay.
Then the Merciful Maker called to the heavy animals to come into existence and they did,
praising Him by lowing and bleating. He created the flesh-eating beasts with claws, and the
howling ones which eat carrion. He designed the quiet giraffe and the irascible buffalo, herds
of antelope and striped donkeys, the river-dwelling hippopotamus and the gigantic elephant.
Only He knows how many species there are; He knows the colour of every feather, the
sharpness of every tooth. He created the herds of docile cows, their bulging udders full of
milk, and the strong-legged camels who travel without thirst. He decided the life-time of the
butterfly , and He lit the glowing light of the fire-fly . He decided the law of His creation: that
the small fishes will be eaten by the big ones, and they in their turn swallowed by yet bigger
fishes. The vultures will descend from the sky to pick the bones of those that die. He makes
green leaves for the goats; He makes the dove unaware of the swift swoop of the hawk. He
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
16 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---
gives the dead bodies to the worms and maggots; then He gives the worms to the chickens
and the unsuspecting chicken to the bateleur eagle, who flies up with it into the pillarless sky.
He caused all his creatures to grow and multiply. Fresh green grass stalks sprout after every
bush fire; smooth reddish mangoes bulge every year between the dark green leaves of the
mother tree.
In every rainy season the white ants swarm out, rustling in their myriads like the first heavy
showers. The black ants march along their own roads, hatching their young in their mounds.
Which animal is there that does not have children?
[Page [22] ]
The baboon-babies cling to their mothers' breasts, the long- legged giraffe sucks his mother.
What is there that He has forgotten? Are all these miracles not signs to you of His infinite
wisdom, of His immense power?
3. HOW MAN W AS MOULDED
God made the night cover the day, and so their alternation marks the progress of time.
One day, He called together His angels. They all appeared before His Throne, performing the
ritual prayer of morning- time. Then the Lord spoke: It has pleased Me to decide that I will
create a being---with brains like you, but his substance will be clay. I will mould him out of
earth, and on earth he will live. He will rear cattle and till the fields. He will learn to sail the
perilous ocean and catch My silver fishes in nets. He will take possession of all My creatures
on earth and rule them, following My laws. He will be My servant; his children will spread
out over the face of the earth, as numerous as ants, and they will work and worship Me.
The angels are permitted to express their feelings, and the strongest one is apprehension.
With their lucid minds they foresee what will happen. They themselves are made out of the
substance of pure light. Their transparence makes them honest: they have no solid faces
behind which evil can be hid. They are pure, and without sin. Their high intelligence makes
them perceive the sufferings of other creatures, and the wishes of their Master. And so they
are devoted to worship and service, to helping and relieving others. Their purity also gives
them altruism: Their diaphanous brains breed no egoism, they cannot think of anything to
wish for; no desire swells up in their sinless souls.
But what will man be like? His body will be lumpy and full
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
17 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
[Page [23] ]
of lust like that of dogs and pigs; like them, he will want to procreate and multiply, to fight
and to kill. He will not be transparent like sunrays in the morning, he will be foggy like dark
rainclouds. Apart from greed and cruelty, there will be stupidity and dishonesty in him.
Brains of clay will be tardy and turgid. His thinking will be sensual rather than sensible,
reluctant to accept the necessary, slow to service, prone to pride. He will hide his hate and
lust behind a stony skull. Worst of all, he will satisfy his senses rather than sing hymns to
praise his Maker.
His involved thinking will not solve problems, but will lead to complications which his lack
of honesty will seek to conceal rather than simplify: direct thinking is the fruit of honesty. His
greed will cause him to steal fruits and females from his neighbour's garden, and jealousy will
inflame his mind. He will seek glory by conquering portions of God's earth, and he will take
pleasure in killing, like a martin. The intelligent angels could already see black clouds of
smoke hanging over the earth: the fierce fire of war.
But their Lord reassured them: do not fear, I will what I will, I know what I know. I have a
purpose which I will fulfil after thousands of years. Then you will see the reason for the
creation of man.
The angels said no more but intoned hymns to praise His wisdom.
Then God took some fat clay, grey and solid, and kneaded it in the shape of a man. Adam
['earth'] was ready; he lacked only one thing: Life. God pronounced the word, and it came to
Adam. Life spread through his body, entering through his mouth. Life throbbed through
Adam's veins, adding colour to his skin. Blood travelled to his hands and feet and made them
ready for movement. Warmth rippled through his muscles and the first sparks of thought lit
up in his dark brain. Adam shuddered; his eyelids trembled and then opened, like
[Page [24] ]
the lid on a coffer full of jewels. The angels held their breath as they saw this handsome lad
open his crystal eyes to admit the sunlight. Adam opened his mouth, drew breath, his tongue
moved, and his voice rang out, proclaiming the greatness of his Maker: 'Al-Hamdu Lillâhi
r-Rahmâni r-Rahîm!'
The angels were greatly astonished to see this clay creature speak intelligently and devoutly.
They admired this beautiful new creation, and all obeyed their Lord when He commanded
them to prostrate themselves before Adam and worship him. Except one.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
18 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 20 ---
4. SA T AN: PROLOGUE IN HEA VEN
God created the angels out of the tissue of light-rays; the evil spirits are created out of the
flames of the Fire, and Satan is their leader. He is as delusive as the substance of fire itself,
always crackling with divided tongues, turning and twisting and emitting smelly smoke.
Never touch it for you will burn yourself! Satan in his smoky mind hatches hot hatred. That
Adam! Does he think he is any better than the mud he was made from? Can a clay creature
fly in the air like a flame? Can it hiss and sparkle, travel through the bush and send up clouds
of billowing smoke? Should I kneel for kneaded earth? Should I worship wet sand? Look at
my bright sparks, feel my glowing heat, consider the purity of my inner being; am I not much
better than that heavy, dark heap of dirt?
Satan is the symbol of sulking selfishness. He is always jealous and broods revenge against
those whom God favours. He resents the fact that he is not himself the favourite of his
Master; his characteristic trait is self-inflation and the wish to have more than his fellows.
But let us not blame
[Page [25] ]
him too much; let us not forget that his Master made him so, and willed him to act as he did.
God's fundamental decision regarding the introduction of evil and suffering in the world
and His conversations with His one Evi Spirit has always fascinated great writers, from
the author of the Book of Job to Goethe. It is well illustrated in Swahili literature. The
Swahili poet Abdi'l-Latifu gives a very original and also philosophical version of this old
legend. He stresses three fundamental aspects of Satan's character .
At first, Satan [Iblîs] enjoyed God's favours, and this high position may have spoiled him, as
it made him proud. This pride gave rise to two other sentiments, one being rebelliousness.
Pride causes disobedience. Only a humble character listens and obeys without asking
questions. Pride, the first of the sins, causes division. Satan is the spirit of separation: only he
who believes that his conclusions are as valid as those of God will wish to disobey His
commandments and set himself up as independent ruler of the earth.
(It is clear that the personality of Satan is merely an exteriorization of part of Man's own
character, but I do not think that the orthodox Swahili are aware of this, and so it is not
relevant for our study of myth.)
This pride and this desire for separation lead to the third aspect of Satan's character: doubt.
Satan doubts God's statement that Adam is the best of creatures and deserves adoration.
Only in a proud mind does doubt arise: doubt too is based on the assumed validity of one's
own conclusions. A humble character accepts what others say as truth. He believes in their
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
19 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
competence and sincerity. Suspicion cannot exist in souls of flawless virtue. Belief and faith
are the privileges of the pure.
Doubt and disbelief are the punishments for the proud. And these are the feelings that Satan
will inspire.
[Page [26] ]
[ This episode is briefly alluded to in the beginning of the seventh chapter of the Koran  .]
Iblîs appears before God, summoned to account for his refusal to worship Adam. He says:
'How can I worship sand? I who have lived near Thy throne, I whose substance is the lively
fire, I cannot prostrate myself before Adam!'
In truth, it was not his contempt for Adam for which he was condemned, but his disobedience
and his doubt. If God states that Man is superior to the angels, all true angels will accept it.
Docility is the greatest virtue.
Satan is cursed by God and chased out of heaven. The presence of the Divine reality is the
privilege of the faithful. The doubters are cast into the depth of the darkness of disbelief.
Boiling with jealousy and spite, Satan calls to his Lord outside the gates of Heaven: 'God,
grant me time, do not banish me to outer darkness yet. Let me cause Adam and his sons to go
astray. Let me tempt them to disobey Thee, that they may become fodder for my Fire. Permit
me to take my revenge on the sons of Adam so that they may change their minds and their
direction. Let me sow doubt in the hearts of men, as a test for the strength of their faith.' God
granted Satan's request. 'Those whom I have destined for the Fire, you may have; but you will
not be able to seduce those for whom I have built Paradise.
'I will grant you respite until the Day of Judgement. On that day even you will regret your
deeds. You will be banished to the deepest darkness, and you will never again harm any of
My chosen souls. And now: Out! Depart from My Heaven, and never return!'
Since that day Iblîs roams the earth, and wherever he finds people hesitating, uncertain about
God's commandments, he whispers his seductive words in their ears and makes them deviate
from the straight path to Heaven.
[Page [27] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
20 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
[ The Swahili authors see language as a collection of names. Each name summarizes a
set of definitions, so that knowing the name of a thing implies knowing its definition  .]
God teaches Adam the names of all the plants, trees, animals and birds. The angels are
invited one day to come and observe his progress in the knowledge of God's creation. They
find him competent. He knows all the names of fruits, and stars, and every other natural
phenomenon. And the angels praise God who has the power to make a piece of clay
understand the constellations of heaven.
Adam, of course, is a prophet. He is the first prophet of the Lord. This means that God
reveals portions of His wisdom to him and that Adam must teach his children the love of
God.
Now all the angels realize that Adam's creation was indeed a miracle. They agree that it was
right that they should prostrate themselves before Adam, and they ask God's forgiveness for
ever having argued. God answers: 'I told you that I know more than you can perceive, the
width and the breadth of the Universe are open to Me, and even the secret thoughts of man
cannot be hidden from Me.'
[ 
It is noteworthy that man, according to the Islamic conception of language, does not
invent the names of things, animals and angels. The words of the Language of the Koran
are pre-existent and were supposedly created with the things they name. God teaches
Man his language. Man will pass it on to his children. The children of Adam will corrupt
the forms and meanings of this divine language, but many Muslims still believe that all
modern languages can be proved to be ultimately derived from classical Arabic .]
5. ADAM AND EVE IN PARADISE
Adam fell asleep and woke up in Paradise. He rose and
[Page [28] ]
walked about in that garden of delights, marvelling at the many beautiful things he saw.
The sand on which he set his foot was perfumed like ambergris, and the streams were pure
milk and honey . There were many trees, their branches bending low with the heavy fruits
they bore. The fruits were large and shining and full of juice, ripe for picking. Colourful birds
twittered in the foliage. But even Paradise did not satisfy Man: he wanted company , someone
to talk to, someone to walk with, to dispel his loneliness.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
21 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
Adam lay down and fell asleep. When he woke up he saw another one like him, standing
there in the garden. She was a ravishing beauty, shining like the sun. Adam felt his heart beat
more lively and so he called her Hawaa ['Life'], because, he said, 'God has brought her to me'.
Adam praised his Maker for this lovable new creation, and God told him: 'Walk ye together
in My garden and enjoy all its delights. Its waters are yours for bathing and drinking, and you
may sit in the shade of the trees and taste the fruits thereof. Except one, that is the Tree of the
Knowledge of the Procreation of Life. You are not allowed to eat its fruit, nor even to come
near it.'
As they live together chastely in Paradise, there begins to develop a difference of habits
between them. Whereas Adam spends most of his time praying and meditating, Eve wanders
about through the gardens of delight, feeling an unfulfilled but ill-understood urge, a longing
for something unknown, a destiny of great moment, something that will give her existence
purpose, meaning and fulfilment. For woman is predestined for motherhood. We all know
what happens next: Eve cannot help seeking the shade of the Tree of Knowledge of the
Procreation of Life. God has created her with the intention that she should bear children and
continue the existence of Man, yes indeed, it was His purpose from the
[Page [29] ]
beginning that her children's children would spread out over the three continents. In His
infinite wisdom He created the Man with a desire to worship Him, but woman He shaped
with a desire to be fertilized and to give birth. Man represents the spiritual aspirations of the
human race: the devotion to the adoration of the Eternal Light, to study and reflection.
Woman represents the earthly wishes of people, the desires for lust and for the enjoyment of
children. The adoration of God is a duty for man; leading a spiritual life will make us happy.
But following our desires for earthly satisfaction, for sex and satiety, will lead to endless
unhappiness. If only Adam had persisted in his prayers and patient prostrations, centuries of
suffering would have been prevented.
But we are all tools in the hand of Destiny. The Serpent had been allowed to worm its way
into Paradise: Satan had taken the form of a snake---symbol of rejuvenation, because it
sloughs its skin. The serpent coiled itself round a branch of the Tree just over Eve's head, and
dropped one of the fruits of the tree in her lap. The fruit smelled delicious, so sweet and so
juicy. The Serpent makes Eve wise: He tells her that she could have children if Adam were
not so egocentric: he is only interested in his profession as a prophet, and in his studies of
language and natural history. Of course (lisps the Serpent), Adam can have as many wives as
he wants, because there are plenty of lovely nymphs in Paradise. Woman is supposed to be
prone to jealousy, and her anxiety to keep her husband's affection will induce her to break any
law, even the law of God.
[ 
The story of Adam and Eve fits a polygynous society, where wives are in a constant state
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
22 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
of fear that they will lose their husband's attention and be divorced. There is one remedy
for this: to bear him many children. To divorce a fertile wife is strongly disapproved of in
Islamic society, because children will care for their parents when they are old. To have
many children is the one way for an
[Page [30] ]
East African woman to have prestige in an otherwise man-centred world .]
The Devil's next move is to convince Eve that eating the Fruit with her husband will give her
children, and children will tie her husband for ever to her: in caring for them he will not have
time for other women.
Satan succeeds. Now Eve has to persuade her husband that just going and sitting down under
the Tree can do no harm. The Serpent will be there to prompt her regarding the procedure to
be followed. Adam takes some convincing. He is a prophet of God and he knows what is at
stake. He has nothing to gain but hard labour, and everything to lose. [ One Swahili poet has
written more than fifty stanzas on this conversation alone .] Eve uses every trick in the
textbook of feminine wiles to cajole her husband into going with her and eating the Fruit. She
reproaches him with tears that children are her dearest wish and that he should not refuse her
that which is the fulfilment of her life. At last he gives in, tired of arguing, and moved by her
desire to fill the emptiness in her existence. They sit down under the Tree, and the Serpent
drops another fruit in Eve's lap. More arguments follow. [ The poet is clearly on the side of
Adam, the pious preacher .] Then Eve eats from the fruit and puts a piece of it between
Adam's lips. Adam foresees the disaster that will happen, but decides to follow Eve into
exile. Loyalty to his wife makes him break God's law. Eve asks him: 'Is it not delicious?'
Adam sighs: ni tamu haramu : 'Sweet is the forbidden.'
6. ADAM AND EVE ON EARTH
At once they fall asleep, and when they wake up they find themselves on earth. It is a grim
landscape indeed [ as the Swahili poet describes it ]: towering mountains, vast stretches
[Page [31] ]
of arid land strewn with boulders, and the salt sea roaring amid the rocks on the shore. The
earth will yield food only to him who works. God teaches Adam how to domesticate the
camel and the donkey, and to plough the fields. Adam has to climb tall trees and pick the
fruits, wounding his body on the thorns. God also teaches Adam to knot nets, to cast them out
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
23 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
into the sea and to haul in his catch of fish, which he dried in the sun.
[ One can still see the fishermen on the East Coast do this. Fish traps too are being used,
ingeniously plaited baskets that fishes can swim into but not out of. Today the fish is still
put out in the sunshine to dry, but the Swahili poet comments that the first couple had to
eat the fish dried because at that time there was nothing to cook it with. Today fish is still
the staple food of the Swahili, but they now eat their fish with curry sauce and vegetables
.]
Adam and Eve finally learnt to plant cereals and to cook them properly, 'which was a
consolation'. They learnt to keep goats, sheep and cows 'and how to use beasts without
brains'. First they had to seek shelter in a cave, later they learned to build a proper house. One
day , Eve complained to Adam that there was something stirring inside her: 'My belly is
swelling, and some being is rolling about in here.'
'How ignorant is Woman!' thought the prophet Adam. 'I have to explain to her what the
significance of this is: she is to become the Mother of Mankind. She asked for children, now
she will have them, and their children will spread out over the face of the earth and become
as numerous as the pebbles on the beach.' It took some time to sink in. Then Eve suddenly
understood: 'So all the people of the earth will come out of my belly?' To which Adam added:
'Yes, and out of the bellies of the little Eves when they have grown up.'
[Page [32] ]
7. HABILI AND KABILI [ABEL AND CAIN]
Adam and Eve begot many children. Eve gave birth to many pairs of twins, first Habili and a
girl, then Kabili and another girl, then Sheti and another girl, and so on.
The children grew up, and when they had come of age, the Lord told Adam: 'Your children
must marry together, as you two have been married. I have given you an equal number of
boys and girls. Now remember that no boy may marry his own twin sister. I want them to
exchange sisters.'
Adam called together his sons and explained the commandment of the Lord to them. After
that Abili, the eldest, went to his brother Kabili and claimed the latter's sister, but Kabili
refused. [ Perhaps modern psychologists would explain this by saying that the second
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
24 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
brother always feels a rivalry against the eldest. For the Swahili writers the reason is
simply that Kabili was disobedient and stubborn .] The brothers started a fight, Kabili beat
up his brother with his fists until Habili stopped moving. Kabili waited, not knowing what to
do, expecting Habili to jump up again.
But hours passed, the body lay motionless and finally it began to smell. What to do with a
corpse in a period of history when death was unknown? The Lord is merciful. He sent two
ravens to earth, who alighted not far from the spot where Kabili was. They began to act out
the tragedy of the two brothers; they started a fight, and finally one fell down dead. Then the
surviving raven dug a hole in the earth, laid the dead bird in it and covered it with sand.
Kabili watched them and understood the message without words: A man must bury his
brother. The law applies to men as well as to birds.
So Kabili in turn dug a hole and buried his brother in it, covering the decaying flesh with
earth. This is how interment
[Page [33] ]
became a God-ordained rite among mankind. When Eve learned that one of her own flesh
had killed his brother, she was truly shocked. She herself had brought disobedience and sin to
earth; now she understood that by causing life she had also caused death. And this was the
beginning of war, which makes mothers weep.
[Page [35] ]
3 The Prophets
[Page [36] ]
1. NABII BURAHIMU [THE PROPHET ABRAHAM]
Burahimu saw the moon rise in the night and exclaimed: 'There is my Lord!' But when the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
25 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
moon set, Burahimu cried out: 'Who can follow that which disappears?' Then the sun rose,
and Burahimu worshipped it, but it too, set, and Burahimu sighed: 'How can a man be guided
by what comes and goes?' This is how Burahimu learned to worship only the Lord, who rules
both sun and moon. So he took an axe and destroyed the idols in the temple of the town,
except the biggest statue, which he left. The people of the town accused Burahimu and
brought him before the king. 'Did you break the statues of our gods?' asked the king. 'No,' said
Burahimu, 'the biggest one among them did it. Why do you not ask him yourself, if you can
make a wooden image speak! Why do you adore sculptures instead of the Lord who makes
the sun rise and set!' The king said: 'I am the Lord.' Burahimu retorted: 'Then make the sun
rise in the West and set in the East. You can neither kill nor bring to life.' This enraged the
king and he thundered: 'I will kill you so that you may feel my power.' He ordered a great fire
to be lit, and Burahimu was thrown in it. But God ordered the fire: 'Be cold!' And He sent His
angel with a 
kanzu [a long robe] which he put on Burahimu. It protected the prophet of God
against the fire.
[Page [37] ]
Burahimu and Sara had no children, but God sent three angels to visit them and announce the
birth of a son. The messengers did not touch the food which Burahimu had prepared for
them, so he suspected that they were no earthlings. But Sara did not believe that she could
still give birth at her age. So God made her offspring less numerous than that of her rival wife
Hajari [Hagar], who became the mother of all the Arabs.
The men of Jumura [Gomorrah] had aroused the wrath of God because they went to other
men to seek that for which God had given them wives. Therefore God decided to destroy
Jumura, but Burahimu prayed that his cousin might be saved. And so Lutu [Lot] was allowed
to go out unharmed before the lightnings rained down on the city.
Sara was jealous because Sumaili [Ishmael], the son of her co-wife Hajari, was a handsome
boy and would be the heir, being the eldest. So she chased Hajari and Sumaili out of the
house into the desert. When Burahimu came home and did not find his eldest, he was
desolate. He wandered into the desert to look for him.
Hajari walked through the arid lands until she was exhausted. She sat down and wept. Then
God caused a well to bubble up so that she could quench her thirst and that of her son. That
became the holy well of Zamzam, which is still there today to give strength to the pilgrims in
Mecca.
At last Burahimu found Hajari and their son, and comforted them. He built a 
Kaaba on that
spot, and Sumaili helped him. There Burahimu prayed to God and God commanded him to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
26 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
sacrifice his son. Burahimu said: 'I surrender [ islam ] to the Will of God.' Burahimu told his
son what God demanded of him, and Sumaili said: 'I surrender to the will of God.' But when
Abraham raised his knife, God sent His angel to seize his hand in the air.
[Page [38] ]
A ram appeared by God's command and was slaughtered instead.
[ To this day the Moslems celebrate the Idi Kabiri (Great Feast) on the 10th day of the first
month of the Islamic calendar , to commemorate Burahimu's surrender , by sacrificing a
ram and feeding the poor , i.e. God's beggars .]
Burahimu prayed to God that his son might become a great nation. God answered: 'I will
make Sumaili the father of the Arabs who will inhabit the lands from Ocean to Ocean. You
and your son's sons shall adore no idols, and you shall institute the Hijja, the yearly
pilgrimage to this holy place. And thus to the present day, pilgrims gather near the Kaaba to
worship Allah.
2. SHAMSHUNI [SAMSON]
Shamshuni was very strong. One day a butcher in his town was about to slaughter a bull when
the bull suddenly went wild and started attacking people in the street. Men and women fled,
but Shamshuni came along, took the bull by the horns, and stopped the heavy beast in its
charge. He turned the bull's head with his hands and so wrenched its neck.
One evening Shamshuni was walking in the forest. A leopard was hiding on a thick branch.
Suddenly it leapt down onto Shamshuni and dug its claws into his shoulders. But Shamshuni
seized the neck of the leopard under his left armpit and strangled it with one arm.
One day Shamshuni was bathing in the river when a crocodile attacked him. He caught the
monster by its tail, lifted it out of the water, swung it round and smashed its head against a
tree.
The elephants were angry with the people because almost every day an elephant was shot
down by a hunter who then
[Page [39] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
27 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
sold the tusks to a merchant. One day when Shamshuni was walking in the wilderness, he
was met by an elephant who attacked him. But he took the tusks of the elephant in his hands
and twisted the giant's head so that its neck was broken. Since then, whenever a herd of
elephants spotted Shamshuni in the bush, they fled in panic.
One day a rhinoceros discovered Shamshuni in the savannah, and as it was in a bad temper, it
ran for him. But Shamshuni jumped on the back of the running animal, seized its horn and
pulled it back so that its neck broke.
One day Jamila, the prettiest girl in the town, strayed out in the bush, looking for firewood.
Suddenly she heard a lion roar quite nearby. Hastily she climbed a tree---just in time, for the
lion came roaring hungrily at her. Jamila shrieked, and at once Shamshuni, who was hunting
in the bush, heard her and came running towards her. As soon as the lion saw that it was
Shamshuni, it began to tremble, but it was too late. Shamshuni seized the lion by its tail and
mane, and invited Jamila to jump down and sit on its back. Jamila trusted Shamshuni, the
great hero, and sat down on the back of the now meek lion, and so she rode into town,
Shamshuni holding the lion relentlessly by its ear. How happy was Jamila to be brought home
by her hero, for whom the lions trembled!
In that town there lived a king who was still a heathen. Shamshuni was a Muslim, one who
believed in the word of Allah. Now this king had decided that he wanted Jamila for himself;
old bucks love fresh leaves. The king said to his minister: 'Cunning conquers strength.' The
vizier said: 'The leopard will run into the trap when he sees a goat.' The king reflected on this
for a while and then said: 'Once a lion has eaten human flesh, he will start to hunt for the
same flesh.' To which the vizier replied: 'Jamila has a sister, Dalila, who is greedy for power
and for silver.' The king then ordered
[Page [40] ]
his minister to go and promise Dalila money and a prominent place in the king's harem if she
could discover the secret of Shamshuni's strength.
Dalila came to the palace, riding her pet ostrich. When the king promised her that she would
become his queen and showed her his treasure chamber, she agreed to tempt Shamshuni into
sharing his secret with her. The king told her that Shamshuni had broken a strong rope as well
as an iron chain by simply stretching lazily.
Dalila went and sought the company of Shamshuni, and the great man fell madly in love with
her. She used all her cunning and femininity to seduce him, and she succeeded. One night she
decided that he was sufficiently enslaved to her to part with the secret. She told him how
much she admired him for his strength, that she had heard how he vanquished an elephant
and a rhinoceros. 'What, O great friend, is the secret of your strength?' While asking this
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
28 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
question, she snuggled close to his big body. Shamshuni lost his control and told her the
secret of his life: 'On earth there is only one thing stronger than I am: my hair.' Having heard
that, Dalila talked of other things until the great fighter fell into a deep sleep. She listened to
his regular breathing; then she wound his long hair round his powerful body and tied it
together in many knots. Quickly she left him and hurried to the king's court. The king at once
ordered his soldiers to carry the bound giant to the dungeon.
But Shamshuni still had one friend, whom he had forgotten: Jamila. When she heard that
Shamshuni was in gaol, she remembered how he had saved her life and she decided to risk
her own now, and liberate him. She slipped into the prison building, saw that the guards were
asleep, and quickly untied all the knots her sister had made. Samson was now cured of his
folly. He had learned which of the two sisters was faithful. He took Jamila with one hand, and
with the other
[Page [41] ]
he struck down the guards, who had woken up and now barred his way. He broke out of the
dungeon, went to the king's court, tore a tree out of the ground and destroyed the king's
building with thundering blows. All the people inside it died when the roof came down: the
king, the minister, the soldiers, and Dalila. And all the idols could not help the king.
Shamshuni went away to a far land, and there he built a big house for Jamila. They had many
children, and always plenty of meat.
3. NABII MUSA [THE PROPHET MOSES]
I. Musa marries
When Joseph died, the Egyptians believed that God would send no more prophets. Pharaoh
ordered that all the sons of the Israelites should be killed. Musa's mother feared for her son,
and God spoke to her: 'Suckle your child and afterwards lay him in a reed basket and let him
float in the River Nile. I will look after him, I will make him My prophet. He will return to
you.'
Musa's mother plaited a basket, suckled her baby, put him in the basket and let it float down
river. She ordered her daughter Mariamu to follow it. The wife of the Pharaoh, the Queen of
Egypt, saw Musa and told her slaves to go and lift the basket out of the river. She liked the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
29 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
baby and told the King that she wanted to keep him. But she found no woman who could
nurse him. Then Mariamu came running up; she knelt before the Queen and said that she
knew a woman in milk. The Queen said: 'Bring her here.' And Musa's own mother was
brought into the palace and told to suckle her own son. Then she recognized how God had
kept His promise. And God made the Pharaoh bring up his own enemy.
[Page [42] ]
Musa grew up to be a young man of exceptional beauty and wisdom. One day he saw two
men fighting, a Jew and an Egyptian. The Jew asked Musa to help him, and Musa killed the
Egyptian with his fist. He soon repented this and prayed to God, promising that he would
never again help evil-doers. But the next morning he saw the same Jew fighting another
Egyptian. He said: 'You are a quarrelsome man!' But the Jew cried: 'Kinsman, help me again!'
Musa could not resist this supplication. He seized the Egyptian, but the latter said: 'Will you
be a man of violence or a man of peace?'
Musa was told that the King wanted him for murder, and he had to flee from the city. He
walked for many days through the savannah until he arrived at a well. He saw herdsmen
watering their cattle, and at a distance, he saw two girls who were driving their sheep away
from the well. He asked whether their sheep did not want water; the girls replied that they
had not been allowed to water them. Then Musa drove the sheep back to the well and let
them drink, driving the cattle away. The men said nothing, for Musa was evidently a very
strong man. Then one of the girls came to him and said timidly: 'Our father Shuaibu is an old
man. He invites you to come and receive your reward.' So they drove the sheep to the
compound of Shuaibu, the chief of Madiani. He said to Musa: 'Do not fear, you have been
saved from the Egyptian evil-doers. You may marry my daughters if you promise to stay here
and look after me in my old age.' Musa agreed, and he lived with the old man and herded his
sheep. Shuaibu was a Muslim who adhered to the religion of Abraham and adored God in the
correct manner. God had sent him to his people to show them the right path, but the
Madianites had rejected his words. So God caused an earthquake so that all the unbelievers
sank into the ground with their houses, and the earth closed itself over their roofs.
[Page [43] ]
II. The Snake-stick
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
30 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
One day Musa was herding the sheep of his father-in-law, when he suddenly saw a great fire.
He went near it and a roaring voice spoke: 'Musa, I am Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. Take
your shoes off, for this is the sacred valley of Tuwa. Go to your people who suffer in the land
of slavery. Lead them out from the darkness into the light, and remind them of My revelation.
I am Allah, the only God. Serve Me, perform the daily prayers and invoke only Me. The hour
of Judgement will come. Throw your staff down!' It became a coiling snake. Allah continued:
'Fear not, pick it up, I will restore its condition.' Musa touched the snake and it became a
stick again. Allah spoke further: 'Go and find your brother, together you will speak to the
King of Egypt and his wicked ministers. Remind them of their sins against your people, and I
will give you signs.'
Musa went with his family and all his beasts to his brother. Haruni [Aaron], entered the
palace and faced the Pharaoh's learned men, all powerful sorcerers and magicians. They had
the power to lay a spell on the eyes of the people and make them see great wonders. The
people feared them greatly .
Musa and Haruni demanded freedom for their people, but Firauni [Pharaoh] would not hear
of it. The king's sorcerers had heard that Musa could change his stick into a snake, but they
were confident that their tricks were better. So they collected many ropes and changed them
into snakes. There were mountains of snakes in the king's hall, all writhing and coiling, and
ready to bite. Musa took fright, but the Lord inspired him with courage. 'Throw down your
staff and see who has the true power.' Musa did so, and lo! his staff immediately turned into a
giant snake which devoured all the other snakes. The king's magicians agreed that the God of
Musa had more power than their own demons, and so
[Page [44] ]
they recognized Allah. But King Pharaoh's heart was hardened because Allah had blocked his
ears. The Lord will make a person blind to the truth if He wishes to lead him into perdition.
III. 
Musa and the Blind Boy
One day, the Prophet Musa was on his way to the mountain Turu Sinai to speak with God. He
came along a river where some boys were playing. One of the boys was blind: his eyes were
full of pus. The other boys teased him for his blindness and his inability to play with them.
The Prophet's heart was filled with compassion. He prayed to Allah: 'Lord, pity overcomes
me when I see this boy.' Then he went on his way. A few hours later he came along the same
river and saw to his amazement that the boy could see: God had restored his eyes because the
Prophet Musa had interceded for him. Now that the boy had good eyes, he joined in the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
31 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
games with the other boys, and as his body was strong and healthy, he teased them and beat
them. Having seen this, Musa went back to see the Lord again, and prostrated himself before
Him.
God spoke to Musa, saying: 'What do you wish, Musa? Speak!' Musa answered: 'My lord, I
saw a great miracle, a blind boy regained his eyesight after I prayed to Thee, praise be to
Thee. But now I see how that boy beats his fellows because he is stronger and can see now.
So I have come back to Thee.'
God answered: 'Musa, you seem to believe that I do not know how to rule the Universe; you
want to alter the course of events. When I commanded the disease to make the eyes of this
boy blind, I had My reasons. I knew that if this boy could see, he would do harm to his
fellows. Those who have strength and can see may become a danger to their neighbours. I
had prevented this wicked boy from beating his
[Page [45] ]
equals. Go back to the world and learn My reasons from My works.'
Musa returned home and passed along the same river. The wicked boy was blind again and
was standing alone on the bank of the river. And Musa wondered, are all blind people bad?
IV. The V alue of Women
Once upon a time a certain man married a girl and they lived together many years in great
happiness. One day fate caught up with the woman and she died. The husband buried her and
spent his days mourning his beloved wife. He neither ate nor slept.
One day an old man in a white beard passed along by the house. He was the Prophet Musa,
peace be upon him. He saw the man sitting and weeping, and asked him the reason of his
sorrow. The man told him how he had lost his beloved wife. Musa said: 'Son of Adam, stop
weeping. Find yourself another wife. Thank the Lord and leave off mourning.' The man said:
'No, I will mourn my wife until I die.'
Musa said: 'God has made the hearts of women inaccessible [ harimu ]; this is why they are
called women [ harimu ]. They would not be called women [ maraa ] if there were no
bitterness [ maraa ] in their hearts.' The man said: 'All that may be true, but I still love her.
She was never bitter and she never hatched secrets in her heart.'
The Prophet Musa said: 'Women are called women [ nisuani ] because they are forgetful [
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
32 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
nisiani ].' But the widower could not agree: 'I will sit here and weep for her until I die.' Now
the Prophet revealed to him: 'Do you realize that God has decided you will not die for quite a
while yet? You still have thirty years to live. Would you give half your life to your wife if you
could have her back?' 'Yes.' 'If I prayed to Allah and he would call your wife back to life,
would you be
[Page [46] ]
prepared to share your remaining thirty years with her, so that you would only have fifteen
years to live?' 'Yes, that is all I want.'
The Prophet Musa took the man to his wife's grave, and said: 'Now you must vow that you
are willing to give half your life to your wife.' The man did so, Musa struck the grave with his
staff, and lo! the woman rose up from the earth, alive as before. Musa said: 'Here, man, take
your wife,' and walked away.
The man was overjoyed and went home with his wife. Half-way they saw a mango tree and
decided to rest a while in its shade. There, the man was overcome by sleep because of the
great joy he had experienced. He dozed away while his wife just sat there. After a short time
a gentleman came walking along the road and saw the woman sitting there. He asked her:
'Are you not bored just sitting there?' She said: 'Yes'. 'Who is that man sleeping there?' She
said: 'I do not know him.' Then he proposed: 'Shall I take you along and show you where I
live?' 'All right,' she replied. She rose and walked away with the good-looking gentleman. At
that moment her husband woke up and saw his wife disappearing in the distance, together
with a well-dressed stranger he had never seen. He jumped up and ran after them, shouting:
'Stop! Where are you going with my wife!'
The stranger turned and said politely: 'How do you mean, your wife? She does not even know
you!' The husband was thunderstruck. He had just given away fifteen years of his life for the
sake of his wife, only to see her walk away with a complete stranger. To the stranger, it could
only appear preposterous that anyone could claim as his wife a woman who had just said she
did not know him. So they were soon quarrelling vehemently, and were about to start pitching
into one another when the town guards arrived and they were arrested for brawling over a
woman of easy virtue.
[Page [47] ]
They were taken to the court-room, and there, sitting in judgement, was the wise Prophet
Musa, on whom be peace. The well-dressed gentleman said: 'Learned Prophet! I was on my
way to my house with this woman, she was going with me out of her own free will---you may
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
33 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
ask her---and suddenly there comes this man running behind us, whom neither of us know,
and he claims that she is his wife! He is either mad or an impostor!' The husband protested,
and they would have started again if Musa had not commanded silence. Then he turned to the
woman, who did not recognize him, as Musa was able to change his appearance: the Prophet
was also a great magician. 'Young woman,' he said, 'tell me, which of these two men is your
husband?' The woman pointed at the well-dressed gentleman and said: 'He is my husband, he
is right, I was walking with him to his house.' Then she pointed at her poor bewildered
husband and said: 'This man is mad, don't you see? How would he get a woman like me?'
Then Musa turned to the husband and said: 'Did you hear what she said? Didn't I tell you that
women are forgetful?' He said: 'Yes, oh Prophet.'
The prophet-cadi then said: 'You, woman, claim that this man is not your husband, and he
claims he is. Now my judgement will rest on one pillar: if he is your husband, he will have
given you something, for instance a bride-price.' She said: 'He has never given me anything
whatsoever.' Musa said: 'In that case it will be easy for you to pronounce and pledge that you
return at once anything that he might have given you. Do so now.' The foolish woman said: 'I
return everything he has ever given to me.' At the same moment she dropped on the floor, as
dead as a stone.
Musa said to the gentleman: 'Take your wife with you; you claimed her, now have her.' But
the gentleman looked contemptuously at the corpse and said: 'I do not even know this wench,'
and walked away . The Prophet turned to the
[Page [48] ]
husband and said: 'Now you have seen the value of women: they create bitterness both when
they are alive and when they are dead.' The husband thanked the Prophet for his wisdom,
took up the dead body of his wife and buried her a second time. Then he went to his house,
cleaned it and made it all look spick and span. Finally he married four wives, one after
another, and lived happily for all the remaining thirty years that our Lord had allotted him.
V.  Musa and the Beggar
One day the prophet Musa passed a beggar on the road who clutched his robe and said: 'Oh
Musa, prophet of Allah, please beg the Lord for me, that He may give me sustenance!' Musa
went on and climbed the mountain, where the Lord spoke to him. Finally, the Lord said: 'Do
you have anything to ask?' Musa said: 'Oh Thou who knowest all and forgettest naught! This
morning I saw a beggar who requested me to intercede on his behalf. He never receives a
penny from anyone.' God said: 'I do not wish him to receive anything.' Musa went back to his
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
34 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
house and spent the night praying.
The next morning, on his way to the mountain, he again saw the same beggar, who held him
by his garment and asked him if he had had any reply.
Musa answered: 'Allah sends you His salaam, but He does not wish to give you anything.'
The beggar insisted: 'Oh Nabii Musa, Holy Messenger, please ask Allah, exalted be His
name, that He have mercy for once!' Musa went on and climbed the mountain where God
spoke to him, and finally asked him if he had any question. Musa repeated the beggar's prayer
and God answered: 'All right, for you I will change my decision once. That will be enough to
show you.' Later that day it occurred to a passer-by on the road to give a silver coin to the
beggar. The beggar took the coin, went to the market and bought a panga, a large sharp knife.
Then the
[Page [49] ]
beggar went and slaughtered a man. The beggar was arrested, brought before the cadi,
condemned to death and executed. And the Lord spoke to Musa: 'Today you know why I did
not wish that beggar to receive money. You begged it for him, and it was his undoing.'
VI. Karuni [ Korah ]
In the days of the Prophet Musa, on whom be peace, there lived a man called Karuni who
possessed more gold and diamonds than anyone on earth. He was so rich that the keys alone
of all his chests and chambers weighed as much as fourteen camels' loads. All the earth's
wealth belonged to him.
At the beginning of his life Karuni, who was an uncle of Musa, was a learned and devout
person, who read the Torah every day; that was before he acquired wealth.
God had revealed to Musa the secret art of alchemy, and when Karuni learned about it, he
asked Musa to instruct him in the rules of this magic. Musa, who knew Karuni for a devout
and virtuous man, agreed, and taught him the secret science. When Karuni had understood all
the principles and their applications, the accursed Satan came on the scene, and succeeded in
gradually corrupting his devotion. At first, he worshipped God on six days and neglected His
service for only one day, then for two, and then he went to the Mosque only on Fridays, and
finally he ceased to care about God altogether.
With his science he produced many strange things, which he sold for high prices so that he
amassed uncounted treasures. But his soul strayed entirely from the straight path, so that he
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
35 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
no longer wished to think about God, who had created him.
One day God commanded the Prophet Musa to inform all the owners of wealth and property
that they were required to
[Page [50] ]
give one thousandth part of every thing they possessed, one out of every thousand sheep, one
out of every thousand fishes caught, and so on, as alms to be divided among the poor. Musa
told his people of God's commandment, and he informed Karuni, the richest of the rich, that
he should put aside one thousandth of all his wealth to be given to the poor. Karuni went
home and pondered on this commandment. He possessed a thousand treasure houses, and in
each there were a thousand rooms full of gold and other treasures. Should he now give away
one whole treasure house full of gold to Musa?
Then Karuni called a meeting of all the rich men in the country, and told them that Musa
exacted a thousandth part of the property of each of them. The wealthy gentlemen asked him
what this was for; Karuni said he did not think there was any valid reason for such extortion:
in his opinion it was mere robbery. He asked them what they wanted to do about this, but
they agreed that he should decide the matter as their deputy, for he was considered as the
leader of the rich.
So he devised a stratagem. He went and found a beautiful but poor woman in the town and
asked her: 'If I give you a thousand dinars, will you say in public that the Prophet Musa has
committed adultery with you?' She said: 'For a thousand golden dinars I will say anything you
like.' 'So be it, I will call you tomorrow to the meeting-place.' The next morning all the men
were called together, and Karuni addressed Musa in public, thus: 'Musa, you call yourself a
Prophet of God. You have said that an adulterer will receive a hundred strokes with the stick
if he is unmarried, and if he is married he will be stoned. Now if you yourself commit
adultery, will you also be stoned?' And Musa said 'Yes'.
Karuni now called the woman to testify in public, and she
[Page [51] ]
said: 'The Prophet Musa has committed adultery with me.' Musa perceived his uncle's plan,
and questioned the woman: 'Do you see the earth, and the skies without pillars, do you know
that God has created all these things without help, in His wisdom? Do you see the sun and
the stars hanging without ceiling, the clouds travelling without feet? Now tell me the truth:
Did I commit adultery with you?'
The woman began to tremble with the fear of God, and confessed: 'It was a lie, Prophet of
God, Karuni paid me in pure gold to say this about you.' Then Musa prayed to God and asked
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
36 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
how Karuni should be punished. God answered: 'Tell the Earth your wish, and she will
perform it for you.' Then the Prophet called out to all the people: 'Everyone who believes in
me, come and stand near me, and everyone who belongs with Karuni, take his side.' And all
those who agreed with Musa went and stood near the prophet. Only one wealthy man
remained with Karuni. Then Musa called out to the Earth: 'Swallow my enemies, just as the
sea swallowed Pharaoh at my behest.' And the two men sank into the ground, first their feet
then their legs, then up to their navels, then up to their necks. They began to implore Musa to
forgive them, but it was too late: They vanished in the ground.
But the rich men accused Musa of greed, saying: 'His uncle Karuni has no other heirs, so now
Musa has all his money.' When Musa heard this, he decided to cleanse himself of the
blemish, so he ordered the Earth to swallow all the treasure houses, with all the gold and
precious stones in them. And so today, if someone strikes gold in the ground, silver or rubies,
diamonds or emeralds, or even copper or iron, it is part of the wealth that once belonged to
Karuni. God once created it all, and then it was swallowed by the Earth. And God decides
who will have the good fortune to find it.
[Page [52] ]
VII. The Exodus
When the prophet Musa decided to emigrate with his people from Egypt, he gathered
together all the men and the women. As soon as the women heard they were leaving the
country for good, each of them went to a friend among the Egyptian women, saying:
'Tomorrow there is a wedding, very unexpectedly; could you lend me your best dress and
your jewels?' The Egyptian ladies did so, quite generously, giving their rubies and diamonds,
pearls and armrings, silk and brocade. The next day the people of Israel were gone, and the
women of Egypt wept when they realized they had lost all their gold and jewels. When
Firauni [the Pharaoh] heard of this, he mounted his horse, as angry as a bull. Musa hurried
with his people in the direction of the sea, but behind them there appeared the dustcloud that
heralded Pharaoh's army.
Musa struck the waters with his stick, and they opened in such a way that there were twelve
paths through the sea. The mud of the sea bottom dried up at once. These paths were rather
like tunnels under the sea; in order to provide light, the Almighty created windows through to
the surface so that the sunlight could penetrate into the tunnels.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
37 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
When Firauni arrived, he hesitated to enter the Red Sea: but the Almighty had devised a
stratagem. He sent down the archangel Jiburili [Gabriel], with a beautiful naked woman, who
was given to Firauni, there on his horse. Firauni was extremely virile and the sight of the
woman made him as mad as a wild bull. While he was making love to her (he could not stop
himself), Jiburili took the horse by the rein and quietly led it down into the water. All
Pharaoh's men followed their king, and were literally led into perdition. The sea closed itself
just as the Israelites had emerged at the other end.
[Page [53] ]
VIII. The Three Men who came to drink
One day the prophet Musa was praying on the mountain. At the foot of the mountain there
was a stream of unusually clean water. When he had finished his prayers, Musa looked down
and saw a man on horseback arrive, dismount, put a bag down on the bank, take a quick
bathe, drink, then jump on his horse and gallop away. A moment later a young man arrived,
found the bag, opened it, saw that it was filled with silver coins, and walked away with it,
looking happy.
Later, a third man arrived, with an axe and a bag full of firewood, presumably a woodcutter
coming back from the forest. He put down his axe and his bag, took off his clothes and began
to bathe, for he was hot and tired. A moment later the first man reappeared and asked the
woodcutter what had happened to the bag of money that was standing on the bank. The
woodcutter said he had never seen it. The owner of the money bag lost his patience, took the
axe and killed the woodcutter. Then he ran away.
Astonished and indignant, Musa turned to the Lord and prayed: 'Lord, the man who got the
money was not the owner and the man who was killed for it was not the thief.' The Lord
answered: 'It is none of your business, but if you wish I will explain it to you. The first man
was not the owner of the money; he had stolen it from the father of the young man who
arrived after him. So the latter only recovered his father's property. And the woodcutter had
just killed the father of the man who arrived first. So I brought the latter back to this spot just
at the moment when his father's murderer was bathing here, and had placed his axe on the
bank. In this manner I made him pay for his crime soon after he had committed it, and by the
hand of his victim's son. In the future, never judge the things you see, because you do not
know what you have not seen.' Musa said: 'By Allah, only He should be worshipped who
knows the unseen.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
38 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
[Page [54] ]
IX. Musa, the Dove and the Hawk
The miraculous staff of the Prophet Musa (on whom be peace) had other wondrous qualities,
besides being able to make tunnels under the sea, and turning itself into a giant snake which
devoured the snakes of the sorcerers.
One day when the children of Israel were hungry, Nabii Musa planted his stick in the ground,
and at once it formed branches, blossomed, and grew fruits in abundance, which the prophet
divided among his nation, until all the people had eaten their fill and went away satisfied.
One hot day Musa wanted shade. So he planted his stick in the ground, and at once it
sprouted heavy branches which broke out in luxurious foliage, throwing a deep shade on the
ground, in which the Prophet sat down to meditate in peace.
He had not been sitting long when a young dove came flying along in a great hurry, and
perched on the lowest branch, panting. To the prophet's surprise it opened its mouth, and
instead of coo-cooing it addressed him in eloquent language: 'Peace be upon you, prophet of
Allah, to whom the Lord has spoken. Understand my condition: I have come to you as a
supplicant. Please avert disaster from me; turn away death which pursues me!'
Nabii Musa said: 'You are welcome. I will protect you; come down and take shelter here
under my wide robe.' The dove was grateful to God's holy man; it entered his mantle of
security and sat down on his lap. Musa folded his robe over its head to cover it. No sooner
had he done so, than out of the blue sky, down swooped the predatory hawk and perched on
the same branch. It too addressed the prophet, rather more curtly: 'You there, did you not see
a dove passing by?' Musa declared: 'That dove is in my charge; I have undertaken to free it
from fear.'
The hawk retorted: 'Really, has the Creator ordered you to stop me from doing what I was
created to do? Did He
[Page [55] ]
tell you to withhold my sustenance from me?' 'No, He has not,' confessed Musa. The hawk
pressed his case: 'In that case, do not interfere, do not try and arbitrate, leave the matter to
take its course, release the dove from your protective robe and allow me to still the desire of
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
39 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
my heart. If you do not give me what God has destined for my needs, I will complain about
you. On the day of Judgement, I will accuse you at the court of the Judge of judges of having
withheld my right!'
Musa sighed in deep despair. How could a prophet of God sin against His divine order! He
opened his robe, but then the dove, in mortal fear, pleaded its cause: 'Nabii Musa, to whom
the Merciful, the Compassionate has spoken, will you allow that bird of prey to kill me and
eat my flesh? Beware! On the day of Judgement I will complain that my blood was spilled
because the prophet Musa did not keep his word. Then, when we shall both stand before the
Maker of Earth and Heaven, together with all the prophets and nations, I will ask what your
word was worth!'
Now the man of God was in great fear and perplexity. Both birds had the right to live; he had
placed himself between the food and its eater: the goodness of his heart had caused him to
protect life against life.
He said: 'You hawk, could you not let this one dove live? I will give you other food---take a
sheep instead. I offer it to you, a whole sheep!' But the hawk would not hear of it: 'I cannot
eat mutton, it is too heavy for me. I must eat the meat I hunt; hunting is my life---you must
give me the dove, its meat is destined for me! If you will not give it, I will accuse you before
the Creator!' Knowing no better solution, Musa then addressed the dove: 'Dear dove, allow
yourself to be eaten, let the hawk crack your bones and allay his greed! I will pray the Lord
that He make you a blessed bird in Paradise. There you would forget the pain you suffered in
this
[Page [56] ]
world. Do consent, lest I be blamed by God!' The dove had her answer ready: 'Which mortal
creature of the Lord consents to be killed? Why did you not let the Pharaoh kill you? And yet
you could have awaited the day of Judgement yourself!'
Caught between two unassailable arguments, Musa despaired. 'Oh hawk, then eat my own
flesh and be satisfied by it! Rather than break my word or deny you your God- given food, I
will offer you myself, as I would not wish to live after doing an injustice. Have my leg, take
what you like!' Moses took out a knife and was about to cut his own flesh with it, when
suddenly the hawk said: 'Stop, prophet of God, I do not wish to eat the flesh of a prophet. I
am not a hawk, I am in reality the angel Mikaili [Michael], and this dove is really my brother
Jiburili [Gabriel]. God sent us to try you. We are satisfied that you have the true fear of the
Lord.' At that, they both vanished. And Musa taught his people that the price of righteousness
is one's own blood.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
40 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---
4. SALEHE, THE FIRST ARABIAN PROPHET
Allah sent the prophet Salehe to the people of Thamuda. They were a very impious and
treacherous people. The prophet Salehe preached in vain about the unity of Allah and the
vanity of the people, condemning their idols. The Thamudians wanted a sign from heaven, to
satisfy them that Salehe was indeed God's messenger. After much bickering, the priests of
Thamuda agreed that they would pray to their idols, and at the same time Salehe would pray
to Allah for a miracle. The prophet Salehe asked them what they wanted him to pray for, and
they said: 'We want this mountain to bear a she- camel, and after that a young he-camel.' If
that happened,
[Page [57] ]
they promised, they would become followers of the religion Salehe preached.
The prophet Salehe said his prayers as prescribed by Islam, and Allah said 'Be', so that it
came to pass the mountain opened itself like a she-camel, and there appeared a young
she-camel, neatly wrapped up in a foetal membrane.
Soon the head and the legs emerged, and the animal proceeded to grow while the
Thamudians looked on. Within a few minutes she was a full-grown she-camel; yes, even her
milk began to flow, and was collected in pots and drunk by the bystanders. The mountain
then bore a young male camel, and finally closed itself so that no one could find the spot that
had given birth to the camels.
The chief priest of the Thamudians, whose name was Jandai, was a stubborn man. He refused
to accept the wondrous sign of the prophet Salehe, although all his people had embraced
Islam and abandoned their idols. Jandai succeeded in persuading them to cut the achilles
tendons of the she- camel. He argued that this would prove that it was just a normal camel
and that the whole thing was nothing but a magic trick of Salehe's. So they cut the camel's
tendons and awaited what would happen. The effect was disastrous. A thunderstorm broke
out, lightning struck the people, an earthquake destroyed their city, and all the people died.
5. HUDU, THE SECOND ARABIAN PROPHET
God sent His prophet Hudu to the people of Adi and their king Shaddadi bin Adi. All Adites
were giants and lived in Hadramautu. Hudu told the king that he must no longer be pagan, but
must believe in God, or else God would send disasters. 'And what,' asked the king, 'will God
give me if I become a Muslim?' 'A palace in Paradise, built with gold and
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
41 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---
[Page [58] ]
jewels.' 'But I can have such a palace on earth,' said King Shaddadi, and ordered his army to
go in all directions and collect gold and silver, pearls and rubies. With these treasures he built
his palace, which he furnished with silk and draperies from the Orient. He then built around it
a city for his officers and men, surrounded by a wall 500 dhira'a [cubits] high. This was the
city of Irama, the city of gold, full of springing fountains. The pillars of the colonnades had
bases of rubies set in gold; the walls were covered with silver plaques plated with gold.
When the king received the message that his city was complete, he set out with his officers
and rode to the lush green valley of Irama. When he approached and saw his city he
exclaimed: 'This is what the prophet Hudu announced to me, the palace in Paradise.' This
pride aroused the wrath of God, who sent his angel of death, Aziraili, to collect the souls of
the Adites. Aziraili swooped down and tore away all the souls, and their bodies fell down on
the steps of the gateway. God then made the city of Irama invisible for the eyes of human
beings; but sometimes travellers in the night see a city of innumerable lights blinking in the
distance: those lights are the millions of precious stones of Irama. They come home telling
stories of the immeasurable treasures they strayed into. But when they come back and look
for it, no matter how long they search, they never find the elusive, cursed city of Irama.
6. NABII SULEMANI [THE PROPHET SOLOMON]
I. 
The Language of the Animals
Sulemani bin Daudi, King Solomon, ruled many peoples, human, animal and invisible. Allah
gave him wisdom and
[Page [59] ]
knowledge, so that he understood the secrets of the stars as well as the languages of the
animals. He could hear what the cocks crowed, what the horses neighed, what the snakes
hissed.
He also knew the languages of the fishes in the sea and of the demons in the fire; yes, he
could even understand the intentions of the trees rustling with their leaves, or the moods of
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
42 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---
the winds, whispering and roaring. But he had to keep all this secret---for otherwise he would
die.
One day Sulemani decreed that all the animals must help to build houses---in fact
barracks---for his soldiers. The elephant, king of the animals, and Hodihodi the hoopoe, king
of the birds, were charged with the supervision of this task. The birds were unanimous that
they could not be employed for this labour, as each of them had to build his own nest. The
elephant did not feel he could do any work himself as he was, after all, a king. He complained
to David, the father of Sulemani, who agreed that the elephant should be exempted.
Sulemani too agreed, on condition that one of the other animals was willing to carry the
stones. The horse was not available, because the king would want to ride it from time to
time. The camel was exempted because she provided milk for the labourers; the cow
supplied milk to the royal family. Finally, King Sulemani called the donkey and told him to
carry stones and clay. The donkey could not think up an excuse, and so he had to work. After
many weeks he was so tired that one evening he asked his friend the ox: 'What shall I do? I
cannot go on like this!' The ox said: 'It is quite simple; you just pretend to be ill!'
The next morning the donkey stayed in bed, moaning and groaning, complaining of aches and
pains. The prophet, however, had overheard the conversation between the ox and the donkey,
so the next day he charged the ox with the work. This was very convenient for the donkey: as
long as
[Page [60] ]
the ox did the work, the donkey could safely stay in bed. The ox brooded on the problem of
how to take his revenge and be relieved from the work at the same time. So, one morning
very early, king Sulemani heard the ox say to the donkey: 'I have heard that if you go on being
sick, the king has decided to have you slaughtered, because he sees no further use for you.'
On hearing this, the king laughed heartily, so that the queen was surprised and annoyed. 'Why
did you laugh?' she asked. King Sulemani said: 'Oh, nothing.' But the queen insisted: 'You are
laughing because you find me ugly, so I will not let you love me any more, until you tell me
why you laughed.' The king argued for hours, saying that he had laughed about something else
which he could not tell her, but she refused to receive him if he did not tell her. He told her
that he would die if he disclosed the secret, but she did not believe him. He threatened to
divorce her but she said she would rather be divorced than have a husband who laughed at
her secretly. Now King Sulemani was an uxorious husband who loved his wife too much to
divorce her, and of course she knew that. And so she could refuse her king and husband her
favours with impunity, until he had told her his secret. King Sulemani now ordered all the
animals to come together, and when they were assembled, he told them that he was going to
die; and again he asked the queen: 'Will you believe again that I shall be dead as soon as I
have told you my secret?' She said: 'No, tell me.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
43 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---
At that moment the cock crowed and the dog barked. Sulemani heard the dog say: 'You
callous cock, our king is dying and all his subjects are mourning for him, but you crow
cheerfully as if there was no reason for grief.' The cock replied: 'Why should I mourn? The
king is just foolish. I have many hens, and if one of them is proud or cheeky, I peck her until
she becomes humble. The king should take a
[Page [61] ]
stick and apply my wisdom!' At which the king rose up, took a stick and began to beat his
wife until she cried: 'I repent. I no longer want to know why you laughed.' All the animals
rejoiced that the king was saved by the wisdom of the cock.
II. King Sulemani and the Mosquitoes
In the days of King Sulemani, peace be upon him, the mosquitoes were as large as camels.
They flew round freely and killed many people, as well as the wild animals in the bush. No
wonder that all other creatures were terrified of them. All the animals, as well as the human
beings, went and complained to King Sulemani. The king ordered the wind to drive away the
mosquitoes. The people went home and locked their doors. The wind began to blow and
soon it was so strong that it roared over mountains and moors. All the big mosquitoes were
blown away to some unknown country. However, the small mosquitoes had managed to hide
away in cracks and crevices. So, today there are only small mosquitoes---those that can creep
through a keyhole.
III. 
King Sulemani and the Dolphin
In the days of King Sulemani there were no dolphins. Sulemani ruled the animals and the
birds, the fishes and the insects, the demons and the human mortals. All the king's regal
power lay in his ring. Allah had given him the ring: on this ring there was a seal, and in this
seal there was engraved Allah's one hundredth name. Only the prophet Sulemani and the
prophet Mohammed have ever known this holy name of God.
One ominous day, when the king was asleep, the devil came and stole the ring. Now the
devil, ugly Satan, took the shape of King Sulemani and sat down on his throne, ready to rule
men and animals. Soon, however, he was bored with sitting there and decided to go on a
voyage. He ordered a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
44 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---
[Page [62] ]
ship to be made ready and sailed out. In the middle of the Ocean he lost the ring, which sank
and sank and sank in the water, until Allah sent a fish along to look for it. This fish was the
dolphin, which Allah created for the purpose. If you go out sailing on the Ocean you are
likely to see the dolphins still diving for the magical ring.
Other learned men narrate that the ring was snapped up by a fish, which was caught by a
fisherman, who offered it for sale to King Sulemani's cook, so that the king found his ring on
his own plate. But Allah knows better.
7. NABII ISA BIN MARIAMU [THE PROPHET JESUS, SON OF MARY]
I. 
The Birth of the Prophet
Every day, Mariamu, the daughter of Amrani, had to fetch water for her parents. One day, as
she was descending into the bed of the river, she saw a man coming towards her, whose white
garments radiated like sunlight. She was frightened but he said: 'Fear not, for it has pleased
the Lord to make you the mother of His prophet.' She said: 'How can I become a mother as I
have never known a man?' The angel Jiburili [Gabriel], for it was he, answered: 'Do not doubt
the word of God, for Him it is only a matter of "Be", and whatever He wishes, comes into
existence.' Then Jiburili touched her lightly in the side and disappeared. Mariamu went on to
fetch water, but on her way back she felt tired and sat down under a dry date tree which had
been standing there, dead and barren, for as long as anyone could remember. And there, under
that dead tree, Mariamu gave birth, one hour after the angel had touched her.
And lo! The very moment the prophet Isa appeared in this world, the date tree became green
all over, it sprouted
[Page [63] ]
leaves and blossoms, and soon the dates began to swell up, and when they were ripe they fell
down before the virgin Mariamu, who gave them to her son and ate some herself.
As evening fell, she took up her baby and her water jar and continued her journey home, for
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
45 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---
she now felt quite well again. However, she had to face the scorn of the neighbours, the
sadness of her mother, and, worst of all, the wrath of her father. But she need not have
worried, for as soon as she entered the house, and before her father could speak, the baby on
her arm opened his mouth and pronounced in clear language: 'Fear not, for my birth is not the
fruit of sin, but an act of God. One day I shall be a prophet of the Lord, and reveal His word
to mankind. It pleased Him to let me be born from a virgin.'
Later, when Isa was a boy, he played on the roadside with his friends. One day he made
beautiful birds of clay. One of the boys was a nasty fellow, and wanted to destroy the birds,
but Isa clapped his hands and said: 'Fly away, fly away!' And so they did.
II. 
The Three Heaps of Gold
One day the prophet Isa was on his way to the mountain where God would speak to him,
when he met a man who asked him: 'Where are you going?' Nabii Isa said: 'I go to have a
conversation.' 'I will go with you.' 'No, you cannot.' 'I will come with you all the same.' The
man followed Isa until they were near a town. There Isa gave the man money and said: 'Buy
three loaves of bread, one for you and one for me and one for later.' The man went and came
back, gave one loaf to Isa, and they pursued their journey. They found a stream and decided
to spend the night there. The next morning, Isa said: 'Give me that loaf of bread.' The man
said: 'It has been stolen.' Isa said: 'It does not matter.' For he was a prophet of God. They went
on with their journey
[Page [64] ]
until they came to a desert where there was nothing but sand. As they were very tired they
decided to rest there. The prophet Isa played with the sand and made three heaps, the same
size and shape, of sand. Then the prophet Isa prayed to the Lord and suddenly the three heaps
became solid gold. The prophet Isa said to his companion: 'I have here three heaps of pure
gold, one for me, one for you and one for the thief who stole our bread,' The man said: 'That
was me,' hoping to get two heaps. Isa said: 'All right, you may have them all.' He went away
and left his companion behind.
The man did not want to part with the golden mounds, but he could not take them with him
either, for they were too heavy for him. So he just sat there, until three horsemen arrived
who, upon seeing one man sitting there near a treasure of gold, slew him and appropriated the
three heaps. They decided to make camp there, and sent one of their number to the town to
buy some bread. This man thought: I will go and buy some poison and put it in the bread so
that they will both die and I shall have the heaps of gold. The other two robbers, in the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
46 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---
meantime, decided to kill their fellow as soon as he came back---and that is what they did.
Having killed him, they took the bread and ate it. And died. After that the prophet Isa came
back with his followers. He knew all that had happened because God had revealed it to him,
and so he told his followers the whole story, ending thus: '... And here you see four men who
died for the possession of three heaps of sand. For it is really sand: I only made it look like
gold in order to know who the thief of the bread was. For greed always reveals itself. Shall I
now make these heaps of gold look like sand again?' The people said: 'Yes, prophet of God,
make it return to its original state.' and Nabii Isa prayed to God, and God returned the gold to
its original condition.
[Page [65] ]
4 The Miracles of Mohammed
[Page [66] ]
1. THE MAULIDI ['NATIVITY'] CYCLE
I. The Conception of Mohammed
It is believed by many faithful followers of the Holy Prophet (but only Allah knows the truth)
that the Almighty created the seed of the prophets out of a handful of His light. There it lay
sparkling in His hand: God decided that He would send one of these sparks to earth from
time to time, and with it He would reveal the Light of His Wisdom, or at least part of its
unending brilliance. The largest and brightest of these fiery sparks He picked out first and set
it apart. That would become the essence of Mohammed's soul. It would be incarnate last,
though it was created first.
There were twenty-five sparks of prophecy. The first one to come to light in a human body
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
47 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
was the soul of Adam. The others were hidden in his loins like pearls in an oyster, and
transferred from generation to generation, via Noah, Burahimu [Abraham] and Sumaili
[Ishmael] until there was only one seed left, that of Mohammed: this finally arrived in the
loins of his father Abdullah.
One evening Abdullah met a young woman called Waraka, who could tell people's fortunes.
She saw a great light shining from Abdullah, as if he were the full moon, and she knew that a
great prophet would be born from his seed if any woman conceived of him that night. She
said: 'Abdullah, Abdullah, come into my tent, I will tell your fortune, I will
[Page [67] ]
give you whatever you like, come to my couch, lie with me, come and sleep here ...'
But Abdullah went home to his own wife, the faithful Amina, and slept with her, so that she,
his rightful spouse, conceived the seed of the Holy Prophet. Later, Abdullah went back to the
beautiful fortune-teller, but this time she did not invite him; indeed, she refused any contact
with him. She had wanted to become the mother of the last of the prophets who was to be
conceived that first night. Now he had already been conceived, the seed was sown, the light
was growing in the womb. The night of the conception of the Prophet was indeed a night of
wonders. When his mother Amina lay between sleeping and waking that night, an angel came
down to her and said: 'Amina, this night it has pleased Allah to fill your womb with the light
of Paradise. You will become the mother of the Lord of all the Arabs, of the last Prophet God
will send to earth before Judgement. When he is born, call him 'Mohammed', the praised one,
for that is his earthly name.'
That night the Lord God ordered His angel Ridhuani to open the gates of Paradise, so that the
pleasant fragrance of the Perfumed Garden would spread over the valleys of the earth. And
with this life-giving breath of heaven, all the female animals of the Kureshi clan became
pregnant, so that in due course they dropped many lambs and kids.
In the country of the Persians, where the priests worshipped the fire in abominable
aberration, they saw to their amazement and dismay that the holy fire in the royal palace of
the Shah was suddenly extinguished, although it had been burning there for a thousand years
without interruption. Fourteen pinnacles of the great hall of pillars came crashing down. All
these events foreshadowed that the power of the Persian kings would soon be broken, and
that their religion of error would be destroyed.
[Page [68] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
48 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
A holy pond called Sawi (or Sawah), dried up that night, although the Persians had
worshipped it for centuries; now, instead of water they found fire in the valley. In this
manner, the elements lost their natural properties.
The water of the River Furati [Euphrates] rose out of its bed and spread out over the lands
and cities of the Persians, like fire spreads in the savannah. The temple fires, on the other
hand, to which the Persians sacrificed, became wet like water and dripped from their
pedestals.
Not only did angels speak to people in the night of Mohammed's conception, the spirits of
the mountains, too, called to each other that the prophet was conceived, and that the time of
Islam would soon come. The animals of the East brought the message to the animals of the
West, and many people heard the animals speak in human language, announcing the
imminent birth of the Best of men.
Amina's pregnancy was light and easy, but alas, her husband died during those months. The
angels of heaven wept when Abdullah died, and asked God why He had made his prophet an
orphan. The answer was: 'Allah suffices as a guardian.'
Every month the angels announced to the inhabitants of the earth that Mohammed, the seal of
the prophets, would soon be born; and the animals again began to speak.
II. 
The Birth of Mohammed
When the hour of Mohammed's birth approached, it was the night of the twelfth Rabia
l'A wali, a Monday night. Allah took special precautions because he knew that the devils
would be particularly active that night. The Satans knew that the birth of Mohammed forecast
doom and destruction for them, so they sought to prevent it. They attacked heaven in great
numbers, trying to penetrate to where the Pen could be heard scratching, in order to find out
where the Prophet
[Page [69] ]
would be born. But a host of angels, placed on guard for the purpose, chased them away from
all the heavens with shooting stars and flaming meteors. They are still squatting near the
gates.
Amina told her father-in-law later: 'When I was about to give birth to him---on whom be
peace---I saw a great light shining forth from my womb, so that I could see in it the distant
mountains and even the towers of the cities of Syria.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
49 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
She was alone that night. Her father-in-law Abdu'l- Muttalibi was performing the pilgrimage
ceremonies in the holy mosque of Mecca. Suddenly, Amina felt a white bird stroking her
heart with its wings, and all her fear vanished. Later, she recalled: 'I saw four women appear
in a radiant light. One of them was an angel who gave me a beverage of white milk (or was it
nectar?). It gave me a wonderful feeling of strength, and I became light like the moon.
'One of the women was the virgin Mariamu [Mary], the mother of Isa [Jesus], one was Asiya,
who was killed by the cruel Pharaoh for her faith in Islam, and one was a huri, a nymph from
Paradise. One of them had brought a large cloth of beautiful brocade to protect me and my
child from the eyes of mortals.
'I saw the beautiful bird which sat on my breast and showed me the horizons of the earth: on
them there were planted the flags of Mohammed.
'At last my son was born, while the four heavenly women supported me. With him the light
emerged from my womb wherein it had been dwelling all this time, so that it was as if the
moon rose from my loins.
'As soon as he was born, Mohammed raised his head and looked up to heaven, from whence
comes all bliss. Then he made all the movements of the ritual prayer (salati), which no one
had taught him. An angel arrived and lifted up my new- born son, carrying him to the four
corners of the earth, to
[Page [70] ]
show him his future kingdom and to acquaint him with all the peoples and all the spirits.
Finally, he was brought back to me, and between his shoulders I found they had placed the
seal of prophecy in the form of a star.'
Mohammed was born circumcised ('purified'), with kohl (antimony) on his eyelids---a sign of
high breeding.
As soon as he was born, the idols of the heathens toppled and crashed on their faces, boding
doom to devil-worship.
III. 
The Nurse's story
Another female story-teller from Arabia is often quoted in Swahili legend: Halima,
Mohammed's wet nurse. In the old days it was considered 'not done' for ladies of standing to
feed their own babies for longer than the first few days, and so, although Mohammed's
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
50 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---
mother was quite poor, she had to find a nurse. Here is Halima's story:
'My own little son had only just been born when we went to Mecca to find a foster child. But
we were late; all the children of the rich had already been given to other nursing mothers.
There was only this young boy Mohammed. The money we were promised for nursing him
was not very much, so my husband said: 'Leave him, we will come back later.' But I had
taken a liking to this boy, and I was not mistaken. He brought us much blessing. I was riding
an old decrepit she-donkey, but as soon as I had the baby Mohammed with me, she began to
trot cheerfully , and took us all the way home to the desert without resting. Our old she-camel
was suddenly in milk again after being dry for many years, and she produced enough milk for
the whole family.
'My own breasts had been dry for several days as there was a famine in our part of Arabia.
Our little son had been crying night after night, so that we did not sleep at all. But now that I
had Mohammed with me my breasts suddenly overflowed with milk, so that I had enough for
both children.'
[Page [71] ]
Halima and her husband belonged to the Banu Saada, a Bedouin tribe in the Arabian desert.
In those days it was the custom to let the primitive but honest Bedouins bring up the sons of
the city nobility, lest the noble boys become effeminate and decadent. It was believed that the
hard life of the desert, with its deprivations, would make them into men of steel, brave
warriors, hardy in enduring hunger and thirst, heat and cold. This is how the tribes of Arabia
remained strong and brave for many centuries. Halima continued her story: 'One day the two
boys were playing together when suddenly three men arrived. They took young Mohammed,
laid him on his back, opened his breast and took out his heart, which they cleaned with pure
water that they had brought with them. They pressed a dark clot out of the heart and filled the
inside of it with a white liquid. Then they put the heart back, and the breast was healed so
that no one could see where it had been cut open. The three angels disappeared and
Mohammed got up, healthy and cheerful.'
IV. 
The Hermit
When Mohammed was twelve years of age his uncle Abu Talibu, who loved him very much,
took him on a caravan journey to Syria. While they were camping near an oasis, an old man
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
51 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---
with a white beard came to Abu Talibu and asked him: 'Is that boy your son?' Abu Talibu said
'Yes', but when the old sage insisted, he admitted that Mohammed was only his nephew.
'That is what the books say,' muttered the old scholar. 'Can I examine the boy?' Abu Talibu
consented, because the venerable sage made a deep impression on him, of great wisdom and
knowledge. The sage examined Mohammed and found what he wanted between the boy's
shoulder-blades: The seal of the prophecy in the form of a star, with the
[Page [72] ]
words: 'There is no God but Allah and Mohammed is His prophet.'
Abu Talibu asked the old sage how he knew he would find the seal, and the sage told him:
'My name is Nestor. I live here in the wilderness in seclusion. I study books of great antiquity
in which the advent of the last prophet is announced. This afternoon, when your caravan
arrived here, I saw that palm tree move its crown to and fro, so that the boy Mohammed was
always protected from the sun. That was the sign I had wanted so long to see. I read that the
great prophet is now twelve years of age and that his father died before he was born. All this
was revealed by the Lord many generations ago to the prophets of the past and written down
in these forgotten books. All knowledge is disclosed to the assiduous student.'
V.  Hadija
When Mohammed was twenty-five years of age, now a young commercial traveller, he was
engaged by a wealthy lady called Hadija. She began to like him better every day, for his
honesty and for his quiet and courteous manners. She sent him out on long caravan journeys
to Syria and Iraq (to the cities of Kufa and Basra), and at twenty-five he was already caravan
leader and business manager---a very responsible position, as some caravans were composed
of a thousand or more camels carrying loads of precious stones, spices, textiles, gold, silver
and ivory.
One day, Hadija was sitting on the roof of her father's house, looking out over the city and the
surrounding countryside.
[ 
It was---and still is---the system in Arabian and other Islamic households for the
well-to-do ladies to sit on the roofs and upper balconies of their houses. They were there
shaded from the sunshine by 'tents', i.e. colourful draperies; they could not go out on the
[Page [73] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
52 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---
streets without chaperones and veils, so this was the only outdoor life they had .]
That day Hadija saw Mohammed come back from one of his safaris, approaching with his
caravan which was winding down the mountain road into the valley of Mecca. To her
surprise, Hadija discovered that Mohammed was all the time riding in the shade, although
there was a cloudless sky. When he came nearer she saw a small cloud hanging just above
him, following him wherever he went. When he came closer still, she saw that it was not
really a cloud but two white angels who all the time held their wings spread out over
Mohammed's head to protect him from the sun's rays. [ 
Even today, Islamic rulers are
accustomed to refer to themselves as ruling 'in the shade of Allah'  .]
This was a sign from heaven for Hadija. She fell in love with Mohammed because he was
Allah's messenger to the world. His holiness caused her love. She invited him upstairs to her
private apartment, and she made advances so as to make him propose to her. She even invited
him inside her pazia [purdah]. He claimed that he could not marry her because he could not
pay the bride price. Hadija then offered to pay it for him out of her personal fortune, but
Mohammed refused. [ This was probably because it would make him her inferior , which is
acceptable for a man on a social level in Islamic society, but on a marital level is totally
inconceivable .] However, since the Almighty had decreed that Hadija and no one else
should marry His holy messenger, the problem was solved by His sending down the angel
Jiburili from heaven with baskets full of precious stones, rubies, sapphires and emeralds, all
rough and uncut, but straight from Paradise, and so of the first quality. This treasure
represented an immeasurable fortune which paid for the 
mahari (bride-price), as well as for
the wedding feast. It is customary for upper-class people to feed the poor at such a
[Page [74] ]
feast, as well as inviting people of quality from the whole town.
VI. Mohammed's Mission
[ This legend is by far the most important part of the Mohammedan tradition in the eyes
of the Islamic peoples themselves, and it is customarily narrated in great detail with full
quotations from the Koran and the Hadithi (Tradition).]
When Mohammed was forty years of age, he began to feel the need to withdraw to the
wilderness from time to time, in order to meditate and be alone with his thoughts. His usual
place of contemplation was Mount Hira, not far from Mecca. It was there that he received the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
53 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---
first revelations of the Divine Word. One night the sky opened and he saw an angel as large
as the valley below him appearing from heaven in a cascade of light. Mohammed fell on his
knees and prayed. When he looked up, he saw the angel Jiburili, for it was he, standing above
him, holding in his hand a cloth or carpet on which there were words inscribed. He said:
'Read!' Mohammed asked: 'What must I read?' The order was repeated twice; then the angel
recited the first line of God's revelation to Mohammed: The Holy Koran. After that night the
angel came back many times, until all the chapters of the Divine Book had been revealed.
Mohammed recited these to his followers and friends, many of whom learned the whole
Book by heart. It was written down from their mouths fifty years later.
2. MOHAMMED'S ASCENSION
One morning, the Holy Prophet told his companions: 'Last night the angel Jiburili came to me
and brought me greetings from the Almighty. He summoned me to come before
[Page [75] ]
His throne and receive His commission. I opened the door of the house, and there on the
road, and also in the sky, thousands of angels were waiting for me. They all greeted me in
chorus.
'They brought me Buraki, my mount. She was a little bigger than a donkey. She smelled like
the perfumes of Paradise. Her harness was inlaid with pearls, and emeralds were set in the
stirrups. The bit was pure gold. Her tail was like the tail of a peacock and she had two large
wings to fly with. Jiburili ordered me to mount her, but when I put my hand on her neck she
shied away. Jiburili reprimanded her, saying: "Don't you know that this is the Prophet of
Allah who has commanded you to carry him?" Buraki said: "His hand is abominable to me, it
has touched an idol." "That is right," said I, "I have destroyed a graven image which was
adored by idolators." Buraki said: "I will only let you mount me if you guarantee me
Paradise."' Mohammed continued: 'Having guaranteed her Paradise I was able to mount her,
for she lay down submissively for me. Then she unfolded her wings and rose up in the air.
Jiburili said: "Remember never to speak to anyone we may meet on our way." Suddenly, I
saw a beautiful woman who called out: "Mohammed, come here, I have something lovely to
show you." I looked straight ahead and did not reply. A moment later we saw an ugly old hag.
Jiburili said: "That is the same woman. It is the curse of all flesh to grow old and ugly. Her
name is the World. If you had answered her, your community would have forsaken Paradise."'
Mohammed continued: 'I was then taken to the mosque in Jerusalem. Suddenly I saw the
great prophets of the past appear before me: Burahimu, Musa and Isa. We exchanged
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
54 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---
greetings and prayed together. After the prayer, Jiburili led me outside, and there I saw a
golden ladder hanging down from the zenith of the sky to where I was standing. I could
[Page [76] ]
not see the top, although the whole ladder radiated like the moon in the mighty sky.
'As soon as I put my foot on the bottom rung, it soared up in the air with me, and before I
knew what was happening we were flying through the clouds. I clung to the ladder, but
Jiburili was flying beside me, keeping up with ease on his own huge wings.
'In a moment we were in Heaven, flying over a vast sea. I asked Jiburili what it was, and he
told me: "That is the blue sky which mortals like you see from the earth."
'The name of the first level of heaven is Rafiu; its width is 500 years. Jiburili knocked on the
gate, and when the voice of an angel answered, "Who is it?" Jiburili stated our business and
our names. The angel, whose name was Sumaili [Ishmael], together with his 70,000 angels,
bade me welcome. Inside there, I saw two arched gateways, and between them there was a
throne on which was seated our forefather Adam. We greeted one another with a 
salaam
aleika , after Jiburili had introduced us. Adam said he was happy that at last Allah had sent
me to mankind with His final message of salvation, for many erring souls had been
condemned to the Fire since he had first fallen into sin. At that, he burst into tears, as just at
that moment there was a group of sinners going past him, entering the gate on his left which
led to the abode of the doomed. A moment later, Adam could smile again, as a large group of
his children entered through the other gate, on his right, which led to the gardens of the
blessed. He asked their names: he knew their forefathers, since all were his sons and
daughters, and he was happy at their happiness, for he was the father of the family of Man.
'I asked permission to see the domicile of darkness, but its guardian, Maliki, turned me back
brusquely. At the same moment, the voice of the Lord boomed through the heavens: "Treat
My servant Mohammed with civility; he is My last
[Page [77] ]
messenger to Mankind." Maliki changed his attitude at once; he said, " Salaam aleika ,
prophet of Allah," and admitted me with courtesy to his region.
'What I saw in Hell is hard to describe. Listen! There were people with large mouths, like
cauldrons. A devil came along every few moments and poured boiling water into these
mouths, so that it passed out of them still boiling. Jiburili explained: These were evil men.
They appropriated the money of orphans that had been entrusted to them, and bought
enjoyment for themselves with it. The victims were crying and moaning with boiling entrails.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
55 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---
'Next we saw a large number of women hanging with their heads down, their feet hooked to
the ceiling. Others were hanging by their hair, still others by their tongues. Jiburili said:
"These women were unchaste. They sinned by sleeping with men other than their husbands."
Fire was flaming in their intestines, their hearts were smouldering, and sparks flew out of
their mouths.
'One woman was eating her own flesh while it was burning; another dug her hands in her own
body; another one had snakes winding themselves round her head, and a fourth one was
surrounded by stinging scorpions. A fifth woman was deaf, blind and lame; she was being
cooked over a fire, having been crammed into a wooden case. A sixth one had her brains
running out through her nose; she also had leprosy and elephantiasis. A seventh woman was
busy cutting her own flesh away with a pair of scissors, her face was already stripped, and its
bones could be seen. The eighth woman was busy eating her own intestines. The ninth had
the body of a donkey and the head of a hog. She brayed like a mule. The tenth barked like a
dog, and her body was on fire. Some women were being skinned while standing amidst the
flames, others were being castigated with red-hot bars of iron.
[Page [78] ]
'Jibuirli explained: "The one who is hanged by her tongue, used to annoy her husband with
abuse; the one who is eating her own flesh refused intercourse with her husband when he felt
the need. The one who is digging into her own flesh deceived her husband, so that the
children she gave birth to were not his. The one who is now deaf and blind took her
husband's money and gave it to her paramour. The one who is cutting her own flesh with
scissors showed it to other men, for she had no sense of shame. The one with the hog's head
and the donkey's body used to vex people. The ones who are being beaten with iron bars are
the ones who did not honour God. The ones hanging by their feet used to go out at night
without telling their husbands where they went. The ones who are being flayed used to live
impurely: they never bathed after menstruation.
'Then we saw people who had to eat molten metal, which then poured out of their bowels.
They were forced to eat the same red-hot liquid again. Jibuirli explained that these were the
embezzlers and confidence-tricksters who "ate" the money of others for their own enjoyment.
'We saw men sitting with good well-cooked meat in front of them, but they were forced to
swallow rotten meat. They were the men who had good wives, but went to the foul women of
the town.
'We saw men with enormous stomachs, sticking out like mountains. When they attempted to
move they rolled over on their faces and cried with pain. Jiburili said: "These have taken
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
56 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---
interest, they are the moneylenders."
'We saw people who were being dragged along the rough floor so that their faces were black
with dirt and soot. They had refused to give alms to the poor, fearing it would diminish their
wealth.
'We saw people being dressed in burning clothes. While
[Page [79] ]
on earth, they had been very proud and had oppressed their fellow men. They were also
blind.
'We saw people dressed in clothes made of tar, their hearts as big as mountains. They had
been playing banjos and flutes all the time instead of praying to Allah.
'A number of people had their hearts full of pus; their lips were as long as their bodies and
dragged along the floor. They wept all the time. These were the liars who bore false witness
on earth.
'Others were being butchered with knives by hideous devils. Their flesh was pitch-black, and
stank as if it were rotting carrion. As soon as they had been killed they came to life again, and
the process started once more. These were the women who hindered their husbands during
intercourse.
'Some were locked up in a gaol; they were full of fire which burst out of their bowels. They
were the ones who had disobeyed their parents.
'A large group of people was being beaten by two black devils with huge clubs, heavy enough
to beat big mountains to fine powder. The angels asked the souls: "Who is your god?" They
said:
'"We do not know him." At once they were beaten again, ever more severely. They were the
polytheists and the dualists.
'In the middle of this plain there was a mountain with two burning eyes out of which fire
sparked. The guardian of this mountain was Suhaili, who had the keys to its entrails. It was
the burning-place for the enemies of God; it was 500 years across.
'Below I saw an angel who carried the earth and the skies in the hollow of his hand. The earth
is resting on the horns of a cow.
'Hell has seven gates, one each for the hypocrites, the worshippers of the devil, the sorcerers,
the Christians, the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
57 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
[Page [80] ]
Jews, the Parsees, and finally the Muslim sinners who did not repent before they died.
'In the plain I saw giant scorpions, pythons and puff adders. There was a broad river of lava,
one drop of which would have been enough to consume the earth.
'There was the tree zakumu , with thorns like knives and fruits like heads of satans. The
sinners have to eat the fruits whose juice is nothing but molten copper.
'I saw a large river of stinking pus. Jiburili explained: "All this matter comes out of the
genitals of the adulterers and whoremongers."
'The colour of this river is pitch-black, and its name is Ghisilina ("Washing water") and also
"River of Discharge".
'There was a special fire, extra hot, for the apostates, who were burnt to ashes in it.
'Finally, in the deepest valley, there was the tower of snakes. Here the sinners were kept in
yokes full of scorpions. These were the atheists.
'We went back to the first heaven. There I saw a huge cock with beautiful feathers. The crest
of its head was near the Throne of Allah. When it crows early in the morning, all the cocks on
earth answer it; they all obey this one celestial cock.
'There was an angel, one half of whom was fire, the other snow, and the snow did not melt,
nor was the fire extinguished. He was the angel in charge of thunder and lightning, of clouds,
rain and hail.
'There was a sea with foaming waves. This was the sea of life. Whoever bathed in it would
be revived, even if he were a corpse. Green is the colour of this sea, and it is surrounded by
angels as numerous as the grains of sand on the beach.
'In the second heaven we saw Isa the son of Mariamu. He greeted me courteously, together
with his cousin Yahya bin Zakariya [John the Baptist]. We saw an enormous angel
[Page [81] ]
there, with innumerable heads and hands. Jiburili explained that its name is Kasim, ("the
divider, the distributer"), and that its task is to provide all the creatures on earth with their
sustenance: insects and fishes, animals and birds, Muslims and heathens, each creature
receives whatever food or drink it needs, from this angel.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
58 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
'In the third heaven, which was made of copper, we met Yusufu [Joseph], a man of great
beauty, with piety in his heart.
'The fourth heaven was made of silver. Here we met David and Solomon. We saw the
Nakima, Noah's sea.
'The fifth heaven was made of gold. We found Musa [Moses] there as the guardian.
'The sixth heaven was made of rubies. We met Ziraili [Azrael], the angel of Death. He was
sitting on a throne and before him he had two writing boards which he studied assiduously,
without ever taking his eyes off the writing on them. These are the tablets of Life and Death.
On one there are the names of those who will live in that hour, on the other the names of
those who will die. As soon as the name of one who is destined to die in the present hour
appears, by God's will, on the latter of the two tablets, the angel Ziraili sends one of his
70,000 servants, all angels of death, down to earth, to fetch the soul of that person. These
souls are all gathered together, like sheep that are driven to the slaughterhouse. This work
never stops.
'In the seventh heaven, which is made of diamonds, we met Abraham, his two sons, and his
grandson Yaakabu [Jacob].
'There I saw the angel Mikaili [Michael]; his feet were on the earth, his head was there in the
seventh heaven. His mouth was so large that the earth would not fill it. He was sitting near
the Scales.
'There was another huge angel sitting there. He was
[Page [82] ]
Serafili [Asrafel], the angel of the trumpet. He took me by the hand at the place where
Jiburili was not allowed to climb any higher. There was another angel there, with
innumerable mouths, each mouth praising God in a different language.
'At last I arrived at the first curtain. It was created out of iron; an angel was there to take
charge of me and to hand me over to the angel at the next curtain. There were altogether
70,000 curtains separating the divine presence from the rest of creation. The curtains were
made from every conceivable substance or element.
'As the last curtain was being removed between me and my Lord, I fainted, but there was His
own hand to support me. He greeted me courteously:
'"May I give you a long life, may My peace be upon thee, My prophet." Allah gave me His
commission and His commandments: Praying, fasting, almsgiving, protecting the orphans,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
59 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
nightly vigils, feeding the poor, and loving one's relatives on one's mother's side.
'Finally Jiburili was called to take me back, but first, I was allowed to see Paradise. Ridhuani
the gate-keeper admitted me through the big gate on which there was an inscription: "Only
those will enter here who have adored the one God alone, and confess that Mohammed is His
prophet; who ban all thoughts of rebellion and dissent from their hearts, as well as jealousy
and greed; who practise generosity, especially to the widows and orphans, and feed the poor."
'There were seven gateways and each had a different inscription.
'At last I entered the garden of Paradise. The sand was ambergris and musk, the grass was
saffron, the stones were rubies and pearls, the streams were milk and honey. I saw tents of
green silk bordered with emeralds, in which there lived the beautiful huris, the nymphs with
the black and white
[Page [83] ]
of the eyes well distinguished. Their faces are like moonshine, they have waving black hair,
and very broad hips. Through their ornaments and through their veils one could see their
skins, white and soft, and as fine as diaphanous silk. They all smiled and they were singing
melodious songs. Never has the Creator made anything more beautiful! I said to Jiburili:
"Now that I am here, leave me, I have arrived at the place where I want to be, where else
should I go?" Jiburili told me that he had to take me back to life and my duties on earth, but
only for a brief period. After that I would come back to Paradise for ever, for it had been
created for me.
'God said: "I give you the keys of the world." I hesitated to accept them because I know that
the world only distracts us from the straight path to heaven. Then Jiburili took me to a high
place with a lovely view of the whole earth. It was a dark night, but Jiburili spread out his
wings, and their golden reflection spread daylight over the valleys. I could see mountains and
oceans, the towers of Syria as well as the green plains of China.
'The descent to Jerusalem happened in the blinking of an eyelid. Yet I came down on the
square as softly as if I had been standing there all the time. Buraki was still waiting patiently,
tied to the ring in the wall which was also used in the days when Abraham rode her. She flew
back with me over the desert to Mecca. In the middle of the desert we saw a caravan
belonging to the Banu Fulani brothers winding its way along.
'I came home and entered my room through the roof. My bed was still warm: no time had
passed on earth. The next morning I met the Kureshi, the prominent gentlemen of Mecca,
and I told them what I had seen. They laughed, and said that as caravan-owners they had
visited Jerusalem several times, so could I give a description of it? I was very
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
60 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---
[Page [84] ]
embarrassed by this as I had had no time to visit the city, so I prayed and Allah sent Jiburili to
Jerusalem. He lifted the entire city from the rocks on which it was built and brought it to me
so that I could describe it as I looked at it. None of the others could see it however. The
gentlemen were satisfied, but then they said: "Tell us, we have invested in a big caravan of
the brothers Fulani. Did you see it, and when is it likely to arrive?" I told them I had seen that
caravan, that the camels were buff, bay and grey-coloured, and that it would arrive in three
days.
'They were satisfied with the description of their camels. Three days later they were awaiting
the caravan at the entrance of the city. The sun was about to set when I prayed an ardent
prayer. It pleased Allah at that moment to stop the sun in its course and hold it there
suspended above the Western horizon, for a full hour, until the caravan arrived.'
The caravan leaders confirmed that they had seen someone on a flying horse speeding
through the night sky, that one of the camels had become skittish, had strayed and broken a
leg, that they had suddenly heard a voice from the sky: 'You can find your camel behind
yonder hill!' That voice, they said, sounded surprisingly like the voice of Mohammed, the son
of Abdullah.
3. THE AMULET OF ANZARUNI
This is the history of the powerful amulet which is called the Secret of Secrets because of its
exceptional qualities. It radiates light in the darkness, which shows the strength of its magical
charge.
Once upon a time this amulet had fallen into the hands of an evil tyrant who had slain the
rightful owner. Listen how it
[Page [85] ]
had pleased Allah to let this happen only to show the glory of Ali.
The wicked oppressor's name was Anzaruni, which shows that he was a servant of Satan.
That is how he knew the secret power of this amulet, which protects its possessor against the
wrath of God and the wiles of men. It gives good people peace of mind and contentment. It
also prevents jealousy, and protects whoever wears it against death, destruction and disease.
Anzaruni lived in a castle on a rock near the crossroads of the caravan routes. He spent his
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
61 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---
days in highway robbery, armed assault and rape. The rock on which his castle stood was
called Smoke Mountain, because its frightening aspect reminded people of the Fire of the
Underworld. The desert in which this mountain was found was called Fire Plain, because he,
the accursed dog, had set fire to all the villages in it. Even the spirits had never seen the
inside of the castle so well- protected was it against even 
their penetration. Anzaruni had
thousands of followers, all thugs and cut-throats like himself; they worshipped the fire, an
abomination in the sight of Allah.
In the treasure-chamber of his castle, Anzaruni kept a chest hidden, and in it, wrapped in
green silk, there was the amulet, a small tablet in which there was inscribed in golden letters
the secret name of God, so that some of Allah's hidden powers were in the hands of whoever
possessed it. This is why he could rob people even of their freedom, and sell them and their
wives into slavery, with impunity.
When the Prophet Mohammed heard about this evil-doer, he assembled his army and rode to
the Valley of Fire.
Anzaruni saw them coming and knew that a fierce battle lay ahead. He put on the amulet,
wearing it on his head, and set out with his men to meet the Holy prophet in the field. He
defied the heroes of Islam and challenged anyone to come
[Page [86] ]
forward and fight him. One brave young knight rode out to face him. Anzaruni simply seized
the knight with his powerful hand, lifted him out of the saddle and threw him down on the
ground. He did the same to fifty other gallant followers of Mohammed.
Mohammed realized that the prospects for victory were not hopeful, so he performed the
ritual prayer with his companions, after which they begged the Omnipresent that He should
turn the chances of the battle. He did. At once, he sent down Jiburili to His prophet. ' Salaam
aleika ,' said Jiburili, 'know, oh prophet, that Anzaruni possesses an amulet which represents
the secret name of Him whose essence is power over all things. Whoever has it with him, has
Allah with him; even if a European gets it, Allah will protect him all his life. The only hero
who can, with God's help, defeat the tyrant, is your son-in-law, Ali the Lion.'
So Mohammed sent out Ali to face the dog, the infidel. They fought for several days, but Ali
could not overcome the oppressor, indeed he was himself hard-pressed in the battle.
Mohammed again prostrated himself in devout prayer to the Lord. Immediately the prayer
arrived in heaven, Allah decided to interfere with His own protective power. He sent down
from heaven a black bateleur eagle with a shooting star in its bill. It pecked the amulet from
Anzaruni's head, tore it off, flew with it to the Prophet Mohammed, and dropped it before his
feet. Mohammed picked it up and threw it at Ali, who caught it with his hand. After that the
tablet had literally turned. Ali had become invulnerable, and the oppressor Anzaruni was now
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
62 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 64 ---
unprotected. For the first time, he had to fear an opponent, so he fled back to his castle where
he told his story. His followers decided, foolishly, to take revenge for him. As they came
storming down the hill and were at once victorious, Mohammed called out to Ali to read the
amulet, and pray for what he wanted. Ali took the amulet,
[Page [87] ]
recited the words on the tablet, and prayed for protection. At once the heavens opened and a
host of angels descended, with flaming swords in their hands. The angels brought sharp and
solid spears from Paradise, and at once began to fight the hordes of infidel dogs.
Systematically and with perfect discipline, they defeated and killed the army of Anzaruni,
including the tyrant himself.
When Mohammed came home from his expedition, he found his old friend Abu Bakari in
bed, sick and ailing. Mohammed merely placed the amulet of Anzaruni on the forehead of his
sick friend, and the latter rose from his couch, cured.
[ 
The remainder of the poem, over 200 stanzas, is devoted to the art of making amulets  .
Some scholars maintain that the miraculous amulet is still in the possession of one of
Ali's descendants---but only Allah knows  .]
[Page [89] ]
5 Mysterious Destinies
[Page [90] ]
1. LIFE AND WHERE IT LEADS US
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
63 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---
I. The history of the Wakami
Long ago the Wakami lived on the East African Coast. As they were great cattle herdsmen
they decided to go to and move into the interior, where they hoped to find greener pastures.
A holy man came and spoke to their chief: 'If you go and live in the interior, you will all
become black. Now you are Arabs, but in the savannah you will go dark.'
The chief of the Wakami asked: 'How can a man change his colour? We are not chameleons.'
The sage replied: 'Your children will become black in yonder lands.' The chief took a grain of
rice and asked: 'Do you see this seed? What colour has it?' 'White.' 'Well, and what colour has
the soil?' 'Black.' 'Now then, if you put this seed into the black earth, it will grow into a plant,
what colour will the seeds of that plant be?' 'White.' 'So you see,' said the chief, 'the seed of
white seed will always be white, even if you plant it in black earth. Therefore, the seed of
Arabs will always be white, even if you plant it in black women.'
The wise man said nothing but went his way. The chief of the Wakami led his people up into
the savannah lands of the interior, with all their cattle. Today they are all black, so the
prediction of the sage has come true. Now they are no longer called Arabs, but Wakami,
'milkers'.
[Page [91] ]
II. The Obedient Son becomes Sultan
A rich man had one son. On his deathbed he told him: 'Never swear an oath, even if what you
swear is true.' Then he died in peace. The son lived in peace, until a man came to him and
said: 'Your father owed me money.' If this young man had taken him to court he would have
had to swear an oath that he owed that man nothing, and his father had forbidden that. So he
paid him. When other men saw how easy it was to get money from this wealthy young man,
they all called at his door saying: 'Your father owed us money.' He paid them all, whatever
they claimed. At last he was penniless. His wife said: 'Let us move out of here, this is no
lucky place.' So, with their two sons, they boarded a ship and sailed out to a new destination.
The ship was caught by a storm and broken to pieces. The man, his wife, and each of his sons
were carried to a different place by the waves and the currents.
The man landed on an uninhabited island. He praised the Lord and lay down to sleep. In his
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
64 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---
sleep he heard a voice saying: 'If you dig a hole in the middle of the island, you will find your
reward for obeying your father.' The next morning, the man went to the middle of the island,
where he found a cave blocked by big boulders. With great trouble he lifted the boulders and
rolled them away. When he had opened the entrance of the cave, he discovered that it was
full of wealth: there came out hundreds of cows and sheep, fat and healthy. Inside he found
heaps of grain and money, silver and gold.
He built himself a house, and kraals for his beasts, and lived in peace. After many days a ship
called, with two merchants who bought his beef and mutton, and sold him their wares, and
went back to their country. Whenever the man wanted something, he opened his cave---to
find fruits and tools and many other things; but he never told his secret to anybody.
[Page [92] ]
The rumour spread that far away in the ocean there was a blessed island where there lived a
great chief. So many people came from abroad and begged him for permission to settle on his
island of plenty, and they all recognized him as their sultan. They tilled his fields and herded
his cattle. Traders arrived from foreign lands and built their towns on the shore, and did good
business. The island was at peace.
The sons of this man who had become king also settled on that blessed island, but they did
not meet because they came at different times, from different directions, and by that time
there were thousands of people living on that island. Later, they entered the service of the
sultan---their own father---but none of them recognized each other because many years had
passed, and they all thought the others had drowned.
One day a man called at the sultan's palace and was invited to spend the night there, but he
said his wife was still on the ship and he had to go back to her. The sultan, however,
persuaded him to stay and said he would send two of his trusted servants to fetch the good
lady from the ship and bring her to the palace to join them. The two servants (in fact his own
sons, whom he loved greatly, though he did not know then their identity) took a boat and
rowed to the ship. The good lady on the ship at once recognized them as her own sons.
Together they went to the palace, and their joy was indescribable. The woman's new husband
agreed to divorce her and was richly rewarded. He returned alone. And so the man who
obeyed his father's last wish was rewarded by seeing his family reunited in his palace.
III. 
The Rain maker
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
65 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---
Once upon a time there was a drought in the country. Some children were playing in the field;
they had mealie meal in a bag and firewood ready, but no water. An orphan boy came along
the road and they asked him if he had any water. He
[Page [93] ]
said: 'Promise that you will never tell anybody anything of what you see here today.' They
promised. Then he said: 'Bring all your pots and pans here and put them out in the field.'
They did so. Then the orphan boy went and stood in the middle of the field and looked up at
the sky. While he was gazing, they saw a cloud coming nearer and nearer, and finally, when
the cloud was just above them, it poured down all its rain and vanished. The children cooked
their porridge and ate it. They kept some of the food and brought it home for their parents.
The parents asked them where they had got water from, because not a drop of rain had fallen
on the village. But none of the children spoke a word about what they had seen. The next day
they met again on the same spot. The orphan boy arrived, told them to put their pots ready,
then he looked at the sky, there came another cloud and it rained heavily on them.
Now there was one boy who thought he was clever. He took a pot of water home with him
and gave it to his old mother. She in turn took some of it to a friend, who gave some to
another friend, until finally it reached the sultan, who called in his vizier and asked him:
'Where does this water come from?' The vizier answered: 'It comes from that poor orphan
boy.' The sultan ordered all the people in the town to dig wells; then he called in the orphan
boy who could make rain, and gave him jewels and golden ornaments, and went with him to
the town square where all the people were assembled.
The sultan ordered the boy: 'Now make rain for all of us.' The boy said: 'You must all come
very close,' but the people refused. Then he looked at the sky, and suddenly there appeared
clouds from all sides, in great multitude. Soon, the rain poured down, the thunder roared and
lightning flashed. And suddenly the boy rose up and flew away into the sky. When the rain
was over he was gone, for ever.
[Page [94] ]
IV. Muniri
A young man called Muniri inherited a hundred dinars from his father, who told him on his
deathbed: 'Go and acquire wisdom.' Muniri buried him, and then went to see a famous sage.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
66 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---
The sage said: 'I will give you a sentence that will save your life, for a hundred dinars.'
Muniri gave him his hundred dinars, and the wise man said: 'Evil of the Land, may Allah
destroy thee.'
Now, Muniri had no money left, so he decided to leave his native town and go out in search
of adventure. He travelled for many days until he arrived in a dry country. The land was so
arid that there was only one well in the whole country. On the bottom of that well there lived
a man-eating snake. Every year a child of the country had to be sacrificed to the snake. The
snake would eat the child, and in return would provide water for one year for all the people,
their cattle, their goats, camels and donkeys.
The day Muniri arrived was just the day when the annual human sacrifice had to take place,
and that year it was the sultan's turn to provide a child. Now the sultan had only one child, a
beautiful daughter, whom he loved more than the light in his eyes. He heard of the arrival of a
young man in the town and he called him to his court. The sultan told Muniri of the sad
circumstances of his country, and promised him a thousand golden dinars if he could fetch
water.
Muniri got a bucket and went to the well. He lowered it and it took a long time before it
reached the water. At that moment the giant snake woke up and roared: 'Evil of the land!' The
earth trembled, the sky trembled and the people trembled. Muniri remembered the formula
of the sage, and pronounced it: 'Evil of the land, may Allah destroy thee.' At that moment,
Allah heard the prayer and answered it. He threw the snake down into hell and banned it to
the deepest abyss.
[Page [95] ]
Muniri raised the bucket and it was full of water: It was the first time in memory that the
people had as much water as they wanted. The sultan gave Muniri not only a thousand golden
dinars but also his daughter in marriage. They lived in the palace together and loved one
another very much. The people rejoiced, they brought their fattest goats for Muniri and made
him sultan when the old sultan retired. And the water made the grass grow and the grass
made the cattle fat.
V.  
The devout slave girl
A man bought a slave girl of exceptional beauty for a hundred golden dinars. He took her
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
67 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
home, looked her over and said: 'Your eyes are so lovely that I fear they will keep me from
the worship of the Lord.' He went out and came back with food, and when he looked at her
again, he saw that she had taken out her eyes. He said: 'Look, what have you done! Have you
destroyed your eyes?' She said: 'Yes, master, I did not want their beauty to keep you from the
service of the Lord.' The man complained that she had destroyed the beauty for which he had
paid a hundred golden dinars. They went to bed and slept together.
In the middle of the night, the man heard a voice and saw an angel from heaven who spoke to
him: 'If you do not want to keep her because you believe her value is now less, the Lord has
decided to buy her from you, because for Him her value is now more.'
The next morning the man woke up and looked for the slave girl. She was dead. Under his
cushion he found one hundred brand-new golden dinars.
VI. 
Three words
A young man inherited from his father three thousand dollars and three words. His father told
him on his deathbed:
[Page [96] ]
'Remember these three words I am giving you, they will be useful one day.'
The young man lived on for a while until his father's three thousand dollars were all gone. He
decided to open a shop and sell his father's words. He sat down on a chair in his shop and
waited. Of course his customers found his words too highly priced, for he wanted two
thousand dollars for one word.
At last, one day, there entered a young man called Buruku who had inherited six thousand
dollars from his father. He agreed to pay two thousand dollars for the first word. So the
shop-owner told him: 'If you are travelling in Africa and you are overtaken by sunset, do not
travel another yard, but make your camp there while you can still see, and sleep there.'
Buruku agreed to pay another two thousand dollars, and the shop-owner told him his second
word of advice: 'If you see something serious, do not speak about it to anybody, for it will be
on your own head if you do.'
Finally, Buruku agreed to pay his father's last two thousand dollars, and the shop-owner gave
him his third word of advice: 'If someone invites you, decline politely twice, but the third
time you may accept and stay with him.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
68 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
Buruku now decided to go on a journey, so he went and bought a camel. On the market he
met a friend who wanted to join him. So they set out on their safari together. One evening the
sun was setting when they heard the noises of a town in the distance, and could see the lights.
Buruku, remembering the advice he had bought so dearly, decided to stay where he was and
to make camp there. His companion, however, saw no point in staying out there on the road
when he could have a good night in the town. So he decided to go on and reach the town the
same night; he said: 'We are practically there, I cannot understand why you do not wish to go
on for this short distance.' They parted company,
[Page [97] ]
and Buruku camped by the roadside. The next morning he rose early and set out, expecting to
find his friend in the town.
But half-way, he found him lying dead, and his camel was there too, also dead. He could see
the track of a 
nundu -snake in the sand. This snake had bitten both the man and his camel in
their heads, its teeth piercing the skulls.
Buruku exclaimed: 'Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Heavens, the Merciful, the
Compassionate! I have escaped death by His permission. I have already harvested great profit
for two thousand dollars!' He buried his companion, said the appropriate prayers, and went on
his way.
He arrived in the town and stayed there many days, doing his business. One day he met the
sultan of that country, who had heard of him, and as soon as they met they liked each other.
The sultan offered him the job of coffee-pourer at his court, and Buruku accepted. In this way
he was always close to the sultan, who trusted him in everything: he was even allowed in the
inner rooms of the palace where the sultan's wives lived.
One day the sultan took him out on a hunting expedition. Suddenly the sultan discovered that
he had forgotten his watch. So he sent Buruku back, saying: 'Go to my bedroom where my
youngest wife lives, and there, in a niche in the wall, you will find my watch.' Buruku said:
'At your service, my Lord,' and went.
He entered the inner rooms of the palace, and there, on the king's own bed, he found the
sultan's youngest wife and the vizier sleeping together. He said nothing, found the watch he
had been sent to get, and left the room without waking anyone. He found the sultan in the
forest, and handed him his watch. The sultan asked: 'What is the news from the palace?'
Buruku answered: 'All is well.'
The vizier had become increasingly jealous of the favours
[Page [98] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
69 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
which Buruku received from the sultan. It may also be that he realized Buruku must have
seen something. In any case he decided to get rid of Buruku. So he said to his servants: 'Dig a
deep pit. If anyone comes to inspect it, throw him down into it, even if it were myself.' The
servants said: 'At your service, sir'; and went to his estate to carry out his orders. When the
vizier thought that the pit might be ready, he told Buruku: 'Go and inspect a pit which my
servants are digging on my estate.' He said: 'At your service, sir.' On his way, Buruku met an
old friend of his father's who said: 'Come along to my house; we must have a long talk
together.'
Buruku declined politely, and declined again when the old gentleman invited him a second
time. But one does not often meet the son of an old friend, so the old man repeated his
invitation a third time, and this time Buruku accepted. He stayed there and forgot all about
the vizier's instructions. The vizier, in the meantime, thinking that Buruku would have
arrived on his estate, been thrown into the pit and buried, went there himself to see what was
going on. As soon as he arrived, the servants seized him and threw him down into the pit,
taking his orders literally.
Soon after, Buruku remembered the vizier's orders, took his leave from his father's friend and
departed hastily towards the vizier's estate.
When he arrived there, he asked for the pit that he was supposed to inspect, but it had already
been filled in. The 
nokora (headman of the servants) told him of the vizier's instructions, and
what had happened. Buruku perceived that the pit had been intended for him, and thanked
God for his salvation. He remembered the wise counsels he had bought so dearly, and he
realized that once again he owed his life to one of them.
Buruku returned to the city and the palace of the sultan.
[Page [99] ]
The sultan asked him what had happened, and Buruku told him his whole history. Of the
death of his father, the six thousand dollars, the three words of advice he had bought, of the
snake who killed his friend, of the vizier and how he had attempted to have him killed by his
servants, and how this vizier now lay buried at the bottom of the pit he had intended for
Buruku. The sultan was deeply disturbed by this story, and he said: 'Those words of advice
were indeed precious.' And he gave him twenty-six thousand dollars for them.
The sultan appointed Buruku vizier, and gave him the keys of his treasure-chambers and of
his gardens. And Buruku surveyed the work of all the slaves on the sultan's plantations and
kept the books of account.
The sultan gave him his own daughter in marriage, and their son became sultan after him. But
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
70 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---
Buruku never told the sultan that he had seen his wife sleeping with the vizier. For nobody
likes bad news.
VII. Ali, the Sword and the Secret Charm
An old man had a son called Ali. On his deathbed he gave him two things. One was a piece of
advice: 'Never sleep with a woman who is not your own before you have put this good sword
between you and her.'
The second thing he gave his son was the secret of a magical medicine, made of the leaves of
a certain tree. Whenever he ate it, it would make him invisible---but only during the night. At
dawn he would always resume his normal appearance. After this, the old man died.
Ali now set out on a journey in search of adventure. At nightfall, he saw a house in the forest,
and he knocked on the door to ask for a bed for the night. The door was opened by an old
woman, who was in reality a dangerous witch. She welcomed him smilingly, gave him food
and called in her
[Page [100] ]
beautiful daughter, whose name was Nahasia. She was lovely indeed!
After the meal the old woman retired discreetly, and Nahasia persuaded young Ali to share
her bed with her. As he lay there with her, he remembered what his father had said about the
sword and carried out the advice to the letter.
When he woke up in the middle of the night he saw to his horror that the lovely lady was
gradually changing into a python. Fortunately for Ali he had been sensible enough to take his
secret leaf, and so the serpent could not find him. He jumped up, took his sword and severed
the monster's head from its long and coiling body. He took his clothes and ran out of the
house. He had just escaped an evil spirit!
A short while later he was walking past the walls of the royal castle when he saw a cage being
lowered on a long rope. It landed on the ground, and out came a beautiful woman who was
the wife of the king---but Ali did not yet know that. He followed the woman (who took no
notice of him, for he was still invisible) to the house of a goldsmith. She knocked on the
door, and when the goldsmith appeared she begged him to lie with her. He answered that he
first wanted the head of the king. So she went back to the castle, and had herself hoisted up in
the cage. The servants whom she had bribed for the purpose found the cage heavier than
usual. They could not know that there was an invisible extra passenger. The queen went on to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
71 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---
the king's quarters, entered his bedroom and cut off his head. At least she thought it was the
king, her husband, but in reality it was her own brother who had arrived that same night and
to whom the king had offered his own bed. So she took her brother's head with her, down in
the cage, and Ali followed her every movement. When the queen arrived at the goldsmith's
house and knocked on the door, the goldsmith refused to open it. She said: 'I brought you the
king's head, was that not what you
[Page [101] ]
wanted?' He said: 'If you kill your own husband and king for one night with a goldsmith, how
can I be sure that you will not kill me for my gold?' The queen said: 'If you do not open the
door I will have it battered open by my servants.' This angered the goldsmith so much that he
rushed out and attacked the queen physically. In the ensuing scuffle he bit off her ear; but at
that moment Ali interfered and cut off his head. The queen fled in panic.
Ali was walking on along the walls of the castle, which was a huge building, when he saw
two thieves running out of a secret door. One was carrying two heavy bags, presumably full of
gold. The other one was carrying the king's only daughter---but Ali did not yet know who she
was. Angered at seeing a foul thief carrying off such a beautiful girl, Ali raised his father's
good sword and cut off the thief's head. The other thief escaped with the king's gold.
At that moment the first grey light of dawn filtered into the sky and Ali became visible. On
seeing that her rescuer was a handsome young man, the princess clung to him and said: 'I am
so afraid, please take me home and to my room!' Ali could not resist that request, and so he
carried her into the castle, along the secret passage, up to her room. There he wanted to leave
her as he was now visible and the palace population would soon begin to stir, but she
persuaded him to lie with her in her large state bed, as she was still trembling with fear (or so
she said). Ali agreed, but before he went to sleep he remembered to put his sword between
her and himself.
Later that morning the princess's lady-in-waiting came in and found them both soundly
asleep, lying there together. As she was a talkative woman, she went and told the princess's
aunt, a sister of the king. This noble lady went and had a look at the young couple herself.
While she was contemplating their innocent-looking sleep, she discovered
[Page [102] ]
the sword lying between the two, and she concluded that they must have behaved chastely.
In the meantime, the lady-in-waiting had told the king, who was enraged and ordered his
soldiers to go and arrest that impostor who slept with the princess.
So poor innocent Ali was dragged before the king, who told him: 'You are going to die before
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
72 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 74 ---
the sun sets. I will grant you one last wish.' Ali requested: 'May I sit in court today instead of
your majesty, and judge the people who come in?' This strange wish was granted: the king
rose and took a seat along the side wall of the hall, whereas Ali was led to the judge's chair.
The town-crier proclaimed in town that the king's court was in session.
The first plaintiff to enter was the old witch, who said: 'Someone killed my daughter last
night.' To the king's surprise Ali ordered the court's soldiers to arrest her. Then he ordered the
court's investigating officers to go to the woman's house and bring him anything of interest
they could find there. They went and came back with numerous tools of witchcraft, as well as
a beheaded python. Ali asked the woman: 'This is your daughter, is she not? She was a spirit,
who lived on human flesh, is that not so? She, a spirit, was your daughter because you
yourself are also a spirit, are you not?'
At that moment the queen rushed into the court-room and cried: 'My brother has been killed!
You, my husband, must find the culprit and punish him.' The king answered: 'Today I have no
authority. Ali is the judge.' To the king's surprise, Ali immediately ordered the soldiers to
arrest the queen, and charged her with killing her own brother in cold blood, intending to kill
the king himself. The king was greatly upset and the queen cried that such a one-day judge
could never prove such an outrageous accusation.
Ali, however, quietly ordered the court's investigating
[Page [103] ]
officers to go to the outer wall of the castle and bring him what they would find there. They
went and came back with the cage, and Ali reminded the queen that she had used this
hoisting vehicle for leaving and entering the castle, having travelled twice each way, during
that night. The king was greatly surprised at the incredible knowledge of his newly-
appointed cadi, but Ali told him that this was only the beginning. He sent the servants to the
house of the goldsmith, telling them to bring back all the unusual things they found there. To
the king's ever-mounting surprise they came back with two heads, one of which he
recognized to his astonishment as that of his own brother-in-law. The other one had a human
ear clenched between its teeth, which Ali correctly identified as one of the queen's own ears.
At that moment a man entered the courtroom whose gold- embroidered garments showed that
he was a person of affluence. He complained bitterly that while he was travelling on business
during the night with his best friend, the latter had suddenly been killed, and now he
demanded that the culprit be found and punished. Ali recognized him as the one of the two
thieves who escaped that night, and so, to the king's increasing amazement, he ordered the
soldiers to arrest the man, and the court's servants were sent to search his house. They came
back with two bags, and the king's astonishment when he found that the contents were the
gold and precious stones from his own treasure-chamber was indescribable.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
73 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---
The judge then ordered the princess to be brought, and asked her if she recognized the man.
She began to tremble and told the king and his court, to everyone's astonishment, how during
the night she had been lifted from her bed by a thief and been carried away through a secret
corridor where her abductor had joined the man who was now there, dressed
[Page [104] ]
in good clothes, but then carrying the two big bags which were also present in the courtroom.
At that moment the king's sister entered the courtroom and told the king: 'Do not kill that
young man, he did nothing reproachable with the princess.' And to the king's amazement she
told him of the sword and where she had seen it.
By that time it was late afternoon. Ali rose, bowed, and said that since the sun was setting,
and since no one received gratitude for his deeds in this world, he was now ready to die.
At that, the king rose too and said: 'I am ashamed that so many things appear to go on in this,
my own castle, of which I have no knowledge. You, Ali, appear to have all the knowledge a
good judge requires. I therefore revoke my sentence, and instead of being executed, you are
appointed my chief cadi, as from tomorrow. As for these three people, the witch, the thief and
even the queen---hangman, take them away and execute them. And now, Ali, I give you to
my only daughter as a husband, for life.'
VIII. The Island of the Snake and the Land of Gold
An old man lived in the bush near a certain town. He was very poor and had only one
daughter. One day he felt he was dying, so he called his daughter and told her: 'We stem from
a people who lived in a land of gold---everything was gold there. But many years ago, when
you were only a baby, there was a great famine; you were entrusted to me, and I was sent to
find food for you in another country. You are not really my daughter but ...' The old man
wanted to say more, but at that moment he died.
The girl buried him and lived in that house for some time. One day, the sultan, coming back
from a hunting expedition, saw this hut and told his servant to go and ask for water
[Page [105] ]
there as he was very thirsty. The servant knocked on the door, the girl appeared, and the
sultan saw she was very lovely. Since sultans can get what they want, he decided to marry
her; so the girl became queen.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
74 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---
One night when they were together, the young queen told him what her father had told her of
the Land of Gold, and she added: 'I should like to go and see that land one day.' The sultan
agreed and ordered a ship to be made ready. They sailed for many days until they landed on
an unknown island. The queen said she wanted to walk alone, and she strayed into a forest.
Suddenly she saw a long snake that raised its head, saying in her language: 'What do you
want?' The girl told her story, and the snake said: 'I will help you, on condition that you give
me your first baby and a hundred pots of honey.' The young queen agreed, and the snake told
her how to reach the Land of Gold. It also promised that it would cause the king of that
country to believe that she was his lost daughter.
So she boarded the ship again and they sailed on until they reached the Land of Gold. They
fired their guns, and the king of the land ordered his vizier to go and see who it was. The
vizier ordered a launch, and was rowed to the ship. He returned to the king with the news that
his daughter had returned after many years. She was now a grown-up woman and was married
to a sultan. They had arrived in a wooden ship.
The king was overjoyed on hearing this, and at once made preparations for a royal welcome.
Guns were fired and boats sent out draped with flags and streamers and burgees. The sultan
and his queen were rowed in state to the stairs of the palace, which was built of gold: the
floors, the pillars, the roof, all were pure gold. And all the ships in the harbour were made of
gold.
The king embraced the young queen, in whom he believed
[Page [106] ]
he recognized his daughter. He took a liking to her, and loved her the more the longer she
stayed with him. They stayed with the king of the golden country for a whole year, and in that
time the young queen gave birth to a son.
At last it was time to go back home. The king was deeply distressed at seeing his newly
regained daughter depart with her lovely baby. He wanted the sultan's wooden ship, for he
had never seen one. In exchange he offered a ship made of pure gold, which the sultan
accepted. The sultan then sailed out with his wife and son, and all that night they could see
behind them the glow of gold: the golden streets, the golden roofs and golden minarets which
gleamed in the starlight.
At the request of the queen they landed on the island of the snake, but she had never told her
sultan what happened there. She insisted on walking in the forest alone with her baby, and,
she said the one hundred pots of honey she had brought must be placed on the edge of the
forest. This was done, and she went into the forest. She met the snake and told it that the pots
of honey were all there. Then she kissed her baby and gave it to the snake. The snake ate the
child: it went in through the mouth and came out again through the nose. This happened
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
75 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---
again and again. The queen stood there looking on quietly, but the tears were streaming down
her face. The snake took pity on her and said: 'All right, you may keep your baby. I will just
eat honey. This little boy will one day be king of three countries: your husband's, your
father's, and this island which I give him. But every year you must come and bring me a
hundred pots of honey. You will have many children.' The snake disappeared and the young
queen went home happily with her baby. She had many more babies, as her husband was
always good to her.
[Page [107] ]
2. THE MYSTERIES OF THE GRAVE
I. Kibwanasi
Kibwanasi made a vow: 'In the year in which I beget a child, I shall be buried, even if I am
still healthy. The next year, his wife bore him a child, but Kibwanasi had forgotten his vow.
However, one day he fell ill, and his illness became worse every day. Then he remembered
his vow, and told his relatives that he would soon be buried. He lay down, they washed him,
put his shroud on and buried him.
In the distant land where he now arrived, he saw people washing clothes, and others who just
stood there.
He saw women fetching water and carrying it home, and other women who just stood by.
Kibwanasi wandered through that land until he met the king, and asked him the meaning of
what he had seen. The king said: 'The men who wash their clothes were clean and tidy during
their lives; those who do nothing were dirty. The women who fetched water and took it home
were the ones who during their lives worked and shared things with their neighbours. Those
who did nothing never shared. And now you may go back to earth.' And suddenly, Kibwanasi
found himself walking towards his own village. His people asked him: 'Have you come back?'
He said: 'I have come back.' 'What did you see?' Kibwanasi then told them everything he had
seen. Since that time the people wash their clothes and the women fetch water and share it
with their neighbours.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
76 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---
II. Isa
A man had three sons, and decided to divide his money among them during his life-time,
because he foresaw that they would otherwise quarrel over it. The two older sons
[Page [108] ]
received ninety-nine rupees each, but for the youngest there were only eight rupees left. This
young man, Isa was his name, asked his father why he received so little. The father answered:
'Ali receiving is from God, He will give you sustenance. Use your common sense.' Isa then
decided to set out on a safari to try his luck. He asked his father's blessing and departed. He
travelled for many days, until he came to a cemetery. There he saw a group of men who put
down a dead body and went away, leaving the body lying there. Isa called after them, saying:
'Why is this man not buried?' One of the men replied: 'There is no money for a burial.' Isa
said: 'My father told me to use my common sense, and my common sense tells me that it is
not proper to abandon a dead man along the road. Go and bury this man, that his soul may
have peace.' The men did so, and Isa paid what he possessed to give the dead man a proper
funeral.
After that, he continued his safari until he came to a river. There he found a man washing
clothes, and as soon as the man saw him, he called him: 'Isa, Isa, come here, I have an
important message for you. Travel along this river until you come to a city. In that city there
lives a sultan who is gravely ill. All the learned doctors have been called to his bedside, but
in vain. Go to the palace and say that you can cure the sultan. Here is a medicine that will
restore his health.' Isa did as the washerman told him and he was admitted to the ailing
sultan. He administered the washerman's medicine, and to everybody's surprise the sultan
rose from his couch; his disease had vanished. The sultan was overjoyed at this, and gave his
daughter in marriage to Isa, making him his successor. Later, Isa again met the man who was
washing clothes by the river. He said: 'You are a good man, for you gave all your money to
redeem me and pay for a proper funeral. Without you I would still be lying rotting on the
ground.'
[Page [109] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
77 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
III. The Gravedigger
In the old days each town had its own gravedigger. In a certain town a gravedigger found a
large stone. He took the stone to the sultan's court and it was there handed over to the sultan.
At that moment, all of a sudden money poured from the stone. The sultan was overjoyed and
said: 'You, gravedigger, are a good man, you are honest and God has blessed you. I will give
you my daughter in marriage.' The gravedigger married the sultan's daughter and later he
became sultan. And all because he was a good gravedigger.
IV. The Poor Man and his Son
A poor man was dying and told his son: 'When I am dead you must take the seeds of
pumpkins and plant them on my grave.' The father died and the son did everything exactly as
his father had told him. The pumpkins grew plump and when one was ripe, the son took it
home with him and cut it open. To his surprise, the pumpkin was entirely filled with silver
coins. And so the son became rich because he followed the advice of his father.
Now the sultan heard of this one day, and sent words to the young man that he must give his
money to him. As soon as the silver coins were handed over to the sultan, they turned into
snakes, so that the sultan was enraged. He sent the snakes back, expecting they would bite
the poor man's son. But as soon as the snakes arrived in his house they turned into silver
coins again, so he could now enjoy his wealth in peace.
V.  
Rising from the Grave (Kutoka Kaburini)
Once upon a time there was a married couple who lived in peace and loved each other dearly.
One day the husband said: 'I love you so much, that on the day I die I will come out of my
grave and appear to you.' The wife promised him
[Page [110] ]
too that she would come back to him after her death. After many years the husband fell ill
and died. Neighbours and relatives gathered and wept bitterly. The wife too cried, and
remembered the promises they had made to each other. The dead husband was duly buried,
but after the funeral the wife of the deceased refused to go home. She stayed and lingered at
the graveyard. The relatives returned home, but she remained near the grave, singing softly to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
78 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
herself. Suddenly she saw the soil of the grave splitting open: her dead husband rose up and
came towards her. She was overjoyed on seeing him back, and they went home together.
Now the mother of that woman lived in the same house, and she was mourning her beloved
son-in-law, when suddenly, to her dismay, she heard her daughter chattering and laughing in
the conjugal bedroom. The old lady went and reprimanded her daughter, saying: 'Your
husband has died, and now you are laughing as if you are glad!' Her daughter said: 'He is not
dead, he is here!' The mother entered the room, and there she saw the man she knew was
dead, standing near her daughter.
Not long after that the daughter fell ill and died. All the people of the village cried, but the
husband did not. He was silent. After the funeral he stayed on near the grave, singing quietly
and reciting poetry. And lo! the sand of the grave parted and there appeared his wife: so they
went home together. That evening the mother came along and saw them there, sitting
together, and they were all very happy .
[Page [111] ]
6 Stories of Wit & Wisdom
[Page [112] ]
I. THE RUSES OF ABU NUW ASI, COURT POET
I. Abu Nuwasi builds a house
One day Abu Nuwasi built a house of two storeys. He sold the upper half to a merchant and
lived in the lower half himself, for a long time, very peacefully. One day he wanted to go and
live somewhere else, so he asked the merchant if he was interested in buying the ground
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
79 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
floor. The merchant, however, was not interested. Abu Nuwasi said nothing, went away and
came back with a dozen labourers. He warned the merchant: 'I am having my house
demolished, for I have no more use for it, so hold on to your own and don't say I didn't tell
you.' So the merchant agreed to buy the ground floor for the price Abu Nuwasi wanted.
II. Abu Nuwasi dies, and rises
One day Abu Nuwasi was sitting on the branch of a tree; busy sawing through it near the
stem. A man passed along on the road and said: 'Be careful, as soon as you have sawn through
that branch you will fall.'
A few moments later it happened. Abu Nuwasi rolled on the ground, then scrambled to his
feet and said to the man: 'You have great knowledge! Now tell me, when am I going to die?'
The man said: 'I do not know.' 'Yes you do. You can forecast the future, you possess
knowledge of
[Page [113] ]
destiny.' So the man said (to be rid of him): 'One day, when your donkey stumbles three
times, you will die!' Many days later, Abu Nuwasi was riding an old donkey. It stumbled, and
it stumbled again. When it stumbled a third time, Abu Nuwasi dismounted, said his prayers,
lay down and pulled his hood over his head, like someone dying. He had been lying there
three days in that position, when an ambassador from a foreign country passed along on his
way to the court of the Caliph Haruni Rashidi. When he saw someone lying on the ground
there, he dismounted and called out: 'You there, can you tell me the way to the Caliph's
palace?' Abu Nuwasi peeped through his hood and said: 'When I was alive, it used to be past
yonder baobab tree.' 'Are you not alive then?' 'No, I have died.'
The ambassador proceeded to the court, and when he was received by the Caliph, he told him
that he had asked and received directions from a dead man. Haruni Rashidi perceived at once
that this must have been Abu Nuwasi acting out a new role. He realized that only a counter
trick could rouse Abu Nuwasi from his 'death'-sleep, and so he sent out his royal trumpeter
with proper instructions. The trumpeter went to where Abu Nuwasi was lying and blew his
trumpet three times. Abu Nuwasi asked him what business he had disturbing his peaceful
death, and the trumpeter replied: 'This is the day of resurrection, and the successor [the
Caliph] of the Holy Prophet summons you to his court.' Abu Nuwasi said: 'Praise be to Allah,'
rose, and followed the trumpeter.
When he arrived, the Caliph asked him what had caused his death. When Abu Nuwasi had
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
80 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---
told him the whole story, the Caliph said: 'That conceited man caused you a lot of trouble.'
'Oh no, he was very useful to me, for now I know what the other world looks like.' 'Well,
what is there to see?' 'Nothing, absolutely nothing, the only thing I experienced
[Page [114] ]
there was hunger.' The Caliph took the hint and ordered a good meal for him.
III. Abu Nuwasi and the two thieves
One day Abu Nuwasi bought a sheep at the market and took it home with him. Then a thief
jumped out of the bushes and started beating the old gentleman with a stick. While Abu
Nuwasi defended himself, another thief appeared and ran away with the sheep. Then the first
thief vanished too. When he had recovered from the beating, Abu Nuwasi got up, dusted
himself, said Allahu Alimu ['God is knowing'], and went home.
There he devised a stratagem for revenge. Near the place where the two thieves operated
there was a forest, and in the forest there was a baobab tree. Abu Nuwasi went up to the tree,
climbed on to one of its lowest branches and reached for one of the gourds. He cut a hole in
it, pushed some gold coins in the hole and closed it, taking care that the fruit remained fixed
on the tree. He did the same with several other calabashes, and then climbed down and
placed armed guards round the tree. He had his bed placed right under it, and lay down on it.
Soon the two thieves arrived on the scene and asked him why he was sleeping under that
tree. He replied that he was guarding his gold tree. 'Your what?' 'My tree with the gold-
bearing fruit that I have inherited from my father.' 'Sell it to us.' 'I cannot sell it, it is family
property.' The thieves went away, rounded up a hundred head of cattle, then came back and
said: 'We want to buy this tree for a hundred cows, but you must first prove to us that the
fruits contain gold.' Abu Nuwasi agreed, and instructed one of his guards to climb up and cut
down some of the fruit from the lowest branch. The thieves cut open the calabashes and
found lovely golden dinars in them. So they bought the tree, and together with
[Page [115] ]
his guards, Abu Nuwasi drove the cattle to his house. When it was harvesting time, the two
thieves climbed the tree with big knives and cut down all the fruit. They were enraged not to
find a single coin in any of them, and they decided to go to Abu Nuwasi and claim their
cattle.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
81 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---
Now Abu Nuwasi was a man of great knowledge, which had enabled him to read in the stars
that they were coming to take their revenge, so he took timely measures.
He went into the bush and caught two gazelles of identical size and shape. Next, he
slaughtered an ox and filled its bladder with blood. Then he told his wife: 'Put on a metal
breast-plate, such as warriors wear, hang the bladder full of blood in front and put on your
usual dress over that. When the two thieves arrive, tell them I am in the fields, and when
they have gone to find me there, cook the ox and prepare a good meal.' He locked up one of
the two gazelles and took the other one with him.
Soon the two thieves found him in the fields, and claimed their cattle. He said: 'All right, all
right, but let us first go to my house and have a good meal.' Then he addressed the gazelle,
saying: 'You, my messenger; go and tell my wife to cook a good meal for my guests.' He
released the gazelle, which ran away into the bush and was never seen again. They walked up
to Abu Nuwasi's house and when they arrived there, the meal was ready. Abu Nuwasi started
rebuking his wife, saying the meal was not good enough for such distinguished guests. The
wife talked back, they started shouting, Abu Nuwasi worked up a temper, saying: 'I will teach
you manners, you cheeky woman!' He drew his dagger and thrust it into her breast. Blood
poured out, and the wife fell flat on the floor. Then Abu Nuwasi went to his cupboard, took
out a stick and touched his wife's breast with it, mumbling words in a strange tongue. Then he
said: 'Now rise again woman, rise from the dead, I will forgive you.' The
[Page [116] ]
wife rose up and the two thieves were deeply impressed. They said: 'We want to buy that
clever gazelle-messenger of yours, and also your stick that wakes up the dead. We will give
you a thousand dollars for it.' Abu Nuwasi agreed, and the thieves went away with the magic
stick (or so they thought), and also with the other gazelle which Abu Nuwasi produced from
where it had been locked up. The thieves did not appreciate that it was not the same animal.
On their way the two thieves started arguing about the problem of how to share out their new
acquisitions. They quarrelled ever more heatedly, until one of the two took out his big knife
and stabbed the other one in the breast. Blood poured from the wound, and he fell dead on
the spot. The murderer regretted having killed his comrade, took the stick, and touched the
dead body with it, but nothing happened---for a corpse is a corpse. He then realized that he
had forgotten to buy the formula as well, so he went back to Abu Nuwasi, to be taught the
magic words.
Abu Nuwasi had foreseen that one thief would come back, so he had called the cadi's
catchpoles and asked them to hide. When the thief arrived, he told him what had happened
and claimed the right to the formula which, he said, was part of the magic that belonged with
the reviving stick. As soon as he had finished his story, the cadi's officers emerged and
arrested him. They had heard everything. They found the corpse and the thief was hanged for
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
82 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---
murder. Never harm a clever man .
IV. Abu Nuwasi obtains a donkey
The Caliph Haruni Rashidi was very fond of his favourite poet Abu Nuwasi, and liked seeing
him every day. One day Abu Nuwasi wanted to buy a donkey but he had no money, so he
went to the inner room where the Caliph resided. The doorkeeper, who was jealous of the
many favours the
[Page [117] ]
Caliph showered on Abu Nuwasi, told him: 'I will only let you in if you promise to share with
me whatever you will get from the Caliph, and I want this from you in writing.' So they
exchanged documents, and Abu Nuwasi was allowed to enter. He did not greet the Caliph,
and this lack of courtesy did not fail to anger Haruni Rashidi who asked him. 'What do you
want?' Abu Nuwasi said: 'I want a hundred strokes with a stick.' The Caliph forgot his
annoyance, so surprised was he. But Abu Nuwasi insisted and Haruni began to beat him---but
very gently, for he liked his court poet too much. At the fiftieth stroke, Abu Nuwasi said:
'Wait, I need a rest.' The Caliph stopped, and Abu Nuwasi produced the contract he had just
made with the doorkeeper. When the Caliph read it, he was enraged. At once, he called in his
guards and told them to arrest the doorkeeper and give him fifty strokes. And so he was
punished. 
Never envy a favourite of the emperor: you cannot win .
The Caliph then asked Abu Nuwasi what the real purpose of his visit had been, and he told
him that he needed a donkey. So the Caliph gave him money for a donkey, and Abu Nuwasi
went and bought a nice white donkey and rode home on it. He grew so fond of it that he kept
it in his bedroom. One day his neighbour called, because he wanted to borrow the donkey.
Abu Nuwasi did not want to part with his dear donkey, so he said: 'The donkey is not here.'
At that moment the donkey brayed and the neighbour said: 'Wasn't that your donkey?' Abu
Nuwasi retorted: 'Do you believe me or a donkey?' Did you come for my donkey or for his
braying? Listen. I can bray better than donkeys: Hee haa, hee haa ...' 
Never try to borrow a
man's dearest possession. He will invent anything to keep it .
V.  Pans proliferate
One day the donkey was thirsty, so Abu Nuwasi went to his
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
83 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---
[Page [118] ]
neighbour and said: 'Could you lend me a pan?' After a week the neighbour asked for his pan
back. Abu Nuwasi returned it, and lo! there was a tiny little pan inside it. The neighbour said:
'That small one is not mine!' 'Oh yes,' said Abu Nuwasi, 'you see, I am no thief, and during
the week, your pan gave birth, so I return the mother with the young. The neighbour praised
Abu Nuwasi very highly for his honesty and marvelled how blessed his house was, 'in which
even the pans drop young'.
A little later Abu Nuwasi came along to borrow the pan again, and it was readily given. He
kept it for more than a month, and when his neighbour inquired after it, Abu Nuwasi said:
'Alas, it has died.' The neighbour was furious, saying: 'I refuse to believe you! Pans made of
solid copper do not die.' To which Abu Nuwasi retorted: 'You did not refuse to believe me
when I told you it had given birth.' But the neighbour had become suspicious and took Abu
Nuwasi to court. The judge ruled: 'All creatures that give birth, die.'
One day a wealthy man came to consult Abu Nuwasi about his wife, and the wise poet told
him that she committed adultery. The wealthy man refused to believe this. But when he went
home he found his wife in bed with another man. He was furious, and decided to punish Abu
Nuwasi: 'He knows too much---he must be guilty himself.' So he sent Abu Nuwasi a large
wooden box, and when Abu Nuwasi opened it and looked inside, the rich man appeared
suddenly, pushed him in and closed the lid. Then he had the box thrown into the river. But it
floated and landed on the bank. There, the neighbour found it and wondered what was inside.
He opened the lid, and Abu Nuwasi jumped out, covering his face with his cloak and saying:
'Shsh, I must not be seen, for this box will be carried into the room of the
[Page [119] ]
wealthy man's daughter, who loves me.' The neighbour jumped into the box and said: 'I want
to make love to her,' and he lay down. Abu Nuwasi said 'All right', closed the lid, and went
away.
VI. The invention of kites
The wealthy man was angry with Abu Nuwasi and complained to the Caliph about his
behaviour. Hoping to sow discord between Abu Nuwasi and his protector he lied: 'Abu
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
84 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---
Nuwasi told me he can build a house in the sky, in three days.' So the Caliph summoned Abu
Nuwasi and told him: 'I want you to build a house in the sky in three days. If you fail you will
be expelled from the country.'
Abu Nuwasi said nothing. He went and cut sticks of bamboo and split them. Then he took the
thinnest paper he could find and made a huge kite, in the form of a house but without a roof.
He tied small bells, of the type dancers wear on their ankles, to the four corners of the kite.
He painted doors and windows on the kite, in bright colours, and little men.
Then he bought a long yarn and waited.
The next day he was lucky: Allah sent him a strong but steady wind. So he flew his kite and
tied the end of the yarn to a treestump in the fields. He went to the Caliph and said: 'If you
look out of your window, what do you see?' The Caliph went out into the garden and looked
up into the sky. And there, far away and high up, he saw a house. He did not know that it was
kept in position by a steady wind; in those days kites were unknown. When he saw that the
emperor was astonished, Abu Nuwasi said: 'The roof is not finished yet; my men are still
busy hammering away, you can hear the noise.' The Caliph saw little men on the house and
heard the bells, so he thought the men were hammering away. Then Abu Nuwasi said: 'I am a
few roofbeams short. Could
[Page [120] ]
you send some men up with a load of timber?' The Caliph agreed and sent some men with
Abu Nuwasi. They came to the treestump, and Abu Nuwasi said: 'This is the only path
leading up to my skyhouse.' The men saw the thin thread and decided they could not walk up
it with the heavy beams. They went back and told the Caliph what they had seen: 'We cannot
walk on a thread into the sky.' The Caliph said: 'No one can.' Then Abu Nuwasi asked: 'Why
did you order me to build a house in the sky?' The Caliph had nothing to say.
No one is allowed to go skywards before his appointed time. And only our virtues can carry
us there.
VII. 
Eggs and pebbles
There were many important men at court who hated Abu Nuwasi, and one day they
succeeded in persuading the Caliph's youngest son that he should suggest to the emperor a
way of beating Abu Nuwasi at his own game. They did some hard thinking together and at
last decided that the next morning each of them would bring an egg. So, that morning, the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
85 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---
young prince announced that all the gentlemen at court were more clever than Abu Nuwasi
because they could all lay eggs and he could not. So the Caliph said: 'I want to see that: I
order everyone in this room to lay an egg now.' Each one of the dignitaries produced an egg.
The Caliph turned to Abu Nuwasi and said: 'Where is your usual cunning, why can't you lay
eggs like everybody else?' To this Abu Nuwasi replied: 'You see, sire, all of them here are
laying hens, whereas I am the rooster ...'
Instead of taking the lesson, the notables were even more incensed and invented a new
stratagem. They went and told the Caliph: 'Abu Nuwasi has been boasting again. He says he
can do anything. They added a suggestion of what the Caliph might order Abu Nuwasi to do.
The Caliph, who liked a
[Page [121] ]
good laugh, agreed, and as soon as Abu Nuwasi arrived, he told him: 'Go and sew my
millstone. It is broken in half, please sew it up for me.' To everyone's surprise, Abu Nuwasi
replied: 'That is an easy matter, sire, just have the pieces placed on the veranda and I will
come back in a moment with some yarn and mend it.' The whole court was wondering: 'Can a
stone be sewn?' A moment later, Abu Nuwasi came back with a basketful of pebbles. He
went to the young prince and asked him politely: 'While I go and look for my stone-needle,
would you be kind enough 
to roll my thread for me? He went away again and came back
with a stone that had a hole in it, and asked the prince: 'When you have some thread ready,
will you put it through my needle for me so that I can sew this millstone? My eyes are not as
good as they used to be, you see ...'
VIII. 
The Seven Thieves
One day Abu Nuwasi was carrying a sheep which he had bought from a farmer, and was now
taking away to be eaten. There were seven robbers in the bush who decided to rob him of his
sheep, so one of them emerged from the bush and said: 'What now, old man, you are carrying
a pig!' Abu Nuwasi said: 'But it is a sheep!' 'Old man, perhaps you are getting old!' He
vanished, and the second thief appeared and said: 'What now, old man, are you becoming a
sinner in your old age? Slaughtering a pig for food, and you know the Koran forbids it!' And
each thief in turn talked to him in a similar manner until they thought they had convinced
him. Finally they all appeared together, and said: 'Old man, we have decided to help you. We
will eat this pig for you, since we are Christians, and we will give you the money for it. Just
stay here until we come back.'
Abu Nuwasi knew very well that he was too old to fight for his sheep and that they never
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
86 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---
intended to return, so he let
[Page [122] ]
them have the sheep, but he decided to take his revenge. He said: 'All right, you may have it,
but why don't you come with me to my house, my wife will cook it for you.' The thieves
accepted the invitation and went with him to his country house.
His wife prepared a grand meal, and the thieves ate as much as they could. Abu Nuwasi had
told his wife to salt the meat well, and the thieves became very thirsty. They wanted water,
but Abu Nuwasi said he had only wine to drink: since they were Christians it was no sin for
them. The thieves drank all the wine and grew very drunk, so they sank in a deep sleep.
Then Abu Nuwasi got up, took a branding iron, laid it in the fire and branded each of the
thieves on his back. Then he went to the Caliph and said: 'My slaves are so unruly, I cannot
control them, they have even eaten my sheep.' The Caliph sent ten soldiers to arrest the
slaves. The thieves woke up and said: 'We are no slaves, we are free men!' 'Oh no,' said Abu
Nuwasi, 'you have my brand on your backs.' So the slaves, as they had now become, were
taken to the Caliph, who said he could use them for his plantations. So Abu Nuwasi sold the
thieves for a good price.
2. A WOMAN FOR A HUNDRED COWS
Once upon a time a man and his wife lived in the land of Pate. They possessed a hundred
cows and one son. Not one calf more than these cows, and only one son, Ali.
The son grew up, and when he was a man, his parents died. He mourned their death for the
appropriate number of days; then he felt lonely. He began to long for a life- companion. As he
did not know how to go about this, he consulted his neighbour. The neighbour said: 'Leave it
to
[Page [123] ]
me, I will find a wife for you---that is what you want---I have experience in such things.' The
neighbour then went to the city and approached certain men of influence, who informed him
that there lived in that city a wealthy man, Abudallah, who possessed more than five
thousand cows and one nubile daughter, Fatuma.
Ali's neighbour then visited the rich man and asked him about the bride-price. He said: 'I
want a hundred cows for her, not a calf less. I have the most desirable daughter of the city.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
87 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
The man from the village agreed and took his leave. When he returned he told Ali: 'I found
the best bride in the city for you. Her father wants a hundred cows bride-price for her, not one
calf less. His name is Abudallah and he owns more than five thousand head of cattle. Fatuma
is his only daughter.' Ali said: 'Good, I thank you for your message. Will you go for me and
tell the father that I accept, and let him fix the date for the wedding.' The neighbour said: 'If
God wills.' The next day he went and came back, saying: 'Bwana Abudallah is expecting you
next new moon with a hundred cows.' The morning after the new moon had appeared, Ali set
out, driving all his cows to the city. When they arrived, the cowherds of Abudallah drove the
cows into the rich man's cattle kraals, together with the thousands he already had.
Abudallah received his daughter's bridegroom royally: he gave him fine clothes to wear and
an abundance of food. The wedding took place with great pomp and the couple stayed in the
rich man's mansion for several weeks. After that, Ali had to take his wife to his home, and
her father gave them ample provisions. They arrived, and some days passed during which
they ate the provisions. After that Fatuma said: 'Where are all your cattle? Can't we have
some milk and meat?' Ali said: 'I didn't have one calf more than the hundred cows for which I
acquired you. I will now go to the
[Page [124] ]
neighbours and milk their cows for them. And you must go to the forest and collect firewood.'
So the young man who was once the proud owner of a hundred cows became a milker, and
the daughter of the wealthy Abudallah had to carry loads of dirty branches on her back.
One day a lecherous man saw her in the forest and made propositions to her. The proud
Fatuma, instead of contemptuously refusing, had grown so hungry that she said: Come back
with a sheep and I will agree. So the sinful man went to the village, collected all his money,
bought a sheep that had just been slaughtered and carried it to Ali's house. He gave it to
Fatuma who had just arrived with her load, and asked her if she would now agree? Fatuma
answered: 'Come back tonight. I must first cook the sheep and prepare a good meal.'
The adulterous man had just left when Abudallah arrived. His daughter had invited him for
the night. She welcomed him and said: 'Sit down, I am just preparing a good dinner.' So
Abudallah sat down on the baraza [veranda] and waited. A short while afterwards, Ali
arrived with some milk he had earned as his salary. He welcomed Abudallah and went into
the house. There he asked his wife if she had anything to treat their guest to? Fatuma said: 'I
am cooking a sheep.' Her husband was speechless with surprise, for he knew that neither of
them owned a single sheep---nor was there any money to buy one with. But Fatuma
forestalled his questions saying: 'Go and sit with father, I shall explain it all tonight.'
When night was falling, the man who desired the favours of other men's wives arrived, and
was surprised to find the old man and the young one sitting on the baraza, eating the sheep.
They invited him to eat a piece of meat with them. So he sat down, for he had not yet eaten.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
88 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
At that moment Fatuma appeared and surprised everyone
[Page [125] ]
by saying: 'You are all fools, for you have sold something precious for something cheap.'
Greatly irritated, the men demanded an explanation, and Fatuma said to the man who had
wished to seduce her: 'You sold today's food for something you hadn't yet got. If you still
want it, ask my husband here if you may have it.' And the adulterer sneaked away, for he was
a poltroon. Then Fatuma told her husband: 'You could have had a village bride for ten or
twelve cows, who would willingly have tilled the soil for you and grown maize and cassava,
which I never learned how to do. But you sold all you owned for a wife who cannot even
make pots.' And to her father she said: 'You had uncountable cows, but only one daughter. Yet
you sold her away into poverty.' The old man saw that she was right. He took his daughter and
her husband home with him, and there they lived for many years in joy and peace. Greetings
to you, listener.
3. MUTANABBI, THE OLD SCHOLAR
I. 
Zubeida
One day, Mutanabbi decided to woo the most beautiful girl in the city. On his way to her
house he overtook a young man and asked him: 'Young man, where are you going?' The
young man replied: 'I am going to woo Zubeida, the most beautiful woman in the city.'
Mutanabbi said: 'I've just passed by her house and I saw her kiss a rich man.' The young man
decided that he had no chance and went back. Mutanabbi went on to the girl's house and
proposed to her. Her father decided that he would like to have the famous poet for a
son-in-law and gave her in marriage to Mutanabbi.
Later, when the young man learned that Mutanabbi had become the husband of the desirable
Zubeida, he went to
[Page [126] ]
him and asked: 'Did you not tell me that she was kissing a rich man?' Mutanabbi replied:
'That is right, but you did not ask me who that man was, and, you see, he was her father.'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
89 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
II. Believe what you see
One day Mutanabbi decided to go and woo another lovely lady. He went to her house and
found a number of hopeful suitors gathered there on the baraza . Just at that moment one of
the suitors was on the point of going in to propose, and Mutanabbi asked him with a voice so
loud that the lady, behind the curtain, could hear him: 'When you have married that lady, what
will you do with her?' The young man, standing near the curtain, replied: 'I will lock away all
the food and all the money and give her just a little every day. I will lock my wife up in her
room and bolt the door as well as the shutters so that she will not have a chance even to look
at other men.' Mutanabbi replied in sonorous tones: 'I will not act like that. On the contrary, I
will give her all the keys of all the doors and cupboards, I will give her all the money I have,
and I will let her go out whenever she wishes.' The lady was standing right behind the curtain
during this conversation, and pondered in her heart upon the words of those two gentlemen,
the one she wanted to have and the one who would let her have what she wanted. She
decided that if she married the old man she would have plenty of food, money and freedom,
so that she could still go out and grant her favours to the young man. So she announced that
she would marry Mutanabbi.
The old scholar took her to his house, and the next morning when he went out to do his
business, he locked her up, carefully closing cupboards and shutters, and saying: 'Believe
what you see, do not believe what you hear.'
[Page [127] ]
III. The Bread Tree
One day Mutanabbi wanted to seduce a woman who was very beautiful. She asked him:
'What will you give me?' He said: 'I will give you something that you must carefully look
after; it will grow into a tree which will produce loaves of bread.' The woman believed him
and consented to grant him her favours. When they were ready she asked him for the thing he
had promised her. He said: 'Wait a while and you will see.' After some time she bore him a
son, and when he was a boy of seven, Mutanabbi took him to his house and taught him to
read and write. When the boy was tall as a tree, he became a teacher and earned a living. So
he was able to give his mother a loaf of bread every day.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
90 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---
4. THE KING AND THE SKULL
Many years ago there lived a king who possessed so much money that no one in his kingdom
had ever been able to assess his wealth.
One day the king decided to undertake a journey. He gave orders that a strong ship should be
made ready , and when the wind blew in the right direction, he set out hoping to see many
strange countries. But soon the wind blew stronger and stronger, and gales from all directions
pounded the ship. The king was in great danger and in his fear renounced his wish to visit
foreign countries. He made a vow to God, praying: 'Lord, if I reach the shore of my own
country in safety, I promise to weigh the first thing I see and I will give its weight in gold as
sadaka , as charity to the poor.'
At once the storm subsided, morning dawned, and a peaceful wind blew the ship to the shore
of Swahili-land. The king jumped on the beach and thanked God. Then he started looking for
something that could be weighed, but he
[Page [128] ]
saw nothing, no stone, no tree, no log, no rock, nothing but sand. As he began to walk, his
foot stumbled upon something hard. He dug it out from the sand and picked it up. It was
round and hollow, like a cup or bowl. The king took it with him and went home to his palace.
There he ordered his servants to bring a pair of scales to his treasure chamber. He placed the
round object on one scale and a handful of golden coins on the other. He added more gold
until the scale was full. But the gold was not heavy enough. He had a bagful of gold put on
the scale but it was still too light. Then the king ordered the largest pair of scales in the
kingdom to be brought. Normally these were used by his majesty's customs for weighing
crates and cases. Now the king had all his gold pieces, his ducats and dinars, his dirhems and
dollars, bushelled in bags and put on the one scale. But the round cup was still heavier.
The king was desperate. He consulted all his councillors and cadis, until one of them told
him: 'Sire, far away in the high mountains there lives a hermit who possesses unequalled
learning. He knows the answers to many mysteries.'
So the king set out and rode into the rocky regions. After a long search he found the holy man
in a cave, praying with his rosary. The king presented his problem, ending his story: 'I own
less gold than the weight of an old bowl buried in the beach.' The sage reflected a long time,
then he spoke: 'That hard bowl is a human skull. And the inside of a human skull is so greedy
that all the gold of the earth cannot satisfy it. But it will all come to an end, for all that is
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
91 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---
human will one day be buried in the sand. Therefore, take a few handfuls of sand and bury
the skull in it. Then weigh it all together and you will see that you pay only the weight of the
sand on your scale, for after burial all human greed rests in peace.'
The king thanked the old man and asked him if he should build a mosque for him, to which
the sage replied, pointing
[Page [129] ]
at the huge mountains: 'Is my place of worship not large enough?' The king went home and
decided to use all his gold for the maintenance of the poor. And his fame spread through the
lands as a king of great wisdom and charity.
5. THE STORY OF MNYANYA AND SULTAN MNYANYA
Once upon a time there was a sultan Mnyanya, who held court every day of the week. The
walls behind the courtroom were entirely made of glass so that one could see the inner rooms
of the palace where the harem was. Every day people came to the sultan's courtroom to look
at the sultan's many wives and concubines. When the visitors left, the sultan charged each of
them a thousand golden dinars for looking at his women.
One day a man arrived and the sultan said: 'Welcome. What is your name?' He said:
'Mnyanya.' The sultan said: 'What do you see?' He said: 'I see my face.' The sultan said: 'Do
you not see my women?' He said: 'I see my face and your people.' The sultan told him to pay
a thousand golden dinars but he refused. The sultan said: 'Up till now all my visitors have
paid for looking at my women.' The man said: 'I saw only my face in the glass, I never looked
at your women.' The sultan said: 'All right, instead you must do something for me. Here are a
goat, a load of leaves and a live leopard. I want you to take these three things safely to my
son who lives in the town across the river. If anything is lost, you will die.' The man said: 'So
be it.' He took the load of leaves on his head, and the two animals on a leash, taking great
care lest the leopard eat the goat.
When he arrived at the bank of the river, he saw only one small boat with a ferryman in it.
The ferryman said: 'I can take only one man with one load or one animal across at a
[Page [130] ]
time.' Mnyanya thought: 'If I take first the goat and then the leaves, the goat will eat the
leaves as soon as I leave it on the other bank to go back for the leopard. If I take either the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
92 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---
load of leaves or the leopard across the first time, the disaster will happen on this bank, and I
shall be executed by the sultan's hangman.' So he took the goat across first, and on his second
trip brought the load of leaves to the other side. Then the clever Mnyanya took the goat back
with him to where the leopard was, took the leopard across to where the leaves were and tied
it to a tree. Finally he went back for the goat. And so he delivered safely to the prince all
three charges. When the sultan learned that Mnyanya had saved the goat as well as the leaves,
he was so pleased that he put him in charge of all the royal supplies and provisions.
And today, if someone has to be very careful, the Swahili say: 'Save the goat and the leaves.'
6. THE LION AND THE SNAKE
The Lion and the Snake were fighting. The snake escaped before the lion could kill it, and
fled to a man's house. The snake begged the man to hide it because the lion was pursuing it.
The man hid the snake in his cupboard and the lion never found it although he searched the
house.
When the lion had gone, the snake took his leave from the man, saying: 'How are good deeds
rewarded?' The man said: 'Normally with money, but since you have no money you may give
me an animal as soon as you have been successful at hunting.' The snake said: 'But do you not
know that snakes reward good with evil? I am going to devour you, man!' The man said: 'No,
no, that isn't fair, let's ask the bee first.' The bee said: 'I never get any gratitude. Man just
takes my honey after having smoked me out of my own house.'
[Page [131] ]
The man said: 'Let's ask the mango tree.' The mango tree said: 'I never receive thanks. Man
takes my fruits, and when I bear no more, he cuts me down and throws me into his fire.' The
man said: 'Let's ask the coconut palm.' The coconut palm said: 'It is true, good is rewarded
with evil. Man takes my nuts, taps my saps, and to cap it all, he cuts off my leaves for his
roof.'
The snake said to the man: 'You see, now I will eat you.' The man said: 'Wait till I have said
good-bye to my wife. The snake agreed, and they went to the man's house. The man said:
'Dear wife, the snake is going to eat me, good- bye!' The wife said: 'Surely, Mr Snake, you
would like some eggs as 
hors d' oeuvre ?' She took a bag of eggs and held it open for the
snake. The snake put in his head to take an egg. The woman pulled the string tight and so
caught the snake with its head in the bag. Then she took a knife and cut its throat, saving her
husband's life. But the husband divorced her, for good is rewarded with evil. ...
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
93 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---
7. KIGONIGONI 'THE WOMANIZER', OR THE FIVE QUESTIONS
From an early age, Kigonigoni was a master at chatting up girls. One day he said: 'I am going
to God to ask Him: "Is sexual intercourse good?" If so, I will make it my daily occupation.'
On his way he met a very short man who said: 'If you find God, ask Him for me if shortness
is good.' Kigonigoni promised and went on. He met a farmer who said: 'If you find God, ask
Him if farming is good. If it is, I will make it my daily work.' Kigonigoni promised and went
on. He met a sorcerer who said: 'If you find God, ask Him if sorcery is good. If so, I will
make it my daily work.' Kigonigoni
[Page [132] ]
promised and went on. He met a giant who said: 'If you find God, ask Him if tallness is good.'
Kigonigoni promised and went on and on and on until there was no more road and no more
path. He heard a voice saying: 'What do you want?' Kigonigoni said: 'If I found God I would
ask Him: "Is tallness good?"' The voice of God answered: 'Tallness is very good, especially
when you have to cross a deep river.' 'Is shortness good?' 'Shortness is good except when you
have to cross a deep river.' 'Is witchcraft good?' 'Witchcraft is very wicked, because, when
there is witchcraft, many people die and that brings no joy.' 'Is agriculture good?' 'Agriculture
is very good indeed.' 'Is sexual intercourse good?' 'It is not good with one wife, but it is very
good with several wives.'
That is why the Swahili have many wives.
8. TONGUE MEAT
A sultan lived with his wife in his palace, but the wife was unhappy. She grew leaner and
more listless every day . In the same town there lived a poor man whose wife was healthy and
fat and happy. When the sultan heard about this, he summoned the poor man to his court, and
asked him what his secret was. The poor man said: 'Very simple. I feed her meat of the
tongue.' The sultan at once called the butcher and ordered him to sell all the tongues of all the
animals that were slaughtered in town, to him, the sultan, exclusively. The butcher bowed
and went. Every day he sent the tongues of all the beasts in his shop to the palace. The sultan
had his cook bake and fry, roast and salt these tongues in every known manner, and prepare
every tongue dish in the book. This the queen had to eat, three or four times a day---but it did
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
94 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 96 ---
not work. She grew even more thin and poorly. The
[Page [133] ]
sultan now ordered the poor man to exchange wives---to which the poor man reluctantly
agreed. He took the lean queen home with him and sent his own wife to the palace. Alas,
there she grew thinner and thinner, in spite of the good food the sultan offered her. It was
clear that she could not thrive in a palace.
The poor man, after coming home at night, would greet his new (royal) wife, tell her about
the things he had seen, especially the funny things, and then told her stories which made her
shriek with laughter. Next he would take his banjo and sing her songs, of which he knew a
great many. Until late at night he would play with her and amuse her. And lo! the queen grew
fat in a few weeks, beautiful to look at, and her skin was shining and taut, like a young girl's
skin. And she was smiling all day, remembering the many funny things her new husband had
told her. When the sultan called her back she refused to come. So the sultan came to fetch
her, and found her all changed and happy. He asked her what the poor man had done to her,
and she told him. Then he understood the meaning of 
meat of the tongue .
[Page [135] ]
7 The Wiles of Women
[Page [136] ]
1. THE JEALOUS HUSBAND
A man built his house far away from the town in the savannah, so that his wife would never
meet another man and never be seduced. One day a hunter called while the husband was
away on business. It is hunters one meets in the wilderness. The woman opened the door for
him, and she liked his muscular appearance when she saw him. Hunters are always looking
for fair game and women like their forceful character. She said: 'What will you give me?' The
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
95 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 97 ---
hunter had just killed an antelope and gave it to her. So she granted him her favours.
At that moment the husband came home and found them together in his own bed. The
woman whispered to the hunter: 'Show him your strength and he will respect you!' The hunter
threw his dagger at the husband without getting up. The man leaped out of his house and
locked the door. He set fire to his house, and when it was burnt to the ground he went away
thinking: 'It is useless to be jealous of one's wife.'
2. THE RAT -CATCHER
The rat-catcher had a wife and a young concubine. They lived in a house in the bush. The
wife was not satisfied and
[Page [137] ]
always complained: 'Eating rats' meat every day , I detest it.' One day they saw the man
coming running towards his house, pursued by a lion. The concubine fled, but the wife took
up a spear, ran at the lion and thrust the spear into his mouth. Which of the two women loved
her husband?
3. THE POOR MAN'S SON
A poor man lived with his wife and son. The wife took a paramour and brought him food
every day, from what her husband gave her. The father gave his son seven ducks as a present,
but his wife took them away one after the other, and cooked them for her paramour. The boy
said: 'Mother, where are you taking all this food? My father works for it and you take it out of
the house!' His mother was angered, took some offerings and brought them to the place of
sacrifice. She prayed to the spirit and cursed her son, begging the spirit that her son should no
longer be able to see what she was doing. At once the boy was struck with blindness, his eyes
were running with matter. His mother was glad, for now no one would see her while her
husband was away. She invited her paramour into the house, but her son sensed him. 'Who is
that man sitting there?' His mother said: 'Who is sitting where? There is no one here!' The
boy said: 'He is sitting there, and I can smell the food.' This made the woman angry. She put
the boy in a bag, dragged him outside and left him in the bush.
As it happened, the king of that country came along just then, on a hunting expedition. He
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
96 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 98 ---
saw the bag and ordered his servants to open it: out came the boy. The king asked him what
destiny had brought him there and the boy told him his whole story. The king entered the
house and saw the woman with her paramour. The man fled, but the woman
[Page [138] ]
was put in the bag and the king ordered her to be thrown into the sea. The king took the boy
to his palace and ordered his court physician to treat him. The physician applied medicine to
the boy's eyes, and cured his blindness. And the king put him in charge of all his ponds, with
the many-coloured birds: ducks, geese, teals and turkeys, storks, herons and cranes. When the
father of the boy came home from his tiring business, he found no wife, no son, no ducks.
The woman had spoilt his home.
4. SALIMU AND HIS WIFE PENDO ['LOVE']
Salimu loved his wife Pendo so much that he told her: 'When one of us dies, the other one
will be buried at the same time. I do not want to live in this world without you.' His wife
Pendo agreed. The following year she died. Salimu said: 'I want to be buried with her, it is an
old custom.' The dead Pendo was lying in the house, ready to be buried the next day. The
devil came along and whispered to her soul: 'I can restore your body to you, I can put you
back inside your body, on one condition: you must follow me and not your husband.'
The soul of the woman was hovering there in the room near her body. She knew that her life
was ended, she would be dead for ever, and she would have no more body to live in or to
enjoy life with. Her husband would either take another wife, she thought, or, if he died too,
he would never be a real husband to her again. So she agreed, for she was very fond of living
on earth. The devil said: 'Remember, you may not go back to your husband. If you do, you
will be dead again.' The woman agreed to everything he said.
So the devil took hold of the soul and put it back in the
[Page [139] ]
body. The body came to life and the devil helped her to tear the shroud open. He also opened
the door for her, and so the woman who had died now walked out on the open road in the
middle of the night---and she enjoyed it.
There approached an Arab, a well-dressed gentleman, he wanted to make love to her. The
woman said: 'What will you give me?' The Arab gave her a golden bangle, and the woman
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
97 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 99 ---
granted him her favours. The Arab went with her to the husband Salimu and said: 'I want to
marry your wife. Why don't you divorce her? I will pay you well.' Salimu was indignant; then
he saw the bangle on his wife's wrist and he understood, for he was an intelligent man. At
once, his love for her cooled. He asked her how she had come back from the dead, for he
suspected black magic. She told him her story and concluded: 'Now I cannot come back to
you. Never mind.'
Salimu was now prepared to divorce his wife. The Arab paid him money and went away with
his wife. But Salimu was left behind, silver in his hand and wisdom in his heart. He had
learned so much about woman in one night that he had divorced his wife 
after she had died .
5. THE TRAPPER
It was the trapper's business to trap animals. He always caught a large number of animals in
his traps and snares, but one day he discovered that a certain monster (who was in reality an
evil spirit) was trying to outwit him: it came and devoured all the animals that got caught in
his traps. The trapper decided to ambush the monster, but it got wind of him and attacked him
before he could catch it. He fled to his house and shouted to his wife: 'Help me kill the
monster!' The wife took a loaf of bread, went out and threw it at the
[Page [140] ]
monster. The monster snapped it up, swallowed it, and died on the spot. The man was
grateful to his wife but looked at her with suspicion: 'Did you have poisoned bread ready in
the house?' The wife said: 'No! It was just ordinary bread; I thought the monster should have
my food rather than my husband!'
At that moment the village schoolmaster came along and heard the argument. He was a man
of wisdom. He said: 'Evil spirits die in the face of virtue and courage.'
6. THE KING'S DAUGHTER
Once upon a time a king had two sons. One year he decided to go on a journey and told his
sons: 'If during my absence a daughter is born to me, kill her.' Not long after his departure, a
girl was born to one of the king's wives. One of the two princes said: 'We must kill her, for
our father said so. His word is law.' But the youngest took pity on his small sister and said:
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
98 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 100 ---
'No, don't kill her, I want to save her. I will go away with her, if you like, and bring her up far
away from here.'
So he took the little girl and went with her to the savannah. There he built a hut for her and
hunted game for her. And the king's daughter grew up and became a young lady. Then one day
she said to her brother: 'Find me a husband, I want to marry.' The brother said: 'Impossible.
We are in the wilderness here; no man lives anywhere near here and we cannot go back to the
city of our father.'
One day, while her brother was hunting in the forest, a wanderer came along and the princess
said: 'Take me! Let us kill my brother.' The wanderer agreed and enjoyed the princess.
Suddenly, the prince came home and found his sister with a tramp. He killed them both with
his spear. He
[Page [141] ]
thought: 'Our father was right. I should have killed her in the first place; now I have spent the
best years of my life working for my wicked sister.' He went back to the city. His brother said:
'Never disobey your father.'
7. FATHER'S FINGER
Musa was still a youngster when his father died. The father's last words to his son were:
'Before they bury me, cut off the little finger of my left hand. You must plant that in the forest
in a secret place. Tell no one! In this manner I will look after you even after my death, when
God wills.'
He died, and Musa quickly cut off the little finger of his left hand. He went to the forest and
there, in the deepest darkness, he planted his father's little finger. At once the finger began to
grow like a carrot, out of it sprouted lovely green leaves, crown after crown, like a palm tree.
And it did grow into a tree, and on the tree there grew fruits, and every fruit, instead of a
stone, contained a silver rupee. Musa picked some of the fruits, said: 'Thank you, father', and
went to the town to buy food.
So he grew up and became a strong lad, and he began to look at the girls. One of the girls told
him: 'If you tell me where you get all that money, I will grant you my favours.' Musa told her:
'These rupees grow on a tree, and the name of the tree is "Father's Finger".' The girl ran away
and told her sweetheart. That man followed Musa into the forest, and when he saw him pick
the fruits of that tree, suck the flesh off, and spit out silver rupees instead of stones, his greed
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
99 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 101 ---
became so great that he jumped up and beat Musa until he lay like one dead.
The tree's leaves withered and it said in a booming voice: 'Never tell a woman your secret.'
The greedy man climbed
[Page [142] ]
the tree and started picking fruits, but the tree stung him with its thorns which were full of
poison. The man could not disentangle himself and died on the spot. The girl started out in
search of her greedy lover and found him hanging in a tree with the ravens sitting on his head.
She found Musa too, and repented; she took him to her house and cared for him. A woman
prefers a lover with money to one without life.
8. THE PUPIL
Sheikh Ali was an old teacher and Kibwana was his pupil. One day the teacher went out and
the teacher's wife called Kibwana: 'You, young man, come quickly.' 'What for?' 'Stupid, you
are hungry and you don't know how to eat!' 'All right,' said Kibwana when he at last
understood. He went inside and lay with his teacher's wife. The teacher's wife taught him
what the teacher did not teach him.
9. THE HARE
One day the hare went to the house of the hunter who was away hunting. He said to the
hunter's wife: 'Come to my house and live with me; we have meat and vegetables every day.'
The woman went with him, but when she saw the lair of the hare and had eaten grass with
him and slept in the open with him, she was not satisfied. She said: 'I want to go back.' The
hare said: 'You came here by your own choice.' The woman did not know the road in the
bush, so she said: 'Come with me and I will cook a nice dinner.' The hare took her to her
house. Then she said: 'Get me some firewood.'
[Page [143] ]
The hare went to the forest and collected a load of firewood. The woman lit a fire and put a
pot on it. When the water was boiling she put the hare into the pot. When the hunter came
home she said: 'I caught a hare for dinner.' The hunter never knew what happened. Women
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
100 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 102 ---
are never satisfied.
[Page [145] ]
8 Social Satire
[Page [146] ]
1. THE POOR MAN AND THE RICH MAN
Once upon a time there lived a poor man and a rich man. The poor man had his small kraal
and the rich man had his big kraal. The poor man had one cow; the rich man had his kraal full
of cattle. The rich man coveted the poor man's cow, and took it. The poor man said: 'Kill the
cow and eat it, but please return the skin to me.' The rich man did so, and gave the skin back.
The poor man said to his friends: 'Isn't the rich man stupid! He returned my property!'
2. THE HUNTER AND THE ROBBER
Saba was a mighty hunter and Udevu was a robber. Saba killed many big animals, while
Udevu attacked people on the roads and robbed them. One day Saba came along on the road
with his catch, and Udevu attacked him. They fought fiercely, but finally Saba ran away, for
he took fright.
Previously the people respected Saba, but now it was Udevu they feared. Therefore: show
your strength so that you may keep your friends.
[Page [147] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
101 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 103 ---
3. THE FARMER AND THE BORROWER
In a year of plenty, the borrower came to the farmer and said: 'Lend me a bag of maize.' The
next year was a year of famine; no maize grew on the land. The farmer said to his son: 'You
must eat what there is. I am old and ready to die.' And God had mercy upon him [i.e., he
died]. The farmer's son went to the borrower and asked him: 'Can I have my maize back
please, for we are starving?' The borrower said: 'I have eaten it.' The farmer's son said: 'Those
who borrow live, those who work die.'
4. MR CLEVER AND MR SIMPLE
There was once a man of small brains who could not seduce a woman. So he asked Mr
Clever: 'How do you do it?' Mr Clever said: 'Go and buy yourself a betel box.' Mr Simple did
so, and went strolling along the streets with his betel. There he met the wife of Mr Clever,
and seduced her. The moral is: 
Do not teach a simpleton .
5. KIBW ANA
Once upon a time there was a man who had a son whose name was Kibwana. He told him:
'Kibwana, I feel that my last hour is approaching. Here are twenty rupees, it is all the money I
possess. Remember that you must always seek the company of intelligent men. Then the
father died. The son Kibwana took the money and gave it to a sage. The sage taught him:
'You want to be intelligent. Very well. Always remember to keep secrets; never tell them to
women, especially not your wife.'
[Page [148] ]
Kibwana went out in search of food. He wandered into the forest and in the middle of the
jungle he found a large field of pumpkins. He picked some of them, went to the market and
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
102 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 104 ---
sold them. When he came home with the money , his wife was surprised and wanted to know
where he got it all. He refused to tell her, but she insisted, crying and sobbing. So eventually
he told her. Immediately the wife went out to the street where she met the sultan, who asked
her for news. She said: 'There are pumpkins in the forest.' The sultan went to the forest with
his men and took all the pumpkins for himself. Kibwana had nothing, his wife had the favour
of the sultan, the sultan had all the pumpkins, and sold them at his own price. Kibwana said:
'To have a secret is bad enough, but to tell anyone is worse, and to tell your wife is worst of
all.'
This story has many morals. First: your wife will despise you if you give in to her sobs and
tears. Second: if you have found a treasure, you should hide it. Third: stay away from those in
power, for you can't win from them.
6. THE POOR MAN AND THE BEANS
A poor man had no hoe and no pick. So he decided to go and till his field with his bare hands.
When the field was well prepared, he planted beans, and these grew beautifully. He picked
the beans and sat down near a tree stump. He wanted to eat his first handful of beans, but
they fell into a hole under the tree stump. The poor man decided that it would be a pity to
leave them there after he had worked so hard to grow them. So he took his axe and started
chopping at the roots of the stump. It was a hot day but he persevered. At last he had
removed the tree stump, and do you know what he found? Silver! Lots and lots of money!
Now the poor man was a rich man and the people said
[Page [149] ]
'Yes, sir', whenever he spoke. They made him their sultan, and he appointed the faithful axe
as his captain of the guards.
The people asked him the reason for his success and his prosperity, and he said: 'I worked
with my hands in the earth, I did not wish to waste a single bean, and I chopped all through
the hot day.'
7. THE BEGGAR'S SON
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
103 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 105 ---
The beggar wanted his son to learn a decent craft. He took him to a farmer to learn
cultivation. But the son did not think that farming brought him enough gain. So the father
sent him away with fishermen on a boat to learn how to catch fish, but the son decided that
this was too hard work. So the beggar took his son to a master thief to learn the art of
stealing.
One day he thought he had learned enough and, seeing a man with a goat on a string, he
decided to steal it. His master told him that thieves operate by night only. The boy, however,
decided to start his career there and then. While the owner of the goat was standing on the
road the boy cut the string and ran away with the goat. The master thief said: 'Of course, you
will give the goat to me as a present.' So he took the goat and roasted it. But the beggar's son
disappeared with the roasted goat.
The master thief decided that his own pupil was becoming a danger to his business and went
to the sultan's court to report him. No sooner had he arrived at the court than he was arrested
and thrown into jail. He had not been quick enough. His pupil had gone to the sultan before
him and told the 
askaris who was the master thief they had been pursuing for so long. The
sultan was glad to know and gave the boy money for his information.
[Page [150] ]
And the lesson of this story is that you must never teach the son of a beggar, for evil breeds
evil.
8. THE SIMPLETON AND THE SULTAN
The simpleton had a beautiful wife. The sultan heard of her beauty and decided that she was
what he wanted. One day when her husband was away, the sultan went to the wife and lured
her to the palace with words and promises. When the simple man came back he found his
house empty, and the neighbours told him: 'The sultan came and went away with your wife.'
This angered the simple man. He went and found a large drum, and beat it. The drum told all
the people: 'There is war in the country, war against the sultan.' And the war spirit of the
people was aroused, they plundered the sultan's palace and set fire to it. The simple man
found his wife and took her home. The sultan fled, leaving everything behind.
The moral of this story is: If poor and simple people have something beautiful, the chiefs will
come and tell them: 'You have no business to have anything, you slave.' They will just take
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
104 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 106 ---
what they desire.
9. MUTORO
Mutoro was a poor fisherman. One day he threw his net into the ocean and hauled it in. It was
very heavy, and when he had hauled it on board he found a giant snake in it. The snake said:
'Mutoro, let me go and I will make you rich.' So Mutoro let the snake free. It vanished into
the sea and came back a moment later with a purse in its mouth, which it gave to Mutoro.
The purse was full of silver, and Mutoro thanked
[Page [151] ]
the snake. When the sultan heard that Mutoro was now a rich man he came and took the
purse from him.
10. THE STICK
A trapper found a stick in his trap. 'What shall I do with a stick?' He shook it, and a piece of
silver fell out. The trapper went back to his village and he bought all the food he wanted. The
chief heard that the trapper had a stick that vomited silver, so he came to the trapper's house
and said: 'Give it to me.' The trapper called: 'Stick, stick, they are coming to take you!' The
stick flew into the chief's face and beat him. The chief fled from the village and never came
back. The people made the trapper chief. 
If only we could all find a stick like that .
11. RUGENDO
Rugendo was a handsome man, so the women of the village were very fond of him.
One day the men had dug a trap-fall for big game and they said to Rugendo: 'Let's go hunting.'
Rugendo agreed and went with them to where the pit was. When they arrived he fell in, for
the men never told him that it was there. He fell with his stomach on the pike and died. The
men came home and said: 'The rhinoceros killed Rugendo.' When the women heard this they
wailed loudly and mourned Rugendo for a long time. The men had a feast together and were
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
105 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 107 ---
very happy.
It is better not to be too handsome .
[Page [153] ]
9 Astute Animals
[Page [154] ]
1. HANDY HARE AND THE DROUGHT
One year the sun shone hotter than ever, there was no rain, and all the pools and rivers dried
up. The animals gathered together, wondering what they should do. Then the Intelligent
Elephant, who has the largest brain, addressed them thus: 'I know where we can dig for water.
But you must all help me. We will start at once, and each of you will take his turn digging. It
is hard work but it must be done.'
All the animals did their stint, one after the other, except the Hare, who thought to himself: 'I
do not have to work. I can rely on my cunning to get my share of the water, if they find it.'
When he heard that the other animals had succeeded in digging a well and had actually struck
water, he appeared on the scene, armed with two empty water-bottles and one jar filled with
honey.
Now the elephant knew very well that the hare would turn up sooner or later, but he did not
want him to get any water. His rule was: 'No work, no water.' So the elephant had left the
giraffe in charge of the water-hole. When the hare arrived the giraffe asked him what he was
doing there. Hare said: 'I have just collected some sweet water that God gave me.' Giraffe
said: 'Let me taste it.' Hare said: 'This is not a good place, let us go somewhere where it is
cool and shady.' The giraffe agreed to be led away. When they were under the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
106 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 108 ---
[Page [155] ]
trees, the hare said: 'Now lower your neck so that I can let you taste this divine water.' The
giraffe lowered his neck and the hare quickly shoved a noose (which he had tied to a tree
beforehand) over his head. Now the giraffe was caught: the hare descended quietly into the
well, filled his water jars and went home.
The next morning the elephant arrived to inspect the water-hole and found the giraffe tied to
a tree. 'How did you get into that position?' 'Oh, eh, I saw a beautiful she- giraffe who came
along, and I tied myself to this tree lest I should relinquish my post.' So the elephant
dismissed him and appointed the buffalo as his night watchman. He was a little harder to
mislead, so the hare gave him a little of the honey. Having tasted it the buffalo bellowed:
'Give me more!' Then he agreed to be led away from his post. The hare said: 'In order to
enjoy this divine water better, you must look upwards and close your eyes. I can then pour it
down your throat more easily, and it will taste sweeter.' So the hare could slip a noose over
the horns of the buffalo and tie the other end to a tree. Then he went and took a bath, and
urinated in the water. [Only low-class people would pollute the communal bath-water in that
manner.] The buffalo could not stop him, for he felt the string round his neck.
The next morning the elephant came round and found the buffalo tied up. He also saw that
the water was polluted. He rebuked the buffalo, who invented an excuse like the giraffe's,
because he did not want to admit that he had been humiliated either. After that the elephant
put one animal after another in charge of the well, and each of them was deceived by the hare
and tied up, and then blamed for the pollution of the water.
The elephant's last watchman was the lion, who certainly should have been strong and
fearless enough to frighten the hare. But cunning is not to be frightened even by lions. The
[Page [156] ]
hare told the lion when he arrived: 'You have a pimple on your head.' So the lion said:
'Scratch me.' That, of course, was fatal for the lion. The hare possessed magic powers, so by
scratching the lion he bewitched him, and the lion fell asleep. After that, everything was easy
for the hare. He slipped his noose around the lion's neck and fastened the other end to a tree.
The hare then filled his water-jars at the well, after which he bathed and finally defecated in
the water, just to spoil it for his fellow animals. Finally, to enjoy his victory completely, he
went to the lion and woke him up, saying: 'Goodbye, old man, have to go now, sorry you can't
come with me, anyhow thanks for the water. See you perhaps!' The lion, roaring with
indignation over so much cheek, and contempt for his rank, wanted to jump at him, but the
rope jerked him back and tightened around his neck.
When the elephant came for his daily inspection, he found the water fouled and the lion all
tied up. He asked: 'What happened?' The lion muttered something like: 'Oh, eh, there was a
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
107 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
lovely lioness, she came and fell in the water and when I saw her beauty I was so
overwhelmed that I tied myself up ...' The elephant said: 'You are as stupid as all the others.
Now go away. Since you have all failed, I will now keep watch myself and see what happens.'
The lion trotted away with his tail between his legs. Towards evening the hare reappeared
and found the elephant himself on duty. Unperturbed, he called: ' Hodi hodi ', and the
elephant replied: ' Karibu , come near.' Then the elephant asked: 'What are you doing here?' 'I
am just returning from my well which God made for me; in it there is delicious, divine water,
very sweet.' The elephant demanded to taste some of it. When he had, he wanted to have it
all, and said: 'Let us exchange: I will give you some of my water if you give me yours.' The
hare refused, saying: 'As you are our chief, I will give it to you for nothing. Let us go and sit
in the shade;
[Page [157] ]
there we can enjoy it in peace.' As soon as they were sitting under the trees the hare said:
'Now, if you look upwards and shut your eyes, I will pour it down your throat, and that will
ensure you maximum enjoyment.' The elephant was effectively deceived by the hare's
magical powers of persuasion. He raised his trunk upwards and shut his eyes. The hare had
brought an iron chain for the purpose, which he now slipped down over the elephant's trunk,
tusks and ears. Then he went to the well, filled his jars, had a bath and left his droppings
behind in the water, just to spoil it for everybody else. After which he quietly went on his
way.
When the animals arrived the next day they found the water fouled and their great chief in
chains. They asked the elephant: 'How did you get chained?' He answered: 'Well, you see, I
am a big animal; when I fall down I don't get up easily, so I decided to chain myself to this
tree, for I was feeling rather sleepy and I might have dozed off and rolled over.' But all the
animals agreed: 'It was the little hare who tricked us all. He made you sleepy by witchcraft.'
At that moment the tortoise appeared, who had at last caught up with the other animals. He
said: 'Tonight, I will keep watch and prevent the hare from fetching water and getting away
with it.' All the animals laughed heartily and said: 'You, Mr Slow, do you think your brain
works quicker than that of the hare who has outwitted us all? Do you really think that you are
more intelligent than the lion and the elephant?'
But the tortoise showed quiet determination: 'You might as well give me a chance. I am the
only one who has not done a night watch yet, and if you do not expect me to be more
intelligent than yourselves, I could hardly be more stupid.' The elephant said: 'All right, let
him try, he might after all find a way. You never know how a tortoise may catch a hare. If
there is no one with two eyes who can see, we have to call
[Page [158] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
108 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 110 ---
in a one-eyed man to look for us.' The animals bowed to the superior wisdom of the elephant,
and the tortoise was appointed watchman for the following night. The animals went home
without any hope of having clean water the next morning.
The tortoise, who is at home in the water, descended into the well, dived and lay down
quietly on the bottom to wait. Soon the hare arrived and called: ' Hodi hodi! ' But there was
no reply. So the hare concluded: 'Now they have all been defeated, so the water is mine.' He
came out in the clearing, and seeing nobody he undressed and took a long bath. Finally, he
wanted to jump out, but suddenly he found that his leg was caught in a hole in the bottom of
the well. He wanted to pull it out but could not. His foot was held ever tighter by the hole,
which was in fact the tortoise's anus. The hare pulled and pulled, trying to scramble on to the
firm ground, but all his efforts were in vain: the tortoise held him as fast as in a foot-iron. At
dawn, all the animals arrived, together with the elephant, and there to their unspeakable
surprise they found the hare himself, with one leg in the water. They pulled him out, but the
tortoise did not let go, so they pulled out the tortoise as well.
The elephant admired and praised the tortoise for having caught the nimble hare. Then he
said: 'It's all right now, you may let him go, he can't escape.' The tortoise looked round the
group of animals with his beady eyes and said: 'If I let him go you will let him go too. But all
right, as you wish.' He let the hare go free and walked away.
At that, the hare regained his confidence and said: 'Now, before you take any harsh and hasty
measures, remember that I am too small to be killed, it is just not worth the effort. You see,
all you have to do is to tie me up and lay me down at the crossroads and leave me there for
the night. The next morning I shall have transformed myself into a much larger
[Page [159] ]
animal; then you can kill me.' 'Then we will kill you,' said all the animals, and tied him up
carefully with his own strings. Then they put him down on the crossroads and left him there
for the night.
After nightfall, there arrived the hyena, the hunter-by- night, and found the hare lying on the
road, all tied up. He asked him why he was there, and the hare answered: 'For an ox. You see,
I told the elephant I could eat a whole ox alone and he said I could not. So we betted and the
elephant decided to tie me up because he wants to see me eat that ox alone. He will bring it
here tomorrow morning.' The hyena said: 'I would like to have a whole ox, I could eat it
alone, and I am sure you could not.' The hare said: 'All right, if you insist, I will give you your
chance to try. All you have to do is to lie here and wait, and tomorrow morning the elephant
will come with an ox and he will be surprised to find you here instead of me, but all you have
to do is to convince him that you are indeed the hare and that you have only transformed
yourself during the night.' The hyena agreed eagerly, untied the hare's strings and sat down to
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
109 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
wait. As soon as the hare felt free he leapt away and vanished.
The next morning the elephant arrived with all the animals and when they found the hyena
sitting there they asked him who he was. The hyena answered: 'I am the hare, I have
transformed myself during the night.' As this statement tallied with what the hare had said he
would do, the animals believed the hyena to be the hare.
So the elephant ordered the animals to bring firewood. When it was brought, he had it piled
up near the hyena, who found this an encouraging sight, for he was sure that the next moment
the ox would be brought and roasted for him, after which he would devour it whole in their
presence. But when the pyre was quite high the animals seized the hyena, put him on top of
it, tied him there with ropes, and
[Page [160] ]
finally lit the fire. The hyena started howling and cried: 'No, I am not the hare, it is all a
mistake, I want my ox, the hare said I could eat it, I only had to say I was him, it is the ox you
want to roast, not me ...!' Some of the animals thought he had gone mad, but the majority just
called him a liar: 'You are the hare and we are going to kill you!' When the hyena was burnt
and dead, the hare appeared from behind a termite hill and cried triumphantly: 'No, I am the
hare, you 
have made a mistake.' Then he was gone. They ran after him but never caught him.
The tortoise did not run. He stayed where he was and said: 'It takes a tortoise to catch a hare.'
2. THE BABOON AND THE TORTOISE
One day the baboon and the tortoise made a pact of friendship. They both decided to marry,
and to invite each other to their weddings. When the baboon celebrated his wedding the
tortoise arrived, but he was told by the baboon to come and sit on the tree, 'Because that is
good manners in the country of the baboons. It is very rude to eat while lying on the floor,'
said the baboon sternly. Of course the tortoise could not remain seated for a long time,
because whenever he wanted to reach for the food he fell flat on his belly and all the baboons
laughed. They ate all the delicious food and the tortoise got very little. But in the end he got
his revenge, because baboons have to walk on all fours.
When it was time for the tortoise to marry, he of course invited the baboon to his party. 'But,'
he told him, 'remember that you must come with clean hands, for you know very well it is an
offence to arrive at a dinner-party with dirty hands.' Before the baboon arrived, the tortoise
burnt the dry grass round his house and all the scrub as well. When the baboon arrived,
having carefully washed his hands, he had
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
110 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
[Page [161] ]
to walk through the charred grass and so his hands and feet were dirty again. The tortoise sent
him back saying: 'Did I not tell you to come with clean hands? Go back to the river and wash
your hands.' When the baboon came back, having washed his hands again, he had to walk
through the same charred grass and sooty dust. The tortoise sent him back a second time, and
a third, until all the splendid dishes had been eaten by the tortoise and his relatives. Tortoises
are wiser because they live longer .
3. THE HISTORY OF MUHOMAZIKORA
In the year of famine every creature was searching for food but found nothing. One day the
hare was wandering in the bush and found a pumpkin. He decided to build a house there for
his family and went away to fell trees.
A few moments later the lion arrived on the spot, saw the pumpkin, and decided it would be a
favourable place for a house. He started digging the foundations at once, then he went away
to fetch poles. A few moments after he had gone the hare returned and found that someone
had dug out the foundations for him. 'One of my friends must have decided to help me,' he
thought. 'Very kind of him.' So he placed the stems of the trees in the holes of the foundation
and stamped in the earth to fix them. Then he left to collect palm fronds.
A few moments after the hare had gone, the lion arrived and to his surprise found all the
corner poles of the house standing up in good order. 'One of my friends must have decided to
help me,' he thought, and then: 'Well, of course, I often help my friends too!' So he went on to
place his poles on top of the corner poles so as to form the main beams of the roof. Then he
went away to collect clay for the walls. A few moments later the hare returned and, finding
the
[Page [162] ]
skeleton of the roof ready, declared that he had indeed good friends. So he plaited the roof
from the palm fronds he had brought and filled it around the roof beams so that it was well
fixed. Then he went away to find his family.
A few moments later the lion arrived with a load of clay and filled in the walls. Then he went
away to collect his family. A few moments after he had gone the hare appeared with his
family and found the house ready. When the lion arrived with his family, he heard people
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
111 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
talking in the house, so he called ' hodi-hodi ' first, for he was very well brought up. When
the hare said: 'Come in!' the lion entered and saw the hare family established in what he
considered his own house. So he asked: 'Who do you think you are?' The hare replied: 'I am
the Muhomazikora.' 'What does that mean?' asked the lion, irritated by this difficult word. 'It
means,' explained the hare patiently, 'that I can catch animals for lions, but as soon as I have
called the lion, the dead animal begins to rot and if the lion does not come quickly enough he
will find the carcass full of maggots.' The lion was much impressed by this statement. He
reflected: If I continue arguing with this what's his name, I may cause my own game to rot
before I ever see it. So he asked meekly if he could sleep with his family in the house; all
this because he had great expectations of a hunting-party the next day. The hare said: 'All
right, you people can sleep on the veranda where it is cool, and you don't have to be afraid of
wild animals. We will sleep in the inner room.'
The next day they went hunting. The hare ran in front until he discovered a dead animal full
of maggots creeping in and out. He called out loudly to the lion, but when the lion arrived, he
found the dead animal was already rotting. 'I'm sorry,' said the hare. 'Next time don't be so
slow.' Now it was the lion's turn. He went and killed two wildebeestes, one hartebeeste and
one redbuck. The hare divided the
[Page [163] ]
animals, saying: 'Here, you can have the redbuck and I will take the rest. You know why?
Because you let my catch rot.' The lion thought it wiser not to waste time arguing and so he
accepted, for he was a little afraid of the power of Mr Hare. You never know.
The next day the same thing happened. The hare ran away to a distant part of the bush and
found an animal lying dead, with the flies buzzing around it. So he called out to the lion, and
the lion ran, only to find the game rotting. After that, the lion caught two waterbucks, a gnu,
and a small antelope. The hare gave the antelope to the lion, and kept the other three, the big
animals, for himself. (If only he had not been so greedy: his greed was his undoing.) He was
soon tired of carrying his big game and had to rest. The lion arrived home with his light catch
and gave it to his wife and children. Then the hare's wife asked him how her husband was
doing, and the lion went into her room and told her what had happened. The hare's wife
confided in him and said: 'You see, you mustn't believe him. He can't kill game; he only eats
plants. He just pretends to be hunting; he is clever with his tongue, that's all.'
The lion decided to be more watchful the next day. So, when they were hunting again, the
lion followed the hare wherever he went, but took care not to be noticed. As soon as the hare
found a carcass and called the lion, he heard the lion's voice close behind him, saying: 'I am
already here. I stayed close behind you. This animal has been dead all the time: you never
killed it. Nor did you kill any of the other animals. Now you will have to pay me for the
animals you took.' He took the hare home with him and said: 'Tomorrow you will pay. Now
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
112 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
you may sleep on the veranda.' So the lion slept in the inner room, and the hare was locked
out.
The hare decided that it would be better to flee than to pay. One never knows with a lion, he
might demand one's own
[Page [164] ]
flesh as payment. After all, the hare still had some of the game, hidden away in the bush, in a
place known to himself alone. So he decided to slip away in the darkness, never to return to
the house he had helped to build.
The moral of this tale is, of course, that a man is often ruined by his own wife.
4. THE LION AND THE HARE
One day the lion caught the hare. He said: 'Now I am going to eat you.' The hare said: 'When
you have eaten me you will not be satisfied.' The lion said: 'That is so, but today, I have
nothing else.' The hare said: 'I will take you to a place where there is plenty of meat.' The lion
said: 'All right then. Quickly!'
The hare took him to a place where people of the village kept their salted meat and fish. The
lion started eating the meat at once, as he was very hungry. Of course, the people of the
village heard him and a few dozen men surrounded him with big sticks and spears and axes.
The lion escaped, bleeding from several wounds. He came to where the hare was and said: 'If
you do not give me water at once, I will eat you!' The hare had been ready for just this,
because he knew that salted meat makes lions thirsty. He had a jar of water ready, but he had
put his charms in it first. Having drunk it, the lion fell asleep like a log, and the hare escaped.
Some people can never be trusted .
5. THE HARE AND THE PEOPLE
One day the people had prepared many delicious dishes: diamond-shaped sugar cakes, sweet
pastries, macaroni,
[Page [165] ]
bean-flower fritters, honey-bread, Turkish delight, rice with brown sugar, roast beef, chicken,
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
113 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
duck and pigeon. As the hare was around the people asked him in for the meal, because it is
stingy to eat your meal alone. The hare sat down on the mat indicated to him, and washed his
hands when the basin and the towel were offered him. But he ate with his left hand, which
was wrong, because, they said, it is the hand of impurity. This showed that with all his
cleverness he was still as ill-bred as a baboon. But he was learning; he was clever enough for
that. When the meal was over and he was asked how he had liked it, he said: 'This sweet
meal was made even sweeter by your pleasant words.' His hosts approved, and concluded that
he was becoming civilized. They saw him off with due respect.
The moral of the story is that it is never too late to learn, or to rectify a mistake you have
made.
6. THE GOA T
A certain man had a goat, but she gave no milk. She stayed as lean as a bag of bones. So the
owner was tired of feeding her, and took her to the bush. There he kicked her and said: 'Go
away, I don't want to see you any more.' The goat wandered about in the forest until she met a
big young buffalo bull, very good-looking. He liked the goat, so he proposed to her. The goat
agreed to the proposal and so they were married the same day. They lived happily together
and the goat grew fat because her husband gave her plenty of food. She dropped many
bellyfuls of young, so many that the people in the village talked about it. When her previous
owner heard this he wanted her back, with all her kids, so he went into the bush to catch her.
The goat said to her husband: 'There comes the man who kicked me out.' The
[Page [166] ]
bull was as hot-tempered as a cooking kettle. He rushed out to attack the man, took him on
his horns and threw him down the hill. He may be lying there still.
7. THE TORTOISE MARRIES A GIRL
In a certain country there lived a man with his daughter, who was a great beauty. He owned a
garden, and in that garden stood a tree. In the tree there lived a bird with beautiful
many-coloured wings, and every night that bird perched on the highest branch of the tree and
sang its song:
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
114 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
Naweza naweza
kufanyiza feza
'I can, I can
make money'
No matter how many times he tried, the man never succeeded in catching the bird. So, in
despair, he announced that he would give his daughter to the man who could catch the bird
for him. Many young men came but they all failed. Even the elephant, the king of the
animals, came and tried to push the tree over with his big head, but he could not.
At last the tortoise arrived, and to the man's great surprise he climbed the tree with agility and
caught the bird. He brought it down, and then demanded the girl. So he married her and took
her off with him. The story does not say if the girl produced children, or if the bird produced
silver. All we learn is that it takes the cunning of a tortoise to get a wife.
8. THE SNAKE AND THE CHICKEN
One day the snake asked the chicken: 'May I travel through your body?' The chicken said: 'All
right.' The snake went in
[Page [167] ]
through the chicken's bill and after some time it came out at the other end. The chicken
asked: 'What did you see?' The snake said: 'Nice big eggs, delicious!' Snakes love eggs. Then
the snake said: 'Now you may travel through my body.' The chicken stepped into the snake's
large mouth, but it could not get out. The snake asked: 'What do you see?' The chicken
answered, slowly choking inside: 'So that is your gratitude.' The moral is: 
Never let Mr Snake
enter into your private affairs .
9. THE HARE AND THE MONGOOSE
One day the hare and the mongoose concluded a pact of friendship. They decided to hunt
together. They set out and found the eggs of a guinea-fowl. The hare said: 'Leave it to me.' He
set a trap and caught the guinea-fowl. They took it home to the house where they lived
together. They lit the fire. The hare said: 'I have caught this bird, now you must roast it, then
we will eat it together.' He lay down and fell asleep. The mongoose roasted the fowl, but it
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
115 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
smelled so good that he could not help eating it. And he ate the eggs as well, all of them.
Then he put the feathers of the guinea-fowl into the fire and lay down. Soon the stench of the
burning feathers woke the hare. He jumped up, shook the mongoose and asked him: 'What
have you done?' The mongoose said: 'I put the fowl on the fire. Look, now it has all been
burnt.' And he went to sleep again, for his stomach was very heavy. The hare realized what he
had done. He went out and came back with banana leaves, which he placed over the head of
the sleeping mongoose, carefully, carefully . The hare took a whip and flogged the mongoose.
Then he went out again, leaving the mongoose whimpering. After some time he came back
and found the mongoose still wailing. He said
[Page [168] ]
with affected compassion: 'What has happened to you?' The mongoose said: 'Someone came
in and flogged me, oh, oh, oh!'
Many days later, the mongoose found a wife and married her. The hare was invited to the
party. The mongoose took a flute and played a melody which meant:
'I put the whole guinea-fowl on the fire.' The real meaning was:
'I ate the whole guinea-fowl.' The hare then took the drum and drummed:
'I tied him with the leaves of the banana, I beat him with the skin that had been hardened.'
The mongoose was furious at this taunting. He attacked the hare and they rolled over the
floor, fighting. The mongoose bit off the ears of the hare, which were very small ears, and the
hare bit off the ears of the mongoose which were nice and long. Thus ended their fight. Each
one kept the ears he had bitten off and put them on his own head. That is why the mongoose
has short, small ears and the hare has long, beautiful ears. You see how fighting upsets the
world.
[Page [169] ]
10 Travellers' Tall Tales
[Page [170] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
116 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
1. THE RIVER SPIRIT
A man was travelling along a river; when evening came he sat down for a rest. Suddenly, a
spirit flew down from a tree and knocked him on the head. The spirit lifted him up like a
dead branch and carried him across the river. There he put him down. The man found himself
in a city where all the houses were made of gold. In one of these houses the door was open
and a beautiful girl was awaiting him. She welcomed him and he had a wonderful time with
her. After some days he felt dizzy in the head. He went to a doctor who gave him medicine to
drink. He fell asleep, and when he woke up he was again sitting near the bank of the river.
2. SENDIBADA
I. 
The Giant Bird and the Girl Tree Island
Sendibada was a sailor of great intelligence. One day he was shipwrecked on an island, and
with his companions decided to spend the night there. The next day a big bird arrived, so
enormous that its head was as high as the minaret of the Mosque in Medina. The bird picked
up one of the sailors, smashed his head against a stone, just as seabirds crack oysters, and
devoured him. The next day the bird came back took another of the sailors in its bill and ate
him.
[Page [171] ]
Finally, Sendibada and his last surviving companion hid in the forest. Suddenly they
discovered a white cupola, as large as the mosque of Medina. Sendibada's companion said: 'It
has neither door nor window.' 'In that case,' said Sendibada, 'it can only be either a grave or an
egg.' So he wrote on the white wall: 
No one will rise out of this except by my leave . The
next day they saw the great bird again and it saw them too. But its attitude had changed. It
came and bowed down before Sendibada and said: 'Great teacher, you have written a spell on
my egg so that my child cannot come out. Please can you undo the magic so that my child
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
117 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
may be born?' Sendibada said: 'I will, on condition that you promise to carry us to the land of
happiness.' The bird agreed, and Sendibada went and wrote on the cupola (which was an
egg): Come out, rise and live again, you who sleep at the appointed time  . At once there
appeared a crack in the wall, and they saw a huge bill hacking its way out of the egg.
The big bird kept its word and said: 'Now I will carry you to where you want to go. Step up,
stand on my feet, and hold my legs.' They did so and the bird soared with them into the sky
like a kite. They flew over the ocean and in a moment they landed on a beautiful beach.
There the bird took its leave.
On this island there were many trees and on these trees there grew large pink fruits.
Sendibada's companion was so hungry that he stretched out his hand to the nearest fruit, but it
said: 'I am not ripe yet!' He stretched his hand out to pick the next fruit, but a voice rang out
of that one too that it was not yet ripe for picking. However, the sailor was so hungry that he
disregarded the warning of the fruit, picked it and ate it. Alas! It made him sick and he died.
Sendibada said to himself: 'Impatience kills; it is better to wait and live.' So he waited a day,
two days, three days, then the fruits started shouting: ' Wako wako ' ('Yours, yours!').
Sendibada chose
[Page [172] ]
a fruit that looked very juicy, and picked it. It fell on him so that he nearly tumbled over. He
peeled the fruit, and lo! out came a beautiful maiden who said to him: ' Mbwako ' ('I am
yours').
Sendibada spent a very long time on the Island of Wakowako, as it is known among learned
men. But the day came when he felt he had had enough of the submissive pink fruits. So he
built a ship, and when it was ready he put all the fruits that were ripe that day in it, and sailed
back to the coast of his home country. To his first fruit-maiden he said: 'Remember, you are
my wife,' and to the others: 'You are my daughters.' When he arrived in the city, the sultan and
his viziers all wanted to marry one of Sendibada's daughters, and they all paid him high bride-
prices. So Sendibada became a wealthy man.
II. 
The Copper City
One day Sendibada went and signed on with a strange captain who was a powerful magician.
Sendibada did not, however, know this. They sailed early the next morning, and when the
wind slacked towards midday the captain appeared on the bridge and pronounced some
strange words in an unknown language. Gracefully, the good ship rose out of the calm ocean
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
118 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
and began to fly through the air, alongside the clouds. After many hours they saw a red spot
which turned out to be a city made of copper, floating on the clouds. They moored alongside
it and went to explore the city. All the houses were made of copper, and in the middle there
was a hall with copper walls; here they sat down. At once a large number of lovely girls
appeared with loads of delicious food on copper trays. The men spent a long time in that city.
In the end Sendibada expressed the wish to go home. The magician gave him a round mat
and told him how to use it. He took it outside with him, spread it out on the floor and
[Page [173] ]
sat down on it, in the middle, facing in the direction of his home town. Then he pronounced
the words: See, we shall all return to it , in a strange tongue, and at once the spirit of the mat
flew away with him through the sky, along the clouds, quicker than the birds, and put him
down on the beach not far from his home town.
3. THE WOMAN IN THE BUSH
A certain traveller was on safari in the wilderness, and when night fell he saw no town or
village. So he decided to sleep in the bush. As soon as he was asleep, a hyena arrived and
started to drag him away by his cloak. He woke up, and when he saw the hyena he leapt up
and ran away. He saw a house, went in and shut the door. At first it was dark, then he saw two
little flames, then a woman with two candles. She was very beautiful, she smiled and bid him
welcome. She gave him a copious meal of meat and fruits; then they slept. The traveller
spent many weeks with the good woman and they were very happy . At last the traveller had
to go back to his town and his business. He said good-bye to his hostess, and asked her what
her name was, so that when he wanted to come back he could ask the people on the road how
to find her house. She said: 'I am the Hyena.'
4. THE GIANT WHALE CHEW A
This is the history of the fish they call Chewa, the king of the fishes. His mouth is bigger than
that of any other fish in the sea. The reason for this is as follows, so the story-makers tell us.
Many years ago someone told him that his father had died. The Chewa said: 'It is God's
work,' and left it at that.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
119 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
[Page [174] ]
Years later they told him: 'Your mother is dead.' 'God's work.' Finally he was told: 'Your wife
has died.' Then the heart of that big fish was filled with mourning. He opened his mouth and
could only utter: 'Ah, ah, ah.' His sorrow was so great and lasted so long that his mouth grew
wider and wider.
Now on the back of the Chewa there is an enormous stone, and on the stone there stands a
big cow. The learned men say that this cow has forty thousand horns and forty thousand legs.
On its horns the cow carries the earth.
This cow which stands on the stone on top of the Chewa has its nose in the sea. And every
day it breathes once. When it breathes out the waves of the ocean are blown up against the
shore and the people on the coast call it high tide. When the cow breathes in, the water is
sucked away and so the people call it low tide. And others say the Chewa fish breathes in
such a manner that the earth is raised or lowered in the ocean---but only Allah knows. He
created the seven oceans and the seven floors of the earth, one above the other, all well-fixed,
and the seven skies hanging without pillars. And the Chewa fish who carries it all is just
floating there by the will of Allah.
5. THE FISHERMAN AND THE SPIRIT
One morning a fisherman set out in his boat and sailed the ocean. Suddenly a fierce storm
sprang up and he was stranded on an island he had never heard of. On the beach he found a
pot, and on the pot there was a lid, and on the lid there were letters. The fisherman went to
his boat and took out his book of astrology, for he was a man of learning. He read in his book
that the letters on the pot meant: 'I, Sulemani, prophet of Allah, have placed my seal on this
pot in which I have
[Page [175] ]
locked up an evil spirit which is an enemy of Allah.' As soon as the fisherman read this he put
the pot back where he found it for he was a prudent man.
He went on to explore the island and came upon the ruins of a large castle. He wandered
through the gate and found a stair that led downwards into a vault. To his great surprise he
there found a beautiful woman, locked in chains and fastened to the wall. The woman was
also very surprised to see him, because she had not seen anyone since the days of the prophet
Sulemani.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
120 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
She told the fisherman that she had been born as the daughter of a Muslim jinn, a good spirit,
and had been brought up in the fear of Allah. But when she had reached the age of nubility,
she was suddenly stolen from her parents by an evil spirit who had built this palace for her on
that island. He had chained her to the wall because he had to go on some urgent business. He
never came back. She did not know what had happened, but she was destined to sit there
until someone came to rescue her. The fisherman, she said, was the first living being she had
seen, apart from the owls.
The jinni girl asked, prayed and begged the fisherman, would he please get her out of that
place. The fisherman took his book and opened it. He read the chapter on how to release
spirits, and it said that he must invoke the help of a very powerful spirit. He thought of the
pot and told the girl he would come as soon as possible. He went out to the beach and picked
up the pot. Then he went in search of a room. He found one room in the rambling ruins, with
the door still intact. On the floor and on the door he carved the seal of the prophet Sulemani
which he copied from the seal on the lid of the pot. He locked the door and sat down in the
room with the pot. He said his prayer to Allah, then he uncorked the pot. Out came a dark
smoke, which condensed into the ugliest demon you ever saw. The demon hovered
[Page [176] ]
there for a short while, then he noticed the fisherman and roared with laughter. 'Ah, now I am
going to kill you, since you are the first mortal I see after so many years in this pot,' he
thundered, and kicked the pot so that it burst into a thousand pieces. The fisherman kept his
composure and said: 'It would not help you to kill me, for you would still be a prisoner of the
prophet Sulemani, on whom be peace.' At this, he pointed to the seal of Sulemani which he
had carved on the door.
The demon was shocked when he saw the secret name of Allah carved on the floor and on
the door, and became suddenly meek and humble. He said: 'Sir, I am defeated, I will give you
gold in abundance if you open this door for me.' The fisherman said: 'First, you will rebuild
this palace, and fill it with plenty of food for the rest of my life, and servants and maids.
Secondly, you will release the jinni girl who has been sitting in the vault down there for many
centuries. Thirdly, you will go away for ever and never bother me again. Swear!' The demon
did swear, and then he did everything the fisherman asked for. After that the fisherman
opened the door, and the demon rose up like smoke in the sky. The fisherman lived happily
with the jinni girl in the splendid palace, ever after.
6. KILANGAMBE
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
121 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
Kilangambe was travelling in the savannah. One day he saw a deep pit. He took a stick and
lowered it into the pit. Something clutched it, down there in the darkness, and Kilangambe
hauled it up. He brought up a lion the first time, then a snake, and finally a man. 'You will all
have to pay me,' said Kilangambe.
The man gave him a golden necklace and went away. The
[Page [177] ]
next day Kilangambe heard yelling and shouting and the lion roared: 'Come here,
Kilangambe, and receive your payment.' Of course, other people could not understand what
the lion was saying. Kilangambe ran to where the shouting came from and saw that the lion
had caught a beautiful girl and was holding her in his powerful claws---but with great care.
She was the sultan's daughter: her servants were all standing at a distance, not daring to come
near, crying and wailing like doomsday.
When the lion saw Kilangambe, he thundered: 'Come here, Kilangambe, I have caught a
bride for you,' and the lion roared with laughter. Kilangambe ran towards the lion; shaking his
spear, but he did not hurt the lion. The lion pretended fright, and ran away, leaving the girl in
the arms of Kilangambe. Of course the girl loved Kilangambe very much, for he was her
liberator. She took him to her father, the sultan, with all the servants in attendance. And the
whole city hailed Kilangambe and cheered him as the chaser of lions. The sultan gave his
daughter in marriage to Kilangambe and there was a big feast.
All the people rejoiced except the sultan's vizier, who had wanted the princess for himself.
He invented lies in order to destroy Kilangambe, for he was a wicked man. So he told the
sultan: 'I wonder where Kilangambe got that golden necklace from; he must have stolen it.'
The snake, who had followed Kilangambe to the sultan's palace without anyone seeing it,
heard every word, for it was hiding under the sultan's divan. It went to Kilangambe and told
him what it had heard. Then it said: 'Tonight I will pay you. You have nothing to fear. I will
take revenge for you.' That night the snake slid into the bedroom of the vizier and bit him so
that he died.
The sultan saw that Kilangambe was invincible, so he made him vizier. And he lived happily
for many years.
[Page [178] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
122 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 124 ---
7. THE MAGIC BETEL
A young man called Kibwana undertook a safari on business in the interior. One day he met a
man who was very rich, and Kibwana asked him: 'How do you do it?' The man said: 'Very
simple, I chew money.' So he took betel, chewed it, and silver coins dropped from his mouth
on the floor. Kibwana bought some betel from him but when he came home and chewed it,
nothing happened, so his people laughed at him.
He had forgotten to ask for the secret formula that turns betel into silver.
8. THE ARROWHEADS
A father had three sons: Salimu, Sika and Bende. He taught Bende, the youngest, the art of
forging iron arrowheads. When he died he divided his money between Salimu and Siku, but
Bende received nothing. He went on a journey and met a man who was exercising a strange
craft. He took dry leaves from the ground, put them in a pot, cooked them, and lo! they
became clothes. He then sold the clothes and received much money. Bende asked him what
the magic medicine was for such a transformation. The man said: 'If you give me a hundred
arrowheads, I will tell you.' So Bende made a hundred arrowheads and the man told him:
'Beat your wife with a spear blade until the blood runs, then take that blood and cook it with
the leaves. They will turn into clothes.'
One day Bende saw a hunter in the bush catch elephants with big tusks. He asked him: 'How
do you do it?' The hunter said: 'Give me a hundred arrowheads.' Bende made a hundred
arrowheads and the hunter showed him how he
[Page [179] ]
made a magic snare that an elephant could not get out of, once he had put his foot in it.
Bende came to a town and saw a beautiful girl. He wanted to marry her but her father said: 'I
want a pair of big tusks.' So Bende went into the bush and caught an elephant and told the
father of his sweetheart: 'You can find your elephant at such and such a place.' The father
went there with his men and was much amazed when he found a big elephant who did not
move. They killed it and had a big feast for the wedding. The couple lived happily for many
days, and then Bende's wife wanted to know his secret. He refused to tell her but she insisted.
Then he took a spear blade and beat her until her back bled. His wife wept and promised that
she would never ask him again. Bende caught her blood in a cup, and put it in a cauldron.
Then he collected dry leaves in the yard and cooked them in the cauldron. They became
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
123 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
beautiful clothes which Bende gave to his wife. She was pleased, dried her tears and said:
'Bende, you are a great husband.'
His two brothers, Salimu and Sika, dissipated their money and became beggars, but Bende
became a great chief. This was because he was able to make something and sell it, whereas
they did not know the value of money, for which they had never worked.
9. THREE DREAMS
Three men were travelling in the wilderness when they discovered they had only one loaf of
bread left. They decided it would not be enough for the three of them, so they made an
agreement that one man would have all the bread. After much discussion they decided it
should be the one who would have the best dream that night.
They settled down for the night, and two of them slept at
[Page [180] ]
once. The third one could not sleep as he was plagued by hunger. So he got up and ate the
bread. All of it. The next morning his companions rose early and he pretended to be emerging
from profound dreams. He asked them at once what dreams they had had.
The first one said: 'I dreamt that I saw a golden ladder rising up into the sky. I climbed it, up
and up and up, until I reached the gate of Paradise. The gate was at once opened by a
beautiful angel who took me by the hand and led me to a hall where there was music and
food and feasting. And I was told I could stay there for ever. Alas, it was only a dream.'
The second one said: 'I dreamt that an ugly devil arrived, seized me and dragged me down
into Hell through a hole in the ground. There, I was locked in chains and shackles and beaten
with iron rods. Oh, it was horrible. Thank God it was only a dream. The worst was that I was
told I would stay there for all eternity .'
Now the man who had eaten the bread told his companions: 'I dreamt that an angel came to
me and asked me: "Have you seen what has happened to your friends?" I said no, I have not.
So the angel took me by the hand and flew with me, up towards the stars and into Heaven.
There we entered a hall where musicians were playing and where people were eating and
feasting, and there I saw you , my friend, sitting on a golden throne and surrounded by
beautiful angels. I was then told that you would be staying there until the end of time.
'Next, the angel took me down, down, past the stars and the clouds and into the ground
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
124 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
through a narrow passage, until we arrived in Hell. There I saw you , hanging in chains and
shackles and being beaten by ugly devils. And I was told you would stay there and never get
out. So when I came back here, knowing that neither of you would return, I ate the bread.'
[Page [181] ]
II Spirits & Sorcerers
[Page [182] ]
1. BIRD SPIRITS
I. The Place of Plenty
The poor man used to fish every day on the bank of the river, and every day there was a bird
perched on a tree. Whenever the poor man caught a fish, the bird would say: 'Poor man, give
me that fish.' At last the poor man said: 'What shall I eat, since you eat all my fish?' 'Give me
that fish, poor man, and I will take you to a land of plenty, although I am sure you will not
like living in a place where there is plentiful food.' 'Why not?' 'Because a poor man does not
like happiness.' The poor man argued vehemently with the bird. So the bird took him to the
Place of Plenty, and the poor man said: 'At last I have found happiness.'
He now had more food than he could eat, he did not have to work, he had a nice house and a
lovely girl to take care of him and to fill the lonely hours. After a short time he asked for the
back door. The girl said: 'The back door is bad, do not talk about it.' The man argued
vehemently and she showed him the back door. He went through it and there he stood again,
on the bank of the river, and there was the tree, with the bird, and the bird asked: 'Do you still
want to argue?' The poor man said nothing.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
125 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
II. Saidi, the Trapper's Son
Saidi, a poor boy, said to his mother: 'What was my father's
[Page [183] ]
work?' The mother answered: 'He was a trapper.' Saidi said: 'I must go and do as my father.'
He went to the forest and set his traps. One day he caught a many-coloured bird. The bird
said: 'If you give me my freedom I will help you to marry the beautiful princess of
Mayakayaka. Saidi said: 'All right,' and released the bird. It said: 'Come with me,' and they
travelled many days through the savannah until they met three robbers.
The robbers were quarrelling over their loot: a dish, a jar and a mat. While the thieves were
fighting, the bird whispered to Saidi: 'Take the dish and the jar, and sit down on the mat.'
Saidi did so, and the bird called in his bird language to the spirit of the mat: 'Carry us to the
country of the princess of Mayakayaka!' The spirit obeyed, and Saidi was lifted, on his mat,
up into the sky. They flew for many hours over fields and forests. At last they alighted near
the palace of the princess of Mayakayaka.
The poor princess was kept prisoner by a monster called Tumbo, to whom food had to be
brought every minute by the people of the country, so that there was a great famine. The
monster Tumbo threatened that it would begin to eat people if it was not satisfied. The
princess then announced that whoever could satisfy the monster Tumbo, and in so doing
liberate her and the people from its tyranny, would marry her. When Saidi arrived on his mat,
he found the princess sitting in her palace and weeping for her people. As soon as the
monster arrived, the bird said to Saidi: 'Now you must set the dish and the jar before the
monster and tell it to eat.' Lo! Food appeared on the dish. The monster ate it. More food
appeared, and still more, until Tumbo was satisfied. Then he drank from the jar but could not
empty it.
Saidi married the princess and they lived in great joy.
[Page [184] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
126 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
III. The Kite Spirit
A certain man had three sons, and many slaves. One day he felt that his death was
approaching and called his sons. He said: 'If times of want arrive, you may sell all the slaves,
but not the nokora , the trusted hodman.'
After this, the father died and the sons buried him. Soon they had dissipated their father's
wealth, and sold all his slaves.
Now they wanted to take the nokora to the slave market, but the youngest, Ali, objected. He
said to his two big brothers: 'Our father has forbidden us to sell the old nokora and so we
must not do it, even if we have nothing left.' But the two brothers laughed at the young boy
and went on their way. They then met a strange ugly-looking person who told them: 'Spit out!'
They spat out, and suddenly this evil spirit seized them and devoured them both. The nokora
came home alone, and told the story to young Ali. Ali said: 'I will go and find my brothers.'
He went and found the evil spirit on the road; flames leaked out of his mouth and a snake
dangled from his nose. Ali drew his sword and killed the spirit. Then he cut him open and
freed his two brothers from the monster's stomach. Ali said to them: 'Now you have seen
what happens if you disobey our dead father's charge!'
The next morning he saw a kite sitting near by, waiting for him. 'Ali, come with me,' said the
kite. They travelled through the savannah for many hours. At last they saw a green land full
of sugar cane. In the middle of the land there was a village with many servants. The kite said:
'Go and live here, it is all yours.' Ali became very happy and married many wives.
IV . 
The Magic Bird
A man cultivated his fields, and then planted rice, but soon
[Page [185] ]
the rice birds arrived in swarms and began to devour it. The man decided to catch the birds,
and he set many snares. One day he caught a beautiful golden bird. It opened its mouth and
said to him: 'Do not kill me, son of Adam, I will reward you!' So he let it go. The next day he
found many dozens of birds caught in his snares. He took them to the market and sold them.
This went on for a long time, so that he became a rich man.
One day he caught the talking bird again, but this time he did not take any notice of what it
said, however much it pleaded for its life. He killed it, and put it in his pan to fry. The dead
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
127 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
bird began to sing:
'Fry me well, fry me well,
you will see great wonders.'
The man took no notice; he put the bird on his plate and cut it into pieces. Each of the pieces
began to sing:
'Finish me off, eat me completely,
you will see great wonders.'
When the man had eaten up all the pieces of the bird, they reassembled in his stomach and
became one bird again. The bird came back to life, it stood up, stretched, and the man's
stomach split open so that he died in great pain. The bird stepped out and flew away, back to
the rice fields, where it went on eating rice.
2. OTHER SPIRITS, GOOD AND EVIL
I. The Liar
The liar was walking in the desert one day. There he saw an evil spirit, carrying away a
human body. The spirit said to the liar: 'Remember, never tell anybody what you saw.' The
[Page [186] ]
liar went home and said to his wife: 'I saw an evil spirit in the desert, carrying away a human
body.' The people of the village went to the desert and looked but they saw nothing. They
came back and found that a grave had been opened. It was the grave of the liar's mother-
in-law. His wife said to the people: 'Seize this evil man, he has desecrated my mother's grave,
and stolen her body for his sorcery. He must be killed!' So they killed him for sorcery. The
spirit had warned him in vain.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
128 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
II. Dalari
Dalari was cutting down trees in the forest when he found a skull of a person who had died.
He kicked it---and the skull began to speak: 'Do not kick me, Dalari. You are bad, you should
show sympathy with dead people, and leave them in peace.'
Dalari went home and said: 'In the forest there is a skull that can talk.' The villagers went
with him into the forest and found the skull. They talked to it but it said nothing. The
villagers were angry and said: 'Dalari, now we will kill you for you are a liar.' They killed him
on the spot, and he lay there, dead. Then the skull began to speak: 'Dalari, now you have seen
that you must show sympathy to the dead. Now you are dead, like me.' The people said: 'We
have killed our friend for nothing.' That is why today people still show sympathy for the dead,
and respect them.
III. 
The Liar and the Sorcerer
The liar and the sorcerer betted on which of the two would succeed in destroying the sultan's
city. The sorcerer arrived first in the city and killed fifty people with his potent poisons and
other magical devices. But nothing more happened; the people became reconciled to losing
their friends and relatives.
[Page [187] ]
So the sorcerer left the town and said to the liar: 'I am defeated, now you have a try.'
The liar came to the city and entered the sultan's palace. He whispered into the sultan's ear: 'I
have it from reliable sources that your brother Salimu is preparing a civil war against you.'
The sultan said: 'That is quite likely, he has always been a wicked character.' So the liar went
round and told everyone in the country that a civil war was imminent. The sultan called his
army and attacked his brother Salimu, who by now was prepared for war and struck back. He
won, and surrounded the city. His soldiers entered it and destroyed it.
The liar came to the sorcerer and said: 'You see, I won. It was quite easy . Leave people to
destroy each other.' The sorcerer thought to himself: 'This liar is much more evil than I am.'
Never bet with a liar .
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
129 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
IV . Kikaurange
A woman was living with a spirit. The spirit owned a plantation. The woman used to steal
maize from his fields, until one day he caught her. She said: 'If you let me go, I will give you
my child to eat when it is born.' She began to swell and her baby was born, a son, who said:
'My name is Kikaurange.' When the spirit heard this he came and said: 'You promised to give
me your son, to eat.' The woman said: 'Come back tonight.' She made a trap and that night the
spirit fell into the trap. Kikaurange said: 'Some animals will always be caught.'
V.  
The Man-eating Monster
A group of girls left their village one day to go and bathe in the river and wash their clothes.
They were playing in the water when suddenly they saw a terrible demon, looking like a
giant, with a stomach as big as a house.
[Page [188] ]
The demon said: 'Come here, little girls!' and gobbled them all up, one after the other. Some
ran away but the demon was quicker: with giant strides it hopped after them and with its
terrifying arms that looked like long branches, it picked them up and threw them into its
mouth that was as big as a well. It took no time to chew, but swallowed them alive.
A hunter who heard the cries of the girls came running along, and shouting: 'You ugly
monster, let go those girls!' And he thrust his spear into the demon's foot. But the monster
only laughed, picked him up and swallowed him too, spear and all, for it was a very careless
monster. There they all were inside the monster's stomach, which was as big as the sultan's
courtroom. The hunter said to the girls, when they had recovered from tumbling down into
this big hollow stomach: 'Now you must all dance, and I will beat the drum.' So the girls, who
understood that this was a clever plan, began to sing, clap their hands, and dance, stamping
their feet on the floor of the giant's stomach. The hunter took his spear and thrust it into the
front wall of the stomach. It made a thunderous noise like the drum of a big chief. And so the
hunter went on and on, drumming with his spear on the stomach wall, thrusting the point of
its good blade against the taught skin with full force, in time with the dancing girls, who were
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
130 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
singing:
'Our hunter has more cunning
than the demon big and stunning'.
The monster felt sicker and sicker with this terrific racket going on in its stomach. What was
worse: the hunter certainly knew his job, that is, how to pierce the skin of a big animal with
his spear. Finally, the spear went clean through the wall of the stomach, and they could see
the light of day through the hole. The hunter now took his big knife
[Page [189] ]
and carved out an opening large enough for a man to creep through. The demon died and the
hunter helped all the girls through the hole and out of the stomach. They were glad to be out
of the bad smell and into the open air. They walked away singing:
'Down the demon with a thud
tumbled in a splash of blood.'
But where were they? Far from their homes, in a land without people. The demon had carried
them to a country no one had ever seen. So they decided to settle there, and build huts for
themselves. The hunter married the girls and became a great chief.
VI. 
The story of Bibi Matalai Shamsi, 'Princess Sunrise'
Once upon a time there was a king who had six sons of his queen and one son, the youngest,
of a concubine; his name was Shamsudini.
Once upon a day they were sitting in their garden, the king and his seven sons, when
suddenly there alighted, on a tree above their heads, a bird of undescribable beauty. At once
the king, seeing this bird, said to his princes: 'My sons, may the one of you who loves me
truly catch this bird for me and bring it here.'
All seven princes said: 'Father, we will do it for you.' The father said: 'It is good,' but to the
youngest he said: 'You are too young.' The young prince Shamsudini persisted, and at last the
king gave in and allowed him to go. Each of the princes received a horse, servants, and
money. They set out together, but soon the queen's six sons could be seen whispering
together, and suddenly they turned round and said to Shamsudini: 'Give us your horse and
money and your slaves. We want to kill you.' Shamsudini said: 'It will not be necessary to kill
me, I will give you all my possessions and go
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
131 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
[Page [190] ]
further on foot.' He dismounted and walked on along the road. The six brothers said: 'Our
father is out of his mind, sending away all his sons in pursuit of a winged creature. We will
not go any farther. We will settle right here, our servants will build houses for us and till the
fields for us.' And so they did; soon they had a village to live in and completely forgot their
father's wish.
Shamsudini walked on and on for two days until he came upon an endless desert, and in the
middle of it he saw a gigantic tree. He went up to that tree and sat down between its roots to
rest a while. After a time he heard a terrible noise in a forest in the far distance, and a few
moments later he saw a big spirit of terrifying aspect rise up from the forest and come rapidly
closer to him. The spirit asked him with a booming voice: 'You, boy, where do you come
from, and where are you going?' Shamsudini said: 'I do not know where I am going or where I
come from.' 'Then why did you take the trouble of coming all this way? You are not even
enough for my breakfast!' boomed the disappointed spirit. The young prince replied: 'That is
quite true.' The spirit said: 'I will squeeze out your blood to rinse my mouth with, and I will
take your bones to pick my teeth with. Then I will have to go to the forest and pick up a
couple of elephants in order to have something to eat.'
The prince said: 'Do as God may command you. I have nothing to command; only God and
His prophet can command. I set out from my home with my brothers. I was the seventh, and
our father the king told us to go and find him a bird he had seen in his garden. So we all set
out to catch it, but we did not see it. My brothers seized me and wanted to kill me. I told
them that my life was not worth taking; they could take all my possessions if they would let
me go. So I walked away with my life and arrived here, and what will happen next is that
which God wishes.'
[Page [191] ]
The spirit said: 'If you want to keep your life, you must find me something to eat.'
Shamsudini asked the spirit how he expected him to get anything to eat. He had absolutely
nothing with him, and even the powerful spirit who could fly long distances could not find
enough meat to fill his stomach. The spirit said: 'If you do not give me food I will eat you.' So
Shamsudini took his book and began to read, reciting all the prayers he knew. And looking up
he suddenly saw forty big pots of food, just standing there. The spirit began to eat at once and
did not stop before all the pots were empty, yet each pot contained two hundred pounds of
good food.
When it was finished, the spirit said: 'Now I am satisfied, so that my spirit has become quiet
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
132 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
in my head. Now we can discuss what we do next. What is it you are looking for?'
Shamsudini said: 'I am looking for a bird which looks like gold and mother of pearl.' The
spirit said: 'I know where it is but it's a long way off.' He took the prince with him, and they
went a journey of three days, like the wind. They came to a city and the spirit said: 'Go to the
palace, and in it you will find that bird, and two others as well. Remember that the talkers are
sleepers, but those who are quiet are awake.'
The young prince went and entered the palace, and found many spirits there, making a noise.
He found the cage with the bird, and was just going to take it with him when the spirits all
rose up and made a terrible noise. Some said: 'We will take him for our breakfast'; others
said: 'We will take him to our king.' The king of the spirits asked him what he wanted the bird
for and Shamsudini told him his story. The king said: 'Bring me the thunder-sword; if you do,
you may have the bird, even all three birds.' Shamsudini rose and said: 'If God wills.' He went
back to his spirit who asked him if he had got the bird. He said: 'No, first I have to get the
thunder-sword. Do you know where that is?' The spirit
[Page [192] ]
said: 'Yes, but first I must have something to eat, then we can discuss it.'
Shamsudini took his book and read all his prayers. There appeared again forty pots of food
which the spirit started eating at once. Shamsudini also took a little of the food. After this
they set out on their next journey. The spirit took Shamsudini with him and they travelled
like the wind. After three days they arrived in another city, and the spirit said: 'Go to the
palace, there is the sword.' Shamsudini did so and found everything as he had found it in the
city of the birds. The sword was hanging on the wall with two other swords. He was just
about to unhook it from the wall when the spirits of that place came and seized him. Some
wanted to eat him at once, but in the end they took him to their king. The king asked him
what he wanted the sword for and he told them his history. The king said: 'You may have the
sword of thunder, and the other two as well, on condition that you bring me Princess Sunrise.'
Shamsudini returned to his spirit who was waiting for him in the plains outside the city. 'Why
did you not bring the sword of thunder?' The prince said: 'I have to find Princess Sunrise first.
Do you know where she is?' The spirit said: 'Yes, but first give me some food, then I can
think and travel.' Shamsudini sat down, took his book and recited all his prayers. And sure
enough, the forty pots of food appeared. The prince ate a few mouthfuls and the spirit ate all
the rest.
After this they set out, and soon they arrived on the beach of the ocean. The spirit began to
uproot tall trees, and from these they built a beautiful ship. They boarded it and sailed away
to the city of Princess Sunrise, whose father was the sultan of that city .
The spirit said: 'Now we must be very careful and act with circumspection. You will enter the
city, disguised as a learned medicine-man. You will go to the palace and say that you
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
133 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
[Page [193] ]
possess amulets which prevent people from dying. When the king has a patient brought in,
then apply your medicines, but if he wants you to cure his daughter Princess Matalai Shemsi,
you must say that medicines for girls cannot be applied on the continent, they have to be
administered at sea. As soon as the young lady boards our ship we will abduct her.'
The next morning Shamsudini went to court dressed as a doctor. At his request he was
admitted to court, and told the king that he knew about many medicines and wondrous cures
which prevented death. The king said: 'Make them for me, my wives, my concubines and all
my household.' Shamsudini went back to his ship and prepared his magic medicines. Then he
went back to administer them to the people of the palace. When at last the beautiful Princess
Sunrise was brought to him, he fell in love with her, but he said: 'Alas, I cannot cure her here,
I can only cure her on my ship.' The king said: 'It is good. She will come tomorrow.'
Shamsudini went back to his ship and told his spirit: 'Tomorrow the princess will come on
board our ship.' The spirit said: 'It is good, I am ready to sail.' The king told his daughter:
'Tomorrow you will go to the ship of that magical doctor to be cured of death. Go with one
maid only.' She said: 'At your service, father.' The next morning, when she arrived, the prince
invited her into the cabin and showed her his many false medicines. At the same time, the
spirit had cast off and hoisted the sail, so they were under way. The Princess Sunrise was so
absorbed in the conversation with the young prince that she did not notice they were sailing
before evening fell. She asked: 'Where are we?' The prince answered: 'Have no fear, fair
princess, with Allah's permission we will sail to my house and live there. Later, we will
return to your father.'
In the meantime, the father of Princess Sunrise became almost insane with terror when he
was told that the ship
[Page [194] ]
had disappeared with his daughter. All reason vanished, so dearly did he love his daughter.
He ordered his entire fleet to pursue the ship of the false magician. The ships sailed out in
search, all together, but after long days of cruising round on the ocean they returned, tired and
unsuccessful. The king wept many days for his lost daughter, but at last he praised the Lord
and fell silent.
Shamsudini and Matalai Shamsi sailed with their guiding spirit to the city of the king of the
thunder-sword. The prince said to his spirit: 'Now, my friend, give me counsel. How shall we
arrange to obtain the sword without giving away this princess, whom I have grown very fond
of?' The spirit who had become his friend said: 'There is only one possibility: we must give
her maid instead.' Shamsudini went to Matalai Shamsi and said: 'I shall need your maid.' The
princess said: 'She is at your disposal, and so am I.' The prince thanked her, took her maid
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
134 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
with him and dressed her so as to look like a real princess. The spirit helped him with his
magical power. When they had landed, the prince took the maid to the king of the
thunder-sword and said: 'This is the princess Matalai Shamsi; may I have the thunder-
sword?' The king was overjoyed and said: 'You may have the other two as well,' but the
prince only took one.
They travelled onwards until they arrived at the city of the king of the Golden Bird, and the
prince said to his friend the spirit: 'What shall we do now? We must devise a way of getting
the bird without parting with the sword.' The spirit said: 'I know answers to small problems as
well as to big problems.' They set up their tents near the city and the spirit said: 'Now cut for
me a piece of wood, and we'll make a sword out of it.' The prince found a long pole and the
spirit carved it and worked it until it looked exactly like the thunder-sword. He changed the
wood into iron by simply rubbing it with his magic medicines. Then he said: 'Take
[Page [195] ]
this to the king of the Golden Bird and say: 'This is the thunder-sword, now give me the
Golden Bird in exchange.' The prince did so, and the king was overjoyed. He said: 'You may
have all three birds.' The prince, however, took only one bird.
They broke camp and travelled on until they arrived near the place where Shamsudini's six
brothers lived. The spirit said: 'This is where I met you, it is here that I take my leave of you.
Remember that your brothers are evil men who wanted to kill you. Just in case, I will give
you one of my feathers. You may pull it out and keep it. If any misfortune should befall you,
or if you are in danger, lay this feather in the fire and you will see me standing before you. I
shall be with you at once.' Shamsudini took a feather, his princess, his caged bird and his
sword, and said good-bye to his friend the great spirit, who soon disappeared.
The prince travelled on with his treasures until he reached the settlement of his six brothers,
who were cultivating their fields. Shamsudini greeted his brothers politely. They asked him
the name of the girl he had with him, but he did not tell them. He said: 'I just met her
somewhere on the road. And now let us go together to our father, and I will give him this
bird, which is what he wanted.' So they all went to sleep. But in the middle of the night the
six brothers got up and strangled Shamsudini until he was unconscious, then carried him off
and threw him outside. They folded his tents and took everything with them, including the
princess, the Golden Bird and the thunder-sword. They travelled until they reached their
father's palace.
When the father saw his sons with the wished-for bird he was overjoyed. But he asked them:
'Where is Shamsudini, your youngest brother?' They said: 'Oh, he went along his own paths.'
The king was angered when he heard this and threw out his concubine, Shamsudini's mother,
because her
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
135 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
[Page [196] ]
son had disobeyed his father. She had to live in a small hut outside the city, in the wilderness.
Then the king asked his sons: 'Who is this beautiful woman?' They said: 'We do not know, we
found her on the road with her sword.' The Princess Sunrise said nothing. She just sat and
looked sad and dejected, refusing all food and all drink. The brothers said they did not know
why, they thought it might be homesickness. The eldest then decided to marry her. So they
prepared for the wedding.
In the early hours, the morning wind began to blow freshly and Shamsudini woke up. He took
out his feather and threw it in the fire which he revived. At once he saw his old friend the
spirit standing before him, saying: 'Well, my friend what happened to you?' Shamsudini told
him his story, and the spirit said: 'I will take you to your father. They travelled like the wind
and Shamsudini was set down in the king's hall. There were all the brothers and the viziers
and dignitaries, all ready for the wedding. Shamsudini greeted his father and told him the
whole history. And when he called Matalai Shamsi by her name she came running towards
him and spoke for the first time, saying to the king: 'He is my prince.' And the voice of the
spirit rang out in the hall, booming: 'It is true.' The king ordered his hangman to sew the six
wicked princes in sacks and throw them into the ocean. Shamsudini's mother was allowed to
return to the palace and received great honour, together with her son.
Shamsudini married Matalai Shamsi, Princess Sunrise, and the wedding lasted many days.
After that they boarded their ship and sailed to the city of Matalai Shamsi's father. When the
old sultan saw his daughter alive and healthy, and the wife of a handsome prince, he was
overjoyed and said to Shamsudini: 'You took away my daughter but now you have made
good, you have brought her back.' And he ordered his servants to prepare another feast, which
lasted many days.
[Page [197] ]
They ate rice and cakes until they could eat no more. And that is the end of the story.
VII. The Tree Spirit
A strong man with an axe selected a big tree in the forest and said aloud: 'I will chop this tree
down. Its wood will fetch a high price with the carpenters in the city.'
The spirit of the tree heard him and cried: 'Do not cut this tree down, it is my house!' 'What
will you give me if I don't?' 'Take this,' said the spirit, 'and come back when it is empty .'
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
136 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
Down came a large copper cauldron, all new and shining.
The woodcutter decided to accept it in lieu of the tree, took it home and told his wife to use it
for cooking rice and chicken, which was his favourite dish. The wife did so. Then she called
in all their children and they started eating. It was delicious. When they were quite satisfied
the cauldron was still full. So they called their old parents, their cousins, nephews and nieces,
and when they had all eaten their fill the pot was still full. So they invited their neighbours
and all the townsfolk, and they all ate until they staggered home. The people of the town
decided that such a generous man must be their chief. So they made him chief, and
everybody lived happily ever after.
VIII. 
The Pumpkin Spirit
One day a boy was walking along by the river, singing a song. Suddenly, he was caught by a
spirit, who pushed him into a wooden cylinder, such as the people use for making drums.
There the boy was, crammed into a hollow log, and the spirit carried him round from town to
town. Before he entered a town he would assume human form and dress up like a
professional singer. Then he would go to the marketplace and announce: 'I have my singing
box with me; I want rice and chicken.' The people would say: 'Sing a song for us
[Page [198] ]
first.' The spirit would then force the boy to sing his song, and afterwards he always gobbled
up all the food, for spirits are hungry creatures.
One day the spirit entered the boy's home town. As soon as the people there heard the song
they said to each other: 'This is our own boy.' They went and fetched strong beer and let the
spirit drink until he fell down, fast asleep. Then they looked in the wooden drum and pulled
out the boy. They hid him in a hut, and put bees and a snake into the drum. They woke the
spirit, saying 'Wake up! The people want to hear your song!' The spirit took his 'drum' and
beat it, but no one sang. He went away until he was alone on the road, and there he opened
his 'drum'. The bees flew out and stung him all over. So he did not notice the snake that slid
out, and bit him. The spirit died and became a pumpkin- plant, growing many large round
pumpkins.
One day, the children of the town came along and saw the pumpkins. They wanted to cut
them off, but one of the pumpkins suddenly came rolling towards them, threatening like a
bull. The children fled back to the town in panic, the pumpkin rolling closely behind them.
When their fathers, who were sitting round the fire, heard their children scream and saw the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
137 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
pumpkin thundering along, they seized it and pushed it into the fire. The spirit-pumpkin went
up in flames and became ashes.
IX. The Giant Horse
A young man called Kibaraka, 'Little Blessing', was once walking in the wilderness when he
was suddenly scooped up by the gigantic hand of a spirit. The spirit flew with him, soaring
through the clouds like an eagle. Then it swooped down again and alighted near a castle.
They entered the gate which the spirit locked behind them.
The next morning the spirit told Kibaraka: 'I must now go
[Page [199] ]
out on business. Here are the keys of the doors of this house. You may open all the doors of
these rooms but you are not allowed to open the cellars, if you do I will eat you.' At that, the
spirit flew away through the keyhole like a thin smoke.
Kibaraka inspected all the rooms. In the first one he found a sword, which was fighting on its
own without anyone to hold it, swishing round in the air. As soon as it noticed Kibaraka, it
swung its hilt towards him and spoke in clear language: 'I want a true warrior who can hold
me. My food is battle.' Kibaraka gripped the hilt, and it lay in his hand as if it were made for
it. He held it a moment, then he put it back and closed the door, saying: 'Later.'
In the next room he found a dagger, thrusting itself backwards and forwards without any man
moving it. When it noticed Kibaraka it came towards him, lay down in his hand, and said:
'My food is the hearts of men. Come, use me.' Kibaraka whispered: 'Later,' and closed the
door. In the next room he found a lioness, roaring and yawning hungrily. 'Bring me food!' she
told Kibaraka, who went to the larder, found a piece of meat and brought it to the lioness;
while she was busy eating it, he locked the door.
In the next room he found a leopard who shouted: 'Hungry, hungry! Kibaraka found some
more meat, gave it to the leopard and locked the door.
Now he had seen all the rooms, and the temptation to go and inspect the cellars was
irresistible. He descended and opened the first cellar. It was an enormous hall and in it he
found a huge horse. The horse spoke in clear language: ' 
Salaam aleika , oh son of Adam.
You have come here to be eaten. But if you are quick and clever you may help me and
yourself to escape. You must first find some food for me.' When Kibaraka had brought some
food and the horse had eaten it, it continued: 'In one of the cellars you will find seven bottles.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
138 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
They are: the sea bottle, the mud bottle, the fire
[Page [200] ]
bottle, the thorn bottle, the pebble bottle, the needle bottle and the creeper bottle.' Kibaraka
searched every cellar under the castle until at last he found the seven bottles with their
mysterious contents and brought them to where the horse was.
The horse said: 'Now release the people and all the cattle: the cows, the sheep, the donkeys
and the goats.' Kibaraka opened all the stables so that the cattle streamed out in great herds.
The horse opened its big mouth, and to the young man's great surprise, it swallowed them,
one after the other, the goats two at a time. Kibaraka understood that the horse was in reality
a spirit. When the horse had eaten all the cattle, it was ready to go. It said to Kibaraka:
'Mount me, and do not forget the seven bottles.'
Although the horse trotted quicker than a bird could fly, it was not long before Kibaraka
reported a dustcloud behind them which was approaching rapidly. 'That is the spirit, the
owner of the castle, and his friends,' said the horse. 'Throw down the bottle of creepers.' At
once a forest of creepers, climbers and lianas grew up in which the evil spirits got entangled.
It took them a long time to work their way through this forest, and several of them never
disentangled themselves at all. The others, however, began to catch up with the giant horse,
so it told Kibaraka to throw down the thorn bottle. At once a forest of thorn trees grew up,
and many of the spirit's friends died of the poisonous spines. The remainder, however, was
soon in sight again, and Kibaraka was told to throw down the needle bottle. The needles at
once began to take root and grow straight up like aloe stalks. Many spirits hurt their feet and
died, but the others soon caught up again, and this time, Kibaraka had to throw down the
mud-bottle, and at once there were vast marshes and mires, and soggy swamps. Many of the
spirits were bogged down, many drowned, many hesitated and went back.
The rest soon caught up with the horse, and for them the
[Page [201] ]
pebble bottle had to be thrown down. A high mountain ridge rose up in the air, and the spirits
who climbed them were hit by falling rock. Yet some survived, and soon caught up again. For
them came the fire-bottle, which caused a bush fire spreading from horizon to horizon. Many
of the evil spirits were burnt and died. Only one spirit survived the fire, and for him there
was the last bottle, the sea-bottle, which transformed itself into an ocean. The other shore
was invisible and the evil spirit never found its way across it.
The horse stopped near a mansion with green meadows and said: 'Here we will live.' To
Kibaraka's great surprise it disgorged all the cows, sheep, goats and donkeys it had eaten.
They walked out of its mouth and at once began to graze peacefully. Kibaraka settled in the
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
139 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
mansion, and every week he went to a town near by to sell a donkey or a few goats and buy
whatever they needed.
Now the sultan of that town had seven daughters, who one day would choose their future
husbands in a special ceremony. Each of the girls had to throw a lemon, and the man who
caught it would be her husband. The first princess threw her lemon and the young man who
caught it was the son of the chief vizier. The second princess's lemon was caught by the son
of the chief cadi; the first six princesses all threw their lemons at nice promising young men,
but the seventh lemon was caught by Kibaraka. The sultan inquired who the young man was,
and received the answer that he was a donkey-dealer.
The sultan was not pleased with this, and ordered another throw. However, Kibaraka caught
the lemon again, and when the third lemon of the seventh princess also landed in his hands,
the consensus was that Allah had willed it so.
The seven princesses were married that same day, and Kibaraka took his young bride home to
his house. His brothers-in-law jeered at him and the other princesses pitied
[Page [202] ]
their sister who had married a mere donkey-dealer, but when she arrived in his mansion and
saw the green meadows and the fat cattle she realized that her husband was rich. He had
many servants too, they were all people who had once been the prisoners of the spirit, and
who now served their liberator and herded his cattle.
So they lived there for some time until the sultan fell ill. Learned doctors were called, and
they concluded that only the milk of a lioness could cure the sultan's disease. The sultan
called his sons-in-law together and told them to go in search of this medicine. They went out,
but soon came back: none of them dared travel into the wilderness and milk a lioness.
Finally, Kibaraka arrived in court with a bottle of milk which his own lioness had given him.
The sultan drank it and at once rose from his bed, whole and healthy.
A little later he had an attack of another disease and this time the doctors declared that only
the milk of a leopard could cure him. The six eldest sons-in-law of the sultan were sent out,
but came back soon after as none of them dared penetrate into the forest, find a female
leopard and milk her. Finally, Kibaraka arrived at court with a small bottle of milk which his
own leopard had given him. The sultan drank it and rose at once, cured.
After some time war broke out; the country was attacked by barbarians from the wilderness.
The sultan was too old now to fight, but he sent out his six eldest sons-in-law as commanders
of the army. They rode out in full armour to face the enemy. But sons of men in high office
are not necessarily heroes. When the enemy charged, the sultan's sons-in-law fled. The
heathens would have won the day if it had not been for a curious event. Suddenly, there
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
140 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
emerged from the forest a young man, brandishing a sword in one hand and a dagger in the
other. To everybody's horror he was riding a leopard. He leaped on his mount right into the
[Page [203] ]
thick of the battle, where his sword began swinging through the air, whistling like a bullet.
Heads rolled left and right, and if anyone was not quite dead, the dagger quickly found his
heart and pierced it. The enemies were put to flight and the young knight disappeared into the
forest. The sultan's sons- in-law came home to the palace and boasted that they had beaten
the heathens and driven them away.
The next day they rode out again, but the pagans too came back, in larger numbers. They
would soon have overrun the battlefield if the young knight had not reappeared, this time
seated on a lion. The sword and the dagger did their work, and the lion terrified the horses.
The heathen tribes were defeated and the lion-rider disappeared. The six princes rode back to
the palace and boasted about their prowess. There was one soldier in the sultan's court who
had more honesty than the others. He said: 'Sire, all this is only bragging. In truth, we should
have been defeated early in the morning if it had not been for one knight, riding on a beast of
prey. He was a great magician, for not only did he rule the wild animals, he also possessed a
magic sword that slashed through the necks of the enemies like a goat grazing. He had a
dagger, too, that sought out the hearts of men the way a dog smells out a rat.' The sultan was
deeply interested in this story and decided to ride out in person the next day.
That morning his army was again being routed when the young knight appeared, seated on a
colossal stallion. He swung his dagger and let his swinging sword do its work. The enemies
fled, this time for ever, and the sultan dispatched a rider to block the young knight's way
before he could vanish. Kibaraka was led before the sultan, who now recognized him as his
youngest son-in-law, and also as the magician who twice provided a cure that saved his life.
He recognized Kibaraka's talents and made him sultan before he retired.
[Page [205] ]
12 Just Judgements
[Page [206] ]
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
141 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
1. ALI BEI AND THE BOY
Once upon a time there lived a man whose name was Ali Bei Kashikashi, the people of the
town believed he was a simpleton, so whenever he was seen walking in the streets there was
a gang of boys behind him, jeering and mocking him.
One day Ali Bei became tired of this and decided to put an end to it. He picked up a stone,
turned round suddenly and threw it at the biggest and nastiest boy in the gang. The stone hit
the boy on the head so that he bled like an ox. The boy screamed and ran to his father, crying:
'That madman hurt me and I have done nothing!' The father, enraged at Ali Bei's outburst of
violence, dragged him before the judge. The cadi listened to what the father and the boy had
to tell him, then turned to Ali Bei and asked him: 'What have you to say?' Ali Bei recited
only: ' 
Y a kadhi, salla Allahu ala Rasulihi Nabii Muhammadi .' ('Oh, cadi, May God bless
His messenger, the Prophet Mohammed.') The cadi gave the traditional reply: ' Salla' llahu
aleihi wa sallam ' ('May God bless him and give him peace.') Ali Bei began again: ' Salla
Allahu ala Rasulihi Nabii Muhammadi  .' And the cadi was obliged to say: ' Salla' llahu
aleihi wa sallam .' And Ali Bei again: ' Salla Allahu ...' etc.
After four times the judge's patience was exhausted. He said angrily: 'Now that's enough, I am
tired of you, stop it!'
[Page [207] ]
Then Ali Bei spoke in his normal tone: 'You see, learned cadi, that was precisely my
argument. I have had to listen to those boys, not just four times but hundreds of times. And
what they said were not decent prayers to the Prophet, but insults, curses and foul language
that no self-respecting father should permit his son ever to say. I wonder where this boy
learnt it.' The cadi realized that Ali Bei was right and acquitted him. The father had to take
his son to the doctor to be cured.
2. THE MERCHANT, THE BEGGAR AND THE HORSE
Once upon a time there was a merchant called Rahimu, who owned a beautiful black stallion
which he was rightly proud of. One day he was riding it on one of his long business safaris.
He was approaching the town of Sala, and when he was just about to enter the gate, there
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
142 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 144 ---
came a beggar who begged to be taken to the market-place. The merchant did not think this
an immodest request so he decided to give the beggar a ride, and helped him to mount up
behind him on the stallion's back. The strong horse carried them through the streets to the
market-place where the merchant had to do his business. He bade the beggar get off his horse,
but the man did not move. He raised his voice, but so did the beggar, crying out to the people:
'This rich man wants to steal my horse, he says he owns it, but it is mine. I gave him a ride to
the town, I even let him sit in my saddle.'
A crowd gathered; the people were inclined to side with the poor man. An 
askari arrived and
took them both to the courtroom, with the horse. There, the cadi listened to the contradictory
stories of the two men. Then he decreed that the horse must be put in his own stable for the
night. The
[Page [208] ]
next morning he sent for the beggar and went to the stable with him. Then, he sent the beggar
to court and invited the merchant into the stable. Finally he went to the courtroom himself
and opened the morning session.
This was how he ruled: 'The horse belongs to the merchant. This morning, when it saw the
beggar it showed no signs of recognition, but as soon as the merchant entered its stable, it
neighed and stretched its neck, expecting food and the other usual signs of affection from its
master. You, beggar, have committed the worst of sins: the sin of ingratitude. Go now, for the
law prescribes no punishment for such a sin.'
3. THE THATCHER
A thatcher was working on the roof of a high building in the town. Suddenly he slipped and
fell off. Now it had pleased Allah to arrange destiny in such a way that a rich man was
walking in the street just as the thatcher came tumbling down. The thatcher fell like a stone
and landed on the head of the rich man. It was the rich man who was fated to die on the spot,
whereas it pleased Allah to prolong the life of the thatcher, who escaped unhurt.
Now the family of the rich man was most indignant that their uncle had died under the impact
of a lowly thatcher---so they took the thatcher to the cadi, saying: 'This man killed our
beloved uncle and bread-winner, by stupidly falling on him. He owes us damages.' The cadi
reflected for a while, then he ruled: 'You are right. You have a right to punish him. The
thatcher will therefore have to go and stand in the same street, on the same spot. One of the
rich man's relatives will go and climb on the roof and jump off it, on the thatcher, to punish
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
143 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 145 ---
him for his false step.' The relatives of the rich
[Page [209] ]
man are still quarrelling about the problem of who in the family will carry out the sentence.
The thatcher is still alive and goes on doing his work on the roofs, by the grace of Allah.
4. THE TURTLE-DOVE
A man's young child cried all night. A turtle-dove came to the man and said: 'I cannot sleep
all night because of the crying. Throw your child out of your nest.' The man said: 'You have
no pity .' The turtle-dove said: 'You have no intelligence.' They went to the cadi. The cadi
said: 'Both of you must bring me water.' The man went out and came back with water. The
turtle-dove could not, because it has no hands. The judge said: 'The one who brought me
water has more intelligence.'
5. ABU NUW ASI AS CADI
Abu Nuwasi was a famous poet at the court of the Caliph Haruni Rashidi. One day the Caliph
appointed Abu Nuwasi Chief Cadi of the city, because some poets are also scholars.
One morning a cook came to see the cadi and complained about a poor man, saying: 'This
beggar just stands there, near my booth on the market where I bake my excellent cakes. He
sniffs and smells the pleasant odours of my pastry without paying, so that I work for nothing.'
Abu Nuwasi the wise cadi, reflected for a long time, then he ruled: 'You are right. The beggar
has enjoyed the smell of your cakes and in doing so he has used the fruit of your work. For
that he owes you compensation. I think that two golden dinars would be an appropriate price.'
The eyes of
[Page [210] ]
the cook lit up on hearing this, but the beggar complained: 'Great Lord, I am a poor man, I
have no money. Shake me and nothing will tinkle. Can you squeeze juice out of a dried
currant?' The learned cadi pondered about this for a while. Then he said: 'Since you are a poor
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
144 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 146 ---
man, I will pay the sum out of my pocket.' And he produced two coins, whereupon the cook
eagerly stretched out his hand to receive the money.
'One minute,' said Abu Nuwasi. 'Did the poor man eat the cakes?' 'No, sir,' said the cook
diffidently . 'Did he nibble at them?' 'No, sir.' 'Did he perhaps spoil them by breathing over
them?' 'Eh, no, sir.' 'So you can still sell those cakes, or you may have already done so?' 'Eh,
yes, sir.' 'In that case, since the poor man consumed nothing but vapour, you will be paid with
nothing but sound. Open your ears and enjoy the ring of true gold.' And the wise judge made
the gold tinkle in his hand, so that the sound of gold entered the ears of the cook. Far from
extracting money from a poor man, the cook should have 
given him some cakes, and Allah
would have rewarded him with the fragrance of Paradise.
6. SAID'S SON (MW ANA SAIDI)
Said had a beautiful horse. When he died, he said to his son: 'Look after the horse, take great
care of it, never sell it, and it will earn your keep.' So when he was dead, Said's son rode his
horse every day, taking messages, letters and parcels from a merchant in one town to another
in the next. Many horse traders wanted to buy his horse, but he never agreed to this. One day
a trader said to him: 'I will buy your bridle.' He offered a very high price, so Said's son sold
him the bridle. The trader then took the bridle and led the horse away. Stop,' cried Said's son,
'I am keeping the horse, you did not
[Page [211] ]
buy that. Wait, let me take off the bridle.' But the trader would not let him. So they came
before the cadi.
The cadi asked the trader: 'Did you buy the horse or the bridle?' The trader said: 'I bought the
bridle, but who would ever buy a string without a goat? I know this young man does not wish
to sell his horse for sentimental reasons, so I proposed that he should sell me the bridle, and
Allah knows that I paid enough money to buy a good horse with.' Said's son said: 'I never
meant to sell the horse. I cannot sell it, for it was my father's last wish that I should keep it.
He said he wanted the bridle so I sold him the bridle. He paid a good price for it because it is
a good bridle. The horse will obey me without a bridle. It has served my father.' The cadi
asked the trader: 'Suppose you had a trap or a snare in the forest. Suppose you sold it, but
when you came to have a last look at it, you found that there was a big animal in it. Would
you not consider that animal yours?' The trader said nothing. The cadi ruled that the horse
was the property of Said's son.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
145 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM


--- PAGE 147 ---
7. THE SEED
A man divorced his wife, but claimed their baby son. The mother refused to give up the child,
and they came before the cadi. The woman said: 'I am still suckling this baby, and shall be for
a long time. In any case I love my child more than he does, and I will give him anything for
it.' The man said: 'A child is grown from a man's seed. It is the seed that is essential; the
woman only feeds it, and so when it is born it is like the father in every way .' The judge said:
'So the mother feeds it, and you contributed only the seed, did you?' 'Oh yes, sir, one tiny seed
was enough.' The judge now turned to the woman: 'How much does the baby weigh?'
[Page [212] ]
As she did not know, scales were brought and the baby was weighed.
The cadi then ruled: 'The man contributed the weight of one grain of seed, the woman ten
pounds. If the man wishes to keep the child, he will have to pay the woman the value of ten
pounds of good food.' The man protested, but the cadi continued: 'In addition, eh, what is
your profession?' 'I am a porter, sir.' 'And how much do you charge for carrying other people's
loads?' 'A shilling a pound for one day, sir.' 'Very well then, you will pay this woman an
additional daily wage for carrying your load for you, at the rate of three shillings daily in the
second month, rising to ten shillings per day during the whole of the ninth month.'
The man understood. He said: 'All right, it wasn't my load she was carrying, but her own. She
may keep it.'
© Jan Knappert 1970
Copyright © 1996-2011 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
African Writers Series - Print V iew http://collections.chadwyck.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/display/printV iew.do
146 of 146 7/9/2011 1:25 PM

