=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Nah Dove~DefiningAMother.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 23
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:34.509924
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Defining a Mother-Centered Matrix to Analyze the Status of Women
Nah Dove
Journal of Black Studies, Vol. 33, No. 1. (Sep., 2002), pp. 3-24.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0021-9347%28200209%2933%3A1%3C3%3ADAMMTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
Journal of Black Studies is currently published by Sage Publications, Inc..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/sage.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Sat Apr 28 08:18:25 2007


--- PAGE 2 ---
DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED 
MATRIX TO ANALYZE 
THE STATUS OF WOMEN 
NAH DOVE 
Accra, Ghana 
This article focuses on the significance of mother-centeredness to state 
development. Modem Africa is faced with the imposition of Western states 
that are fundamentally male-centered and antithetical to the well-being of 
Africa and her people and, for that matter, all humanity. Defining the 
Mother-Centered Matrix that underpinned the development of Kemet chal- 
lenges the belief that the United States and other modem states are neces- 
sarily progressive. Issues of "development" from a culturally sensitive per- 
spective highlight the importance of Kemet as a state model that can 
provide contemporary African people with examples of ways of governing 
and living that are still unparalleled by modem states. 
A people losing sight of origins are dead. 
A people deaf to purpose are lost. 
Under fertile rain, in scorching sunshine there is no difference: 
their bodies are mere corpses, awaiting final burial. 
Ayi Kwei Armah (1973, p. xiv) 
In this work, Kemet (Ancient Egypt) is considered the progenitor of 
the modern state. It represents the first known model that produced 
an urban environment. Although there are recognizably different 
types of state structures, it can be conceived that this ancient model 
provided the pattern that influenced the development of other state 
models. This is not to deny the existence of other models that pre- 
ceded and influenced the development of Kemet. In light of its 
achievements, Kemet's African origin places Black people at the 
forefront of the development of modern urban humanity. The con- 
JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES, Vol. 33 No. I, September 2002 3-24 
O 2002 Sage Publications


--- PAGE 3 ---
4 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
tinuing inferiorization of Africa and her people challenges this 
assertion. This apparent contradiction has placed the field of 
Egyptology in a difficult position as it attempts to claim the great- 
ness of European civilization by appropriating African cultural 
characteristics. 
In this regard, Cheikh Anta Diop's knowledge of Africa led him 
to challenge the school of Egyptology. At the 1974 Symposium on 
the "Peopling of Ancient Egypt and the Deciphering of Meroitic 
Script," organized by United Nations Educational, Scientific, and 
Cultural Organizations in Cairo, Diop and his student Obenga 
challenged Egyptologists with prepared arguments that criticized 
some of the fundamental premises within the discipline. In partic- 
ular, Diop and Obenga deconstructed the notion that African peo- 
ple had little or nothing to do with the development of Ancient 
Egypt. From their linguistic, archeological, historical, and 
anthropological data, they were able to cogently theorize that the 
northerly movement of humanity from central Africa to the rest of 
the world could be applied to the peopling of Ancient Egypt 
(Diop, Leclant, Obenga, & Vercoutter, 1997). They successfully 
opposed, what Egyptology implies, that Egyptian civilization 
developed as a result of the impact of more northerly, so-called 
Caucasian, influences. As a result, Ancient Egypt could now be 
seen as culturally African. Moreover, the recent discovery of bone 
tools dating 90,000 years, found in the Congo, further challenges 
the belief that Europe was the home of modem humans. These 
findings affirm that Africa was the home of people whose tools 
were advanced some 50,000 years before those of Europe (Yellen, 
Brooks, Cornelissen, Mehlman, & Stewart, 1995, pp. 553-556). 
Diop's (1974) mission was to reclaim Kemet for Africa by con-
necting its cultural characteristics to the rest of Africa. He believed 
that "the history of Black Africa will remain suspended in air and 
cannot be written correctly until African historians dare to connect 
it with the history of Egypt" (p. xiv).


--- PAGE 4 ---
Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 5 
DIOP'S CRADLE THEORY REVISITED 
Grounded by his love for humanity, Diop sought to rectify scho- 
lastic attempts to debase Africa and her people. The "cradle theory" 
was an attempt to show that distinctions among people could be 
linked to their cultural persuasions. Culture is embedded so deeply 
in a people that their human identity as people and individuals is 
shaped by it. Moreover, for a people to maintain culture, it is neces- 
sary to preserve cultural memory through their historical knowl- 
edge, language, and psychology. 
For African people, enslavement, colonization and neocolon- 
ization have severed and eroded much of the cultural memory. Afri- 
can men and women trained in Western and Arabic schools and uni- 
versities have been inculcated with alien (often anti-African) 
cultural renditions of their own histories, thus greatly influencing 
the construction of political structures and decisions concerning 
personal, family, and societal "development." 
Diop warned that 
Every people must edify its own culture and especially must write 
its own history rather than being content with a passive knowledge 
of [its] culture and history as misrepresented in foreign writings. 
(Diop, 1996, p. 54) 
Even Diop did not escape from the Western cultural-historical par- 
adigm. Among its many revelations, the cradle theory is able to 
show how culture can ensure social change through domination and 
conquest and how social change can take place when a people 
regain knowledge of their cultural memory (identity) and rise up to 
challenge such conquest. Diop applied a European culture-based 
theory from Marx to his ideas on state construction and develop- 
ment,' thereby unwittingly limiting his own theoretical analysis. 
This work takes Diop's cradle theory further by arguing that the 
defining cultural-social characteristic of national or state societies 
is mother-centeredness or the lack thereof. More emphasis on this 
distinction will facilitate an understanding of the fundamental con- 
flict between the African and European civilizations and state


--- PAGE 5 ---
6 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES 1SEPTEMBER 2002 
development. This article focuses on the significance of mother- 
centeredness to state development. 
Modern Africa is faced with the imposition of Western states 
that are fundamentally male-centered and antithetical to the well- 
being of Africa and her people and, for that matter, all humanity. 
Kemet is a state model that can provide contemporary African peo- 
ple with examples of ways of governing and living that are still 
unparalleled by modern states. 
The two main cradles of civilization-the southern cradle, 
Africa, and the northern cradle, Europe-represent modes of soci- 
etal structures that are almost antithetical to each other. Africa, 
where humanity began, produced mother-centered societies. Over 
time, the migration of African people to the northern clime pro- 
duced patriarchal male-centered societies. Cultural distinctions 
between these cradles are attributed to the arrangement of female1 
male power relations. These two cultural entities have had an 
impact on each other, creating "zones of confluence" (Diop, 19591 
1990, p. 55). Southern cradle or mother-centered people, for 
instance, once populated Arabia, or what is known as the Middle 
East. Over time, conquerors from the northern cradle imposed 
patriarchal beliefs and practices that manifest today, in the spiritual 
realm, as Christian, Hebraic, and Islamic religions (Dove, 1998, 
p. 522). 
Within the Mother-Centered Matrix,' balance between the femi- 
nine and masculine principles is sought from the physical and 
material to the spiritual planes. Mother-centered literally means 
mother-led societal and cultural constructs. In such societies, the 
line of inheritance through the mother is known as matrilineal or, 
what Amadiume (1987, p. 17) terms, Mother-$ocused/matrifocal. 
A concept of the Akan system (of Ghana) is that the Mogya (blood), 
is given to the child by the mother (Opoku, 1978, p. 99). It is impor- 
tant that, unlike in Europe, even patrifocal or father-focused societ- 
ies in Africa, whereby the line of descent is through the father, seek 
female-male reciprocal power relationships (Diop, 195911990, 
pp. 66-72; T'Shaka, 1995, pp. 194-196). The Ga women (of Ghana), 
for instance, do not take their husbands' names when they marry 
and concessions with naming and lineage are made (Odotei, 1989,


--- PAGE 6 ---
7 Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 
p. 43, 46). The mother is viewed as the bringer of life, the conduit 
for the spiritual regeneration of the ancestors, the bearer of culture, 
and the center of social organization (Dove, 1998). 
The family in this matrix seeks a reciprocal relationship between 
the female and male members. For example, female and male 
members of the family will be equally respected for their contribu- 
tion to the family's development. As T'Shaka (1995, p. 39) postu- 
lates, this balanced relationship is the basis of a "just society." In 
light of this, it may be said that if the partnership between the 
female and male, which constitutes the smallest unit of the family 
and therefore of society, is equal, then all that evolves from this 
power structure will strive to reflect this equality. It was from this 
cultural matrix that the notion of justice was created, according to 
Diop, T'Shaka, and others. 
In contrast to the mother-centered family structure, individuality 
and the priority of self above others is a fundamental tenet of this 
cradle belief system. This family reproduces hierarchical personal 
and social relations as a result of the domination of the male over 
the female. All progeny are required to reproduce this hierarchy 
within the family. The maintenance of this unequal partnership 
must be continuously justified. Hierarchical notions of superiority 
and inferiority rationalize reasons why the woman should be sub- 
servient to the man. This imbalance or injustice is the basis for con- 
flict and aggression. It is reflected in the social order with examples 
like disrespect for women, children, and elders. Concepts like race 
and human difference follow the same logic and are justified in a 
hierarchical ordering of humanity. These societies can be called 
patriarchal, father-centered, or father-led. The woman is considered 
a burden that the man dragged behind him. Outside her function of 
child-bearing, her role in nomadic society is nil. Having a smaller 
economic value, it is she who must leave her clan to join that of her 
husband, contrary to the matriarchal custom which demands the 
opposite. (Diop, 195911 990, p. 29) 
Although the potential for mother-centered societies is to seek reci- 
procity and balance among the members of society, father-led soci- 
eties seek male-centered control over women.


--- PAGE 7 ---
8 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
Amadiume (1987) asserts that contrary to Diop's idea, "it was 
not a 'harmonious dualism' between men and women in matri- 
archal systems. . . .In whatever system, men incessantly sought to 
control women and their services, and succeeded more often than 
not" (p. 84). This suggests perhaps a natural tension between male 
and female power relations that in its most concrete form manifests 
as patriarchy. An example put forward by Houessou-Adin (1998) 
was that during the Ibo women's war in Nigeria, women fought not 
only against British colonial taxation under "indirect rule" and the 
destruction it caused to their power bases, but also against some 
indigenous men and the colonial authority the men collaborated 
with. One may say therefore that the preservation of female- 
centered institutions is critical to the survival of the Mother- 
Centered Matrix. 
For Diop however, environmental concerns far more greatly 
affect the dynamics of these relations. The origin of the Mother- 
Centered Matrix is attributed to an agrarian lifestyle in a climate of 
abundance, whereas patriarchy is associated with nomadic tradi- 
tions arising from harsh environments. Kemet is characterized as a 
mother-centered civilization that evolved from agrarian, sedentary 
societies. Its development hinged on the voluntary coming together 
of cities, towns, and villages along the Nile river based on collective 
interests in supporting a national authority that could advance the 
fulfillment of their needs (Diop, 199 1, pp. 129- 130; Kemp, 1989, 
p. 62). Intrinsic to this model is the cultural similitude among the 
people that invited and cemented the fundamental precepts for this 
state construction. It is from this construction that the first urbanites 
were produced. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF CULTURE 
TO STATE DEVELOPMENT 
The modern states, particularly the United States, are built to the 
cultural specification of European patriarchy. As previously 
asserted, it is a contention of this article that patriarchal power rela- 
tions are unable to provide the social environment conducive to the


--- PAGE 8 ---
9 Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 
wellness of African people, specifically women and children, and 
of all people generally. Kemet embraced the ideal of developing 
human potential because of its Mother-Centered Matrix. An impor- 
tant quest of this article is to link the quality of a civilization (the 
treatment of women for example) to the symbolic representation of 
the mother. 
Differences regarding Kemet and the United States are related to 
cultural distinctions between the people who designed them. A his- 
torical reality is that Kemet was the first known state, and based on 
structural similarities in the United States and other Western states, 
they should be viewed as imitations. However, the European ability 
to replicate this state model is limited by its lack of cultural knowl- 
edge concerning the Mother-Centered Matrix and, in particular, 
African spirituality, the basis of women's power in Africa. 
Culturally, the United States, created by descendants of Europe, 
may be characterized as patriarchal. Moreover, the United States 
may be likened to its ancient forbear, the Spartan state model (Diop, 
1991, p. 132). The evolution of this patriarchal state structure is 
contingent on the genocide of the indigenous or original people. As 
Diop (1991) postulated, 
If for whatever reason the conquering ethnic group refuses to mix 
with the indigenous conquered element and bases its domination on 
this absolute separation, the opposition is essentially ethnic and will 
always be resolved, in ancient and modern history, by genocide. 
(P 132) 
Most of the modem states like Australia, New Zealand, Canada, 
South Africa, and so on belong to this model (Diop, 199 1,pp. 132- 
133). Israel can also be viewed in this light. The cultural similitude 
in the construction of these states reveals the distinctive differences 
between mother-centered and patriarchal power relations. Whereas 
the construction of the state of Kemet required the collaboration of 
indigenous people in its organization, the Spartan state and these 
modem states used terrorism and barbarism to build their societal 
structures. In this way, they institutionalized the continuing domi- 
nation of and dominion over a conquered people whose lands, 
resources, and energies supplied the states with their power base.


--- PAGE 9 ---
10 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES 1 SEPTEMBER 2002 
During the development of the U.S. model (and the states of 
South America), the arrival of Europeans signaled the dawning of 
the enslavement and extermination of the First Nations people, 
indigenous to the Americas. As an essentially mother-centered 
people, the ensuing patriarchal domination was devastating. The 
decline in the indigenous populations owing to enslavement, geno- 
cide, and diseases brought by Europeans was catastrophic. Carew 
(1994,p. 72) cited an estimate of 68 million indigenous people who 
died in the holocaust. Their lives were expendable because Europe- 
ans placed a premium on their lands, not on their energies. Iron- 
ically, more value was placed on the energies of captured and 
enslaved African people. Over time, the nation was taught a fabri- 
cated history of how the West was won. 
When the process of eliminating the native population is completed 
like a snake that has finished swallowing its victim, a feeling of col- 
lective guilt, which is hard to suppress, grips the conscience of the 
conquerors and gives rise to an expiatory literature, in the forms of 
legends of the founding of cities in which the conquered people are 
charged with all the sins . . .the murderous people in this way regain 
a pristine conscience. (Diop, 1991,p. 133) 
Movies were and are used as a medium in contemporary times to 
debase and criminalize First Nations people who were forced into 
exile in the least productivelarable land spaces. Paradoxically, 
many African-descended people have and continue to play signifi- 
cant roles in the continuing genocide of First Nations people. 
Another irony is that the imposition of this state model on con- 
quered groups, who are trained to sustain it, can produce the same 
results. In other words, indigenous people may themselves become 
agents of oppression and genocide, as in the obvious case of 
Rwanda and Burundi and less obvious cases in other parts of Africa 
where traditional people whose lands are exploited by the state can 
be deprived of their benefits and allowed to die through neglect (as 
if deprivation of basic needs is traditional). In this type of state, the 
need for and the capacity to sustain a massive military institution 
receives a high priority. The necessity to produce and maintain 
wealth requires the prioritization of armaments.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Dove 1 DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 11 
Kennedy (1989, p. xvii), like Diop, traced military improvement 
and technological advance to outcomes based on historical warring 
rivalries among European societies and kingdoms. Conversely, in 
Kemet, the weight of civilian power compared to military power 
was far greater, and "military aristocracy" was not the "focal point 
of society" (Diop, 1991, p. 129). This condition does not negate the 
ability of mother-centered societies to go to war, rather it suggests 
that peace is deemed preferable. 
Kemet, even during its imperialist phases, for example, the New 
Kingdom XVIII dynasty when Thutmosis I11 was able to secure 
and maintain a vast empire, was considered less militarily oriented 
than invaders like the Hyksos, Hittites, Persians, and Greeks. In 
fact, marriages among members of the ruling families to the prin- 
cesses of potential enemies were considered political victories and 
peacemaking enterprises. It appears that militarism was more of a 
defensive tactic, in that the security of its resources from invaders 
was paramount to its development. The Narmer palette, which 
depicts the unification of upper and lower Kemet, shows Narmer's 
victory over Asian invaders during the time of the Old Kingdom, 
offering a clear record of early patriarchal attempts to conquer and 
secure that area. 
Presently, Egyptologists regard King Narmer, sometimes known 
as Menes, as the first of the dynastic kings who came to power 
3,200 years B.C.E. The school of Egyptology begins the dynastic 
period some 2,000 years after the date provided by historian, 
scholar, and priest, Manetho, who wrote the dynastic history of 
Kemet in 241 B.C.E. By his account, this period began 5,700 years 
B.C.E. Moreover, he placed the antiquity of Kemet to 17,000 years 
B.C.E. (Chandler, 1991, p. 120; Hilliard, 1991, p. 21 1; Walker, 
1999, p. 19). The change in these dates has a great bearing on the 
ability of Europe to claim the European origin of Kemet. 
Nevertheless, prior to King Narmer's triumph in uniting Upper 
and Lower Kemet, Lower Kemet in the north continually suffered 
from incursions of invading settlers. C. Williams (1987) postulated 
that White Asian settlers trying to take control constantly threat- 
ened indigenous Africans. To circumvent this situation, Africans 
designed a boundary between the north (Lower) and south (Upper)


--- PAGE 11 ---
12 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
to keep marauders out of the south. Narmer effectively brought the 
north under the control of the south, through African rule. This 
event is known as the uniting of the Two Lands. With regard to the 
uniting of the Two Lands and the African Black origin of Kemet, 
possibly one of the most contentious findings was the archeological 
evidence of professor Bruce Williams from the University of Chi- 
cago. An archaic Horus incense burner showing a royal procession 
with a king wearing the crown of Upper Kemet was found in Qustul 
in Lower Nubia or Upper Kemet. B. Williams (1991) said, 
The great 1960's rescue effort has recently unveiled a birthplace of 
pharaonic civilization several generations before the rise of the first 
historic Egyptian dynasty. This finding is rendered even more star- 
tling by the fact that advanced political organization was not 
believed to have come to Nubia, or anywhere south of Egypt, for 
another 2,500 years. (p. 90) 
In this case, King Narmer may not be credited with the acclaim of 
being the first dynastic king. Nevertheless, continuous African rule 
lasted for the first six recognized dynasties (B. Williams, 1991, 
p. 146). It may be that the Nubian (African) antecedents of the 
development of state structure are far more ancient than previously 
thought. 
MOTHER-CENTERED VERSUS 
FATHER-CENTERED CONTRADICTIONS 
It is possible to equate the continuing conflicts in the north of 
Kemet to tensions between mother-centered and patriarchal values 
and beliefs. Throughout the dynastic years, the conflict, as C. Wil- 
liams (1987) argued, was to affect the lineage of kings and queens 
as well as the kings' loyalty to Africa. Over time, the Asians or 
Whites were able, through marriage into the African lineage, to 
become legitimate monarchs with allegiance to their fathers. In this 
way, mother-centered values would have eroded. The system of 
matrilineal or mother-focused inheritance through the mother 
required the allegiance to the mother to be maintained if the culture


--- PAGE 12 ---
Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 13 
was to remain intact. Until the resurgence of the Mother-Centered 
Matrix, regenerated by the Kushite rulers of the 25th dynasty, the 
importance of women's roles had declined substantially. Although, 
even by the time of the Greeks, Kemet was still essentially mother 
focused/matrifocal, both in terms of the line of royal descent and in 
its spiritual focus. 
Over two millennia after Narmer, Piankhi of Kush, southern 
Kemet took legitimate African sovereignty as the first king of the 
25th dynasty. Piankhi and succeeding kings of that dynasty made a 
concerted attempt to return Kemet to its old kingdom mother- 
centered beliefs and values. 
They made it a practice to install their female relatives as high- 
priestesses of Amon at Thebes. These women, working through 
their own prime ministers, were in effect rulers of Upper Egypt. 
They undertook massive restoration and public works in Thebes and 
throughout Upper Egypt. (L. Williams & Finch, 1985, pp. 22-23) 
Thebes was known as "the Mother of Cities" (C. Williams, 1987, 
p. 90). While the priestesses ruled Upper Kemet, the kings ruled 
from Napata in Kush (C. Williams, 1987, p. 23). Napata was the 
capital of the south domain that included areas into Africa's heart- 
lands. As Johnson (1978, p. 212) noted, the Kushites restored not 
only the institution of the High Priestess called the Divine 
Adoratrice of Amun but also the proper worship of Ptah at Mem- 
phis. Amenirdas 1, Piankhi's sister, was installed by her brother as 
Chief Prophetess of Amun and ruled the Principality of Thebes (L. 
Williams & Finch, 1985, pp. 23-24). Importantly and keeping with 
mother-centered principles, the Kushite rulership was shared 
between women and men. This dynasty was considered another 
and most likely the last high point in Kemet's development 
(Goldman, 1991; Monges, 1997; L. Williams & Finch, 1985). 
AFRICAN INFLUENCES IN HEADING STATE 
In both the Ancient African and U.S. systems, the head of state is 
responsible for malung critical decisions. For the Kemites, their


--- PAGE 13 ---
14 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
king was considered both central and divine to their existence-the 
embodiment of the creator on earth. The potential divinity of 
humanity was sought by the Kemites through their belief in the 
transformation of humans in becoming godlike. 
It was a science directed toward the embodiment of spiritual knowl- 
edge, toward the internalization and corporeal expression of intel- 
lectual and spiritual powers, rather than the mechanistic utilization 
of knowledge-power for the exploitation and manipulation of the 
earthly environment. (Schwaller de Lubicz, 1977, p. 13) 
The tradition of the priestly role of the Kemetic King has been 
linked to other African kingships (Asante, 1990, pp. 90-96, 2000, 
p. 64; Diop, 195911990, pp. 152-154, 1974, p. 138; Monges, 1997, 
pp. 89-90, 102-108; T'Shaka, 1995, p. 41; C. Williams, 1987, 
pp. 96-99; Wimby, 1985, pp. 36-47). "The African king was distin- 
guished from the Northern king by his divine essence and by the 
vitalist character of his functions. One was a man priest, the other 
was a god-priest among the living" (Diop, 195911990, p. 140). The 
King had the power to bring good harvests, indeed, he was expected 
to "guarantee cosmic order" (Diop, 195911990, p. 334). "The king 
carried the ka force of the nation and this force was the collective 
solidarity of the people"' (Asante, 2000, p. 64). Even today, after 
years of European colonial domination, the kingslchiefs of the 
Ashanti of traditional Ghana are still considered "sacred because of 
the link they have with the ancestors and gods the chief's blood is 
sacred; in case of injury or loss of blood, a sheep must be sacrificed 
to prevent danger befalling the chief's subjects" (Warren, 1986, 
p. 42). 
Regardless of this cultural continuity, there is no evidence to 
suggest that divine kingship existed in the European world regard- 
ing their royalty. Critical to understanding the role of divine king- 
ship is the recognition of its symbiotic relationship to the role of the 
queen. As Wimby (1985) asserted in her discussion on "Female 
Horuses," "there was equality between men and women. The 
woman had political power as well as the general running of the 
country, as did her sisters in other parts of Africa" (p. 36).


--- PAGE 14 ---
Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 15 
It is evident, however that the Greeks and others who were stu- 
dents of higher learning in Kemet imitated mother-centered tradi- 
tions and rituals without the experiences of the thousands of years 
of spiritual training that had gone into producing royal families 
who understood their obligations. 
The culture of Kemet remained African and essentially mother 
centered despite the corruption of foreign patriarchal values. Prior 
to the northern invasions, "the military role of the King was toned 
down and took second place after his priestly and agricultural role" 
(Diop, 1959/1990, p. 154). 
The protection of the people was viewed as a spiritual accom- 
plishment. Communion with the spiritual world and the practice of 
the order of Maat as an ethical and moral enterprise was seen as a 
way of controlling disorder and chaos (Budge, 1967, p. cxix; 
Carmthers, 1986, pp. 3-30; Karenga, 1991, pp. 352-394, 1994, 
pp. 108-109). 
Maat is the personification of the mothering ideal (Karenga, 
1994, p. 162), her presence and manifestation in institutional orga- 
nization and human culture ensured the righteous existence of 
humanity as part of the cosmic order. She stands for justice, truth, 
honesty, balance, reciprocity, peace, and so on. She was also 
revered as a goddess who is critical to the ascendancy of the spirit 
reaching heaven. The divine king pays deference to her feminine 
divinity. He must display these feminine qualities as the example of 
god on earth during his sovereignty. In this way, collective values, 
consideration for humanity and nature, ancestral esteem, and love 
and respect for the family constituted the continuation of the envi- 
ronment and thwarted danger. All members of society were 
expected to maintain and preserve the social order by practicing the 
mothering ideal of Maat. 
What is so significant in this state structure is that there is not 
separation between religion and politics. Religion was synony- 
mous with women's power. Thus, a stark difference between 
Kemetic state structure and U.S. structure is the attainment of spiri- 
tual enlightenment and social cohesion. In the United States, the 
secularity of the political system is underpinned by Christian (patri-


--- PAGE 15 ---
16 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES I SEPTEMBER 2002 
archal) ideology. This secular system is built on the success of the 
unholy war waged against the indigenous people. 
In the United States, as with the concept of divine kingship, the 
president is considered the most qualified human to take office on 
behalf of the people's interests. As to be expected in a patriarchal 
facsimile, the divine mother plays no role in tempering his activity. 
The president is not trained as a high priest or expected to be blame- 
less in his action. His election is often predicated on his looks or 
personality or ability to convince others of his worthiness based on 
rhetoric4 and not the divine speech required in Kemet. The ability of 
the president to make sound decisions regarding the political econ- 
omy is vital. Massive bureaucracies maintain and control the econ- 
omy through banking and global investment. In Kemet, wealth was 
also produced through accumulation. An abundance of food, arti- 
facts, inventions, and so on provided exchange for world trade. 
Commerce through import and export was invaluable to the life and 
sustenance of Kemet. 
In stable times it had wealth in plenty and in circulation, offering to 
all, the prospect or the dream of a life far above subsistence level. 
When the state was strong and well organized many people gained 
much from its redistributive mechanisms, which must, in these 
times, have acted as a general control over the whole economy sim- 
ply on account of its magnitude. (Kemp, 1989,p. 259) 
Pyramid complexes centralized the state location, and the enor- 
mous bureaucracies were administered by priests and priestesses. 
The findings of Davies and Friedman (1998) were that these com- 
plexes housed immense production resources from fish processing 
plants to food production facilities and warehouses as well as hous- 
ing for working people. It was essential for the support and institu- 
tional maintenance of their spiritual beliefs. The energies of the 
state were focused on the development of creative social skills. As 
Kemp (1989, pp. 89-90) suggested, the centrality of traditional reli- 
gion to the lives of the Kemites kept the social dynamics of the state 
intact. Although these pyramid complexes were early kingdom 
(African) projects, the emphasis on spiritual development and the 
centrality of divine kingship was maintained.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Dove I DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 17 
For Kemet and the United States, ideology was/is critical to 
maintaining its structure. A belief in the justification of the order is 
necessary whether the emphasis is on its spiritual or material main- 
tenance. Obviously, the institutional development around these 
ideologies is different, as are the consequences of their existence. 
Again their differences can be attributed to the Mother-Centered 
Matrix and patriarchal orientations. While in the United States, 
there is none in authority higher than the president, the Father, in 
the State of Kemet, the Queen Mother had authority over both his 
ascendancy to the throne as well as his worthiness when in power. 
Queen mothers, like the kings and queens, were considered god- 
desses and as the bearers of new generations had immense respon- 
sibilities regarding the teachings of the future kings and queens. 
SACRED IMAGES OF DIVINE MOTHERS 
Hathor, an ancient predynastic goddess, was the original divine 
mother and was associated with kingship. Although she predates 
Auset (Isis), she later becomes the wife of Heru (Horus), the son of 
Auset (Isis) and Ausar (Osiris). She is of Nubian origin and is asso- 
ciated with healing as well as considered the goddess of love, 
music, and dance. She is depicted wearing cow horns with the sun 
disc between them. She was a universal goddess and the Greeks 
later called her Aphrodite (Hart, 1998, pp. 75-81). She sometimes 
manifests as the cow mother suckling a king (Hornung, 1982, 
p. 110). According to Stone (1976), Hathor was 
during the earliest times served by sixty-one priestesses and eigh- 
teen priests, while the Goddess known as Neith was attended solely 
by priestesses. By the time of the Eighteenth Dynasty women were 
no longer even part of the religious clergy, but served as temple 
musicians. (p. 38) 
The Goddess Neith is a divine mother (Budge, 1967, p. cxx). She 
is called the Mother of the Gods (Hornung, 1982, p. 147). She is 
also known as a creator goddess, from the Old Kingdom Dynasty. 
She originates in the south and was said to have followed the Nile


--- PAGE 17 ---
18 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES 1 SEPTEMBER 2002 
down to the north of Kemet. She wears the red crown of the North, 
(although her title of Mistress of the Bow may be linked to Ta Seti, 
known as land of the bow and located in the south). She is associ- 
ated with kingship. Sobek, her son, is symbolized as a crocodile. 
The symbol of the crocodile signifies the might and strength of 
kings, particularly in Upper Kemet (Hart, 1998, pp. 13 1 - 134). 
Auset, better known as Isis, is a divine mother also known as 
Mother of the Gods (Budge, 1967, pp. Cxiv). Her crown is a throne 
that is also her symbol for the Mdw Ntr. Auset is often seen with 
Hathor's cow horns and sun disk and is sometimes known as the 
"great sow." She is associated with kingship. Her best known role is 
as the wife and sister of Ausar (Osiris) and the mother of Heru 
(Homs) (Hart, 1998, pp. 101-106). There are many depictions of 
her feeding Hem, an image that precedes the Madonna and child by 
several thousand years. 
The Goddess Mut (Mut is the root word for mother) was sym- 
bolic of the king's mother. She wears the crowns of Upper and 
Lower Kemet. She manifests as a lion and vulture and is seen wear- 
ing vulture wings on her head. Mut is a southern concept and had a 
priest (and priestess) following. She is the consort of Amun and 
their son is Khonsu, a moon god. Her title is god's wife. This union 
is regarded as a sacred triad (like Mary, God, and Jesus or Auset, 
Ausar, and Heru) (Hart, 1998, pp. 128-129). 
Sakhmet is a lion goddess, and she is of the Old Kingdom. She is 
known as the mistress of the two lands (Upper and Lower Kemet). 
Sakhmet is associated with Mut who appears as a lion. She is con- 
sidered fierce and a warrior who is a protector of kings. She is a 
divine mother and connected with healing and medicine, having a 
following of priests (and priestesses) (Hart, 1998, pp. 187- 189). 
Bastet is an Old Kingdom cat goddess. Like the others, she is a 
divine mother of kings. She is from the south and her original form 
was of a lion (possibly Sakhmet). In the Mdw Ntr, she is depicted as 
the symbol for a perfume jar and is associated with perfume (possi- 
bly related to ritual in shrine visitations and offerings). She is fear- 
less and known as revengeful and at the same time loving. Bastet is 
known as the Lady of the Two Lands. Cats were mummified with 
respect to her powers (Hart, 1998, pp. 54-56).


--- PAGE 18 ---
Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 19 
However, even today, the position of the queen mother is one still 
coveted by parts of traditional Africa. For instance, the Akan of 
Ghana rely on the wisdom of the elder lady, she has a critical role in 
the political arena. 
In the villages, the official counselling body to the chief often 
includes an aberewa, an older woman, or obaapanin, a female func- 
tionary responsible for women's affairs. . . . Besides this, though, 
chiefs are typically male, the positions are meaningless without an 
ohemmaa, queenmother, often a sister or mother of the chief, who 
has a hand in the choice of the royal successor and participates in the 
legislative processes. . . . She has her own court, where she sits in 
jurisdiction over certain domestic issues; she also has her own body 
of counsellors and akyeame, orators who are mostly female. 
(Yankah, 1995, pp. 70-71) 
In northern Ghana, among the Dagomba who have few women who 
become priestesses, the Tindaana (land priestess) is the overall 
leader of her village near Tamale. She is responsible for the total 
well-being of the people and the village (Rijssel, 1999, p. 18). 
THE DECLINE OF THE MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 
According to Stone (1976), even in predynastic Kemet 
the Goddess held supremacy in Upper Egypt (South). . . . In Egypt 
the concept of the Goddess always remained vital. (p. 35) 
Male deities did not appear until the beginning of the dynastic 
periods. Stone links the gradual loss of women's status to Indo- 
European influences. 
Conquest and invasion were the tools of cultural disruption for 
terminating the Mother-Centered Matrix. As Diop (195911990) 
theorized, the northern cradle patriarchy was antithetical to the 
southern cradle mother-centered societies. The aggressive focus of 
the patriarchs on war and conquest is incompatible with southern 
cradle development. Although Kemet was able to defend itself mil- 
itarily, the internal breakdown of its values regarding its spiritual


--- PAGE 19 ---
20 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
beliefs played a significant role in its demise and that of matriarchal 
societies Africa-wide centuries later. 
The erosion of the Mother-Centered Matrix was predicated on 
the disruption and corruption of the social order of the state of 
Kemet. The subversion of Mother-centered values such as the focus 
of mothering as a critical social skill, the veneration of feminine 
spiritual energy, respect for members of society and the institution 
of the priestess ended this ancient order. It had required all the 
members to exhibit the compassion and care that a mother would 
bestow on her child, along with the responsibilities of transmitting 
knowledge and wisdom of the cultural values required to become a 
balanced member of society. The order of the Mother or Maat 
enabled each member of society to understand herthis responsibili- 
ties to others. Once the respect for the Mother was defiled, women 
were placed at the mercy of male domination and chaos followed. 
Kemet as an African state oversaw the protection of internal 
Africa. It was southern or Upper Kemet that defended Africa from 
foreign invasion. The Greeks and Romans never conquered the 
Candaces, Queen Mothers of Kush, even after the conquest of 
Kemet. The Queen Mothers continued their rulership and defense 
of Nubia (Sudan) right up until the Christian era (Finch, 1990; L. 
Williams & Finch, 1985, p. 20-32). 
It seems that without knowledge of northern cradle beliefs, 
mother-centered people are unable to withstand the cultural 
onslaught, as evidenced by the conquest of the world by Europeans. 
That is not to say that attempts by tradition-based societies to 
patriarchalize have not occurred in response to avert cultural con- 
quest. There is evidence of some patriarchal institutional structures 
and customs developed to safeguard women and therefore families 
from the imposition of alien cultures. These remnants of societies 
at the lowest historical point in their struggles against extinction 
cannot be considered serious evidence to challenge the fundamen- 
tal Mother-Centered Matrix of their origins.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Dove I DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 21 
THE CONQUEST OF AFRICAIMOTHER 
In the United States, the Mother is debased; her murder is wit- 
nessed in Hollywood as a cultural norm. The rape and murder of 
women is a central theme in many movies just as it is in real life. 
The portrayal of the woman, whether African or European, as the 
Hollywood or real-life temptress and the sexual object, for the sale 
of entertainment or commodities, is an every day reality. In the 
same way, the African woman is more often than not sensation- 
alized as the unfit mother in all mediums. Her sons and daughters 
live in chaos on the movie screen and in real life in the interests of 
capital gain. These realities have become mainstream, spreading 
across the world. 
The conquest of Africa was the conquest of the woman. She, 
Africa, lies bleeding and debased, and those who remember her are 
marginalized, becoming extinct. As Ayi Kwei Armah (1973) 
warned "A people losing sight of origins are dead" (p. xiv). The old 
order of the Mother, Maat, that represented African stability pro- 
duced the first urban people. The question of whether modern states 
like the United States can be considered superior or progressive 
compared to the Ancient African state should be answered in the 
context of the image and status of the Mother. It seems evident that 
the depiction of the Mother in the United States is debased, not 
divine. According to the African world view, when Maat is 
debased, there can be no order. 
Kemet can provide contemporary African people with examples 
of ways of governing and living that are still unparalleled by mod- 
em states. It is only by uncovering historical culture connections 
that African people may institute Sankofa and review ancient val- 
ues as a basis for creating a future where the sanctity of the Mother 
can prevail in the interests of true world development.' This is 
Africa's task-is she up to it?


--- PAGE 21 ---
22 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES I SEPTEMBER 2002 
NOTES 
1. Karl Marx used a European-based cultural analysis to correlate the impetus for social 
change to economic concerns. In this way, economies are separated from their historical- 
cultural bases and cultural issues are made irrelevant. For further information on Karl Marx's 
ideas, see Dove (1996). 
2. Mother-Centered Matrix is a concept that moves away from the common use of matri- 
archy, denoting societies dominated by women. Diop's (1959/1991) definition of matriarchy 
relates to male-female reciprocity as a basis for social order. Mother-Centered Matrix 
acknowledges this reality, offering terminology more in keeping with and relevant to this 
belief. 
3. The ka is known as a vital force, an energy of life associated with the spirit. 
4. Within Ani's (1994, pp. 3 12-3 17) conceptual framework regarding culture, hypocrisy 
is viewed as a fundamental characteristic of European culture. Members of U.S. society, for 
instance, are expected to believe that politicians are honest. The belief itself is hypocritical 
because, in reality, people know that politicians are not generally honest. Rhetorical ethic is a 
manifestation of this condition whereby the verbal expression of this ideal is possibly aspired 
to but not practiced. 
5. The ancient Akan belief, Sankofa, is that one should take the best from the past to build 
the future. It implies a synthesis of positive beliefs and values from the past and the present. 
REFERENCES 
Amadiume, I. (1987). Afrikan matriarchal foundations: The Igbo case. London: Karnak 
House. 
Ani, M. (1994). Yurugu. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press. 
Amah, A. K. (1973). Two thousand seasons. Oxford: Heinemann International. 
Asante, M. K. (1990). Kemef, Afrocentricit) & knowledge. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press. 
Asante, M. K. (2000). The Egyptian philosophers: Ancient Afrlcan voices from Imhotep to 
Akhenaten. Chicago: African American Images. 
Budge, E.A.W. (1967). The Egyptian book of the dead. New York: Dover. 
Carew, J. (1994). Rape ofparadise. Brooklyn, NY: A & B. 
Carruthers, J. (1986). The wisdom of governance in Kemet. In M. Karenga & J. Carruthers 
(Eds.), The African worldview. Los Angeles, CA: University of Sankore Press. 
Chandler, W. B. (1991). Of Gods and men: Egypt's old kingdom. In I. Van Sertima (Ed.). 
Egypt revisited (pp. 117-182). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Davies, V., & Friedman, R. (1998). Egypt. London: British Museum Press. 
Diop, C. A. (1974). The African origin of civilization: Myth or realit). Chicago: Lawrence 
Hill & Co. 
Diop, C. A. (1990). The cultural unifyofBlack Africa. Chicago: Third World Press. (Original 
work published 1959 as L'Unite culturelle de I'Afrique noir). 
Diop, C. A. (1991). Civilization or barbarism. Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books. 
Diop, C. A. (1996). Towards the African renaissance: Essays in African culture & develop-
ment, 1946-1960. London: Karnak House.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Dove / DEFINING A MOTHER-CENTERED MATRIX 23 
Diop, C. A,, Leclant, J., Obenga, T., & Vercoutter, J. (1997). Thepeopling ofancient Egypt & 
the deciphering of the Meroitic Script. Lawrenceville, NJ: Red Sea Press. 
Dove, N. (1996). Racialized power relations: An African-centered critique of Marx's logic. 
Western Journal of Black Studies, 19(3), 357-380. 
Dove, N. (1998). Afrikan mothers: Bearers of culture, makers of social change. Albany, NY: 
SUNY Press. 
Finch, C. (1990). The African background to medical science. London: Karnak. 
Goldman, P. (1991). The Nubian Renaissance. In I. Van Sertirna (Ed.), Egypt revisited (pp. 
261-270). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Hart, G. (1998). A dictionary of Egyptian gods & goddesses. London: Routledge. 
Hilliard 111, A. G. (1991). Waset, the eye of Ra & the abode of Maat: The pinnacle of Black 
leadership in the ancient world. In I. Van Sertima (Ed.), Egypt revisited (pp. 21 1-238). 
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Homung, E. (1982). Conceptions of God in ancient Egypt. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press. 
Houessou-Adin, T. (1998). The concept of "sitting on a man": Ibo women and political 
strategies. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Temple University, Pennsylvania. 
Johnson, P. (1978). The civilization of ancient Egypt. London: Weidenfield & Nicolson. 
Karenga, M. (1991). Towards a sociology of Maatian ethics: Literature &context. In I. Van 
Sertima (Ed.), Egypt revisited (pp. 352-395). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Karenga, M. (1994). Maat, the moral ideal in ancient Egypt: A study in classicalAfrican eth- 
ics. Vol. 1. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Dissertation Services. 
Kernp, B. (1989). Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a civilization. London: Routledge. 
Kennedy, P. (1989). The rise and fall of the greatpowers. New York: Vintage Books. 
Monges, M. M-K-R. (1997). Kush the jewel of Nubia. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press. 
Odotei, E. (1989). What is in a name?: The social and historical significance of Ga names. 
Research Review, 5(2), 34-5 1. 
Opoku, K. A. (1978). WestAfrican traditional religion. Accra, Ghana: F.E.P. International. 
Rijssel, van L. (1999). Traditional medicine: Beliefs and values in the Northern Region in 
Ghana. Unpublished Master's thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University, Holland. 
Schwaller de Lubicz, R. A. (1977). The temple in man. Rochester, NY: Inner Traditions 
International. (Original publication 1949 as Le Temple duns I'Homme). 
Stone, M. (1976). When God was a woman. New York: Harvest /HBJ Book. 
T'Shaka, 0. (1995). Return to the African mother principle of male and female equality. 
Vol. I. Oakland, CA: Pan Afrikan Publishers & Distributors. 
Walker, R. (1999). Roots of Black history: A comprehensive guide to the ancient and 
mediaeval history ofAfrica. London: Bogle L'Ouverture. 
Warren, D. M. (1986). The Akan of Ghana. Accra, Ghana: Pointer Ltd. 
Watterson, B. (1997). Women in ancient Egypt. London: Sutton. 
Williams, B. (199 1). The lost pharaohs of Nubia. In I. Van Sertima (Ed.), Egypt revisited (pp. 
90-104). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Williams, C. (1987). The destruction of Black civilization. Chicago: Third World Press. 
Williams, L., & Finch, C. (1985). The great queens of Ethiopia. In I. Van Sertima (Ed.), Black 
women in antiquity (pp. 12-35). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Wimby, D. (1985). The female horuses and great wives of Kemet. In I. Van Sertima (Ed.), 
Black women in antiquity. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Yankah, K. (1995). Speaking for the chief Bloornington: Indiana University Press.


--- PAGE 23 ---
24 JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES / SEPTEMBER 2002 
Yellen, J. E., Brooks, A. S., Cornelissen, E., Mehlman, M. J., & Stewart, K. (1995). Amiddle 
Stone Age worked bone industry from Katanda, Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire. Science, 
268, 553-556. 
Nah Dove is an advisor/consultant living in Ghana. She is working on a follow-up 
book to Afrikan Mothers: Bearers of Culture, Makers of Social Change. Prior to her 
move to Ghana, DI:Nah Dove taught at Medgar Evers College in New York, the State 
University of New York at Buffalo, Temple University, Philadelphia, and Pennsylva- 
nia State University at University Park. As an interdisciplinar3; scholar her continu- 
ing research focuses on investigating the social and global implications of African 
cultural identity to Women of the African Diaspora.

