=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: National-Strategy-of-the-Front-for-the-Liberation-of-the-New-African-Nation-V4.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 43
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:54.177368
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
2011 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank 
RBG Street Scholar 
 
 
 
57 Documents 
RBG FROLINAN STUDIES COLLECTION 
RBG National Strategy of the- Front for the Liberation of the New African Nation (FROLINAN) I have taken the initiative to 
write this proposal and treaty (and supportive assets) for our numbers and revolutionary nationalist to build upon, for us to  
unite our forces under a single program and national strategy. To build Frolinan is to push forward the quest of national 
emancipation, as Frolinan's national strategy is not based simply on survival pending revolution, but rather, building the 
revolution to survive. This position on survival is not relegated to a defensive posture, but develops an offensive Program 
for Decolonization, establishing a revolutionary theory and program to militantly fight for national independence…


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG NATIONAL STRATEGY OF THE FRONT FOR 
THE LIBERATION OF THE NEW AFRIKAN NATION 
 
 
 …to build Frolinan is to push forward the quest of national 
emancipation, as Frolinan's national strategy is not based simply on 
survival pending revolution, but rather, building the revolution to 
survive…  
 
The Second Amendment (Amendment II) to the United States Constitution 
 
29 videos 
RBG FROLINAN VIDEO EDU. GRID


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Hypertext Table of Contents 
Author's Preface.................................................................................................................. 4 
Introductory Note ................................................................................................................ 6 
HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW .................................................................. 8 
A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE .................................................................. 14 
THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE ......................................... 16 
First Phase – CLASS STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE .......................... 17 
Second-Phase - NATIONAL UNITY FOR SELF GOVERNMENT .................................... 22 
Third Phase - SELF-GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE ...................... 24 
NATIONAL STRATEGY- BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES PROGRAM FOR 
DECOLONIZATION ............................................................................................................ 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
View Document Icebreaker Video


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author's Preface 
 
In the last several years from many corners of the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement, there has been a clarion call for the building of the Front for the 
Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation . A revolutionary nationalist front to establish a 
movement for national independence, to free the national territory  of Kush from the 
colonial (U.S.A.) government. This call has mostly come from BLA---POWs and their 
supporters who recognize the need to resurrect a militant resistance to continued 
national oppression, identifying the basis of our peoples' coloni al subjugation as part of 
the anti-imperialist struggle being waged by Third World peoples in many parts of the 
world. Of course, this means we have to once again develop a militant political 
organization that will challenge U.S. colonialism and organize N ew Afrikans to 
offensively pursue the ultimate objective of national independence. This task has to be 
greater than a surv ival program pending revolution,  as all survival programs are in 
essence defensive in posture, based on the idea to survive is to defend against attacks, 
but survival programs do not forge a movement, only sustain an existence. 
 
 
Therefore, to build Frolinan is to push forward the quest of national emancipation, as 
Frolinan's national strategy is not based simply on  survival pending revolution, but 
rather, building the revolution to survive. This position on survival is not relegated to a 
defensive posture, but develops an offensive Program for Decolonization, establishing a 
revolutionary theory and program to militantly fight for national independence. 
I have taken the initiative to write this proposal and treaty for our numbers and 
revolutionary nationalist to build upon, for us to unite our forces under a single progr am 
and national strategy. Since the destruction of the Black Panther Party, our movement 
has fallen in the hands of passive resisters, losing its vitality, momentum, an d 
revolutionary fervor. It is now necessary to rekindle the spirit of militant resistance and 
rebuild our revolutionary movement. Build Frolinan, our revolutionary nationalist front, 
comprising the needed national organizations and programs that will assure not only our 
survival, but also, our inevitable victory in establishing the Republic of New Afrika  in 
the western hemisphere.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  5 
 
 
 
This document is presented for revolutionary nationalist to discuss and seek the means 
and methods to create conditions to manifest the National Strategy of Frolinan . Of 
course, this is my conception of what needs to be done based on varied discussions 
amongst Comrades, and basic analysis of the general situation of opportunism, 
liberalism, and sectarianism effecting our overall struggle. Therefore, this document is 
not all conclusive or inclusive of our needs in struggle; rather, it seeks to forge the basis 
to establish a durable foundation by which we may unite our talents and resources to 
build Frolinan. Hence, this document is offered as a pivot to create the neede d center of 
gravity from which we can rally our forces, and move forward in unity and struggle. 
Based on the foregoing, I'm requesting of those receiving this document and who are 
able, to make copies and redistribute to those you believe might be interested in 
building Frolinan. Furthermore, I'm requesting all authentic revolutionary nationalist to 
do the following upon review of this document: 
1. Submit proposals to strengthen the basis to build Frolinan, i.e., organizational 
structure, ideological format, political programs, etc.;  
 
2. Establish a Frolinan organizing-cadre to build one of the Programs of Decolonization 
in your area, adopting Frolinan's National Strategy;  
 
3. Discuss this document with others, and contribute financially, materially and 
personally to the National Strategy of Frolinan. 
In the near future, an effort will be made to organize a national congress/conference of 
revolutionary nationalists who have expressed an interest and commitment to build 
Frolinan and support a particular aspect of the Program for Decolonization, to come 
together, and develop this revolutionary nationalist front.  
 
To contribute to this cause and become a front member of Frolinan, write to: 
FROLINAN 
Front for the Liberation of the 
New Afrikan Nation 
rbgstreetscholar@gmail.com


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  6 
 
 
 
 
 
Download RBG-FROLINAN OVERIVEW-An Interactive Power Point Presentation 
 
"Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National Oppression" 
 
Introductory Note 
 
Frolinan is initially a cadre-organization of New Afrikan revolutionary nationalist, whose 
primary objective is to evolve a united strategy and direction amongst the many New 
Afrikan nationalist formations. This objective is to further enjoin New Afrikan 
revolutionary nationalist to accept a position within the front, to develop greater 
principled unity of action in the New Afrikan Independence Movement (NAIM), in 
accordance with the National Strategy of Frolinan. 
 
 
There are many progressive and revolutionary  organizations/parties/fronts in the NAIM 
of local, regional and national significance. Frolinan recognizes each organization/  
party/ front has a specific and general role in the NAIM, but it is our faith, this role must 
be formulated in unity and struggle  amongst our oppressed N ew Afrikan masses under 
the guidance of a single national strategy and program.  We believe that with the 
tactical implementation of a national strategy, which embraces the specific and general 
cause of NAIM in theory and practice, the various organization/parties/fronts will greatly 
enhance the overall development of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. 
 
 
Frolinan is characterized as a revolutionary nationalist front, recognizing the human and 
inalienable rights of New Afrikans to be free from racist colonialism, genocide, and 
imperialist national oppression/ exploitation. That New Afrikan "human rights', 
encompass the right to be self -governed and independent of the U.S. colonial 
government, thus, national rights in accordance to international law and politics.  
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  7 
 
 
 
 
The prerequisite for becoming a member of Frolinan are as follows: 
1. Recognition of the existence of the New Afrikan Nation as an oppressed nation within 
the colonial government of the United States of America in the Western Hemisphere; 
 
2. That the Republic of New Afrika is the name and government of the New Afrikan 
Nation, a government in exile, struggling for the liberation of the National Territory of 
Kush; 
 
3. Acceptance of the New Afrikan Declaration of Independence, Creed, Code of Umoja 
and RBG Code of Conduct. 
 
4. Recognize and support the New Afrikan People Liberation Army (NAPLA) as the 
armed front of the New Afrikan Nation;  
 
5. Support and work to manifest the National Strategy of Frolinan as the legitimate 
representative of New Afrikan Independence Movement, and work to support all groups 
in alliance to Frolinan; 
 
6. Must be anti-imperialist, anti-capitalist, antiracist/fascist, pro-national independence, 
willing to participate in the class and national liberation struggle for land (Kush) and 
social-democracy; 
 
7. Believe and have faith in the creative ingenuity, spiritual quality, and humanity of our 
New Afrikan people, and the historical, cultural, socioeconomic, and political productivity 
of our struggle for national independence. 
 
Frolinan National Strategy is based on the Three Phase Theory for National 
Independence, it is our faith, this revolutionary theory is the criteria which our 
revolutionary movement is to be organized. Frolinan's Na tional Strategy is exemplified 
in our Ten Point Platform, Theory, and Organizational Program for Decolonization; 
Strategy and Practice will serve to manifest in reality the Ten Point Platform, a program 
accepted in principle by all members of Frolinan. 
 
We anticipate and work toward Frolinan to develop into a mass based  revolutionary 
nationalist front, comprising national organizations and groups, to organize and mobilize 
our oppressed New Afrikan people for our inevitable independence.


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  8 
 
 
 
 
HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW 
 
We accept all aspects of our history from the beginning of civilization on the Afrikan  
continent, to the present stages of technological development of Afrikan nation -states, 
and the continued struggle of Afrikan people throughout the world against tyranny and 
imperialist oppression. 
 
 
With this conception of history, we view the material b asis in which history evolved to its 
present and ongoing developing modes of history; as Afrikan people relate and 
interrelate with one another, other people of color i n the Third World, and the European 
races. This understanding and materialist outlook of  history, notes that dialectically, our 
present condition and struggle is based on our past experiences in a continuing 
development of an Afrikan history. The New Afrikan experience in America is not 
separate from the Afrikan experience on the continent, r ather, they are linked in a chain 
of events which imposes socioeconomic, political and historical realities encompassing 
the criteria by which New Afrikan struggle for independence must be developed.  
 
 
 
 
We call ourselves New Afrikan because  of the degree of force breeding and 
miscegenation we as a people have suffered, as well as the cultural imperialism and the 
psychological plunder and rape of our affinity to Afrika - stripping away our Afrikan 
language, art and world outlook, and national oppression, which in our efforts to combat 
have created a national heritage rich in resistance based on the two ideals of integration 
or separation. These experiences which left us stripped of our Afrikanist perspective 
despite miscegenation and cultural imperialism, en compassing those experiences into 
an Afrikan national heritage in the Diaspora, creating the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement. 
 
 
This conception of history in a dialectical materialist perspective provides the means to 
formulate a program and strategy to conquer racist oppression and national subjugation 
utilizing the truth of our entire history as a guide to enlighten our practice.  For instance, 
in terms of a (foreign) policy of Afrikan intercommunalism with our people on the Afrikan 
continent, it is essential to know what our relationship had been in history -providing a 
substantial foundation to develop principled relations today. .. For New Afrikans, it is 
important to know that slavery did not begin as an American phenomenon, but rather, 
American chattel slavery of Afrikans is a direct outgrowth of Afrikans enslaving


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  9 
 
Afrikans on the Afrikan continent. Many of our ancestors had bee n enslaved by Afrikans 
due to internecine struggles, border wars of territorial imperative - amongst tribes and 
wars of aggression between Afrikan nation -states. The prisoner of wars, and  / or 
because of denture, were placed in bondage, and often sold or traded.  
When the Europeans (Portuguese, Dutch, Spanish, British, etc.) made contact with 
Northern and Western coastal areas of Afrika, they not only raided villages and 
kidnapped Afrikans, but more often and productively (numerically) brought already 
enslaved Afrikans from Afrikan chieftains and traders. Hence, for the most part, our 
existence in the Western hemisphere is as much a consequence of Afrikan history as it 
is of European history. 
 
 
Thus, as we conceive ourselves in history, we must place responsi bility of our condition 
in context to the actual historical development leading to our present situation. In this 
regards, we don't  expect assistance from our Afrikan brothers nations simply because 
we are of one people -- only separated by distance -- but because history demand 
recompense for a people (New Afrikans) whose existence and suffering is based on our 
unfortunate relation in the history of slavery mutual to us all, and the commonality of our 
fight against mutual enemy -- imperialism. This same co nception and relation to history 
is binding on any relationship established with other past enslaver, such as the Dutch, 
Portuguese, British, Spanish, etc. 
 
 
As we struggle against continued U.S. colonization, New Afrikans  must have a 
determined sense of history in regard to the New Afrikan Nation relationship to the 
world. Without this common national consciousness and perception of our existence, 
based on history, our practice will continue to be confused and chaotic, wit hout 
historical continuity which serves to give practical guidance on the road to 
independence. As an oppressed nation, we have a rich history of resistance to 
bondage; revolts on slave ships during the middle passage; revolts and rebellions for 
hundreds o f years on slave plantations; fighting for freedom in the War of 
Independence, War of 1812, and Civil War; and fighting in the U.S. Army in the name of 
U.S. democracy (hypocrisy) can also be considered part of the national determination to 
be free. 
 
 
We preserve four epochs in our history as indicative of our struggle to be free of U.S. 
national subjugation and colonial domination. After the signing of the Emancipation 
Proclamation in 1863 and the 13th Amendment in 1865, and the Civil War having ended 
barbaric chattel slavery; the 14th Amendment stripped Afrikans in America of their land 
(provided by Field Order No. 115 ) and imposed American citizenship on these Afrikan 
nationals, this country entered a period defined as reconstruction and the industrial 
revolution. This was a period when the slavocracy gave bir th to mercantile capitalism; 
the gross surplus of such commodities as cotton, tobacco, sugar, etc., produced from 
slave labor in the South, provided economic-textile-industrial growth and development in 
Northern States. Reconstruction found millions of New Afrikans either re -enslaved by


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  10 
 
the vestiges of the Black Code-Law to sharecropping, unemployment, and landless, or 
migrating North in search of educational and employment opportunities. But the Hayes 
Tilden agreement restored racist national oppression and colonial domination prevailed 
with terrorist KuKluxKlan raids, r ace riots (white against Blacks), mob violence  and 
lynching of New Afrikans in the North and South. 
 
 
In 1905, the Niagara Movement  was consummated, we recognized the Niagara 
Movement as the first significant epoch in our continued struggle for independence. 
The Niagara Movement was not the first time New Afrikans organized themselves, as 
there had been many abolitionist groups comprising "freedman" of Afrikan descent. But 
the Niagara Movement marks a stage in which, under the leadership of W.E.B. DuBois, 
they developed a concept and an organization which prevails today. The concept of 
integration was comprehensively evolved during the Niagara Movement by DuBois, and 
is adamantly held today by the  NAACP, which came into existence out of the Niagara 
Movement in 1910, with DuBois as a founding member and incorporator. It was DuBois 
who forged the conceptual appeal of Pan -Afrikanism during this time; while the NAACP 
up until 1940 had campaigned for an ti-lynch legislation, and from 1950 to present 
campaigned for desegregation, integration and civil rights. 
 
 
The second epoch  of historical importance was the  1920 Marcus Garvey "Back to 
Afrika" Movement . This movement which has yet to be surpassed appealed to and 
organized millions of New Afrikans, and established nationa l pride and dignity directly 
associated to the Afrikan continent. Although the Back to Afrika movement only lasted 
until 1925, when viewed in juxtaposition in historical continuity to the Niagara Movement 
and Pan Afrikanist ideas developing at the time, th e thread of struggle and our peoples' 
conscious determination to be free of colonial domination becomes very significant.  
 
 
The third epoch is divided into two distinct and interdependent parts as they actualized 
the first and second epochs in character an d content. The Elijah Muhammad Nation of 
Islam movement which came-into existence in the 1940, but had not come into national 
prominence until the 1960, developed many of the separatist ideals held by Marcus 
Garvey movement; it generally appealed to those who had been adherents of the 
separatist movement of Marcus Garvey. In the 1960s, Malcolm X (El Hajj Malik 
Shabazz) brought the Nation of Islam separatist movement into national attention, 
recruitment reported to be approximately 1 million "Black Muslims" by some estimates. 
Elijah Muhammad called for the separation of Blacks (New Afrikans) into a government 
of their own in the South Black Belt, basing his program on mystified interpretation of 
Islam and Black "self-help" economics (the principle now adopted as Black capitalism)  
 
... During this same epoch, in 1955, the so -called civil rights movement was launched, 
with Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr . as its primary leader and spokesperson. Given 
the political character and objective of Martin L. King, Jr.'s movement, it ushered the line 
and principle of struggle first established in the Niagara Movement. The principle


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  11 
 
organizations of this course of struggle were SCLC, NAACP, Urban League,  CORE 
and SNCC all working in an united front strategy for desegregation, integration and civil 
rights. Politically, this movement could actually be defined as a negro -bourgeoisie 
democratic revolution . It attacked and did battle with the essential foundat ion and 
cornerstone of colonial domination of New Afrikans in America - racism and national 
oppression. The ci vil rights movement sought the fruition of democratic civil -rights 
guaranteed to white to be equally administrated to Black people It was a natio nally 
organized movement, which put in motion masses of people in freedom -rides, sit -ins 
and marches, which precipitated the eventful call for "Black Power"; nationalist political 
consciousness, resulting in riots and rebellions across the country. 
 
 
The dialectical (unity and struggle of opposites) relationship between the Elijah 
Muhammad separatist and Martin L. King, Jr. integrationist  movement, preserved in 
historical continuity the ideals of both the Marcus Garvey separatist and W.E.B. DuBois 
integrationist movements, forging the course of struggle towards a synthesis of ideals 
first espoused with the cry and birth pains of "Black Power". 
 
 
The fourth epoch , an outgrowth of the proceeding era adopted the synthetic 
conception of Black Power , uniting the symbolic determination of the Mississippi 
Freedom Democratic Party and Malcolm X Black Nationalist ideas in the Black Panther 
Party. The Black Panther Party for Self -Defense was established in 1966 and in 1967 
Black Panthers captured national  attention by entering the California State Capital 
hearing-on gun control, carrying rifles and shotguns, calling for community control of 
police, self-defense, and Black political power. Even through, during this period, there 
had been other Black nationa list groups and formations ( i.e., RNA, JOMO, Deacons for 
Defense and Justice, RAM, APP, etc.) that evolved out of the negro -bourgeois-
democratic revolution, none made such an indelible historic impression on the 
developing struggle like the Black Panther P arty. From its inception, the BPP had 
considered the necessity for armed struggle to wrestle Black power from the U.S.' white 
power structure. The BPP developed the Black underground which evolved into the 
Black Liberation Army - a clandestine network of armed urban guerrillas. It had been the 
BPP that first raised the concept of class struggle, introducing and infusing the ideology 
of Marxist- Leninist-Mao Tse Tung thought with the Black Nationalist ideas of Malcolm X 
in accordance to the concrete realitie s of the struggle taking shape in Black (New 
Afrikan) ghettos/communities across the country.


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  12 
 
With its Ten Poi nt Platform and Program the BPP  attempted to manifest Black 
political power on the basis of community control as a tactical objective toward the 
strategic goal of total independence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 1976, the colonial government (U.S.A.) had directed its attenti on and counter -
intelligence program (COINTELPRO*) on the BPP/BLA and other nationalist formations 
as the RNA. This counter revolutionary action by the government was implemented with 
the intent to discredit, disrupt and destroy the BPP, with murderous raids, infiltration and 
provocation. In a four year battle with the police, by 1971, the BPP had been 
significantly subverted on a national level, whereupon, by 1973, the BPP was in all 
actuality defunct. This inevitably led to the defeat and decimation of the BLA as a 
fighting clandestine urban guerrilla network. 
 
*COINTELPRO (an acronym for Counter Intelligence Program) was a series of covert, and often illegal, 
projects conducted by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) aimed at investigating and 
disrupting dissident political organizations within the Unite d States. The FBI used covert operations from 
its inception, however formal COINTELPRO operations took place between 1956 and 1971. The FBI's 
stated motivation at the time was "protecting national sec urity, preventing violence, and maintaining the 
existing social and political order."  
 
According to FBI records, 85% of COINTELPRO resources were expended on infiltrating, disrupting, 
marginalizing, and/or subverting groups suspected of being subversive, such as communist and socialist 
organizations; the women's rights movement; militant black nationalist groups, and the non -violent civil 
rights movement, including individuals such as Martin Luther Ki ng, Jr. and others associated with the 
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, the Congress of Racial Equality, the American Indian Movement, and other civil rights groups; a 
broad range of organizations labeled "New Left", including Students for a Democratic Society, the 
National Lawyers Guild, the Weathermen, almost all groups protesting the Vietnam War, and even 
individual student demonstrators with no group affiliation; and nationalist gr oups such as those "seeking 
independence for Puerto Rico." The other 15% of COINTELPRO resources were expended to 
marginalize and subvert "white hate groups," including the Ku Klux Klan and National States' Rights 
Party. 
 
The directives governing COINTELPRO were issued by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who ordered FBI 
agents to "expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" the activities of these movements 
and their leaders. 
 
 
 
It is these four epochs in the continuing struggle of New for political power and 
independence that are of great significance. They had the greatest influence and impact 
on New Afrikans nationally in juxtaposition to our relationship to the enemy colonia l 
(U.S.A.) government. We accept these four epochs as the foundation in which current


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  13 
 
and future development in the New Afrikan Independence Movement will be objectively 
molded, shaped and forged to victory. 
 
 
History shows us that there are two basic and distinct lines and influences in the New 
Afrikan peoples I struggle f or political power and self -determination. Our oppressed 
people have fought for integration and civil rights, and we've fought for separation and 
human rights. It is these two directions  that characterize any real differences in our 
peoples' aspiration to be free of racist colonial domination. Furthermore, it will be 
integration verses separation that will be a determinative aspect for the building of 
national unity amongst New Afrikans t o engage the colonial (U.S.A.) government for 
political power and self -determination in the future. This understanding of history and 
the ideological political  forces that have shaped our struggle provides conscious and 
deliberate activity to combat nation al oppression and colonialism, with the continuity of 
preserving history and the mode of struggle toward separation. We of Frolinan must 
take a stand on the side of separation, and in so doing, give recognition to those forces 
that are currently making history in building the independence movement. We recognize 
the organization of the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika for its 
contribution, but not necessarily to subordinate ourselves to its current strategy and 
program in the movement. We  therefore reserve the right to formulate a revolutionary 
theory, strategy, and program to educate, organize and mobilize New Afrikans toward 
national emancipation, and unite our strategy and program of action with other New 
Afrikan revolutionary forces that are also fighting for separation and independence, not 
excluding the present Republic of New Afrika - Provisional Government. 
 
 
 
 
Frolinan recognizes and understands the history of resistance our oppressed nation has 
fought in both the integrationist and separatist movements. But because we believe in 
our inalienable human rights, as a nation of people, to be self -governed; and because 
we are anti-capitalist-imperialist, we find no practical basis - in accordance to our history 
- to integrate in this colonial (U.S.A.) government. Therefore, we will concentrate our 
energies in preserving our nation peoples' history to separate, to establish an  
independent self-governed socioeconomic, political and cultural -sovereign nation in the 
Western Hemisphere. 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE 
In Refutation of Black Capitalism  
 
Since the advent of the government sponsored Economic opportunity Commission, and 
the various poverty programs instituted as a result of the Black insurrections during the 
1960s, the quest for Black capitalism as an integral part of the freedom struggle su rged 
as the political, socioeconomic alternative to white capitalism and exploitation - and 
established a unique obstacle before the New Afrikan revolution. By 1970, the U.S. 
government managed to consolidate a national bourgeoisie neo -colonial class 
comprising Black businessmen, civil rights leaders and elected officials. In the process 
of this development, evolved a Black middle class whose political alliance remained with 
the oppressed Black masses, and recognized a political responsibility that in essen ce 
contradicts the economic realities of Black capitalism, they now find themselves at lost 
to the real ideals, program, and objectives of the Black struggle. While the national 
bourgeoisie aspires integration and assimilation into the mainstream 'of monop oly-
capitalism, the Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie are split in their sociopolitical 
aspirations; although economically, the Black middle class can't afford to negate their tie 
to the system of national oppression without forfeiting material advantag e and 
livelihood. But as the crisis of monopoly -capitalism worsens (inflation/recession), the 
existence of the Black middle class is threatened, as the national bourgeoisie intensifies 
their integrationist program on the deaf ear of the U.S. conservatism. The overall roll -
back of affirmative action and economic programs that served the needs of the Black 
masses during the late 60s and throughout the 70s, provides the basis in which the New 
Afrikan (Black) revolution will be mounted; the socioeconomic contradiction between the 
owners of the means of production (ruling class imperialist) and the laborers (managers 
and manual labor) becoming antagonistic - the principle ideal of Black capitalism in 
juxtaposition in capitalist-imperialism is refuted.  
 
 
From a N ew Afrikan revolutionary nationalist analysis of the developing struggle, 
dialectical historical materialism must be the basis in which such an analysis serves to 
manifest an ideology, theory and political program that will strengthen the 
socioeconomic and political determination of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. 
In this way, the New Afrikan revolution will not become short -sighted and bend to 
reformist concessions the national bourgeoisie neo-colonialist - in behalf of their class


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  15 
 
interest and the interest of colonialism - may throw in the path of the revolution via the 
Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie and working class. Hence, this New Afrikan 
revolutionary nationalist analysis must be a class analysis of national significance. It 
then becomes first to identify the classes of neo -colonial oppression; the national Black 
bourgeoisie, neo-colonialists are identified as those business people/ corporations such 
as Johnson Publication and Products, Motown music/movie industry, etc. whose 
economic poli cy in class collaboration and collusion with monopoly -capitalism serves 
as. financiers to political entities/ individuals who espouse the neo -colonialist dictates of 
integration and assimilation; those sociopolitical personages of the national bourgeoisie 
are identified as the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Rev. Joseph Lowery, Rev. Benjamin Hooks, 
Rev. Leon Sullivan, Ron Brown, Reginald Lewis, Percy Sutton, Coretta S. King, Dorothy 
Haight, Eleanor Holmes Norton, and other such national neo -colonist representatives. 
 
These individuals and organizations maintain direct ties to the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government in their relationship to the oppressed neo -colony, and espouse the 
sociopolitical illusion of integration -assimilation and non -violent struggle for Black 
survival i n racist -imperialist America. They are the bulwark of neo -colonialist leaders 
who serve the colonial government by institutionalizing the concept of gradualism, 
reformism, and Black capitalism as the socioeconomic policy for political struggle by the 
oppressed New Afrikan masses. Their entire program is based on acculturation, 
assimilation, and integration on a monopoly capitalist  platform. Such a program has 
influenced the established Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie skilled laborers in their 
efforts to gain material wealth and status in the colonial system of oppression. In many 
cases, the petty bourgeoisie comes face to face with racist institutions and standards 
(i.e., housing, employment, promotions, etc.) that cause them to reconsider socio-
politically the aspects in which acculturation, integration and assimilation are realistic. 
But because of their socioeconomic ties to the system of oppression, they aren't totally 
able or willing to sever their relationship and join the oppressed New Afrikan mas ses in 
the national independence movement. Hence, the Black (upper) middle class attempts 
to employ a cultural identity to the development of Black capitalism, which is 
progressive in form and reactionary in content. This bourgeois cultural nationalism has  
evoked socioeconomically an exploitative relationship to the oppressed neo -colony by 
developing Black business, employment, etc., in the Black community but taking the 
profit out of the community -- while politically they espouse Black community self-control 
in which Black capitalists and politicians will overwhelmingly benefit. Their most recent 
scheme to enhance this development is the building of a National Black Independent 
Political Party. 
 
 
The question of a National Black Independent Political Party  as elucidated by the Black 
bourgeoisie cultural nationalist (upper and middle class) would consolidate in a program 
for independent Black capitalism and conformity to white capitalism/imperialism, thus a 
neo-colonial relationship to colonial (U.S.A.) rule rs. The political determination of the 
National Black Independent Political Party as developed by the National Black Political 
Assembly, would seek to compete with the Democratic and Republican Party(s), 
running Black politicians for various local (mayoral , governor), regional (congress,


--- PAGE 16 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  16 
 
senate), and national (president) offices and fight for federal funds, laws and policy in 
response to the needs of the New Afrikan neo-colony, and/or against U.S. foreign policy 
to Afrika. Whereupon, the need for such a Nat ional Black Independent Political Party is 
real, the Political goal and direction of this party cannot be based on the development of 
Black capitalism nor hold to a concept of co -existence to imperialism. The Black middle 
class petty bourgeoisie cultural nationalist, economic and political aspiration as currently 
forged is progressive in form by collecting and consolidating our talented, educated and 
skilled Black people in a national formation to supposedly represent the interests of the 
oppressed New Afri kan masses; and reactionary in content by developing Black 
capitalism intricately tied to U.S. monopoly -capitalism. It is illusionary, as it would not 
evolve independent of U.S. monopoly -capitalism, since Black capitalism would rely on 
capitalist imperialism for its own growth and development, strengthening a neo -colonial 
relationship to the oppressed New Afrikan masses of whom are a colonized nation. 
Hence, Black capitalism perpetuates class exploitation of New Afrikans, and neo -
colonial subjugation to U.S. imperialism. 
 
 
It can thereby be determined, the Black middle class petty bourgeoisie cultural 
nationalist can be allied to the New Afrikan working class upon realizing Black 
capitalism is a tool of the colonial ruling class oppressors, utilized by their  neo-
colonialist agents - the national Black bourgeoisie. Furthermore, where Black capitalism 
is tied to monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, its existence and development is based 
on the existence and development of imperialism and imperialism is based on  colonial 
domination of oppressed people -nations. Thus, socioeconomic and politically Black 
capitalism is a neo -colonialist institution demanding continued Black exploitation and 
colonial oppression domestically and U.S. imperialist expansion in the Third World. 
 
THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE 
 
With a full understanding of our history in relationship to the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government and its economic system of monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, we are 
then able to develop a practical theory to formulate a decisive working strategy by which 
to educate, organize and mobilize our oppressed New Afrikan Nation for complete 
sovereignty and independence. It is important that recognition is given to our task for a 
social, political, economic and cultural perspective. That we totally commit ourselves t o 
an arduous struggle for national emancipation and liberation, allowing absolutely 
nothing from preventing our success and freedom from racist colonial and neo -colonial 
subjugation. 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 17 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  17 
 
Our Three Phase Theory for National Independence  is based on the histo rical 
manifestation of our national oppression in racist capitalist America. This theory negates 
nothing from our history although it establishes its pragmatic foundation on prevailing 
conditions, and moves from these conditions, building conceptual unders tanding of how 
our practice must conform to given realities, if we are to be free. The Three Phase 
Theory for National Independence is based on the principles of dialectical materialism, 
determining the need of both class and national struggle. 
1) We recognize we are a subjugated and oppressed colonized nation in the imperialist 
government of the United States of America; 
 
2) That racist national oppression and monopoly-capitalism are the two all pervasive 
means in which U.S. imperialism maintains a colonial strangle-hold on the New Afrikan 
Nation, with miscegenation, acculturation, assimilation, individualism, sexism and 
competition being the character of control and our super exploitation; 
 
3) Our colonial condition is re-enforced by the institutionalization of class-divisions and 
neo-colonial control by members of the New Afrikan Nation; 
 
4) That the New Afrikan Nation is entitled to restitution/reparations from the U.S. 
government for four (4) centuries of colonial domination, including, monetary 
compensation, land, machinery (industrial and technological), and military equipment to 
establish our sovereignty and security to defend against future aggression; 
 
5) As an oppressed nation of colonized people, we are the third largest nation of Afrikan 
people in the western hemisphere. We have a population of 30+ million with a 
purchasing power of $250 to $350 billion dollars and must be afforded international 
recognition and status in both United Nations and Organization of Afrikan Unity. 
 
First Phase – CLASS STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE 
 
It is first important to identify the various classes in which national unity is to be brought. 
We recognize the fact that the New Afrikan  people are a colonized nation in the United 
States. We also recognize that New Afrikans' colonization is one of the race and class 
oppression. The division of oppression between Euro Americans and New Afrikans is 
buffeted by a system of neo colonization established and maintained by members of the 
New Afrikan Nation who are in essence neo -colonialist agents of the oppressor nation 
government. 
 
These neo-colonialists are the National Bourgeoisie of the oppressed New Afrikan 
Nation. The national bourgeoisie are Black politicians and business people (capitalist) 
who are integrationist and assimilationist, they aspire (by policy making in 
organizations) to have the oppressed New Afrikan people to integrate and assimilate 
into the government of oppression. This ideal, as it has been historically manifested, is 
in essence an illusion in which it is the national bourgeoisie who benefits, with token 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 18 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  18 
 
concessions from the colonial government, rewarded for their efforts to maintain order 
and control of the New Afrikan people. The national bourgeoisie are identified as 
leaders of the NAACP, PUSH, National Urban League, Congressional Black Caucus, 
Johnson Products, Motown, etc. All of them work in the interests of the colonial 
government and in the own interests, aspiring  integration and assimilation into this 
system of capitalist imperialism; and by seeking to stifle the militant struggle of the 
oppressed New Afrikan people for independence. 
 
 
The political wing of the national bourgeoisie is financed by Black capitalist and liberal 
white institutions (i.e., foundations) and corporate groups. Essentially they epitomize by 
the structure of -the colonial government to represent the interests of New Afrikan 
people. They attempt to persuade New Afrikans what is in their interest to struggle for or 
against in relation to the policies of the colonial government. Their policy and interests 
are that of neo -colonial capitalist and integrationist in relation to the oppressed New 
Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
Under the nat ional bourgeoisie are the petty bourgeoisie (cultural nationalist) middle 
class. These are the skilled Black professionals and marginal/small business people 
which can be divided into two segments in a socio -psychological conception, but are 
equally Black capitalist. On the one hand there are the assimilationist and integrationist 
who are in every way like the national bourgeoisie, and on the other hand are the 
cultural nationalist. The middle class cultural nationalist attempts to maintain a Black 
social consciousness in terms of identifying with the New Afrikan oppressed masses, 
but because they are in essence capitalist, their aspirations as pseudo -nationalist are 
forsaken. They are economically and materially tied to the system of oppression and 
these ties are manifested politically as they tend to support and enhance the prospects 
of neo -colonialism, ensuring Blacks are the representatives of Blacks, who are the 
representatives of the colonial (U.S.A.) government. As an example, they seek to 
establish an  independent Black political party to compete with other capitalist (ruling 
class) political institutions. They work to broaden and secure their class and national 
interest, working within the legitimate confines and avenues the colonial government 
allows for a given class or national to address their problems and seek redress to 
disenfranchisement and aspects of colonial subjugation. I Hence, they are in actuality 
social and political reformist, utilizing the oppression of the New A frikan masses as 
stepping-stones to assure their own security and survival as capitalists. They also 
support upward mobility of other aspiring Black capitalists from the lower classes, 
building and strengthening their class status in competition with white middle and upper 
class capitalists. They are the bulwark supporters of the national bourgeoisie, even 
though as social reformers, potentially, they are capable of developing national Black 
social consciousness to motivate and influence the New Afrikan peoples' struggle for 
the e nd of colonial oppression, if they were to confront the colonial government for 
national emancipation and independence.


--- PAGE 19 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  19 
 
The majority of New Afrikans are of the lower class - workers and laborers - the 
proletariat class. They are the semi -skilled and manu al laborers, the office and factory 
workers, etc., whose standard of living is just above or at poverty level, many of whom 
subsist on a combination of work, welfare (medical aid, social security or veterans 
benefits, etc.) and hustling. The Black proletariats suffer the brunt of the socioeconomic 
oppression of capitalist exploitation and are  most politically disenfranchised by the 
system of colonial domination. In juxtaposition to neocolonial class divisions within the 
New Afrikan Nation, the capitalist sy stem employs racist national oppression as the 
primary mechanism to keep the aspirations of the Black proletariat in check. This racist 
national oppression is found in every vestige of the Black proletariat existence, in 
housing, employment, health, and social institutions. The colonial government maintains 
the policies and regulates when and how such living means are to be dispensed in the 
New Afrikan community and/or to the benefit of the Black proletariat. Racist national 
oppression and class divisions, serves to trap the Black proletariat in a socioeconomic 
condition and-level of subsistence where poverty is always close at hand. But, socio-
politically, the Black proletariat aspires an end to colonial domination and racist 
oppression, and not for such co nditions to be covered up in Black face. They are not in 
essence capitalist, but rather, recognize they live in a capitalist society, and thereby 
must live in accordance to the norms by which a livelihood can be maintained. When 
such conditions of oppressi on become unbearable, the Black proletariat and youth are 
more likely to rebel (riots, strikes, boycotts, etc.) and demonstrate their frustration and 
anger to continued exploitation and racism. 
 
 
Beneath the Black working class are the subculture, lumpen -proletariat, the unskilled 
and menial laborers whose primary means of subsistence is based on hustling (selling 
drugs, thievery, prostitution, etc.), marginal employment and welfare. For the most part, 
the socioeconomic provisions within the subculture are maintained by the "illegitimate 
capitalist" activity of the lumpen -proletariat. In accordance to their aspirations to fulfill 
the social values of the bourgeoisie, they employ business acumen in criminal activity 
for subsistence and profit. As they seek ma terial wealth and social status of the 
bourgeoisie within the confines of the subculture, they are in many cases politically 
reactionary, unconcerned with nothing other than personal survival and individual gain. 
It is only when the lumpen-proletariat are educated and become politically aware of their 
socioeconomic condition, does the possibility exist for them to become staunch 
supporters of the revolution, recognizing their dire standard of living is based wholly on 
the system of oppression they are desperately trying to emulate. 
 
 
This brief description of the class break -down of the oppressed New Afrikan Nation 
provides some indication as to why it is so difficult for the oppressed Black masses to 
challenge the government of oppression in unity and struggle. This also determines why 
the first phase of Frolinan theoretical position is one in which struggle must commence 
within the class divisions of the neo -colony, before New Afrikans can adequately 
challenge the colonial government with a degree of streng th and fortitude, and cause 
the enemy government to bend to the will of the New Afrikan Nation for complete


--- PAGE 20 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  20 
 
independence and sovereignty. 
 
 
By comprehending the class divisions within the neo -colony, we find the particularity of 
the principle contradiction  that exists between the neo -colony and the colonial 
government with its national and international ramifications. Essentially, the particularity 
of the contradiction is one between the direction of the liberation movement; is it for 
integration or separat ion from this capitalist -imperialist system of oppression? It is this 
contradiction within the movement that determines the necessity for class struggle 
within the New Afrikan Nation; such a struggle to evolve national unity towards a single 
and principle revolutionary program and strategy to confront the colonial government. 
The contradiction as it presently exists, between the forces of integration and the forces 
for separation, is one in which each are building ideological, political programs and 
direction within the objective reality of the fight for civil and human rights. At this point, 
the contradiction is not antagonistic, but rather one of coexistence and in some cases 
mutual cohesion and accountability. It is this aspect of mutual accountability, i f 
continued in unprincipled class collaboration that will prevent the forces for separation to 
build and sustain a revolutionary movement for complete independence. 
 
 
Thus, class struggle for national unity must begin by understanding the aspects of the 
particular contradiction existing between two contending forces within the neo -colony, 
and how these forces in unity and struggle - dialectically - attract and repel one another 
politically, and determine the basis of this relationship with the oppressed New  Afrikan 
people in building and sustaining their aspiration to fight for independence. Here it can 
be said that the struggle must commence by drawing a line of demarcation between 
programs and objectives of the two forces in relation to the oppressed -New A frikan 
masses. 
 
This line of demarcation must be forged through ideological and political struggle, as 
well as socioeconomic programs addressing the concrete realities of the oppressed 
disenfranchisement. Where the forces of integration fights for civil ri ghts, the forces for 
separation must fight for civil rights as the minimum objectives to attain within the 
process of building towards complete emancipation. In so doing, the forces for 
separation must at times call the forces of integration to do more, to  fight harder, to 
make greater demands on the colonial government ( i.e., for Black community control) 
and when they fail to do this, to condemn them for national betrayal, class collaboration 
and collusion with the enemy government. When such demands are m ade on the 
national bourgeoisie, for them to become responsive to the demands being made by the 
revolutionary forces (especially the working class), they will either have to capitulate and 
show the oppressed masses their true political nature, as boot lick ing lackeys, or 
antagonize the principle contradiction existing between the neo -colony and the colonial 
government, leading to confrontation. This is the point in which class struggle for 
national unity broadens and strengthens the capacity for revolutiona ry forces to 
organize and mobilize the oppressed New Afrikan masses to support and fight for 
national liberation.


--- PAGE 21 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  21 
 
 
 
At this time, the forces of integration ( i.e., National Bourgeoisie) have for the most part 
the greater influence over the New Afrikan peopl e, because they are recognized as the 
official leaders- and speakers of the neo -colony by the colonialist; while the oppressed 
masses are for the most part politically integrated into - +-he working mechanism 
(Democratic and Republican Party or building a N ational Black Independent Political 
Party and as wage earners) of the system of oppression, and thereby provides the 
neocolonialist a semblance of legitimacy as representatives. Hence, the purpose of 
class struggle within the neo -colony is to erode this id eal of legitimacy the neo -
colonialist wields, expose their relationship as its exists. To expose the means and 
method in which the colonial government maintains control over the oppressed New 
Afrikan Nation, by causing the contradiction between the neocolo nial integrationist and 
the colonialist to become antagonistic. 
 
 
The mementos of the class struggle for national unity is for revolutionary nationalist 
forces to build support of the independence movement by discrediting the prospects of 
integration into this capitalist system. Class divisions within the structural foundation of 
capitalism determines the essential basis by which the particular contradiction rests, 
which in and of itself indicates integration in this system would be to perpetuate class 
division and exploitation of the neo -colony. Thus, class struggle for national unity also 
holds the principle contradiction, whereby to end class divisions within the neo -colony 
would be to end the means and method of control and national oppression the neo -
colony suffers by the system of capitalist colonial imperialism. 
 
 
 
 
The class struggle will inevitably cause a contradiction to arise amongst the neo -
colonialist and their supporters, and it will heighten political consciousness and 
combativeness amongst all classes within the neo -colony. The various segments of the 
middle class will split for and against the course of development between the national 
bourgeoisie of the neo -colony, and the revolutionary nationalist working class as 
epitomized by the forces f or separation. The working class will gain a better 
understanding of the political determination of the movement, gaining a class 
consciousness that will re -enforce their nationalist fervor. The lumpen -proletariat 
subculture will also gain a class consciou sness in which they will come to understand 
that their survival and development will be based on the fulfillment of the revolutionary 
nationalist direction of the independence movement. In this way, national unity can be 
attained and evolve to a level wher e a greater number of the oppressed New Afrikan 
people will support the endeavors of the forces for separation and become staunch 
supporters of the independence movement.


--- PAGE 22 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  22 
 
It must also be stated, during the course of the class struggle for national unity , the 
enemy government will seek to preserve the legitimacy -of the neo-colonialist. They will 
afford them greater amount of visibility in the media, become more politically friendly, 
giving larger concessions and authority to command the mode and direction  of the 
struggle. This is why it is so important that revolutionary nationalist forces make their 
programs for Black community control known amongst the New Afrikan people 
(especially the working class). They must diligently, relentlessly and vigorously 
challenge the national bourgeoisie civil rights program as minimum demands, and 
insufficient to the needs of the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
At first, the class struggle may appear to be divisive, but only until lines of demarcation 
have been drawn between two con tending forces and directions in the neo -colony 
struggle for self -determination and independence. Thereby, class struggle for national 
unity becomes an essential part of the liberation movement -- a fight for Black 
community control; a part in which the p articularities of the contradiction of class 
divisions within the neo -colony becomes a motivating factor by which the principle 
contradiction between the neo -colony and the colonial government becomes acute and 
antagonistic; and separation/ independence be come the ultimate goal to attain in a 
revolutionary nationalist struggle between the nationally oppressed and the national 
oppressor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second-Phase - NATIONAL UNITY FOR SELF GOVERNMENT  
 
Within the development of the first phase, lies the seed of the second phase, the phase 
whereby national unity has been attained for the ideals of the independence movement. 
It then becomes possible to challenge the colonial government with a single nation al 
program to concretize our immediate demands as expressed during the first phase in 
terms of civil and human rights. The concrete social and political struggle of New Afrikan 
peoples' fight for self -determination is characterized in economic and politica l terms of 
self-government. 
 
Hence, it can be established that the first phase is one in which the revolutionary 
nationalist forces fight to win the oppressed New Afrikan masses to support Black 
community control in the independence movement. The programs and struggle for civil 
and human rights are tactical initiatives to build and sustain the movement on the 
socioeconomic level, while ideological and politically the class struggle evolves political 
class consciousness on a national level to the ideals of separation and self-government. 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 23 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  23 
 
 
Thereby, the New Afrikan Nation has become educated and organized into a national 
liberation front, a united -front in national unity, and in the second phase, they are 
mobilized for self-determination and self-government. Our national unity is decisive, it is 
our strength and foundation for the future, and our fight for self -government is 
prerequisite to  total and complete independence. Encompassing this theory for 
emancipation is the objective and concrete realities of the fight for civil and human rights 
as expressed in the first phase. It is manifested, the fertilization of the seed for 
independence as planted in the first phase - class struggle for national unity - is then 
cultivated in the second phase - national unity for self -government - and will be 
harvested in the last phase. 
 
 
The political programs of Frolinan in national unity for self governm ent are to concretize 
the struggle for independence. To demand control of the socioeconomic and political 
institutions in the ghettos/barrios of the urban and rural areas where New Afrikan people 
comprise the majority, independent of the federal colonial ( U.S.A.) government control. 
To strengthen and intensify the political struggle between the nationally oppressed and 
the national oppressor; and socioeconomically consolidate the prospects for national 
independence, is the basic condition by which the movem ent will evolve qualitatively in 
both the national and international political arena. This leads to the principle 
contradiction of two antagonistic contending political forces and national wills. Whereby 
the demand and struggle for complete control of inst itutions, resources and the wealth 
of the oppressed nation will be the character of the second phase. It then becomes 
essential at this phase to call for the assistance of Frolinan international supporters, to 
support and assist in the socioeconomic and po litical objectives in building New Afrikan 
communities independent of the colonial government. But at the same time, it will be 
incumbent of the colonial (U.S.A.) government to preserve a practical relationship with 
the New Afrikan Nation, a relationship o f economic and political co -existence and 
interdependence. Hence, the dialectics of unity and struggle of opposites in the principle 
contradiction, between two contending forces and nationals. 
 
Thus, this second phase as a prerequisite to national independ ence is one in which the 
New Afrikan Nation begins to formulate the means and method of self -government in 
the geographical areas where New Afrikans constitute the majority; to control and direct 
the resources, labor, institutions and wealth which determi nes the extent of their 
livelihood. The demands of civil and human rights as applicable to these social, political, 
and economic conditions, will serve to preserve the growth and development of the 
liberation movement, as New Afrikans become self -determinative in manifesting their 
future on all fronts. The federal colonial government will be called upon to relinquish 
taxation on New Afrikans, so that this tax money will be redistributed in accordance to 
the needs of the New Afrikan Nation communities, and f or the establishment of the New 
Afrikan sovereignty: it will also be called for the building of the New Afrikan security 
force/military; for the construction of New Afrikan industries in the national territory of 
Kush, building a national economic system t o support the autonomous regions (New


--- PAGE 24 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  24 
 
Afrikan communities) across the country and developing economic ties internationally; 
to demand the release of New Afrikan prisoners to support the building of the New 
Afrikan Nation in both the rural and urban areas; to organize a national plebiscite and 
vote for independence, to be monitored by the United Nations and the organization of 
Afrikan Unity; to demand reparations for slave labor of over 400 years and damages for 
colonial exploitation and domination at a cost  of $500 million at 6% semi -annual 
interest, since 1865 to the present. These and other aspects of Frolinan's national 
political program will become the predominate objective to rise in confrontation with the 
colonial government in national unity for self-government. 
 
 
 
In this way, the New Afrikan people will consolidate their national aspirations to be 
independent of racist national oppression and capitalist -imperialist exploitation. While 
the first phase is to win the minds of Now Afrikan people in national unity -to the concept 
of Black community control, and an end to class divisions and neo -colonialism; the 
second phase is to mobilize the body of Now Afrikans to become self -determinative, 
self-governed, and bring an end to colonial domination toward t he ultimate goal of 
national independence. 
 
Third Phase - SELF-GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE  
 
Where the first two phases were for building the movement and consolidating it - where 
New Afrikan  people comprise the majority geographically - establishing a national 
political consciousness, socioeconomic and cultural development for national 
independence. The third phase, golf -Government for National independence, is to fight 
for the national territory of Kush, to win the war and free the land. 
 
 
It can be easily determined based on this proposition; the third phase depends much on 
the success of the first two phases. Once Frolinan has established a revolutionary 
nationalist social consciousness amo ngst the oppressed masses to want and fight for 
control of the Black community, and further consolidate this social and political 
consciousness toward self -government; the prospects of substantiating the ultimate 
goal of national independence becomes more realistic and plausible in the overall 
scheme of this undertaking. Each step is a tactical initiative within a national strategy, 
each tactical initiative being strategically developed to formulate the necessary 
socioeconomic, political and cultural ingred ients into a national program in which the 
various segments of the independence movement can fulfill. 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 25 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  25 
 
 
The third phase is the final stage - to mobilize the entire nation to free the land - 
employing all the resources available to the movement in challengi ng the colonial 
government for complete independence. To recover the territory the oppressed nation 
once occupied and controlled by its labor and ownership of land, granted by the 
government when it first freed New Afrikans from chattel slavery in 1863. Th is is the 
phase in which the national aspirations of New Afrikans, as determined through the 
course of the struggle, will be called to task to wrestle the national territory from the 
colonial government. The mobilization of New Afrikans will be in national  
demonstrations, and strangling the economic development of the colonial government, 
as well as intensifying the guerrilla war in both urban and rural areas, gaining 
international support on the specific objectives of national independence. 
 
 
This is a tim e when the call will be made for mass migration to Kush and where 
economic, social, political development will concentrate in the national territory. The 
transferring of economic, political resources and finances from out of the autonomous 
regions to the n ational territory will create a social, economic and political upheaval for 
the colonial government, greater than the struggles created in the first two phases. It will 
cause a major shift in the relationship of the autonomous regions with the colonial 
government in each area, diffusing and disrupting what may have been tentatively 
secured economic and political areas of co -existence between the colonial government 
and New Afrikan communities (or Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika 
and Frolinan). 
 
Of course, this fight cannot be fully developed until the course of the struggle 'for self -
government has evolved the mechanisms and institutions for governmental organization 
of national magnitude with international recognition: providing the esse ntial tasks of a 
government in all socioeconomic and political fronts, such as in agriculture, industries 
(for food and employment), for national security, etc. It cannot be expected of New 
Afrikans to sacrifice beyond the exercise and expectations of a go vernment to provide 
stable livelihood for its nationals. Hence, the reasons for the first two phases, in which’ 
New Afrikans will be organized in national unity and self -government, utilizing the skills 
and resources within the oppressed nation, establishing a national social consciousness 
and political determination for the inevitable fight to free the land. Thereby, the first two 
phases, lines-up the social, economic and political aspects of the struggle in a strategic 
position to challenge the colonial g overnment weaknesses. In so doing, Frolinan will 
establish the criteria by which the sacrifices for the fight for national independence will 
be minimized. To maximize the prospects of securing a liberated New Afrikan 
government in the national territory, h aving the government of New Afrika function with 
as much efficiency possible arising out of the national liberation struggle.


--- PAGE 26 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  26 
 
Thus, self -government for national independence, the third phase of this theory -
strategically - is the phase in which all others work to accomplish. The point in the 
national liberation struggle where New Afrikans are in a position of strength beyond the 
capacity of the colonial government to destroy the independence movement. The seed 
of independence planted in the first phase and cultivated in the second phase, will have 
blossomed in the third phase, the phase in which national independence will become a n 
accomplished reality. 
 
 
 
 
In conclusion, this theoretical proposition determines the need of the national liberation 
struggle, by first recognizing and organizing the New Afrikan Nation on the ideal of 
national independence, by having our talented, skill ed and educated return to the Black 
communities; for them to live, work and build the political and social movement in the 
Black community under the guiding principles of class struggle for national unity; and 
further develop a political and socioeconomic foundation toward self -sufficiency and 
self-reliance amongst New Afrikan people on the principle of national unity for self -
government. 
 
This course of struggle will assure the independence movement will not become 
subjugated to the class struggle of Euro -Americans. Frolinan will not hold the class and 
national struggle of New Afrikans in abeyance or subject to the class struggle of Euro 
Americans. Frolinan maintain the New Afrikan Independence Movement is independent 
of and held in juxtaposition to the cla ss struggle of Euro -Americans. Thereby, the 
fulfillment of this proposition does not negate a relationship with the class struggle of 
Euro Americans, but rather base such a relationship on the political determination of the 
New Afrikan Independence Movemen t and not in reverse. Furthermore, Frolinan holds 
that building the national liberation struggle is to free New Afrikan s socio-
psychologically, socio-economically, politically and culturally from neo -colonialism as a 
particular aspect of the principle stru ggle to end colonial domination. The course of the 
struggle, self -government for national independence is to free the land - the national 
territory of Kush. 
 
 
This theoretical proposition is not all encompassing addressing the current direction and 
sectarian condition of the national liberation struggle as it exists at this time. What is 
elucidated herein is the position of Frolinan to provide a motivating factor in which to 
play down sectarianism and heighten the prospect of united action amongst the many 
revolutionary nationalist organizations across the country. Such united actions that will 
embrace the New Afrikan Nation in national unity toward the objective goal of self -
government as prerequisite to national independence. Therefore, it is Frolinan's 
position; - this theoretical proposition attaches to the national liberation movement a


--- PAGE 27 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  27 
 
concept for the development of a national strategy. A national strategy which all 
authentic revolutionary nationalist organizations must embrace and fulfill under the 
auspices of Frolinan in unity and struggle. It is this concept for the development of a 
national liberation strategy which will build, strengthen and fortify the national liberation 
struggle. Based on the revolutionary principle that without a revolutionary t heory there 
can be no revolutionary movement. Here rests the theoretical proposition to build and 
sustain a revolutionary movement - the New Afrikan Independence Movement. 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL STRATEGY- BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION 
 
The national strategy basic aim and objectives are to establish a Program for 
Decolonization that encompasses the strategic and tactical goals of the New Afrikan  
Independence Movement. It is within - the development of a Program for Decolonization 
that national liberation will be accomplished. The Program for Decolonization must 
afford a tactical initiative attacking the social, political, economic and cultural 
manifestation of disenfranchisement New Afrikans suffers as a neo -colony; and seek 
the means to rid New Afrikans of this condition of oppression strategically leading to 
national independence. 
 
 
The Program of Decolonization is a program for national liberation and a strategy in the 
independence movement to be fulfilled tactically by the various members of Frolinan, 
and New Afrikan revolutionary nationalists across the country. 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 28 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We therefore call for the establishment of several national organizations to be 
constructed under the auspices of Frolinan:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Union of New Afrikan Workers:  
 
The National Union of New Afrikan Workers (NUNAW) is a national network of New 
Afrikan political activists in urban and rural areas, who function on the organizing 
principle of Frolinan  in the work place (industries, companies, manufacturers, office 
workers, etc.). Their primary goal and objective is to raise the political consciousness of 
New Afrikan Workers of the socioeconomic condition inherent in the system of 
monopoly-capitalism. I n so doing, to organize New Afrikan workers into labor 
federations who will call for the implementation of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization 
at the work place. 
PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION 
National Union of New Afrikan 
Workers 
National Alliance of New Afrikan 
Students 
New Afrikan Independence 
Academy 
Panther Youth Corps 
New Afrikan Children Center 
New Afrikan Community Health 
Clinic 
New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program 
The New Afrikan Community Alert 
Patrol 
New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance 
Program 
National Organization of New 
Afrikan Women


--- PAGE 29 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  29 
 
 
 
It will be the responsibility of NUNAW to address the problems of affirmative action in 
the work place, to call for owners of the means of production to relinquish profits for the 
development of New Afrikan communities, and have them not engage -in economic 
ventures in South Afrika and other reactionary Afrikan countries. To further establish a  
national body of workers in a union formation to fortify the political thrust of the 
independence movement in the economic sphere. On the rural front, NUNAW will be 
responsible to organize agrarian collectives, co -ops, and the establishment of rural 
industries. 
 
Eventually, it will be the responsibility of NUNAW to develop a national economic 
system as. A foundation for the liberated national territory of Kush and the 
establishment of the New Afrikan Nation. Hence, NUNAW is the backbone of the 
independence movement in building and strengthening the class struggle for national 
unity, by organizing the Black proletariat under the auspices of Frolinan's Program for 
Decolonization. 
 
 
 
Furthermore, because of the role NUNAW will play in support of New Afrikan wo rkers, it 
has the potential to become the most powerful sector within the New Afrikan 
communities across the country. As New Afrikans are victims of inequality in the 
economic system of monopoly- capitalism, they have often organized separately on the 
job to advance their interests and protect their rights. New Afrikan workers in general , 
and those who are employed by multi -national corporations in particular, should be 
organized around demands that more jobs be made available to our People by cutting 
back in the use of cheap labor abroad. New Afrikan workers should be organized 
against state and federal government sanctions allowing multi -national corporations to 
hire foreign workers aboard at less than the national minimum wage required by state 
and federal law in the U.S. There should be a minimum wage hiring act that applies to 
all U.S. owned business and corporations and that applies to all employees on their 
payroll regardless of territory. 
 
 
These aims can be furthered through the following demands: 
1. Call for rank and file democratic control of the unions currently in existence and 
for the elimination of all racial practices in the labor movement. Equal rights for all 
New Afrikan workers. 
 
2. Call for preferential hiring and advancement of New Afrikan workers and free 
access to apprentice training programs, the skilled trades and higher paying 
supervisory posts in affirmative action.


--- PAGE 30 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  30 
 
 
3. Call for an escalator clause in all union contracts to assure automatic wage 
adjustment to keep up with the rising cost of living (inflation/recession). 
 
4. Call for a shorter work week at standard living wages allowing the means for 
unemployed to gain employment preserving the need of productivity. 
 
5. Call for speedier grievance procedures and safety inspection with no restrictions 
on the right to strike. 
 
6. Call for the complete independence of unions from government interference. 
Repeal of all anti-labor laws. End prisoners slavery and uphold their right to 
unionize. 
 
7. Call for the establishment of a national import quota on products made by foreign 
corporations outside the U.S. territory, a balance in import/export trade. 
 
8. Call for workers control of industry through factory committees elected by the 
workers on the job. 
 
9. Call for big business taxes subsidize New Afrikan community projects, i.e., health 
clinic, child day care centers, drug rehabilitation programs, prisoners parole training 
programs, senior citizen care programs, etc. 
 
10. For multi-national corporations in conjunction with the U.S. government to give 
reparations to the New Afrikan Nation by subsidizing industrial construction and 
agricultural development in the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
These democratic demands within the Program for Decolonization builds the foundation 
in which Frolinan political activists can organize New Afrikan workers in NUNAW, and 
have NUNAW become a motivating factor in building the class struggle for national unity 
in the independence movement. 
 
 
National Alliance of New Afrikan Students:  
 
The National Alliance of New Afrikan Students (NANAS) is a national network of New 
Afrikan student groups and activists functioning under the auspices of Frolinan's 
Program for Decolonization. It will be the responsibility of NANAS to formulate a 
national direction on school campuses across the country, to support the development 
of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. To have New Afrikan history programs 
established, taught and maintained by professionals who are in support of the 
independence movement. To also have New Afrikan students to become more aware


--- PAGE 31 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  31 
 
of their responsibility in the independence movement, by organizing tutoring courses in 
high school and building liberation schools in the ghetto/barrio. It is important that New 
Afrikan students know they are the future of the independence movement and 
essentially are the principle leaders of the movement. With this understanding, they will 
be able to apply themselves in education and in other extracurricular activity to the well 
being of the movement and the security of the Nation. Students must recognize that 
their education is not solely for individual gain and pleasure, but rather, for the building 
of minds to serve the movement and the Nation. They must become politically aware of 
their relationshi p to the Nation, and it is the responsibility of NANAS to assure New 
Afrikan students are organized in support of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. This 
program dealing in the area of education will allow NANAS to become the motivating 
factor in assuring its development and success. The following are NANAS program: 
 1. Election of community control boards to supervise schools in the New Afrikan 
community. 
 
2. Establish an educational system and curriculum which meets the needs of 
New Afrikan children, prepares them for the future in economic and technical 
skills, and technical security of the New Afrikan Nation. And gives them 
knowledge of themselves and an understanding of the true history and culture of 
Afrikan people. 
 
3. To involve parents in every phase of school life as part of the development of 
community involvement in the political life of the independence movement. 
 
4. Under the direction of Frolinan to support a program to train Black 
academicians, historians (so-called) intellectuals, and administrators in the 
principle and policy of class and national liberation struggle, and the objective of 
community control of the education system. 
 
5. To support Frolinan's position that community groups should be entitled to use 
school facilities to promote activities for the benefit of the community and the 
independence movement.  
 
6. In support of Frolinan's direction, to call for the dismissal of all school officials 
who victimize or insult students on racial grounds, or are found to be directly in 
cahoots with the colonial government efforts to suppress Frolinan's education 
Program for Decolonization. 
 
7. Support the establishment of community liberation schools to introduce special 
tutoring programs for all students who have fallen behind in their studies; to offer 
a full program of adult education; and teach the political motives and direction of 
the New Afrikan Independence Movement, the prospect of a national social 
democratic society.


--- PAGE 32 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For High School Students: 
1. Establishing student policy-making boards to run student activities in the high schools 
handle disciplinary problems and participate in the general supervision of the schools. 
 
2. To hold regular school assemblies to discuss school-problems and ascertain the will 
of the student body in conjunction with the independence movement. 
 
3. Maintain the rights of all students and teachers. These include the freedom of 
expression, freedom to organize, to pass out literature, freedom from censorship of 
school newspaper, freedom of assembly and the right to invite outside speakers 
regardless of their political views. 
 
4. End disciplinary expulsions and suspensions, if there is a problem with a particular 
student, it must be brought to the policy making board, for them to deal with the problem 
- without having the student lose in education. 
 
5. Special tutoring for all students who fall behind in their studies, and for the 
development of a study program teaching New Afrikan history and the real nature of 
monopoly-capitalism, colonialism, and imperialism. To further upgrade job training 
programs and adequate preparation for all students to attend college. 
 
In this aspect of the Program for Decolonization, NANAS will be able to organize 
students on both the high school and college levels, working in con junction with one 
another in support of Frolinan's political program. In this way, the political development 
of the independence movement becomes a total part of the education process of 
students, each working for the benefit of the other for as long as Ne w Afrikan students 
must attend schools controlled by the colonial government. The primary objective is to 
control the schools in the ghetto/barrios and within the development of the class 
struggle for national unity, to have New Afrikan educators become re sponsible to the 
needs and development of the independence movement. It is in the process of freeing 
our minds of cultural imperialism that our oppressed nation will be able to free ourselves 
from national oppression and colonial domination.


--- PAGE 33 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  33 
 
The building of NANAS will be the forging of a youth movement on school campuses 
under the auspices of Frolinan. This youth movement will have a practical program to 
develop directly in relation to education and the political development of Frolinan. 
Hence, NANAS is the spirit of the independence movement, New Afrikan youth 
organized in a national network of groups and activists to establish Frolinan's Program 
for Decolonization in the heart of the New Afrikan community, strengthening the 
foundation of the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
New Afrikan Independence Academy:  
 
The building of New Afrikan Independence Academy (NAIA) is the essential tool in 
which Frolinan broadens its organizing ability in the New Afrikan community. The New 
Afrikan Independence Academy is the needed liberation schools established for the 
purpose of teaching and training New Afrikan youth, adults and members of Frolinan in 
the political direction of the independence movement! These liberation schools will be 
organized in a national network by New Afrikan members of NANAS, NUNAW, political 
educators and activist in support of the independence movement. It is Frolinan's 
position that the New Afrikan community should have universities which are in support 
of New Afrikan independence struggle and against national oppression, cultural 
imperialism and colonialism; where such universities do not exist, the New Afrikan 
Independence Academy will serve this purpose. 
 
 
These academies will be education centers, established in urb an and rural communities 
to forge education in Afrikan history, political and social science, economics, business 
and organization administration, and technical training conducive to the preservation of 
the independence movement. The curriculum of the acad emy will be divided to serve 
youth and adult education, especially developed to evolve leadership quality amongst 
New Afrikans and fulfill the needs of the national program and strategy of Frolinan. The 
New Afrikan Independence Academy will be established by a national education b oard 
consisting of progressive **academicians, historians, intellectuals. 
 
 
Panther Youth Corps: 
 
The Panther Youth Corps (PYC) is Frolinan's pre -teen and young adult youth 
organization whose primary activity is to learn the foundation in which the independence 
movement is being organized; similar to PLO's Fedayeen youths -Simba, the PYC will 
serve to develop the young minds of our oppressed nation of the ideals, principles, 
concepts and fortitude of nationhood.


--- PAGE 34 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  34 
 
 
In the course of the liberation movement, the most courageous brother and sisters that 
have yet to organize the New Afrikan community had been those of the Black Panther 
Party. This history must not be forgotten, but rather maintained in a principled and 
dialectical fashion that will preserve that spirit of resistance in the liberation movement. 
Thusly, Frolinan will use the name Panther as the foundation in which the spirit of 
resistance will be taught to your young. They will become young Panthers progre ssively 
forging this determination of our history of struggle towards the finer and better modes 
of struggle embodied in the socioeconomic and political program of Frolinan.  
 
The PYC will also serve the aspirations of the elementary grade school children i n 
conjunction with NANAS in establishing a national curriculum conducive to their 
education and development. An essential part of their activity will be field trips to sites of 
noted interest to New Afrikans, community recreation activity, history classes and other 
programs to strengthen their impressionable young minds in disciplined understanding 
of their responsibility and place in the oppressed New Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
New Afrikan Children Center:  
 
The New Afrikan Children Center (NACC) is child day care centers established by 
Frolinan and operated by members of the oppressed New Afrikan community and 
Frolinan organizers. These day care centers will operate to serve the needs of working 
parents and political activist who need someone to loo k after their children, while they 
are out securing a livelihood and/or fulfilling the political objectives of the independence 
movement. 
 
These centers depending on location, will also serve free breakfast for school children 
in the neighborhood, and gene rally be supportive of the development of the community 
in respects to the growth of children in conjunction with the PYC and other student 
related programs. Although, the New Afrikan Children Center -will mostly is responsible 
for children from the age of one to five years of age, these children will be taught basic 
skills and practices that will enhance their intelligence aptitude and understanding of the 
world around them. 
 
 
It is in the development of the New Afrikan Children Center's that will further the building 
of Frolinan and forge its program in the heart of the New Afrikan community, fulfilling a 
need and concern that affects most families. Whereby, having the community support 
the centers would be to have New Afrikan families support the political  motivation by 
which Frolinan seeks to build the independence movement.


--- PAGE 35 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Afrikan Community Health Clinic:  
 
The New Afrikan Community Health Clinic (NACHC) is institutions established in the 
New Afrikan community for which preventive medicine wi ll be the primary method of 
operation. These clinics will serve the New Afrikan community in regards to dentistry, 
abortion, drug rehabilitation, rape crisis, acupuncture, hypertension, stress and other 
forms of physical and mental complications New Afrika ns suffers and find common in 
their communities. It will also be the responsibility of the health clinics to formulate 
Sickle Cell Anemia research and HIV -AIDS prevention programs as a central health 
awareness campaign in the New Afrikan community, in conj unction with the overall 
political program of Frolinan. 
 
 
These New Afrikan Community Health Clinics are essential tools by which Frolinan 
serves a particular interest in the community, and as part of the campaign to combat 
genocides in health care New Afr ikans suffers across the country. It is Frolinan0s 
position, we as a nation, have responsible trained professional doctors and medics to fill 
the various positions that these clinics will serve. Upon the development of the class 
struggle for national unity , these medical professionals will be organized to serve the 
needs of New Afrikan people and the independence movement. Thus, the 
establishment of NACHC is a necessary part of Frolinan's organizing platform, building 
its program for the survival and inevitable liberation of the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program:  
 
The New Afrikan Food Co -op Program (NAFCOP) is a Frolinan project to organize 
members of the New Afrikan  community to unite in cooperative economic planning in 
securing wholesale produce and food stuff. With the development of food co -ops and 
the socioeconomic interaction of members of the community, the community will 
formulate working relationships for the improvement of the entire group. This also is the 
basic means in which Frolinan educate New Afrikans of the ideals of community 
responsibility, development and survival during the course of the independence


--- PAGE 36 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  36 
 
movement. Efforts will be made to develop farmin g cooperatives, whereby, agriculture 
will be used in the supplying of food co -ops in urban areas. The establishment of food 
co-op networks across the country for the distribution of foods will ensure the growth 
and development of Frolinan's national program and strategy. 
 
 
 
These food co-ops will strengthen the political determination of the need to free the land 
as an essential and recognize objective, as New Afrikans will understand the need for 
us to feed ourselves. The food co -ops will become a practica l organizing tool both 
politically and organizationally, a central foundation to serve other aspects of Frolinan's 
national strategy, such as the free breakfast program for school children. It is when New 
Afrikan Food Co-op Markets are established, compris ing hundreds of community co -op 
groups throughout the New Afrikans community, will Frolinan be able to gauge the 
strength of its political determination in organizing New Afrikans under the auspices of 
its national program towards self-government and independence. 
 
 
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol:  
 
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol (NACAP) will become a network of New 
Afrikan men and woman organized for the defense of the New Afrikan  community. It will 
establish security patrols against vigilantes, killer cops, racists, and black on black 
crime. These Now Afrikans will be trained in police tactics and codes to protect the New 
Afrikan community in patrols as security guards. They will compile information and 
intelligence of high crime areas that are frequented by outsiders; they will be 
responsible for the protection of our senior citizens and youth, a well as, various political 
programs, demonstrations, etc. Members of NACAP will be tr ained in martial arts, 
weapons, drilling, police science, crowd control and military science encompassing 
guerrilla warfare. 
 
 
One of the primary objectives of Frolinan's political program is to have the colonial 
government occupation army (police) withdra w from the New Afrikan community. But in 
order to gain the support of New Afrikans in this endeavor, it is essential that community 
residences feel safe and confident. The folks in the community must believe their lives 
will not be in any greater danger on ce the occupying army in forced to withdraw from 
the community. It is important that the community understand the police, occupies our 
territory primarily to protect the property of the capitalists, who for the most part do not 
live in our communities. Fro linan's call for community control and self-government will 
become a motivating factor by which the establishment of NACAP is an essential part.


--- PAGE 37 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  37 
 
It must also be put forth, that drugs and black on black crime is a problem that causes 
the occupying (police)  army to be called and stay in and around the New Afrikan 
community. It is with the liquidation of the distribution, selling and consumption of drugs 
and black on black crime; and when New Afrikans becomes responsible to each other in 
respects to the independence movement, the community will be organized in its highest 
operative development. Eventually, NACAP will be organized into a peoples' militia to 
serve the development of the armed struggle for national liberation. These community 
alert patrols will be the means in which members of the New Afrikan community will gain 
experience in working in a disciplined security conscious apparatus. They will gain with 
the high ideals and responsibility of protecting the New Afrikan community. 
 
 
New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance Program:  
 
The New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance Program (NAPOWAP) will be developed to assure 
that Now Afrikan captives are assisted in their efforts to be released from prison. Such 
assistance will be formulated in legal support in defense of our ca ptured; pre -release 
programs for those about to be release on parole or discharged; political assistance in 
building programs and campaigns of national impact concerning the prison movement; 
and when possible, financial aid for the family of captives. In t he past, the Prison 
movement has lead significant political support to the general independence movement. 
Many of those captured had been principle leaders in the movement on the streets. 
Where they might be able to continue to give leadership and enhance the development 
of the independence movement, it will be the responsibility of NAPOWAP to ensure they 
are provided the essential assistance in mutual regards to the independence 
movement, and Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. Emphasis will be given to  the 
development of national campaigns for amnesty and/or exchange of political prisoners 
of war; the ending of prison slavery and repeal of the 13th Amendment of the U.S. 
constitution as it upholds prison slavery; call for the unionization of prisoners la bor and 
minimum wage remuneration for their labor; call for the release of New Afrikans 
prisoners nationally, for them to return to the national territory of Kush and support the 
agricultural development of the New Afrikan Nation; for the immediate end of the death 
penalty; and release of New Afrikans in military prisons. All of which is part of the 
Program for Decolonization and Ten Point Program. 
 
National Organization of New Afrikan Women:  
 
The National Organization of New Afrikan  Women (NONAW) will become a national 
network of New Afrikan women organized under the auspices of Frolinan's political 
direction. The express purpose of NONAW will be to fulfill the Program for 
Decolonization, and the problems effecting New Afrikan women in general. We do not 
separate the problems effecting New Afrikan Women from the major problem


--- PAGE 38 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  38 
 
confronting the oppressed nation. We must differentiate the problem besetting New 
Afrikan women from those expressed by women of the oppressor nation and their 
movement. It is important that New Afrikan women recognize that their responsibility in 
the New Afrikan Independence Movement is wholly encompassing their liberation from 
sex discrimination, which is an essential aspect of colonial oppression. Once this 
understand is re -enforced in the political matrix of the independence movement, New 
Afrikan women will take leadership roles and responsibility in the independence 
movement. 
 
 
Furthermore, Frolinan hold dearly to the ideal that our women are the backbone of t he 
New Afrikan Nation. They nurture our young providing them with wisdom of life, and 
further secure a household and family, the very fabric of the nation. It is the women of 
the New Afrikan Nation, and their staunch support and participation in the variou s 
Programs for Decolonization, will ensure the independence movement is victorious. In 
their support of the Programs for Decolonization, they will become liberated by working 
for the liberation of the nation. They will establish the basis for unity and equ ality among 
gender roles while working in their responsibility towards the oppressed nation.  
 
We hold that our women can become fighters for independence at whatever level of the 
struggle they wish to attend or are needed. We also maintain that the establi shment of 
secure family households is the foundation in which women are most needed. We hold 
to this position, because over the years and due to slavery and vestiges of colonialism, 
the New Afrikan household has become disunited and fractionalized. Histori cally, it has 
been the women who have held what family structure we now have together. It is most 
necessary that this development does not erode, but rather become stable and grow -
stronger, as families become a part of the independence movement. 
 
In this regards, particular ideological and social questions need to be address by our 
women, such as the ideal of polygamy, monogamy, and the effects of homosexuality; 
how to combat prostitution; the building of viable education institutions and develop 
positive images for our children in our communities; the establishment of health and day 
care centers, rape crisis and sterilization/abortion centers, etc. These are issues of 
social and political significance that has particular effects on women, and affects our 
oppressed nation. We therefore call upon our women to lead the fight against these 
social and political problems, that has disastrous effects on our family structures in 
particular, and the social morass of the New Afrikan nation in general. These and other  
areas of concern embodied in the Program for Decolonization women will take 
leadership responsibility, encompassing the struggle in the home, in the community,, at 
the work place and within the political development of the New A frikan Independence 
Movement. 
 
These ten organizational programs are the essential determinations by which Frolinan 
will build its Program for Decolonization, establishing a national strategy within the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement. The emphasis is placed on organizing New


--- PAGE 39 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  39 
 
Afrikans, and in doing so, educating them on the ideals of independence. To build 
towards national liberation by employing the Three Phase Theory for National 
Independence, and the manifestation of the Program for Decolonization. It is with the 
fulfillment of the Three Phase Theory, in conjunction with the Program for 
Decolonization, that Frolinan will build the New Afrikan Independence Movement. Each 
organizational program compliments the other, broadening the prospects for unified and 
even development across the country. 
 
 
While these organizational programs are of socioeconomic and political significance of 
strategic magnitude, there are tactical political issues that need  to be addressed. For 
instance, the question of voter registration; when and where time and energy may be 
exerted to register New Afrikans to -vote. This issue must be considered in respects to 
electing politicians within the framework of the colonial government. 
 
 
It is held within our theoretical outlook that those who work within the struct ure of the 
colonial (U.S.A.) government do not necessarily work in the interest of the 
independence movement. For the most part, elected officials comprise those New 
Afrikans who are in actuality neo-colonialist bourgeois agents. It then becomes a matter 
of principle in organizational and political development to engage or not to engage in 
voter registration and the electing of New Afrikans to function in the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government. The principle involved is one of not compromising our theoretical and  
political understanding of the nature of our national oppression. In this regards, we hold 
that where voter registration for the election of New Afrikans may have short range 
tactical significance, strategically, it is of no value. It is the strategic dev elopment of the 
New Afrikan Independence Movement we are concerned with foremost. Therefore, 
Frolinan will not seek to elect political candidates for office within the colonial 
government. It is our position the colonial government can do nothing other tha n 
relinquish our demands for national independence to relieve our condition of national 
oppression and colonial domination. If a political party within the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement seeks to have a member of their organization elected to a 
position within the colonial government; we will give critical support to then when it can 
be assured their aspirations does not conflict with the interes t of the independence 
movement. 
The only exception to this position is when voting for positions or direction within the 
independence movement and the development of the struggle for community control. In 
this respect, it is important that New Afrikans takes part in the development of th e 
movement, such as a plebiscite vote, or voting for supervisors to maintain control of the 
schools, the health institutions and police in our communities. Many of these political 
electoral positions are relative to forging social and political consciousne ss, towards 
substantiating the building of the independence movement under the auspices of the 
Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation.


--- PAGE 40 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG FROLINAN: WHAT WE WANT 
1. We want National Independence and the power to determine the destiny of the New 
Afrikan Nation. We believe that New Afrikans will not be free or able to determine their 
own destiny until they have end neo -colonial and capitalist -imperialist domination. It 
hereby b ecomes essential that our struggle commences with the fight for Black 
community control, a fight that will be the first step towards self -government, which is 
prerequisite to national independence. 
 
 
2. We want full employment of our people. We believe that the federal government and 
this system of monopoly -capitalism are responsible for the  abject poverty and the basis 
for unemployment existing in the New Afrikan community. This provides the basis for 
underdevelopment in the New Afrikan community, giving rise to socioeconomic and 
political disenfranchisement of New Afrikans. Thereby, the fight for Black community 
control encompasses a fight for community development in which the federal 
government and multi-national corporation provide economic incentive to produce jobs in 
the New Afrikan community. This is the major formulation revolutionary nationalist are to 
establish a relations with the colonial (U.S.A.) government, to assure federal funds are 
allocated to the New Afrikan community for constructive development and jobs. 
 
 
3. We want  the end of capitalist exploitation of the New Afrikan community, national 
liberation of the national territory of Kush, and reparations for over four hundred years of 
national oppression. We demand all tax money expropriation from New Afrikan people 
be appropriated for the development in national territory of Kush. 
 
 
4. We want decent housing and control of the land in which New Afrikans  reside. In the 
past the landlord who owned the property of Now Afrikan residences, usually live outside 
the community, and did not care for the land and housing dwelling. Based upon that 
experience and the struggle for Black community control and self -government, we 
demand ownership of the property in which we reside, to - be developed in cooperatives 
and communal central. 
 
 
5. We want  education for our people that not exposes the true nature of monopoly -
Back to Top


--- PAGE 41 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  41 
 
capitalism and imperialism, but also provides the hi storical foundation in which our 
cultural development is based in this country, in relation to other people of color 
throughout the world; such an education that provides our youth with the essential skills 
and incentive to become a part of the independenc e movement. As we demand control 
of the community in which we reside, the development of academic institutions becomes 
a fundamental part of the security of the independence movement, to build leaders for 
the future, in preserving the prospects for self-determination. Hence, education is to 
evolve understanding of the development of the struggle for self -determination, but also 
the historical and practical academic foundation in which the New Afrikan Nation is to 
preserve its destiny. 
 
 
 
6. We want  all New Afrikans to be exempt of military service in the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government as it is our position that all wars by the colonial government are wars of 
aggression for the colonial domination and imperialist exploitation of lesser developed 
nations/countries; and other people of color victimized by the same forces of racism and 
capitalist exploitation New Afrikans are currently under subjugation. -we demand 
exemption from military service in the colonial government and call for the building of a 
New Afrikan  Peoples Liberation Army to fight for and establish the security and well 
being of New Afrikans. 
 
 
7. We want an immediate end to police brutality and murder of New Afrikan people. We 
believe that the police of the colonial (U.S.A.) government acts as an o ccupation force to 
maintain control and order for the benefit of the colonial government. That the police 
motives are not in the basic interest of New Afrikans and their community, but rather, for 
the interest of the capitalist class who have business and own property in the New 
Afrikan community. In the course of establishing Black community control, we call for the 
immediate withdrawal of the occupation police army from our communities, and for New 
Afrikans to establish their own security system. We also maintain the right of self -
defense against racist police repression -and brutality, to bear arms, and organize self-
defense groups to preserve the security of the New Afrikan community. 
 
 
8. We want  the immediate release of all New Afrikan  people held in federal, state, 
county and city prisons and jails. W e believe that the system of national oppression has 
not provided New Afrikans with fair and impartial trials or hearings, in which the bias and 
prejudice inherent in the system serv ed to assure their imprisonment  Furthermore, the 
judicial system is one of the major tools by which the system of oppression uses to stifle 
the fruition of the national liberation struggle and every aspects in which New Afrikans 
fight for civil and human rights.  It is therefore held that the police, courts and prisons are 
all a part of the system of oppression and ar e unable to dispense justice and impartiality 
towards New Afrikans who might come before them for a trial or hearing. We call for all 
New Afrikans when brought to trial to be tried by a jury of their peers or  people from their 
New Afrikan community, and if found guilty of a charge for them to be sentence to areas 
of confinement in or near the New Afrikan community. We maintain the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government has no right to try any New Afrikan for as long as a state of war exist 
between two nations and colonial domination persists; and that all captive members of 
NAPLA or the Black underground be recognized as political prisoners of war and 
afforded Geneva Accord status.


--- PAGE 42 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  42 
 
 
 
 
9. We want the right to be free of colonial domination, capitalist exploitation and national 
oppression. We demand full control of the New Afrikan community where we are a 
majority, for the express purpose of self -government towards nation independence. We 
call on the United Nations and the Organization of Afrikan Unity to recognize the 
existence of a nationally oppressed New Afrikan people and nation in the United States 
and for them to conduct a national plebiscite for the purpose o f a vote of independence, 
giving recognition to the New Afrikan nation in the western hemisphere 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
10. We want  the right to migrate to the national territory of Kush and establish an 
independent nation separate from the colonial (U.S.A.) government of the United States 
of America. We believe New Afrikans have had enough of over four hundred years of 
national oppression and are willing to establish their own nation employing the resources 
and labor inherent in the New Afrikan nation. We claim the five (5) states of the black 
belt as our national homeland in this country having named the national territory Kush 
and ar e bound to liberate this territory in a national liberation struggle; to eventually 
migrate to the national territory and establish the government of the Republic of New 
Afrika.


--- PAGE 43 ---
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG FROLINAN CORE STUDY GUIDES: 
 RBG FREEDOM FIGHTERS CLASSROOM  
(RBG Members Only) 
 
Multi-media Tutorials for Study and Download (Public) 
 The RBG Freedom Fighters -On the BLA by the BLA 
 The BLA Coordinating Committee, Message to the Black Movement- A Political 
Statement From the Black Underground 
 A Brief History of the New Afrikan Prison Struggle (Parts 1 and 2) by Sundiata Acoli  
 RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 The Murder of Chairman Fred Hampton Sr. by Chicago Police and F.B.I. 
 Who is Dr. Mutulu Shakur - a Lifelong Activist in the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement 
 A Biography of New Afrikan Attorney Chokwe Lumumba 
 The New Afrikan Liberation Front-Honorable Herman Ferguson 
 History and Select Documents of the Provisional Government of the REPUBLIC of NEW 
AFRIKA 
 A Brief History of the Black Panther Party- Positives and Negatives-By Sundiata Acoli 
 The Official Black History Mixtapes 2010 Press Booklet 
 The Wisdom of Dhoruba Al Mujahid Bin Wahad 
 Who Are New Afrikan Political Prisoners and Prisoners of War and a Brief History of the 
New Afrikan Prison Struggle 
 
Back to Top

