=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Ngugi Wa Thiong O~Writers in Politics Essays.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 146
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:07:59.929518
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Studies in African Literature
A Reader's Guide to African
Literature
HANS ZELL and HELENE SILVER
Homecoming: Essays
NGUGI WA THIONG'O
Writers in Politics: Essays
NGUGI WA THIONG'O
Morning Yet on Creation Day
CHINUA ACHEBE
African Literature in the
Twentieth Century
o. R. DATHORNE
Protest and Conflict in African
Literature
Edited by COSMO PIETERSE and
DONALD MUNRO
An Introduction to the African
Novel
EUSTACE PALMER
The Growth of the African
Novel
EUSTACE PALMER
The Novel and Contemporary
Experience in Africa
ARTHUR SHATTO GAKW ANDI
The Literature and Thought of
Modern Africa
CLAUDE WAUTHIER
New West African Literature
KOLAWOLE OGUNGBESAN
The African Experience in
Literature and Ideology
ABIOLA IRELE
Aspects of South African
Literature
Edited by CHRISTOPHER HEYWOOD
African Art and Literature:
The Invisible Present
DENNIS DUERDEN
Four Centuries of Swahili Verse
JAN KNAPPERT
African Writers Talking
Edited by DENNIS DUERDEN and
COSMO PIETERSE
African Writers on African
Writing
Edited by G. D. KILLAM
Tendi
J. W. T. ALLEN
The Writings of Chinua Achebe
G. D. KILLAM
The Writings of Wole Soyinka
ELDRED JONES
The Poetry of L. S. Senghor
S. o. MEZU
The Poetry of Okot p'Bitek
G. A. HERON
An Introduction to the
Writings of Ngugi
G. D. KILLAM
The Novels of Ay_iKwei Armah
ROBERT FRASER -~,
CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES
Critical Perspectives on Chinua
Achebe
Edited by CATHERINE INNES
and BERNTH LINDFORS
Critical Perspectives on Amos
Tutuola
Edited by BERNTH LINDFORS
Critical Perspectives on V. S.
Naipaul
Edited by ROBERT HAMNER
Critical Perspectives on
Nigerian Literatures
Edited by BERNTH LINDFORS
AFRICAN LITERATURE
TODAY
Edited by ELDRED JONES
Omnibus edition, volumes 1-4
The Novel in Africa 5
Poetry in Africa 6
Focus on Criticism 7
Drama in Africa 8
Africa, America and the
Caribbean 9
Retrospect and Prospect 10


--- PAGE 2 ---
Writersin Politics
ESSAYS
NGUGI WATHIONG'O
LONDON
HEINEMANN
IBADAN· NAIROBI


--- PAGE 3 ---
Heinemann Educational Books Ltd
22 Bedford Square, London WC1B3HH
PMB 5205, Ibadan .PO Box 45314, Nairobi
EDINBURGH MELBOURNE AUCKLAND
HONG KONG SINGAPORE KUALA LUMPUR
NEW DELHI KINGSTON PORT OF SPAIN
Heinemann Educational Books Inc.
4 Front Street, Exeter, New Hampshire 03833, USA
ISBN 0435 91751 X (cased)
0435 917528 (paper)
© NgugiWaThiong'o 1981
First published 1981
Typeset by the Castlefield Press of Northampton
in 11/12ptJournal Roman, and printed in Great Britain
by Spottiswoode Ballantyne Ltd, Colchester and London


--- PAGE 4 ---
Contents
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Preface Xl
Part 1 Literature, Education: The Struggle for
a Patriotic National Culture
1
1 Literature and Society 3
2 Literature in Schools 34
3 Kenyan Culture: The National Struggle for Survival 42
4 'Handcuffs' for a Play 49
5 Return to the Roots 53
Postscript: On Civilization 66
Part 2 Writers in Politics 69
6 Writers in Politics
7 J. M. - A Writer's Tribute
8 Born Again: Mau Mau Unchained
9 Petals of Love
71
82
86
94
Part 3Against Political Repression 99
10 The Links that Bind Us 101
11 Repression in South Korea 107
12 The South Korean People's Struggle is the
Struggle of all Oppressed Peoples 117
13 The Robber and the Robbed: Two Antagonistic
Images in Afro-American Literature and Thought 123
Index 139


--- PAGE 5 ---
To Kim Chi Ha, the great poet of South Korean people and
all writers languishing in neo-colonial prisons;
AND
To all those writers in Kenya and elsewhere who have refused
to bow to the neo-colonial culture of silence and fear.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Let us not try to be the best or worst of others, but let us make
the effort to be the best of ourselves
Marcus Garvey
The profound hypocrisy and inherent barbarism of bourgeois
civilization lies unveiled before our eyes, turning from its home,
where it assumes respectable forms to the colonies, where it
goes naked ...
When the great social revolution shall have mastered the results
of the bourgeois epoch, the markets of the world and the
modern powers of production, and subjected them to the
common control of the most advanced peoples, then only will
human progress cease to resemble that hideous pagan idol, who
would not drink the nectar but from the skulls of the slain.
Karl Marx
on The Future Results of British Rule in India


--- PAGE 7 ---
Preface
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
These essays were written between 1970 and 1980 and they reflect some
of the issues that dominated my mind in the seventies, but which can be
summed up in the question: what's the relevance of literature to life? The
search for relevance immersed me in many ideological debates ranging from
questions of culture and education to those of language, literature and
politics. This search also saw me move from an intense involvement in the
Department of Literature and its many lively debates and activities at the
University of Nairobi, to an equally intense involvement in the cultural
life of peasants and workers in Limuru. For me, it was a decade of tremen-
dous change: towards the end, I had ceased being a teacher and had be-
come a student at the feet of the Kenyan peasant and worker. The result
was my departure from Afro-Saxon literature in order to reconnect myself
to the patriotic traditions of a national literature and culture rooted
among the people. This change was reflected in my writing of the decade;
at the beginning of the seventies I had started Petals of Blood, in English,
but towards the end of the seventies I had completed Caitaani MiItharaba-
ini, in Gikuyu language. In the field of theatre, the period saw my col-
laboration with Micere Githae Mugo in the writing of The Trial of Dedan
Kimatbi in English, to my collaboration with Ngilgi'wa Mifilin the script-
ing of Ngaahika Ndeenda in Gikuyu. The period also saw my being
hauled from professorial heights at the University of Nairobi to a dungeon
in Kamit i'maximum security prison.
The search for relevance was given impetus by three programmes in
the Department of Literature: its quest for a relevant literature in Kenyan
schools; its popular public lecture series on literature and society; and its
struggle for a people-based theatre through its annual project of a Free
Travelling Theatre.
Thus, for instance, the essay on literature and society was written for
teachers at a literature conference organized at the Department's initiative,
at Nairobi School in 1973, on the teaching of literature in Kenyan schools.
The paper on 'Writers in Politics' was given in the Department's pro-
gramme of public lectures. And if the essays are dominated by issues
of language and theatre, it is only because the great ideological battle


--- PAGE 8 ---
between a pro-imperialist culture and Kenyan national, patriotic culture
has been fought out particularly in the theatre.
This ideological battle is, in turn, a reflection of the increasing struggles
of the Kenya of the seventies, a period that saw the assassination of
J. M. Kariilki and the detention and imprisonment of MPs, workers,
writers, students and patriotic intellectuals. The two pieces on J.M. and
on his book, Mau Mau Detainees, reflect the anxieties raised by the grow-
ing right wing political trend in Kenya. It is my hope that the essays
should, in a small way, help in the continuing struggle of a national,
patriotic culture, reflecting Kenya's interests against the onslaught of a
foreign-based culture reflecting imperialist interests.
However, the struggles in Kenya should not be seen in isolation from
what is happening in Africa, Asia, Latin America - the whole world.
The struggles of the Kenyan people against foreign domination in
economics, politics and culture are an integral part of similar struggles in
the Third World and elsewhere. I have therefore included some pieces on
South Korea and America to show the links that bind us.
I have titled the book, Writers in Politics, because literature cannot
escape from the class power structures that shape our everyday life. Here
a writer has no choice. Whether or not he is aware of it, his works reflect
one or more aspects of the intense economic, political, cultural and
ideological struggles in a society. What he can choose is one or the other
side in the battle field: the side of the people, or the side of those social
forces and classes that try to keep the people down. What he or she
cannot do is to remain neutral. Every writer is a writer in politics. The
only question is what and whose politics?
NGUGIWA THIONG'O
diTOGOOTHI, LIMURU.
KENYA.


--- PAGE 9 ---
PART I
Literature, Education:
The Struggle for a
Patriotic National Culture


--- PAGE 10 ---
I Literatureand Society'
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Ignorant of their country, some people can only relate
tales of ancient Greece and other foreign lands.
Mao Tse-Tung
If we want to turn Africa into a new Europe, then let us
leave the destiny of our countries to Europeans. They
will know how to do it better than the most gifted
among us.
Frantz Fanon
The subject of our three days gathering and discussion is the
place and the teaching of African literature in our schools. I
hope that the very title will provoke us to anger and protest:
how come that it has taken ten whole years after constitutional
independence, Uhuru wa Bendera, for us native sons and
daughters to meet and to debate for the first time on the
subject - the place of our literature in our education system?
And why do we find it necessary to qualify this literature with
the word 'African', for what else should it be?
A Russian child grows under the influence of his native
imaginative literature: a Chinese, a Frenchman, a German or an
Englishman first imbibes his national literature before attempt-
ing to take in other worlds. That the central taproot of his
cultural nourishment should lie deep in his native soil is taken
for granted. This ABC of education is followed in most societies
because it is demanded by the practice and the experience of
living and growing.
Not so in Africa, the West Indies and the colonized world as
a whole, despite the crucial role of the twin fields of literature


--- PAGE 11 ---
4 Writers in Politics
and culture in making a child aware of, and rediscover his
environment.
Let me give you three examples:
The other day I found my own son trying to memorize a
poem by William Wordsworth. I contained my disappointment
and held the book for him while, with a face tortured with the
effort, he recited:
I wander'd lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils,
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.
I asked him: What are daffodils? He looked at the illustration
in the book: Oh, they are just little fishes in a lake!
Three years ago on a sunny hot afternoon, Okot p'Bitek and
I went to a school where one of our former students was teach-
ing. The children hated poetry, she told us: Couldn't we con-
vince them that though poetry was difficult it was a distillation
of human wisdom and thought? A gigantic request since we had
only one hour between us, but we would do our best. For a
start we asked them what poems they had already learnt. There-
upon they told us about a poem of fourteen lines called a sonnet
written by one William Shakespeare comparing old age to Winter!
I know of a leading school in Kenya where, on top of Sheri-
dan's School for Scandal, Paul Gallico's The Snow Goose and
other literary vintages' in the same vein, (not a single African
writer, though they had possibly heard of Chinua Achebe's
Things Fall Apart and no doubt of Charles Mangua's Son of
Woman - the latter through the girls' own initiative) they have
a text whose title I cannot recall which tells the story of Queen
Victoria and how she used to cough and sneeze and eat pudding,
and pull her dog's ears and of course anglicize (or is it civilize?)
her German husband.
These would be fit cases for jokes and laughter were they not
the general practice in our schools. Indeed until a few years ago,
the departments of literature (then called English departments)
in Nairobi, Dar-es-Salaam and Makerere Universities would only
teach British authors from Chaucer through Oliver Goldsmith


--- PAGE 12 ---
Literature and Society 5
to Graham Greene. That is how most of us were brought up
under the old colonial system administered from the Uni-
versity of London: but is there any reason why our children in
this day and age should be brought up on the same impoverished
diet administered in the so-called English departments, often
headed by some retired biology teachers or retired army majors
or men of God, whose main qualifications for the posts are a
white skin, long residence in the country, and of course an
acquaintance with The London Book of English Verse, or
A Penguin Book of English Verse?
Why was this pattern so in our time? Why does it still per-
sist? Has it all been an accident of content, time, place and
persons?
Let us not mince words. The truth is that the content of our
syllabi, the approach to and presentation of the literature, the
persons and the machinery for determining the choice of texts
and their interpretation, were all an integral part of imperialism
in its classical colonial phase, and they are today an integral
part of the same imperialism but now in its neo-colonial phase.
Cultur~Limpe:rialism, which during colonialism often affected
the population and the country unevenly depending on the
colonial policies of the marauding powers and the degree of
resistance in each country and in different parts of the country,
becomes the major agency of control during neo-colonialism.
To support this claim, I must for a few minutes discuss:
(1) literature in society, and especially the crucial role played
by literature in a people's, any people's, cultural education
and in their ordinary daily interaction and contact with other
men; (2) how literature was used in the colonization of our
people; (3) the role of literature in the anti-colonial national
liberation process. Finally, we shall ask ourselves: What is to
be done?
Literature results from conscious acts of men in society. At
the level of the individual artist, the very act of writing implies Ia social relationship: one is writing about somebody for some- '
body. At the collective level, literature, as a product of men's
intellectual and imaginative activity embodies, in words and
images, the tensions, conflicts, contradictions at the heart of a
community'S being and process of becoming. It is a reflection
on the aesthetic and imaginative planes, of a community's
wrestling with its total environment to produce the basic means


--- PAGE 13 ---
6 Writers in Politics
of life, food, clothing, shelter, and in the process creating and
recreating itself in history.
It is important to make that simple and obvious point at the
beginning because the general tendency is to see literature as
something belonging to a surreal world, or to a metaphysical
ethereal plane, something that has nothing to do with man's
more mundane, prosaic realm of attempting to clothe, shelter
and feed himself.
At the same time literature is more than just a mechanistic
reflection of social reality. As part of man's artistic activities,
it is in itself part of man's self-realization as a result of his
, wrestling with nature; it is, if you like, itself a symbol of man's
creativity, of man's historical process of being and becoming.
It is also an enjoyable end-product of man's artistic labour.
But more important, it does shape our attitudes to life, to the
daily struggle with nature, the daily struggles within a com-
munity, and the daily struggle within our individual souls and
selves.
It follows then that because of its social character, literature
as a creative process and also as an end is conditioned by his-
torical social forces and pressures: it cannot elect to stand above
or to transcend economics, politics, class, race, or what Achebe
calls 'the burning issues of the day' because those very burning
issues with which it deals take place within an economic, poli-
tical, class and race context. Again because of its social involve-
ment, because of its thoroughly social character, literature is
partisan: literature takes sides, and more so in a class society."
A writer after all comes from a particular class and race and
nation. He himself is a product of an actual social process -
eating, drinking, learning, loving, hating - and he has developed
a class attitude to all those activities, themselves class condi-
tioned. A writer is trying to persuade us, to make us view not Ionly a certain kind of reality, but also from a certain angle of Yvision often, though perhaps unconsciously, on behalf of a
certain class, race, or nation:
All art aims to evoke; to awaken in the observer, listener
or reader emotions and impulses to action or opposition.
But the evocation of man's active will requires more 'than
either mere expression of feelings, striking mimesis of
reality, or pleasing construction of word, tone or line: it


--- PAGE 14 ---
Literature and Society
presupposes forces beyond those of feeling and form which
assert themselves simultaneously and in harmony with
emotional forces, fundamentally different from them. The
artist unfolds these forces in the service either of a ruler -
whether despot or monarch - or of a particular com-
munity, rank in society or financial class; of a state or
church, of an association or party; or as a representative
or spokesman of a form of government, a system of con-
ventions and norms: in short, of a more or less rigidly
controlled and comprehensive organization. 3
7
Seen in this light, the product of a writer's pen both reflects
reality and also attempts to persuade us to take a certain atti- t
tude to that reality. The persuasion can be a direct appeal on
behalf of a writer's open doctrine or it can be an indirect appeal
through 'influencing the imagination, feelings and actions of
the recipient" in a certain way toward certain goals and a
set of values, consciously or unconsciously held by him. A
nation's literature which is a sum total of the products of
many individuals in that society is then not only a reflection
of that people's collective reality, collective experience, but
also embodies that community's way of looking at the world
and its place in the making of that world. It is partisan on
the collective level, because the literature is trying to make
us see how that community, class, race, group has defined
itself historically and how it defines the world in relationship
to itself.
How does this come about? We shall see this dearly if we
place literature more centrally in a community'S cultural en-
vironment and look at its relationship to the totality of a com-
munity's activities and experience in the struggle to live.
The basis of all human communities is the soil, land. Without
the soil, without land, without nature there is no human com-
munity. Quite apart from anything else man is himself of nature.
But man detaches himself from nature, observes it and studies
its laws with a conscious aim of harnessing them to his service,
to his strategy for survival. Unlike the beast that merely adapts
itself to its habitation, man through the labour process, acts on
the natural environment. In the words of Karl Marx, he 'regu-
lates, controls the material reactions between himself and
nature':


--- PAGE 15 ---
8 Writers in Politics
He opposes himself to nature as one of her own forces,
setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, the natural
forces of his body, in order to appropriate nature's pro-
duction to his own wants. By thus acting on the external
world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own
nature. He develops his slumbering powers and compels
them to act in obedience to his sway."
To harness those laws even more effectively to his sway and
also as a product of the very development of his 'slumbering
powers', man fashions tools, instruments of production, which
together with his labour power (physical, experience, skill etc.,)
constitute his forces of production. He uses tools, technology,
to wrest a living from nature. In the process, he enters into
certain relations, certain arrangements, certain forms of co-
operation with other men suited, of course, to the level of his
knowledge of nature and to the level of his development of his
material forces of production:
In production, men not only act on nature but also on one
another. They produce only by co-operating in a certain
way and mutually exchanging their activities. In order to
produce, they enter into definite connections and relations
with one another and only within these social relations
does their action on nature, does production, take place."
For our own purposes, we can simply say that in the process
of man acting on his natural environment through a combina-
tion of his labour-power and technology (tools), and his know-
ledge of science, he creates a social environment, a social
community. First it is an economic community: i.e. the social
community expresses itself in terms of an economic arrangement,
of certain economic alignments, with different groups standing
in differing positions in the labour process, hence in the produc-
tion process. The community develops a political structure (the
state, government, administration, etc.), corresponding to the
economic structure, to regulate and enforce those alignments in
the economic structure. In the process, the community expresses
itself in terms of culture. That is, the community develops a
cultural environment in the economic and political processes,
both as a product of these processes and simultaneously with


--- PAGE 16 ---
Literature and Society 9
them as a means of cementing the economic and political struc-
tures. Hence the community develops an education system, a
legal system, a religious system, a language and literature, forms
of dances and songs, in short all the intellectual, moral, ideologi-
cal forces that give the social relations of production - what we
call society - a unique character, a distinctive mark, a certain
identity in a particular historical phase." It is the culture that a
people have that embodies their values, those aesthetic and
moral qualities that they consider basic and important in their
contact and interaction with one another, and with the universe.
A culture then embodies a community's structure of values,
the basis of their world outlook, and how they see themselves
and their place in the universe and in relation to other com-
munities. It is the values that a people have that are the basis
of their collective and individual image of self, their identity
as a people, since culture is an ideological expression of the
totality of their activities.
As a people deepen their knowledge of nature, as they
develop their instruments of production, and hence change their
mode of production (i.e. what, and how, they produce and ex-
change)," so will there occur changes in the political and cultural
spheres and hence also in their values and how they look at
themselves." Mark you, this is not a mechanical process: how
people look at themselves, their values and images of self, will
affect their cultural, political and economic structures, their
relationship to technology and ultimately their relationship
to the soil, land and nature. It is a dialectical process with
everything acting on one another to produce the ever changing
complexity we call society.
Now a community's knowledge of nature's laws and their
skill and experience in the production of tools with which to
act on nature do not develop evenly: man's action on nature's
space is not always uniform; he does not use nature's laws at
the same time, in the same way, in the same degree; the rate of
growth and changes in technology are not uniform in time.
Equally men's social environment is subject to the same laws of
uneven development: man has not always so organized his social
environment as to meet the total needs of the members of that
community equally with regard to both the quantity and the
quality of those needs. The economic structure is at the same
time a class structure so that at every level of a community's


--- PAGE 17 ---
10 Writers in Politics
being, that society is characterized by opposing classes with the
dominant class, usually a minority, owning and controlling
the means of production, and hence having greater access to the
social product, social because it is the product of the combined
efforts of men. It is the dominant class which wields political
power, and whose interests are mainly served by the state and
all the machinery of state power, like the police and the army
and the law courts.
Such a class by its command of what is produced, how it is
produced, and how that wealth is distributed, has the greater
material basis to follow up, develop and control intellectual
and ideological forces - education, language, literature, for
instance -- and hence control the values and the world outlook
of the rest of the society. Therefore when we talk about culture,
language, literature, ideas, and values of a nation group, a com-
munity, we are often talking about the culture and ideas and
values of the dominant class in that society. In all economically
class-structured societies we would- often be more truthful if we
talked of two cultures: that of the exploiting class, usually the
minority, and that of the exploited class, usually the majority:
There are two nations in every modern nation ... there are
two national cultures in every national culture. _ .. The
elements of democratic and socialist culture are present, if
only in a rudimentary form, in every national culture,
since in every nation there are toiling and exploited masses,
whose conditions of life inevitably give rise to the ideology
of democracy and socialism. But every nation also possesses
a bourgeois culture (and most nations a reactionary and
clerical culture as well) in the form not merely of elements
but of the dominant culture.!?
This is clearly seen, for instance, in a feudal society like
China, where a definite official literature approved by the ruling
dynastic and landed aristocracy co-existed with an underground,
unofficial people's written literature. Or it can be seen in a
colonial situation where, as we shall see, two antagonistic move-
ments and literary tendencies co-existed. The two were antagon-
istic because a people's literature, the literature of the exploited
classes, no rnatter how rudimentary or how couched in images
and symbols derived from the past, is struggling against the


--- PAGE 18 ---
Literature and Society 11
stultifying present and it embodies values and sentiments that
look to a future society. Class antagonism at the level of culture'
and values is only reflecting the reality at the political and
economic level where man's development is characterized by
class warfare and class political power struggle, which results in
different relations of production (i.e. society) with correspond-
ing changes in what constitutes the dominant class and hence
the dominant culture, literature and values. /n :We can now turn to the nature and practice of this colonial
process. In this we shall be talking of a definite, actual historical
relationship between a European society characterized by that
mode of production (of commodities and for commodity ex-
change in a market situation) that we call capitalism; and African
societies at different stages in the development of their forces
of production, at different stages in their action on nature. We
shall be talking not only of how Europe underdeveloped Africa, II
but also how Africa has over the last four centuries continued
to develop Europe - to develop European capitalism - through
all its main stages with corresponding changes in the forms of
relationship between the two continents: from mercantile and
laissez-faire capitalism where our people were themselves sold
as commodities alongside sugar, tobacco and gold (slavery).'?
through the era of industrial monopoly capitalism with the sub-
sequent scramble for and territorial occupation of Africa to
control raw materials and create markets (classical colonialism); /
to the present stage of finance - industrial monopoly capitalism,
the era of international trusts, cartels, monopoly combines with
aid and the export of finance capital and with the deliberate
fostering of a dependent native ruling class in 'independent'
states - all to control not only the raw materials and markets,
but for continued and thorough exploitation of the labour
power of the African peoples (neo-colonialism).13 Thus for the ..-)-
last four hundred years, Africa has been part and parcel of the
growth and development of world capitalism, no matter what
the degree of penetration of European capitalism in the interior.
Europe has thriven, in the words of C.L.R. James, on the devas-
tation of a continent and the brutal exploitation of millions,
with great consequences on the economic, political, cultural and
literary spheres.
Thus despite protestations to the contrary from missionaries
and other members of the religious, intellectual and spiritual


--- PAGE 19 ---
12 Writers in Politics
armies of imperialism, the aim of any colonial mission is to get
at a people's land and what that land produces. This can take
the form of direct occupation, as in the settler colonies of
Kenya, Mozambique, Zimbabwe and South Africa; or at indirect
control, through a colonial government and administration as in
the more commercial colonies of Uganda and West Africa. The
end is the same: to institute an economic structure, and con-
sequently a class system, the colonizing nation can control.
But it is important to keep in mind that although the exploit-
ation of the colonies benefits the colonizing country as a whole,
it is the ruling classes of the colonizing countries that really gain
from colonial and neo-colonial possessions. Dr Norman Bethune,
in an article in China Today in 1946, was right to exclaim in
anger:
Are wars of aggression, wars for the conquest of colonies,
then just big business? Yes. It would seem so however the
perpetration of such national crimes seek to hide their
true purpose under the banner of high sounding distractions
and ideals. They make wars to capture markets by murder,
raw materials by rape. They find it cheaper to steal than to
exchange; easier to butcher than to buy. This is the secret
of (all bourgeois colonial) wars. Profit. Blood. Money.
But to make economic and political control the more com-
plete, the colonizing power tries to control the cultural en-
vironment;' education, religion, language, literature, songs,
forms of dances, every form of expression, hoping in this way
to control a people's values and ultimately their world outlook,
their image and definition of self. They would like to have a
slave who not only accepts that he is a slave, but that he is a
slave because he is fated to be nothing else but a slave. Hence
he must love and be grateful to the master for his magnanimity
in enslaving him to a higher, nobler civilization. A slave is not
completely a slave until he accepts that he is a slave. For as
Amilcar Cabral has put it:
History teaches us that, in certain circumstances, it is quite
easy for a stranger to impose his rule on a people. But his-
tory equally teaches us that, whatever the material aspects
of that rule, it cannot be sustained except by the permanent


--- PAGE 20 ---
Literature and Society 13
and organized repression of the cultural life of the people
in question. It can only firmly entrench itself if it physically
destroys a significant part of the dominated people.
Indeed, to dominate a nation by force of arms is, above
all, to take up arms to destroy or at least, to neutralize and
paralyse its culture. For as long as a section of the populace'
is able to have a cultural life, foreign domination cannot be
sure of its perpetuation. At any given moment, depending
on internal and external factors which determine the
evolution of the society in question, cultural opposition
(indestructible) will take on new forms (political, econ-
omic, military) with a view to posing a serious challenge
to foreign domination. The ideal situation for foreign rule,
whether imperialist or not, would be one of these two
alternatives: either to practically liquidate the entire popu-
lation of the dominated country, thus eliminating all possi-
bility of that kind of cultural resistance; or to succeed in
imposing itself without adversely affecting the culture of
the dominated people, that is to say, harmonizing the
economic and political domination of these people with its
cultural personality.
The first hypothesis implies the genocide of the indige-
nous population, and creates a void which takes away from
the foreign domination its content and objective: the
dominated people. The second hypothesis has not up till
now been confirmed by history. Humanity's great store of
experience makes it possible to postulate that it has no
practical viability: it is impossible to harmonize economic
and political domination of a people whatever the degree of
its social development, with the preservation of its culture.
With a view to avoiding this alternative - which could
be called the dilemma of cultural resistance - colonial im-
perialist domination has attempted to create theories,
which, in fact, are nothing but crude racist formulations
and express themselves in practice through a permanent
siege of the indigenous population, based on a racist (or
democratic) dictatorship.!"
Some of these crude racist formulations can be seen in the
works of leading European thinkers. David Hume, in 1735, was
apt to suspect:


--- PAGE 21 ---
14 Writers in Politics
The negro isnaturally inferior to the whites. There scarcely
ever was a civilized nation of that complexion, nor even
any individual, eminent either in action or speculation. No
ingenious manufactures among them, no arts, no science."
For Thomas Jefferson, a president of the United States of
America, a country that had fought against Britain on the basis
that all men were created equal, could advance as a suspicion
only that:
The blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made dis-
tinct by time and circumstances, are inferior to the whites
in the endowments both of body and mind."
As for Hegel, Africa was the unhistorical, undeveloped spirit
still involved in conditions of mere nature, and the African was
the natural man in his completely wild and untamed state. This
opinion was later to be repeated in the 1960s by an eminent
historian at Oxford, Trevor-Roper, who in effect argued, to
borrow words from Cabral, that 'imperialism made us enter
history at the moment when it began its adventure in our
countries'.
Anthony Trollope, the English novelist, was sure that Africans
had made no approach to the civilization of white creatures,
whom he imitated as a monkey did a man:
He is idle, unambitious as to worldly position, sensual, and
content with little .... He despises himself thoroughly and
would probably starve for a month if he would appear as a
whiteman for a day.!?
One could get more quotations of similar quality in racist
sickness but these few will do to illustrate how it was that the
best minds were employed by the European ruling classes for
the cultural genocide of the colonized peoples.
This racism is expressed in the very structure of the English
language, probably the most racist of all human languages. It
was not only the character of black sambo, but also phrases like
black market, black sheep, blackmail, blacklist, black everything,
would testify to the value assumptions in that linguistic negative
definition of blackness. Those white racist lies were reinforced


--- PAGE 22 ---
Literature and Society 15
by religion, Christianity especially, which saw God, Christ,
angels, in terms of whiteness, while sin and the devil and satan
were black and heaven was depicted as a place where the elect
of God would wear white robes of virgin purity, while hell was
depicted as a place where the rejects of the white God would
burn to charcoal blackness. The South African apartheid system,
the most highly developed repressive racist machine of western
monopoly capital, is rationalized by biblically derived religious
doctrines of predetermination and the notion of a chosen
people. So the African Christian, desirous of a place among the
band of the saved sang to his maker: 'Wash me Redeemer and I
shall be whiter than snow'. If God was slow to respond, there
were always hot combs and lipsticks, snowfire and ambi to help
the spiritual journey to whiteness and black death.
Cultural imperialism was then part and parcel of the thorough
system of economic exploitation and political oppression of the
colonized peoples and literature was an integral part of that
system of oppression and genocide. It was used in the same way
as language and religion. But it was a more subtle weapon be-
cause literature works through influencing emotions, the
imagination, the consciousness of a people in a certain way; to
make the colonized see the world as seen, analyzed, and defined
by the artists and the intellectuals of the western ruling classes.
The colonial student was assaulted by European literatures of
principally three kinds and in three principal ways.
There was first the good European literature, the product of
the best and the most sensitive minds of European culture:
Aesychylus, Sophocles, Montaigne, Rabelais, Cervantes, Shakes-
peare, Goethe, Balzac, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Thomas Mann,
Ibsen, Yeats, Whitman, Faulkner, to mention a few. These,
may I repeat, represent the best and the most refined tradition
in European culture and thought. But of necessity their defi-
nition of social reality was rooted in their European history,
race, culture, and class. When they talked of human conflicts
and tensions, when they talked of the human condition and
human anguish, they were talking of these tensions and con-
flicts and anguish as expressed and emerging in the European
experience of history. When they talked of man they meant the
European man, just aswhen Americans fought for independence
on the basis of the inalienable rights of man, they obviously
meant the Anglo-Saxon White Protestant, not the black man.


--- PAGE 23 ---
16 Writers in Politics
So the African student was daily confronted with the white
image in literature: just as today, he is hit by the same white
image in advertisements, on television, on film, in juke-boxes,
everywhere. These writers anyway were used for cultural diplo-
matic export and were used to overawe us who were not known
for ingenious manufacture and no arts or sciences. In any case
where a writer was good and sensitive, he was used to buy our
goodwill and favourable image towards his country - notice
the ruthless way in which Shakespeare has been used by the
British Council. The interpretation given to this literature by
our teachers, white teachers of course, reinforced the image of
the European bourgeois with all its narrow-mindedness, bigotry
and spiritaul wasteland as 'the universal man'.
The other body of literature was the one that tried to define
the colonized world for the European colonizer. This was down-
right racist literature and often made no effort to hide it. You
know the works of people like Rider Haggard (King Solomon's
Mines); John Buchan (Prester John); Rudyard Kipling (the
'Mowgli' stories); Robert Ruark (Uhuru and Something of
Value); Nicholas Monsarrat (The Tribe that Lost its Head).
In Nicholas Monsarrat, for instance, Kipling's white man's
burden is unashamedly stated as the motive force behind the
colonial adventures: where would Africa be without Europe?
Without Britain, Pharamaul would have been nothing: now
at last it was something. It was on the map as a separate
country, where before it had been two half-starved warring
tribes, eternally at each other's throats, fighting murder-
ously for goats and sand. The process had taken a long
time, and lost the lives of many good men; generations of
the younger sons of England, pitchforked into this barren
waste and told to get on with it.... Britain, having come
to pacify and discipline, had remained to educate and
develop.P
In all these European emerges as the hero, the superman,
Batman, Tarzan, who can wipe a thousand thick-lipped, big-
nosed, curly-haired blacks. The blacks, especially in Rider
Haggard, are always of two kinds: the evil ones who are so
described that a picture of a devil forms in a reader's rnind.!?
and whose one characteristic is an insane hatred of white


--- PAGE 24 ---
Literature and Society 17
benefactors out of sheer spite and motiveless envy; or the good
ones who are always described in terms of grinning teeth and
who always run errands for the white man, tremble in fear when
the white man frowns in anger, or show an 'Uncle Tom' face of
humility and gratitude for any favour bestowed on them by the
European master.i?
You get a variation of Haggard's two types in the novels of
the racist appologist for European settlerism in Kenya - Elspeth
Huxley - especially in her two novels, The Red Strangers and
A Thing to Love. Only now] her bad evil Africans are those
educated in western schools and instead of thanking the Lord
for small mercies, actually demand political rights and urge the
simple-souled African to violence and sabotage.
Karen Blixen is another writer in the racist tradition. An
aristocrat from Denmark she came to Kenya at the beginning of
this century and acquired a farm in the now fashionable district
of Nairobi still bearing her name. She enjoyed wild animals and
naked rugged nature. Later in her book, Out of Africa, she was
to write:
When you have caught the rhythm of Africa,
You find that it is the same in all her music.
What I learnt from the game of the country was useful
to me in my dealings with Africans."
She protests her love for natives and animals in the same breath:
As for me, from my first week in Africa, I had felt a great
affection for the natives. It was a strong feeling that em-
braced all ages and both sexes. The discovery of the dark
races was to me a magnificent enlargement of all my world.
If a person with an inborn sympathy for animals had come
into contact with animals late in life: or if a person with
an instinctive taste for woods and forest had entered a
forest for the first time at the age of twenty; or if someone
with an ear for music had happened to hear music for the
first time when he was already grown up; their cases might
have been similar to mine.P
In all her descriptions of African characters she resorts to animal
imagery. The African was really part of the woods and animals,


--- PAGE 25 ---
18 Writers in Politics
part of Hegel's unconscious nature. She gives medicine to
Kamante and after he is cured he becomes her very good cook.
Kamante could have no idea as to how a dish of ours
ought to taste, and he was, in spite of his conversion, and
his connexion with civilization, at heart an arrant Kikuyu,
rooted in the traditions of his tribe and his faith in them,
as in the only way of living worthy of a human being. He
did at times taste the food that he cooked, but then with a
distrustful face, like a witch who takes a sip out of her
cauldron. He stuck to the maizecobs of his fathers. Here
even his intelligence sometimes failed him, and he came
and offered me a Kikuyu delicacy a roasted sweet potato
or a lump of sheep's fat - as even a civilized dog, that has
lived for a long time with people, will place a bone on the
floor before you, as apresent. 23 (italics mine)
When she goes back to Denmark, her African characters keep
on visiting her in her dreams - but in the form of animals.
It was then that rny old companions began to put in an
appearance in my dreams at night, and by such behaviour
managed to deeply upset and trouble me. For till then no
living people had ever found their way into those dreams.
They came in disguise, it is true, and as in a mirror darkly,
so that I would at times meet Kamante in the shape of a
dwarf-elephant or a bat, Farah as a watchful leopard snarl-
ing lowly round the house, and Sirunga as a small jackal,
yapping - such as the natives tell you that jackals will do
in times of disaster with one forepaw behind his ear. But
the disguise did not deceive me, I recognised each of them
every time and in the mornings I knew that we had been
together, for a short meeting on a forest path or for a
journey. So I could no longer feel sure that they did still
actually exist, or indeed that they had ever actually existed,
outside of my dreams."
Her cosmos is hierarchically ordered with God at the top
followed by the white aristocracy, ordinary whites, domestic
animals, wild animals who are all in 'direct contact' with God.
Africans don't figure anywhere in this cosmic picture except as


--- PAGE 26 ---
Literature and Society 19
parts of wood and stones, different only because occasionally
they exhibit impulses towards animals.
Karen Blixen was once proposed by Hemingway for the Nobel
prize in Literature.
I quoted from Blixen liberally because she was no ordinary
drunken soldier or an uncouth frustrated missionary spinster
come to Africa to fulfil herself in lording it over schoolgirls
and terrorizing timid African teachers but a refined lady of
some discrimination and learning. She belongs to the same
tradition of great racists like Hume, Trollope, Hegel, Trevor-
Roper and all other arch-priests of privilege, racism and class
snobbery.
The last group of writers I want to mention are those who
set out to sympathetically treat the African world either to
appeal to the European liberal conscience or simply to inter-
pret Africa for the Africans. But even among these, the African
image is still in negative terms. For Joseph Conrad, the African
characters in Heart of Darkness are part of that primitive savagery
that lay below the skin of every civilized being. He was telling
his fellow Europeans: You go to Africa to civilize, to enlighten
a heathen people; scratch that thin veneer of civilization and
you will find the savagery of Africa in you too. For Joyce Cary,
the positive creative African in Mister Johnson is a clowning
idiot whose desire and final fulfilment is having to be shot dead
by an Englishman whom we are led to believe loves him well.
We all love our horses and dogs and cats and we often shoot
them to put them out of pain. So much for Mister Johnson and
Master Joyce Cary. For William Blake, the little black boy,
cries thus:
My mother bore me in the southern wild,
And I am black, but 0, my soul is white
White as an angel is the English child,
But I am black as if bereaved of light."
He longs for the day he will die and be freed from the burden of
his skin colour, then he and the white boy will 'lean in joy upon
our Father's knee':
And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair,
And be like him, and he will then love me."


--- PAGE 27 ---
20 Writersin Politics
This is the white liberal's dream of a day when black and
white can love one another without going through the agony
of violent reckoning. Liberalism has always been the sugary
ideology of imperialism: it fosters the illusion in the exploited
of the possibilities of peaceful settlement and painless escape
from imperialist violence which anyway is not called violence
but law and order. Liberalism blurs all antagonistic class contra-
dictions, all the contradictions between imperialist domination
and the struggle for national liberation, seeing in the revolu-
tionary violence of the former, the degradation of humanity:
Liberalism rejects ideological struggle and stands for
unprincipled peace, thus giving rise to a decadent, phili-
stine, attitude and bringing about political degeneration in
certain units and individuals (among the oppressed)
and objectively has the effect of helping the enemy [i.e.
imperialism] .27
And nowhere is liberalism so clearly manifested as in imaginative
literature.
You can see this more clearly in Alan Paton's Cry the Beloved
Country. Here the good African exemplifies the Christian virtue
of spineless humility and a longing to be loved by the enemy
which of course is an element of self-hatred and negative self-
definition. Looking around him Alan Paton sees the physical,
religious and intellectual violence inflicted on the African by a
colonial system that would more than meet with Hitler's full
approval. He can see, and knows it anyway, that it is the white
fascist minority that has brought the barracks, the prisons, the
police station, the black maria, the gun - all the instruments of
state violence to keep the African in actual hell - while the
ruling classes in Europe (the Anglo-American monopoly com-
bines, the Oppenheimer empire, etc.) reap their thirty pieces of
silver and cry shame to Nixonian Hitler. Alan Paton knows,
with Frantz Fanon, that decolonization is a violent process.
One day the black South African workers, the tsotsis, the
Lumpenproletariat, the peasants, will meet this reactionary
violence with revolutionary regenerative violence. This is the
possibility that scares Alan Paton. So he writes a book, a novel
depicting an African who has been completely emasculated by
the Christian church, a man who not only eschews the mildest


--- PAGE 28 ---
Literature and Society 21
form of violence but is seen as being incapable of anger even,
as a positive hero.
To show you the sickness, the pious pusillanimous dream and
flabby hopes in the novel, I have chosen a passage depicting the
final meeting between Jarvis and Stephen Kumalo up on Martin
Luther King's mountain of wishful dreams. Here Blake's white
boy reappears with the bright eyes of tomorrow's saving angel,
and the black boy regains hope and faith and cries in gratitude
to the white man for donating a pittance to the church and for
speaking kindly to him:
They stayed there in silence till Jarvis said, Umfundisi, I
must go. But he did not go. Instead he said, Where are you
going at this hour?
Kumalo was embarrassed, and the words fell about on his
tongue, but he answered, Iam going into the mountain. Be-
cause Jarvis made no answer he sought for words to explain
it, but before he had spoken a word, the other had already
spoken. Iunderstand you, he said, Iunderstand completely.
And because he spoke with compassion, the old man
wept, and Jarvis sat embarrassed on his horse. Indeed he
might have come down from it, but such a thing is not
lightly done. But he stretched his hand over the darkening
valley, and he said, One thing is about to be finished, but
here is something that is only begun. And while I live it
will continue. Umfundisi, go well.
Umnumzana!
Yes.
Do not go before I have thanked you. For the young
man, and the milk. And now for the church.
I have seen a man, said Jarvis with a kind of grim gaiety,
who was in darkness till you found him. If that is what
you do, I give it willingly.
Perhaps it was something deep that was here, or perhaps
the darkness gives courage, but Kumalo said, Truly, of all
the white men that I have ever known ...
I am no saintly man, said Jarvis fiercely.
Of that I cannot speak, but God put His hands on you.
And Jarvis said, That may be, that may be. He turned
suddenly to Kumalo. Go well, umfundisi. Throughout this
night, stay well.


--- PAGE 29 ---
22 Writers in Politics
And Kumalo cried after him, Go well, go well.28 (italics
mine)
Reading Alan Paton, and the works of other liberal writers,
we should ask ourselves: Why is it that the church is always
preaching humility and forgiveness and non-violence to the
oppressed? Why do the liberals preach gratitude, humility, kind-
ness, forgiveness and meekness to the oppressed classes? Why is
it that the church does not concentrate its preaching and efforts
of conversion on the very classes and races that have brutalized
others, manacled others, robbed others?
The aim is obvious: it is to weaken the resistance of the
oppressed classes and here imaginative literature comes in as
a useful medium of mental conditioning, making the oppressed
believe that the root cause of their problem, and hence the
solution, lies deep in their spiritual condition, in their sinful souls.
This then is the kind of literature, the kind of literary fare
being ladled to our children, even today: what greater violence
to our sense of being? This kind of literature was aptly described
by Edward Blyden in 1883 when he wrote:
All our traditions and experiences are. connected with a
foreign race. We have no poetry or philosophy but that of
our taskmasters. The songs that live in our ears and are
often on our lips are the songs which we heard sung by
those who shouted while we groaned and lamented. They
sang of their history, which was the history of our degrada-
tion. They recited their triumphs, which contained the
records of our humiliation. To our great misfortune, we
learned their prejudices and their passions, and thought
we had their aspirations and their power.F
He summed the whole effect of cultural imperialism on the
psyche of the African child in the following words:
In all English-speaking countries the mind of the intelligent
Negro child revolts against the descriptions given in ele-
mentary books - geographies, travels, histories - of the
Negro; but though he experiences an instinctive revulsion
from the caricatures and misrepresentations, he is obliged
to continue, as he grows in years, to study such pernicious


--- PAGE 30 ---
Literature and Society 23
teachings. After leaving school he finds the same things in
newspapers, in reviews, in novels, in quasi scientific works,
and after a while - sape cadendo - they begin to seem to
him the proper things to say and to tell about his race, and
he accepts what, at first, his fresh and unbiased feelings
naturally and indignantly repelled. Such is the effect of
repetition.
Having embraced, or at least assented, to these errors
and falsehoods about himself, he concludes that his only
hope of rising in the scale of respectable manhood is to
strive after whatever is most unlike himself and most alien
to his peculiar tastes.'?
Under classical colonialism, the effect of that kind of litera-
ture was to produce an African permanently injured by a feeling
of inadequacy, a person who would look up with reverent awe
to the achievements of Europe; a person, who like Kumalo in
Cry the Beloved Country has no faith either in himself, or in the
capacity of his people for total liberation; a person who cries
with gratitude at the Blixenian- Jarvis type of love and kind
words. Above all, this literature, and the whole approach to
literary and cultural education, inculcated in some of our people
the values of the European ruling class and made our own rising
middle class take on those values for a universal norm. This has
been responsible for the mental structure of dependence so....'
evident in ourselves, so evident in our rising bourgeoisie: else
why do we still retain advisers of dubious quality and qualifica-
tions in all our spheres of national life? Why do we still retain
foreign headmasters, foreign teachers of literature, language,
history, religion, in our schools under the cloak of that dirty
euphemism - experience? What use is experience in an old
structure of values we want to get rid of? Experience anyway
comes out of practice, participation and challenge.
But more important, this kind of education typified by
that approach to literature, was part of a calculated policy to
nurture a dependent native middle class sharing the values of
exploitation, to take positions of influence after constitutional
independence.
This class born and thriving under colonialism but whose
growth to its full height and status as the national middleman
of international industrial and finance monopoly capitalism was


--- PAGE 31 ---
24 Writers in Politics
blunted by the racism inherent in direct colonial control, now
becomes the main beneficiary of constitutional or flag independ-
ence. Its interests therefore lie in maintaining in fact the struc-
ture of capitalism and their alliance with the imperialist bour-
geoisie. Faithfully obeying the laws of capitalist accumulation,
it becomes at least in the initial stages of its flowering, the
greatest ally of international finance capital and the international
ruling class. Neo-colonialism then means the continued economic
exploitation of Africa's total resources and of Africa's labour
power by international monopoly capitalism through continued
creation and encouragement of subservient weak capitalistic
economic structures, captained or overseered by a native ruling
class. In the political sphere, this class will often make defence
pacts and arms agreements with the former colonial masters as a
guarantee of its continued claim to political power. A political
characteristic of this class is its discomfiture with the masses.
The masses (peasants, workers) are not to be trusted and ethnic
divisions are now actively encouraged and perpetuated.
The discomfiture with the masses so evident among the ruling
political circles is present in most African novels even at their
most radical and critical. The crowds emerge as gullible, easily
fooled, praising now this leader then that leader in return for a
drink of beer and five cents. They are often depicted as watchers
and applauders of Andu Agima. The masses are seen as having
no minds of their own. African writers themselves being part of
the petty intellectual army of this native ruling class (note that
most of them are products of colonial universities) have never
really accepted the possibility of their becoming true literary
guerrillas of the masses in their quest and struggle for total
liberation. In African literature, we have very few positive
heroes from among the working people, positive heroes who
would embody the spirit of struggle and resistance against
exploitation and naked robbery by the national bourgeoisie
and its global allied classes.
In the realm of culture and values then, this class becomes
the main agency for cultural imperialism. So that apart from
continuing to import the personnel to run our humanities
departments (often through cultural-technical aid agreements);
apart from continuing to import foreign literature into our
schools and universities and making it the corner-stone of our
studies, we are encouraged to produce and are applauded for


--- PAGE 32 ---
Literature and Society 25
producing the kind of literature that perpetuates the same
decadent western bourgeois values and class world outlook.
If you think that I am exaggerating about this encouragement,
you have only to look around you and see the mad rush of
European critics who only a few years ago, before independ-
ence, were so disparaging about African literature and African
writers. Now they are the new interpreters, interpreting African
literature for the African. You can't win, can you?
But sadder still is when you get our own African critics
continuing the same aged approach to literature, the same
mouthing of phrases about the anguish of the human condition,
universal values that transcend race, class, economics, politics
and other social activities of ordinary living.
It is important that we understand that cultural imperialism
in its era of neo-colonialism is a more dangerous cancer because
it takes new subtle forms and can hide even under the cloak ofl
militant African nationalism, the cry for dead authentic cultural:
symbolism and other native racist self assertive banners. Suddenly.j
under neo-colonialism it is the African who is building churches
in every village under Harambee self-help schemes; who is
rushing for the latest literary trash from America or failing that,
Africanizing the same thrills and escapism by giving them local
colour; who will tell you about the latest fashions in clothes, ,
songs and dances from New York; who will import hot combs,
ambi, and other skin lightening creams; who will be horrified
at the idea of planning a man-made social environment but will
be ecstatic about family planning, i.e. planning human beings;
who will defend with the greatest possible fervour the decaying
values of the Western ruling circles.
It is the African ruling classes, once described by Fanon
as having a permanent wish for identification with the bour- ,
geois representatives of the mother country, who under neo- '
colonialism become the missionary agency for the continuation
, of cultural imperialism as part and parcel of imperialism's econ-
. omic and political encirclement of the world.
Having painted a picture full of gloom and pessimism, it
might be asked is there nothing to be done? What must now be
done? I hope we shall debate that question in the next two days
and after. But we can learn a lesson from the anti-colonial
process, from the whole historical struggle for national libera-
rion. This struggle is simply a dialectical negation of the colonial


--- PAGE 33 ---
26 Writers in Politics
process outlined above. For a colonized people, Fanon has
written, the most essential value, because the most concrete,
is first and foremost the land. People want to control their soil,
their land, the fruits of their labour-power acting on nature; to
control their history made by their collective struggle with their
natural and social environment. Cabral has said that since for
both colonialism and neo-colonialism:
The essential characteristic of imperialist domination re-
mains the same: the negation of the historical process of
the dominated people by means of violent usurpation of
the freedom of development of" the national productive
forces .... We can state that the national liberation is the
phenomenon in which agiven socio-economic whole rejects
the negation of the historical process. In other words, the
l1_aj!Q_Il:¥__)lb.c::r:~~i_O_Q.of a people is_the Jc::gaining of the
historical personality of that people, its return to history
through destruction of the imperialist domination to which
it was subjected .... National liberation exists only when
the national productive forces have been completely freed
from every kind of foreign domination."
This is why the anti-colonial process is primarily an economic
and political struggle and in essence is incompatible with the
economic structure of capitalism.
Under colonialism, this economic and political struggle isoften
waged under the petty-bourgeois banner of racial nationalism. It
is 'we' black people against 'them' whites; Africans versus
Europeans. This is only natural since under colonialism, exploit-
ation and privilege masquerade or take the form of an ironrace-
caste structure. But under neo-colonialism, the political and
economic struggle assumes its true class character despite any
and every attempt at ethnic mystification. It is now African
workers and the peasant masses, together with progressive
intellectuals, patriotic elements, students and their class allies
from other parts of the world, pitted against the native ruling
class and its international imperialist class allies.
But the anti-colonial and anti-imperialist (i.e. anti-neo-
colonial struggle is also waged at the level of culture and values.
In other words, for the anti-colonial, anti-imperialist political
and economic struggle to be complete, it must also be a cultural


--- PAGE 34 ---
Literature and Society 27
struggle since the aim is to restore the African personality to its
true human creative potentialities in history, so as to enhance
the quality of life and of life-based values.
Indeed most national liberation movements start by rejecting
the culture of the colonizer, by repudiating the religion of the
oppressing nation and class and the entire education system of
the colonizer. People create their own songs, poems, dances,
literature, which embody a structure of values dialectically
opposed to those of the ruling class of the oppressing race and
nation. Often they will take the songs of the colonizer and give
them an entirely different meaning, interpretation and emphasis.
We shall go no further than Mau Mau. Mau Mau was Kenya's
national liberation movement that opted for the armed struggle
as the highest form of political and economic struggle. On top
of demanding back the land and power, they rejected the culture
of the oppressor and created a popular oral literature embody-
ing anti-exploitation values. They took Christian songs; they
took even the Bible and gave these meanings and values in
harmony with the aspirations of their struggle. Christians had
often sung about heaven and angels, and a spiritual journey
in a spiritual intangible universe where metaphysical disem-
bodied evil and good were locked in perpetual spiritual warfare. '
Christians sang:
Aanake iikiraai
MuugwTtwo ni Jesu
Muoe matimii na Ngo
Mute guoya wanyu
UkTrTwake guoya
Thiii na iicaarnba,
Miitwariitwo ni'jesii
No rnukaahootana.P
Young men arise
Jesus calls you to
Take up spears and shields and to
Throwaway your fears.
For what's the point of fear?
Go ye with bravery;
Led by Jesus
You'll be victorious.
The Mau Mau revolutionaries took up the same song and tune
;111<1 turned it into a song of actual political, visible material
freedom and struggle for land. The battle was no longer in heaven
but here on earth, in Kenya. So they sang:
Aanake iikiraai
MuugwTtwo ni Mbiii
Muoe Matimii na ngo
Young men arise
Mbiii calls you to
Take up spears and shields


--- PAGE 35 ---
28
Na miitigaikare.
Umaai na Ihenya
Ukaai Miiteithanie
Ageni ni'Nyakeerii
Na ni njaamba nene."
Writers in Politics
And don't delay.
Get out quickly
Come help one another
The white people are foreigners
And they are very strong
(i.e. well-armed).
The song goes on to ask the patriots to eschew drinking; they
should only take up things made by Kenyan people, for with
such things they would never be defeated. It further calls on
them to cast away fear and cowardice (iikrrl wak'i'guoya) and
step up political agitation among the masses. With justice being
on their side they would truly emerge victorious from their anti-
imperialist struggle.
Mbaara Ir'ia tiiraariia
NT ya ithaka ciitii
Na kiifi andii amwe aitii
Maroiga ti ciirii
KaT0 mataroona
Thiina iiria tiiraaheeo?
Tiiraathiinirio ithaka
Twaheirwo ni' Ngai
The war we are fighting
It is for our lands
But there are some of our
people
Who say the lands are
not ours.
Can't they see
The oppression inflicted on us?
We are being tortured for lands
We were given by God.
There were other songs. Christians sang:
Maikarite Thi iitukii
Ariithi a Mburi
Miirekio wa Ngai ni ookire
Na iitheri miinene.P"
The Mau Mau sang:
Maikariite Kaloleni
Ariithi a KA U
Magithoondeka meeciiria
Ma giithii Riiraaya.i"
They sat down by night
Shepherds of sheep
The angel of the Lord came
With bright light.
They sat at Kaloleni
Shepherds of K A U
Thinking out plans
Of how to go to England (i.e.
to send a political delegation to
Europe).


--- PAGE 36 ---
Literature and Society 29
They go on to sing about the one who is born today, a leader
of the people in their struggle for political rights, social justice
and for the recovery of the stolen lands.
Christians sang of the happy day when 'I first became a con-
vert and Jesus cleansed me'. The Mau Mau sang of the 'happy
day, when they first sent their spokesman to UNO (United
National Organization). There were many others in a similar
vein. It was as if the people of Kenya did to the Christian uni-
verse and spiritual idealism what Marx did to Hegel's dialectics:
made them stand firmly on the ground, our earth, instead of
standing on their head. The aim, in other words, is to change a
people's world outlook, it is to seize back the right and the
initiative to define oneself.
A written literature also develops alongside people's oral
fighting literature again as part of the cultural struggle and
cultural assertion. In the case of Africa, the very act of writing
was itself a testimony of the creative capacity of the African
and the first tottering but still important steps by the 'educated'
elite towards self-definition and the acceptance of the environ-
ment from which they had been alienated by western, Euro-
centric imperialist education. But the literature produced,
because of its critical realism, also reflected the reality of the
African struggle against colonial domination.
Chinua Achebe is a case in point. His novels taken as a whole
beautifully delineate the origins, growth and development of
a neo-colonial native ruling class. This class has roots in the
early Christian converts, the early asomi who learnt to read and
write; the court messengers; the policemen; the road overseers,
in Things Fall Apart and Arrow of God. This class later becomes
the backbone of the business and civil service 'been to's' in No
Longer at Ease. In A Man of the People, the class inherits power
and begins to fulfil its historical mission of a messenger class.jn
the rocess lootin the people. Where the individual messenger
was bribed b[ indivi ual families in Things Fall Apart. wbere.
tEe same iud· Tjdua m en er la ed one clan . :nother
t confuse them about his messenger role and cloud it with
ne otism and hence eat the bribe in e in s Fall
an Arrow of God! the same class now extorts bribes from the
whole country in A Man of the People and plays one ethnic
community against others on a national scale, again to mystify
its true role and character as a messenger class. In Girls at War,


--- PAGE 37 ---
30 Writers in Politics
the class involves the whole country in bloodshed in its intra-
class warfare for a share of the cake, the left-overs, given to it
by the master.
Such a literature, again at its critical best and most committed,
defines a people not in terms of always being acted on but in
terms of actors. ~_~.!!d Ezeulu~reseotatives of the
p~oo~-oflle.'s_.spiriLoL[esistan_c_e_mg._k~ th~ir__Q_~ __hi~~_Q_ry.
Okonkwo commits suicide rather than submit and live in a
r.:ortd where-ne IS denied the rigb~ake his own history
through .hi~_<::_ontroland development of the producti\"~JQ!"£es.
His-act 01 killing an imperialist messenger is as symbolic aut
}s prophetic. It is__the_n_ewmessenger c1ass~Een~w erral!i_l;>_<?_ys
;!f~national monopoly capitalism that make totalliberatiin
difficult, for on the surface they do look hkeHone of Okwonkwo ~sQWil-pe<)Iik.---------- --------
I believe that we as teachers of literature can help in this
collective struggle to seize back our creative jnjtiatjve ilJhistory.
For this it is essential that we grasp the true function and role
of literature in our society. We can help principally in three
ways:
(1) In all our schools, teacher training colleges and community
•centres we must insist on the rimae and centrality of African
literature an the Iterature of African p~oplejn the West Indies
and America. Central to this is the oral literature of om ~"ple,
including their con!_emporary compositions.
(2) Where we imporrttrefal:ure--fromoutside, it should be
relevant to our situation. It should be the literature that treats
of historical situations, historical struggles, similar to our own.
It should be the kind of literature that rejects oppressive social-
economic systems, that rejects all those forces that dwarf the
creative development of man. In this case anti-imperialist
literatures from Asia and Latin America and literature from
socialist countries are very important. But anti-imperialist,
anti-bourgeois literature and the pro-people literature of struggle
from writers in imperialist countries can add a considerable
contribution to our own struggles for a better world.
(3) While not rejecting the critical demands of the more
formal elements and needs of any art, we must subject literature
whether oral, African or from other lands to a most rigorous
criticism from the point of view of the struggling masses. We
must detect what is positive, revolutionary, humanistic ih a


--- PAGE 38 ---
Literature and Society 31
work of art, support it, strengthen it; and reject what is negative
and anti-humanistic in the same or other works.
All this is not easy for it calls upon us to re-examine our-
selves, our values, our own world outlook, our own assumptions
and prejudices. Above all, it demands of us to re-examine our
own stand and attitude to the struggle that still goes on in our
continent: the struggle of our people against economic, political,
and cultural imperialism of western European and Japanese
capitalism, whose most ugly deformation is seen in South Africa,
Rhodesia, Angola and Mozambique. It demands of us to adopt a
scientific materialistic world outlook on nature, human society
and human thought, and assume the standpoint of the most
progressive and revolutionary classes (i.e. workers and peasants)
in our society, for they are at the forefront in the struggle
against imperialism and foreign domination, indeed against the
suffocating alliance between the imperialist bourgeoisie and
the local pro-foreigner comprador class.
In his last days in Conakry, Kwame Nkrumah wrote that the
spectre of Black Power was haunting the world. Black Power
here does not mean a glorification of an ossified past. Rather it
means the true creative power of African people through a
people's control of their forces of production and equitable
distribution of the products of their sweat to enhance the
quality of all their lives. Seen in this light, Black Power is im-
possible outside a socialist context and a total liberation of the
African genius at all the levels we have been talking about.
Literature, and our attitudes to literature, can help or else
hinder in the creation of a united socialist Black Power in Africa
based on the just continuing struggle of peasants and workers
for a total control of their productive forces.
We writers and critics of African literature should form an
essential intellectual part of the anti-imperialist cultural army of
African peoples for total economic and political liberation from
imperialism and foreign domination.
Notes
1. Paper read during a conference of teachers of literature in Kenya, at
Nairobi School, in 1973.
2. 'In the world today all culture, all literature and art belong to definite
classes and are geared to definite political lines. There is in fact no


--- PAGE 39 ---
32 Writers in Politics
such a thing as art for art's sake, art that stands above classes, art that
is detached from, or independent of politics.' Mao Tse-Tung, 'Yenan
Forum on Literature and Art.'
3. Arnold Hauser: 'Propaganda, Ideology and Art', Aspects of History
and Class Consciousness, Istvan Meszaros (ed.) p. 128.
4. Ibid., p. 129.
5. Karl Marx: Capital, vol. 1, chap. vii, p. 177.
6. Karl Marx: 'Wage Labour and Capital', Selected Works, vol. 1,
Moscow, p. 89.
7. 'The relations of production in their totality constitute what are
called the social relations, society, and, specifically, a society at a
definite stage of historical development ... .' Karl Marx: 'Wage Labour
and Capital', ibid., p. 90.
8. Friedrich Engels: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, section 3.
9. 'Thus the social relations within which individuals produce, the social
relations of production, change, are transformed, with the change and
development of the material means of production, the productive
forces.' Karl Marx: 'Wage Labour and Capital', op. cit., p. 90.
10. V. 1. Lenin: Critical remarks on the National Question, p. 20 and p. 14.
11. Walter Rodney: How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, (Tanzania
Publishing House, Dar-es-Salaam, 1972). See also Frank: Capitalism
and Underdevelopment in Latin America.
12. 'Direct slavery is as much the pivot of our industrialism today as
machinery, credit, etc. Without slavery no cotton; without cotton no
modern industry. Slavery has given value to the colonies; the colonies
have created world trade; world trade is the necessary condition of
large-scale machine industry. Thus, before the traffic in Negroes began,
the colonies supplied the Old World with only very few products and
made no visible change in the face of the earth. Slavery is therefore an
economic category of the highest importance. Without slavery North
America, the most progressive country, would be transformed into a
patriarchal land. You have only to wipe North America off the map of
the nations and you get anarchy, the total decay of trade and of
modern civilization. But to let slavery disappear is to wipe North
America off the map of the nations. And therefore, because it is an
economic category, we find slavery in every nation since the world
began. Modern nations have merely known how to disguise slavery of
their own countries while they openly imported it into the New World.
Karl Marx: The Poverty of Philosophy. 'p. 180. See also Eric Williams:
Capitalism and Slavery (Andre Deutsch, London, 1964).
13. V. 1. Lenin: Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, (Selected
Works, n.d.), and Kwame Nkrurnah. Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage
of Imperialism (Heinemann, London. 1968).
14. Amilcar Cabral: 'National Liberation and Culture' in Transition 45,
p.12.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Literature and Society 33
15. Quoted by Eric Williams: History of the People of Trinidad and
Tobago, p. 30.
16. Ibid., p. 31.
17. Ibid., p. 3l.
18. Quoted from Monsarrat's novel Richer Than All His Tribe, by Anne
Dummett in A Portrait of English Racism p. 225-226.
19. Note the description of Gagool in King Solomon's Mines haunted
Graham Greene all his life, at least so he says in his collected Essays.
And Micere Githae Mugo has written: 'I can never forget King Solo-
man's Mines nor the weird portrait of Gagool which for a long time
epitomized in my childish mind the figure of an African woman in old
age. It is only recently that I have got over my dread and fear of old
black women.' See her article, Written Literature and Black Image, in
Gachukia and Akivaga's Teaching of African Literature in Schools.
20. See the description of this in King Solomon's Mines.
21. Karen Blixen. Out of Africa, Penguin edition, p. 24.
22. Ibid., p. 25.
23. Ibid.,p.44.
24. Isak Dinescn. Shadows on the Grass (John Murray, London, 1960),
p.45.
25. William Blake: 'The Little Black Boy' (The Complete Poems, Long-
man, p. 58).
26. Ibid., p. 58.
27. Mao Tse-Tung. 'Combat Liberalism'.
28. Alan Paton: Cry the Beloved Country (Penguin Books, Harmonds-
worth, 1972), p. 231-2.
29. Edward W. Blyden: 'Christianity, Islam and the Negro Race', African
Heritage Books 1, Edinburgh, p. 77.
30. Ibid., p. 00.
31. Amilcar Cabral.
32. Nyiimbo cia Kuinira Ngia, Hymn No. 115. Note that the Hymn is a
Gikuyu rendering of G. Duffield's Christian hymn, 'Stand up! stand
up for Jesus! Ye soldiers of the Cross'.
33. From a Gikiiyii' song book published by Gakaara Wanjau about or
just before 1952. Song No. 41.
34. Nyiimbo cia Kiiinira Ngia, Hymn No. 171. Original English hymn by
Nahum Tate 'While shepherds watch'd their flocks by night'.
35. Gakaara Wanjaii - Song No. 10.


--- PAGE 41 ---
2 Literaturein Schools'
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The current debate about literature in our schools has shown
that we Kenyans are very concerned over the literary diet now
being ladled out to our children. This is as it should be. For
education is 'a mirror unto' a people's social being. It has been a
{, major ideological battlefield between the economic, political
and cultural forces of oppression and the forces for national
liberation and unity. Hence, the education system of us Kenyans
was one of the first national fortresses to be stormed by the
colonial spiritual policemen preparing and subsequently guard-
ing the way for the permanent siege of the oppressed by all the
other occupation armies of British imperialism.
The debate has raised four main issues with questions that
well go beyond the problem of literature alone. These issues
are as follows: (1) The relevance and adequacy of the present
education system: What is the philosophy behind it? What are
its premises and guidelines? What and whose social vision is it
setting out to serve? On the basis of our answers to the above,
what area and what sort of literature should we be teaching in
our schools? (2) The decision-making personnel: Who should
take crucial decisions regarding our cultural and literary pro-
grammes - foreigners or nationals? Who should determine
what, and how, we are teaching in our schools? (3) The teaching
staff: Should we still recruit and retain imperialist foreigners to
teach literature, language, history and culture in our schools?
Should we in fact continue employing imperialist foreigners
to interpret our being to ourselves? (4) Approaches to literature:
What is our guiding world outlook as teachers of literature?
What is our attitude to literature as a reflection of society? On
whose side are we when interpreting literature? To help which
side in the social struggle?
The debate has tended to centre on the third issue, whether or


--- PAGE 42 ---
Literature in Schools 35
not we should continue employing foreigners, and while this is
an important matter, it has overshadowed the other three prob-
lems and has helped to obscure the main and real thrust of the
report and recommendations of the working committee. The
report of the committee in fact gave more space to the first two
issues with comments, observations and conclusions based on the
assumption that literature is a very crucial reflection of a society.
The report completely rejected the notion that a child in
Nairobi can only know itself by studying London first; by first
immersing itself in a European writer's imaginative responses to
his countryside and to his history; the notion, in other words,
that a Kenyan child's route to self-realization must be via
European heritages and cultures. The price we pay for these
Eurocentric studies of ourselves is the total distortion and
misplacement of values of national liberation, making us con-
tinue to be slaves to imperialism.
Literature, the report argues, reflects the life of a people. It
reflects in word images, a people's creative consciousness of
their struggles to mould nature through co-operative labour
and in the process acting on and changing themselves. It reflects
in word images a people's consciousness of the tensions and
conflicts arising out of their struggles to mould a meaningful
social environment founded on their combined actions on
nature to wrest the means of life: clothing, food and shelter.
Literature thus contains people's images of themselves in
history and of their place in the universe.
What images are presented to a Kenyan child through the
literature he reads in Kenyan national schools? Let us be frank.
Being a student of literature in today's Kenya means being an
English student. Our children are taught the history of English
literature and language from the unknown author of Beowulf to
T. S. Eliot. They are made to recite, with ethereal faces and
angelic voices, poems in praise or censure of the retiring un-
reachable haughtily coy mistress, a remnant of the courtly love
games of the idle European feudal classes:
Go, lovely Rose!
Tell her, that wastes her time and me
That now she knows,
When I resemble her to thee,
How sweet and fair she seems to be.?


--- PAGE 43 ---
36 Writers in Politics
They recite poems which are an English writer's nostalgic re-
sponse to his landscape:
I sing of brooks, of blossoms, birds and bowers:
Of April, May, of June, and July-flowers
I sing of May-poles ... 3
They sing of the beauty of England and of the changing seasons
and flowers:
Fair daffodils, we weep to see
You haste away so soon:
As yet the early-rising sun
Has not attain'd his noon."
The children are mesmerized by winter in a polluted British
industrial setting and so they faithfully chant about:
The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes,
Licked its tongue into corners of the evening,
Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
And seeing that it was a soft October night,
Curled once about the house and fell asleep."
Yes, so much for roses and daffodils and may-poles, and yellow
fogs, not to mention songs of London burning and Baa Baa
Black Sheep!
Thus the teaching of only European literature, and mostly
British imperialist literature in our schools, means that our
students are daily being confronted with the European reflec-
tion of itself, the European image, in history. Our children
are made to look, analyse and evaluate the world as made
and seen by Europeans. Worse still, these children are con-
fronted with a distorted image of themselves and of their
history as reflected and interpreted in European imperialist
literature. They see how Prospero sees Caliban and not how
Caliban sees Prospero; how Crusoe discovers and remakes
Man Friday in Crusoe's image, but never how Friday views


--- PAGE 44 ---
Literature in Schools 37
himself and his heroic struggles against centuries of Crusoe's
exploitation and oppression.
This emerges more clearly if you compare literature with
the state of the cinema in Kenya today. Every time we go to the
movies we are confronted with the way the imperialist bourgoisie
sees the world; we are faced, so to speak, with the ideological
justification of their ways to themselves and to us. Thus we
never see ourselves reflected on the screen; we never react to or
respond to ourselves and to our environment on the screen.
Worse, we often applaud the superhuman feats of racist heroes
of imperialism - a James Bond or an American cowboy wiping
out a whole crowd of Third World people: Africans, Chinese,
Mexicans, or the native Americans - the so-called Red Indians.
This is cultural imperialism, a very powerful instrument of
oppression because it distorts a people's vision of history and of
the reality of the world around them. These distorted literary
reflections, reinforced by religious images of white gods and
angels reigning and 'choiring' in heaven while black devils
writhed in hell because of their black sins, were meant to lead
us - and especially the 'educated' and the Christianized - to
paths of self-doubt and self-hatred and to indecisive postures
before our enemies. Okot p'Bitek in Song of Ocol has power-
fully depicted this educated generation writhing in anguish
amidst tortuous thoughts and questions:
Why
Why was I born blacks"
The phenomenon is not of course peculiar to Africa. It is true
of the whole black world, the colonized world, indeed true of
those Aime Cesaire has described as' 'Societies drained of their
essence, cultures trampled underfoot, institutions undermined,
lands confiscated, religions smashed, magnificent artistic cre-
ations destroyed, extraordinary possibilities wiped out.' Ocol's
torments and his repudiation of the creative collective selfhood
of African peoples is borne out by a real life testimony from
Malcolm X who writes:
How ridiculous I was to stand there simply lost in admira-
tion of my hair now looking white in the mirror .... This
was my first really big step towards self-degradation: when


--- PAGE 45 ---
38 Writers in Politics
I endured all that pain, literally burning my flesh in order
to conk my natural hair until it was limp, to have it look
like a white man's hair! I had joined that multitude of
black men and women who are brainwashed into believing
that black people are inferior and white people superior
that they will even violate and mutilate their God created
bodies to try to look pretty by white standards."
Well, we may not always mutilate our bodies, but how often
have we mutilated our minds and our creative potential through
total surrender to cultural imperialism!
It is time that we realized that the European imperialist bour-
geois experience of history as reflected in their art and literature
is NOT the universal experience of history. Moreover, their his-
tory has largely been one of exploitation, oppression and elimi-
nation of other peoples. Why should we, whose experiences of
history as reflected in our songs and our literature, is one of
continuous heroic struggle against western European slavery and
their imperialist pillage and plunder of our wealth, be expected
to memorize and recite the story of our imperialist oppressors
and thus identify with their literary glorification of imperialist
plunder and murder?
I am convinced that the principles guiding the report were
entirely sound: Literature of the African peoples should come
first. Literature of people who have struggled against racism,
colonialism, against imperialist economic, political and cultural
domination - and this means mostly progressive Asian and
Latin American literatures - should follow. Literature from the
rest of the world - chosen on the basis of relevance to our
struggle against inhibitive social structures - should be the third
component of literature in our schools.
In this way we shall develop a critical mentality in our stu-
dents: people who can critically assess and evaluate their total
environment in Kenya and using the tools gained therefrom,
look at other worlds and similarly assess and evaluate. In litera-
ture there have been two opposing aesthetics: the aesthetic of
oppression and exploitation and of acquiescence with imperial-
ismj and that of human struggle for total liberation. The literature
of all those who cherish and fight for freedom is our literature:
the literature of all who hate, and therefore struggle against ex-
ploitation, oppression, diminution of the human creative spirit,


--- PAGE 46 ---
Literature in Schools 39
is our literature: the aesthetic arising from that literature is in
harmony with the aesthetic evolving from the Kenyan people's
history which reached its previous highest epic peak in the Mau
Mau armed struggle against British imperialism, an aesthetic
which found literary expression in Mau Mau songs and poems.
But the order and combination of study is important: Kenya,
East Africa, Africa, Asia and Latin America, and the rest, in
that order.
The second issue - the decision-making personnel - is ob-
viously related to the first and here again the report was clear
and emphatic. No independent country should allow its most
vital decisions about the study of their culture to be taken
by foreigners. Decisions affecting the lives of fifteen million
Kenyans can only be meaningfully taken by patriotic Kenyans
and not by imperialist foreigners. I don't see why this should
even be a matter of debate. It is the height of criminal folly and
utter national irresponsibility and naked betrayal of millions to
entrust policies on national culture to foreigners. That is why
the report called for the immediate Kenyanization of the in-
spectorates of literature and languages. I repeat: only Kenyan
nationals should decide on the running of their education system.
The third issue, concerning the employment of expatriates,
is dependent on what is done about the above two issues. The
feeling of the working committee was that most of the current
staff in our schools were recruited and employed on the basis of
the current policies that have resulted in only foreign literature
in our schools. A few of these teachers have no training in
literature and they can only talk about backgrounds to literature,
but are incapable of adequately evaluating literature, any litera-
ture, even their own, and therefore they spend time in explaining
references to daffodils, wintry snow, and may-poles. Thus they
hide their ignorance behind a knowledge of their language and
an acquaintance with the natural and social background to the
litera ture.
But a few of the teachers are progressive and approach litera-
ture with a sensitivity and intelligence born of a sound training
and dedication to the cause of human liberation. Such are not
afraid of progressive literature. They don't feel threatened by a
Kenyan national literature or any other socially relevant litera-
tures. On the contrary, these enlightened few welcome a literature
whose background the students can take for granted so that


--- PAGE 47 ---
40 Writers in Politics
they can get on with the more exciting work of interpretation
and debate. In the same way there are a few nationals who are
authoritarian and who are obviously happier discussing and
explaining a London they know nothing about, or a Europe
learnt from imperialist literature. These literary Ocols hate this
uncivilized thing called Kenyan literature, and they also hate a
situation in which a student might be as much acquainted with
the social background as the teacher. Fortunately these Kenyans,
who are sold to the culture of imperialism without even grasp-
ing its full import are increasingly being challenged by a new
generation of Kenyan students and teachers who are committed
to a national aesthetic of liberation.
But once again, the question about the employment of
foreigners to teach literature in our schools cannot be decided
on the basis of philosophical stance of the foreigners. I believe
that only the nationals of a country have the right and the
responsibility of running their education system, and this
over-reliance on foreigners is dangerous for our country's
future.
Finally I would say that the basic assumption underlying
the committee's work and recommendations was the general
realization, as it emerged from the discussions of the main
conference, that literature, any literature, is useless unless
it is committed to the values of a people 'sceptreless and free',
developing to the highest possible level their limitless creative
potential and enjoying to the full the fruits arising therefrom.
Imperialism, in its colonial and neo-colonial stages, is the
enemy of those human values of liberation. The literature
reflecting an aesthetic that glorifies the wicked deeds of the
imperialist bourgeoisie and its local allies is enemy literature.
The literature we teach in Kenya's schools should reflect the
grandeur of our history: it should reflect Kenya's great past of
heroic struggles to overcome nature and her even more heroic
struggles against foreign domination: From the wars of resistance
against the Portuguese and the Arab slave-raiders, to the patriotic
wars against the British.
The history and the literature we teach should bring to the
fore those immortal words in Aime Cesaire's poem Return to
My Native Land when he argued that for a century the European
imperialist bourgeoisie has fed the colonized and the oppressed
with racist lies and defeatist propaganda.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Literature in Schools
For it is not true that the work of man is finished
That man has nothing more to do in the world
but be a parasite in the world
That all we now need is to keep in step with the world.
But the work of man is only just beginning and it remains
to man to conquer all the violence entrenched in the
recesses of his passion
And no race possesses the monopoly of beauty ,
of intelligence, of force, and there is
a place for all at the rendezvous
of victory ... 8
The teaching of literature in Kenyan schools must help us to
return to our native land among the masses of Kenyan peasants
and workers, to build a self-reliant Kenya totally free from ex-
ternal and internal exploitation and oppression. The report of
the working committee was only a tiny tiny step in that direc-
tion. But then, the journey of a thousand miles begins with
one step.
41
Notes
1. This is a slightly revised article which appeared in The Weekly Review,
1976 as part of the fierce debate which erupted in Kenya's press after a
working committee appointed by the conference of teachers of litera-
ture, Nairobi School, 1973 to re-examine the literature syllabus in
schools, released its findings and recommendations in a document
entitled: Teaching of Literature in Kenya's Secondary Schools.
2. Edmund Waller, 'Go Lovely Rose!', in Read and Dobree, The London
Book of English Verse.
3. Robert Herrick, 'Argument of His Book'.
4. Robert Herrick, 'Daffodils', in Read and Dobree, op. cit.
5. T. S. Eliot, 'The Love Song of Alfred Prufrock', The Complete Poems
and Plays of T. S. Eliot (Faber, London, 1969), p. 13.
6. Okot p'Bitek , Song of Ocol (EAPH, Nairobi, 1970), p. 22.
7. The Autobiography of Malcolm X.
8. Aime Cesaire, Return to My Native Land (Penguin, Haemondsworth,
1969), p. 85.


--- PAGE 49 ---
3 Kenyan Culture
:The National StruggleforSurvival
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
A central fact of Kenyan life today is the fierce struggle between
the cultural forces representing foreign interests and those
representing patriotic national interests. This cultural struggle
may not always be obvious to a casual observer, for such a
person will almost certainly be struck by the virtual domination
of Kenyan life by foreigners and foreign imperialist cultural
interests.
If such an observer should want to see a film show, he will be
sitting in cinemas owned by foreigners (Twentieth Century Fox
for instance) to see American offerings on the screen. These
offerings range from the moderately good like Coming Home,
which was slightly critical of American imperialist adventurism
in Indo-China; to the mass-produced, mindless trash like Omen
and Magic where change, and possibilities of change, are seen in
terms of doomsday and the end of human civilization. The
message is clear: any change from the American dominated
present is the end of civilization. Agents of change are devils.
The heroes (all American of course) are those fighting against
the villains from Hades or outer space who threaten the present
world stability guaranteed by American dollars and guns.
Should the same visitor want to buy a daily newspaper, his
choice is between the Nation Newspapers owned by the Aga
Khan in Paris, or the Standard Newspapers owned by Tiny
Rowland's Lonrho in London. Thus the two major means of
mass communication to Kenya's reading public are owned by
foreign imperialist firms. The editors may be Kenyans. But
when there is a conflict between the editorial policy and that of
t~e foreign owner, it is the interests of the Kenyans which must
grve way.
If our visitor should want to see book publishing houses in


--- PAGE 50 ---
Kenyan Culture: The National Struggle for Survival 43
Kenya, he will be welcomed by Kenyan directors of branches of
such well known foreign firms like Heinemann, Longman,
Oxford, Nelson, Macmillan and the like. The only exception is
the Kenya government-owned Kenya Literature Bureau. These
firms sometimes publish books written by Kenyans. But it
means that book production, both in quantity and quality, is at
the grace and mercy of foreigners.
Now our visitor might visit schools. The English language
dominates a Kenyan child's life from primary school to uni-
versity and after. Swahili, the all-Kenya national language, is not
only not compulsory, but is often offered as an optional alter-
native to French and German. There is total neglect of the
languages of the nationalities that make up Kenya. Thus a
Kenyan child grows up admiring the culture carried by these
foreign languages, in effect western European ruling class cul-
tures, and looks down upon the culture carried by the language
of his particular nationality, in effect Kenyan peasant rooted
national cultures. In other words, the school trains him to look
down upon what is national and Kenyan, and to look up to
what is foreign even if it is anti-Kenyan. This process is hastened
by the literature he is made to study: Shakespeare, Jane Austen,
and Wordsworth still dominate the literary scene in Kenyan
schools. The present language situation in Kenya means that
over ninety per cent of Kenyans (mostly peasants) are com-
pletely excluded from participation in national debates con-
ducted in the written word.
The trend is virtually the same in music and the plastic arts.
It is either foreign music, or Kenyan music but produced by
foreign firms. It is either foreign sculpture and painting, or
Kenyan sculpture and painting but exhibited in foreign-owned
art galleries.
But it is in the theatre that this domination by foreign
cultural interests is most nakedly clear. Nairobi has recently
seen a mushrooming of neo-colonial foreign cultural institutions
like the French Cultural Centre, the German Goethe Institute;
the Japanese Cultural Institute, and of course the American
Information Services. Some of these institutes promote theatre
and theatre-related events and discussions. But naturally they
are basically interested in selling a positive image of their
governments' neo-colonial profit-hunting adventurism in Asia,
Africa and Latin America.


--- PAGE 51 ---
44 Writers in Politics
A most ludicrous colonial affair is the Donovan Maule Theatre
in Nairobi. With their productions like The Killing of Sister
George and Michael Frayn's Clouds, they see themselves as
offering a touch of civilization (West End and Broadway com-
bined) in theatrically darkest Africa. One of their favourite
advertisements in tourist brochures is the supposedly dramatic
slogan: A Professional Theatre in the Heart of Africa. They just
about avoided advertising a professional theatre in the Heart of
Darkness!
What really annoys most patriotic Kenyans about the theatre
scene in their own country is not so much the above foreign
presences but the fact that the Kenya government-owned
premises, The Kenya Cultural Centre and The Kenya National
Theatre, should themselves be controlled by foreigners offering
foreign theatre to Kenyans. A foreign imperialist cultural
mission, i.e. The British Council, occupies virtually all the
offices at The Kenya Cultural Centre. The governing council of
the same Centre is chaired by a British national and The British
Council is in addition represented on the council. The Kenya
National Theatre which is run by the governing council is com-
pletely dominated by foreign-based theatre groups like The City
Players and Theatre Ltd. What these groups offer has nothing
to do with Kenyan life except when maybe they offer racist
shows like The King and lor Robinson Crusoe. A small list of
titles they offer is quite revealing: A Funny Thing Happened on
the Way to the Forum; Godspell, Jesus Christ Superstar; Okla-
homa; Carmen; Vivat! Vivat Regina! etc. Most of these groups
at The Kenya National Theatre often import directors, costumes,
orchestral pieces and actors from England and Canada, giving
the impression that there are no Kenyan directors, no Kenyan
costumes, no Kenyan actors and no Kenyan musical instruments.
As for the theatre critics (again foreigners) their critical vocabu-
lary is a variation of three sentences: 'It is universal'; or 'It is
not talking about oppression'; or 'It has a touch of West End or
Broadway'. The Kenyan reply to all this over the years has met
with varying degrees of success and failure.
In the cinema there has not been any success. A Kenyan
film-maker, Hilary Ng'weno, once tried entering the field only
to make an exit for lack of financial backing and lack of venues.
Kenya television would rather import films about the American
Wild West than encourage a modest Kenyan effort.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Kenyan Culture: The National Struggle for Survival 45
In the newspaper world, various Kenyan enterprises like The
Nairobi Evening News and The Weekend Star have flared up for
a day only to disappear the following day for lack of advertise-
ments from the mostly foreign firms in Kenya; for lack of
adequate capital and also because of the severe restraint of a
self-imposed censorship for fear of overstepping the boundaries.
The only Kenyan-owned enterprise which has so far survived
is Hilary Ng'weno's Weekly Review and The Nairobi Times.
The Weekly Review, for instance, has been in print for four
years. Their content and outlook however is entirely another
matter.
The Kenyan-owned publishing industry has not fared any
better, with groups rising and falling for similar reasons: lack of
adequate capital, or inadequate government patronage.
In the schools, a conference of Kenyan teachers of literature
met in 1973 and for the next three years or so produced far-
reaching, detailed recommendations on the teaching ofliterature
in Kenyan schools, basically asking the Kenyan government to
replace the present syllabus, whose centre is foreign imperialist
culture, with one which would be Kenyan and African based.
The recommendations went through all the necessary admini-
strative organs, often meeting with enthusiastic approval, until
the time of implementation; they have now been shelved.
Jane Austen is certainly deemed more relevant to Kenya than
Chinua Achebe.
Kenyan musicians, like Joseph Kamaru, are struggling against
great odds but they have survived and continue to enliven the
Kenyan musical scene with their compositions in Kenyan
national languages, thus reaching a mass audience.
But once again, it is in the theatre where the struggle for
national expression in culture is most manifest. Kenyan drama
groups like the Festac 77 Drama Group which produced NgilgI
and Micere Miigo's The Trial of Dedan Kimathi and Imbuga's
Betrayal in the City; The University of Nairobi Free Travelling
Theatre which tours all over Kenya once a year with a repertoire
of plays in Kiswahili and English; The Tamaduni Players and
The Kenya National Theatre Company; the Kenyan Schools
and Colleges Drama Festivals; have all tried to challenge this
foreign establishment in theatre. In the process, they have
unleashed a torrent of Kenyan talents in acting and directing
that puts to shame the foreign productions.


--- PAGE 53 ---
46 Writers in Politics
And yet often these talented Kenyans have no venue for
their theatrical performances. Often these Kenyan groups of
amateurs have to go cap in hand to imperialist cultural insti-
tutes, like the French Cultural Centre, to beg for stage facilities
because there is no room in the ark for them at their own
national premises. Very occasionally they may get a night or
two at The Kenya National Theatre, but only in the months
when the foreign European groups are resting.
One of the weaknesses of these various national efforts is
that writers, directors and actors often operate within the same
tradition as the foreign theatre they are setting out to challenge.
First, their theatre has mostly been in a foreign language, i.e.
English, and therefore, despite any radical innovations in con-
tent and method, their main target audience can only be the
foreign, English-speaking audience or the urban, Kenyan English-
speaking bourgeoisie. These groups have tried to exploit the
resources of the Kenyan national languages (that is the languages
of the several nationalities that make up Kenya) and the cultural
traditions carried by these languages. Hence these groups despite
their achievements in what is a difficult situation have not yet
appealed to a truly national audience; that is the peasants and
workers who form the overwhelming human content of Kenya
both in terms of numbers and in the production of Kenya's
wealth and, more importantly, who have for the last seven
decades stood opposed to foreign interference and oppression.
Most of the Kenyan writers for theatre have not tried to
represent this last point or even tried to change the content of
their drama to take militantly patriotic stands. Their plays have
espoused the same class, sometimes the same racist values, of
their Western foreign counterparts. A good example is Kenneth
Watene's Dedan Kimatbi which depicts Kirnathi, the brilliant
Mau Mau guerrila leader against the British colonial presence,
in the same terms as he was last depicted by racist Ian Hender-
son in The Hunt for Dedan Kimathi twenty years ago. Because
they have operated within the same structure of values, assump-
tions, political outlook, language audience, as the foreign
theatre establishment, most of these groups have not been able
to make a very effective challenge to imperialist cultural domi-
nation in Kenya. The three exceptions are: The Schools and
Colleges Drama Festival; The University of Nairobi Free Travel-
ling Theatre; The Festac 77 Drama Group.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Kenyan Culture: The National Struggle for Survival 47
This is the historical importance of the emergence of village-
based theatre groups like that of Kamlrfithii Community Edu-
cation and Cultural Centre in Limuru. This group in 1977 pro-
duced Ngaahika Ndeenda by NgiigTwa Thiong'o and Ngugi wa
Mirii, the first major modern play in one of Kenya's languages.
The actors were all peasants and workers from Kamlrfithii
village, they designed and built an open-air stage in the centre
of the village, and they collaborated in the evolution of the
script as well as in the directing. In the process they broke with
the hitherto accepted theatrical traditions. For instance the
initial reading and discussion of the script was done in the open.
The selection of actors was done in the open with the village
audience helping in the selection, and all the rehearsals for four
months were done in the open with an ever increasing crowd of
commentators and directors. The dress rehearsal was done to an
audience of over one thousand peasants and workers. When
finally the show opened to a fee-paying audience, the group
performed to thousands of peasants and workers who often
would hire buses or trek on foot in order to come and see the
play. For the first time, the rural people could see themselves
and their lives and their history portrayed in a positive manner.
For the first time in their post-independence history a section
of the peasantry had broken out of the cruel choice that was
hitherto their lot: the Bar or the church. And not the least,
they smashed the racialist view of peasants as uncultured re-
cipients of cultures from beneficient foreigners.
The withdrawal of the licence to perform the play and the
subsequent detention of one of the authors in December 1977
was a severe blow to the efforts of some Kenyans to success-
fully challenge the foreign theatre and cultural establishment in
Kenya, and the efforts of Kenyans to positively affirm them-
selves in theatre and culture. It also betrayed the blatantly accom-
plice role played by important sections of the Kenyan ruling
elements and showed where perhaps the real opposition lay.
Despite this temporary setback, Kamirfithii's example pro-
vided the first meaningful challenge to imperialist cultural
domination in Kenya by changing the whole terms of the
struggle - in location, audience, language, values, and even style
of production, i.e. the communal participation.
It seems to me that the choice in Kenya today is between the
foreign imperialist-type theatre in foreign languages, and the


--- PAGE 55 ---
48 Writers in Politics
national patriotic efforts like those of the peasants and workers
of Kamiriithii Community Education and Cultural Centre in
Kenya's own national languages. The two positions are irrecon-
cilable because they represent two opposed class interests:
anti-Kenyan and foreign; and pro-Kenyan, patriotic and national.
The first choice can only lead Kenya to cultural sterility and
death; the second would lead Kenya to cultural regeneration
and strength, national pride and dignity.
In making their choice, the Kenyan people may want to look
back to history and realize that no civilization on earth has ever
thrived on blind imitation and copying; that foreigners, no
matter how well intentioned, no matter how clever and gifted,
no matter how original, can never develop our culture and our
languages for us. It is only patriotic Kenyans who can develop
Kenyan culture and languages. Only a culture which is a product
of our people's history, and which in turn correctly reflects
that history, can push Kenya to the forefront in the community
of nations. It is such a culture which can help us build a modern
human civilization free from the social cannibalism which today
has reduced over three-quarters of mankind to beggary, poverty
and death, not because they don't work but because their wealth
goes to feed, clothe and shelter a few idle classes in America,
western Europe and Japan.
In the present cultural struggle between imperialist and
national interests, most Kenyans would take the view that a
modern Kenyan national culture should reflect the strength and
confidence of a people who have completely rejected the posi-
tion of always being the ragged trousered philanthropists to
money-mongers in London and New York and in the other
western seats of barons of the profits snatched from the peasants
and workers of the world.
Notes
1. An article commissioned by The Guardian in its commemorative issue
of 7 June 1979 in honour of President Moi's state visit to Britain.


--- PAGE 56 ---
4 'Handcuffs'fora Play(or the difficulties of staging a Kenyan play on Kenyatta Day)
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The recent announcement that The Trial of Dedan Kimatbi and
Betrayal in the City will run for eight nights at The Kenya
National Theatre between 20 to 30 October has raised awkward
questions among Kenyan theatre-goers. Why have the two
plays, which will be representing Kenya in Lagos, been crammed
into four nights each between two European shows, Bossman's
[eune Ballet de France (10 to 18 October), and the City Players'
A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (1 to 21
November)?
This means that, between them, the two foreign cultural
shows will have a total of thirty-one days at The National
Theatre while the two Kenyan plays will have only eight days.
Surely the people of this country have a right to see and to
criticise over a period of time, what will be representing them at
the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Cul-
ture in Lagos, Nigeria?
What the public may not know is that since June, 1976 there
has been a bitter struggle between the Kenyan Festac '77 Drama
Group and the management of The Kenya National Theatre
over what plays and what events should be on at the Kenya
Cultural Centre during the Kenyatta Day week and also during
the Unesco General Conference to be hosted by Kenya.
Kenya Festac '77 Drama Group (the name under which the
Drama Sub-Committee of the Ministry of Social Services is
organising the two Kenyan plays) insisted that The Trial of
Dedan Kimatbi and Betrayal in the City should be performed
during the Kenyatta Day week and for another week or so
during the Unesco Conference. Under the chairmanship of Seth
Adagala, the group argued that the Kenyatta Day week and
indeed the whole of October was very crucial in the history of


--- PAGE 57 ---
50 Writers in Politics
Kenya. It was after all, the month in which some Mau Mau and
KAU leaders were arrested and detained. It was the month in
which the Mau Mau armed struggle against British colonialism
started. What could be more relevant for the week than a play
about one of the most heroic leaders of the Mau Mau armed
resistance? Kenyans needed to remind themselves that their
independence had been won through sweat and blood.
The foreign management, on the other hand, were for Boss-
man's [eune Ballet de France and the City Players' A Funny
Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Their only argument
was that the dates had been booked many months ago; that
African plays never attracted true theatre-lovers anyway.
Statistics were even quoted as evidence. They never stopped to
ask why, even assuming their allegations to be true, there was a
small audience for African plays at The National Theatre.
Couldn't the reason be found in the fact that African plays were
always crammed into two or three nights and therefore gaining
very little from the crucial word-of-mouth publicity given by
the first three nights' audiences? Couldn't it also be that The
National Theatre has, over the years, created the image of a
service station for irrelevant cultural shows such as Godspel/,
The Boyfriend, Jeune Ballet de France, A Funny Thing Hap-
pened on the Way to the [Roman] Forum?
At issue behind the struggle over dates were basic questions of
principle. Shouldn't The Kenya National Theatre and the Kenya
Cultural Centre be catering for national interests? In planning
cultural activities for the year, didn't the theatre management
take the Kenyan image in and outside the country into consider-
ation? What shows should be organised for national festivals like
Madaraka Week, Kenyatta, Jamhuri Day, Labour Day, etc?
There were also certain symbolic parallels in the subject-
matter of at least The Trial of Dedan Kimatbi and the venue,
i.e. The National Theatre, and the history of this country.
It is interesting, for instance, that The National Theatre was
opened in 1952 under a colonial management. Many of the
plays they performed between 1952 and 1958 served to enter-
tain the British soldiers who came to Kenya to fight against Mau
Mau guerrillas and to suppress the Kenyan people. Such colonial
theatre was meant to boost the morale of British soldiers,
while at the same time taking captive the minds and hearts of
the educated Kenyan African petty bourgeois. Over the same


--- PAGE 58 ---
'Handcuffs' for a Play 51
period, the Mau Mau guerillas led by Dedan Kirnathi and others
put up one of the most heroic armed struggles against imperial-
ism in this century. It is often forgotten that while liberation
movements in places such as Guinea Bissau, Mozambique,
Angola and Algeria had free neighbouring territories which
served as supply and operation bases, the Mau Mau guerrillas
had no such bases. They were surrounded by the enemy ad-
ministration and so they had to entirely depend on what arms
they could steal from the enemy and what guns they could
make in the nascent underground arms factories in the cities
and forests. The Mau Mau guerrillas also developed a strong
anti-imperialist national culture, as seen in their written litera-
ture and in their songs created on the battlefield. The Trial of
Dedan Kimatbi tries to recapture the heroism and the deter-
mination of the people in this glorious moment of Kenya's
history, a moment that was the culmination of struggles that
were started by other national resistance heroes such as Waiyaki,
Me Katilili, Koitalel, etc., at the turn of the century.
The fact that the Ministry of Social Services had to intervene
before these two plays were allowed to run at The National
Theatre shows the extent to which theatre and our cultural
institutions are in the hands of foreigners - mostly British -
whose only aim is to promote British imperialist interests in
the country. At a time when theatre in Kenya is trying to
reflect national history and a national struggle, the foreign
management of our Cultural Centre is selling Christmas cards
that commemorate The National Theatre as it was in 1952,
flying a colonial flag. Itisvery insulting that The Kenya National
Theatre in 1976 should be selling a Christmas card carrying the
British flag!
However, despite their production being crammed between
two foreign productions, the Kenya Festac '77 Drama Group,
led by directors Seth Adagala and Tirus Gathwe, seem deter-
mined to do their best. They are encouraged by the support
they have had from the Kenyan people, says Seth Adagala.
'We are determined to make a hit in Lagos. We shall represent
Kenya and represent her well, despite some frustrations.'
As for me, I think the birth of the Kenya Festac '77 Drama
Group, which for the first time has brought together Kenya's
writers, artists, directors, actors and producers, from all walks
of life ranging from the University to insurance companies,


--- PAGE 59 ---
52 Writers in Politics
has added to the growth of a patriotic national theatre arts
movement that is developing in fierce struggle against imperialist
theatre and cultures.
No foreigner can hold back this movement. It's only fitting
that this national arts movement will make yet another mile-
stone on Kenyatta Day with the performance of The Trial of
Dedan Kimathi which celebrates the uncompromising heroic
leadership of Kirnathi. Seth Adagala and Tirus Gathwe are
looking forward to big public support. Judging by the
enthusiastic response to the University of Nairobi Free Travelling
Theatre, which shows that the people want a theatre reflecting
national culture and national life, the two directors should
have no difficulty in filling the theatre - for the four days
allowed to each between 20 October and 30 October.
Notes
1. An article that appeared in the Daily Nation of 15 October, 1976, just
before the opening of The Trial of Dedan Kimatbi at The Kenya
National Theatre in October, 1976. All the shows were sold out, with
some people travelling from as far as Kisumu, Nyeri and Mombasa to
see the play.


--- PAGE 60 ---
5 Return to the Roots
National Languages as the Basis of a
Kenya National Literature and Culture!
In 1958, a year after Ghana's independence, a young Nigerian
writer, Chinua Achebe, published his first novel, Things Fall
Apart, and it gave rise to a literary stream still flowing out of
the pens of numerous African writers.
Most of the works produced by these pens have different
subject-matter: for instance, some of the novels, plays and
poems have a strong anti-imperialist content while others are
completely insensitive to imperialism as a social historical force
in Africa today. Even to the same subject-matter the authors
have assumed differing attitudes and postures. Some have a con-
tent which shows the reality of the struggles of peasants and
workers of Africa against their ruthless exploitation by an
alliance of foreign money-mongers in Tokyo, Bonn, Paris,
London, New York and local money-mongers and holders of
moneyed privileges, while others have a content that masks the
reality of the struggle, a content that would send us into sweet
slumber murmuring to ourselves: Oh how beautiful the First
Bank of Chicago/New York Building is lying side by side with
International Life House and the Hilton all in peace and harmony
with Mathare Valley, oh our City in the sun; a content, if you
like, which sets out to persuade us that producing ten million-
aires of the sweat of ten million hungry shelterless, clothe-
less peasants and workers is development.
But from Things Fall Apart in the fifties to Petals of Blood in
the seventies, nearly all the novels, poems and plays have been
written in foreign languages: this is their one unifying factor.
To choose a language is to choose a world, once said a West
Indian thinker, and although I do not share the assumed pri-
macy of language over the world, the choice of a language al-
ready pre-determines the answer to the most important question


--- PAGE 61 ---
54 Writers in Politics
for producers of imaginative literature: For whom do I write?
Who is my audience? If you write in a foreign language, French
for instance, you can only reach a French-speaking audience;
if in English, an English-speaking audience; in practice, foreigners
and those of your people who know that foreign language. If a
Kenyan writer writes in English - no matter how radical the
content of that literature - he cannot possibly reach or directly
talk to the peasants and workers of Kenya. If a Kenyan acts a
play in English (or in French as it is now becoming the fashion)
he cannot possibly be assuming a truly Kenyan audience.
The question of audience has a bearing on the next few prob-
lems for a writer: What is the subject and content of my works?
From whose standpoint do I look at that content, whether I am
critical of the content or not? You cannot possibly write for a
peasant-worker audience (or perform) the same things in the
same way as you would for the parasitic jet set in Africa. The
bourgeois class wants a literature that titillates the senses, that
makes them pass through Mathare Valley without seeing it.
For them sex and more sex is the answer; or else, absurd little
sugary, musical left-overs from abroad which are so fashionable
in Kenyan theatres: bartered pride for peace of mind over a
glass of whisky? Tell this class that their water is taken from the
mouth of the thirsty, their clothes from bodies of naked chil-
dren, awaken them from their sweet self-deceitful slumbers, and
you might find yourself in a maximum security prison. On the
other hand, if you write in a language understood by peasants
and workers (and thus assuming them as the audience), you'll
have to search your literary conscience whether to correctly
reflect their lives or not; whether to tell them their poverty is
God-ordained or man-conditioned and therefore to be fought.
The position of the African writer who has chosen total
dependence on, and literary enslavement to, foreign languages
and who at the same time wants to speak to a national audience,
can be compared to that of the following characters that I have
met, one in Limuru, and the others in Nakuru.
In 1966, a girl from my village, Kamiriithii, in Limuru, went
to England to train as a nurse. She was about twenty. She stayed
in England for two years. When she returned to our village, she
spoke to the crowd of peasants who had gathered to welcome
her through an interpreter. Rumour went that even to her
parents she could only communicate through an interpreter.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Return to the Roots 55
A two-year stay in England had apparently wiped out her
twenty years' knowledge of her mother tongue.
A few years back I went to visit a friend at Nakuru. That was
before Nakuru became so famous in contemporary Kenya's
political vocabulary. A man and his wife and their seven year
old daughter joined us on the verandah. I knew the man and his
wife because they and I were once students at Makerere and were
active in anti-colonial activities. The following scene unfolds:
Mother goads daughter to speak. Daughter speaks in English.
Mother then urges daughter to read a book. She obliges with an
English book: I think Winnie the Pooh or something. I make the
mistake of speaking to daughter in Cikiiyii. Daughter answers
with a stream of incomprehensible words. Mother laughs with
pride. Then she puts on a very sad face: 'Children of these days!
They don't know our native tongues. Only English, English air
the time, so different from our times, don't you think?'
You could see that mother and father were really proud not
only that their daughter could speak English with an upper class
English accent, but that she could also not speak Cikiiyii at all.
Thus ignorance of the language of her own nationality, instead
of being a matter for personal shame and discomfort became a
thing for positive pride.
Faced with accusations that he has abandoned his national
languages for foreign languages, the African writer has oscillated}
between the position of the girl-nurse and that of the mother
and child. '
Let me give a few concrete examples: In 1963 a Nigerian
critic, Obi Wali, wrote an article for Transition magazine in
which he argued that African literature as then understood and
practised was merely a minor appendage in the mainstream of
European literature:
The whole uncritical acceptance of English and French as
the inevitable medium of educated African writing is mis-
directed and has no chance of advancing African literature
and culture. In other words, until these writers and their
western midwives accept the fact that any true African
literature must be written in African languages, they would
be merely pursuing a dead end, which can only lead to
sterility, uncreativity, and frustration ... (African litera-
ture lacks any blood and stamina) because it is severely


--- PAGE 63 ---
56 Writers in Politics
limited to the European-orientated few college graduates
in the new universities of Africa, steeped as they are in
European literature and culture.
The ordinary local audience with little or no education
in the conventional European manner and who constitute
an overwhelming majority has no chance of participating
in this kind of literature.'
This article aroused a lot of wrath from African writers: Wole
Soyinka, who currently is advocating Swahili as a continental
language, disdainfully demanded to know 'what Obe Wali has
done to translate my plays or others into Ibo or whatever
language he professes to speak." Chinua Achebe was later to
write defiantly that he had been 'given the language and I in-
tend to use it'.
Ezekiel Mphahlele, for a long time regarded as a leading critic
of African literature, was even more forthright in his total em-
brace of the English language, in fact ascribing to it mystical
political powers:
English and French have become the common languages
with which to present a nationalistic front against white
oppressors. Where the white man has already retreated as
in the independent states, these two languages are still a
unifying force,"
Turning to South Africa, Mphahlele criticized the fascist
regime for encouraging 'vernacular' languages:
... the (S.A.) government has decreed that the African
languages shall be used as the medium of instruction right
up to secondary schools. The aim is obviously to arrest the
black man's education because the previous systems where-
by English was the medium for the first six years of pri-
mary education produced a strong educated class that has
in turn given us a sophisticated class of political leaders
and a sophisticated following - a real threat to white
supremacy.'
Mphahlele could not see that the South African government did
not want English, not because of any mystical political qualities


--- PAGE 64 ---
Return to the Roots 57
inherent in the language, but because of the uncensored wide ,
range of reading material readily available in that language. With
the government control of publishing houses in African lan-
guages the government hoped to control the content of what
people would read in those languages. For Mphahlele, English
was politically superior to African languages. The sophisticated
leadership that he talked about had to wait for SOWETO school-
children to show them the correct path of resistance to fascism.
The position of MphahIele has been echoed by Professor Ali
Mazrui in all his writings on the English language. In his book
Cultural Engineering and Nation Building in East Africa" for
instance, he tends to argue that it was English language, English
literature, and English culture in that order that created nation-
alism in East Africa.
Another African writer Taban 10 Liyong, in his book The
Last Word? tells us that since his father was opposed to Taban
talking English at university, Taban 10Liyong was very happy
when he received news of his father's death: he could now study
English in freedom.
And finally I can remember I myself, in 1965 or 1966 in
the deepest ignorance of my colonial education, writing a talk
on English as a second language for the BBe European language
programme, in which I outlined the advantages of writing in
English as opposed to writing in African languages. One of the
reasons I gave was that English had a large vocabulary!
Thus the position of most African writers is not very different
from that of foreign critics like Gerald Moore for instance, who
once commended the creative intelligence of Africans for choos-
ing the English language as the medium of their literary produc-
tion. His book on African literature was appropriately titled:
The Chosen Tongue." meant of course to echo the Biblical
notion of the chosen people. The English language was thus
seen as the God chosen tongue in the same way as the Israelites
saw themselves as the God chosen race on earth.
The major failing in Obi Wali's article was its ignoring the
issue of imperialism. He could not see, or if he did he failed to
stress the point, that the root cause of the African writer's
predicament was historically explainable in terms of the colonial!
racist encirclement and brutal suppression atAfrican languages
and cultures; that the African writer was himself part of the
petty-bourgeois class which had completely' imbibed, or had


--- PAGE 65 ---
58 Writers in Politics
been made to imbibe, western bourgeois education and cultures
and the world outlook these carried; a petty-bourgeois class
which, if and when it saw the necessity of rebellion, tended to
see that rebellion only within the same inherited tradition of
language and culture.
I do not of course want to suggest that the writers I have
quoted above still cling to the same views on national and foreign
languages. They may, in fact, have changed their positions. I
certainly have changed mine.
But the fact still remains that none of the African writers
were able to satisfactorily answer Obi Wali's challenge, because
the only way in which they could have meaningfully met the
challenge was through a conscious deliberate rejection of their
class base, and their total identification with the position of
peasants and workers in their struggle against exploitation by
an alliance of the imperialist bourgeoisie and the comprador
bourgeoisie to end all forms of exploitation, oppression and
domination. They would then have had to put all their intel-
lectual resources into the service of the peasant/worker struggles
not by haranguing the ruling class, appealing if you like to its
conscience, but by giving correct images of the struggle for the
direct consumption of the only alliance that matters in Africa's
historic struggle for its dignity; the alliance of workers and
peasants.
Instead, the petty-bourgeois African writers heaped one in-
dignity upon another on the African peasant and worker
characters necessitated by the very choice of language and audi-
ence. Often the African peasant characters were made to appear
naive and simple-minded because of the kind of simplistic,
distorted foreign languages through which they were made to
articulate their feelings and world outlook. More often the
peasant/worker characters were given the vacillating mentality
and pessimistic world outlook of the petty hourgeois. But the
final indignity was that even where the peasant/worker charac-
ters were given their due in terms of dignity and world outlook,
they were made to express these awkwardly in foreign languages.
Thus the tongues of millions of peasants were mutilated in the
works of African writers, and in their stead the peasants were
given plastic surgery in the literary laboratories of Africa and
emerged with English, French andt Portuguese tongues. The
final indignity consisted precisely in this death wish for an
J.


--- PAGE 66 ---
Return to the Roots 59
African-language speaking peasantry and working class and the
literary creation of a foreign-language speaking peasantry and
working class.
I do not wish of course to ascribe any mystical qualities to
the mere fact of writing in African languages without regard
to content and form. But the questions Obi Wali posed about
peasant/worker audiences as the strongest source of stamina
and blood for African literature isbasic and primary, and Kenyan
writers in particular must meet the challenge of language choice
and audience before we can meaningfully talk of a national
literature and a national theatre as two of the most important
roots of a modern Kenyan national culture.
What in fact has so far been produced by Kenyan writers in
English is not African literature at all. It is!tf!_fL:!iq:!cf2..~Jj!f!!_a_~l!~f!.!
part of that body of literature produced by African writers in
foreign languages like French, Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, that
we should correctly term: Afro-European literature.
Kenyan national literature should mostly be produced in the
languages of the various nationalities that make up modern
Kenya. Kenyan national literature can only get its stamina and
blood by utilizing the rich national traditions of culture and
history carried by the languages of all the Kenyan nationalities.
In other words, Kenyan national literature can only grow and
thrive if it reaches for its roots in the rich languages, cultures
and history of the Kenyan peasant masses who are the majority
class in each of the Kenya's several nationalities.
Let me, for amoment dwell on this: a language, any language,
has its social base in a people's production of their material
life - in the practical activity of human beings co-operating and
communicating in labour to wrestle with nature to procure their
material means of life - food, clothing and shelter. Language as
a system of verbal signposts is a product of a people communi-
cating in labour, that is their production, exchange and distri-
bution of wealth. Languages arise historically as a social need.
But over time, a particular system of verbal signposts comes
to reflect a given people's historical consciousness of their twin
struggles over nature and over the social product. Their language -,
becomes the memory-bank of their collective struggles over a
period of time. Language thus comes to embody both con---
tinuity and change in that historical consciousness. It is this
aspect of language, as a collective memory-bank of a given


--- PAGE 67 ---
60 Writers in Politics
people, which has made some people ascribe mystical independ-
ence to language. It is the same aspect which has made nations
and peoples take up arms to prevent a total annihilation or
assimilation of their languages, because it is tantamount to
annihilating that people's collective memory-bank of past
achievements and failures which form the basis of their common
identity. It is like uprooting that community from history.
History is nothing but the succession of the separate gener-
ations, each of which exploits the materials, the capital
funds, the productive forces handed down to it by all
preceeding generations, and thus, on the one hand, con-
tinues the traditional activity in completely changed
circumstances, and on the other, modifies the old circum-
stances with a completely changed activity. (Karl Marx)."
Language is both a product of that succession of the separate
generations, as well asbeing a banker of the way of life - culture
- reflecting those modifications of collective experience in pro-
duction. Literature as a process of thinking in images utilizes
language and draws upon the collective experience - history -
embodied in that language. In writing one should hear all the
whispering, and the shouting and crying and the loving and the
hating of the many voices in the past and those voices will
never speak to a writer in a foreign language.
For we Kenyan writers can no longer avoid the question:
Whose language and history will our literature draw upon?
Foreign languages and the history and cultures carried by those
languages? Or national languages - Dholuo, Kiswahili, Gikiiyii,
Luluhya, Kikamba, Kimasai, Kigiriama, etc., - and the histories
and cultures carried by those languages?
The questions bring us back to the issue of audience. If a
Kenyan writer wants to speak to the peasants and workers
then he should write in the languages they speak; i.e. in the
languages of the Kenyan nationalities or in the all-Kenya
national language which is Kiswahili. If, on the other hand, he
wants to communicate with foreigners and those that speak the
foreign tongues, he must use foreign languages like English,
French and German. If a Kenyan writer wants to be part of the
Kenya national main stream, seeking inspiration and strength
from the many national voice~ past and present, then he should


--- PAGE 68 ---
Return to the Roots 61
utilize national languages. But if he wants to be part of a
foreign main stream seeking inspiration and strength from foreign
voices, then he should use foreign languages. In making their
choice, Kenyan writers should remember that the struggle of
Kenyan national languages against domination by foreign
languages is part of the wider historical struggle of the Kenyan
national culture against imperialist domination.
In a very informative paper entitled Language and Politics in
Kenya, Dr Karega Mutahi has pointed out that between 1900
and 1940, the British colonial government in Kenya was broadly
hostile to many Kenyans learning English because of the same
kind of fear, as we noted in the case of South African fascist
regime, that some radical progressive literature, and especially
anti-imperialist communist literature available in English, might
be accessible to Kenyans. But by 1950, the need to consciously
create and foster a native bourgeois class with British imperialist
bourgeois values to cater for British interests in the future
Kenya had outweighed the other fear of easy accessibility of
radical anti-imperialist literature, and it was decided that English
should be taught at the expense of Kiswahili. I quote Mutahi:
The political unity of denying English to Africans had
ceased to exist. Politically the situation demanded that
Africans be taught the language. Reasons for this sudden
change can be found in a speech given by the Governor
Sir Phillip Mitchell in Nairobi in 1954. He said: ... what
we have set our hands here is the establishment of a
civilized state in which the values and standards are to be
the values and the standards of Britain, in which everyone
whatever his origins, has an interest and a part. The wildest
naked man in Turkana has an investment in it, although
apart from the security he now enjoys, it may be a remotely
maturing one ....
From the above it is obvious that in establishing British
values and standards in Kenya, African elites were needed.
It was only with such an elite class that those values could
be entrenched in this country. The teaching of English to
Africans must be seen as a process of safeguarding Euro-
pean interests in Kenya. This was to be done by making
sure that these Africans had the same views and culture as
their colonial masters.'?


--- PAGE 69 ---
62 Writers in Politics
It is therefore not accidental that at the same time as the
English language was being used as a tool to forge bourgeois
unity in Kenya, other cultural institutions for spreading British
imperialist interests were started: the Outward Bound Move-
ment to school Kenyans in a British Scout mountaineering
mentality; cinemas like Theatre Royal, Capitol, Empire, and
playhouse cinemas run by Sir Ernest Vasey's New Theatres Ltd.,
to show British films; the Nairobi Musical Society and the East
African Conservatoire of Music given land to promote British
and western music in Kenya; the British Forces' Broadcasting
Unit of the then cable and wireless studios at Kabete organized
entertainment by and for Africans under the direction of Peter
Colmore and the settler leader, Michael Blundell.
But one of the most important institutions was the theatre.
The Donovon Maule Theatre Ltd., was started in 1948 in
Nairobi; the Kenya National Theatre was built in 1952 with
the then Governor Sir Phillip Mitchell as one of the directors
of the governing council; the Little Theatre Club was started in
Mombasa in 1952; and similar amateur theatre clubs were
started all over Kenya, in Nakuru and Eldoret for instance.
All these were meant to promote British, English language
theatre in Kenya. This British imperialist cultural offensive in
Kenya, consciously and deliberately launched in the 1950s at
the same time as the outbreak of Mau Mau war of national
independence, continues unabated to the present time.
If you are in doubt, you only have to open the pages of any
Kenyan newspaper on the entertainment pages to see what
theatre the foreign groups who have controlled the so-called
Kenyan National Theatre since its inception in 1952 are showing
there, seventeen full years after independence. It is all foreign
theatre glorifying the deeds of foreigners. Oklahoma; The
Bartered Bride; The King and I; Why Not Stay for Breakfast?
and other theatrical activities in the same vein. What have these
to do with struggles in Kenya? Everything. For they are part of
the imperialist culture suppressing Kenyan national cultures.
Lest we forget, only as recently as 1975 was Annabel Maule
made a Member of the British Empire for promoting British
theatre in Kenya since 1948. Again, you have only to open
the same pages and read the theatre arts column to see some
of these racist foreign critics calling Kenyan patriots like Dedan
Kimathi terrorists, and praising to the sky plays that depict


--- PAGE 70 ---
Return to the Roots 63
the likes of Kirnathi as sex-motivated, senseless terrorists.
For such critics, any play that does not say anything about
colonial oppression is good: any play that is anti-imperialist
is bad theatre. Do you think that all this is an accident? No.
It is part of a great cultural military design against the minds
and hearts of Kenyans.
At the same time as the English language was being en-
couraged and the British bourgeois culture carried by that
language was being promoted, Kenyan national languages were
being actively discouraged and the progressive culture they
carried, actively suppressed.
According to Dr Karega Miitahi in the paper quoted above,
African languages either during the colonial presence or during
independence have never been given more than lip service. Some
have never been reduced to writing. During the colonial presence
between 1900 and 1963, some of these languages were taught
for the first four years of primary education to meet the needs
of missionaries (to be able to read the Bible) and to be able to
read colonial instructions. But after independence, even this
little tribute to Kenyan languages was dropped by the English-
speaking bourgeois class that had received the flag from the
British imperialist bourgeoisie.
Again between 1909 and 1940, Kiswahili was widely taught
in Kenya both as a subject and as a medium of instruction. But
after 1949 Kiswahili, the all-Kenya working-class and national
language, 'was to be dropped out of all rural schools' (Miitahi).
This oppression of Kenyan languages during colonial and
post-colonial times went hand in hand with suppression of the
cultures of the various nationalities. For instance, in Central
Province the big Ituika cultural festival of dances, songs, and
poems, and instrumental music was banned. Again during the
same British colonial presence, the only poems and songs ever
banned were those composed in Kenyan languages. Some well
known examples were the Miithzrzgii dance and song in the
1930s, and the Mau Mau patriotic literature in the 1950s.
Newspapers written in Kenyan languages and carrying pro-
Kenyan patriotic news and news interpretation, likeMiimenyereri
were banned. Books, like Jomo Kenyatta's Kenya Biiriiri wa
Ngiii, written in Kenyan languages for the direct consumption
by Kenyan peasants and workers, were banned. In other words,
any and every progressive anti-imperialist literature, oral or


--- PAGE 71 ---
64 Writers in Politics
written, in Kenyan languages has always been banned. It is a
sad commentary in our post-independence cultural situation
that following in the footsteps of the colonial practices as out-
lined above, the only literature suppressed by our independent
Kenyan government was the very first major modern theatrical
effort in a Kenyan language. I am referring to the refusal by the
Kenya government to licence the peasants and workers of
Limuru to continue the public performance of Ngaahika Ndeenda
by Nglig'l wa Thiong'o and Ngug'l wa Mi'rTIat Kamirfirhii Com-
munity Education and Cultural Centre in November 1977, and
the subsequent detention of one of the authors. Recently, July
1979, the girls at Riara Secondary School, Kiambu wrote and
performed a play Th7 [no Ihaana At7a Andii Aitii, (What a
World) in Gikiiyii depicting the plight of a plantation worker
who has to live on 300 hundred shillings a month. The school
was raided by the secret police and the teacher in charge was
closely questioned. To the best of my knowledge, not a single
book, poem, play, even the most racist and pro-imperialist, in
English or any foreign language has ever been stopped in Kenya.
Today while the comprador ruling class in Kenya is busy
suppressing Kenyan languages and patriotic Kenyan theatre in
Kenyan languages, the foreign imperialist embassies have in-
tensified their foreign languages programmes, their foreign
language theatre programmes, and their foreign language cinema
programmes, as well as providing Kenya, as part of their Techni-
cal Aid Programmes, with 'free' language teachers to take charge
of foreign language programmes in Kenyan schools and colleges.
Even Brazil has 'donated' for 'free' a Brazilian professor to
teach Brazilian Portuguese.
Thus in making their choice, Kenyan writers should remember
not only the above historical, cultural struggle between the
national and the foreign, but also the following words from
Shabaan Roberts:
~ a juuya lug~~, kitabu hi~i chan~ husema katika. s~~iri
JIngme kuwa nn la mama litamu lmgawa la mbwa, lingine
halishi tamu. Hii ni kweli tupu. Watu wasio na lugha ya
asili, kadiri walivyo wastaarabu, cheo chao ni cha pili
dunia - dunia ya cheo _u
And lastly in making their choices, Kenyan writers should


--- PAGE 72 ---
Return to the Roots 65
remember that no foreigners can ever develop our languages,
our literatures, our theatre for us: that we in tum cannot develop
our cultures and literatures through borrowed tongues and
imitations.
Only by a return to the roots of our being in the languages
and cultures and heroic histories of the Kenyan people can we
rise up to the challenge of helping in the creation of a Kenyan
patriotic national literature and culture that will be the envy of
many foreigners and the pride of Kenyans. Titi la mama litamu
lingawa la mbwa, lingine halishi tamu.
Notes
1. Speech read at the Kenya Press Club, Nairobi, on 17 July 1979.
2. Obi Wali, 'The Dead End of African Literature', Transition, 10, 1963.
3. Wole Soyinka, letter to the Editor, Transition, 11,1963.
4. Ezekiel Mphahlele, letter to the Editor, Transition, 11, 1963.
5. ibid.
6. Ali Mazrui, Cultural Engineering and Nation Building in East Africa,
(Evanston, Northwestern Press, 1972). See also his other books such
as The Anglo-African Commonwealth, or The African Condition
(London, Heinemann, 1980).
7. Taban 10 Liyong, The Last Word (Nairobi: East African Publishing
House, 1969). See particularly the opening essay, 'My Father'.
8. Gerald Moore, The Chosen Tongue (Harlow, Longman).
9. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology.
10. Taken from Mutahi's unpublished paper.
11. ShabaanRoberts,Masomo YenyeAdili, 1967,p.l03.


--- PAGE 73 ---
PostscripttoPartI
On Civilization1
..............................................~
Civilization, like so many words in common usage, is really a
complex phenomenon with different meanings and connotations
for different nations and classes. But broadly it refers to a state
of bringing nature under human control. It is therefore not a
uniform process identical for all people at all times.
In other words, civilization is not a static state. Different
people have had different civilizations. Civilizations do rise and
fall, do in fact change, even for the same nations and races.
There are two very important struggles in the life of man: the
struggle with nature; and the struggle with other men for the
control of the material produced from the struggle with nature.
When man lived completely at the mercy of nature (of which
he is a part) he cannot be described as having been civilized. But
when man joined hands with other men and started taming
nature and in the process developed tools for the conquest of
nature, he was making the first steps towards civilization. In
other words, human labour, co-operative human labour that is,
is basic to the process of civilization. In the process of conquer-
ing nature through co-operative labour, man also created a social
environment, or a social nature. If man is not a slave to natural
nature (or the natural environment) he is not civilized. But it is
equally true that if a man is a slave to social nature (social en-
vironment) he cannot be said to be civilized.
We can now narrow down the concept. Civilization refers to
recognizable historical high points or landmarks in man's struggle
to bring both the natural order and social nature under human
co-operative control.
Ngugz wa Tbiong'o in answer to a listener's question on BBe
Africa programme, July 1979.


--- PAGE 74 ---
On Civilization 67
Seen in this light, there has not been as yet any truly human
civilization. For instance, today America has reached hitherto un-
dreamt of heights in the conquest of nature through a fantastic
development of instruments of labour (i.e. technology). But
America is today a man-eats-man society. In the realm of
social nature, America is still in a state of social cannibalism. It ~...
eats its own children and the children of other lands especially
of Africa, Latin America and Asia. What I have said of America .:
is generally true of what has been called western civilization.
Some African civilizations had not developed the conquest of
nature to a very high degree; but they had developed to a high
degree their control of social nature.
No civilization has so far been built on the basis of blind
imitation of other people. We, in Africa, do not have to imitate
other people's languages, other people's mannerisms, other
people's cultures, in order to be civilized. We must, in fact,
build on our national languages and national cultures, and on
our own co-operative labour.
Because no civilization has as yet been a truly complete
human civilization, we must all strive for that human civilization
which ensures adequate clothing, shelter and food for everyone;
that civilization which ensures that all the benefits of modern
science and the arts are available to everyone; that civilization
which ensures the end of social cannibalism on earth.
In concrete terms this means a strenuous struggle against
imperialism and its class allies in Africa, Latin America and
Asia. To struggle against imperialism and its comprador allies
is to struggle for a truly human civilization.


--- PAGE 75 ---
PART2
Writersin Politics


--- PAGE 76 ---
6 WritersIn Politics'
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
We cannot pose the problem of native culture without at the
same time posing the problem of colonialism for all native
cultures today are developing under the peculiar influence
of the colonial, semi-colonial and para-colonial situations.
Aime Cesaire
There is a dramatic poem of L. S. Senghor in which a white man
is so overwhelmed by Chaka's power and mastery over language
that he exclaims: 'my word Chaka ... you are a poet ... a
politician. '
The poet and the politician have certainly many things in
common. Both trade in words. Both are created by the same
reality of the world around us. Their activity and concern have
the same subject and object: human beings and human relation-
ships. Imaginative literature in so far as it deals with human
relationships and attempts to influence a people's conscious-
ness and politics, in so far as it deals with and is about operation
of power and relationship of power in society, are reflected in
one another, and can and do act on one another.
There is no area of our lives including the very boundaries of
our imagination which is not affected by the way that society is
organized, by the whole operation and machinery of power:
how and by whom that power has been achieved; which class
controls and maintains it; and the ends to which the power is
put. The class in power, for instance, controls not only the pro-
ductive forces of the community - what is produced, how it is
produced and how it is shared out - but cultural development as
well. The means of life, and how they are produced, exchanged
and shared out and the social institutions that the whole process


--- PAGE 77 ---
72 Writers in Politics
gives rise to do move men, do profoundly affect the very quality
of their lives: how they eat, laugh, play, woo and even make
love. This universe - of moral significance of values and the
quality of human life - is what imaginative literature is about.
This universe is itself both a product and a reflection of the
material process of living. Literature and politics are about
living men, actual men and women and children, breathing,
eating, crying, laughing, creating, dying, growing, men in history
of which they are its products and makers.
The way power in society is organized can affect writers and
their writing in three ways:
The writer as a human being is himself a product of history,
of time and place. As a member of society, he belongs to a
certain class and he is inevitably a participant in the class
struggle of his times. As a writer in a given society, it does make
a difference whether he is allowed to write or not; whether
what he writes is controlled or not; and whether he is espousing
this or that class outlook.
A writer's subject matter is history: i.e. the process of man
acting on nature and changing it and in so doing acting on
and changing himself. The entire changing relations of produc-
tion and hence the changing power relations consequent on
mutable modes of production is a whole territory of a writer's
literary concern. Politics is hence part and parcel of this literary
territory.
The product of a writer's imaginative involvement - what
Shakespeare called mirror unto nature - becomes a reflection
of society: its economic structure, its class formation, its con-
flicts and contradictions; its class power political and cultural
struggles; its structure of values - the conflict and tensions
arising from the antagonism between those which are dying and
those which are pointing to the future. Hence literature has
often given us more and sharper insights into the moving spirit
of an era than all the historical and political documents treating
the same moments in a society's development. The novel in
particular, especially in its critical realist tradition, is import-
ant in that respect: it pulls apart and it puts together; it is both
analytic and synthetic.
The relationship between the poet and politician, or between
writers and politics, is particularly important in our situation
where our cultures - our literature, music, songs, dances - are


--- PAGE 78 ---
Writers in Politics 73
developing under the strangulating embrace of western indus-
trial and finance monopoly capital and the fierce struggles of
our people for breath even. The embrace of western imperialism
led by America's finance capitalism is total [economic, political,
cultural]: and of necessity our struggles against it must be
total. Literature and writers cannot be exempted from the
battlefield.
In Africa the relationship has taken various forms. Often the
writer and the politician have been the same person. In the very
process of articulating a people's collective consciousness, the
writer is led into active political struggles. Leopold Sedar Senghor
is a case in point. Or the politician steeped in active political
struggle takes up the pen as a necessary and a most important
adjunct to his involvement. Agostinho Net02 is an outstanding
poet and politician. For him the gun, the pen, and the platform
have served the same ends: the total liberation of Angola. But
whether actively involved in political struggle or not, many
African writers have often found that the very subject-matter
of their poems and stories has placed them on the wrong side
of the ruling cliques. Most South African writers - Dennis
Brutus, Ezekiel Mphahlele, Bloke Modisane, Alex la Guma,
Mazisi Kunene, Lewis Nkosi - are. now in exile, while those
who remained, like Can Themba, were slowly strangled to death
by the racist atmosphere and system of violent repression. Their
books, need I say, have all been banned, and this is not surprising
in a nervous fascist outpost of western imperialism and mono-
poly capital that bans Black Beauty, the story of ahorse, because
it might carry the implication of black being beautiful.
Even where the writer has not ordinarily been actively im-
mersed in politics, i.e. in a situation where the writer does not
consciously see himself in terms of political activism either as an
individual citizen or in the subject matter of his literary concern,
he may well find himself suddenly involved in the hot political
power struggles of the day. Christopher Okigbo who once re-
marked that he wrote his poems for poets only and that anyway
he would rather have lived fully than write, died for the Biafran
secessionist cause. The others - Chinua Achebe, Gabriel Okara,
Cyprian Ekwensi - who in an earlier decade of optimism had
put African literature on the world map were all active in Biafran
politics. The involvement was what prompted Achebe to write
thus in 1969:


--- PAGE 79 ---
74 Writers in Politics
It is clear to me that an African creative writer who tries to
avoid the big social and political issues of the contemporary
Africa will end up being completely irrelevant like that
absurd man in the proverb who leaves his house burning to
pursue a rat fleeing from the flames.'
A very apt image that dismisses the case for non-involvement art
for art's sake approach to the writing of literature.
But while I agree with Chinua Achebe, there is a sense in
which no writer of imaginative literature from the very best to
the moderately significant can really avoid the big issues of the
day, for literature to the extent that it is a mirror unto man's
nature must reflect social reality or certain aspects of social
reality. How beautifully we get from Shakespeare, Marlowe,
Jonson, Rabelais a feel of sixteenth century English and French
societies: the emerging empirical spirit, the bourgeois individual-
ism, the mercantile capitalist spirit struggling against feudalism
for the freedom to move and conquer the seas, to colonize and
christianize natives, crying in the same breath: my God, my
Gold; my Gold my God. Unforgettable too is the frenzy, the
trembling rage of the characters in nineteenth century Russian
fiction reflecting the volcanic rumblings of the peasants' and
the workers' struggle against tsarist feudalism and capitalism
that later ushered a new socialist order in the world. On the
other hand Jane Austen is often criticized and accused of in-
sulating herself from the big upheavals of her day - but even
she unwittingly gives a wonderful picture of a leisurely para-
sitic landed middle class in eighteenth century England. Or
Emily Bronte isolating herself in the Yorkshire moors, setting
her novel Wuthering Heights in the same moors, amidst the
local howling wind and rainstorms, but giving us a most incisive
examination of the limiting repressive and oppressive ethical
values of an industrial bourgeois class with all its suffocating
comforts derived from the exploitation of the working class
and the people of the colonies.
But Chinua Achebe is more right in the basic sense of rele-
vance, concern and the commitment of literature to society.
What is important is not only the writer's honesty and faith-
fulness in capturing and reflecting the struggles around him, but
also his attitude to those big social and political issues. It is not
simply a matter of a writer's heroic stand as a social individual


--- PAGE 80 ---
Writers in Politics 75
- though this is crucial and significant - but the attitudes and
the world view embodied in his work and with which he is
persuading us to identify vis-a-visthe historical drama his com-
munity is undergoing. What we are talking about is whether or
not a writer's imaginative leap to grasp reality is aimed at help-
ing in the community's struggle for a certain quality of life free
from all parasitic exploitative relations - the relevance of litera-
ture in our daily struggle for the right and security to bread,
shelter, clothes and song, the right of a people to the products
of their own sweat. The extent to which the writer can and will
help in not only explaining the world but in changing it will
depend on his appreciation of the classes and values that are
struggling for a new order, a new society, a more human future,
and which classes and values are hindering the birth of the new
and the hopeful. And of course it depends on which side he is
in these classstruggles of his times.
There are however two types of writers defined by their atti-
tudes to society. There are those who assume that a society is
basically static and stable either because they live in a period
when society is generally assumed to be stable or because
cocooned in their class or being prisoners of the propaganda of
the dominant class become insensitive to basic structural con-
flicts. English novelists like George Eliot in the nineteenth
century tend to assume such a stability of the basic static
structure. Her world is vast, the issues she is dealing with are
wide, but the intellectual and moral conflicts do not arise out of
an awareness of a changing world - a world consistently in
motion, always in the process of transforming itself from one
form to another, and hence giving rise to new class alignments
and possibilities of new social orders. What interests such
writers is just the moral conduct of their characters whatever
their class, race or religious origins. Such writers have often an
ideal of conduct or human type to which the different charac-
ters approximate with differing degrees of success and failure.
At their best, these writers can and do produce a literature of
sharp social criticism. But such an attitude to society, such an
abstraction of human types and moral ideals from their basis
in the class structure and class struggle, often gives rise to a
literature distinguished for its shallow dive into society and
only redeemed from oblivion by those of our critics who have
no other critical tools apart from the worn and meaningless


--- PAGE 81 ---
76 Writers in Politics
phrases like 'human compassion' 'timeless and universal' etc.
Haven't we heard critics who demand of African writers that
they stop writing about colonialism, race, colour, exploitation,
and simply write about human beings? Such an attitude to
society is often the basis of some European writers' mania for
man without history - solitary and free - with unexplainable
despair and anguish and death as the ultimate truth about the
human condition.
But other writers, either because of the nature of the period
in which they live, or because of their instinctive or conscious
dialectical approach to life and society do not assume a static
stability. The very conduct of their characters is firmly rooted
in history and changing social conditions. Being aware of a
changing world, great writers like Aesychlus, Shakespeare,
Tolstoy, Conrad, Sholokhov, Chinua Achebe, place conflicts
between peoples in differing classes with their differing and
often antagonistic conceptions of world order: of who holds,
who should hold power, the ends toward which the power is
put, and of the possibilities of a new social order from the
womb of the old. The tragic dilemma of Okonkwo and Ezeulu
is so profound and encompassing because at the basis of their
conduct and decisions are two world orders in irreconcilable
conflict: Okonkwo's world of emergent feudalism based on
family and partly slave labour and that European colonial
capitalism and imperialism based on racism and ruthless ex-
ploitation of African labour power by European capital. The
old classes and social, economic and political order and its entire
value structure is challenged by new classes and a new structure
of values. In Joseph Conrad's novel Nostromo set in a fictional
Latin American republic the issues are not the simplistic ones
of a Christian morality and that of America's Wild West -
absolute good (God) versus absolute evil (satan). Here in this
Latin American republic where British and American mining
interests hold power there is not universal-once-for-all-time
ideals of conduct to which people conform or fail to conform.
Here morality, religion, ethics are rooted in class: we can only
adequately evaluate the characters' conduct and alienation by
recognizing the historical, economic, class and racial basis of
the conflicting moralities and outlooks. Here, as in Achebe's
Nigeria, is no metaphysical evil versus metaphysical good.
Imperialism and the exploitation of the labour power and the


--- PAGE 82 ---
Writers in Politics 77
natural resources of the colonized peoples by international
monopoly capital is at the root of the problems. Hence Conrad's
images of coal, ivory, silver that abound in his novels.
The African writer and Joseph Conrad share the same world
and that is why Conrad's world is so familiar. Both have lived
in a world dominated by imperialism. They have known Hola
camps, My Lai, Algiers, Sharpeville, the Arab mother and
child driven from Palestine. They have seen the bowels of
pregnant mothers ripped open; they have witnessed the artistic
finesse of the colonial mercenary hewing the bodies of strug-
gling peasants and workers as carcasses fit for the God of
profit. They have seen the workings of justice in a social system
whose base is capitalism so well described by Shakespeare
in King Lear:
... Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.
They have witnessed mercenaries, coup d'etats, and they know
that Macbeth's bloody dagger is not a figment of imagination
from heated brains of starry-eyed idealists. Have they not seen
imperialist dogs of war and oppression bathe in blood of the
people in neo-colonial regimes and crying out in glee:
How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over,
In states unborn and accents yet unknown.
Theirs is a world in which societies are demonstrably changing
much of the time with the proletariat and the poor peasants
with a section of the petty bourgeoisie and the lumpenproletariat
struggling against a combination of local big business and
foreign business interests and against the political and cultural
system protecting the status quo. The economic, political and
cultural struggle between the various classes finds itself trans-
mitted into the writers' work. The situation, especially in the
colonial era, compelled many writers into a progressive ideologi-
cal stance: they were swept off their feet as it were by the dy-
namic force and vision of atotal national liberation. Hence much
of African literature was anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist:
Much of this writing then was against a background of hope
for better and more egalitarian black organized states. But like


--- PAGE 83 ---
78 Writers in Politics
Conrad whose bourgeois position limited his vision making him,
for instance, unable to condemn British imperialism, the African
writer's petty-bourgeois position could not allow him to seethe
nature of imperialism and the need for a continuous class
struggle against it and its local comprador allies. I myself can
remember writing in 1962 how I looked forward to the day
when all the preoccupation of African writers with colonial
problems and politics would be over and we would all sit back
and poke sophisticated irony at one another and laugh at our-
selves whatever that was supposed to mean: we would then
indulge in the luxury of comedies of social manners (what a
philistine hollow bourgeois ideal!) or explore the anguished
world of lonely individuals abstracted from time and actual
circumstances.
Often we never moved beyond blackness, beyond the racial
aspect of the struggle for national liberation from colonial rule,
to see what was basic to colonial oppression: the fact that
we were part and parcel of a world-wide system of production
calledcapitalism: the fact that the colonial, political and cultural
invasion was to make conquest in the economic sphere more en-
trenched and permanent: and therefore that the African people's
anti-colonial struggle was more than a racial struggle. It was
also, and more fundamentally, a struggle against that system
that for four hundred years had devastated a continent. It was
Africa that fed capitalism from its beginnings in slavery,through
the colonial phase to the current phase of neo-colonialism with
all the intricate tubes leading from Africa to the metropolis of
the western world.
Even today the African writer has often refused to see that
values, cultures, politics and economics are all tied up together,
that we cannot call for meaningful African values without
joining in the struggle against alI the classes that feed on a
system that continues to distort those very values. We must
join the proletarian and the poor peasant struggles against the
parasitism of the comprador bourgeois, the landlords and chiefs,
the big business African classes that at the same time act in
unison and concert with foreign business interests.
The fundamental opposition in Africa today is between
imperialism and capitalism on the one hand, and national
liberation and socialism on the other: between a small class
of native 'haves' which is tied to international monopoly


--- PAGE 84 ---
Writers in Politics 79
capital and the masses of the people. Within that fundamental
antagonistic contradiction is the opposition between the urban
and the rural, between relatively highly developed pockets of
the country and others close to the stone ages. The cut-throat
competition between the emergent native bourgeoisie of the
various nationalities who try to identify their interests as the
interests of the whole ethnic group (nationality) can often
blind us to these more real, more basic contradictions which
link us to the class struggles in Asia, Latin America, Europe
and America.
Faced with these contradictions, the African writer can often
retreat into individualism, mysticism and formalism: such an
African writer who often can see the shortcomings of the neo-
colonial economies, the consequent distortion of values, the
fascism in so many neo-colonial ruling classes, is at the same
time scared of encountering socialism as an alternative social
system. He is scared of the possibility of the working class and
the peasantry controlling the productive forces and consequent-
ly of their seizure and exercise of political power as the only
route to that control of the means of production. To avoid the
two alternatives - the continuation of a neo-colonial status quo
and the violent overturning of that status quo by the masses -
he makes a cult of Africanness, of Blackism, of the dignity of
the African past, of the African approach to problems; or he
simply becomes cynical and laughs at everything equally; at
capitalism and its exploitative and oppressive social system and
at the struggles of the people for total liberation: or he may
condemn every effort and everything - gains and losses in the
struggle - in the name of abstract humanism, abstract uni-
versalism without seeing that free unfettered human intercourse
is impossible within capitalistic structures and imperialism: that
true humanism is not possible without the subjection of the
economy, of the means of production (land, industries, the
banks, etc.) to the total ownership and control by the people;
that for as long as there are classes - classes defined by where
or how the various people stand in relation to the means of pro-
duction - a truly human contact in love, joy, laughter, creative
fulfilment in labour, will never be possible. We can only talk
meaningfully of class love, class joy, class marriage, class families,
class culture.
What the African writer is called upon to do is not easy:


--- PAGE 85 ---
80 Writers in Politics
it demands of him that he recognize the global character of
imperialism and the global character or dimension of the forces
struggling against it to build a new world. He must reject,
repudiate, and negate his roots in the native bourgeoisie and
its spokesmen, and find his true creative links with the pan-
African masses over the earth in alliance with all the socialisitic
forces of the world. He must of course be very particular, very
involved in a grain of sand, but must also see the world past, I
present, and future in that grain. He must write with the vibra-
tions and tremors of the struggles of all the working people in
Africa, America, Asia and Europe behind him. Yes, he must
actively support and in his writing reflect the struggle of the
African working class and its peasant class allies for the total
liberation of their labour power. Yes, his work must show
commitment, not to abstract notions of justice and peace, but
the actual struggle of the African peoples to seize power and
hence be in a position to control all the forces of production
and hence lay the only correct basis for peace and justice.
In conclusion, I would like to single out one African writer
who exemplifies the kind of commitment that I have been
talking about. He is Sembene Ousmane, a Senegalese, and who
gave us God's Bits of Wood. Read it - an account of the Sene-
galese workers' struggle in 1948 - and you'll see how he ana-
lyzes and then synthesizes; how he is involved in the particular
without losing time, you feel that he is with the people, that it
is their fate and their eventual triumph in which he is interested.
He also wrote a poem called 'Fingers' and it illustrates the vision
informing his work:
Fingers, skilful at sculpture
At modelling figures on marble,
At translation of thoughts
Fingers that would impress,
Fingers of artists.
Fingers, thick and heavy
That dig and plough the soil
And open it up for sowing,
And move us,
Fingers of land tillers.
A finger holding a trigger
An eye intent on a target finger.
Men at the very brink


--- PAGE 86 ---
Writers in Politics 81
Of their lives,at the mercy of their finger
The finger that destroys life.
The finger of a soldier.
Across the rivers and languages
Of Europe and Asia
Of China and Africa,
Of India and the Oceans,
Let usjoin our fingers to take away
All the power of their finger
Which keeps humanity in mourning,"
Unless we as African writers embrace such a vision - a vision
anchored in the struggles of the people - we shall succumb to
self-despair, cynicism, and individualism, or else we become
mesmerized by superficial bourgeois progress which in the
words of Karl Marx has never been possible without dragging
individuals and peoples through blood and dirt, through misery
and degradation. To borrow words from the same author,
bourgeois progress resembles that hideous pagan idol who
would not drink nectar but from the skulls of the slain.
The reign of that pagan idol in Africa is doomed. African
writers must be with the people in burying the imperialist
idol and his band of white and black angels, for ever.
Notes
1. Public lecture, given in the department of literature series in October
1975.
2. Now (1976) the President of the People's Republic of Angola.
3. Chinua Achebe, 'The African Writer and the Biafran Cause', Morning
Yet on Creation Day (Heinemann, London, 1975), p. 78.
4. Sembene Ousmane, 'Fingers' quoted in Lotus Awards 1971, published
by the Permanent Bureau of Afro-Asian Writers.


--- PAGE 87 ---
7 J.M.-A Writer's Tribute',
•• •••••••••• • •••••••••• • ••••••••••••• 4••• •••••••••
I first heard of him in 1963. His book Mau Mau Detainee had
just come out. It was immediately the centre of a critical rage
and storm. The imperialist foreigners then in the offices of the
Nation Newspapers would not allow the African staff to review
it. They handled it themselves in order to smear the book and
its author and his celebration of Mau Mau resistance. The Euro-
pean bourgeois and the settler establishment in Kenya were
angry and bitter, not simply because Oxford University Press,
a pillar of the British literary publishing world, had brought out
a book on Mau Mau ,not even because Margery Perham, a liberal
doyenne of the British academic establishment had written a
favourable foreword, but because an African, a Kenyan native,
had dared to write openly and proudly about Mau Mau as a
national liberation movement. They, together with the bourgeois
brainwashed African intellectuals who later reviewed the book
in academic journals, were stunned. They did not know how to
cope with Kariiiki. How could they handle a Kenyan whom
they had not managed to cage and tame in the corridors of their
hollow colonial schools; a Kenyan who looked to his past and
to his involvement in Mau Mau, not with guilt, not with any
qualifying apologia, but with a positive glow of pride and
achievement; a Kenyan who could state that the Mau Mau oath
to liberate Kenya from sixty years of British imperialist robbery
of a people's soil and soul turned him into a man, a complete
man, restored to his humanity? Kariuki had refused to be defined
in a framework of values set by the oppressor and it was with a
contemptuous tone of triumph that he wrote of his enemies:
Lord forgive them for they know not what they are doing!
Later in 1964 I met him in his office in Nairobi, near the law
courts, the present site of the Kenyatta Conference Centre.


--- PAGE 88 ---
]. M. - A Writer's Tribute 83
He was then not only theMP for NyandaruaNorth but also leader
of the National Youth Service. I wanted to write an article on
him, the first in a projected series on people's representatives
(MPs) at work. I wanted him to give me a day when I could
follow him touring his constituency. My novel, Weep Not Child
had just been published and we talked about it. We also talked
a little about his book Mau Mau Detainee. 'Aah, but all the
money from it has gone into Income Tax,' he laughed, leaning
back on the chair. The open laughter made me feel easy and
relaxed. He told me that he was planning another book on
political revolutionary movements in eastern Europe. He men-
tioned Yugoslavia and the people's resistance movement against
the German occupation forces in the Second World War. I knew
nothing about these struggles, but I went away thinking.
My colonial university education at Makerere had blinded me
to the true nature of colonialism and imperialism. It had turned
me into a parrot and an animated puppet mouthing out phrases
prepared for me in European text-books. But Kariiiki's education
in the settled area, in the streets of political struggle with the
masses, in the universities of Manyani and other concentration
camps, had opened him out to see the link which bound the
peasants and workers of Kenya to all others struggling against
oppression and exploitation.
I never wrote the article, for I soon after resigned from the
Nation. But throughout my studies and teaching in England,
Kenya, Uganda, America and back in Kenya in 1972, I kept on
following Kariiiki's activities, speeches and writings with keen
interest. For here was a writer and a critic raising issues which
were troubling me as a writer: neo-colonialism, imperialism,
the rise of an African ruling class of wealthy people, the insulted
and humiliated majority of Kenyan people, the need and the
necessity for unity among the peasants and workers from the
ocean to the lake. I wanted to meet him again or hear him
talk. But he was never allowed a political gathering. So when in
1973 I heard that he would speak at the United Kenya Club, I
rushed there. He talked about many things from tourism, to the
question of land, to the problem of Palestine. He kept his
audience good-humoured and laughing with him. He had the
pleasant touch of making an audience relax and be with him. I
was not satisfied with one or two things he said about the
Palestinian struggle and I waited for him outside the club. He


--- PAGE 89 ---
84 Write~ in Politics
saw me: 'Oh, when did you come back from America?' I was
surprised that he could remember me, and more that he could
recall our encounter in 1964. 'You never came back,' he said.
I voiced my disagreement with his taking a neutral position be-
tween Israel's Zionist aggression and the Palestinian struggle A
thought he should have come down firmly on the side of the
Palestinian struggle which was basically anti-colonial and anti-
imperialist. Israel and South Africa after all were in identical
positions as creations of western American imperialism. He said:
'Why don't you give me a ring so we can have time to discuss
this?' I somehow never went, though I kept on saying to myself
that there was always time. I would ask him about that book on
revolutions in Eastern Europe.
Today as I write this, I know I shall never have an answer
from his mouth. They are burying his body in Gilgil. But I
also know in a sense more deep than words can tell that on
Sunday, 2 March 1975, he wrote one of the most important
chapters in the Kenyan people's continuing struggle for a
meaningful national liberation from external and internal
exploitation and oppression and signed it with his blood.
Mau Mau Detainee was the earlier chapter in that national
quest for a social system in which no African child would go
hungry, go without adequate shelter, go without school, go
without a job - a system in which wealth and property and
the soil bought by the collective blood of the Kenyan people
would not end up in the pockets of a few Africans and Asians
and Europeans. It was as if in Mau Mau Detainee and in his
life he was posing the question: Why should the poor die, why
should women lose their husbands and sons and daughters only
to see Kenya's wealth, the product of their own sweat and
blood, go into the hands of a small class of exploiters?
On the Wednesday in 1975 when I learnt about his death, I
drove aimlessly round Limuru, then toward Nairobi, passing
through the tracts of tea and coffee plantations formerly owned
by British settlers but now owned by African individual land-
lords farming from their offices in the city. I looked at the
workers picking tea leaves, huge baskets on their plastic covered
bodies and I remembered that they were doing the same in the
1940s when I was a child. I reached my office to be confronted
by the bewildered faces at the University. So we shall never see
him again?


--- PAGE 90 ---
]. M. - A Writer's Tribute 85
I recalled the betrayal of Lumumba, Mulele, Old Waiyaki,
Kirnathi, Achieng Oneko (who was never allowed to see his
dying mother), of all the militants of early resistance move-
ments against the British forces of occupation by the Nandi,
Maasai, Gall, Akamba, Giriama, Luo, Cikiiyii and other Kenyan
nationalities. Who betrayed J. M. Kariiiki? Who killed him?
I felt the truth pain, the truth hurt. For it was we, we who have
kept silent and propped up an unjust oppressive system, because
we were eating a bit of the fruits. So we kept quiet when Gama
Pinto was killed; when Mboya was murdered; when Kung'u
Karumba disappeared. We kept quiet saying it was not really
our sbauri.
Then suddenly above the silence of my grief I heard students,
youthful voices, shouting defiance, denouncing the lies, and
singing poems to the struggle, voicing their determination to
take up the fallen sword of J. M. and continue the struggle
against inequalities in our land. British Imperialist Forces Out!
they were shouting. I remembered that Mwangi is the name of a
generation; and Kariiiki means Born Again, or The Resurrected.
Mwangi Kariiiki. A generation resurrected. I remembered that
encounter in 1964 when he was the leader of the National
Youth Service and was talking of one Kenya, one people.
This generation will never keep silent again. Not even if they
have to pay with their blood. That for me is the meaning and
significance of Kariiiki's death. A new generation was born on
2 March, on Ngong Hills, the heart of Maasai who for years kept
away Portuguese, Arab and European invaders and destroyers
from raping Kenya, our beautiful land. Never again shall we be
humiliated, degraded, insulted, injured, laughed at in our homes
in silence, for a new generation of socially conscious warriors
was born again.
Notes
1. Weekly Review, No 7,24 March 1975.


--- PAGE 91 ---
8 Born Again:
Mau Mau Unchained1
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Those of us who read Mau Mau Detainee when it first came out in
1963 admired the triumphant ring of hope risingabovethe sober
and restrained tone of its rendering. We were equally unhappy
about Margery Perham's liberal hesitancy and apologies in her
lengthy introduction to the book. Whydid sheand her kind want
to detain the Mau Mau resistance movement in a liberal prison?
It has been a painful experience to read again this account of
the Kenya people's heroic struggle for a land in which, to use
the author's words:
Everyone will have an opportunity to educate himself to
his fullest capabilities, in which no one will die or suffer
through lack ofmedical facilities and in which every person
will earn enough to eat for himself and his family.
Where have all our hopes gone? They have been replaced by a
general feeling that water, water everywhere is bitter. For on
2 March 1975, Mwangi Kariiiki was taken from a Nairobi hotel
(it is rumoured that one of his captors had the uniform of the
para-military GSU) to a valley in the Ngong Hillswhere he was
shot dead after being beaten and tortured.
It is impossible not to see the parallel between this and a
similar episode on 28 October 1953, when Kariiiki had been
taken from a Nakuru Hotel by an African police officer of the
special branch and was whisked off to Kowop, a small detention
camp in a valley between rocky hills near Lake Turkana to start
on that forced journey which for seven years was to take him
through fourteen concentration camps, often being beaten and
tortured by the enemies of the Kenyan people.
There are other scenes which, again in retrospect, stand out
stark and vivid in their prophetic symbolism. During his first


--- PAGE 92 ---
Born Again: MauMau Unchained 87
detention in Manyani, the camp commandant was so incensed
by Kariiiki's exposure of the officer's cruel sadistic methods
to a visiting committee that on the following day he took
Kariiiki to a place near the forest:
He said that he would shoot me unless I wrote down on a
piece of paper that I would not send any more letters to
England, that I would co-operate with the government and
that I would help to type in the screeners' office. Although
the thought of death was still not wholly desirable, I re-
fused. He then took from his car a piece of three-ply wood
about three feet by two feet and told me to hold it up
above my head at arm's length. He walked five yards
away and said that he was going to kill me if I did not
agree to write the sentences. Still, not imagining he could
be serious, I refused. To my horror he raised his gun and
shot at me. I remember a tremendous noise and knowing
that I was now dead and then nothing. He had, in fact,
shot through the wood and I had fallen down with it.
Out of the void I then heard the words 'Simama, simama,'
(Swahili for 'Get up'), and by a notable piece of deduction
in the circumstances I decided that this was unlikely to be
the language of heaven or hell and that I was therefore
probably alive. As if hypnotized I stood up and faced him
and we went through the rigmarole all over again. I refused
and he shot again; again I fell into the abyss and emptiness
and smelt death. Then distantly I heard 'Amka' amka,'
(Swahili for 'Wake up, wake up'), and the second time I
rose from the dead. My body was now running with sweat
and my mind was no longer able to grasp whereabouts
we were or what was happening. 'For the third and last
time,' he said, 'will you agree to write those sentences?'
It was like a scene out of afilm and without really knowing
what I was being asked I repeated my 'No'. He fired again
and this time I felt something sear through the base of the
thumb on my right. Absolutely certain that I had at least
been seriously wounded and was about to die I fell down
again. When I saw the blood, which stained allmy sweat so
that wherever I felt wasblood and stillmore blood, I rushed
at him and clasped him round the waist and said, 'Look at
this blood, you have killed me, there is blood all over me."


--- PAGE 93 ---
88 Writers in Politics
This can be seen as a preparation, a foretaste of the death he
was going to die, and we can with confidence hope that he met
his death with equal fortitude.
I have quoted the episode in full, not only because of the
prophetic symbolic parallel with what was later to happen to
him, not only too because it brings out Kariiiki's narrative
technique - the matter-of-fact tone, the dead-pan humour, the
piling up of details without over-dramatic decoration - but
because it really shows the man that Kariuki was: his total
courage even in the face of death - his total uncompromising
commitment to the people's political struggle against injustice,
racism, and against economic inequalities and exploitation of
the labour power of the masses, even if it meant paying for the
commitment with his blood. It is an episode that brings out
patriotism at its purest and most luminous.
The book is, for me, a profile in political courage, indestruct-
ible human will and determination; but it has other themes
which are important in today's Kenya. I can only cite a few:
Education: Right from his youth, Kariiiki felt the need to arm
himself with the weapon of literacy, with the power of reading
and writing. But for Kariiiki education was meaningful only as
a weapon in the service of the Kenyan people's anti-imperialist
struggle. From the book, it is clear that he despised those
Africans who saw their formal education, their ability to read
and write, as setting them apart from the struggle of the people
for the right to have adequate food, shelter and clothing in their
own Kenya. Most of the educated in colonial schools became
screeners, opportunists, collaborators with the enemy, all in
exchange for the privileges and the safety of their own skins and
stomachs. In contrast, Kariiiki and his other brothers, like Gad
Kamau Gathumbi, seized every chance to share their knowledge
of the alphabet with others. What can be more poignant than
those literacy classes in Manyani, using smoothed and flattened
earth as slates and sharp, pointed sticks as chalk and pen! Or
more encouraging than the case of that old man of seventy-five,
Kimana Wachuku, regularly attending Standard I classes to learn
how to read and write and turn teaching them the history of
Kenya he carried in his memories! Mutual education; mutual
responsibility to one another; educators being educated; that
(should have been) the guiding vision of our nation.


--- PAGE 94 ---
Born Again: Mau Mau Unchained 89
Unity of the Struggling Masses: Kariiiki was concerned about
the unity of the Kenyan people at the national level and of all
the African people at the level of Pan-Africanism, Whichever
camp he went to he tried to make friends with the people,
learning their language and customs and local problems. What
can be more illuminating of the spirit of Mau Mau detainees
than the sharing of their meagre rations with the Turkana
people? What agreat sense of political discipline in the detainee's
refusal to abuse or prostitute Kenyan womanhood, whether
they were among the Akamba, the Luo or the Turkana? In the
book, he wrote of Lodwar:
We were shocked to see the terrible environment in which
they struggled to live and we all felt that the government
should give them more help even if it was at the expense of
development in our own areas of GikuyiI and Nyanza. We
soon learnt some words in their language and began to
give them food."
Was the memory of this behind his personal involvement in,
and contribution to all the collective efforts of our people all
over Kenya? Of Pan-Africanism, he wrote:
We are determined to press forward with the concept of an
East African Federation, and move on to a union of East
and Central Africa until we approach the great ideal of
Pan-Africanists. None of us can rest quietly while any of
our peoples, whether in Angola, Mozambique, South
Africa, or Rhodesia is still under the imperialists' rule.
There may yet be further sacrifices needed till they are
free and we are ready to undergo them."
Commitment to the Struggle: The Oath he took remained for
him a commitment to the Kenyan people's struggle for their
lands, for their total economic, political and cultural liberation.
The commitment to a cause, to a group struggle, transformed
him.
My emotions during the ceremony had been a mixture of
fear and elation. Afterwards in the maize I felt exalted
with a new spirit of power and strength. All my previous
life seemed empty and meaningless. Even my education, of
which I was so proud, appeared trivial beside this splendid


--- PAGE 95 ---
90 Writer.s in Politics
and terrible force that had been given me. I had been born
again and I sensed once more the feeling of opportunity
and adventure that I had had on the first day my mother
started teaching me to read and write. The other three in
the maize were all silent and were clearly undergoing the
same spiritual rebirth as myself. 5
In the book he came back over and over again to this theme of
the transforming power of the struggle with the masses. He for
instance never considered escaping from prison since his place
was with his fellow detainees. For him, those without formal
schooling were the strongest in the struggle and he only wanted
to put his brain power and skills at their disposal. He warned
the leaders against betrayal of the masses, their faith, their love,
their hope: 'Our leaders must realize that we have put them
where they are, not to satisfy their ambition nor so that they
can strut about in fine clothes and huge Cadillacs as ambassadors
and ministers but to create a new Kenya."
Relationship with Kenyatta: Kariiiki was first aroused to a
political awareness by Kenyatta's voice in 1946. Although in
the book, Kariiiki emphatically denies Kenyatta's involvement
in the Mau Mau Oaths ('I must, too, emphasize here that in all
the statements and confessions made in my hearing by thousands
of detainees in fourteen camps, the name of Kenyatta was never
once mentioned as being involved in an oath'), he kept on
reiterating his loyalty to him as the accepted head of the con-
stitutional wing of the struggle. While in detention at Lodwar,
Kariiiki and others made a box and a hat which they sent to
Kenyatta at Likitaung. When Kariiiki was finally released, he
sent Kenyatta supplies of Njahi 'as a mark of my deep respect
for him'. He also sent him things in Maralal, 'some things he
asked for to help him sustain his life in that place, and although
I was not rich, I fulfilled every request to the utmost limit of
my ability'. There is one revealing symbolic scene in the book
describing Kariiiki and his wife's visit to Kenyatta at Maralal
where, after an exchange of gifts, they all sat down to eat.
When I had finished my plateful, Mzee asked if I would
like some more. I replied that I had eaten enough. He then
turned and said in the voice of a father: 'You are not in
detention now. You and I must eat together until this food


--- PAGE 96 ---
Born Again: Mau Mau Unchained 91
is finished.' I told him that I would agree as this was no
time to start disobeying his roders... 7
The Spirit of Resistance: It is this more than anything else
that gives the book its enduring quality, as a prose of praise to
an epic struggle. In the light of what has now happened, how
can one forget the memorable comment about the beatings he
got at Manyani:
I was stripped and given twelve strokes by a Mkamba
sergeant. These were just about the most painful ones
I ever received and they drew much blood from my
buttocks. When the detainees saw my body, which was
thin and bruised with the treatment we were receiving
in Compound 6, they buzzed with anger like a swarm
of bees. I was given strength to endure all these things
because I knew that I was right and that all the other
detainees thought I was doing right. This is the sort of
strength that no amount of beatings can weaken. When
will people realize that such beatings only stiffen the
resolve of the victim? A beating may do some good when
the person beaten knows he has done wrong, although
I do not personally think so. But when he thinks that
he has done right (whether he has or has not) beating
immeasurably toughens his determination. Finally the
authorities by their treatment were rapidly building
me up as a martyr which was again contrary to their
real objectives,"
One closes the book with a lot of soul-searching and self-
questioning. I had just finished the book and I was thinking
about the clandestine democratic organization in the detention
camps (where democracy came from the people; where the rules
were devised by the people at grass-roots); I was thinking about
Kariiiki's outspokenness which brought him so much personal
suffering at the hands of all those who support colonialism, neo-
colonialism and capitalism, when I got a poem sent to me
anonymously through the post.
Whoever had sent it had scribbled a simple message, Keep
the faith, and he or she had sent it because I had that very


--- PAGE 97 ---
92 Writers in Politics
week published an article in the Weekly Review as a writer's
tribute to]. M.
TO THE FACULTY
In Germany they first came for the communist
And I did not speak up because I wasn't a communist
Then they came for the Jew and
And I didn't speak up because I wasn't a Jew
Then they came for the trade unionists
And I didn't speak up because I wasn't a trade unionist
Then they came for the Catholics
And I didn't speak up because I was a Protestant
Then they came for me - and by that time no one was
left to speak up
Martin Niemoeller
The poem shows how fascism can divide a whole people on any
pretext so that they are eliminated one by one. The only correct
answer to fascism is resistance.
It is time that Kenyan intellectuals and all the progressive
youth, students, church-leaders, workers, took up Kariiiki's call
and resolutely denounced and struggled against all the economic,
political and cultural forces that condemn our people to starva-
tion wages, to landlessness, to lack of shelter, clothes and schools:
forces that have kept us only cultivating, planting, working, while
others reap and harvest and eat that which is a product of our
collective sweat, forces that are selling us to Euro-American and
Japanese imperialism.
Not to take up the call would mean that we too have joined
those who would detain the spirit of Mau Mau; only in such an
attempt we would merely be deceiving ourselves. For with
Kariiiki's death, the spirit of Mau Mau, so well described in his
book, was set free and will no longer be chained to please the
British and other international imperialist interests. Mau Mau is
the spirit of all the Kenyan workers and peasants from Mombasa
to Kisumu. The day they shall join hands will make the earth
move, our earth, and linking hands with all the African peoples
on the continent and in the diaspora, they shall truthfully say:
Africa for the African people. This is the vision that guided
Kariiiki, given expression in the Song of Africa that ].M. and
his fellow fighters composed on the occasion of Ghana's in-
dependence. The final verse goes:


--- PAGE 98 ---
Born Again: Mau Mau Unchained
Happy, happy, we shall be
When black people came together
To forge out unity
Universal Kingdom for all black people."
93
Notes
1. A shortened version of this article appeared as a postscript to the
1975 re-issue of Mwangi Kariiiki's,Mau Mau Detainee, (Nairobi, Oxford
University Press, 1975).
2. Kariiiki, op. cit., pp. 76-7.
3. ibid., p. 125.
4. ibid., p. 181.
5. ibid., p. 27.
6. ibid., p.181.
7. ibid., p. 179.
8. ibid., pp. 90-1.
9. ibid., p. 124.


--- PAGE 99 ---
9 Petals of Love1
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
I would like to start by introducing to this audience the woman
who has all along inspired me, the woman who in fact made me
go to school to learn how to read and write. I am referring to
my mother, my peasant mother. I am happy that she is here to-
night to witness the launching of Petals of Blood not only
because it is one of the results of my learning how to read and
write, but also because in so many ways the Kenyan peasantry
is the real actor in the novel. The turning of peasants into pro-
letarians by alienating them from the land, is one of the most
crucial social upheavals of the twentieth century, one moreover
fraught with pregnant possibilities for the future.
Now I really don't know what a writer is supposed to say on
an occasion like this because most writers are wordless when it
comes to speeches. Politicians are much better at that kind of
thing. We who use our pens are maybe writers in politics, but
we are not necessarily politicians. What anyway can writers say
about what they have already written? After all they have had
their say in between hard or soft covers.
For me, the say contained in between the hard and soft covers
of Petals of Blood took place over a period of six years, 1970 to
1975, with a spillover into 1976. It was a hard day's journey:
in the course of writing it, I would sometimes feel myself riding
on clouds of sheer excitement. But most were the times when I
felt totally fed up with the drudgery, the boredom, and the
frustrations of writing it: how did I ever come to be involved in
this madness of putting words together to form stories? How
did I ever get caught in this indulgence of fiction?
At such times I would remember those days in my peasant
mother's house where people often gathered to tell stories and
to compete in unravelling word riddles. I would go back to my


--- PAGE 100 ---
Petals of Love 95
days in Maanguuii and Kinyogoori Primary Schools where one
teacher, Mr Samuel Kibicho, (now Dr Kibicho) insisted on my
reading several story books such as Stevenson's TreasureIsland,
Dickens's Oliver Twist and other European classics in the Sim-
plified English Series. My search for the origins of 'this madness'
would take me to Alliance High School where I read more
novels like Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights and Tolstoy'S
Childhood, Boyhood and Youth; and then on to Makerere
University College where on top of European literature, I was to
discover the great wealth of African and West Indian literatures.
The headmaster of Alliance High School had said that Econ-
omics was that terrible subject which only Americans studied,
certainly not a subject fit for sober English gentlemen. Well, I
did not want to be a sober or an unsober English gentleman,
hence I studied Economics. In preparing myself for the great
task of NOT becoming any sober or unsober English gentleman,
I had read a small book called Teach Yourself Economics or
Economics Made Easy, in which the whole world capitalism was
explained in terms of supply and demand and maximization of
satisfaction under conditions of perfect competition in a free
market, although it was a little different from the unfree market
at Limuru where my mother used to buy us sugar-canes and
ripe bananas. Of course the book, did not call this free market
economy, capitalism: it was assumed that this was an eternal
universal economic system and what was being studied was
simply the objective laws governing its operation.
Then came a young lecturer - he was I think the only
Kenyan or the only student then who had ever got a first class
B.A. at Makerere - and who had gone on to the London School
of Economics and performed as brilliantly. His name was Mwai
Kibaki. What was very amazing that he was so brilliant and
yet he did not have a Christian name! Anyway he talked to us
about conditions of imperfect competition and he drew com-
plicated graphs on the blackboard and he said that perfect com-
petition was all fiction. He gave us a question on this imperfect
competition and I scored very low, so I gave up economics. I
preferred fiction to facts. I went on to study English Literature
and Mr Mwai Kibaki left Makerere for the KANU headquarters
in Nairobi where he became the party's Executive Officer. I feel
honoured by his presence; the presence of my mother, my
brothers, my wife Nyambura, and all your presence tonight.


--- PAGE 101 ---
96 Writers in Politics
Now my pursuit of literature, which I then thought was
fiction, has brought me full circle to the facts of economics,
that is to matters of what we produce and how, what we eat,
what we wear, and what we shelter under: who controls what
we eat, wear and shelter under? Economics is really the system
of production, control and distribution of wealth and this
ultimately determines every other aspect of life for, as Engels
once said: 'mankind must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and
clothing, before it can pursue politics, science, arts, religion.'
How the wealth of our country is produced, who controls it,
and how it is distributed should then be a matter for all our
concern for it does affect us wherever we may be: in the library,
in the church, or at the bar.
Literature, as part of culture, is really a reflection of the
material reality under which we live. In trying to understand
the distortion of Kenyan culture by imperialism, I have come
to realise that no people can develop a meaningful national
culture under any form of foreign economic domination. A
people's total control of all their natural and human resources,
their control of all the products of their labour, is truly the only
condition for the flowering of a patriotic national culture. It is
equally true that when a people's culture is dominated by
foreigners, those people will be looking at and evaluating their
material reality, their economic reality, through the distorted
eye-glasses of those foreigners. They will be evaluating their
history, their past and present achievements, their future poten-
tial, from the standpoint of imperialist foreigners who cannot
possibly be wishing those people any unfettered prosperity and
development. No country, no people can be truly independent
for as long as their economy and culture are dominated by
foreigners!
I was therefore horrified when, in the course of writing the
novels, I came to realise that Kenya was poor, not because of
anything internal, but because the wealth produced by Kenyans
ended in developing the western world. It is simple. For every
one unit of invested wealth from West Germany, France, Britain,
Japan and America, the imperialist bourgeoisie takes away ten
units of wealth back to those countries. Their aid, loans and
investment capital that they gloat about are simply a chemical
catalyst that sets in motion the whole process of expropriation
of Kenya's wealth, with, of course, a few left-overs for the


--- PAGE 102 ---
Petals of Love
'lucky' few. Imperialism, I came to realise, can never develop
a country or a people.
This was what I was trying to show in Petals of Blood: that
imperialism can never develop our country or develop us,
Kenyans. In doing so, I was only trying to be faithful to what
Kenyan workers and peasants have always realised as shown by
their historical struggles since 1895. This history has often been
distorted in our bourgeois schools, in our bourgeois universities,
in our libraries often filled with the filthy results of bourgeois
scholarship. But if the peasants and workers were to write in
ink the history they have already written in blood and sweat,
their standpoint would be closer to that of the worker looking
at history in the poem by Brecht:
Who built the seven gates of Thebes?
The books are filled with the names of kings.
Was it kings who hauled the craggy blocks of stone?
And Babylon, so many times destroyed,
Who built the city up each time? In which of Lima's houses,
That city glittering with gold, lived those who built it?
In the evening when the Chinese wall was finished
Where did the masons go? Imperial Rome
Is full of arcs of triumph. Who reared them? Over whom
Did the Ceasars triumph? Byzantium lives in song,
Were all her dwellings palaces? And even in Atlantis
of the legends
The night the sea rushed in,
The drowning men still bellowed for their slaves.
Young Alexander conquered India.
He alone?
Ceasar beat the Gauls.
Was there not even a cook in his army?
Philip of Spain wept as his fleet
Was sunk and destroyed. Were there no other tears?
Frederick the Great triumphed in the Seven Years War. Who
Triumphed with him?
Each page a victory,
At whose expense the victory ball?
Every ten years a great man,
Who paid the piper?


--- PAGE 103 ---
98 Writers in Politics
So many particulars,
So many questions.?
am not as a Kenyan ashamed of speaking and writing about
the peasants and workers who have built Kenya and who,
through their blood and sweat, have written a history of
grandeur and dignity and fearless resistance to foreign economic,
political and cultural domination, a history of which we should
be proud.
If Petals of Blood can convey at least that message to us
Kenyan readers, I shall be satisfied. Hopefully out of Petals of
Blood we might gather petals of revolutionary love.
Notes
1. Speech at the formal launching of Ngugi's novel, Petals of Blood, in
Nairobi in July 1977.
2. B. Brecht, 'Questions from a worker who reads' in Poems 1929-1938,
edited by Willett and Manheim (London. Methuen, 1976), p. 252.


--- PAGE 104 ---
PART3
AgainstPoliticalRepression


--- PAGE 105 ---
10 The Links thatBindUs1
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
My wife and I are overwhelmed by the warmth with which we
have been received by the people of Alma-Ata, this famed
father of luscious apples, in the heart of Kazakhstan. Even the
weather has been smiling: the sunshine on green trees and grass
along the wide spacious city avenues; and of course the snow on
Tien Shan mountains which, I am told, once formed averitable
fortress for those Kazakhs fighting against the foreign dictator-
ship of Ghengis Khan and other invaders in earlier times; and
later, in the nineteenth century against Tsarist feudalism and
oppression. I hope that all of you will visit Kenya and enjoy a
similar sunshine in a land of green leaves and many-a-coloured
flower and also the snow on Mount Kenya which, with the
Nyandarwa Mountain ridges, was a refuge for those Kenyan
patriots struggling against British imperialism.
I feel touched that my small efforts to sing about those
patriots and their epic struggle have been honoured by this
movement of African and Asian writers in the form of the
Lotus Award. I feel proud to be in the company of such dis-
tinguished previous winners as Alex la Guma, Marcellino Dos
Santos, Hiroshi Noma, Sonomyn Udval, Sembene Ousmane,
Agostinho Neto, and others. I take this, not so much as a
personal honour, but as a tribute to the creative efforts of
writers in East Africa.
But equally important, especially in connection with the
aims of this movement, the award to the songs that we have
sung is a recognition of the basic and enduring links which
bind the peoples of Africa and Asia and it is only appropriate
that this year's prize is being given simultaneously to Kateb
Yacine from Algeria, and Thu Bon from South Vietnam.
Friends, I will now seek your indulgence and patience and


--- PAGE 106 ---
102 Writers in Politics
for a few minutes echo the thoughts and words of the great
genius of Pan-Africanism, W.E.B. Du Bois, by posing the question
he once raised, though in a slightly differing context in his
book Dusk of Dawn: What are the links that bind us?
The ties of geography are easier to see. Africa and Asia, two
great continents, shake hands across the Suez Canal. The Indian
Ocean anyway has never been a barrier and for centuries East
Africa peacefully traded with China, India and Arabia before
the arrival of the Portuguese who turned this creative trade into
a traffic of destroyed cities, cultures and human beings for a
little silver to fatten the coffers of bourgeois Europe.
This is an African story: it is also an Asian story and any
cursory glance at the history of China, Indo-China, India, Africa,
the West Indies and Afro-America, will see the testimony in
tears and blood. We are truly a colonial people whose sweat has
been cruelly exploited by western-monopoly capital to build
the monument called western civilization. We groaned while
they ate: our skins were caked dry in the mines and plantations
while they drank water in the shade. We built their cities for
them and ourselves slept in the gutter. They scattered us all over
the globe and then added insult to injury by coming to our own
homes and using their superior technology, itself built on black
cargo across the middle passage, gunned us out and said the
home was theirs.
Let me for a few minutes confine myself to Kenya. Here the
missionary, the settler and the colonial governor came as three
imperial massives of western monopoly-capital. The settler
grabbed the land and exploited African labour. The governor
protected him with political oppression of Kenyans and with
the gun. And the missionary stood guarding the door as a colonial
spiritual policeman. As Kenyan people were taken to work on
tea and coffee plantations for the settler or conscripted to fight
in European imperialist wars, the missionary had the audacity
to tell them to lift up their eyes unto the Lord and sing alleluia
-Aaamen!
In their racist books and in their colonial and bourgeois
schools were the poetic and intellectual exultation of our humili-
ation and degradation. The best minds of Europe, Hume,
Carlyle, Gustav Lebon, Froude, Hegel abetted in these cultural
falsehoods. They sang of us as a people without history, and
without meaningful values. This was drummed into our heads


--- PAGE 107 ---
The Links that Bind Us 103
through their racist literatures and colonial schools: Europe was
the centre; the universe revolved around Europe, the fountain-
head of universal values and civilization.
In the name of that civilization, they destroyed our dances,
our languages, our songs, our poetry. This was not a case of
wanton carelessness; it was calculated. Literature, songs, dances
and stories embody the image people have of themselves and of
their place inthe universe as they struggle to harness the energies
of nature for their use. Colonialism then systematically tried to
kill the African individual and collective image of self. Get at
their self-hood, fervently urged the governor and the settler:
the spiritual policeman wearing the cloak of a priest or that of a
man ofletters went about his task sometimes with the subtleness
of a serpent, often with the awkward crudeness of the one-eyed
giant. They told their African converts to sing: 'Wash me
Redeemer and I shall be whiter than snow'. They all knew that
a slave was not a slave until he accepted that he was a slave. So
economic exploitation and political repression were accompanied
by racist ideology for spiritual repression. This made a few of
our westernized bourgeoisie cry in the words of Okot p'Bitek in
his Song of Ocol, 'Mother, mother, why was I born black?'
But this gloomy picture isonly one side of the story. A system
of exploitation also gives rise to those forces which set out to
destroy that system and its dire consequences. From our midst,
from the midst of the people, arise new Prometheuses who
wrest fire from the gods and light the path of liberation. So
again in Kenya, rightfrom the moment the settlers, the governor,
and the missionary set foot in our land, people resisted: they
fought back with sticks and spears and clubs, and guns and bare
hands. They were often beaten: but they retreated only to
reorganize and strike back. They were often defeated and the
settler went to play polo, golf, tennis, and gymkhana, his fears
assuaged: but this was only temporary - for the people came
back even stronger, arming themselves with better weapons and
a firmer unity arising from their consciousness of their common
lot as peasants and workers, of their common link asan African
working people.
On the cultural level, they refused to sing to the Lord asking
to be washed white: they created their own songs, their own
poetry, their own dances, their own literature. Often these
songs and dances created by the people for the people in their


--- PAGE 108 ---
104 Writers in Politics
economic and political struggle were banned by the colonial
administration. But no amount of gunpowder can put down the
creative spirit of a people. They composed new songs, invented
new dances, even as they sharpened their swords and spears and
cleaned their home-made guns or those wrested from the enemy.
Behind them were the epic stories of Waiyaki-Ied heroic struggles
against the British forces of occupation, of Koitalel's ten-year
guerrilla warfare against the British; of Thuku's mass demon-
stration in the twenties. Later Kenyatta's book Facing Mount
Kenya was to indicate the only way people could drive out the
gentleman of the European jungle from their home: by meeting
reactionary violence with revolutionary violence.
Came the greatest moment in our history when the Kenyan
peasants and urban workers rose in armed struggle. They went
to the mountains and forests and for eight years resisted the
British military might. And still they sang:
We shall never stop fighting
For Kenya is an African people's country
They were re-enacting the scenes earlier acted out by their
brothers both in Africa and in the western world. Nat Turner,
Toussaint L'Ouverture, Dedan Kifnathi. their full story and
what they stood for has never really been told.
This is the story that East African writers, and indeed all
African writers in their different ways, have been trying to tell.
It is simple. The true literature of the African peoples, from the
Americas and the West Indies to the continent of Africa, is
written with the blood of the people on their black flesh. It is
the literature of struggle: the struggle of ordinary people, who
against great odds have nevertheless changed and are continuing
to change oppressive social systems and hence the power map
of the twentieth century.
In this, the progressive African writer has no choice other
than of aligning himself with the revolutionary forces of change
at every historical phase of the struggle. This has not been an
easy task. It calls upon him to go beyond cliches and slogans.
It calls upon him not only to capture the vibrations of the very
intricate human interactions in space, but also their vibration
and contradictions in the structural reformation of society in
time. But whatever the difficulties, whatever the challenges to


--- PAGE 109 ---
The Links that Bind Us 105
his craftsmanship and artistry, I have no doubt as I stand before
this gathering that for the African writer hisrole isto be one with
the people so as to articulate their deepest aspirations for free-
dom and a higher quality of life. This holds true for the writer
in Asia, indeed all progressive writers from the oppressed world.
A shared experience of the past, a shared hope for the future:
these then are the most enduring links that bind the African
peoples on the continent and in diaspora with those of Asia.
They are the links that bind us to the words of Abay Kunan-
bayav, the Kazakh poet of the nineteenth century, in his
anguished cry:
Oh that freedom should reign
And that men could maintain
Conditions to favour, the clear, searching brain!"
The links that bind us to the words of the Senegalese writer,
Sembene Ousmane, in his poem against the one finger (the
minority classes and imperialism) that holds the trigger of a gun
aimed at the livesof the people:
Across the rivers and languages
Of Europe and Asia
Of China and Africa
Of India and the Oceans
Let usjoin fingers to take away
All the power of their finger
Which keeps humanity in mourning."
Or to those of the Vietnamese poet Thu Bon in his celebratory
certainty of victory :
Our hatred isthe plough-share that plunges
into the earth
One day it will re-erupt to the surface
On that day, my hand will make a chain with
thousands of other hands
And we will emerge from the earth and go
towards the azure.
Our guns will chastize the enemy
In order to bury him for ever into the depths
of this earth.3


--- PAGE 110 ---
106 Writers in Politics
The links are enduring because as we struggle against the
forces which exploit us, oppress us, humiliate us in South Africa,
Mozambique, Angola, Rhodesia, Vietnam, Cambodia and Pales-
tine, we are truly waging war against all those forces that exploit,
oppress, humiliate and dwarf the creative spirit of man.
So why not now dream the hopes of millions: of a United
People's Republic of Africa joining hands with a United People's
Republic of Asia in the service of the true Republic of man and
works. What greater story can we as writers be privileged to tell?
We can only hope that our hearts and pens will always be equal
to the task.
Notes
1. Acceptance speech of the Lotus prize in literature during the meeting
of African and Asian Writers in Alrna-Ata, Kazakhstan, 6 September
1973.
2. Sembene Ousmane, 'Fingers', quoted in Lotus Awards 1972, published
by the Permanent Bureau of Afro-Asian Writers.
3. Thu Bon, 'My Underground', quoted in Lotus Awards 1973, pp. 17-18.


--- PAGE 111 ---
I I Repression in
South Korea1
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
News of the recent jailing of Kim Dae Jung and other leaders of
the democratic movement in South Korea was received with
shock by all the participants in the Emergency International
Conference on Korea held in Tokyo, Japan, on 12-14 August.
One of the main resolutions of the conference was a call for
the immediate release of all the civic leaders, students, religious
people, writers, university teachers, and countless other political
prisoners now rotting in the 'tiger cages' of the South Korean
military dictator Park Chung Hee. The conference also called
for the removal of 42,000 U.S. troops and nuclear personnel
in South Korea and expressed its complete support for the
movement for democratic rights and freedoms of speech, associ-
ation, assembly, religion and for the peaceful reunification of
Korea.
The conference, which was convened by the National Con-
gress for Democracy and Unification of Korea with the help of
a group of concerned Japanese writers led by ada Makota, a
novelist, was attended by prominent scholars and writers from
Algeria, Australia, Canada, England, France, Hong Kong,
Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
U.S.A., and West Germany. These included such notables as
George Wald, Harvard Professor and Nobel prize-winner in
Biology. The conference had also the support of, among
many others, Isio Askada (mayor of Yokohama City), Joan
Baez (singer), Norman Mailer (novelist), and Noam Chomsky
(linguist).
I was the only writer from East Africa and for me it was an
eye-opener. I had read about the 4 July 1972 joint communique,
simultaneously announced in Seoul and Pyongyang, which set
out the three principles of North and South reunification: viz.,


--- PAGE 112 ---
108 Writers in Politics
Koreans, not foreigners, would take the initiative, would resort
to peaceful means, and unity would transcend differences in the
social systems. I had read about the subsequent declaration of
martial law in South Korea on 17 October 1972 and Park's
cynical comment that he would never entrust the fate of South
Korea to a piece of paper and that unity would not be achieved
within a hundred years. I had heard about the imprisonment of
Kim Chi Ha, a Catholic poet and surely one of the leading
writers in the world today. His crime was simply writing poems
which Park did not like, but which were nevertheless enormous-
ly popular with the people. In these poems, now translated into
English and published under the title, Cry of the People, we can
hear the collective anguish of the South Korean people as well
as their collective determination to be free. I had read about the
abduction of KimDaeJung from a hotel in Japan by the dreaded
Korean C.I.A. in 1973. His crime? That he had almost defeated
Park in presidential elections despite intimidation and rigging
of votes. I had also known about the 42,000 American military
and nuclear personnel that prop up an otherwise tottering
unpopular regime afa South Vietnam!
What I had not known was the extent of the internal re-
pression and the cruel disregard for South Korean lives that
makes the Park regime one of the cruellest in the world, perhaps
only equalled by South Africa. It is a police state thriving on
anti-Communist phobia, which it carefully nurses, and on the
support of American troops. I had also not fully realised the
massive strength of the movement for democratic restoration -
it cuts across a wide spectrum of different shades of liberal per-
suasions - and the depth of their passionate commitment to
reunification of South and North. I had to hear it from South
Koreans of all agesand of different ideological shades and to see
the pain and the seriousness intheir facesand gestures. I can now
understand the broad-based unity and the passions behind it.
Park seized power in 1961 with a coup that ended the liberal
regime of the democratically elected prime minister, Chang
Myon, who had taken office after the fall of the Syngman Rhee
repressive regime in 1960. This means that except for a brief
period following the liberation of Korea from years of Japanese
colonialism in 1945, South Korea has never known peace,
democracy and freedom. Park based his claim to power on his
proclaimed need to build a strong government to counter an


--- PAGE 113 ---
Repression in South Korea 109
imagined possible attack from the People's Republic in North
Korea. He immediately took several measures to kill all op-
position to himself. The National Security Act was passed
to outlaw conspiracy, instigation and propaganda in support
of any presumed anti-state organisations. The Anti-Communist
Lawwasalsoenacted to punish heavily any organisation assumed
or suspected of working along any lines the regime thought
were communistic, or to punish any person suspected of luring
others into such an organisation, or suspected of praising it,
encouraging it, or in any way benefiting it.
Under these two laws most liberals, writers and religious
leaders who criticised the corruption, nepotism, unemployment,
low salaries, and the livingconditions of the people, were silenced
by prison and detention. But this already tight control was
further strengthened by the proclamation of the so-called
Revitalisation (Yushin) Constitution of 1972. Article 53 of
this fundamental law gave Park the right to take on emergency
powers and hence to rule by decrees. Emergency Decree No.1,
declared on 8 January 1974, prohibited the denial, criticism
or defamation of the Yushin Constitution. Decree No.2 of
the same date established an emergency court martial to try
any crime against the emergency decrees. Decree No.9, of
13 May 1975, forbade rumour-mongering, opposition to the
constitution, meetings by students, and any criticism of the
emergency decrees; the government, or rather Park, had full
powers to expel offenders from school, places of work, and to
ban publications. The criminal code was alsorevised, introducing
crimes of slander against the state by South Koreans whether
in or outside South Korea. Under this section, many Koreans
have been abducted from Europe and Japan by the KCIA,
which like its American counterpart, has a worldwide network.
These state terrorist activities of the Park regime against the
South Korean people and their democratic and human rights
are well illustrated in Kim Chi Ha's satiric poem, 'Groundless
Rumours':
A timid peasant, An-Do, goes to Seoul to look for a job.
On the verge of starvation after turning to every corner without
any success in this supposedly modern prosperous city, An-Do
stands on his own two feet, and for the first time in his life,
protests against the world: 'What a bitch this world is!'
An-Do is heard by Park's secret police who hurl him to court


--- PAGE 114 ---
110 Writers in Politics
charging him with the crime of rumour-mongering against
the state. Let me quote from the poem:
No sooner had the words left his mouth than
Handcuffs were put on An-Do's hands and he was
dragged to court.
Pounding his gavelthree times,
The judge opened the hearing.
'What's the charge?'
'His crime is that of standing on his own two feet
and spreading groundless rumours, Sir.'
'Aah, that isa big crime indeed.'
'The accused, by standing on the ground with
his two feet and spreading groundless rumours,
committed the crime of touching the ground
with his two feet, the crime of resting his
body, the crime of tranquillizing his mind, the
crime of attempting to stand up despite his
poverty-stricken status, the crime of wasting
time in thinking, the crime of looking up
at the sky without afeeling of shame, the
crime of
Inhaling the air and expanding his thorax, the
crime of forgetting his status and standing
upright, which isgranted only to the special
privileged class, the crime of insolently
avoiding the national policies for more
production, export, and construction without
amoment's rest, the crime of violating the
3 'un's', 5 'no's', 7 'anti's', 9 'non's', the
crime of
Thinking up groundless rumours which would
mislead innocent people, the crime of
intending to voice the same rumours, the crime
of voicing the same, the crime of intending
to spread the same, the crime of spreading
the same, the crime of disrespecting the
fatherland, the crime of disgracing his native
language, the crime of comparing the
fatherland to an animal, the crime of creating
a possibility for the world to look on the


--- PAGE 115 ---
Repression in South Korea
fatherland as an animal, the crime of
Disturbing the environment for capital investment,
the crime of promoting social disorder and
creating social unrest, the crime of agitating
the mind of the people, the crime of growing
weary of life, the crime of escaping from
existing customs, the crime of
Possibly helping the enemy, the crime of
entertaining anti-establishment thought, the
crime of possibly organizing an
anti-government body through telepathic
means, the crime of anti-government riot
conspiracy, the crime of strong mindedness,
and on top of it the crime of violating the
special society manipulating law.'
'GUILTY.' the judge declared,
Pounding his gavelthree more times.
'And it is hereby solemnly declared in
accordance with the Law
That from the body of the accused shall be cut
off immediately, after the closing of this court,
One head, so that he may not be able to think
up or spread groundless rumours any more,
Two legs, so that he may not insolently stand on
the ground on his two feet any more,
One penis and two testicles, so that he may not
produce another, seditious like himself.
And after this is done, since there exists a great
danger of his attempting to
Resist, his two hands shall be tied together behind
his back, his trunk shall be
Tied with a wet leather vest, and his throat shall
be stuffed with a hard and long-lasting
voice-preventing tool, and then he shall be
placed in confinement
For five hundred years from this date.'
'No!' he cries out.
Snip.
'No, my penis isgone!' Snip snap.
'My testicles too, no, no.' Crack.
111


--- PAGE 116 ---
112 Writersin Politics
'My neck, oh my neck isgone.' Hack hack.
'No, my two legsalsogone.' Handcuffs, leather
vest, voice-preventing tool.
So they brutally shoved the fellow An-Do
into a solitary cell.
Not surprisingly the opposition to the Yushin Constitution -
surely a legalisation of brutal repression and oppression afa
South Africa - has united the various anti-Park forces on a
broad democratic front, from civic to religious leaders. The
church has been at the forefront of this struggle and many of its
leaders arenow inprison. The democratic movement has received
support from many corners of the world and especially from in-
side the U.S.A. On 2 April 1976, a letter signed by about one
hundred and twenty prominent U.S.A. leaders, among them
Edward Kennedy, Walter F. Mondale, Frank Church and George
McGovern, was sent to President Ford. The letter expressed
distress at the continuation of suppression of South Koreans
who:
... urge progress toward the restoration of democracy in
their country. Several religious, academic and political
leaders have been arrested and are being charged with plot-
ting to overthrow the government after signinga declaration
presented at a church service.... The policies of Park to-
ward political dissidents not only violate internationally
recognised standards of human rights but also raise serious
questions about the supportive role of the United States in
its relation with the Republic of Korea....
The same issues were raised by Edward Kennedy in a senate
debate of 24 March 1976, when he stated, among other things:
'Yet what could be more fundamental to the principles of
democracy - and human rights - than freedom to criticise
one's own government?'
The Washington Post of 19 March 1976, described Park as:
a dangerous man ... on the loose in South Korea, one who
threatens to provoke internal unheaval and to cost his
country the support of its leading foreign ally. Indeed,
given the ruthless centralisation of power in Seoul, this


--- PAGE 117 ---
Repression in South Korea 113
man is in a position to do more damage to Korea's stability
and security than any other figure.
But the main struggle isled by the South Koreans themselves
under the umbrella of the National Congress for Democracy and
Unification. I shall long remember the moving testimony of
Professor Yun I Sang, an internationally recognised Korean
composer, telling us how he was abducted from WestGermany
and taken to prison in Seoul where he was tortured. I shall long
remember the letter from KimChi Ha talking to us so intimately
about friendship although he washimself in prison:
I think that of all the words that I love most dearly such as
liberation, revolution, etc., the most brilliant is the word
friendship by which you and I were forcibly bound to-
gether. Our aim must be to givean expansion, an historical
expansion.
I shall long be haunted by the beautiful face and the soft voice
of twenty-one year old Miss Yun Jong Hee telling us how she
had never seen her homeland and how she could not now go
home because as an active worker for the movement for demo-
cracy and reunification she would only be welcomed into
prison . . . or the smiling face of twenty-year old Miss Lee
Miyon telling me that she would never marry until South Korea
was liberated.
The Emergency International Conference was hopefully the
beginning of a concerted international pressure for democratic
rights in South Korea, so that youngsters like Miss Yun Jong
and Miss Lee and the 650,000 South Koreans exiled in Japan
can return and help in rebuilding their motherland in unity and
peace. This international pressure is often blunted by Park's
orchestrated propaganda machine, which often buys whole
pages in the western press to put across fabrications dressed
as truth.
But the pressure seems to be mounting. What the South
Korean people are asking for is simple. They want an end to
internal repression and murder; an end to foreign domination;
the withdrawal of all foreign troops and nuclear weaponry;
and for the reunion with the fifteen million brothers and sisters
in the north. It is true that Japan and the U.S.A. fear the united


--- PAGE 118 ---
114 Writers in Politics
power of fifty-five million free Koreans, for South Korea
where strikes are banned, is still one of the most lucrative
areas for Japanese and American investments because of cheap
labour.
The beneficiaries of the oppression of South Korean people
are in fact the imperialist bourgeoisie of Japan and the U.S.A.
and of course the South Korean comprador bourgeoisie whom
Kim Chi Ha, calls the 'Five Bandits' in a poem of the same
title. The Five Bandits (business tycoons; top bureaucrats;
national assemblymen; the top military brass; cabinet ministers)
who comprise the native ruling class headed by Park Chung Hee
have one national anthem, one motto, one prayer:
Let's construct a bridge across the Strait of Korea with
the bones of those who have starved to death, so we
can worship the god of Japan! Like slave-masters of
olden times, they drive the people to work harder and
longer, with the beating of bursted drums and the sounds
of broken trumpets, with one aim in mind: to increase
their own wealth.
The lifestyle of the Five Bandits is the same:
They buy aMercedes in addition to their black Sedans, but
feign humility by riding in a Corona. They make their
fortune by cheating the budget and further fatten it by
illegal biddings, but chew gum to rid themselves of the
smell of corruption. They shout loudly not to deal in
foreign goods, while lighting up a Kent. They hastily write
decrees to ban foreign goods and are pleased with how
nicely the law was written. They deny their dishonesty to
an 'ignorant' journalist who, hearing of a big scandal,
rushes upon the scene. And for an answer they smugly
whisper: 'What isyour golf handicap?'
In this respect South Korea islike most Third Worldcountries,
although Park's propaganda portrays South Korea as part of the
developed world - hence his promises of aid the country can
hardly afford to some Third World countries. Anyway whatever
the odds, those Koreans seem determined to continue their
struggle.


--- PAGE 119 ---
Repression in South Korea 115
'We shall return to a united motherland,' Yun Chung Ho of
the South Korean Youth League told me. He quoted a few lines
from Kim Chi Ha's poem 'Cry of the People':
Spring has come - the earth is waiting.
Now is the time to rise!
The will of the people is the will of Heaven;
Noone can resist it!
Who is made afraid by threat?
Who is made afraid by violence?
Better to die fighting,
Than to die of gnawing hunger.
Students, rise! Workers, struggle!
Farmers, join the fray!
Shake the heavens and the earth;
The spirits of our brothers will protect you.
Who can stop us? Who can slow us?
Who will block the way?
Anguished policemen sympathize;
Soldiers denounce the regime!
Absolute power corrupts absolutely;
Absolute power shall be totally destroyed!
Rise up together, stand up together,
Overthrowing the brutal rule!
In April Revolution's spirit,
Struggle on for democratic rights!
Let nothing keep us from our freedom!
Let tyranny no longer reign!
Arise, spirit of self-determination!
Guide our destiny!
And we will sing the song of peace,
In freedom, justice, and love.
Yung Chung Ho was only twenty. But I was left with no
doubts about the determination behind that voice. South


--- PAGE 120 ---
116 Writers in Politics
Korea and South Africa and all other oppressive regimes had
better listen to the voice of the young who are saying it loud
and clear, that the cry of the people will never be put down
by the gun.
Notes
1. An article that appeared in The Weekly Review of 13 September 1976.


--- PAGE 121 ---
12 The South Korean,People s StruggleIs the Struggle of all Oppressed Peoples
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
I want to thank the organizers of the Emergency International
Conference on Korea. I know very little about the Korean
people's struggle for national unity and democracy. Of course I
do know that they were among the first Asian people to strike a
mortal blow at American imperialism. I also know that they
have a country which is partitioned, with one half under U.S.
imperialism and that the other half has been liberated and is a
people's Korea. But that is about all I know. I come from a
country whose press is owned by foreigners and which always
sides with imperialism. Thus it tells us little about the happen-
ings and struggles in the oppressed countries. When it reports
on such events it does so with the view of obscuring the truth
or showing that imperialist domination is a good thing and that
anti-imperialist struggles are bad. Thus I have come here to
learn. I want to carry home something about the Korean people's
just struggle for national liberation. I would like to make it clear
that I'm not speaking for any organization in Kenya or Korea
and that for the purposes of this meeting I am non-aligned: but
then we were told that this conference was for non-aligned
persons and was paralleling the Non-Aligned Nations Conference
in Colombo! I am here in my capacity as a writer who tries to
speak about myself and who tries to get his inspiration from the
struggles of our people for total liberation from imperialism and
any form of foreign domination. That means that as a writer I
can never be non-aligned. How can a writer, if he is to be mean-
ingful, assume a non-aligned position amid a million voices
crying out in unison for the right to control the natural and
human resources of their own land; the right to control the
fruits of their sweat, the products of their labour? How can one
be non-aligned in the very sight of a million muscles flexing to


--- PAGE 122 ---
118 Writers in Politics
break centuries of chains tied around their bodies by imperial-
ism and all the exploiting classes?
Yesterday I was moved to tears by the testimony of the
Korean composer Yun I Sang, when he described his experien-
ces in the cages of Park Chung Hee. I was impressed with his
statement that he gained strength to compose opera in prison
from the knowledge that he was speaking for many gagged
voices, for the many whose bodies were being tortured. That's
an example of the position that music and the arts in the
oppressed must take. Speak for, speak to, speak out for the
strength and determination of the people in their struggle for
total liberation.
It is the position taken by Kim Chi Ha in his poetry. That is
why his poems speak not only to Koreans but to all the struggl-
ing peoples in the world. He is in prison but his voice is an
inspiration to us in South Africa and Zimbabwe, to us in Pales-
tine, to us in all countries under neo-colonialism. When he
speaks of the Five Bandits which, in alliance with u.s.imperial-
ism, are helping in the plunder and murder of our peoples, he
is speaking about all our histories.
Let me dwell for a few minutes on that history which we all
share. It has two dialectically related aspects. First, it has been
a history of exploitation and oppression by the western Euro-
pean ruling classes. Wemay remember that Portuguese mercenary
explorers and sailors landed in Africa at the close of the fifteenth
century on a mission to find the shortest sea-route to the wealth
of Asia. The ruling feudal classes and the emergent mercantile
bourgeoisie both wanted this route to theft and plunder. They
wanted gold, glittering gold! In pursuit of this glittering yellow
metal and shining white ivory they wantonly destroyed many
advanced cities, especially those along the East African coast.
They destroyed cities in Mozambique, Zanzibar, and in Kenya.
It was these Portuguese hunters for gold and ivory who destroyed
Zimbabwe, a city of stone and well-laid streets, and turned
them into ruins. They had gunpowder on their side and, of
course, the Holy Bible. It is interesting that at the time they
were planting missionaries in Korea and other parts of Asia,
they were doing the same in Africa. Their wanton destruction
of human lives was part and parcel of their destruction of cities
and cultures. Remember what they wanted was gold, silver,
ivory and spices, anything that would bring instant profit to the


--- PAGE 123 ---
The South Korean People's Struggle 119
feudal and bourgeois classes in Portugal. Their new bourgeois
splendour was based on the corpses and blood of murdered
Africans. Their so-called civilization was built on the destruc-
tion of highly advanced African civilizations. Fort Jesus in
Mombasa, Kenya, built by the predators from Portugal, still
stands as an ugly monument to their short-lived glory and
success as a major European colonialist power. They were only
an advance party of other European powers with equally noth-
ing more than the possession of gunpowder to boast about. But
the gunpowder worked .... Africans died, their cattle died,
their houses fell, the great migrations and movements inland
started. They would try to build new houses, new cities and
new lives, but even this was not to be. More hordes of Euro-
pean colonialist predators came from the sea.
The history of European exploitation, domination and op-
pression of African nations and peoples falls into three main
phases:
(1) Slavery: This was the period when Africans were seized as
slaves and were shipped across the seas to build the New World
of America, the West Indies and Latin America. When you con-
template western industrial and technological growth - later
transported to Japan - remember that it too was built on the
enslaved labour of Africans. On the other side, you can see the
terrible negative consequences of this transplanting of labour on
Africa's own growth. Human beings are the subject and object
of any development, for it is their combined labour power that
changes nature and hence changes themselves. You cannot kill
people, you cannot cage people, you cannot scatter people,
making them beggars in their own land or in other lands and
still call it development.
(2) Classical colonialism: Then came the period of direct
colonial occupation. This was characterized by the exploitation
of Africa's natural resources and the exploitation of African
labour by European capital. Africa became the source of raw
materials, the source of cheap labour and also a market for
European goods. This exploitation was accompanied by direct
political rule and direct oppression and suppression of the
people by colonial armies and police.
(3) Neo-colonialism: Then came the period of neo-colonialism
under which most of Africa now lives. This has also been called
the stage or the period of 'flag independence'. This means a


--- PAGE 124 ---
120 Writers in Politics
situation where a client indigenous government is ruling and
oppressing people onbehalf of American, European andJapanese
capital. Such a regime acts as a policeman of international
capital and often mortgages a whole country for arms and
crumbs from the masters' table. It never changes the colonial
economy of development and uneven development.
All these three stages are accompanied by brutality and
oppression - in fact, all these three stages are nothing but
different aspects of slavery. Just now as we are talking in this
hall, African workers' children are being killed in South Africa.
Just now as we are talking so many of our people are being
tortured in South Africa and Zimbabwe - not to mention many
others being killed or rotting in jails in many neo-colonial states
in Africa, including Uganda and Kenya. But what I have been
talking about is only one aspect of the history which we share
with Korea and many other Asian countries.
The other and more enduring aspect is that of struggle and
resistance. The several hundred years of European slavery in
Africa has given rise to an infinitely glorious and heroic history
of the people who have refused to succumb to exploitation and
oppression. African people fought the British, Portuguese,
French and other European slave-drivers. They fought and
struggled against the colonial armies of occupation. There are
many glorious sagas of this period. I may cite the Algerian
armed struggle against the French, and the Kenyan Mau Mau
armed resistance against the British. You may be interested to
know that the Mau Mau liberation struggle in Kenya was being
waged at about the same time as the Korean War.More recently,
there have been the successful armed struggles in Mozambique,
Angola and Guinea Bissau. Armed struggle is still going on in
Zimbabwe. Wecan see the beginnings of a similar armed struggle
in South Africa: Soweto is only a beginning of things to come.
I believe that the recent victories of the people in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea Bissau have ushered in a new era in
the struggles of the African peoples. Just as the Portuguese were
the first to introduce the era of slavery and colonialism in the
fifteenth century, so their forced departure signifies the end of
classical colonialism in Africa and the beginning of strenuous
struggles against imperialism in the neo-colonial stage. Neo-
colonialism thrives because of the alliance between a native
comprador class and a foreign bourgeoisie. The comprador class


--- PAGE 125 ---
The South Korean People's Struggle 121
rules by torture, fraud, imprisonment, military brutality, terror
and so on to suppress the people on behalf of their paymasters
in London, Paris, New York, Amsterdam and Tokyo. They are,
if you like, the present day slave-drivers and plantation overseers
hired by international monopoly capital.
The native comprador class is the most dangerous because it
confuses the people. The real masters are invisible. The visible
apparent rulers seem to wear the same skin and certainly seem
to speak the same tongue as the rest of the people. But they kill
democracy and they kill national initiative. They kill unity under
the pretence of fighting communism.
But the struggle will continue simultaneously against this
comprador native ruling class and against the foreign inter-
national aggressors, as well as against the Park Chung Hees of
the oppressed world and their foreign paymasters. That's why
the Korean people's struggle for democracy and unity is the
struggle of all oppressed people.
I believe that peace is only possible through the total burial
of imperialism. So our struggle for national unity and demo-
cracy necessarily is a struggle against imperialism and foreign
domination. But the imperialist powers are co-operating and
sharing information and strategies, so all the oppressed and ex-
ploited peoples must also unite to smash and bury the enemy
for ever.
The enemy is now led by u.S. imperialism. After the U.S.
defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia, the imperialists have retreated
and are now attempting to consolidate their positions in Africa,
the Middle East, Latin America, Korea and other South-East
Asian countries. You remember that after Vietnam, the U.S.
Defence Secretary threatened to use nuclear weapons against
the Korean people should they continue to refuse to be slaves
in their own land. More recently, the U.S. Defence Secretary
visited Kenya and Zaire to conclude secret defence agreements.
Kissinger has been meeting the South African Hitlerite, Vorster,
in West Germany to hatch out more plots to' continue mounting
armed attacks in Africa just as previously the same Hitlerite
Vorster met with his Zionist collaborators in Israel. And France
has been selling new nuclear plants to the Hitlerite Vorster.
The threat of nuclear war thus obviously still comes from the
mad dog, rampaging imperialist countries.
Thus it is more than obvious why we in Asia, Africa and


--- PAGE 126 ---
122 Writers in Politics
Latin America must support the Korean people's struggle for
national unity and democracy. We must not see our struggle in
isolation. South Africa, Zimbabwe, Palestine, Chile, Korea -
it's all the same battle against the enemy of democracy and the
unity of peoples; we must therefore consciously forge unity
of all the oppressed world peoples. I said that I was not speaking
for an organization. But I am sure that the Kenyan people who
have consistently stood against the position of a division of
their own country and who have stood firmly against any foreign
claims on their territory, will firmly support the Korean people's
just demand for national reunification and for democracy.
Long live the Korean people's struggle! Long live the struggle
of all the peasants and workers in the world! Long live the unity
of all peoples in the world struggling against imperialism and all
forms of foreign domination!!
Notes
1. Speech read during the International Emergency Conference on Korea
held in Tokyo, 12-14 August 1976.


--- PAGE 127 ---
13The Robber
andtheRobbedTwo Antagonistic Images in Afro-American
Literature and Thought!
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
I was asked to speak on 'Literature and the Evolution of Black
Consciousness: The Making of an Image'. But there is not one
image: there is not one black consciousness in Afro-American
literature. There are in fact two opposing consciousnesses, two
images, two opposing trends in Afro-American literature and
thought shaped by the different persons' perception of the
nature of American society. Now the images we have for our-
selves in relationship to other selves, or the images we have of
other people in relationship to ourselves are dependent on the
place we occupy in the system of production, ownership and
hence our power over the share-out of the national wealth.
It matters whether we are only part of the productive forces,
suppliers and sellers of the labour power which alone, with
instruments of labour acting on nature, produces wealth; or
whether we are merely the owners of the means of production
hiring the labour powers of others: Whether in other words we
are the robbed or the robbers.
The minority who reap where they never planted, who pocket
the wealth produced by the working-labouring-majority, are
able to rob with impunity even, because in the evolution of that
society they have come to control the state with all its coercive,
violent powers, and to control the other social institutions with
all their hidden powers of psychological coercion and mental
conditioning. Thus their historical task of robbing the majority
is made easier both by their seizure of the state and its mani-
fold powers, and by their control of the instruments of subtle
persuasion, of the cultural tools that forge certain images, that
develop a given consciousness. If the robbers of wealth are able
to instil images of defeat, unsureness, division, inferiority com-
plex, helplessness, fawning, abject humility, slavishness in the


--- PAGE 128 ---
124 Writers in Politics
minds of the robbed, then they can eat their loot in comfort
and sleep in peace. Thus, it has always been in the interests of
a robbing minority to control the minds, the consciousness of
the working majority - the true producers of wealth - by all
the educational, literary, communicational, cultural and aes-
thetic means at their disposal.
But the robbed do not always acquiesce. They have always
struggled for the control of the wealth they have produced. To
do so, they have found it imperative to, at the same time,
struggle against all the oppressive social institu tions erected on
the structure of theft and robbery. In the process of so struggl-
ing, they evolve images embodying a consciousness correspond-
ing to the objective needs and demands of their struggle, a
consciousness that is directly and diametrically opposed to that
of the exploiting and hence oppressing minority. There are thus
two warring ideologies in a society built on a system of robbery
and theft corresponding to the two antagonistic positions of the
robber and the robbed, of the parasitic and the creative, in the
social production of wealth.
The two consciousnesses are necessarily at war with one
another because they are reflections of the actual warring politi-
cal and economic positions of the two classes in society. The
two consciousnesses do not remain static: they change even as
the productive forces in society change and hence as the rela-
tions of production (the relations of the robber class and the
robbed class) change in time.
The battlefield of the two consciousnesses is the working
majority. The ruling robbing class and idle minority want the
working people to perceive themselves in a negative manner.
They want the robbed to look at the world through the eyes of
the robber. But the conditions of their existence and the ob-
jective demands of their position call, in the robbed, for a
different kind of consciousness, a different way of looking at
the world. For the robbing minority, reality is final, is static,
is given, is divinely willed, it cannot change. For the robbed, the
present conditions, the present reality, cannot be final, absolute,
unchanging. The world must change, must be changed.
Spokesmen of the robbed and the oppressed (or those pur-
porting to speak for the oppressed, or those recruited from the
oppressed) oscillate between the ideology, the consciousness,
that bespeaks the objective needs of the exploiting minority


--- PAGE 129 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 125
(i.e. we have the best of all possible worlds; that there has been
and always will be the robber and the robbed; human nature
will never change, human nature is selfish; we only need minor
reforms, a few adjustments within this best of allpossible worlds;
etc.) and that ideology, that consciousness, which represents the
needs of the struggling majority (i.e. the rejection of eternal,
unchanging human nature; the recognition and affirmation of
change as a constant theme in nature and society; the affirma-
tion of the necessity not only to explain the world but also to
change it; that the masses are the most revolutionary part of
society's productive forces; etc.).
All this can best be seen if we look at the relationship between
Afro-Americans and Euro-Americans over the last two hundred
years. The ruling robbing minority has always been Euro-
American. The Afro-American has, by and large, been part of
the robbed working majority. But the Afro-American worker
has been the most exploited, the most oppressed section of the
working majority. Racism and racist theories have been effect-
ively used by the ruling Euro-American minority of robbers and
thieves to divide the robbed majority - Afro-American, Euro-
American, Asio-American - by bribing the Euro-American
working class with titbits of the loot cruelly robbed from the
Afro-American workers, and also by feeding the Euro-American
worker with spurious fascist notions of racial superiority, and
the Afro-American worker with equally spurious notions of
racial inferiority.
Thus, the Afro-American masses have been the greatest vic-
tims of two hundred years of the growth of American capitalism
to its current position of leader of world imperialism; two
hundred years of economic exploitation; four hundred years of
repressive socio-political institutions; two centuries of a racist
ruling class ideology and consciousness. By the same token,
the Afro-American workers have been at the forefront of
economic struggles, of political struggles, and thus, at the fore-
front in the evolution of a consciousness containing all the gems
of the most advanced ideas and objectives of total liberation.
This is true whether one is talking about the American Declara-
tion of Independence (all the notions in that Declaration were
first articulated in the slave revolts and songs); or about the
consciousness animating the Republican side in the American
Civil War (again, Lincoln's statements were forestalled in the


--- PAGE 130 ---
126 Writers in Politics
slave escapes to the North, the continuing slave revolts and
declarations, and in the slave narratives); or about the struggle
of the American people against occupation of Vietnam. There-
fore, the two consciousnesses, the two warring and opposed
images, the two world outlooks of the robber and the robbed,
can best be illustrated in Afro-American literature and thought.
Afro-American writers and spokesmen range from those who
hold positions that correspond to those of the ruling Euro-
American class of robbers, to those who hold positions and
articulate a consciousness that corresponds to that of the fore-
most and most advanced forces of change in American society.
These two trends in Afro-American literature and thought are
easily seen in their image of Africa; in their attitudes to the
class struggle in America; in their attitudes to American capital-
ism and imperialism. For the purpose of this talk I shall not
draw on the people's oral literature because here the ideas of
total liberation from bondage, the acceptance of self and of
one's origins, the feeling that the social institutions of capital-
ism are exploitative and rotten, the ideas of violent struggle
to change society, have been consistent and have been en-
shrined in the slave songs and folk poetry. Here, in the popular
people's tradition, there is no compromise with the ideology
and consciousness of the ruling class. I shall illustrate my thesis
by drawing on the literature by that army of spokesmen that
can either choose to articulate the correct position of the people;
or to obscure, confuse, in order to aid the enemy of the people.
As early as 1773, Phyllis Wheatley had swallowed whole the
images of Africa contained in the works of European writers,
such as Hume and other spokesmen for slavery and the slave
trade, so that for her Africa was 'the land of errors, and Egyptian
gloom'. She was all gratitude for having been rescued in safety
from 'those dark abodes'.
Twas mercy brought me from my Pagan land,
Taught my benighted soul to understand
That there's a God, that there's a Saviour too.
Once I redemption neither sought nor knew.
Some view our sable race with scornful eyes;
'Their colour is a diabolic dye.'
Remember, Christians, Negroes, black as Cain.
May be refined, and join the angelic train."


--- PAGE 131 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 127
This was not any different from the posrnon of Thomas
Jefferson, the Secretary of State under Washington, (to the latter
Wheatley had written an enthusiastic poem and a letter saying
how his appointment as a general of the North American armies
had excited sensations not easy to suppress) who wrote in 1785:
I advance it, therefore, as a suspicion only, that the blacks,
whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time
and circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endow-
ments both of body and mind.... This unfortunate differ-
ence of colour, and perhaps of faculty, is a powerful
obstacle to the emancipation of these people.'
Yet Africans were the main productive force of the American
economy: Phyllis Wheatley's position corresponds to the con-
sciousness of the then ruling, slave-holding classesthat rational-
ized degradation of the masses on the basis of racist theories of
the African continent and the African past.
But, even during this era of slavery and slave trade, there
were those who refused to espouse the slavementality and ruling
class ideologies and instead articulated a consciousness of eman-
cipation and liberation.
Olaudah Equiano, like Wheatly, had been abducted from
Africa in his youth and so retained memories of his past. In his
book, The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano,
or Gustavus Vassa, the African, he wrote of his Africa in terms
of a nation of dancers, musicians and poets. He talked of the
plain manner of his people's living. He wrote positively of their
manufactures of golden ornaments, of their spinning and weav-
ing of cotton, and of other manufactures like earthen vessels.
He was again positive about their architecture in which 'we
study convenience rather than ornament'. He was even more
profuse in his memories of the abundance of the land:
Our land isuncommonly rich and fruitful, and produces all
kinds of vegetables in great abundance. We have plenty of
Indian corn, and vast quantities of cotton and tobacco.
Our pineapples grow without culture; they are about the
size of the largest sugar-loaf and finely flavoured. Wehave
also spices of different kinds, particularly pepper, and a
variety of delicious fruits which Ihavenever seenin Europe,


--- PAGE 132 ---
128 Writersin Politics
together with gums of various kinds and honey in abund-
ance. All our industry isexerted to improve those blessings
of nature. Agriculture isour chief employment, and every-
one, even the children and women, are engaged in it. Thus
we are all habituated to labour from our earliest years.
Everyone contributes something to the common stock,
and as we are unacquainted with idleness we have no
beggars,"
In the same tradition, Benjamin Banneker, a self-trained and
self-taught African genius of physics, mathematics and astro-
nomy could in 1792 reply to Thomas Jefferson in bold words
of courage and great social awareness:
I freely and cheerfully acknowledge, that I am of the
African race, and in that colour which is natural to them,
of the deepest dye; and it isunder a sense of the most pro-
found gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, that
I now confess to you, that I am not under that state of
tyrannical thraldom, and inhuman captivity, to which many
of my brethren are doomed, but that I have abundantly
tasted of the fruition of those blessings, which proceed
from that free and unequalled liberty with which you are
favoured; and which I hope you will willingly allow you
have mercifully received, from the immediate hand of that
being from whom proceedeth every good and perfect gift.
Suffer me to recall to your mind that time, in which the
arms of the British crown were exerted, with every power-
ful effort, in order to reduce you to a state of servitude:
Look back, I entreat you, on the variety of dangers to
which you were exposed; reflect on that period in which
every human aid appeared unavailable, and in which even
hope and fortitude wore the aspect of inability to the con-
flict, and you cannot but be led to a serious and grateful
sense of your miraculous and providential preservation;
you cannot but acknowledge, that the present freedom
and tranquillity which you enjoy, you have mercifully
received, and that it is the peculiar blessing of heaven.
This, Sir, was a time when you clearly saw into the
injustice of a state of Slavery, and in which you had just
apprehension of the horrors of its condition. It was then


--- PAGE 133 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 129
that your abhorence thereof was so excited, that you pub-
licly held forth this true and invaluable doctrine, which is
worthy to be recorded and remembered in all succeeding
ages: 'We hold these truths to-be self-evident, that all men
are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator
with certain inalienable rights, and that among these are
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.'
Here was a time in which your tender feelings for our-
selves had engaged you thus to declare; you were then im-
pressed with proper ideas of the great violation of liberty,
and the free possession of those blessings, to which you
were entitled by nature; but, sire, how pitiable it is to re-
flect, that although you were so fully convinced of the
benevolence of the Father of Mankind and of his equal and
impartial distribution of these rights and privileges which
he hath conferred upon them, that you should at the same
time counteract his mercies, in detaining by fraud and
violence, so numerous a part of my brethren under groan-
ing captivity and cruel oppression, that you should at the
same time befound guilty of that most criminal act, which
you professedly detested in others, with respect to your-
seloes? (Italics mine)
Banneker's tradition was continued in one of the finest minds
and one of the most courageous fighters of the nineteenth
century. Frederick Douglass was another self-taught genius, who
rose from a state in which he was 'so pinched with hunger as to
dispute with Old "Nep", the dog, for the crumbs which fell
from the kitchen table'; to a leading position in the struggle for
the emancipation of Afro-Americans and other oppressed, en-
slavedAmericans. As he said:
. . . Though I am more closely connected and identified
with one class of outrage, oppressed and enslaved people,
I cannot allow myself to be insensible to the wrongs and
suffering of any part of the great family of man. I am not
only an American slave,but a man, and as such, am bound
to use my powers for the welfare of the whole human
brotherhood .... I believe that the sooner the wrongs of
the whole human family are made known, the sooner
those wrongs will be reached,"


--- PAGE 134 ---
130 Writers in Politics
His autobiography, Life and Times of Frederick Douglass
should be a must in all our schools and colleges both because of
its tremendous strengths and for Douglass's failures toward the
end of his life when he was lured into serving American imperial-
ism in Haiti. But the early part of his life and his speeches
clearly show the only path open to people and classes who want
to be free. He was not squeamish about revolutionary violence,
even on the personal level. He relates how when he became a
slave of Thomas Auld, he was handed to an Edward Covey, a
slave-breaker. He describes the beatings, the overwork, the
degradation in what he calls the period he was made to drink
the bitterest cup of slavery, until he decided to stand up to
Covey and fight him:
This battle with Mr Covey, undignified as it was and as I
fear my narration of it is, was the turning point in my 'life
as a slave'. It rekindled in my breast the smouldering
embers of liberty. It brought up my Baltimore dreams and
revived a sense of my own manhood. I was a changed being
after that fight. I was nothing before - I was a man now.
It recalled to life my crushed self-respect, and my self-
confidence, and inspired me with a renewed determination
to be a free man. A man without force is without the
essential dignity of humanity. Human nature is so con-
stituted, that it cannot honour a helpless man, though it
can pity him, and even this it cannot do long if signs of
power do not arise ....
I was no longer a servile coward, trembling under the
frown of a brother worm of the dust, but my long-cowed
spirit was roused to an attitude of independence. I had
reached the point at which I was not afraid to die. This
spirit made me a freeman in fact, though I still remained
a slave in form. When a slave cannot be flogged, he is more
than half free. He has a domain as broad as his own manly
heart to defend, and he is really 'a power on earth'.'
He never forgot the violent combat and his own personal
struggle to escape from slavery. In his speeches he always in-
sisted on the primacy of the struggle of the oppressed classes
and peoples. He was later to argue that without struggle there
could never be progress:


--- PAGE 135 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 131
The whole history of the progress of human liberty shows
that all concessions, yet made to her august claims, have
been born of earnest struggle. The conflict has been excit-
ing, agitating, all-absorbing, and for the time being putting
all other tumults to silence. It must do this or it does
nothing. If there is no struggle, there is no progress. Those
who profess to favour freedom, and yet depreciate agita-
tion, are men who want crops without plowing up the
ground. They want rain without thunder and lightning.
They want the ocean without the awful roar of its many
waters. This struggle may be a moral one; or it may be a
physical one; or it may be both moral and physical; but it
must be a struggle. Power concedes nothing without
demand. It never did, and it never will. Find out just what
people will submit to, and you have found out the exact
amount of injustice and wrong which will be imposed
upon them; and these will continue till they are resisted
with either words or blows, or with both. The limits of
tyrants are prescribed by the endurance of those whom
they oppress. In light of these ideas, Negroes [sic] will be
hunted at the North and held and flogged at the South,
so long as they submit to these devilish outrages, and
make no resistance, either moral or physical. Men may
not get all they pay for in this world; but they must
certainly pay for all they get. If we ever get free from
all the oppression and wrongs heaped upon us, we must
pay for their removal. We must do this by labour, by
suffering, by sacrifice, and if needs be, by our lives, and
the lives of others." (italics mine)
You can see that he is espousing a different kind of conscious-
ness from that of Wheatley or that of Booker T. Washington.
Washington continues the tradition of Wheatley but even
more slavishly. He articulated better than most members
of the Euro-American ruling class the racist ideology that
rationalized the oppression of Afro-American workers. His
autobiography, Up From Slavery could better have been en-
titled: Back To Slavery:
... When we rid ourselves of prejudices, or racial feeling,
and look facts in the face, we must acknowledge that,


--- PAGE 136 ---
132 Writersin Politics
notwithstanding the cruelty and moral wrong of slavery,
the ten million Negroes [sic] inhabiting this country, who
themselves or whose ancestors went through the school of
American slavery, are in a stronger and more hopeful con-
dition, materially, intellectually, morally, and religiously,
than is true of an equal number of black people in any
other portion of the globe. This is so to such an extent
that Negroes in this country, who themselves or whose
forefathers went through the school of slavery, are con-
stantly returning to Africa as missionaries to enlighten
those who remained in the fatherland ....
Ever since I have been old enough to think for myself, I
have entertained the idea that, notwithstanding the cruel
wrongs inflicted upon us, the black man got nearly as
much out of slavery as the white man did,? (italics mine)
He is ecstatic about the fact that during the Civil War,some
of the slaves would even beg for the privilege of sitting up at
night to nurse the wounded masters:
This tenderness and sympathy on the part of those held in
bondage was a result of their kindly and generous nature.
In order to defend and protect the women and children
who were left on the plantation when the white males
went to war, the slaveswould have laid down their lives.
The slavewho wasselected to sleep in the 'big house' during
the absence of the males was considered to have the place
of honour. Anyone attempting to harm 'young Mistress'
or 'old Mistress' during the night would have had to cross
the dead body of the slave to do so. I do not know how
many have noticed it, but I think that it will be found to
be true that there are few instances, either in slavery or
freedom, in which a member of my race has been known
to betray a specific trust.'?
When freedom came, he writes, the slaveswere almost aswell
fitted to begin life anew as the master, except in the matters of
book learning and ownership of property. And yet a few pages
later he is almost ecstatic about the inability of 'negroes' to
cope with the life of freedom and hence the stealthy return of
some to the slavecondition:


--- PAGE 137 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 133
The wild rejoicing on the part of the emancipated coloured
people lasted but for a brief period, for I noticed that by
the time they returned to their cabins there was a change
in their feelings. The great responsibility of being free, of
having charge of themselves, of having to think and plan
for themselves and their children, seemed to take possession
of them. It was very much like suddenly turning a youth
of ten or twelve years out into the world to provide for
himself. In a few hours the great questions with which the
Anglo-Saxon race had been grappling for centuries had
been thrown upon these people to be solved. These were
the questions of a home, a living, the rearing of children,
education, citizenship, and the establishment and support
of churches. Wasit any wonder that within a few hours the
wild rejoicing ceased and a feeling of deep gloom seemed
to pervade the slave quarter? To some it seemed that, now
that they were in actual possession of it, freedom was a
more serious thing than they had expected to find it.
Some of the slaveswere seventy or eighty years old: their
best days were gone. They had no strength with which to
earn a living in a strange place and among strange people,
even if they had been sure where to find a new place of
abode. To this class the problem seemed especially hard.
Besides, deep down in their hearts there was a strange and
peculiar attachment to 'old Marster' and 'old Missus', and
to their children, which they found it hard to think of
breaking off. With these they had spent in some cases
nearly a half-century, and it was no light thing to think of
parting. Gradually, one by one, stealthily at first, the
older slaves began to wander from the slave quarters back
to the 'big house' to have a whispered conversation with
their former owners as to the future.P
Up From Slavery isreally asongin praise of social and mental
subjugation, fawning, self-humiliation and self-abjection. It is a
hymn in praise of the consciousness, the world-view of the
master, the slave-driver, the colonizer, the imperialist, the
oppressor. It calls upon the oppressed, the robbed, to accept
the condition of their robbery and oppression with gleeful grati-
tude. It goes further and blames them for their slavery. This is
clearer in his so-called 'Atlanta Exposition Address':


--- PAGE 138 ---
134 Writers in Politics
The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of
questions of social equality is the extremest folly, and that
progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will
come to us must be the result of severe and constant
struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has
anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long
in any degree ostracized. It is important and right that all
privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important
that we be prepared for the exercises of these privileges.
The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is
worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a
dollar in an opera house _12
The neo-slave who rejoices at his slavery is a most pathetic
creature indeed. Booker T. Washington wept tears of gratitude
when, after urging his people to start at the bottom where they
had always been anyway, 'Governor Bullock rushed across the
platform and took me by the hand and others (the whites) did
the same'.
The two consciousnesses represented by Douglass and Wash-
ington have continued to plague Afro-American literature and
thought. The sell-out position of Wheatley and Washington has
been continued in writers like Martin Luther King, James
Baldwin, Ralph Ellison, Whitney Young, Eldridge Cleaver and
other thinkers and spokesmen who have allied themselves with
the consciousness of the exploiting and oppressing minority
(i.e. do not struggle violently; we can reform the system of
capitalism and make it work). The other trend of Bannekerl
David Walker-Douglass (the early Douglass) has been con-
tinued in the work of people like Du Bois, Paul Robeson,
Richard Wright, Malcolm X and George Jackson. Most others
tend to oscillate between the two positions. Even within the
work and life of the same writer one may get this oscillation
between espousing an oppressor-class consciousness and espous-
ing the consciousness of the exploited and oppressed.
Malcolm X forms avery important departure in Afro-American
thought. Through involvement in the struggle, he came to see
that the root cause of Afro-American oppression lay, not in the
sinfulness and biological depravity of whiteness, but in the very
system of social production of wealth, in the very system of
ownership of the wealth produced by the majority. CaPiBlism


--- PAGE 139 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 135
~_~!_l1 __gf the robber and therobbed. Except that the
Afro-American worker hasbeen not only tfieobject of economic
robbery but also of cultural and racist oppression. Capitalism
was then at the root of the slave consciousness. To fight for
total liberation then, one had to see the social basisof exploit-
ation and oppression; capitalism and the class that maintained
it had to go. This led Malcolm X to see the nature of American
imperialism. Hence, he would now tell the Afro-American
workers that the forces oppressing a child in the Congo, in
South Africa, were the same as those doing the same to a child
in Mississippi. Thus, within a very short time he had travelled
the road that Du Boishad travelled all his life.
The Du Bois/Malcolm X line isbeing continued by writers like
Imamu Baraka who has now abandoned his earlier mystical and
limiting standpoint of cultural nationalism. He has come to
recognize the class basis of Afro-American oppression; that
American capitalism at home and American imperialism in
Africa are at the root of that continued robbery and theft of
the social product created by the combined power of the Afro-
American working class and other workers from other racial
nationalities in America. His address to the Sixth Pan-African
Congress is important in this respect because it shows a definite
movement towards an unequivocal articulation of an anti-
imperialist consciousness, a definite stand against the American
ruling class robbery not only of the wealth of American people
but that of all other peoples, especially in Africa:
The conscious determination to struggle demands the con-
scious creation of systems of struggle. The Tanzania re-
cruitment programme ofAfricans in the diaspora represents
a small initiating step in creating some aspect of a revolu-
tionary Pan-African culture. With the same seriousness
with which NATO or SEATO or EEC, or GATT were
created, as examples of imperialist 'integration' (to cut
down rivalry between imperialists and jointly exploit the
rest of the world), so the anti-imperialist forces through-
out the world must have asimilarintegration. And Africans,
oppressed and struggling in various parts of the world,
must be integrated into a truly Pan-African anti-imperialist
system. One that utilizes the democratic and socialist
element of each society, the revolutionary, anti-bourgeois


--- PAGE 140 ---
136 Writersin Politics
quality of each of these African communities, the national
cultures linked together asan international anti-imperialist
culture. We can only build an actual Pan-African culture
by defeating petty-bourgeois statism and neo-colonialism
and the rule of imperialist borders and treaties. Only
by creating systems and institutions based on revolution-
ary ideology, incorporating Revolutionary Nationalism,
Pan-Africanism and truly scientific Socialism. Which
means socialism based on analysis of our own social
structures, through utilizing the universally applicable
scientific method, and international revolutionary ex-
periences."
Should this be reflected in his creative imaginative work,
it will mark a definite landmark in the evolution of a people's
consciousness in Afro-American literature and thought.
We who are gathered at Abidjan cannot escape from the
two consciousnesses I have tried to oudine. We can choose
to continue the line of Wheadey/Washington/whitney Young
and become the black spokesmen of American imperialism
in our own continent, or we can put ourselves at the service
of the struggle of African people - the peasants, and the
workers - against imperialism at all the levels: economic,
political, and ideological. We can thus continue and strengthen
the line of Banneker/Douglass/Du Bois/Jackson/Malcolm X/
Baraka (his latter self) and forge a consciousness that never
compromises with the path of sell-out to imperialism and
to all the classes that benefit from exploitation and oppression
of peoples.
In this, we may want to remember what American imperial-
ism, its social institutions and its ideological weapons mean to
us who only the other day saw Kissinger come to make a deal
with South Africa. Wemay borrow words from Frederick Doug-
lass who once posed the question of the meaning of the fourth
of July:
What, to the American slave, is your fourth of July? I
answer: A day that revealsto him, more than all other days
in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is
the constant victim. To him, your celebration is a sham,
your boasted liberty, an unholy licence; your national


--- PAGE 141 ---
The Robber and the Robbed 137
greatness, swelling vanity; your sounds of rejoicing are
empty and heartless; your denunciation of tyrants, brass
fronted impudence; your shouts of liberty and equality,
hollow mockery; your prayers and hymns, your sermons
and thanksgivings, with all your religious parade and
solemnity, are to him, mere bombast, fraud, deception,
impiety, and hypocrisy - a thin veil to cover up crimes
which would disgrace a nation of savages. There is not a
nation on the earth guilty of practices more shocking and
bloody than are the people of the United States, at this
very hour.
Go where you may, searchwhere you will, roam through
all the monarchies and despotisms of the Old World,
travel through South America, search out every abuse, and
when you have found the last, lay your facts by the side
of the everyday practices of this nation, and you will say
with me, that, for revolting barbarity and shameless hypo-
crisy, America reigns without a rival.14 (italics mine)
I believe that these words are astrue today as they were when
they were spoken in 1842. American imperialism having been
defeated in South-East Asia is trying to consolidate in Africa.
But the African people have given the answer. They will no
longer continue to build America and western Europe, from the
days of mercantile capitalism, through slavery and the slave
trade, through laissez-faire capitalism to the present era of im-
perialism in the last stage of neo-colonialism. Weshall no longer
continue to cultivate and plant for others, the imperialist bour-
geoisie and their overseer comprador class, to reap.
The African proletariat and the peasantry and the working
people of Asia and Latin America are telling it to U.S. imperial-
ist bourgeoisie: Wewill not let you and your local Nyapara allies
reap where you never planted.
That for me seems to be the significant change of attitude to
American imperialism in this bi-centennial year of the found-
ation of the United States of America; the rejection of the
robber consciousness and attitudes, and their replacement by
the revolutionary consciousness of the robbed of the world
as expressed in their literature, life and thought. It isa position
once articulated by the poet of democracy, Walt Whitman,
when he wrote:


--- PAGE 142 ---
138 Writers in Politics
Those corpses of young men,
Those martyrs that hang from gibbets -
those hearts pierced by grey lead,
Cold and motionless as they seem, live
elsewhere with unslaughtered vitality.
They live in other young men, 0 kings!
They live in brothers, again ready to defy yoU!15
Notes
1. Paper presented to the American Studies Regional Conference, Abidjan,
26-8 July, 1976.
2. G. Herbert Renfro, Life and Works of Phillis Wheatley, 1916, p. 48.


--- PAGE 143 ---
Index
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Abidjan, American Studies Regional
Council at, 1976, 137
Achebe, Chinua, 4, 29, 45, 53, 73,
74,76,81
Aeschylus, 15, 76
African Writers and the Biafran
Cause, The (Achebe), 81
Alma Ata, meeting of African and
Asian writers at, 1973, 101, 106
Arrow of God (Achebe), 29
Austen, Jane, 45,74
Baldwin, James, 134
Banneker, Benjamin, 128-9, 134
Baraka, Imamu, 135, 136
Beowulf (Anglo-Saxon epic poem),
35
Bethune, Dr Norman, 12
Betrayal in the City (play) (Imbuga),
45,49
Black Beauty (Sewell), 73
Blake, William, 19,21,33
Blixen, Karen, 17-19, 33
Blyden, Edward, 22-3,33
Brecht, Bertholdt, 97
Bronte, Emily, 74, 95
Brutus, Dennis, 73
Buchan, John, 16
Cabral, Amilcar, 12, 13, 14,26, 32,
33
Cary, Joyce, 19
Cesaire, Aime, 37,40,71
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 4
Childhood, Boyhood and Youth,
(Tolstoy), 95
China Today (journal), 12
Cleaver, Eldridge, 134
Clouds (play) (Frayn), 44
Coming Home (film), 42
Conrad, Joseph, 19,76-8
Cry of the People (Kim Chi-ha),
108, 115
Cry the Beloved Country (Paton)
20-3,32
Cultural Engineering and Nation
Building in East Africa (Mazrui),
57
Dedan Krmathi, 46, 49-51,62-3
Dedan Kimathi (Watene), 46
Douglass, Frederick, 129, 130, 136,
137
DuBois, W.E.B., 102, 134, 135
Dusk of Dawn (DuBois), 102
Ekwen~,Cyprian,73
Eliot, George, 75
Eliot, T.S., 35, 41
Equiano, Olaudah, 127
Ezeulu, 30, 76
Facing Mt Kenya (Kenyatta), 104
Fanon, Frantz, 3
Festac '77 Drama Group, 49
Fingers (poem by Ousmane), 80-1


--- PAGE 144 ---
140
Fleming, Ian, 37
Frayn, Michael, 44
Future Results of British Rule In
India (Marx), xi
Gallico, Paul, 4
Garvey, Marcus, xi
Gathumbi, Gad Kamau, 88
Girlsat War, 29-30
God's Bit of Wood (Ousmane), 80
Godspell (musical), 44
Goldsmith, Oliver, 4
Greene, Graham,S, 33
Groundless Rumours (Kim Chi-ha),
109-112
Haggard, H. Rider, 16-17
Hauser, Arnold, 6, 7,32
Heart of Darkness (Conrad), 19
Hegel, Georg, 14, 18-19,29
Hemingway, Ernest, 19
Hume, David, 13-14, 19
Huxley, Elspeth, 17
James, C.L.R., 11
Jefferson, President Thomas, 14,
127,128
Jesus Christ Superstar (musical), 44
Jonson, Ben, 74
Kamaru, Joseph, 45
Kamlffithu (Village with Education
and Cultural Centre), 47, 48, 64
Kariiiki, J. Mwangi, 82-92
Kenya Bururi wa Ngm (Kenyatta),
63
Kenyan Festac '77 Drama Group,
49,51
Kenyatta, Jomo, 63, 90,104
Killing of Sister George, The (play),
44
Kimathi, see Dedan Kimathi
Kim Chi-ha, 108, 109, 113-5, 118
King, Dr Martin Luther, 21,134
King and I, The (musical), 44
Writers in Politics
King Lear (Shakespeare), 77
King Solomon's Mines (Haggard), 16
Kipling, Rudyard, 16
Korea, Emergency International
Conference on, (held in Tokyo),
107-13,117
Kunene, Mazisi, 73
La Guma, Alex, 73
Language and Politics In Kenya
(Mutahi), 61-3
Last Word, The (Taban 10 Liyong),
57
Lenin, V.I., 10, 32
Life and Times of Frederick Doug-
lass (Douglass), 130-1
Lincoln, President Abraham, 125
Liyong, Taban 10, see Taban 10
Liyong
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 77
Magic (film), 42
Malcolm X, 37, 134, 135
Mangua, Charles, 4
Man of the People, A (Achebe),
29
Mao Tse-tung, 1, 32-3
Marlowe, Christopher, 74
Marx, Karl, xi, 7,8,29,32,60
Mau Mau Detainee (Kariiiki), 82-84,
86-7,89-91
Mau Mau, Songs of the, 27-8, 39
Mazrui, Ali, 57
Mister Johnson (Cary), 19
Midisane, Bloke, 73
Montsarrat, Nicholas, 16,33
Mowgli Stories, The (Kipling),
16
Mphahlele, Ezekiel, 56-7, 73
Miitahi, Dr Karega, 61-3
Narrative of the Life of Olaudah
Equiano or Gustavus Vassa, the
African (Equiano), 127-8
Neto, Agostinho, 73, 101


--- PAGE 145 ---
Index
Ngaahika Ndeenda (Ngilgiwa Thi-
ongo and Ngtigi wa Mi'rIT co-
authors), 47,64
Ngugl wa Mi'rIT,47, 64
Ngugl wa Thiong'o:
J.M., his tribute to, 82-5
on civilization, 66-8
on Kenyan culture, 42-8
on languages, 53-65
on literature and society, 3-31
on literature in schools, 34-41
on Petals of Blood, 94-8
on the ideals of Mau Mau, 86-93
on theatrical production, 49-51
on writers in politics, 69-81
Robber and Robbed, 123-138
South Korea:
repression in, 107-116
struggle of the people, 117-122
speech at Alma Ata (1973),
101-106
Ng'weno, Hilary, 44-5
Niernoeller, Martin, 92
Nkosi, Lewis, 73
Nkrurnah, Dr Kwame, 31
No Longer at Ease (Achebe),
29
Nostromo (Conrad), 76
Okara, Gabriel, 73
Okigbo, Christopher, 73
Oklahoma (musical), 44
Okonkwo , 30, 76
Oliver Twist (Dickens), 95
Omen (film), 42
Ousmane, Sernbene, 80, 91, 101,
105
Out of Africa (Blixen), 17
Paton, Alan, 20, 22, 33
p'Bitek, Okot, 4,37,41,103
Perham, Margery, 82, 86
Petals of Blood (Nguglwa Thiong'o),
53,94-8
Prester John (Buchan), 16
141
Rabelais, Francois, 15, 74
Red Strangers, The (E. Huxley), 17
Return to my Native Land (Cesaire),
40
Roberts, Shabaan, 64,65
Robeson, Paul, 134
Robinson Crusoe (Defoe), 36, 44
Ruark, Robert, 16
School for Scandal (Sheridan), 4
Senghor, Leopold Sedar, 71, 73
Shakespeare, William, 4, 36, 72, 74,
76-7
Sheridan, Richard, 4
Sholokhov, Mikhail, 76
Snow Goose, The (Gallico), 4
Something of Value (Ruark), 16
Song of Africa (Kariiiki and others),
92
Song of Ocol (p'Bitek), 37,41,103
Son of Woman (Mangua), 4
Soyinka, Wole, 56
Taban 10Liyong, 57
Tempest, The (Shakespeare), 36
Themba,Can,73 .,
Thing to Love, A (E. Huxley), 17
Things Fall Apart (Achebe), 4, 29,
53
Thiong'o, Ngugi wa, see Ngtigi wa
Thiong'o
Thu Bon (South Vietnamese poet),
101, 105
Tolstoy, Count Leo, 15,76,95
Treasure Island (Stevenson), 95
Trevor-Roper, Professor Hugh, 14,
19
Trial of Dedan Klmatbi, The (play)
(Ngugl and Micere Mugo) , 45,
49-52
Tribe that Lost its Head, The
(Montsarrar), 16
Trollope, Anthony, 14, 19
Uhuru (Ruark), 16


--- PAGE 146 ---
142
Up from Slavery (Washington),
131-4
Wachuku, Kimana, 88
Wali, Obi, 55-9
Washington, Booker T, 131-4, 136
Watene, Kenneth, 46
Writers in Politics
Weep Not Child (Ngug'Twa Thion-
g'o),83
Wheatley, Phyllis, 126-7, 131, 136
Whitman, Walt, 137-8
Wordsworth, William, 4
Wuthering Heights (Emily Bronte),
74, 95

